
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with librarles to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuáis, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrainfrom automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other áreas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remo ve it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
any where in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's Information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 




Acerca de este libro 

Esta es una copia digital de un libro que, durante generaciones, se ha conservado en las estanterías de una biblioteca, hasta que Google ha decidido 
escanearlo como parte de un proyecto que pretende que sea posible descubrir en línea libros de todo el mundo. 

Ha sobrevivido tantos años como para que los derechos de autor hayan expirado y el libro pase a ser de dominio público. El que un libro sea de 
dominio público significa que nunca ha estado protegido por derechos de autor, o bien que el período legal de estos derechos ya ha expirado. Es 
posible que una misma obra sea de dominio público en unos países y, sin embargo, no lo sea en otros. Los libros de dominio público son nuestras 
puertas hacia el pasado, suponen un patrimonio histórico, cultural y de conocimientos que, a menudo, resulta difícil de descubrir. 

Todas las anotaciones, marcas y otras señales en los márgenes que estén presentes en el volumen original aparecerán también en este archivo como 
testimonio del largo viaje que el libro ha recorrido desde el editor hasta la biblioteca y, finalmente, hasta usted. 

Normas de uso 

Google se enorgullece de poder colaborar con distintas bibliotecas para digitalizar los materiales de dominio público a fin de hacerlos accesibles 
a todo el mundo. Los libros de dominio público son patrimonio de todos, nosotros somos sus humildes guardianes. No obstante, se trata de un 
trabajo caro. Por este motivo, y para poder ofrecer este recurso, hemos tomado medidas para evitar que se produzca un abuso por parte de terceros 
con fines comerciales, y hemos incluido restricciones técnicas sobre las solicitudes automatizadas. 

Asimismo, le pedimos que: 

+ Haga un uso exclusivamente no comercial de estos archivos Hemos diseñado la Búsqueda de libros de Google para el uso de particulares; 
como tal, le pedimos que utilice estos archivos con fines personales, y no comerciales. 

+ No envíe solicitudes automatizadas Por favor, no envíe solicitudes automatizadas de ningún tipo al sistema de Google. Si está llevando a 
cabo una investigación sobre traducción automática, reconocimiento óptico de caracteres u otros campos para los que resulte útil disfrutar 
de acceso a una gran cantidad de texto, por favor, envíenos un mensaje. Fomentamos el uso de materiales de dominio público con estos 
propósitos y seguro que podremos ayudarle. 

+ Conserve la atribución La filigrana de Google que verá en todos los archivos es fundamental para informar a los usuarios sobre este proyecto 
y ayudarles a encontrar materiales adicionales en la Búsqueda de libros de Google. Por favor, no la elimine. 

+ Manténgase siempre dentro de la legalidad Sea cual sea el uso que haga de estos materiales, recuerde que es responsable de asegurarse de 
que todo lo que hace es legal. No dé por sentado que, por el hecho de que una obra se considere de dominio público para los usuarios de 
los Estados Unidos, lo será también para los usuarios de otros países. La legislación sobre derechos de autor varía de un país a otro, y no 
podemos facilitar información sobre si está permitido un uso específico de algún libro. Por favor, no suponga que la aparición de un libro en 
nuestro programa significa que se puede utilizar de igual manera en todo el mundo. La responsabilidad ante la infracción de los derechos de 
autor puede ser muy grave. 

Acerca de la Búsqueda de libros de Google 

El objetivo de Google consiste en organizar información procedente de todo el mundo y hacerla accesible y útil de forma universal. El programa de 
Búsqueda de libros de Google ayuda a los lectores a descubrir los libros de todo el mundo a la vez que ayuda a autores y editores a llegar a nuevas 



audiencias. Podrá realizar búsquedas en el texto completo de este libro en la web, en la página lhttp : / /books . google . com 




ALARCON 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



Bourland 



WTTH VOCABULARV 



fíENRT HOLT AND COMPANY 



T,a.t> s,-^ [-9-^ os. i ^'^ -.H- t>o 




3 2044 102 781 820 








v-o> 






EL 

SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



HISTORIA VERDADERA DE UN SUCEDIDO QUE ANDA EN 
ROMANCES ESCRITA AHORA TAL Y COMO PASÓ 



D. PEDRO A. DE ALARCON 

Bachiller bn Filosofía y TbologU, etc., btc. 



EDITED WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND 
VOCABULARY 

BY 

benjamín p. bourland 

Profbssor im Jü>blbbrt Collbgb op Wbstbrm Rbsbrvb Umivbrsity 







NEW YORK 
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY 






*; 'i c "^ 



\'- 5 . 'H- ^ 




lo . V'^. r. ■- « .i 



Copyright, 1907, 

BY 

HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY 



PREFACE 

The present edition o£ El Sombrero de tres picos is 
designed to make the book accessible as a text for use 
in college classes as early as the second or third se- 
mester of Spanish study. The plan of the edition needs 
no special comment. The editor has made the effort 
to include in the notes and the vocabulary explanation 
sufficient to cover all difficultie^ reasonably to be attrib- 
uted to students who have done careful work in the 
elements of Spanish grammar, and the usual elemen- 
tary reading. The numerous references in the notes 
are addressed more particularly to the teachers. 

In the use of the vocabulary, it should be borne in 
mind that the latter is designed for this text alone, and 
is in no sense a dictionary. It may be said also that 
an effort has been made to exelude from the notes all 
puerilities, and the explanation of commonplaces, 
whether of history, grammar, or mythology. 

Gratef ul acknowledgment is made here to the f riends 
who have helped the editor in whatever way in the 
preparation of this book, and in especial to Professor 
DeHaan of Bryn Mawr College ; to Professor Caroline 
B. Bourland of Smith College, the editor's sister ; to 

iü 



iv PREFACE 

Professor William D. Briggs, of the Leland Stanford, 
Jr. University; to Professor Christian Gauss, of 
Princeton University; to the Rev. Gilbert P. Jen- 
nings, Rector of St. Agnes' Church in Cleveland, and 
to Don Adolfo Bonilla y San Martín, of Madrid ; and 
lastly, and most of all, to the editor's friend and pupil, 
Mr. Gustav G. Laubscher, of Adelbert College, whose 
work on the vocabulary was more nearly collaboration 
than assistance. 

B. P. B. 
Cleveland, December, 1906. 



INTRODUCTION 

I. Alarcón's Lifk 

Pedro Antonio de Alarcón was born at Guadix in 
the province of Granada, the loth of March 1833, the 
fourth of ten children of an oíd and noble family, whose 
wealth had been lost in the wars of the Napoleonic period 
and the disorders that had foUowed. His father destined 
him for the bar, and after reaching the baccalaureate at 
the age of fourteen, at the seminario oí Guadix, he went to 
Granada to begin his professional studies, only to be re- 
called by the res augusta domi to his home, where perforce 
he exchanged jurisprudence for theology, and began prep- 
aration for the priesthood. 

The boy's heart was not in his professional studies, and 
his best eíforts were given to other mátters; he taught 
himself French and Italian, began to write, and formed 
the project of going to Madrid, to set up as a man of let- 
ters. His parents declined to support him in this ambi- 
tion, but Alarcón persisted. Through Torcuato Tarrago, 
a young writer at that time living in Guadix, he was intro- 
duced to a Cádiz publisher, who undertook the issuing of 
a weekly joumal. El Eco de Occidente^ which was to ap- 
pear at Cádiz and Granada, and whose literary redaction 
was to be entrusted to the two young men. The venture 



vi INTRODUCTION 

was successful. Af ter three years' work the savings seemed 
sufficient, and on the i8th pf January, 1853, Alarcón left 
home. 

He went first to Cádiz, where he gave his attention to 
matters concerning the journal, and a month later he 
reached Madrid, — without introduction or friends, but 
with some little moncy and with a goodly sheaf of verses, 
notably an ambitious continuation of Espronceda's Diablo 
MundOy all of which he bumed, after much interviewing of 
publishers. In short, he did not get along at all at the 
capital, and when his money was gone and the husks were 
sour, he inade his own the im memorial custom of the prodi- 
gal, and went back to his father's house. A complete re- 
conciliation followed his return. He had been drawn for 
military service : his father purchased his reléase, and gave 
him permission to live in Granada, where he renewed his 
connection with the Eco de Occidente. In Granada also he 
found agreeable literary society, and the year spent there 
was one of profit to himself and of success for his joumal, 
in whose management he had an increasing influence and 
part. 

His first míngling in politics was in 1854, when he took 
open and active part in the rebellion that culminated in the 
mutiny of Vicálvaro (the 3oth of June), distinguishing him- 
self by his noisy and militant radicalism, and gaining the 
ill-will of many of the elements whose favor, in his later 
life, he found it wise to win — the clergy, the army, the 
national militia. Before the end of the year he was in 
Madrid, where he became the editor of El Látigo ^ the most 
extreme of the anti-royalist periodicals. This connection 



INTRODUCTION vii 

was ended by a duel, and Alarcón gave up politics for the 
time, and retired to Segovia, to restore health broken by 
irregular living, and to write. El Final de Norma was the 
most ambitious work that dates from this time, with a veiy 
great number of short stories and miscellaneous articles 
published in various joumals, all of which brought him a 
considerable reputation throughout Spain. In 1856 he 
visited París and " wrote up " the exposition of that year 
for the Spanish press. Towards the end of 1857 he made 
his appearance at the theatre of the Circo at Madrid, with 
his one play. El Hijo Pródigo. The premíere was riotously 
successful, but the critics were against the author, whose 
personality seems to have been a large factor in the matter, 
and the piece was soon withdrawn. In 1859 Alarcón vol- 
unteered for the campaign in Morocco, and after doing 
excellent service, was honorably discharged in April, 1860, 
when he returned to Spain. The fruit of this military ex- 
perience was the Diario de un testigo de la Guerra de África^ 
which is of his best work. The book was exceedingly suc- 
cessful commercially, and the author's profits permitted 
him the journeying in France, Switzerland, and Italy, 
whose story is told in De Madrid á Ñapóles^ two volumes 
of fairly acute observation and superior literary worth. 
(August, 1860 — February, 1861). 

From this time until 1873 Alarcón was devoted to an 
active political life, into whose details we need not foUow 
him. He was deputy from Guadix much of the time, and 
was prominent as a writer for the Epoca^ then as now the 
first conservative newspaper of Spain, and later as one of 
the founders and editors of La Política, He had much 



Viii INTRODUCTION 

success, and we are told that only feelings of personal deli- 
cacy stood bétween him and the holding of at least one 
ministerial portfolio. In 1866 he was one of the signers 
of a celebrated protest of the unión ist deputies, and was 
dignified by being sent into exile for a time, and afterwards 
being forbidden to live in Madrid. In 1863 his father 
died, and in 1866 he was married in Granada to Doña 
Paulina Contreras y Reyes. 

From 1873 until his death, July 18, 1 891, he lived prin- 
cipally in Madrid, until 1888 taking a large part in literary 
life, and not without some mingling in matters public. In 
1875, as one of the early supporters of the Alfonsine res- 
toration, he was made Councillor of State ; and on Decem- 
ber i5th of the same year he was elected to the Spanish 
Academy, in which he took his seat about a year laten 
His pen was very active. El Sombrero de tres picos, El Es- 
cándalo, El Niño de la Bola, La Pródiga, El Capitán Ve- 
neno, are from this final period, which was opened with 
La Alpujarra. He gave much time also to revising, se- 
lecting, and destroying, to which process we owe the de- 
finitive collection of works noticed below. In 1887 ^^s 
powers began noticeably to fail. In 1888 there was a first 
hemiplegia — then other attacks followed in December, 
1889, and February, 1890, and the final one in July, 1891. 

II. Alargónos Works 

Alarcón's writings have been brought together in nine- 
teen volumes, sixteen of which are of the well known C(h 
lección de Escritores Castellanos, There are three volumes 
of short stories, the Novelas Cortas; four longer novéis» 



INTRODUCTION ix 

El Escándalo, La Pródiga, El Final de Norma, El Niño 
de la Bola ; two storíes that are neither long ñor short, El 
Capitán Veneno and El Sombrero de tres picos ; one volume 
of. popular sketches, Cosas que fueron; three volumes of 
travels, Viajes por España, one volume, and De Madrid á 
Ñapóles, two; an historic-geographical study, La Alpu- 
jarra ; one volume of essays, Juicios Literarios ; and one 
volume of verse, The three volumes outside the collection 
contain the celebrated Diario de un testigo de la Guerra de 
África, 

Of all this mass, only two works are really first-rate : 
El Sombrero de tres picos and El Capitán Veneno ; of the 
special merits of these we shall speak again presently, 
The diary of the African war has won praise, and so have 
the books of travel; an occasional short story is good ; 
the longer novéis have no permanent worth, the verse is 
insignifícant. 

The most ambitious of the novéis, El Escándalo, was 
published in 1875. Its author, in his Historia de mis li- 
bros, included in the collected works in the volume with 
El Capitán Veneno, makes a defence of this book that is 
most illuminating as to the principies of criticism prac- 
ticed by the Spanish critics of the day, and that gives us a 
clear sight of the literary conditions of the time. The 
artistic question does not seem to have been raised : the 
one asked is simply as to the author's attitude toward cer- 
tain other matters, chiefly of religión ; and it is on the cor- 
rectness of these views that the book is to stand or fall. 
Alarcón in his defence, accepts the situation, and joins 
issue : and he does this with a willingness that lets us see 



X INTRODUCTION 

that his own mind could discover no impropriety in treat- 
ing literature in that way. * Herein lies the explanation 
of many weaknesses in Alarcón's work, which, given his 
many good qualities, raight else cause us to wonder, 

Alarcón's best points are a very keen eye for a situation, 
thorough control of a language adequate to his matter, an 
excellent idea of the exigencies of style offered by his situ- 
ations, and a keen sense of humor, which, however, oeca- 
sionally goes to sleep or deserts. His weakness lies in 
the faulty idea of his task already pointed out, in a certain 
immaturity, a childish petulance that stays with him to the 
last, and in an utter inability to develop a character. He 
can picture one admirably, but he cannot make one grow ; 
and in general, he does not try it. The one place in which 
he has some measure of success in this not easy task is in 
Don Jorge of the Capitán Veneno^ whose struggle is very 
prettily exhibited ; but the great, the serious effort, Fabián 
Conde in El Escándalo^ falls ñat. His is a metempsycho- 
sis, not a development. 

The Spanish language does not lend itself with much 
grace to the needs of the modem short story. Its leisurely 
diffuseness is a fair reflex of the mode of thought it repre- 
sents ; so Alarcón cannot, except within the four seas of 
Spain, be held a really good writer in this genre? It is 
in the happy borderland between the long and the very 

« He emphasizes these views in the inaugural discourse he delivered when 
he took his seat in the Academy. 

a That he knew this, and to a degree was \villing to admit his shortcom- 
ings, is made clear by his pref ace to the Novelas Cortas^ where he sets up as 
mitigating circumstance his own youth and the newness of the short story in 
modem Spanish literature. 



INTRODUCTION xi 

short, that he has done his best Finding himself for 
once — or for twice — with a literary task (quite uncon- 
sciously to himself, it is true) exactly fítted to his abilities, 
he has arnved, and succeeded. El Capitán Veneno and 
El Sombrero de tres picos are real works of art, for their 
author in them has shaken himself free of self-conscious- 
ness, forgotten to preach or to moralize, let ethics and 
politics alone and written without outward haste or inward 
restraint. 

Alarcón's work in puré literature was beyond question 
much hanipered by his political life, and by the false no- 
tions of the aims and ends of belles-lettres into which, as 
he grew older, the life of the times and his own disposition 
caused him to fall. The history of Spain of his lifetime is 
a nightmare. Whether, if he had lived in happier days, he 
would have done better work, is one of those literary ques- 
tions that are good and pleasant to think and talk over, 
but unprofitable to write about. Still, the constructive 
psychologist should have great joy in Alarcón, should he 
have the patience to read all his works, for the man reveáis 
himself naked as do few ; and it is most edifying to see 
the conservative academician of El Escándalo and La Época 
making his peace with the world and with heaven for the 
sins of the editor of El Látigo, Truly he seems to wish 
that we should know that he felt indeed that he had sinned 
much, and need make great haste. 

III. El Sombrero d^ tres picos 

El Sombrero de. tres picos was written and published in 
1874. It made its ñrst appearance on August 2, 9, i6th 



3Üi INTRODUCTTDM 

of that year, in numbers 23, 24, 25, of the Revista Euro^ 
pea^ was issued in book form immediately, and has passed 
through thirteen editions. Alarcón has given two accounts 
of its génesis — one in the original form of the preface 
to the book, and the other in his Historia de mis libros, 
They are not mutually exclusive, though the second men- 
tioned, which the author has allowed to stand, forgets much 
that is confided in the first.' 

The success of the story was immediate and deserved. 
The pseudo-modest praise, " the least bad of my books," 
applied by Alarcón to El Escándalo^ might be transferred 
and made positive here. The skill of construction, the 
exact sense of propriety that preserves every decency while 
yielding no shred of the interest, the really admirable dia- 
logue, and the beautifully Spanish atmosphere of it all, 
make us wish that the author's judgment had led him of- 
tener into these ways, where alone his desire fails to outrun 

^ The two may be said to complete each other, the original preface giving 
the account of Alarcón's first dealings with the subject, the other telling of 
the real wríting of the book. In the preface he says that the material was 
tumed over at ñrst, in conference, by a number of literary men, at some date 
not given, but evidently of the earlier part of Alarcón's career: and that it 
was ''assigned" to José Joaquín Villanueva, who planned a uarzuéla with 
the title £1 que se fué á Sevilla^ but died before his work was fairly under 
way. Nothing more was done until 1866, when José Zorrilla came back to 
Spain from México. The matter was suggested to him and he planned a 
comedy, but did not write it. In the Historia de mis libros we read that the 
idea of workingout the theme came back to Alarcón in connection with the 
promise of a short story to a popular periodical in Havana; that his interest 
grew as he worked at it, and that he was led by the merit f riends found in 
the story to keep it for the Madrid public. 

{See preface to first edition of El Sombrero de trespicos^ Madrid, 1874, be- 
¡¿íSívXiíf^yA^chabacaneria; i. e. after p. 4, Une 15 of the present text; Akrcóii, 
Historia de mis libros, pp. 244-249). 



INTRODUCTION xiii 

his performance. Alarcón has written sensational ser- 
mons — witness El Escándalo; psychological romance, 
with the psychology left out, as in La Pródiga ; inf antile 
melodrama, in El Niño de la Bola; and utter balderdash, 
as El Final de Norma ; but El Sombrero is not like any of 
these. It is worthy of the rank it holds among the longer 
short stories of literature, a strong, objective piece of work, 
without shade of self-consciousness ; a fine story, in short, 
admirably told. Aside from its purely aesthetic valué, the 
book is a precious document to the student of the history 
of manners and customs in Spain, both in its Unes and in 
the much that is to be read between them. 

Adolfo Bonilla y San Martín has recently published a 
short account of the sources of El Sombrero} He 
takes it back to a well-known story of the Decameron 
(day 8, novel 8), and reprints two popular ballads, to one 
of which, already published by Agustín Duran in his Ro- 
mancero General (Vol. 2, p. 409), Alarcón in his preface 
acknowledges his indebtedness. The other bailad seems 
from language and form to be younger ; the content of the 
two is almost identical. It is not my purpose in the pres- 
ent place to enlarge on Bonilla's article, though I suspect 
that the theme in its cruder forms is considerably older 
than Boccaccio ; he has given us all that served as the 
fírst-hand sources of our story, and more, and he seems to 
me beyond any doubt to be in the right in holding that 
the differences to be noted between these sources and the 
novel are Alarcón's own, not the product of some other 
model, to him (Bonilla) unknown. To my mind this con- 

^Révue Hispaniqi4€^ Tome XlIIy 1905, pp. 5-17» 



xiv INTRODUCTION 

clusion should be more strongly put In his preface Alar, 
con tells US where he found the story, and makes direct 
reférence to the Duran Romancero ; had he had another, 
more strictly decorous, versión at hand, one in short better 
suited to his need, he had surely mentioned it. Bonilla 
seems to me to take far too seriously the closing lines of 
the preface, which, to one without the palé, seem simply a 
graceful confession of faith in the basic decency of Spain. 
For the sources of the book, then, Alarcón's preface and 
Bonilla's essay must seem a sufficient guide. 

The text here printed is that of the thirteenth Spanish 
edition. Two passages have been omitted ; one (after page 
6, line 28 of this text) touching taxes and imposts, as be- 
ing unduly düñcult, and of no help to the story : the curious 
may find it in the notes. The other, a bare two lines, had too 
much local color for dignifíed appearance in the American 
classroom. The only other changes the editor has allowed 
himself are occasional deviations from the somewhat arbi- 
trary system of capitalization foUowed in the model. 

My friend Professor De Haan, of Bryn Mawr College, 
did me the favor of making a collation of this text with 
that of the ñrst edition in book form, which, as it appeared 
so promptly after the other, is probably to all intents ana 
purposes identical with that of the serial. The differences 
to be noted between the ñrst and thirteenth editions are 
altogether matters of style, except in the preface, where, 
as noted, the end is very düferent in the two. As I have 
not had access to all the editions, I cannot say with cer- 
tainty when the revisión was made : it is likely that it carne 
when Alarcón prepared the deñnitive edition of his works 



INTRODUCTION XV 

for the Colección de Escritores Castellanos : in which case 
the first revised edition would be the eighth or ninth. The 
changes are often interesting as showing the working of 
the better second thought ; — here the flow of the syntax 
is made a little smoother, there a harsh word has been 
suppressed. In general the text has gained by the author's 
later attention, though there is an occasional spot where 
the style seems fresher and more vigorous in the older 
form. 

jEI Sombrero de tres picos has been much translated and 
has been used as material for at least four comic operas. 
Alarcón mentions two, one French, one Belgian, in Histo- 
ria de mis Libros (page 247) ; I have been unable, so far, 
to find out anything about these. A third, by M. Giró, is 
spoken of by Albert Soubies, Histoire de la Musique, Es- 
pagne, XIX símele, París, 1900, page 54. The title of this 
one is El Sombrero de tres picos ^ and it was brought out at 
Madrid. The fourth, Der Korregidory music by Hugo 
Wolff , libretto by Rosa Mayreder, was first given at Mann- 
heim in 1896. 

IV. BlBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 

The biographical matter of this introduction is taken 
from two short lives of Alarcón, one by José Calvo y Te- 
ruel, prefixed to the 1870 edition of Poesías serias y humo- 
rísticas ; and the other by Mañano Catalina, written after 
Alarcón'sdeath(i905)and published with volumel (Cuentos 
Amatorios) oí the Novelas Cortas, 

Of serious critical matter conceming Alarcón, I have 
seen, besides what ís in the usual histories of Spanish Lit- 



xvi INTRODUCTION 

erature, only the essay on El Sombrero de tres picos by 
Luis Alfonso, prefixed to the book, in the Colección de Es- 
critores Castellanos^ and what is given by Padre Francisco 
Blanco García, in his Literatura Española en el Siglo XIX, 
zá edition, Madrid, 1903, vol. II, pp. 452-467. Both seem 
unscientific, and not useful, though both have very good 
will ; and Luis Alfonso's essay has á certain valué as an 
histórica! document* 



AL SEÑOR 

D. JOSÉ SALVADOR DE SALVADOR 
Dedico esta obra, 

P. A. DE Alarcón. 
Julio de 1874. 



PREFACIO DEL AUTOR 

Pocos españoles, aun contando á los menos sabios y 
leídos, desconocerán la historieta vulgar que sirve de 
fundamento á la presente obrilla. 

Un zafio pastor de cabras, que nunca había salido de 

5 la escondida Cortijada en que nació, fué el primero á 
quien nosotros se la oímos referir. — Era el tal uno de 
aquellos rústicos sin ningunas letras, pero naturalmente 
ladinos y bufones, que tanto papel hacen en nuestra 
literatura nacional con el dictado de picaros. Siempre 

lo que en la Cortijada había fiesta, con motivo de boda 6 
bautizo, 6 de solemne visita de los amos, tocábale á él 
poner los juegos de chasco y pantomima, hacer las 
payasadas y recitar los romances y relaciones; — y 
precisamente en una ocasión de éstas (hace ya casi 

15 toda una vida . . . , es decir, hace ya más de treinta y 
cinco años), tuvo á bien deslumhrar y embelesar cierta 
noche nuestra inocencia (relativa) con el cuento en 
verso de El Corregidor y la Molinera^ 6 sea de El 
Molinero y la Corregidora^ que hoy ofrecemos nosotros 

» al público bajo el nombre más trascendental y filosófico 
(pues así lo requiere la gravedad de estos tiempos) de 
El Sombrero de tres picos. 

Recordamos, por señas, que cuando el pastor nos 
dio tan buen rato, las muchachas casaderas allí reuni- 

I 



2 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

das se pusieron muy coloradas, de donde sus madres 
dedujeron que la historia era algo verde, por lo cual 
pusieron ellas al pastor de oro y azul ; pero el pobre 
Repela (así se llamaba el pastor) no se mordió la len- 
gua, y contestó diciendo : que no había por qué escan- 5 
dalizarse de aquel modo, pues nada resultaba de su 
relación que no supieren hasta las monjas y hasta las 
niñas de cuatro años. . . . 

— Y si no, varaos á ver (preguntó el cabrero) : ¿ qué 
se saca en claro de la historia de El Corregidor y la 10 
Molinera? |Que los casados duermen juntos, y que 

á ningún marido le acomoda que otro hombre duerma 
con su mujer ! — | Me parece que la noticia 1 . . . 

— ¡Pues es verdad I — respondieron las madres, 
oyendo las carcajadas de sus hijas. 15 

— La prueba de que el tío Repela tiene razón (ob- 
servó en esto el padre del novio), es que todos los 
chicos y grandes aquí presentes se han enterado ya de 
que esta noche, así que se acabe el baile. Juanete y 
Manolilla estrenarán esa hermosa cama de matrimonio 20 
que la tía Gabriela acaba de enseñar á nuestras hijas 
para que admiren los bordados de los almohadones. . . . 

— I Hay más I (dijo el abuelo de la novia) : hasta en 
el libro de la Doctrina y en los mismos Sermones se 
habla á los niños de todas estas cosas tan naturales, al 95 
ponerlos al corriente de la larga esterilidad de Nuestra 
Señora Santa Ana, de la virtud del casto José, de la 
estratagema de Judit, y de otros muchos milagros que 
no recuerdo ahora. — Por consiguiente, señores. . . . 

— I Nada, nada, tío Repela ! (exclamaron valerosa- 30 



PREFACIO DEL AUTOR 3 

mente las muchachas.) | Diga V. otra vez su relación ; 
que es muy divertida 1 

— I Y hasta muy decente I (continuó el abuelo). Pues 
en ella no se aconseja á nadie que sea malo ; ni se le 

5 enseña á serlo ; ni queda sin castigo el que lo es. . . . 

— I Vaya ! i repítala V. I — dijeron al fin consistorial- 
mente las madres de familia. 

El tío Repela volvió entonces á recitar el romance , 

y, considerado ya su texto por todos á la luz de aquélla 

10 crítica tan ingenua, hallaron que no había pero que 

ponerle ; lo cual equivale á decir que le concedieron 

las ikcndas necesarias, 

* 
* « 

Andando los años, hemos oído muchas y muy diver- 
sas versiones de aquella misma aventura de El Moli- 

15 ñero y la Corregidora^ siempre de labios de graciosos 
de aldea y de cortijo, por el orden del ya difunto Repela, 
y además la hemos leído en letras de molde en diferen- 
tes Romances de ciego y hasta en el famoso Romancero 
del inolvidable D. Agustín Duran. 

ao El fondo del asunto resulta idéntico: tragi-cómico, 
zumbón y terriblemente epigramático, como todas las 
lecciones dramáticas de moral de que sé enamora nues- 
tro pueblo; pero la forma, el mecanismo accidental, 
los procedimientos casuales, difieren mucho, muchísimo, 

25 del relato de nuestro pastor, tanto, que éste no hubiera 
podido recitar en la Cortijada ninguna de dichas ver- 
siones, ni aun aquellas que corren impresas, sin que 



4 EL áOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

antes se tapasen los oídos las muchachas en estado 
honesto, 6 sin exponerse á que sus madres le sacaran 
los ojos. — I A tal punto han extremado y pervertido 
los groseros patanes de otras provincias el caso tra- 
dicional que tan sabroso, discreto y pulcro resultaba en 5 
la versión del clásico Repela 1 

Hace, pues, mucho tiempo que concebimos el propó- 
sito de restablecer la verdad de las cosas, devolviendo 
á la peregrina historia de que se trata su primitivo ca- 
rácter, que nunca dudamos fuera aquel en que salía 10 
mejor librado el decoro. — Ni ¿ cómo dudarlo ? Esta 
clase de relaciones, al rodar por las manos del vulgo, 
nunca se desnaturalizan para hacerse más bellas, deli- 
cadas y decentes, sino para estropearse y percudirse al 
contacto de la ordinariez y la chabacanería. 15 

Tal es la historia del presente libro. . . . Conque 
metámonos ya en harina ; quiero decir, demos comienzo 
á la relación de £¿ Corregidor y la Molinera^ no sin 
esperar de tu saiio juicio (i oh respetable publico I) que 
« después de haberla leído y héchote más cruces que 20 
»si hubieras visto al demonio (como dijo Estebanillo 
» González al principiar la suya), la tendrás por digna y 
» merecedora de haber salido á luz.» 

Julio de 1874. 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



DE CUÁNDO SUCEDIÓ LA COSA 

Comenzaba este largo siglo, que ya va de vencida. — 
No se sabe fijamente el año: sólo consta que era 
después del de 4 y antes del de 8. 

Reinaba, pues, todavía en España Don Carlos IV de 

5 Borbón ; por ¡a gracia de Dios^ segün las monedas, y 
por olvido 6 gracia especial de Bonaparte, segün los 
boletines franceses. — Los demás soberanos europeos 
descendientes de Luis XIV habían perdido ya la coro- 
na (y el jefe, de ellos la cabeza) en la deshecha borrasca 

xo que corría esta envejecida parte del mundo desde 1789. 

Ni paraba aquí la singularidad de nuestra patria en 

aquellos tiempos. £1 Soldado de la Revolución, el hijo 

de un obscuro abogado corso, el vencedor en Rívoli, en 

las Pirámides, eii Marengo y en otras cien batallas, 

15 acababa de ceñirse la corona de Cario Magno y de 
transfigurar completamente la Europa, creando y su- 
primiendo naciones, borrando fronteras, inventando di- 
nastías y haciendo mudar de forma, de nombre, de sitio, 
de costumbres y hasta de traje á los pueblos por donde 

ao pasaba en 911 corcel de guerra como un terremoto ani- 

S 



6 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

mado, 6 como el ^^ AnUcristo,^^ (\\xe le llamaban las poten- 
cias del norte ... — Sin embargo, nuestros padres (jDios 
los tenga en su santa gloria !), lejos de odiarlo ó de te- 
merle, complacíanse aun en ponderar sus descomunales 
hazañas, como si se tratase del héroe de un libro de caba- 5 
Herías, ó de cosas que sucedían en otro planeta, sin que ni 
por asomos recelasen que pensara nunca en venir por acá 
á intentar las atrocidades que había hecho en Francia, 
Italia, Alemania y otros países. Una vez por semana 
(y dos á lo sumo) llegaba el correo de Madrid á la mayor 10 
parte de las poblaciones importantes de la Península, 
llevando algún número de la Gaceta (que tampoco era 
diaria), y por ella sabían las personas principales 
(suponiendo que la Gaceta hablase del particular) si 
existía un estado más 6 menos allende el Pirineo, si se 15 
había reñido otra batalla en que peleasen seis ú ocho 
reyes y emperadores, y si Napoleón se hallaba en Mi- 
lán, en Bruselas ó en Varsovia ... — Por lo demás, nues- 
tros mayores seguían viviendo á la antigua española, 
sumamente despacio, apegados á sus rancias costum- 20 
bres, en paz y en gracia de Dios, con su Inquisición y 
sus frailes, con su pintoresca desigualdad ante la ley, 
con sus privilegios, fueros y exenciones personales, con 
su carencia de toda libertad municipal ó política, gober- 
nados simultáneamente por insignes obispos y^ pode- 25 
rosos corregidores (cuyas respectivas potestades no era 
muy fácil deslindar, pues unos y otros se metían en lo 
temporal y en lo eterno), y pagando un sinnúmero de 
contribuciones y tributos, cuya nomenclatura no viene 
á cuento ahora. -30 



DE CUÁNDO SUCEDIÓ LA COSA 7 

Y aquí termina todo lo que la presente historia tiene 
que ver con la militar y política de aquella época ; pues 
nuestro único objeto, al referir lo que entonces sucedía 
en el mundo, ha sido venir á parar á que el año de que 
5 se trata (supongamos que el de 1805) imperaba todavía 
en España el antiguo régimen en todas las esferas de la 
vida pública y particular, como si, en medio de tantas 
novedades y trastornos, el Pirineo se hubiese convertido 
en otra Muralla de la China. 



II 

DE CÓMO VIVÍA ENTONCES LA GENTE 

En Andalucía, por ejemplo (pues precisamente acon- 
teció en una ciudad de Andalucía lo que vais á oir), las 
personas de suposición continuaban levantándose muy 
temprano ; yendo á la Catedral á misa de prima ^ aun- 
que no fuese día de precepto ; almorzando, á las nueve, 5 
un huevo frito y una jicara de chocolate con picatostes ; 
comiendo, de una á dos de la tarde, puchero y principio, 
si había caza, y, si no, puchero solo ; durmiendo la 
siesta después de comer ; paseando luego por el campo ; 
yendo al Rosario, entre dos luces, á su respectiva parro- 10 
quia; tomando otro chocolate á la Oración (éste con 
bizcochos); asistiendo los muy encopetados á la ter- 
tulia del corregidor, del deán, ó del título que residía . 
en el pueblo ; retirándose á casa á las Ánimas ; cerrando 
el portón antes del toque de la queda ; cenando ensalada 15 
y guisado por antonomasia, si no habían entrado boque- 
rones frescos, y acostándose incontinenti con su señora 
(los que la tenían), no sin hacerse calentar primero la 
cama durante nueve meses del año . . . 

I Dichosísimo tiempo aquel en que nuestra tierra 90 
seguía en quieta y pacífíca posesión de todas las tela- 
rañas, de todo el polvo, de toda la polilla, de todos los 
respetos, de todas las creencias, de todas las tradiciones, 
de todos los usos y de todos los abusos santificados por 

8 



DE CÓMO VIVÍA ENTONCES LA GENTE 9 

los siglos 1 I Dichosísimo tiempo aquel en que* había en 
la sociedad humana variedad de clases, de afectos y de 
costumbres I { Dichosísimo tiempo, digo . . . , para los 
poetas especialmente, que encontraban un entremés, un 
saínete, una comedia, un drama, un auto sacramental 6 
una epopeya detrás de cada esquina, en vez de esta 
prosaica uniformidad y desabrido realismo que nos legó 
al cabo la Revolución Francesa! — ¡Dichosísimo tiempo, 
sí! . . . 

Pero esto es volver á las andadas. Basta ya de 
generalidades y de circunloquios, y entremos resuelta- 
mente en la historia del Sombrero de tres picos. 



III 



DO UT DES 



En aquel tiempo, pues, había cerca de la ciudad de 
*** un famoso molino, harinero (que ya no existe), 
situado como á un cuarto de legua de la población, 
entre el pie de suave colina poblada de guindos y 
cerezos y una fértilísima huerta que servía de margen 5 
(y algunas veces de lecho) al titular, intermitente y 
traicionero río. 

Por varias y diversas razones, hacía ya algún tiempo 
que aquel molino era el predilecto punto de llegada y 
descanso de los paseantes más caracterizados de la men- xo 
donada ciudad ... — Primeramente, conducía á él un 
camino carretero, menos intransitable que los restantes 
de aquellos contornos. — En segundo lugar, delante del 
molino había una plazoletilla empedrada, cubierta por 
un parral enorme, debajo del cual se tomaba muy bien 15 
el fresco en el verano y el sol en el invierno, merced á 
la alternada ida y venida de los pámpanos. . . . — En 
tercer lugar, el molinero era un hombre muy respetuoso, 
muy discreto, muy fino, que tenía lo que se llama don 
de gentes, y que obsequiaba á los señorones que solían ao 
honrarlo con su tertulia vespertina, ofreciéndoles . . . 
lo que daba el tiempo, ora habas verdes, ora cerezas y 
guindas, ora lechugas en rama y sin sazonar (que están 
muy buenas cuando se las acompaña de macarros de 

10 



DO UT DES H 

pan y aceite ; macarros que se encargaban de enviar 
por delante sus señorías), ora melones, ora uvas de 
aquella misma parra que les servía de dosel, ora rosetas 
de maíz, si era invierno, y castañas asadas, y almendras, 
5 y nueces, y de vez en cuando, en las tardes muy frías, 
un trago de vino de pulso (dentro ya de la casa y al 
amor de la lumbre), á lo que por Pascuas se solía aña- 
dir algún pestiño, algún mantecado, algún rosco ó 
alguna lonja de jamón alpujarreño. 

10 — i Tan rico era el molinero,vó tan imprudentes sus 
tertulianos ? — exclamaréis, interrumpiéndome. 

Ni lo uno ni lo otro. El molinero sólo tenía un 
pasar, y aquellos caballeros eran la delicadeza y el 
orgullo personificados. Pero en unos tiempos en que 

15 se pagaban cincuenta y tantas contribuciones diferen- 
tes á la Iglesia y al Estado, poco arriesgaba un rústico 
de tan claras luces como aquél en tenerse ganada la 
voluntad de regidores, canónigos, frailes, escribanos 
y demás personas de campanillas. Así es que no 

90 faltaba quien dijese que el tío Lucas (tal era el nombre 
del molinero) se ahorraba un dineral al año á fuerza 
de agasajar 4 todo el mundo. 

— «Vuestra Merced me va á dar una puertecilla 
vieja de la casa que ha derribado,» decíale á uno. — 

25 « Vuestra Señoría (decíale á otro) va á mandar que me 
rebajen el subsidio, ó la alcabala, ó la contribución de 
frutos-civiles.» — «Vuestra Reverencia me va á dejar 
coger en la huerta del convento una poca hoja para 
mis gusanos de seda.» — « Vuestra Ilustrísima me va á 

30 dar permiso para traer una poca leña del monte X.» — 



12 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

« Vuestra Paternidad me va á poner dos letras para 
que me permitan cortar una poca madera en el pinar H.» 
— «Es menester que me haga Usarcé una escriturilla 
que no me cueste nada.» — « Este año no puedo pagar 
el censo.» — « Espero que el pleito se falle á mi favor.» 5 
— « Hoy le he dado de bofetadas á uno, y creo que 
debe ir á la cárcel por haberme provocado.» — « ¿ Ten- 
dría su Merced tal cosa de sobra?» — «¿Le sirve á 
Usted de algo tal otra?» — «¿Me puede prestar la 
muía ? » — « ¿ Tiene ocupado mañana el carro ? » — xo 
« ¿ Le parece que envíe por el burro ? . . .» 

Y estas canciones se repetían á todas horas-, obte- 
niendo siempre por contestación un generoso y desin- 
teresado . . . « Como sepide.m 

Conque ya veis que el tío Lucas no estaba en camino 15 
de arruinarse. 



ly/: 



UNA MUJER VISTA POR FUERA 



La Ultima y acaso la más poderosa razón que tenía 
el señorío de la ciudad para frecuentar por las tardes 
el molino del tío Lucas, era . . . que, así los clérigos 
como los seglares, empezando por el Sr. Obispo y el 
5 Sr. Corregidor, podían contemplar allí á sus anchas 
una de las obras más bellas, graciosas y admirables que 
hayan salido jamás de las manos de Dios, llamado en- 
tonces el Ser Su ^mo por Jovellanos y toda la escuela 
afrancesada de nuestro país. ... * 

\Q Esta obra ... se denominaba « la seña Frasquita.» 

Empiezo por responderos de que la seña Frasquita, 

legítima esposa del tío Lucas, era una mujer de bien, y 

de que así lo sabían todos los ilustres visitantes del 

molino. Digo más : ninguno de éstos daba muestras 

^5 de considerarla con ojos de varón ni con trastienda 
pecaminosa. Admirábanla, sí, y requebrábanla en oca- 
siones (delante de su marido, por supuesto), lo mismo 
los frailes que los caballeros, los canónigos que los 
golillas, como un prodigio de belleza que honraba á su 

20 Criador, y como una diablesa de travesura y coquetería, 
que alegraba inocentemente los espíritus más melan- 
cólicos. — «Es un hermoso animal^yt solía decir el vir- 
tuosísimo Prelado. — «Es una estatua de la antigüedad 
helénica,» observaba un Abogado muy erudito, Acadé- 

13 



14 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

mico correspondiente de la Historia. — « Es la propia 
estampa de Eva,» prorrumpía el Prior de los F Va n-_ 
píscan os. — «Es una real moza,» exclamaba el Coronel 
de milicias. — «Es una sierpe, una sirena, ; un demo- 
nio!» añadía el Corregidor. — «Pero es una buena 5 
mujer, es un ángel, es una criatura, es una chiquilla de 
cuatro años,» acababan por decir todos, al regresar del 
/ molino atiborrados de uvas 6 de nueces, en busca de 
sus tétricos y metódicos hogares. 

La chiquilla de cuatro años, esto es, la seña Fras- 10 
quita, frisaría en los treinta. Tenía más de dos varas 
de estatura, y era recia á proporción, ó quizás más 
gruesa todavía de lo correspondiente á su arrogante 
talla. Parecía una £Iiobe colosal, y eso que no había 
tenido hijos : parecía un Hércules . . . hembra : pare- 15 
cía una matrona romana de las c[ue aún hay ejemplares 
en el Irastévere* — Pero lo más notable en ella era la 
movilidad, la ligereza, la animación, la gracia de su 
respetable mole. Para ser una estatua, como pretendía 
el Académico, le faltaba el reposo monumental. Se ao 
cimbraba como un junco, giraba como una veleta, bai- 
laba como una peonza. — Su rostro era más movible 
todavía, y, por tanto, menos escultural. Avivábanlo 
donosamente hasta cinco hoyuelos : dos en una mejilla ; 
otro en otra ; otro, muy chico, cerca de la comisura 25 
izquierda de sus rientes labios, y el ultimo, muy grande, 
en medio de su redonda barba. \\ñadid á esto los 
picarescos mohines, los graciosos guiños y las varia« 
das posturas de cabeza que amenizaban su conver- 
sación, y formaréis idea de aquella cara llena de sal 30 



UNA MUJER VISTA POR FUERA 15 

y de hermosura y radiante siempre de salud y alegría. 
Ni la seña Frasquita ni el tío Lucas eran andaluces : 
ella era navarra y él murciano. Él había ido á la ciu- 
dad^ de ***, á la edad de quince años, como medio 

5 paje, medio criado del obispo anterior al que entonces 
gobernaba aquella iglesia. Educábalo su protector 
para clérigo, y tal vez con esta mira y para que no care- 
ciese de congrua^ dejóle en su testamento el molino ; pero 
el tío Lucas, que á la muerte de Su Ilustrísima no estaba 

10 ordenado más que de menores^ ahorcó los hábitos en 

aquel punto y hora, y sentó plaza de soldado, más 

ganoso de ver mundo y correr aventuras que de decir 

-P^misa ó de moler trigo. — En 1793 hizo la campaña de 

los Pirineos Occidentales, como ordenanza del valiente 

Z5 General Don Ventura Caro ; asistió al asalto de Castillo 
Piñón, y permaneció luego largo tiempo en las provin- 
cias del Norte, donde tomó la licencia absoluta. — En 
Estella conoció á la seña Frasquita, que entonces sólo 
se llamaba Frasquita; la enamoró ; se casó con ella, y 

ao se la llevó á Andalucía en busca de aquel molino que 
había de verlos tan pacífícos y dichosos durante el resto 
de su peregrinación por este valle de lágrimas y risas. 

La seña Frasquita, pues, trasladada de Navarra á 
aquella soledad, no había adquirido ningún hábito 

«5 andaluz, y se diferenciaba mucho de las mujeres 
campesinas de los contomos. Vestía con más sencillez, 
desenfado y elegancia que ellas, lavaba más sus carnes, 
y permitía al sol y al aire acariciar sus arremangados 
brazos y su descubierta garganta. Usaba, hasta cierto 

30 punto, el traje de las señoras de aquella época, el traje 



V 



y 



1 6 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

de las mujeres de Goya, el traje de la reina María Luisa : 
si no falda de medio paso, falda de un paso solo, suma- 
mente corta, que dejaba ver sus menudos pies y el 
arranque de su soberana pierna : llevaba el escote re- 
dondo y bajo, al estilo de Madrid, donde se detuvo dos 5 
meses con su Lucas al trasladarse de Navarra á Anda- 
lucía ; todo el pelo recogido en lo alto de la coronilla, 
lo cual dejaba campear la gallardía de su cabeza y de 
su cuello ; ^en^las arracadas en las diminutas orejas, y 
muchas sortijas en los afílados dedos de sus duras pero 10 
limpias manos. — Por último : la voz de la seña Fras- 
quita tenía todos los tonos del más extenso y melodioso 
instrumento, y su carcajada era tan alegre y argentina, 
que parecía un repique de Sábado de Gloria. 

Retratemos ahora al tío Lucas. 15 



UN HOMBRE VISTO POR FUERA Y POR DENTRO 

El tío Lucas era más feo que Picio. Lo había sido 
toda su vida, y ya tenía cerca de cuarenta años. Sin 
embargo, pocos hombres tan simpáticos y agradables 
habrá echado Dios al mundo. Prendado de su viveza, 

5 de su ingenio y de su gracia, el difunto obispo se lo 
pidió á sus padres, que eran pastores, no de almas, sino 
de verdaderas ovejas. Muerto Su Ilustrísima, y dejado 
que hubo el mozo el seminario por el cuartel, distin- 
guiólo entre todo su ejército el General Caro, y lo hizo 

10 su ordenanza más íntimo, su verdadero criado de cam- 
paña. Cumplido, en ñn, el empeño militar, fuéle tan 
fácil al tío Lucas rendir el corazón de la seña Frasquita, 
como fácil le había sido captarse el aprecio del general 
y del prelado. La navarra, que tenía á la sazón veinte 

15 abriles, y era el ojo derecho de todos los mozos de Este- 
lia, algunos de ellos bastante ricos, no pudo resistir á 
los continuos donaires, á las chistosas ocurrencias, á los 
ojillos de enamorado mono y á la bufona y constante 
sonrisa, llena de malicia, pero también de dulzura, de 

20 aquel murciano tan atrevido, tan locuaz, tan avisado, 
tan dispuesto, tan valiente y tan gracioso, que acabó 
por trastornar el juicio, no sólo á la codiciada beldad, 
sino también á su padre y á su madre. 

Lucas era en aquel entonces, y seguía siendo en la 
17 



i8 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

fecha á que nos referimos, de pequeña estatura (á lo 
menos con relación á su mujer), un poco cargado de es- 
paldas, muy moreno, barbilampiño, narigón, orejudo y 
picado de viruelas. — En cambio, su boca era regular y 
su dentadura inmejorable. Dijérase que sólo la corteza 5 
de aquel hombre era tosca y fea ; que tan pronto como 
empezaba á penetrarse dentro de él aparecían sus per- 
fecciones, y que estas perfecciones principiaban en los 
dientes. Luego venía la voz, vibrante, elástica, atrae- lo 
tiva; varonil y grave algunas veces, dulce y melosa 
cuando pedía algo, y siempre difícil de resistir. Llegaba 
después lo que aquella voz decía : todo oportuno, dis- 
creto, ingenioso, persuasivo ... Y, por tíltimo, en el alma 
del tío Lucas había valor, lealtad, honradez, sentido 15 
común, deseo de saber y conocimientos instintivos ó 
empíricos de muchas cosas, profundo desdén á los 
necios, cualquiera que fuese su categoría social, y cierto 
espíritu de ironía, de burla y de sarcasmo, que le hacían 
pasar, á los ojos del Académico, por un D. Francisco ao 
de Quevedo en bruto. 

Tal era por dentro y por fuera el tío Lucas. 



VI 

HABILIDADES DE LOS DOS CÓNYUGES 

Amaba, pues, locamente la seña Frasquita al tío Lucas, 
y considerábase la mujer más feliz del mundo al verse 
adorada por él. No tenían hijos, según que ya sabemos, 
y habíase consagrado cada uno á cuidar y mimar al otro 

5 con esmero indecible, pero sin que aquella tierna solici- 
tud ostentase el carácter sentimental y empalagoso, por 
lo zalamero, de casi todos los matrimonios sin sucesión. 
Al contrario : tratábanse con una llaneza, una alegría, 
una broma y una confianza semejantes á las de aque- 

lo líos niños, camaradas de juegos y de diversiones, que se 
quieren con toda el alma sin decírselo jamás, ni darse 
á sí mismos cuenta de lo que sienten. 

I Imposible que haya habido sobre la tierra molinero 
mejor peinado, mejor vestido, más regalado en la mesa, 

15 rodeado de más comodidades en su casa, que el tío 
Lucas 1 I Imposible que ninguna molinera ni ninguna 
reina haya sido objeto de tantas atenciones, de tantos 
agasajos, de tantas finezas como la seña Frasquita I 
I Imposible también que ningún molino haya encerrado 

io tantas cosas necesarias, útiles, agradables, recreativas y 
hasta superfinas, como el que va á servir de teatro á 
casi toda la presente historia I 

Contribuía mucho á ello que la seña Frasquita, la 
pulcra, hacendosa, fuerte y saludable navarra, sabía, 

19 



29 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

quería y podía guisar, coser, bordar, barrer, hacer dul- 
ces, lavar, planchar, blanquear la casa, fregar el cobre, 
amasar, tejer, hacer media, cantar, bailar, tocar la gui- 
tarra y los palillos, jugar á la brisca y al tute, y otras 
muchísimas cosas cuya relación fuera interminable. — Y 5 
contribuía no menos al mismo resultado el que el tío 
Lucas sabía, quería y podía dirigir la molienda, cultivar 
el campo, cazar, pescar, trabajar de carpintero, de he- 
rrero y de albañil, ayudar á su mujer en todos los que- 
haceres de la casa, leer, escribir, contar, etc., etc. 10 

Y esto sin hacer mención de los ramos de lujo, ó sea 
de sus habilidades extraordinarias . . . 

Por ejemplo : el tío Lucas adoraba las flores (lo mis- 
mo que su mujer), y era floricultor tan consumado, que 
había conseguido producir ejemplares nuevos, por medio 15 
de laboriosas combinaciones. Tenía algo de ingeniero 
natural, y lo había demostrado construyendo una presa, 
un sifón y un acueducto que triplicaron el agua del 
molino. Había enseñado á bailar á un perro, domesti- 
cado una culebra, y hecho que un loro diese la hora por 20 
medio de gritos, segiín las iba marcando un reloj de sol 
que el molinero había trazado en una pared ; de cuyas 
resultas el loro daba ya la hora con toda precisión, hasta 
en los días nublados y durante la noche. 

Finalmente: en el molino había una huerta que producía 25 
toda clase de frutas y legumbres ; un estanque encerrado 
en una especie de kiosko de jazmines, donde se bañaban 
en verano el tío Lucas y la seña Frasquita, un jardín; 
una estufa ó invernadero para las plantas exóticas ; una 
fuente de agua potable; dos burras, en que el matrí- 30 



HABILIDADES DE LOS DOS CÓNYUGES 2 1 

monio iba á la Ciudad 6 á los pueblos de las cercanías ; 
gallinero, palomar, pajarera, criadero de peces ; criadero 
de gusanos de seda ; colmenas, cuyas abejas libaban en 
los jazmines ; jaraiz 6 lagar, con su bodega correspon- 
diente, ambas cosas en miniatura ; homo, telar, fragua, 
taller de carpintería, etc., etc. ; todo ello reducido á una 
casa de ocho habitaciones y á dos fanegas de tierra, y 
tasado en la cantidad de diez mil reales. 



VII 



EL FONDO DE LA FELICIDAD 



Adorábanse, sí, locamente el molinero y la molinera, 
y aun se hubiera creído que ella lo quería más á él que 
él á ella, no obstante ser él tan feo y ella tan hermosa. 
Dígolo porque la seña Frasquita solía tener celos y 
pedirle cuentas al tío Lucas cuando éste tardaba mucho 5 
en regresar de la Ciudad 6 de los pueblos adonde iba 
por grano, mientras que el lío Lucas veía hasta con 
gusto las atenciones de que era objeto la seña Frasquita 
por parte de los señores que frecuentaban el molino ; 
se ufanaba y regocijaba de que á todos les agradase 10 
tanto como á él : y, aunque comprendía que en el fondo 
del corazón se la envidiaban algunos de ellos, la codi- 
ciaban como simples mortales y hubieran dado cualquier 
cosa porque fuese menos mujer de bien, la dejaba sola 
días enteros sin el menor cuidado, y nunca le pregun- 15 
taba luego qué había hecho ni quién había estado allí 
durante su ausencia . . . 

No consistía aquello, sin embargo, en que el amor 
del tío Lucas fuese menos vivo que el de la seña Fras- 
quita. . Consistía en que él tenía más confianza en la 20 
virtud de ella que ella en la de él ; consistía en que él la 
aventajaba en penetración, y sabía hasta qué punto era 
amado y cuánto se respetaba su mujer á sí misma ; y 
consistía principalmente en que el tío Lucas era todo 



EL FONDO DE LA FELICIDAD 



23 



un hombre: un hombre como el de Shakespeare, de 
pocos é indivisibles sentimientos; incapaz de dudas; 
que creía 6 moría; que amaba 6 mataba; que no 
admitía gradación ni tránsito entre la suprema felicidad 
5 y el exterminio de su dicha. 

Era, en ñn, un O fe/o de Murcia, con alpargatas y 
montera, en el primer acto de una tragedia posible . . . 
Pero i á qué estas notas lúgubres en una tonadilla tan 
alegre ? ¿Á qué estos relámpagos fatídicos en una at- 
10 móstera tan serena ? ¿A qué estas actitudes melodramá- 
ticas en un cuadro de género ? 
Vais á saberlo inmediatamente. 



v^ 






VIII 

EL HOMBRE DEL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



Eran las dos de una tarde de Octubre. 
v} El esquilón de la Catedral tocaba á vísperas, — lo 
o^ cual equivale á decir que ya habían comido todas las 
personas principales de la ciudad. 

Los canónigos se dirigían al coro, y los seglares á 5 
sus alcobas á dormir la siesta, sobre todo aquellos que, 
por razón de ófrcib7 v. gr., las autoridades, habían pasa- 
do la mañana entera trabajando. 

Era, pues, muy de extrañar que á aquella hora, im- 
propia además para dar un paseo, pues todavía hacía 10 
demasiado calor, saliese de la Ciudad, á pie, y seguido 
de un solo alguacil, el ilustre señor Corregidor de la mis- 
ma, — á quien no podía confundirse con ninguna otra 
persona ni de día ni de noche, así por la enormidad de 
su sombrero de tres picos y por lo vistoso de su capa 15 
de grana, como por lo particularísimo de su grotesco 
donaire . . . 

De la capa de grana y del sombrero de tres picos, son 
muchas todavía las personas que pudieran hablar con 
pleno conocimiento de causa. Nosotros, entre ellas, 90 
lo mismo que todos los nacidos en aquella ciudad en 
las postrimerías del reinado del Señor Don Fernando 
VII, recordamos haber visto colgados de un clavo, 
único adorno de desmantelada pared, en la ruinosa 

24 



EL HOMBRE DEL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



25 



torre de la casa que habitó Su Señoría (torre destinada 
á la sazón á los infantiles juegos de sus nietos), aquellas 
dos anticuadas prendas, aquella capa y aquel sombrero, — 
el negro sombrero encima, y la roja capa debajo, — 

5 formando una especie de espectro del absolutismo, una 
especie de sudario del Corregidor, una especie de carica- 
tura retrospectiva de su poder, pintada con carbón y 
almagre, como tantas otras, por los párvulos constitu- 
dónales de la de 1837 que allí nos reuníamos; una 

10 especie, en fin, de espantapájaros ^ que en otro tiempo 
había sido espanta-hombres^ y que hoy me da miedo de 
haber contribuido á escarnecer, paseándolo por aquella 
histórica ciudad, en días de carnestolendas, en lo alto 
de un deshollinador, ó sirviendo de disfraz irrisorio al 

15 idiota que más hacía reir á la plebe... — | Pobre 
principio de autoridad/ \ Así te hemos puesto los mis- 
mos que hoy te invocamos tanto I 

En cuanto al indicado grotesco donaire del señor 
Corregidor, consistía (dicen) en que era, cargado de 

20 espaldas . . . , todavía más cargado de espaldas que el 
tío Lucas . . . , casi jorobado, por decirlo de una vez ; 
de estatura menos que mediana; endeblillo; de mala 
salud ; con las piernas arqueadas y una manera de an- 
dar sui generis (balanceándose de un lado á otro y de 

2S atrás hacia adelante), que sólo se puede describir con 
la absurda fórmula de que parecía cojo de los dos pies. — 
En cambio (añade la tradición), su rostro era regular, 
aunque ya bastante arrugado por la ^alta absoluta de 
dientes y muelas ; moreno verdoso, como el de casi 

90 todos los hijos de las Castillas ; con grandes ojos obs- 



iS £L SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

euros, en que relampagueaban la cólera, el despotismo 
y la lujuria ; con finas y traviesas facciones, que no 
tenían la expresión del valor personal, pero sí la de 
una malicia artera capaz de todo, y con cierto aire de 
satisfacción, medio aristocrático, medio libertino, que 5 
revelaba que aquel hombre habría sido, en su remota 
juventud, muy agradable y acepto á las mujeres, no 
obstante sus piernas y su joroba. 

D. Eugenio de Zúñiga y Ponce de León (que así se 
llamaba Su Señoría) había nacido en Madrid, de familia 10 
ilustre; frisaría á la sazón en los cincuenta y cinco 
años, y llevaba cuatro de corregidor en la ciudad de que 
tratamos, donde se casó, á poco de llegar, con la prin- 
cipalísima señora que diremos más adelante. 

Las medias de D. Eugenio (única parte que, además xs 
de los zapatos, dejaba ver de su vestido la extensísima 
capa de grana) eran blancas, y los zapatos negros, con 
hebilla de oro. Pero luego que el calor del campo lo 
obligó á desembozarse, vídose que llevaba gran corbata 
de batista ; chupa de sarga de color de tórtola, muy ao 
festoneada de ramillos verdes, bordados de realce ; cal- 
zón corto, negro, de seda ; una enorme casaca de la 
misma estofa que la chupa ; espadín con guarnición de 
acero ; bastón con borlas, y un respetable par de guantes 
(ó quirotecas) de gamuza pajiza, que no se ponía nunca 2$ 
y que empuñaba á guisa de cetro. 

£1 alguacil, que seguía á veinte pasos de distancia al 
señor Corregidor, se llamaba Garduña, y era la propia 
estampa de su nombre. — Flaco, agilísimo; mirando 
adelante y atrás y á derecha é izquierda al propio tiempo 30 



EL HOMBRE DEL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



27 



que andaba ; de largo cuello ; de diminuto y repugnante 
rostro, y con dos manos como dos manojos de discipli- 
nas, parecía juntamente un hurón en busca de criminales, 
la cuerda que había de atarlos, y el instrumento desti- 

5 nado á su castigo. 

El primer corregidor que le echó la vista encima, 
le dijo sin más informes : « Tú serás mi verdadero 
alguacil ...» — Y ya lo había sido de cuatro corregi- 
dores. 

10 Tenía cuarenta y ocho años, y llevaba sombrero de 
tres picos, mucho más pequeño que el de su señor (pues 
repetimos que el de éste era descomunal), capa negra 
como las medias y todo el traje, bastón sin borlas, y una 
especie de asador por espada. 

15 Aquel espantajo negro parecía la sombra de su vis- 
toso amo. 



IX 

I ARRE, BURRA I 

Por dondequiera que pasaban el personaje y su 
apéndice, los labradores dejaban sus faenas y se des- 
cubrían hasta los pies, con más miedo que respeto; 
después de lo cual se decían en voz baja : 

— I Temprano va esta tarde el señor Corregidor á ver 5 
á la seña Frasquita I 

— I Temprano ... y solo I — añadían algunos, acos- 
tumbrados á verlo siempre dar aquel paseo en com- 
pañía de otras varias personas. 

— Oye, tú, Manuel : ¿ por qué irá solo esta tarde el 10 
señor Corregidor á ver á la navarra ? — le preguntó una 
lugareña á su marido, el cual la llevaba á grupas en la 
bestia. 

Y, al mismo tiempo que la pregunta, le hizo cosquillas, 
por vía de retintín. 15 

— I No seas mal pensada, Josefa 1 (exclamó el buen 
hombre). La seña Frasquita es incapaz . . . 

— No digo yo lo contrario . . . Pero el Corregidor no 
es por eso incapaz de estar enamorado de ella ... Yo he 
oído decir que, de todos los que van á las francachelas 20 
del molino, el único que lleva mal fín es ese madrileño 
tan añcionado á faldas . . . 

— ¿Y qué sabes tú si es ó no aficionado á faldas ? — 
preguntó á su vez el marido. • 

28 



{ARRE, BURRA I 29 

— No lo digo por mí ... | Ya se hubiera guardado, 
por más corregidor que sea, de decirme los ojos tienes 
negros I 

La que así hablaba era fea en grado superlativo. 
5 — Pues mira, hija, | allá ellos 1 (replicó el llamado 
Manuel). Yo no creo al tío Lucas hombre de consen- 
tir ... ; Bonito genio tiene el tío Lucas cuando se 
enfada I . . . 

— Pero, en fin, | si ve que le conviene 1 . . . — añadió 
10 la tía Josefa, retorciendo el hocico. 

— El tío Lucas es hombre de bien . . . (repuso el 
lugareño) ; y á un hombre de bien nunca pueden con- 
venirle ciertas cosas . . . 

— Pues entonces, tienes razón . . . | Allá ellos I — ¡Si 
15 yo fuera la seña Frasquita 1 . . . 

— I Arre, burra I — gritó el marido, para mudar la 
conversación. 

Y la burra salió al trote ; con lo que no pudo oirse 
el resto del diálogo. 



DESDE LA PARRA 

Mientras así discurrían los labriegos que saludaban 
al señor Corregidor, la seña Frasquita regaba y barría 
cuidadosamente la plazoletilla empedrada que servía de 
atrio ó compás al molino, y colocaba media docena de 
sillas debajo de lo más espeso del emparrado, en el cual 5 
estaba subido el tío Lucas, cortando los mejores racimos 
y arreglándolos artísticamente en una cesta. 

— I Pues sí, Frasquita 1 (decía el tío Lucas desde lo 
alto de la parra) : el señor Corregidor está enamorado 
de ti de muy mala manera ... 10 

— Ya te lo dije yo hace tiempo (contestó la mujer 
del Norte) . . . Pero | déjalo que pene ! — ¡ Cuidado, 
Lucas, no te vayas á caer 1 

— Descuida : estoy bien agarrado ... — También le 
gustas mucho al señor ... 15 

— I Mira 1 I no me des más noticias 1 (interrumpió 
ella). I Demasiado sé yo á quién le gusto y á quién no 
le gusto 1 I Ojalá supiera del mismo modo por qué no 
te gusto á ti 1 

— I Toma ! Porque eres muy fea ... — contestó el 20 
tío Lucas. 

— Pues, oye . . . , i fea y todo, soy capaz de subir á 
la parra y echarte de cabeza al suelo 1 . . . 

— Más fácil sería que yo no te dejase bajar de la 
parra sin comerte viva ... 25 

30 



DESDE LA PARRA 



31 



— { Eso es 1 . . . [ y cuando vinieran mis galanes y nos 
viesen ahí, dirían que éramos un mono y una mona I . . . 

— Y acertarían ; porque td eres muy mona y muy 
rebonita, y yo parezco un mono con esta joroba , . . 

5 — Que á mí me gusta muchísimo . . . 

— Entonces te gustará más la del Corregidor, que es 
piayor que la mía . . . 

— I Vamos 1 ¡ Vamos 1 Sr. D. Lucas ... | No tenga 
V. tantos celos I . . . 

10 — ¿ Celos yo de ese viejo petate ? — ¡Al contrario ; 
me alegro muchísimo de que te quiera 1 . . . 

— I Por qué ? 

— Porque en el pecado lleva la penitencia. ¡ Tú no 
has de quererlo nunca, y yo soy entretanto el verdadero 

15 Corregidor de la ciudad 1 

— j Miren el vanidoso ! — Pues figúrate que llegase á 
quererlo ... — i Cosas más raras se ven en el mundo I 

— Tampoco me daría gran cuidado ... 

— I Por qué ? 

ao — I Porque entonces tú no serías ya tú ; y, no siendo 
tú quien eres, ó como yo creo que eres, maldito lo que 
me importaría que te llevasen los demonios 1 

— Pero bien ; ¿ qué harías en semejante caso ? 

— ¿ Yo ? I Mira lo que no sé 1 . . . Porque, como 
25 entonces yo sería otro y no el que soy ahora, no puedo 

figurarme lo que pensaría . . . 

— ¿Y por qué serías entonces otro? — insistid va- 
lientemente la seña Frasquita, dejando de barrer y 
poniéndose en jarras para mirar hacia arriba. 

30 El tío Lucas se rascó la cabeza, como si escarbara 



32 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



para sacar de ella alguna idea muy profunda, hasta que 
al fín dijo con más seriedad y pulidez que de costumbre : 

— Sería otro, porque yo soy ahora un hombre que cree 
en ti como en sí mismo, y que no tiene más vida que 
esta fe. De consiguiente, al dejar de creer en ti, me 5 
moriría 6 me convertiría en un nuevo hombre ; viviría 
de otro modo; me parecería que acababa de nacer ^ 
¡ tendría otras entrañas 1 Ignoro, pues, lo que haría en- 
tonces contigo . . . Puede que me echara á reir y te vol- 
viera la espalda . . . Puede que ni siquiera te cono- xo 
ciese . . . Puede que ... — Pero | vaya un gusto que 
tenemos en ponemos de mal humor sin necesidad 1 
I Qué nos importa á nosotros que te quieran todos los 
corregidores del mundo ? ¿No eres tú mi Frasquita ? 

— I Sí, pedazo de bárbaro 1 (contestó la navarra, 15 
riendo á más no poder). Yo soy tu Frasquita, y tú 
eres mi Lucas de mi alma, más feo que el bú, con más 
talento que todos los hombres, más bueno que el pan, 
y más querido ... — | Ah 1 \ lo que es eso de querido, 
cuando bajes de la parra lo verás 1 ( Prepárate á llevar 20 
más bofetadas y pellizcos que pelos tienes en la cabeza 1 
— Pero \ calla 1 i Qué es lo que veo ? El señor Corre- 
gidor viene por allí completamente solo . . . i Y tan tem- 
pranito 1 . . . — Ese trae plan ... — | Por lo visto, tú 
tenías razón I . . . 35 

— Pues aguántate, y no le digas que estoy subido en 
la parra. ] Ese viene á declararse á solas contigo, 
creyendo pillarme durmiendo la siesta! . . . — Quiero 
divertirme oyendo su explicación. 

Así dijo el tío Lucas, alargando la cesta á su mujer. 30 



DESDE LA PARRA 33 

— I No está mal pensado I (exclama ella, lanzando 
nuevas carcajadas). | El demonio del madrileño 1 ¿ Qué 
se habrá creído que es un corregidor para mí ? — Pero 
aquí llega ... — Por cierto que Garduña, que lo seguía 
5 á alguna distancia, se ha sentado en la ramblilla á la 
sombra . . . | Qué majadería 1 — Ocúltate tü bien entre 
los pámpanos, que nos vamos á reir más de lo que te 
figuras . . . 

Y, dicho esto, la hermosa navarra rompió á cantar el 
10 fandango, que ya le era tan familiar como las canciones 
de su tierra. 



XI 



XL BOMBARDEO DE PAMPLONA 

Dios te guarde, Frasquita ... — dijo el Corregidor á 
media voz, apareciendo bajo el emparrado y andando de 
puntillas. 

— I Tanto bueno, señor- Corregidor 1 (respondió ella 
en voz natural, haciéndole mil reverencias). | Usía por 5 
aquí á estas horas ! ¡ Y con el calor que hace I '\ Vaya, 
siéntese Su Señoría I . . . Esto está f resquito. — ¿ Cómo 
no ha aguardado Su Señoría á los demás señores ? — Aquí 
tienen ya preparados sus asientos . . . Esta tarde espe- 
ramos al señor Obispo en persona, que le ha prometido xo 
á mi Lucas venir á probar las primeras uvas de la parra. 
— I Y cómo lo pasa Su Señoría ? ¿ Cómo está la Señora ? 

El Corregidor se había turbado. — La ansiada sole- 
dad en que encontraba á la seña Frasquita le parecía un 
sueño, ó un lazo que le tendía la enemiga suerte para 15 
hacerle caer en el abismo de un desengaño. 

Limitóse, pues, á contestar : 

— No es tan temprano como dices . . . Serán las tres 
y media . . . 

El loro dio en aquel momento un chillido. 90 

— Son las dos y cuarto, — dijo la navarra, mirando 
de hito en hito al madrileño. 

Éste calló, como reo convicto que renuncia á U 
defensa. 

34 



EL BOMBARDEO DE PAMPLONA 35 

— ¿Y Lucas ? ¿ Duerme ? — preguntó al cabo de un 
rato. 

(Debemos advertir aquí que el Corregidor, lo mismo 
que todos los que no tienen dientes, hablaba con una 
5 pronunciación floja y sibilante, como si se estuviese 
comiendo sus propios labios.) 

— I De seguro I (contestó la seña Frasquita). — En 
llegando estas horas se queda dormido donde primero 
le coge, aunque sea en el borde de un precipicio . . . 

10 — Pues mira ... I déjalo dormir 1 . . . (exclamó el 
viejo Corregidor, poniéndose más pálido de lo que ya 
era).^ — Y tü, mi querida Frasquita, escúchame . . . , 
oye . . . , ven acá . . . j Siéntate aquí ; á mi lado 1 . . . 
Tengo muchas cosas que decirte . . . 

15 — Ya estoy sentada, — respondió la Molinera, aga- 
rrando una silla baja y plantándola delante del Corregi- 
dor, á cortísima distancia de la suya. 

Sentado que se hubo, Frasquita echó una pierna 
sobre la otra, inclinó el cuerpo hacia adelante, apoyó 

20 un codo sobre la rodilla cabalgadora, y la fresca y her- 
mosa cara en una de sus manos ; y así, con la cabeza 
un poco ladeada, la sonrisa en los labios, los cinco 
hoyos en actividad, y las serenas pupilas clavadas en 
el Corregidor, aguardó la declaración de Su Señoría. — 

25 Hubiera podido comparársela con Pamplona esperando 
un bombardeo. 

El pobre hombre fué á hablar, y se quedó con la boca 
abierta, embelesado ante aquella grandiosa hermosura, 
ante aquella esplendidez de gracias, ante aquella formi- 

30 dable mujer, de alabastrino color, de lujosas carnes, 4e 



36 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

limpia y rienté boca, de azules é insondables ojos, que 
parecía creada por el pincel de Rubens. 

— I Frasquita 1 . . . (murmuró al fin el delegado del 
rey, con acento desfallecido, mientras que su marchito 
rostro, cubierto de sudor, destacándose sobré su joroba, 5 
expresaba una inmensa angustia). ; Frasquita 1 . . . 

— I Me llamo 1 (contestó la hija de los Pirineos). — 
¿Y qué? 

— Lo que tú quieras ... — repuso el viejo con una 
ternura sin límites. 10 

— Pues lo que yo quiero . . . (dijo la Molinera), ya 
lo sabe Usía. Lo que yo quiero es que Usía nombre 
secretario del ayuntamiento de la Ciudad á un sobrino 
mío que tengo en Estella . . ^ , y que así podrá venirse 
de aquellas montañas, donde está pasando muchos 15 
apuros « . . 

— Te he dicho, Frasquita, que eso es imposible. 
El secretario actual . . . 

— I Es un ladrón, un borracho y un bestia 1 
— Ya lo sé . . . Pero tiene buenas aldabas entre los ao 
regidores perpetuos, y yo no puedo nombrar otro sin 
acuerdo del Cabildo. De lo contrario, me expongo . . . 

— 1 Me expongo 1 . . . f Me expongo 1 ... ¿ A qué no 
nos expondríamos por Vuestra Señoría hasta los gatos 
de esta casa ? 35 

— I Me querrías á ese precio ? — tartamudeó el Co- 
rregidor. 

— Nof señor ; que lo quiero á Usía de balde. 

— I Mujer, no me des tratamiento 1 Habíame de V. 

6 como se te antoje ... — ¿ Conque vas á quererme ? 30 
DI 



EL BOMBARDEO DE PAMPLONA 37 

— ¿No le digo á V, que lo quiero ya? 

— Pero ... 

— No hay pero que valga. ¡ Verá V. qué guapo y 
qué hombre de bien es mi sobrino ! 

5 — I Tü sí que eres guapa, Frascuela 1 . . . 

— ¿Le gusto á V. ? 

— ' I Que si me gustas 1 . . . | No hay mujer como tü 1 

— Pues mire V. . . Aquí no hay nada postizo ... — 
contestó la seña Frasquita, acabando de arrollar la 

xo manga de su jubón, y mostrando al Corregidor el resto 
de su brazo, digno de una cariátide y más blanco que 
una azucena. 

— I Que si me gustas ! . . • (prosiguió el Corregidor). 
I De día, de noche, á todas horas, en todas partes, sólo 

X5 pienso en ti ! . . . 

— I Pues qué 1 ¿ No le gusta á V. la «señora Corre- 
gidora ? (preguntó la seña Frasquita con tan mal fingida 
compasión, que hubiera hecho reir á un hipocondríaco). 
— I Qué lástima I Mi Lucas me ha dicho que tuvo el 

ao gusto de verla y de hablarle cuando fué á componerle á 
V. el reloj de la alcoba, y que es muy guapa, muy bue- 
na y de un trato muy cariñoso. 

— I No tanto 1 i No tanto 1 — murmuró el Corregidor 
con cierta amargura. 

35 — En cambio, otros me han dicho (prosiguió la 
Molinera) que tiene muy mal genio, que es muy celosa, 
y que V. le tiembla más que á una vara verde . . . 

— I No tanto, mujer ! . . . (repitió Don Eugenio de 
Zúñiga y Ponce de León, poniéndose colorado). | Ni 

9D tanto ni tan poco I La Señora tiene sus manías, es 



38 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

cierto . . . ; mas de ello á hacerme temblar, hay mucha 
diferencia. ; Yo soy el Corregidor 1 . . . 

— Pero, en fin, ¿ la quiere V., ó no la quiere ? 

— Te diré ... — Yo la quiero mucho ... .ó, por 
mejor decir, la quería antes de conocerte. Pero desde 5 
que te vi, no sé lo que me pasa, y ella misma conoce 
que me pasa algo . . . Bástete saber que hoy . . . , 
tomarle, por ejemplo, la cara á mi mujer me hace la 
misma operación que si me la tomara á mí propio ... — 

I Ya ves, que no puedo quererla más ni sentir menos ! . . . 10 
— j Mientras que por coger esa mano, ese brazo, esa 
cara, esa cintura, daría lo que no tengo ! 

Y, hablando así, el Corregidor trató de apoderarse 
del brazo desnudo que la seña Frasquita le estaba 
refregando materialmente por los ojos ; pero ésta, sin 15 
descomponerse, extendió la mano, tocó el pecho de Su 
Señoría con la pacífica violencia é incontrastable rigidez 
de la trompa de un elefante, y lo tiró de espaldas con 
silla y todo. 

— I Ave María Purísima ! (exclamó entonces la na- 20 
varra, riéndose á más no poder). Por lo visto, esa silla 
estaba rota . . . 

— I Qué pasa ahí ? — exclamó en esto el tío Lucas, 
asomando su feo rostro entre los pámpanos de la parra. 

El Corregidor estaba todavía en el suelo boca arriba, 25 
y miraba con un terror indecible á aquel hombre que 
aparecía en los aires boca abajo. 

Hubiérase dicho que Su Señoría era el diablo, ven- 
cido, no por San Miguel, sino por otro demonio del 
infierno. 30 



EL BOMBARDEO DE PAMPLONA 39 

— I Qué ha de pasar ? (se apresuró á responder la 
seña Frasquita), iQue el señor Corregidor puso la 
silla en vago, fué á mecerse, y se ha caído 1 

— I Jestís, María y José ! (exclamó á su vez el Moli- 
5 ñero). ¿ Y se ha hecho daño Su Señoría ? i Quiere un 

poco de agua y vinagre ? 

— ¡No me he hecho nadal — dijo el Corregidor, 
levantándose como pudo. 

Y luego^adi^^or lo bajo, pero de modo que pudiera 
10 oirlo la seña Frasquita : 

— I Me la pagaréis 1 

— Pues, en cambio. Su Señoría me ha salvado á mí 
la vida (repuso el tío Lucas sin moverse de lo alto de la 

f j ^ parra). — Figúrate, mujer, que estaba yo aquí sentado 
>^ is'contemplando las uvas, cuando me quedé dormido sobre 
una red de sarmientos y palos que dejaban claros sufi- 
cientes para que pasase mi cuerpo . . . Por consiguiente, a 
si la caída de Su Señoría no me hubiere despertado tan . 
á tiempo, esta tarde me habría yo rotfi.lla cabeza contra 
90 esas piedras. 

— Conque sí . . . ¿ eh ? . . . (replicó el Corregidor). 
Pues, I vaya, hombre I me alegro ... i Te digo que me 
alegro mucho de haberme caído ! 

— I Me la pagarás 1 — agregó en seguida, dirigiéndose 
^ á la Molinera. 

Y pronunció estas palabras con tal expresión de re- 
concentrada furia, que la seña Frasquita se puso triste. 

Veía claramente que el Corregidor se asustó al prin- 
cipio, creyendo que el Molinero lo había oído todo ; 
30 pero que, persuadido ya de que no había oído nada 



40 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



(pues la calma y el disimulo del tío Lucas hubieran 
engañado al más lince), empezaba á abandonarse á toda 
su iracundia y á concebir planes de venganza. 

— I Vamos ! ; Bájate ya de ahí, y ayüdame á limpiar 

á Su Señoría, que se ha puesto perdido de polvo ! — 5 
exclamó entonces la Molinera. 

Y, mientras el tío Lucas bajaba, díjol^.ella al Corre- 
gidor, dándole golpes con el delantal en la cbupg^ ^ 
alguno que otro en las orejas : 

— El pobre no ha oído nada . . . Estaba dormido 10 
como un tronco . . . 

Más que estas frases, la circunstancia de haber sido 
dichas en voz baja, afectando complicidad y secreto, 
produjo un efecto maravilloso. 

— I Pícara I ¡ Proterva ! — balbuceó Don Eugenio de 15 
Züñiga con la boca hecha un agua, pero gruñendo 
todavía . . . 

— ¿Me guardará Usía rencor? — replicó la navarra 
zalameramente. 

Viendo el Corregidor que la severidad le daba buenos ao 
resultados, intentó mirar á la seña Frasquita con mucha 
rabia; pero se encontró con su tentadora risa y su^s ^^ ' 
divino3 ojos, en los cuales brillaba la caricia de una 
aplica, y , derritiéndosele la gacha en el acto, le dijo 
cón un acento baboso y sibilante, en que se descubría 25 
más que nunca la ausencia total de dientes y muelas l. - . 

— I De ti depende, amor mío 1 

En aquel momento se descolgó de la parra el tío 
Lucas. 



XII 

DIEZMOS Y PRIMICIAS 

Repuesto el Corregidor en su silla, la Molinera diri- 
gió una rápida mirada á su esposo, y viole, no sólo tan ^ 
sosegado como siempre, sino reventando de ganas de 
reir por resultas de aquella ocurrencia : cambió con él 
5 desde lejos un beso tirado, aprovechando el primer 
descuido de Don Eugenio, y díjole, en fin, á éste con 
una voz de sirena que le hubiera envidiado Cleopatra ; '. 

— I Ahora va Su Señoría á probar mis uvas ! 
Entonces fué de ver á la hermosa navarra (y así la 

lo pintaría yo, si tuviese el pincel de Ticiano), plantada 
enfrente del embelesado Corregidor, fresca, magnífica, 
incitante, con sus nobles formas, con su angosto vesti- 
do, con su elevada estatura, con sus desnudos brazos 
levantados sobre la cabeza, y con un transparente raci- 

15 mo en cada mano, diciéndole, entre una sonrisa irre- 
sistible y una mirada suplicante en que titilaba el miedo : ' 

— Todavía no las ha* probado el señor Obispo . . . 
Son las primeras que se cogen este año . . . 

Parecía una gigantesca Pompna, brindando frutos á 
ao un dios campestre ; — á un sátiro, v. gr. 

En esto apareció al extremo de la plazoleta empedrada 

el venerable Obispo de la diócesis, acompañado del 

Abogado Académico y de dos Canónigos de avanzada 

edad, y seguido de su Secretario, de dos familiares y de 

95 dos pajes. 

41 



42 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



Detúvose un rato Su Ilustrísima á contemplar aquel 
cuadro tan cómico y tan bello, hasta que, por último, 
dijo, con el reposado acento propio de los prelados de 
entonces : 

— El Quinto , . . pagar diezmos y primicias á la iglesia 5 
de Dios, nos enseña la doctrina cristiana ; pero V., señor 
Corregidor, no se contenta con administrar el diezmo, 
sino que también trata de comerse las primicias. 

— I El señor Obispo ! — exclamaron los Molineros, 
dejando al Corregidor y corriendo á besar el anillo al 10 
Prelado. 

— I Dios se lo pague á Su Ilustrísima, por venir á 
honrar esta pobre choza I — dijo el tío Lucas, besando 
el primero, y con acento de muy sincera veneración. 

— I Qué señor Obispo tengo tan hermoso ! (exclamó 15 
la seña Frasquita, besando después), i Dios lo bendiga 

y me lo conserve más años que le conservó el suyo á 
mi Lucas I 

— I No sé qué falta puedo hacerte, cuando tú me 
echas las bendiciones, en vez de pedírmelas 1 — contestó 20 
riéndose el bondadoso Pastor. 

Y, extendiendo dos dedos, bendijo á la seña Frasquita 
y después á los demás circunstantes. 

— I Aquí tiene Usía Ilustrísima \bs primicias! (dijo 

el Corregidor, tomando un racimo de manos de la 25 
Molinera y presentándoselo cortésmente al Obispo). — 
Todavía no había yo probado las uvas . . . 

El Corregidor pronunció estas palabras, dirigiendo 
de paso una rápida y cínica mirada á la espléndida 
hermosura de b. /'bolinera. 30 



DIEZMOS Y PRIMICIAS 43 

— I Pues no será porque estén verdes, como las de la 
fábula! — observó el Académico. 

— Las de la fábula (expuso el Obispo) no estaban 
verdes, señor Licenciado ; sino fuera del alcance de la 

5 zorra. 

Ni el uno ni el otro habían querido acaso aludir al 
Corregidor ; pero ambas frases fueron casualmente tan 
adecuadas á lo que acababa de suceder allí que Don 
Eugenio de Züñiga se puso lívido de cólera, y dijo, 

10 besando el anillo del Prelado : 

— I Eso es llamarme zorro, señor ilustrísimo ! 

— / Tu dixistil (replicó éste, con la afable severidad 
de un Santo, como diz que lo era en efecto). — Excu- 
satio non petita^ accusatio tnant/esta, — Qualis vir^ \alis 
15 oratio, — Pero satis jam dictum^ nullus ultra sit sermo, 
Ó, lo que es lo mismo, dejémonos de latines, y veamos 
estas famosas uvas. 

Y picó . . . una sola vez ... en el racimo que le pre- 
sentaba el Corregidor, 
ao — I Están muy buenas 1 (exclamó, mirando aquella 
uva al trasluz y alargándosela en seguida á su secreta- 
rio). — I Lástima que á mí me sienten mal ! 

El Secretario contempló también la uva; hizo un 
gesto de cortesana admiración, y la entregó á uno de 
25 los familiares. 

El familiar repitió la acción del Obispo y el gesto del 
Secretario, propasándose hasta oler la uva, y luego . . . 
la colocó en la cesta con escrupuloso cuidado, no sin 
decir en voz baja á la concurrencia : 
50 — Su Ilustrísima ayuna . . . 



44 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



El tío Lucas, que había seguido la uva con la vista, 
la cogió entonces disimuladamente, y se la comió sin 
que nadie lo viera. 

Después de esto, sentáronse todos: hablóse de la 
otoñada (que seguía siendo muy seca, no obstante haber 5 
pasado el cordonazo de San Francisco) ; discurrióse 
algo sobre la probabilidad de una nueva guerra entre 
Napoleón y el Austria ; insistióse en la creencia de que 
las tropas imperiales no invadirían nunca el territorio 
español ; quejóse el Abogado de lo revuelto y calamitoso 10 
de aquella ¿poca, envidiando los tranquilos tiempos de 
sus padres (como sus padres habrían envidiado los de 
sus abuelos) ; dio las cinco el loro . . . , y á una seña 
del reverendo Obispo, el menor de los pajes fué al coche 
episcopal (que se había quedado en la misma ramblilla 15 
que el Alguacil), y volvió con una magnífica torta so- 
bada, de pan de aceite, polvoreada de sal, que apenas 
haría una hora había salido del horno: colocóse una 
mesilla en medio del concurso; descuartizóse la torta; 
se dio su parte correspondiente, sin embargo de que se jo 
* resistieron mucho, al tío Lucas y á la seña Frasquita . . . , 
y una igualdad verdaderamente democrática reinó du- 
rante media hora bajo aquellos pámpanos que filtraban 
los últimos resplandores del sol poniente . . . 



XIII 

LE DIJO EL GRAJO AL CUERVO 

Hora y media después todos los ilustres compañeros 
de merienda estaban de vuelta en la Ciudad. 

El señor Obispo y su familia habían llegado con 
bastante anticipación, gracias al coche, y hallábanse ya 
5 en palacio^ donde los dejaremos rezando sus devociones. 
El insigne Abogado (que era muy seco) y los dos Canó- 
nigos (á cual más grueso y respetable) acompañaron al 
Corregidor hasta la puerta del Ayuntamiento (donde Su 
Señoría dijo tener que trabajar), y tomaron luego el 
lo camino de sus respectivas casas, guiándose por las 
estrellas como los navegantes, ó sorteando á tientas las 
esquinas como los ciegos: — pues ya ^abía cerrado la 
noche; aun no había salido la luna, y el alumbrado 
publico (lo mismo que las demás luces de este siglo) 
15 todavía estaba allí en la mente divina. 

En cambio, no era raro ver discurrir por algunas 

calles tal ó cual linterna ó farolillo con que respetuoso 

servidor alumbraba á sus magníficos amos, quienes se 

dirigían á la habitual tertulia ó de visita á casa de sus 

20 parientes . . . 

Cerca de casi todas las rejas bajas se veía (ó se olfa- 
teaba, por mejor decir) un silencioso bulto negro. ^-Eran 
galanes que, al sentir pasos, habían dejado por un ino- 
mento de pelar la pava ... 
25 — ¡ Somos unos calaveras ! (iban diciéndose el Abo- 

45 



46 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

gado y los dos Canónigos). ¿ Qué pensarán en nuestras 
casas al vernos llegar á estas horas ? 

— Pues ¿qué dirán los que nos encuentren en la 
calle, de este modo, á las siete y pico de la noche, 
como unos bandoleros amparados de las tinieblas ? 5 

— Hay que mejorar de conducta . . . 

— ¡ Ah 1 sí . . . I Pero ese dichoso molino I . . . 

— Mi mujer lo tiene sentado en la boca del estó- 
mago ... — dijo el Académico, con un tono en que se 
traslucía mucho miedo á próxima pelotera conyugal. 10 

— Pues ¿ y mi sobrina ? (exclamó uno de los Canóni- 
gos, que por cierto era penitenciario). — Mi sobrina 
dice que los sacerdotes no deben visitar comadres . . . 

— Y, sin embargo (interrumpió su compañero, que 
era magistral), lo que allí pasa no puede ser más ino- 15 
cente ... 

— I Toma 1 \ Como que va el mismísimo señor 
Obispo I 

— Y luego, señores, | á nuestra edad 1 . . . (repuso el 
Penitenciario). — Yo he cumplido ayer los setenta y 90 
trinco. 

— ¡Es claro I (replicó el Magistral). — Pero hable- 
mos de otra cosa : ¡ qué guapa estaba esta tarde la seña 
Frasquita 1 

— I Oh, lo que es eso . . . ; como guapa, es guapa I — 25 
dijo el Abogado, afectando imparcialidad. 

— Muy guapa ... — repitió el Penitenciario dentro 
del embozo. 

— Y si no (añadió el Predicador de Oficio), que se lo 
pregunten al Corregidor ... 30 



LE DIJO EL GRAJO AL CUERVO 47 

— I El pobre hombre está enamorado de ella ! . . . 

— I Ya lo creo 1 — exclamó el Confesor de la catedral. 

— I De seguro ! (agregó el Académico . . . corre- 
spondiente). — Conque, señores, yo tomo por aquí para 

5 llegar antes á casa . . . { Muy buenas noches 1 

— Buenas noches ... — le contestaron los Capitulares. 
Y anduvieron algunos pasos en silencio. 

— I También le gusta á ese la Molinera ! — murmuró 
entonces el Magistral, dándole con el codo al Peniten- 

zo ciario. 

— I Como si lo viera 1 (respondió éste, parándose á 
la puerta de su casa). — i Y qué bruto es 1 — Conque 
hasta mañana, compañero. — Que le sienten á V. muy 
bien las uvas. 

15 — Hasta mañana, si Dios quiere ... — Que pase V. 
muy buena noche. 

— I Buenas noches nos dé Dios 1 — rezó el Peniten- 
ciario, ya desde el portal, que por más señas tenía farol 
y Virgen. 

ao Y llamó á la aldaba. 

Una vez solo en la calle, el otro Canónigo (que era 
más ancho que alto, y que parecía que rodaba al andar) 
siguió avanzando lentamente hacia su casa ; pero, antes 
de llegar á ella, se paró, y murmuró, pensando sin duda 

25 en su cofrade de coro : 

— I También te gusta á ti la seña Frasquita 1 . . . — 
¡ Y la verdad es (añadió al cabo de un momento) que, 
como guapa, es guapa 1 



XIV 

LOS CONSEJOS DE GARDUÑA 

Entretanto, el Corregidor había subido al Ayunta- 
miento, acompañado de Garduña, con quien mantenía 
hacía rato, en el salón de sesiones, una conversación 
más familiar de lo correspondiente á persona de su 
calidad y oficio. 5 

— I Crea Usía á un perro perdiguero que conoce la 
caza I (decía el innoble Alguacil). La seña Frasquita 
está perdidamente enamorada de Usía, y todo lo que 
Usía acaba de contarme contribuye á hacérmelo ver más 
claro que esa luz . . . lo 

Y señalaba á un velón de Lucena, que apenas si 
esclarecía la octava parte del salón. 

— I No estoy yo tan seguro como tú, Garduña 1 — 
contestó D. Eugenio, suspirando lánguidamente. 

— I Pues no sé por qué 1 — Y, si no, hablemos con 15 
franqueza. — Usía . . . (dicho sea con perdón) tiene 
una tacha en su cuerpo ... ¿ No es verdad ? 

— I Bien, sí ! (repuso el Corregidor). Pero esa tacha 
la tiene también el tío Lucas, i Él es más jorobado 
que yo ! ao 

— I Mucho más I ; muchísimo más I i sin comparación 
de ninguna especie I — Pero en cambio (y es á lo que 
iba), Usía tiene una cara de muy buen ver . . . , lo que 
se llama una bella cara . . . , mientras que el tío Lucas 

se parece al sargento Utrera, que reventó de feo. ^ 

48 



LOS CONSEJOS DE GARDUÑA 49 

El Corregidor sonrió con cierta ufanía. 

— Además (prosiguió el Alguacil), la seña Frasquita 
es capaz de tirarse por una ventana con tal de agarrar 
el nombramiento de su sobrino . . . 

5 — Hasta ahí estamos de acuerdo, i Ese nombra- 
miento es mi única esperanza 1 

— I Pues manos á la obra, señor I Ya le he explicado 
á Usía mi plan . . . i No hay más que ponerlo en ejecu- 
ción esta misma noche I 

10 — I Te he dicho muchas veces que no necesito conse- 
jos I — gritó D. Eugenio, acordándose de pronto de que 
hablaba con un inferior. 

— Creí que Usía me los había pedido ... — balbuceó 
Garduña. 

15 — I No me repliques I 
Garduña saludó. 

— I Conque decías (prosiguió el de Ztíñiga, volviendo 
á amansarse) que esta misma noche puede arreglarse 
todo eso ? — Pues i mira, hijo ! me parece bien. — I Qué 

90 diablos ! | Así saldré pronto de esta cruel incertidumbre ! 
Garduña guardó silencio. 

El Corregidor se dirigió al bufete y escribió algunas 
líneas en un pliego de papel sellado, que selló también 
por su parte, guardándoselo luego en la faltriquera. 

25 — I Ya está hecho el nombramiento del sobrino 1 
(dijo entonces, tomando un polvo de rapé). | Mañana 
me las compondré yo con los Regidores . . . , y, ó lo 
ratifican con un acuerdo, ó habrá la de San Quintín I — 
¿ No te parece que hago bien ? 

3P — I Eso I I eso 1 (exclamó Garduña entusiasmado, 



so 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



metiendo la zarpa en la caja del Corregidor y arreba- 
tándole un polvo). I Eso I I eso 1 El antecesor de Usía 
no se paraba tampoco en barras. Cierta vez . . . 

— ¡Déjate de bachillerías I (repuso el Corregidor, 
sacudiéndole una guantada en la ratera mano). — Mi 5 
antecesor era un bestia, cuando te tuvo de alguacil. — 
Pero vamos á lo que importa. Acabas de decirme que 
el molino del tío Lucas pertenece al término del lugar- 
cilio inmediato, y no al de esta población . . . ¿ Estás 
seguro de ello ? 10 

— I Segurísimo ! La jurisdicción de la ciudad acaba 
en la ramblilla donde yo me senté esta tarde á esperar 
que Vuestra Señoría . . . ; Voto á Lucifer 1 i Si yo hu- 
biera estado en su caso I 

— I Basta I (gritó D. Eugenio). — | Eres un insolente I 15 
Y, cogiendo media cuartilla de papel, escribió una 

esquela, cerróla, doblándole un pico, y se la entregó á 
Garduña. 

— Ahí tienes (le dijo al mismo tiempo) la carta que 
me has pedido para el alcalde del Lugar. Tü le expli- 20 
caras de palabra todo lo que tiene que hacer. — ¡Ya 
ves que sigo tu plan al pie de la letra 1 | Desgraciado 
de ti si me metes en un callejón sin salida 1 

— I No hay cuidado 1 (contestó Garduña). El señor 
Juan López tiene mucho que temer, y en cuanto vea la 25 
firma de Usía, hará todo lo que yo le mande. — i Lo 
menos le debe mil fanegas de grano al Pósito Real, y 
otro tanto al Pósito Pío I . . . Esto último contra toda 
ley, pues no es ninguna viuda ni ningún labrador pobre 
para recibir el trigo sin abonar creces ni recargo, sino 3p 



LOS CONSEJOS DE GARDUÑA 51 

un jugador, un borracho y un sin vergüenza, muy amigo 
de faldas, que trae escandalizado el pueblecillo ... — 
Y aquel hombre ejerce autoridad 1 . . . i Así anda el 
mundo I 

5 — I Te he dicho que calles 1 ; Me estás distrayendo ! 
(bramó el Corregidor). — Conque vamos al asunto 
(añadió luego, mudando de tono). Son las siete y cuar- 
to ... Lo primero que tienes que hacer es ir á casa y 
advertirle á la señora que no me espere á cenar ni á 

10 dormir. Dile que esta noche me estaré trabajando aquí 
hasta la hora de la queda^ y que después saldré de ronda 
secreta contigo, á ver si atrapamos á ciertos malhe- 
chores , . . En fin, engáñala bien para que se acueste 
descuidada. — De camino, dile á otro alguacil que me 

15 traiga la cena ... | Yo no me atrevo á parecer esta noche 
delante de la señora, pues me conoce tanto, que es 
capaz de leer en mis pensamientos 1 — Encárgale á la 
cocinera que ponga unos pestiños de los que se hicieron 
hoy, y dile á Juanete que, sin que lo vea nadie, me 

90 alargue de la taberna medio cuartillo de vino blanco. — 
En seguida te marchas al Lugar, donde puedes hallarte 
muy bien á las ocho y media . . . 

— I Á las ocho en punto estoy allí ! — exclamó 
Garduña. 

25 — I No me contradigas ! — rugió el Corregidor, acor- 
dándose otra vez de lo que era. 
Garduña saludó. 

— Hemos dicho (continuó aquél, humanizándose de 
nuevo) que á las ocho en punto estás en el Lugar. Del 

30 Lugar al molino habrá ... Yo creo que habrá una me- 
dia legua . . . 



52 EL SOMBRERO D£ TRES PICOS 

— Corta. 

— I No me interrumpas I 

£1 Alguacil volvió á saludar. 

— Corta . . , (prosiguió el Corregidor). Por con- 
siguiente, á las diez . . . ¿ Crees tü que á las diez ? . . . 5 

— ) Antes de las diez 1 ; Á las nueve y media puede 
Usía llamar descuidado á la puerta del molino ! 

— I Hombre I ( No me digas á mí lo que tengo que 
hacer I . . . — Por supuesto que tü estarás . . . 

— Yo estaré en todas partes . . . Pero mi cuartel 10 
general será la ramblilla. — i Ah, se me olvidaba I . , . 
Vaya Usía á pie, y no lleve linterna . . . 

— I Maldita la falta que me hacían tampoco esos con- 
sejos. 1 i Si creerás tü que es la primera vez que salgo 

á campaña ? 15 

— Perdone Usía ... — | Ah I Otra cosa. No llame 
Usía á la puerta grande que da á la plazoleta del em- 
parrado, sino á la puertecilla que hay encima del caz . . . 

— I Encima del caz hay otra puerta ? — | Mira tü una 
cosa que nunca se me hubiera ocurrido I ao 

— Sí, señor. La puertecilla del caz da al mismísimo 
dormitorio de los Molineros . . . , y el tío Lucas no 
entra ni sak nunca por ella. De forma que, aunque 
volviese de pronto . . . 

— Comprendo, comprendo . . . { No me aturdas más 35 
los oídos ! 

— Por ultimo : procure Usía escurrir el bulto antes 
del amanecer. — Ahora amanece á las seis . . . 

— I Mira otro consejo inütil 1 — Á las cinco estaré de 
vuelta en mi casa ... — Pero bastante hemos hablado 30 
ya ... I Quítate de mi presenciad 



LOS CONSEJOS DE GARDUÑA 53 

— Pues entonces, señor . . . i buena suerte 1 — excla- 
mó el Alguacil, alargando lateralmente una mano al 
Corregidor y mirando al techo al mismo tiempo. 

El Corregidor puso en aquella mano una peseta, y 
5 Garduña desapareció como por ensalmo. 

— I Por vida de ! . . . (murmuró el viejo al cabo de 
un instante). Se me ha olvidado decirle á ese bachi- 
llero que me trajesen también una baraja I | Con ella 
me hubiera entretenido hasta las nueve y media, viendo 

10 si me salía aquel solitario / . • . /- 



XV 



DESPEDIDA EN PROSA 



Serían las nueve de aquella misma noche, cuando el 
tío Lucas y la seña Frasquita, terminadas todas las 
haciendas del molino y de la casa, se cenaron una 
fuente de ensalada de escarola, una libreja de carne 
guisada con tomates, y algunas uvas de las que queda- 5 
ban en la consabida cesta; todo ello rociado con un 
poco de vino y con grandes risotadas á costa del Corre- 
gidor: después de lo cual miráronse afablemente los 
dos esposos, como muy contentos de Dios y de sí mis- 
mos, y se dijeron, entre un par de bostezos que revé- 10 
laban toda la paz y tranquilidad de sus corazones : 

— Pues, señor, vamos á acostamos, y mañana será 
otro día. 

En aquel momento sonaron dos fuertes y ejecutivos 
golpes aplicados á la puerta grande del molino. 15 

£1 marido y la mujer se miraron sobresaltados. 

Era la primera vez que oían llamar á su puerta á 
semejante hora. 

— Voy á ver ... — dijo la intrépida navarra, enca- 
minándose hacia la plazoletilla. 90 

— I Quita I I Eso me toca á mí 1 (exclamó el tío 
Lucas con tal dignidad, que la seña Frasquita le cedió 
el paso). — I Te he dicho que no salgas 1 — añadió luego 
con dureza, viendo que la obstinada Molinera quería 
seguirle. ^s 

54 



DESPEDIDA EN PROSA 55 

' Ésta obedeció) y se quedó dentro de la casa. 

— ¿Quién es? — preguntó el tío Lucas desde en 
medio de la plazoleta. 

— I La Justicia 1 — contestó una voz al otro lado del 
5 portón. 

— i Qu^ Justicia ? 

— La del Lugar. — ; Abra V, al señor Alcalde I 

El tío Lucas había aplicado entretanto un ojo á cierta 
mirilla muy disimulada que tenía el portón, y recono- 
10 cido á la luz de la luna al rustico Alguacil del Lugar 
inmediato. 

— \ Dirás que le abra al borrachón del Alguacil I — 
repuso el Molinero, retirando la tranca. 

— ¡ Es lo mismo . . . (contestó el de afuera) ; pues 
15 que traigo una orden escrita de su Merced ! — Tenga 

V. muy buenas noches, tío Lucas ... — agregó luego 
entrando, con voz menos oficial, más baja y más gorda, 
como si ya fuera otro hombre. 

— I Dios te guarde, Toñuelo 1 (respondió el mur- 
20 ciano). — Veamos qué orden es esa . . . i Y bien podía él 

señor Juan López escoger otra hora más oportuna de 
dirigirse á los hombres de bien ! — Por supuesto, que la 
culpa será tuya. — ; Como si lo viera, te has estado 
emborrachando en las huertas del camino 1 — ¿ Quieres 
25 un trago ? 

— No, señor; no hay tiempo para nada, i Tiene V. 
que seguirme inmediatamente 1 Lea V. la orden. 

— I Cómo seguirte ? (exclamó el t/o Lucas, pene- 
trando en el molino, después de tomar el papel). — ; A 

30 ver, Frasquital ¡alumbral 



56 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

La seña Frasquita soltó una cosa que tenía en la 
mano, y descolgó el candil. 

El tío Lucas miró rápidamente el objeto que había 
soltado su mujer, y reconoció su bocacha, ó sea un 
enorme trabuco que calzaba balas de á media libra. 5 

£1 Molinero dirigió entonces á la navarra una mirada 
llena de gratitud y ternura, y le dijo, tomándole la cara : 

— I Cuánto vales 1 

La seña Frasquita, pálida y serena como una estatua 
de mármol, levantó el candil, cogido con dos dedos, sin 10 
que el más leve temblor agitase su pulso, y contestó 
secamente : 

— ¡ Vaya, lee I 

La orden decía así : 

«Para el mejor servicio de S. M. el Rey Nuestro 15 
» Señor (Q. D. G.), prevengo á Lucas Fernández, moli- 
» ñero, de estos vecinos, que tan luego como reciba la 
» presente orden, comparezca ante mi autoridad sin ex- 
»cusa ni pretexto alguno; advirtiéndole que, por ser 
» asunto reservado, no lo pondrá en conocimiento de ao 
» nadie : todo ello bajo las penas correspondientes, caso 
» de desobediencia. — El Alcalde : 

»JUAN LÓPEZ.» \ 

f , ) ' ^ ^ 
Y había una cruz en vez de rubrica. 

— Oye,tií. ¿ Y qué es esto? (le preguntó el tío Lucas 25 
al Alguacil), i Á qué viene esta orden ? 

— No lo sé . . . (contestó el rustico ; hombre de unos 
treinta años, cuyo rostro esquinado y avieso, propio de 
ladrón ó de asesino, daba muy triste idea de su since- 



DESPEDIDA EN PROSA 57 

ridad). Creo que se trata de averiguar algo de brujería, 
ó de moneda falsa . . . Pero la cosa no va con V. . .. , 
Lo llaman como testigo ó como perito. — En fin, yo no 
me he enterado bien del particular ... El señor Juan 
5 López se lo explicará á V. con más pelos y señales. • 1 

— [ Corriente I (exclamó el Molinero). Dile que iré 
mañana. 

— I Ca 1 I no, señor I , • . Tiene V. que venirse ahora 
mismo, sin perder un minuto. — Tal es la orden que me 

10 ha dado el señor Alcalde. 

Hubo un instante de silencio. 
Los ojos de la seña Frasquita echaban llamas. 
El tío Lucas no separaba los suyos del suelo, como si 
buscara alguna cosa. 
15 — Me concederás cuando menos (exclamó al fin, 
levantando la cabeza) el tiempo preciso para ir á la 
cuadra y aparejar una burra . . • 

— I Qué burra ni qué demontre I (replicdel Alguacil). 
I Cualquiera se anda á pie media legua ! La noche está 

90 muy hermosa, y hace luna ... 

— Ya he visto que ha salido ... — Pero yo tengo los 
pies muy hinchados . . . 

— Pues entonces no perdamos tiempo. Yo le ayu- 
daré á V. á aparejar la bestia. 

25 — ¡ Hola ! I Hola 1 i Temes que me escape ? 

— Yo no temo nada, tío Lucas . . . (respondió To- 
ñuelo con la frialdad de un desalmado). Yo soy la 
Justicia. 

Y, hablando así, descansó armas; con lo que dejó ver , 
30 el retaco que llevaba debajo del capote. 



58 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— Pues mira, Toñuelo . . . (dijo la Molinera). Ya 
que vas á la cuadra . . . á ejercer tu verdadero oficio . . . , 
hazme el favor de aparejar también la otra burra. 

— I Para qué ? — interrogó el Molinero. 

— I Para mí 1 — Yo voy con vosotros. 5 

— I No puede ser, seña Frasquita ! (objetó el Algua- 
cil). Tengo orden de llevarme á su marido de V. nada 
más, y de impedir que V. lo siga. — En ello me van « el 
destino y el pescuezo.» — Así me lo advirtió el señor 
Juan López. — Conque . . . vamos, tío Lucas ... 10 

Y se dirigió hacia la puerta. 

— I Cosa más rara 1 — dijo á media voz el murciano 
sin moverse. 

— I Muy rara 1 — contestó la seña Frasquita. 

— Esto es algo . . . que yo me sé . . . — continuó 15 
murmurando el tío Lucas, de modo que no pudiese 
oirlo Toñuelo. - 

— ¿Quieres que vaya yo á la ciudad (cuchicheó la 
navarra), y le dé aviso al Corregidor de lo que nos 
sucede ? . . . 20 

— ¡ No I (respondió en alta voz el tío Lucas). \ Eso 
no I 

— I Pues qué quieres que haga ? — dijo la Molinera 
con gran ímpetu. 

— Que me mires , . . — respondió el antiguo soldado. 25 
Los dos esposos se miraron en silencio, y quedaron 

tan satisfechos ambos de la tranquilidad, la resolución 
y la energía que se comunicaron sus almas, que acaba- 
ron por encogerse de hombros y reirse. 

Después de esto, el tío Lucas encendió otro candil y 30 



DESPEDIDA EN PROSA 59 

se dirigid á la cuadra, diciendo al paso á Toñuelo con 
socarronería : 

— I Vaya, hombre I | Ven y ayúdame . . . supuesto 
que eres tan amable I 
5 Toñuelo lo siguió, canturriando una copla entre 
dientes. 

Pocos minutos después, el tío Lucas salía del molino, 
caballero en una hermosa jumenta y seguido del 
Alguacil. 
xo La despedida de los esposos se había reducido á lo 
siguiente : 
•^- Cierra bien ... — dijo el tío Lucas. 
---Embózate, que hace fresco... — dijo la seña 
Frasquita, cerrando con llave, tranca y cerrojo. 
15 Y no hubo más adiós, ni más beso, ni más abrazo, ni 
más mirada. 
¿Para qué? 



XVI 

UN AVE DE MAL AGÜERO 

Sigamos por nuestra parte al tío Lucas< 
Ya habían andado un cuarto de legua sin hablar pala- 
bra, el Molinero subido en la borrica, y el Alguacil 
arreándola con su bastón de autoridad, cuando divisa- 
ron delante de sí, en lo alto de un repecho que hacía el 5 
camino, la sombra de un enorme pajarraco que se diri- 
gía hacia ellos. 

Aquella sombra se destacó enérgicamente sobre el 
cielo, esclarecido por la luna, dibujándose en él con 
tanta precisión, que el Molinero exclamó en el acto : tb 

— Toñuelo, I aquel es Garduña, con su sombrero de 
tres picos y sus patas de alambre I 

Mas, antes de que contestara el interpelado, la som- 
bra, deseosa sin duda de eludir aquel encuentro, había 
dejado el camino y echado á correr á campo travieso 15 
con la velocidad de una verdadera garduña. 

— No veo á nadie ... — respondió entonces Toñue- 
lo con la mayor naturalidad. 

— Ni yo tampoco, — replicó el tío Lucas, comiéndose 

la partida. 20 

Y la sospecha que ya se le ocurrió en el molino prin-^ 
cipió á adquirir cuerpo y consistencia en el espíritu re- 
celoso del jorobado. 

— Este viaje mío (díjose interiormente) es una estra- 

60 



UN AVE DE MAL AGÜERO 6l 

tagema amorosa del Corregidor. La declaración que 
le oí esta tarde desde lo alto del emparrado me demues- 
tra que el vejete madrileño no puede esperar más. 
Indudablemente, esta noche va á volver de visita al 
5 molino, y por eso ha principiado quitándome de en 
medio . . . Pero ¿ qué importa ? ¡ Frasquita es Fras- 
quita . . . , y no abrirá la puerta aunque le peguen fuego 
á la casa 1 . . . Digo más : aunque la abriese ; aunque el 
Corregidor lograse, por medio de cualquier ardid, sor- 

lo prender á mi excelente navarra, el picaro viejo saldría 
con las manos en la cabeza. | Frasquita es Frasquita I 
— Sin embargo (añadid al cabo de un momento), 
¡bueno será volverme esta noche á casa lo más tem- 
prano que pueda I 

15 Llegaron con esto al Lugar el tío Lucas y el Alguacil, 
y dirigiéronse á casa del señor Alcalde. 



XVII 

UN ALCALDE DE MONTERILLA 

El Sr. Juan López, que como particular y como 
Alcalde era la tiranía, la ferocidad y el orgullo personi- 
ficados (cuando trataba con sus inferiores), dignábase, 
sin embargo, á aquellas horas, después de despachar 
los asuntos oficiales y los de su labranza y de pegarle á 5 
su mujer la cotidiana paliza, beberse un cántaro de vino 
en compañía del secretario y del sacristán, operación 
que iba más de mediada aquella noche, cuando el Moli- 
nero compareció en su presencia. 

— I Hola, tío Lucas 1 (le dijo, rascándose la cabeza 10 
para excitar en ella la vena de los embustes). ¿ Cómo 
va de salud ? — j A ver. Secretario ; échele V. un vaso 
de vino al tío Lucas I — ¿Y la seña Frasquita ? ¿Se 
conserva tan guapa ? ; Ya hace mucho tiempo que no 

la he visto I — Pero, hombre . . . , i qué bien sale abona 15 
la molienda 1 i El pan de centeno parece de trigo can- 
deal 1 — Conque . . . , vaya . . . Siéntese V., y descanse ; 
que, gracias á Dios, no tenemos prisa. 

— I Por mi parte, maldita aquella 1 — contestó el tío 
Lucas, que hasta entonces no había despegado los 20 
labios, pero cuyas sospechas eran cada vez mayores al 
ver el amistoso recibimiento que se le hacía, después de 
una orden tan terrible y apremiante. 

— Pues entonces, tío Lucas (continuó el Alcalde), 
supuesto que no tiene V. gran prisa, dormirá V. acá 25 

6a 



UN ALCALDE DE MONTERILLA 63 

esta noche, y mañana temprano despacharemos nuestro 
asuntillo ... 

— Me parece bien . . . (respondió el tío Lucas con 
una ironía y un disimulo que nada tenían que envidiar 

5 á la diplomacia del Sr. Juan López). — Supuesto que la 

cosa no es urgente . . . , pasaré la noche fuera de mi casa. 
.^ - rr- Ni urgente, ni de peligro para V. (añadió el 

Alcalde, engañado por aquel á quien creía engañar). 

Puede V. estar completamente tranquilo. — Oye tú, 
10 Toñuelo . . . Alarga esa media-fanega, para que se 

siente el tío Lucas. 

— Entonces . . . ; venga otro trago 1 — exclamó el 
Molinero, sentándose. 

— ¡ Venga de ahí I — repuso el Alcalde, alargándole 
15 el vaso lleno. 

— Está en buena mano . . . Médielo V. 

— I Pues, por su salud 1 — dijo el señor Juan López, 
bebiéndose la mitad del vino. 

— Por la de V ... , señor Alcalde, — replicó el tío 
90 Lucas, apurando la otra mitad. 

— I A ver, Manuela! (gritó entonces el Alcalde de 
monterilla). Dile á tu ama que el tío Lucas se queda 
á dormir aquí. Que le ponga una cabecera en el gra- 
nero . . . 

95 — ¡ Ca I no ... I De ningún modo ! Yo duermo en 
el pajar como un rey. 

— Mire V. que tenemos cabeceras . . . 

-^ I Ya lo creo ! Pero i á qué quiere. V. incomodar 
á la familia ? Yo traigo mi capote v ; . 
^ — Pues, señor, como V. guste. — i Manuela 1 dile á 
tu ama que no la ponga ... 



64 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— Lo que sí va V. á permitirme (continuó el tío Lucaj^^ f , . 
bostezando de un modo atroz) es que me acueste en 
seguida. Anoche he tenido mucha molienda, y no he 
pegado todavía los ojos . . . 

— ; Concedido ! (respondió majestuosamente el Al- 5 
calde). — Puede V. recogerse cuando quiera. 

— Creo que también es hora de que nos recojamos 
nosotros (dijo el Sacristán, asomándose al cántaro de 
vino para graduar lo que quedaba). Ya deben de ser 
las diez ... ó poco menos. 10 

— Las diez menos cuartillo ... — notificó el Secre- 
tario, después de repartir en los vasos el resto del vino 
correspondiente á aquella noche. 

— I Pues á dormir, caballeros I — exclamó el anfitrión, 
apurando su parte. 15 

— Hasta mañana, señores, — añadió el Molinero, 
bebiéndose la suya, t 

— Espere V. que le alumbren ... — | Toñuelo I 
Lleva al tío Lucas al pajar. ' 

— I Por aquí, tío Lucasl . . . — dijo Toñuelo, llevándose 20 
también el cántaro, por si le quedaban algunas gotas. 

— Hasta mañana, ái Dios quiere, — agregó el Sacris- 
tán, después de escurrir todos los vasos. 

Y se marchó, tambaleándose y cantando alegremente 
el De profundis, 25 



— Pues, señor . . . (di jóle el Alcalde al Secretario 
cuando se quedaron solos). £1 tío Lucas no ha sospe- 
chado nada. Nos podemos acostar descansadamente,^ 
y ; . . I buena pro le haga al Corregidor I 



XVIII 

DONDE SE VERÁ QUE EL TÍO LUCAS TENÍA EL SUEÑO 
MUY LIGERO 

Cinco minutos después, un hombre se descolgaba por 
la ventana del pajar del señor Alcalde ; ventana que 
daba á un corralón y que no distaría cuatro varas del 
suelo. !^ ■ 

5 En el corralón había un col^ertizo sobre una gran 
pesebrera, á la cual hallábanse atadas seis ü ocho caba- 
llerías de diversa alcurnia, bien que todas ellas del sexo 
débil. — Los caballos, mulos y burros del sexo fuerte 
formaban rancho aparte en otro local contiguo. 

10 El hombre desató una borrica, que por cierto estaba 
aparejada, y se encaminó, llevándola del diestro, hacia 
la puerta del corral ; retiró la tranca y desechó el ce- 
rrojo que la aseguraban ; abrióla con mucho tiento, y 
se encontró en medio del campo. 

15 Una vez allí, montó en la borrica, metióle los talones, 
y salió como una flecha con dirección á la Ciudad ; — 
mas no por el carril ordinario, sino atravesando siem- 
bras y cañadas, como quien se precave contra algún 
mal encuentro. 

20 Era el tío Lucas, que se dirigía á su molino. 



«S 



XIX 

VOCES CLAMANTES IN DESERTO 

I Alcaldes á mí, que soy de Archena I (iba diciéndose 
el murciano), i Mañana por la mañana pasaré á ver 
al señor Obispo, como medida preventiva, y le contaré 
todo lo que me ha ocurrido esta noche I — ; Llamarme 
con tanta prisa y reserva, á hora tan desusada ; decirme 5 
que venga solo; hablarme del servicio del rey, y de 
moneda falsa, y de brujas, y de duendes, para echarme 
luego dos vasos de vino y mandarme á dormir I . . . ; La 
cosa no puede ser más clara ! Garduña trajo al Lugar 
esas instrucciones de parte del Corregidor, y esta es la 10 
hora en que el Corregidor estará ya en campaña con- 
tra mi mujer . . . i Quién sabe si me lo encontraré lla- 
mando á la puerta del molino 1 i Quién sabe si me lo 
encontraré ya dentro ! . . . — i Quién sabe ! . . . — Pero 
I qué voy á decir ? ; Dudar de mi navarra I . . . j Oh, 15 
esto es ofender á Dios 1 ; Imposible que ella 1 . . . 
I Imposible que mi Frasquita I . . . i Imposible I . . . — 
Mas i qué estoy diciendo ? ¿ Acaso hay algo imposible 
en el mundo ? ¿ No se casó conmigo, siendo ella tan 
hermosa y yo tan feo ? 20 

Y, al hacer esta última reflexión, el pobre jorobado 
se echó á llorar . . , 

Entonces paró la burra para serenarse ; se enjugó las 
lágrimas: suspiró hondamente; sacó los avíos de £u- 

66 



VOCES CLAMANTES IN DESERTO ^7 

mar ; picó y lió un cigarro de tabaco negro ; empuñó 
luego pedernal, yesca y eslabón, y, al cabo de algunos 
golpes, consiguió encender candela* 

En aquel mismo momento sintió rumor de pasos hacia 
5 el camino, — ^que distaría de allí unas trescientas varas. 

— i Qué imprudente soy 1 (dijo). ¡ Si me andará ya 
buscando la Justicia, y yo me habré vendido al echar 
estas yescas I 

Escondió, pues, la lumbre, y se apeó, ocultándose 
10 detrás de la borrica. . 

Pero la borricaj entendió las cosas de diferente modo, 
y lanzó un rebuzno de satisfacción. ; »( t 

— ¡Maldita seas I — exclamó el tío Lucas, .tratando 
de cerrarle la boca con las manos. 

15 Al propio tiempo resonó otro rebuzno en el camino, 
por vía de galante respuesta. 

— ¡ Estamos aviados ! (prosiguió pensando el moli-^ 
ñero), i Bien dice el refrán : el mayor mal de los males 
es tratar con animales ! 

90 Y, así discurriendo, volvió á montar, arreó la bestia 
y salió disparado en dirección contraría al sitio en 
que había sonado el segundo rebuzno. 

Y lo más particular fué que la persona que iba en el 
jumento interlocutor, debió de asustarse del tío Lucas 

25 tanto como el tío Lucas se había asustado de ella. Lo 
digo, porque apartóse también del camino, recelando 
sin duda que fuese un alguacil ó un malhechor pagado 
por D. Eugenio, y salió á escape por los sembrados de 
la otra banda. 

30 El murciano, entretanto, continuó cavilando de este 
modot 



68 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— { Qué noche I i Qué mundo 1 i Qué vida la mía 
desde hace una hora I | Alguaciles metidos á alcahuetes ; 
alcaldes que conspiran contra mi honra; burros que 
rebuznan cuando no es menester ; y aquí, en mi pecho, 
rm miserable corazón que se ha atrevido á dudar de la 5 
mujer más noble que Dios ha criado I — { Oh I | Dios 
mío, Dios mío I i Haz que llegue pronto á mi casa y 
que encuentre allí á mi Frasquita I 

' Siguid caminando el tío Lúeas, atravesando siembras 
y matorrales, hasta que al fin, á eso de las once de la 10 
noche, llegó sin novedad á la puerta . grande del 
molino . • • 

I Condenación 1 | La puerta del molino estaba abierta I 



XX 

LA DUDA Y LA REALIDAD 

Estaba abierta . . , ) y él, al marcharse^ había oído á 
su mujer cerrarla con llave, tranca y cerrojo ! 

Por consiguiente, nadie más que su propia mujer 
había podido abrirla. 
5 Pero ¿cómo? ¿cuándo? ¿por qué? — ¿De resultas 
de un engaño ? ¿ Á consecuencia de una orden ? — ¿Ó 
bien deliberada y voluntariamente, en virtud de previo 
acuerdo con el Corregidor ? 

¿Qué iba á ver? ¿Qué iba á saber? ¿Qué le 
lo aguardaba dentro de su casa? — ¿Se habría fugado la 
seña Frasquita? ¿Se la habrían robado? ¿Estaría 
muerta ? — ¿Ó estaría en brazos de su rival ? 

— El Corregidor contaba con que yo no podría venir 
en toda la noche ... (se dijo lúgubremente el tío Lucas). 
15 El Alcalde del Lugar tendría orden hasta de encade- 
narme, antes que permitirme volver • . . — ¿Sabía todo 
esto Frasquita ? ¿ Estaba en el complot ? — ¿ Ó ha sido 
víctima de un engaño, de una violencia, de una infamia ? 

No empleó más tiempo el sin ventura en hacer todas 
90 estas crueles reflexiones que el que tardó en atravesar 
la.plazoletiUa del emparrado. 

También estaba abierta la puerta de la casa, cuyo 
primer aposento (como en todas las viviendas rústicas) 
era la cocina • • • 

69 



70 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



Dentro de la cocina no había nadie. 

Sin embargo, una enorme fogata ardía en la chime- 
nea . . . ; I chimenea que éi dejó apagada, y que no se 
encendía nunca hasta muy entrado el mes de Diciembre I 

Por último, de uno de los ganchos de la espetera 5 
pendía un candil encendido . . • 

¿Qué significaba todo aquello? ¿Y cómo se com- 
padecía semejante aparato de vigilia y de sociedad con 
el silencio de muerte que reinaba en la casa ? 

¿ Qué había sido de su mujer ? 10 

Entonces, y sólo entonces, reparó el tió Lucas en linas 
ropas que había colgadas en los espaldares de dos ó 
tres sillas puestas alrededor de la chimenea ... 

Fijó la vista en aquellas ropas, y lanzó un rugido tan 
intenso, que se le quedó atravesado en la garganta, 15 
convertido en sollozo mudo y sofocante. 

Creyó el infortunado que se ahogaba, y se llevó las 
manos al cuello, mientras que, lívido, convulso, con los 
ojos desencajados, contemplaba aquella vestimenta, 
poseído de tanto horror como el reo en capilla á quien 20 
le presentan la hopa. 

Porque lo que alH veía era la capa de grana, el som- 
brero de tres picos, la casaca y la chupa de color de 
tórtola, el calzón de seda negra, las medias blancas, 
los zapatos con hebilla y hasta el bastón, el espadín y 25 
los guantes del execrable Corregidor ... ¡Lo que allí 
veía era la hopa de su ignominia, la mortaja de su 
honra, el sudario de su ventura 1 

El terrible trabuco seguía en el mismo rincón en que 
dos horas antes lo dejó la navarra . . ¿ ' ' - -'• '- ^ 30 



LA DUDA Y LA REALIDAD 



71 



El tío Lucas dio un salto de tigre, y se apoderó de él. 

— Sondeó el cañón con la baqueta, y vio que estaba 

cargado. Miró la piedra, y halló que estaba en su lugar. 

Volvióse entonces hacia la escalera que conducía á la 

5 cámara en que había dormido tantos años con la seña 

Frasquita, y murmuró sordamente : 

— I Allí están I 

Avanzó, pues, un paso en aquella dirección ; pero en 
seguida se detuvo para mirar en torno de sí y ver si 
10 alguien lo estaba observando . . • 

— I Nadie ! (dijo mentalmente), \ Sólo Dios • . • , y 
Ese ... ha querido esto 1 

Conñrmada así la sentencia, fué á dar otro paso, 
cuando su errante mirada distinguió un pliego que había 
15 sobre la mesa . . . 

Verlo, y haber caído sobre él, y tenerlo entre sus 
garras, fué todo cosa de un segundo. 

I Aquel papel era el nombramiento del sobrino de la 
seña Frasquita, firmado por D. Eugenio de Züñiga y 
90 Ponce de León I 

— \ Este ha sido el precio de la venta I (pensó el tío 
Lucas, metiéndose el papel en la boca para sofocar sus 
gritos y dar alimento á su rabia). ; Siempre recelé que 
quisiera á su familia más que á mí ! — i Ah 1 [No hemos 

25 tenido hijos 1 ... i He aquí la causa de todo I 

Y el infortunado estuvo á punto de volver á llorar. 
Pero luego se enfureció nuevamente, y dijo con un 
ademán terrible, ya que no con la voz ; 

— ( Arriba I i Arriba 1 

.90 Y empezó á subir la escalera, andando á gatas con 



72 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



una mano, llevando el trabuco en la otra, y con el papel 
infame entre los dientes. 

En corroboración de sus lógicas sospechas, al llegar 
á la puerta del dormitorio (que estaba cerrada), vid que 
salían algunos rayos de luz por las junturas de las 5 
tablas y por el ojo de la llave. 

— I Aquí están I — volvió á decir. 

Y se paró un instante, como para pasar aquel nuevo 
trago de amargura. 

Luego continuó subiendo . . . hasta llegar á la puerta 10 
misma del dormitorio. 

Dentro de él no se oía ningún ruido. 

— I Si no hubiera nadie 1 — le dijo tímidamente la 
esperanza. 

Pero en aquel mismo instante el infeliz oyó toser 15 
dentro del cuarto . . . 

I Era la tos medio asmática del Corregidor I 

I No cabía duda 1 i No había tabla de salvación en 
aquel naufragio ! 

El Molinero sonrió en las tinieblas de un modo horro- 20 
roso. — ^ i Cómo no brillan en la obscuridad semejantes 
relámpagos ? ¿ Qué es todo el fuego de las tormentas 
comparado con el que arde á veces en el corazón del 
hombre? 

Sin embargo, el tío Lucas (tal era su alma, como ya 25 
dijimos en otro lugar) principió á tranquilizarse, no bien 
oyó la tos de su enemigo . . . 

La realidad le hacía menos daño que la duda. — Se- 
gún le anunció él mismo aquella tarde á la seña Fras- 
quita, desde el punto y hora en que perdía la única fe '30 



LA DUDA Y LA REALIDAD 



73 



que era vida de su alma, empezaba á convertirse en un 
hombre nuevo. 

Semejante al moro de Venecia (con quien ya lo com- 
paramos al describir su carácter), el desengaño mataba 

5 en él de un solo golpe todo el amor, transfigurando de 
paso la índole de su espíritu y haciéndole ver el mundo 
como una región extraña á que acabara de llegar. La 
única diferencia consistía en que el tío Lucas era por 
idiosincrasia menos trágico, menos austero y más egoísta 

lo que el insensato sacriñcador de Desdémona. 

I Cosa rara, pero propia de tales situaciones 1 La 
duda, 6 sea la esperanza (que para el caso es lo mismo), 
volvió todavía á mortificarle un momento . . . 

— I Si me hubiera equivocado 1 (pensó). ; Si la tos 
15 hubiese sido de Frasquita 1 . . . 

£n la tribulación de su infortunio, olvidábasele que 
había visto las ropas del Corregidor cerca de la chime* 
nea ; que había encontrado abierta la puerta del molino; 
que había leído la credencial de su infamia . . . 
20 Agachóse, pues, y miró por el ojo de la llave, tem- 
blando de incertidumbre y de zozobra. 

£1 rayo visual no alcanzaba á descubrir más que un 

pequeño triángulo de cama, por la parte del cabecero . . • 

¡ Pero precisamente en aquel pequeño triángulo se veía 

25 un extremo de las almohadas, y sobre las almohadas la 

cabeza del Corregidor I 

Otra risa diabólica contrajo el rostro del Molinero» 

Dijérase que volvía á ser feliz . . . 

— I Soy dueño de la verdad I . . . i Meditemos I — 
ya murmuró, irguiéndose tranquilamente. 



74 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

Y volvió á bajar la escalera con el mismo tiento que 
empleó para subirla . , . 

— El asunto es delicado . . . Necesito reflexionar. 
Tengo tiempo de sobra para todo ... — iba pensando 
mientras bajaba. 5 

Llegado que hubo á la cocina, sentóse en medio de 
ella, y ocultó la frente entre las manos. 

Así permaneció mucho tiempo, hasta que lo despertó 
de su meditación un leve golpe que sintió en un pie . . . 

Era el trabuco que se había deslizado de sus rodillas, lo 
y que le hacía aquella especie de seña . . . 

1 No I I Te digo que no 1 (murmuró el tío Lucas, 

encarándose con el arma). — { No me convienes ! Todo 
el mundo tendría lástima de eUos . . . , i y á mí me ahor- 
carían I I Se trata de un Corregidor . . . , y matar á un 15 
Corregidor es todavía en España cosa indisculpable 1 
Dirían que lo maté por infundados celos, y que luego 
lo desnudé y lo metí en mi cama . . . Dirían, además, 
que maté á mi mujer por simples sospechas ... | Y me 
ahorcarían I | Vaya si me ahorcarían I — Además, yo 20 
habría dado muestras de tener muy poca alma, muy 
poco talento, si al remate de mi vida fuera digno de 
compasión 1 { Todos se reirían de mí ! i Dirían que 
mi desventura era muy natural, siendo yo jorobado y 
Frasquita tan hermosa I — | Nada I | no ! Lo que yo 25 
necesito es vengarme, y, después de vengarme, triunfar, 
despreciar, reir, reirme mucho, reirme de todos . . . , 
evitando por tal medio que nadie pueda burlarse nunca 
de esta jiba que yo he llegado á hacer hasta envidiable, 
y que tan grotesc^i sería en una horca 1 j» 



LA^ DUDA Y LA REALIDAD.! 



75 



Así discurrió el tío Lucas, tal vez sin darse cuenta de 
ello puntualmente, y, en virtud de semejante discurso, 
colocó el arma en su sitio, y principió á pasearse con los 
brazos atrás y la cabeza baja, como buscando su ven- 

5 ganza en el suelo, en la tierra, en las ruindades de la 
vida, en alguna bufonada ignominiosa y ridicula para 
su mujer y para el Corregidor, lejos de buscar aquella 
misma venganza en la justicia, en el desafío, en el per- 
dón, en el cielo . . . , como hubiera hecho en su lugar 

lo cualquier otro hombre de condición menos rebelde que 
la suya á toda imposición de la naturaleza, de la socie- 
dad ó de sus propios sentimientos. 

De repente, paráronse sus ojos en la vestimenta del 
Corregidor ... 

15 Luego se paró él mismo ... 

Después fué demostrando poco á poco en su sem- 
blante una alegría, un gozo, un triunfo indefinibles . . . ; 
hasta que, por último, se echó á reir de una manera 
formidable « . . , esto es, á grandes carcajadas, pero sin 

2o hacer ningún ruido (á fin de que no lo oyesen desde 
arriba), metiéndose los puños por los ijares para no re- 
ventar, estremeciéndose todo como un epiléptico, y 
teniendo que concluir por dejarse caer en una silla 
hasta que le pasó aquella convulsión de sarcástico 

25 regocijo. — Era la propia risa de Mefistófeles. 

No bien se sosegó, principió á desnudarse con una 
celeridad febril ; colocó toda su ropa en las mismas sillas 
que ocupaba la del Corregidor ; púsose cuantas prendas 
pertenecían á éste, desde los zapatos de hebilla hasta 

30 el sombrero de tres picos ; ciñóse el espadín ; embozóse 



76 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

en la capa de grana ; cogió el bastón y los guantes, y 
salió del molino y se encaminó á la Ciudad, balanceán- 
dose de la propia manera que solía D. Eugenio de 
Züñiga, y diciéndose de vez en cuando esta fraseí que 
compendiaba su pensamiento : 

I También la Corregidora es guapa 1 1 



XXI 

I EN GUARDIA, CABALLERO I 

Abandonemos por ahora al tío Lucas, y enterémonos 
de lo que había ocurrido en el molino desde que deja- 
mos allí sola á la seña Frasquita hasta que su esposo 
volvió á él y se encontró con tan. estupendas novedades. 

5 Una hora habría pasado después que el tío Lucas se 
marchó con Toñuelo, cuando la afligida navarra, que se 
había propuesto no acostarse hasta que regresara su 
marido, y que estaba haciendo calceta en su dormitorio, 
situado en el piso de arriba, oyó lastimeros gritos fuera 

lo de la casa, hacia el paraje, allí muy próximo, por donde 
corría el agua del caz. 

— 1 Socorro, que me ahogo 1 ¡Frasquita I i Fras- 
quita 1 . . . — exclamaba una voz de hombre, con el 
lúgubre acento de la desesperación. 

15 — ¿Si será Lucas ? — pensó la navarra, llena de un 
terror que no necesitamos describir. 

£n el mismo dormitorio había una puertecilla, de que 
ya nos habló Garduña, y que daba efectivamente sobre 
la parte alta del caz. — Abrióla sin vacilación la seña 

ao Frasquita,. por más que no hubiera reconocido la voz 
que pedía auxilio, y encontróse de manos á boca con el 
Corregidor, que en aquel momento salía todo cho- 
rreando de la impetuosísima acequia . . • 

— I Dios me perdone 1 ¡Dios me perdone I (balbu- 
«5 ceaba el infame viejo). — i Creí que me ahogaba I 

77 



j8 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— I Cómo I ¿ Es V. ? i Qué significa ? i Cómo se 
atreve ? ¿ A qué viene V. á estas horas ? . . . — gritó 
la Molinera con más indignación que espanto, pero 
retrocediendo maquinalmente. 

— I Calla 1 i Calla, mujer 1 (tartamudeó el Corregidor, 5 
colándose en el aposento detrás de ella). Yo te lo diré 
todo ... I He estado para ahogarme 1 i £1 agua me lle- 
vaba ya como á una pluma I — ; Mira, mira cómo me he 
puesto I 

— I Fuera, fuera de aquí 1 (replicó la seña Frasquita 10 
con mayor violencia), i No tiene V. nada que expli- 
carme 1 ... I Demasiado lo comprendo todo I ¿ Qué me 
importa á mí que V. se ahogue ? ¿ Lo he llamado yo á 
V. ? — I Ah 1 I Qué infamia I i Para esto ha mandado 
V. prender á mi marido I 15 

— Mujer, escucha ... 

— I No escucho 1 | Márchese V. inmediatamente, 
señor Corregidor I . . . j Márchese V., ó no respondo de 
su vida I . . . 

— ¿Qué dices ? 90 

— I Lo que V. oye 1 — Mi marido no está en casa ; 
pero yo me basto para hacerla respetar. \ Márchese 
V. por donde ha venido, si no quiere que yo le arroje 
otra vez al agua con mis propias manos ! 

— I Chica, chica ! i no grites tanto, que no soy sor- 25 
do 1 . . . (exclamó el viejo libertino). | Cuando yo estoy 
aquí, por algo será 1 . . . Vengo á libertar al tío Lucas, 

á quien ha preso por equivocación un alcalde de mon- 
.terilla . , , — Pero, ante todo, necesito que me seques 
estas ropas . . . i Estoy calado hasta los huesos I 30 



EN GUARDIA, CABALLERO 79 

— I Le digo á V. que se marche I 

— I Calla, tonta 1 . . . ¿ Qué sabes tú ? — Mira . . . 
aquí te traigo el nombramiento de tu sobrino ... — 
Enciende la lumbre, y hablaremos ... — Por lo demás, 

5 mientras se seca la ropa, yo me acostaré en esta cama . . . 

— I Ah, ya 1 ¿ Conque declara V. que venía por mí ? 
I Conque declara V. que para eso ha mandado arrestar 
á mi Lucas ? ¿ Conque traía V. su nombramiento y 
todo ? — I Santos y Santas del cielo I i Qué se habrá 

10 figurado de mí este mamarracho ? 

— I Frasquita 1 ; soy el Corregidor 1 

— I Aunque fuera V. el Rey 1 A mí, i qué ? — | Yo 
soy la mujer de mi marido, y el ama de mi casa I — 
I Cree V. que yo me asusto de los Corregidores ? i Yo 

15 sé ir á Madrid, y al fin del mundo, á pedir justicia con- 
tra el viejo insolente que así arrastra su autoridad por 
los suelos I Y, sobre todo, yo sabré mañana ponerme 
la mantilla, é ir á ver á la señora Corregidora . . . 

— ¡No harás nada de eso I (repuso el Corregidor, 
20 perdiendo la paciencia, ó mudando de táctica). No 

harás nada de eso ; porque yo te pegaré un tiro, si veo 
que no entiendes de razones . . . 

— I Un tiro 1 — exclamó la seña Frasquita con voz 
sorda. 

25 — Un tiro, sí ... Y de ello no me resultará perjuicio 
alguno. Casualmente he dejado dicho en la ciudad que 
salía esta noche á caza de criminales ... — i Conque 
no seas necia ... y quiéreme . . . como yo te adoro ! 

— Señor Corregidor ; ¿ un tiro ? — volvió á decir la 
^0 navarra, echando I03 brazos atrás y el cuerpo hacia 

adelante, como para lanzacse sobre su adversario. 



8o EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— Si te empeñas, te lo pegaré, y así me veré libre de 
tus amenazas y de tu hermosura ... — respondió el 
Corregidor, lleno de miedo y sacando un par de cacho- 
rrillos. 

— ¿Conque pistolas también ? j Y en la otra faltri- 5 
quera el nombramiento de mi sobrino 1 (dijo la seña 
Frasquita, moviendo la cabeza de arriba abajo). — 
Pues, señor, la elección no es dudosa. — Espere Usía 
un momento ; que voy á encender la lumbre, 

Y, así hablando, se dirigió rápidamente á la escalera, 10 
y la bajó en tres brincos. 

El Corregidor cogió la luz, y salió detrás de la Mo- 
linera, temiendo que se escapara ; pero tuvo que bajar 
mucho más despacio, de cuyas resultas, cuando llegó á 
la cocina, tropezó con la navarra, que volvía ya en su 15 
busca. 

— I Conque decía V. que me iba á pegar un tiro ? 
(exclamó aquella indomable mujer dando un paso atrás). 

— Pues, I en guardia, caballero; que yo ya lo estoy I 
Dijo, y se echó á la cara el formidable trabuco que 20 

tanto papel representa en esta historia. 

— I Detente, desgraciada I i Qué vas á hacer ? (gritó 
el Corregidor, muerto de susto). Lo de mi tiro era una 
broma . . . Mira . . . Los cachorrillos están descargados. 

— En cambio, es verdad lo del nombramiento ... — 25 
Aquí lo tienes . . . Tómalo ... Te lo regalo . . . Tuyo 

es ... de balde, enteramente de balde . . . 
Y lo colocó temblando sobre la mesa. 

— I Ahí está bien 1 (repuso la navarra). Mañana me 
servirá para encender la lumbre, cuando le guise el y> 



EN GUARDIA, CABALLERO 8i 

almuerzo á mi marido. — | De V. no quiero ya ni la 
gloria ; y, si mi sobrino viniese alguna vez de Estella, 
sería para pisotearle á V. la fea mano con que ha es- 
crito su nombre en ese papel indecente I — i Ea, lo dicho I 

5 ¡ Márchese V. de mi casa 1 — i Ains ! i aire ! j pronto ! . . . 
I que ya se me sube la pólvora á la cabeza ! 

El Corregidor no contestó á este discurso. Habíase 
puesto lívido, casi azul ; tenía los ojos torcidos, y un 
temblor como de terciana agitaba todo su cuerpo. Por 

10 ultimo, principió á castañetear los dientes, y cayó al 
suelo, presa de una convulsión espantosa. 

El susto del caz, lo muy mojadas que seguían todas 
sus ropas, la violenta escena del dormitorio, y el miedo 
al trabuco con que le apuntaba la navarra, habían ago- 

15 tado las fuerzas del enfermizo anciano. 

— I Me muero 1 (balbuceó). — ; Llama á Garduña I . . . 
Llama á Garduña, que estará ahí ... en la ramblilla . . . 
— I Yo no debo morirme en esta casa 1 . . . 

No pudo continuar. Cerró los ojos, y se quedó como 
2o muerto. 

— I Y se morirá como lo dice 1 (prorrumpió la seña 
Frasquita). — Pues, señor, \ esta es la más negra 1 ¿ Qué 
hago yo ahora con este hombre en mi casa ? i Qué 
dirían de mí, si se muriese? ¿Qué diría Lucas? . . . 

25 ¿Cómo podría justificarme, cuando yo misma le he 

abierto la puerta ? — i Oh ! no ... Yo no debo quedarme 

aquí con él. ; Yo debo buscar á mi marido ; yo debo 

escandalizar el mundo antes de comprometer mi honra ! 

Tomada esta resolución, soltó el trabuco, fuese al 

30 corral, cogió la burra que quedaba en él, la aparejó de 



82 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

cualquier modo, abrid la puerta grande de la cerca, 
montó de un salto, á pesar de sus carnes, y se dirigid á 
la ramblilla. 

— I Garduña 1 i Garduña 1 — iba gritando la navarra, 
conforme se acercaba á aquel sitio. 5 

— I Presente 1 (respondid al cabo el Alguacil, apare- 
ciendo detrás de un seto). — ¿ Es V., seña Frasquita? 

— Sí, soy yo. — | Ve al molino, y socorre á tu amo, 
que se está muriendo I . . . 

— ¿ Qué dice V. ? — | Vaya un maula 1 lo 

— Lo que oyes. Garduña . . . 

— ¿ Y V., alma mía ? ¿ Addnde va á estas horas ? 

— ¿ Yo ? . . . — I Quita allá, badulaque I — Yo voy . . . 
I á la Ciudad por un médico ! — contestd la seña Frasquita, 
arreando la burra con un talonazo y á Garduña con un 15 
puntapié. 

Y tomd . . . , no el camino de la Ciudad, como aca- 
baba de decir, sino el del Lugar inmediato. 

Garduña no repard en esta ultima circunstancia; 
pues iba ya dando zancajadas hacia el molino y dis- 20 
curriendo al par de esta manera : 

— I Va por un médico I ... j La infeliz no puede 
hacer más I — i Pero él es un pobre hombre 1 — i Famo- 
sa ocasidn de ponerse malo 1 . . . { Dios le da conñtes á 
quien no puede roerlos ! 35 



XXII 

GARDUÑA SE MULTIPLICA 

Cuando Garduña llegó al molino, el Corregidor prin- 
cipiaba á volver en sí, procurando levantarse del suelo. 

En el suelo también, y á su lado, estaba el velón en- 
cendido que bajó Su Señoría del dormitorio. 
5 — ¿Se ha marchado ya? — fué la primera frase de 
D. Eugenio. 

— ¿Quién? 

— I El demonio 1 . . . Quiero decir, la Molinera. . . . 

— Sí, señor ... Ya se ha marchado . . . , y no creo 
lo que iba de muy buen humor . . . 

— I Ay, Garduña ! Me estoy muriendo. . . . 

— Pero ¿ qué tiene Usía ? — ; Por vida de los hom- 
bres ! . . . 

Me he caído en el caz, y estoy hecho una sopa. . . . 
15 I Los huesos se me parten de frío 1 

— I Toma, toma 1 | ahora salimos con eso 1 

— I Garduña 1 ... i ve lo que te dices 1 . . . 

— Yo no digo nada, señor. . . . 

— Pues bien : sácame de este apuro. . . . 

20 — Voy volando. . . . ; Verá Usía qué pronto lo arreglo 
todo! 

Así dijo el Alguacil, y, en un periquete, cogió la luz 
con una mano, y con la otra se metió al Corregidor 
debajo del brazo; subiólo al dormitorio; púsolo en 

83 



84 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

cueros ; acostólo en la cama ; corrió al jaraíz ; reunió 
un brazado de leña ; fué á la cocina ; hizo una gran 
lumbre ; bajó todas las ropas de su amo ; colocólas en 
los espaldares de dos ó tres sillas ; encendió un candil ; 
lo colgó de la espetera, y tornó á subir á la cámara. 5 

— ¿Qué tal vamos? — preguntóle entonces á D. 
Eugenio, levantando en alto el velón para verle mejor 
el rostro. 

— I Admirablemente ! ; Conozco que voy á sudar ! 
— I Mañana te ahorco. Garduña 1 10 

— I Por qué, señor ? 

— ¿ Y te atreves á preguntármelo ? ¿ Crees tú que, al 
Seguir el plan que me trazaste, esperaba yo acostarme 
solo en esta cama, después de recibir por segunda vez 

el sacramento del bautismo ? — ] Mañana mismo te 15 
ahorco 1 

— Pero cuénteme Usía algo ... — ¿La seña Fras- 
quita ? . . . 

— La seña Frasquita ha querido asesinarme. ; Es 
todo lo que he logrado con tus consejos 1 — Te digo «> 
que te ahorco mañana por la mañana. 

— I Algo menos será, señor Corregidor 1 — repuso 
el Alguacil. 

— ¿Por qué lo dices, insolente? ¿Porque me ves 
aqu{ postrado ? 35 

— No, señor. Lo digo, porque la seña Frasquita no 
ha debido de mostrarse tan inhumana como Usía cuenta, 
cuando ha ido á la Ciudad á buscarle un médico. . . . 

— I Dios santo 1 ¿ Estás seguro de que ha ido á la 
Ciudad? — exclamó D. Eugenio más aterrado que nunca. 30 



GARDUÑA SE MULTIPLICA 85 

— A lo menos, eso me ha dicho ella. . . . 

— I Corre, corre. Garduña ! — i Ah 1 \ estoy perdido 
sin remedio 1 — i Sabes á qué va la seña Frasquita á la 
Ciudad ? ¡ A contárselo todo á mi mujer 1 . . . i A 

5 decirle que estoy aquíl — ¡Oh, Dios mío. Dios míol 
I Cómo había yo de figurarme esto ? | Yo creí que se 
habría ido al Lugar en busca de su marido ; y, como 
lo tengo allí á buen recaudo, nada me importaba su 
viaje I Pero i irse á la Ciudad ! . . . — i Garduña, corre, 

10 corre . . . , tü que eres andarín, y evita mi perdición 1 
I Evita que la terrible Molinera entre en mi casa 1 

— ¿ Y no rae ahorcará Usía si lo consigo ? — preguntó 
irónicamente el Alguacil. 

— I Al contrario ! Te regalaré unos zapatos en buen 
15 uso, que me están grandes. | Te regalaré todo lo que 

quieras I 

— Pues voy volando. Duérmase Usía tranquilo. 
Dentro de media hora estoy aquí de vuelta, después de 
dejar en la cárcel á la navarra. — i Para algo soy más 

ao ligero que una borrica 1 

Dijo Garduña, y desapareció por la escalera abajo. 
Se cae de su peso que, durante aquella ausencia del 
Alguacil, fué cuando el Molinero estuvo en el molino 
y vio visiones por el ojo de la llave. 

«5 Dejemos, pues, al Corregidor sudando en el lecho 
ajeno, y á Garduña corriendo hacia la Ciudad (adonde 
tan pronto había de seguirle el tío Lucas con sombrero 
de tres picos y capa de grana), y, convertidos también 
nosotros en andarines, volemos con dirección al Lugar, 

30 en seguimiento de la valerosa seña Frasquita. 



XXIIT 

OTRA VEZ EL DESIERTO Y LAS CONSABIDAS VOCES 

La dnica aventura que le ocurrió á la navarra en su 
viaje desde el molino al pueblo, fué asustarse un poco 
al notar que alguien echaba yescas en medio de un 
sembrado. 

— ¿Si será un esbirro del Corregidor ? ¿ Si irá á 5 
detenerme ? — pensó la Molinera. 

En esto se oyó un rebuzno hacia aquel mismo lado. 

— I Burros en el campo á estas horas ! (siguió pen- 
sando la seña Frasquita.) — Pues lo que es por aquí 
no hay ninguna huerta ni cortijo. ... — ¡ Vive Dios 10 
que los duendes se están despachando esta noche á su 
gusto 1 Porque la borrica de mi marido no puede ser. 
... — ¿ Qué haría mi Lucas, á media noche, parado 
fuera de camino ? 

— I Nada 1 ; nada I { Indudablemente es un espía 1 15 
La burra que montaba la seña Frasquita creyó opor- 
tuno rebuznar también en aquel instante. 

— I Calla, demonio ! — le dijo la navarra, clavándole 
un alfiler de á ochavo en mitad de /a cruz, 

Y, temiendo algún encuentro que no le conviniese, 20 
sacó también su bestia fuera del camino y la hizo trotar 
por otros sembrados. 

Sin más accidente, llegó á las puertas del Lugar, á 
tiempo que serían las once de la noche. 

86 



XXIV 

UN REY DE ENTONCES 

Hallábase ya durmiendo la mona el señor Alcalde, 
vuelta la espalda á la espalda de su mujer (y formando 
así con ésta la ñgura de águila austríaca de dos cabezas 
que dice nuestro inmortal Que vedo), cuando Toñuelo 

5 llamó á la puerta de la cámara nupcial, y avisó al Sr. 
Juan López que la seña Frasquita, la del molino^ quería 
hablarle. 

No tenemos para qué referir todos los gruñidos y 
juramentos inherentes al acto de despertar y vestirse 

lo el Alcalde de monterilla, y nos trasladamos desde luego 
al instante en que la Molinera lo vio llegar, despere- 
zándose como un gimnasta que ejercita la musculatura, 
y exclamando en medio de un bostezo interminable : 

— I Téngalas V. muy buenas, seña Frasquita 1 — 
15 i Qué le trae á V. por aquí ? ¿ No le dijo á V. Toñuelo 

que se quedase en el molino ? ¿ Así desobedece V. á 
la Autoridad ? 

— I Necesito ver á mi Lucas ! (respondió la navarra). 
I Necesito verlo al instante ! — ; Que le digan que está 

30 aquí su mujer I 

— I Necesito I i necesito ! — Señora, | á V. se le olvida 
que está hablando con el Rey I . . . 

— i Déjeme V. á mí de reyes, Sr. Juan, que no estoy 
para bromas 1 ; Demasiado sabe V. lo que me sucede 1 

^7 



88 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

I Demasiado sabe para qué ha preso á mi marido I 

— Yo no sé nada, seña Frasquita. ... Y en cuanto 
á su marido de V., no está preso, sino durmiendo tran- 
quilamente en esta su casa, y tratado como yo trato á 
las personas. — \ A ver, Toñuelo 1 | Toñuelo 1 Anda 5 
al pajar, y dile al tío Lucas que se despierte y venga 
corriendo. ... — Conque vamos . . . i cuénteme V. lo 
que pasa 1 • . . ¿ Ha tenido V. miedo de dormir sola ? 

— I No sea V. desvergonzado, señor Juan ! ; Dema- 
siado sabe V. que á m{ no me gustan sus bromas ni sus 10 
veras I Lo que me pasa es una cosa muy sencilla : que 
V. y el señor Corregidor han querido perderme ; i pero 
que se han llevado un solemne chasco 1 i Yo estoy aquí 
sin tener de qué abochornarme, y el señor Corregidor 

se queda en el molino muñéndose 1 . . . 15 

— I Muriéndose el Corregidor I (exclamó su subordi- 
nado). Señora, ¿ sabe V. lo que se dice ? 

— I Lo que V. oye 1 Se ha caído en el caz, y casi 
se ha ahogado, 6 ha cogido una pulmonía, 6 yo no sé 
... I Eso es cuenta de la Corregidora ! Yo vengo á ao 
buscar á mi marido, sin perjuicio de salir mañana mis- 
mo para Madrid, donde le contaré al Rey. . . . 

— I Demonio, demonio I (murmuró el Sr. Juan López). 
— I A ver, Manuela 1 . . . | muchacha 1 . . . Anda y 
aparéjame la mulilla. ... — Seña Frasquita, al molino 25 
voy. ... I Desgraciada de V. si le ha hecho algün 
daño al señor Corregidor 1 

— I Señor Alcalde, señor Alcalde 1 (exclamó en esto 
Toñuelo, entrando más muerto que vivo). El tío Lucas 
no está en el pajar. Su burra no se halla tampoco en 30 



UN REY DE ENTONCES 89 

los pesebres, y la puerta del corral está abierta. . . . 
I De modo que el pájaro se ha escapado I 

— I Qué estás diciendo ? — gritó el señor Juan López. 

— I Virgen del Carmen 1 ¿ Qué va á pasar en mi 
5 casa ? (exclamó la seña Frasquita). ¡ Corramos, señor 

Alcalde ; no perdamos tiempo I ... Mi marido va á 
matar al Corregidor al encontrarlo allí á estas horas. . . . 

— I Luego V. cree que el tío Lucas está en el molino ? 
— I Pues no lo he de creer ? — Digo más . . . cuando 

10 yo venía me he cruzado con él sin conocerlo. \ Él era 
sin duda uno que echaba yescas en medio de un sem- 
brado 1 — I Dios mío 1 I Cuando piensa una que los 
animales tienen más entendimiento que las personas 1 
— Porque ha de saber V., señor Juan, que indudable- 

15 mente nuestras dos burras se reconocieron y se saluda- 
ron, mientras que mi Lucas y yo ni nos saludamos ni 
nos reconocimos. . • . { Antes bien huimos el uno del 
otro, tomándonos mutuamente por espías ! . . . 

— (Bueno está su Lucas de V. I (replicó el Alcalde). 
90 — En fin, vamos andando, y ya veremos lo que hay que 

hacer con todos Vds. i Conmigo no se juega I \ Yo 
soy el Rey I . . . Pero no un rey como el que ahora 
tenemos en Madrid, ó sea en el Pardo, sino como aquel 
que hubo en Sevilla, á quien llamaban D. Pedro el 

25 Cruel. — I A ver, Manuela ! i Tráeme el bastón, y dile 
á tu ama que me marcho I 

Obedeció la sirvienta (que era por cierto más buena 
moza de lo que convenía á la Alcaldesa y á la moral), 
y, como la mulilla del Sr. Juan López estuviese yá apa- 

90 rejada, la seña Frasquita y él salieron para el molino, 
seguidos del indispensable Toñuelo. 



XXV 

LA ESTRELLA DE GARDUÑA 

Precedámosles nosotros, supuesto que tenemos carta 
blanca para andar más de prisa que nadie. 

Garduña se hallaba ya de vuelta en el molino, después 
de haber buscado á la seña Frasquita por todas las 
calles de la Ciudad. 5 

£1 astuto Alguacil había tocado de camino en el 
Corregimiento, donde lo encontró todo muy sosegado. 
Las puertas seguían abiertas como en medio del día, 
según es costumbre cuando la Autoridad está en la calle 
ejerciendo sus sagradas funciones. Dormitaban en la lo 
meseta de la escalera y en el recibimiento otros algua- 
ciles y ministros, esperando descansadamente á su amo ; 
mas, cuando sintieron llegar á Garduña, desperezáronse 
dos 6 tres de ellos, ^ le preguntaron al que era su de- 
cano y jefe inmediaioy 15 

— I Viene ya el señor ? 

— I Ni por asomo! — Estaos quietos. — Vengo á 
saber si ha habido novedad en la casa. • • • 

— Ninguna. 

— ¿Y la Señora? » 

— Recogida en sus aposentos. 

— ¿ No ha entrado una mujer por estas puertas hace 
poco? 

90 



LA ESTRELLA DE GARDUÑA 91 

— Nadie ha parecido por aquí en toda la noche. . . . 

— Pues no dejéis entrar á persona alguna, sea quien 
sea y diga lo que diga. ; Al contrario ! Echadle mano 
al mismo lucero del alba que venga á preguntar por .el 

5 Señor ó por la Señora, y llevadlo á la cárcel. 

— I Parece que esta noche se anda á caza de pájaros 
de fcuenta? — preguntó uno de los esbirros. ^\ ^Ulúr^^ 

— I Caza mayor ! — añadió otro. 

— I Mayúscula I (respondió Garduña solemnemente.) 
10 [Figuraos si la cosa será delicada, cuando el señor 

Corregidor y yo hacemos la batida por nosotros mis- 
mos ! . . . — Conque . . . hasta luego, buenas piezas, y 
I mucho ojo ! 

— Vaya V. con Dios, señor Bastían, — repusieron 
15 todos, saludando á Garduña. 

— ¡ Mi estrella se eclipsa ! (murmuró éste al salir del 
Corregimiento.) i Hasta las mujeres me engañan 1 La 
Molinera se encaminó al Lugar en busca de su esposo, 
en vez de venirse á la Ciudad ... — i Pobre Garduña 1 

20 i Qué se ha hecho de tu olfato ? 

Y, discurriendo de este modo, tomó la vuelta del 
molino. 

Razón tenía el Alguacil para echar de menos su 

antiguo olfato, pues que no venteó á un hombre que se 

?5 escondía en aquel momento detrás de unos mimbres, á 

poca/distancia de la ramblilla, y el cual exclamó para 

su ¿apote, ó más bien para su /capa de grana: -' * 

— I Guarda, Pablo I i Por allí viene Garduña 1 . . • 
Es menester que no me vea. . . . 

y) Era el tío Lucas, vestido de Corregidor, que se diri« 



92 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

gía á la Ciudad, repitiendo de vez en cuando su diabólica 
frase : 

— I También la Corregidora es guapa 1 

Pasó Garduña sin verlo, y el falso Corregidor dej<S 
su escondite y penetró en la población. . . . 

Poco después llegaba el Alguacil al molino^ según 
dejamos indicado 



XXVI 

REACCIÓN 

El Corregidor seguía en la cama, tal y como acaba- 
ba de verlo el tío Lucas por el ojo de la llave. 

— I Qué bien sudo, Garduña ! i Me he salvado de 
una enfermedad I (exclamó tan luego como penetró el 

5 Alguacil en la estancia). — ¿ Y la seña Frasquita ? ¿ Has 
dado con ella ? ¿ Viene contigo ? ¿ Ha hablado con la 
Señora? 

— La Molinera, señor (respondió Garduña con angus- 
tiado acento), me engañó como á un pobre hombre; 

lo pues no se fué á la Ciudad, sino al pueblecillo . . . , en 
busca de su esposo. — Perdone Usía la torpeza . . . 

— I Mejor I I mejor I (dijo el madrileño, con los ojos 
chispeantes de maldad) . { Todo se ha salvado entonces 1 
Antes de que amanezca estarán caminando para las 

15 cárceles de la Inquisición, atados codo con codo, el tío 
Lucas y la seña Frasquita, y allí se pudrirán sin tener 
á quien contarle sus aventuras de esta noche. — Trá- 
eme la ropa. Garduña, que ya estará seca . . . i Tráeme- 
la, y vísteme I i El amante se va á convertir en Córre- 
lo gidor 1 . . . 

Garduña bajó á la cocina por la ropa. 



93 



XXVII 

I FAVOR AL REY I 

Entretanto, la seña Frasquita, el Sr. Juan López y 
Toñuelo avanzaban hacia el molino, al cual llegaron 
pocos minutos después. 

— I Yo entraré delante I (exclamó el Alcalde de mon- 
terilla). I Para algo soy la Autoridad 1 — Sigúeme, 5 
Toñuelo, y V., seña Frasquita, espérese á la puerta 
hasta que yo la llame. 

Penetró, pues, el Sr. Juan López bajo la parra, donde 
vio á la luz de la luna un hombre casi jorobado, vestido 
como solía el Molinero, con chupetín y calzón de paño xo 
pardo, faja negra, medias azules, montera murciana de 
felpa, y el capote de monte al hombro. 

— ¡Él es! (gritó el Alcalde). ¡Favor al Rey! — 
I Entregúese V., tío Lucas I 

El hombre de la montera intentó meterse en el molino. '5 

— I Date I — gritó á su vez Toñuelo, saltando sobre 
él, cogiéndolo por el pescuezo, aplicándole una rodilla 
al espinazo y haciéndole rodar por tierra. 

Al mismo tiempo, otra especie de fiera saltó sobre 
Toñuelo, y, agarrándolo de la cintura, lo tiró sobre el ^ 
empedrado y principió á darle lie bofetones. 

Era la seña Frasquita, que exclamaba : 

— I Tunante I | Deja á mi Lucas I 

Pero, en esto, otra persona, que había aparecido Ue- 



FAVOR AL REY 95 

vando del diestro una borrica, metióse resueltamente 
entre los dos, y trató de salvar á Toñuelo . . . 

Era Garduña, que, tomando al Alguacil del Lugar 
por D. Eugenio de Züñiga, le decía á la Molinera : 
5 — j Señora, respete V. á mi amo I 

Y la derribó de espaldas sobre el lugareño. 

La seña Frasquita, viéndose entre dos fuegos, des- 
cargó entonces á Garduña tal reve's en medio del estó- 
mago, que le hizo caer de boca tan largo como era. 

10 Y, con él, ya eran cuatro las personas que rodaban 
por el suelo. 

El Sr. Juan López impedía entretanto levantarse al 
supuesto tío Lucas, teniéndole plantado un pie sobre los 
ríñones. 

15 — I Garduña 1 ; Socorro 1 i Favor al Rey 1 \ Yo soy 
el Corregidor I — gritó al fin Don Eugenio, sintiendo 
que la pezuña del Alcalde, calzada con albarca de piel 
de toro, lo reventaba materialmente. 

— I El Corregidor ! i Pues es verdad ! — dijo el Sr. 
20 Juan López, lleno de asombro . . . 

— I El Corregidor I — repitieron todos. 

Y pronto estuvieron de pie los cuatro derribados. 

— j Todo el mundo á la cárcel 1 (exclamó D. Eugenio 
de Züñiga). i Todo el mundo á la horca ! 

25 — Pero, señor . . . (observó el Sr. Juan López, po- 
niéndose de rodillas). — 1 Perdone Usía que lo haya 
maltratado I ¿ Cómo había de conocer á Usía con esa 
ropa tan ordinaria ? 

— I Bárbaro 1 (replicó el Corregidor) : ; alguna había 
30 de ponerme 1 ¿ No sabes que me han robado la mía ? 



96 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

I No sabes que una compañía de ladrones, mandada por 
el tío Lucas . . . 

— I Miente V. I -^ gritó la navarra. 

— Escúcheme V., seña Frasquita (le dijo Garduña, 
llamándola aparte). — Con permiso del señor Corregí- 5 
dor y la compaña ... — j Si V. no arregla esto, nos van 

á ahorcar á todos, empezando por el tío Lucas ! . . • 

— Pues i qué ocurre ? — preguntó la seña Frasquita. 

— Que el tío Lucas anda á estas horas por la Ciudad 
vestido de Corregidor . . . , y que Dios sabe si habrá 10 
llegado con su disfraz hasta el propio dormitorio de la 
Corregidora. 

Y el Alguacil le refirió en cuatro palabras todo lo que 
ya sabemos. 

— I Jesús I (exclamó la Molinera). ¡ Conque mi ma- 15 
rido me cree deshonrada 1 i Conque ha ido á la Ciudad 

á vengarse 1 — | Vamos, vamos á la Ciudad, y justifícad- 
me á los ojos de mi Lucas 1 

— I Vamos á la Ciudad, é impidamos que ese hombre 
hable con mi mujer y le cuente todas las majaderías que 20 
se haya figurado ! (dijo el Corregidor, arrimándose á 
una de las burras). — Déme V. un pie para montar, 
señor Alcalde. 

— Vamos á la Ciudad, sí . . . (añadió Garduña) ; ly 
quiera el cielo, señor Corregidor, que el tío Lucas, 25 
amparado por su vestimenta, se haya contentado con 
hablarle á la Señora 1 

— I Qué dices, desgraciado ? (prorrumpió D. Eugenio 
de Zúñiga). ¿ Crees tú á ese villano capaz ? . . . 

— ¡ De todo I — contestó la seña Frasquita. jo 



xxyiii 

I AVE MARÍA PURÍSIMA I | LAS DOCE Y MEDIA Y SERENOl 

Así gritaba por las calles de la Ciudad quien tenía 
facultades para tanto, cuando la Molinera y el Corre- 
gidor, cada cual en una de las burras del molino, el Sr. 
Juan López en su muía, y los dos alguaciles andando, 
5 llegaron á la puerta del Corregimiento. 

La puerta estaba cerrada. 

Dijérase que para el Gobierno, lo mismo que para los 
gobernados, había concluido todo por aquel día. 

— I Malo I — pensó Garduña, 
lo Y llamó con el aldabón dos ó tres veces. 

Pasó mucho tiempo, y ni abrieron, ni contestaron. 

La seña Frasquita estaba más amarilla que la cera. 

£1 Corregidor se había comido ya todas las uñas de 
ambas manos. 
15 Nadie decía una palabra. 

I Pum ! . . . I Pum I . . . ; Pum ! . , , — golpes y más 
golpes á la puerta del Corregimiento (aplicados suce- 
sivamente por los dos alguaciles y por el Sr. Juan 
López) ... — Y I nada i | No respondía nadie 1 i No 
ao abrían I ; No se movía una mosca 1 

Sólo se oía el claro rumor de los caños de una fuente 
que había en el patio de la casa. 

Y de esta manera transcurrían minutos, largos como 
eternidades. 

97 



98 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

Al ñn, cerca de la una, abrióse un ventanillo del piso 
segundo, y dijo una voz femenina : 
— I Quién ? 

— Es la voz del ama de leche . . . — murmuró Gar- 
duña. 5 

— I Yol (respondió D. Eugenio de Ziíñiga). — i Abrid 1 
Pasó un instante de silencio. 

— ¿Y quién es V. ? — replicó luego la nodriza. 

— I Pues no me está V. oyendo ? — \ Soy el amo I • . . 

I el Corregidor I . . . 10 

Hubo otra pausa. 

— I Vaya V. mucho con Dios 1 (repuso la buena 
mujer). — Mi amo vino hace una hora, y se acostó en 
seguida. — i Acuéstense Vds. también, y duerman el 
vino que tendrán en el cuerpo 1 15 

Y la ventana se cerró de golpe. 

La seña Frasquita se cubrió el rostro con las manos. 

— I Ama 1 (tronó el Corregidor, fuera de sí), i No 
oye V. que le digo que abra la puerta ? ¿ No oye V. 
que soy yo ? ¿ Quiere V. que la ahorque también ? 90 

La ventana volvió á abrirse. 

— Pero vamos á ver . . . (expuso el ama). ¿ Quién 
es V. para dar esos gritos ? 

— I Soy el Corregidor I 

— I Dale, bola I ¿ No le digo á V, que el señor Co- 25 
rregidor vino antes de las doce . . . , y que yo lo vi con 
mis propios ojos encerrarse en las habitaciones de la 
Señora ? ¿Se quiere V, divertir conmigo ? — i Pues 
espere V, . , , y verá lo que le pasa I 

Al mismo tiempo se abrió repentinamente la puerta» 30 



LAS DOCE Y MEDIA Y SERENO 99 

y una nube de criados y ministriles, provistos de sendos 
garrotes, se lanzó sobre los de afuera, exclamando 
furiosamente : 

— I A ver ! ¿ Dónde está ese que dice que es el Co- 
5 rregidor ? ¿ Dónde está ese chusco ? ¿ Dónde está 
ese borracho ? 

Y se armó un lío de todos los demonios en medio de 
la obscuridad, sin que «nadie pudiera entenderse, y no 
dejando de recibir algunos palos el Corregidor, Gar- 
io duna, el Sr. Juan López y Toñuelo. 

Era la segunda paliza que le costaba á D. Eugenio 
su aventura de aquella noche, además del remojón que 
se dio en el caz del molino. 

La seña Frasquita, apartada de aquel laberinto, 11o- 
15 raba por la primera vez de su vida . . . 

— I Lucas I I Lucas I (decía). ; Y has podido dudar 
de mí I ¡Y has podido estrechar en tus brazos á otral 
— ¡ Ah ! I Nuestra desventura no tiene ya remedio 1 



XXIX 

POST NUBILA . . , DIANA 

Qué escándalo es este? — dijo al fin una voz tran- 
quila, majestuosa y de gracioso timbre, resonando enci- 
ma de aquella baraúnda. 

Todos levantaron la cabeza, y vieron á una mujer ves- 
tida de negro, asomada al balcón principal del edificio. 5 

— I La Señora ! — dijeron los criados, suspendiendo 
la retreta de palos. 

— I Mi mujer 1 — tartamudeó D. Eugenio. 

— Que pasen esos rústicos ... — El señor Corre- 
gidor dice que lo permite ... — agregó la Corregidora, w 

Los criados cedieron el paso, y el de Zúñiga y sus 
acompañantes penetraron en el portal y tomaron por la 
escalera arriba. 

Ningún reo ha subido al patíbulo con paso tan inse- 
guro y semblante tan demudado como el Corregidor 15 
subía las escaleras de su casa. — Sin embargo, la idea 
de su deshonra principiaba ya á descollar, con noble 
egoísmo, por encima de todos los infortunios que había 
causado y que lo afligían y sobre las demás ridiculeces 
de la situación en que se hallaba ... «i 

— I Antes que todo (iba pensando), soy un Zúñiga y 
un Ponce de León ! . . . ¡ Ay de aquellos que lo hayan 
echado en olvido 1 i Ay de mi mujer, si ha mancillado 
mi nombre I 

100 



XXX 

UNA SEÑORA DE CLASE 

La Corregidora recibió á su esposo y á la rustica 
comitiva en el salón principal del Corregimiento. 

Estaba sola, de pie, y con los ojos clavados en la 
puerta. 

5 Érase una principalísima dama, bastante joven toda- 
vía, de plácida y severa hermosura, más propia del 
pincel cristiano que del cincel gentílico, y estaba vestida 
con toda la nobleza y seriedad que consentía el gusto 
de la época. Su traje, de corta y estrecha falda y 

xo mangas huecas y subidas, era de alepín negro: una 
pañoleta de blonda blanca, algo amarillenta, velaba 
sus admirables hombros, y larguísimos maniquetes ó 
mitones de tul negro cubrían la mayor parte de sus ala- 
bastrinos brazos. Abanicábase majestuosamente con un 

15 pericón enorme, traído de las islas Filipinas, y empu- 
ñaba con la otra mano un pañuelo de encaje, cuyos 
cuatro picos colgaban simétricamente con una regulari- 
dad sólo comparable á la de su actitud y menores mo- 
vimientos. 

» Aquella hermosa mujer tenía algo de reina y mucho 
de abadesa, é infundía por ende veneración y miedo 
á cuantos la miraban. Por lo demás, el atildamiento 
de su traje á semejante hora, la gravedad de su conti- 
nente y las muchas luces que alumbraban el salón, 

lOX 



I02 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

demostraban que la Corregidora se había esmerado en 
dar á aquella escena una solemnidad teatral y un tinte 
ceremonioso que contrastasen con el carácter villano y 
grosero de la aventura de su marido. 

Advertiremos, finalmente, que aquella señora se 5 
llamaba Doña Mercedes Carrillo de Albornoz y Espi- 
nosa de los Monteros, y que era hija, nieta, biznieta, 
tataranieta y hasta vigésima nieta de la Ciudad, como 
descendiente de sus ilustres conquistadores. — Su fa- 
milia, por razones de vanidad mundana, la había indu- 10 
cido á casarse con el viejo y acaudalado Corregidor, y 
ella, que de otro modo hubiera sido monja, pues su 
vocación natural la iba llevando al claustro, consintió 
en aquel doloroso sacrificio. 

A la sazón tenía ya dos vastagos del arriscado ma- 15 
drileño, y aiin se susurraba que había otra vez moros en 
la costa. . . . 

Conque volvamos á nuestro cuento. 



XXXI 

LA PENA DEL TALIÓN 

I Mercedes 1 (exclamó el Corregidor al comparecer 
delante de su esposa). Necesito saber inmediata- 
mente. . . . 

— ¡ Hola, tío Lucas 1 i V. por aquí ? (dijo la Corre- 
5 gidora, interrumpiéndole). — ¿ Ocurre alguna desgracia 

en el molino ? 

— I Señora 1 ¡ no estoy para chanzas 1 (repuso el Co- 
rregidor hecho una fiera). — Antes de entrar en expli- 
caciones por mi parte, necesito saber qué ha sido de 

10 mi honor. , , . 

— I Esa no es cuenta mía I ¿ Acaso me lo ha dejado 
V. á mí en depósito ? 

— Sí, Señora. ... ; A V. ! (replicó D. Eugenio). — 
¡ Las mujeres son depgsitarias del honor de sus ma- 

Z5 rídos I 

— Pues entonces, mi querido tío Lucas^ pregúntele 
V. á su mujer, ... — Precisamente nos está escuchan- 
do. 

La seña Frasquita, que se había quedado á la puerta 
30 del salón, lanzó una especie de rugido. 

— Pase V., señora, y siéntese . . . — añadió la Co- 
rregidora, dirigiéndose á la Molinera con dignidad 
soberana. 

Yy por su parte, encaminóse al sofát 
103 



I04 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



La generosa navarra supo comprender desde luego 
toda la grandeza de la actitud de aquélla esposa inju- 
riada . . . , é injuriada acaso doblemente. . . 1 Así es 
que, alzándose en el acto á igual altura, dominó sus 
naturales ímpetus, y guardó un silencio decoroso. — 5 
Esto sin contar con que la seña Frasquita, segura de 
su inocencia y de su fuerza, no tenía prisa de defen- 
derse. — Teníala, sí, de acusar ; y mucha . . . ; pero no 
ciertamente á la Corregidora. — ; Con quien ella deseaba 
ajustar cuentas era con el tío Lucas . . . , y el tío Lucas xo 
no estaba allí 1 

— Seña Frasquita . . . (repitió la noble dama, al ver 
que la Molinera no se había movido de su sitio) : le he 
dicho á V. que puede pasar y sentarse. 

Esta segunda indicación fué hecha con voz más 15 
afectuosa y sentida que la primera. ... — Dijérase que 
la Corregidora había adivinado también por instinto, al 
fijarse en el reposado continente y en la varonil hermo- 
sura de aquella mujer, que no iba á habérselas con un 
ser bajo y despreciable, sino quizá más bien con otra 20 
infortunada como ella ; — | infortunada, sí, por el solo 
hecho de ^aber conocido al Corregidor 1 

Cruzaron, pues, sendas miradas de paz y de indul- 
gencia aquellas dos mujeres que se consideraban dos 
veces rivales, y notaron con gran sorpresa que sus almas 25 
se aplacieron la una en la otra, como dos hermanos que 
se reconocen. 

No de otro modo se divisan y saludan á lo lejos las 
castas nieves de las encumbradas montañas. 

Saboreando estas dulces emociones, la Molinera entró 30 



LA PENA DEL TALIÓN 105 

majestuosamente en el salón, y se sentó en el filo de 

una silla. 

A su paso por el molino, previendo que en la Ciudad 

tendría que hacer visitas de importancia, se había arre- 
5 glado un poco y puéstose una mantilla de franela negra, 

con grandes felpones, que le sentaba divinamente. 

— Parecía toda una señora. 

Por lo que toca al Corregidor, dicho se está que 

había guardado silencio durante aquel episodio. — £1 
10 rugido de la seña Frasquita y su aparición en la escena 

no habían podido menos de sobresaltarlo. — ; Aquella 

mujer le causaba ya más terror que la suya propia 1 

— Conque vamos, tío Lucas . . . (prosiguió Doña 
Mercedes, dirigiéndose á su marido). Ahí tiene V. á 

15 la seña Frasquita. ... ; Puede V. volver á formular 

su demanda 1 [Puede V. preguntarle aquello de su 

honra 1 

— : Mercedes, ; por los clavos de Cristo I (gritó el 

Corregidor). | Mira que tú no sabes de lo que soy 
90 capaz 1 I Nuevamente te conjuro á que dejes la broma 

y me digas todo lo que ha pasado aquí durante mi 

ausencia 1 — i Dónde está ese hombre ? 

— I Quién ? i Mi marido ? ... Mi marido se está 
levantando, y ya no puede tardar en venir. 

25 — I Levantándose 1 — bramó D. Eugenio. 

— ¿Se asombra V. ? ¿ Pues dónde quería V. que 
estuviese á estas horas un hombre de bien, sino en su 
casa, en su cama, y durmiendo con su legítima consorte, 
como manda Dios ? 

30 — I Merceditas I ; Ve lo que te dices ! i Repara en 



lo6 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

que nos están oyendo 1 | Repara en que soy el Co- 
rregidor 1 . . . 

— I A mí no me dé V. voces, tío Lucas, ó mandaré á 
los alguaciles que lo lleven á la cárcel ! — replicó la 
Corregidora, poniéndose de pie. 5 

— j Yo á la cárcel ! i Yo ! j El Corregidor de la 
Ciudad 1 

— El Corregidor de la Ciudad, el representante de 
la Justicia, el apoderado del Rey (repuso la gran señora 
con una severidad y una energía que ahogaron la voz lo 
del fingido Molinero), llegó á su casa á la hora debida, 

á descansar de las nobles tareas de su oficio, para se- 
guir mañana amparando la honra y la vida de los ciu- 
dadanos, la santidad del hogar y el recato de las 
mujeres, impidiendo de este modo que nadie pueda 15 
entrar, disfrazado de Corregidor ni de ninguna otra 
cosa, en la alcoba de la mujer ajena ; que nadie pueda 
sorprender á la virtud en su descuidado reposo; que 
nadie pueda abusar de su casto sueño. . . . 

— ¡ Merceditas ! i Qué es lo que profieres ? (silbó el » 
Corregidor con labios y encías). ; Si es verdad que ha 
pasado eso en mi casa, diré que eres una picara, una 
pérfida, una licenciosa 1 

— I Con quién habla este hombre ? (prorrumpió la 
Corregidora desdeñosamente, y paseando la vista por 29 
todos los circunstantes). ¿ Quién es este loco ? ¿ Quién 
es este ebrio ? , . . ¡Ni siquiera puedo ya creer que 
sea un honrado molinero como el tío Lucas, á pesar de 
que viste su traje de villano 1 — Sr. Juan López, créame 
V. (continuó, encarándose con el Alcalde de monterilla, 3Q 



LA PENA DEL TALIÓN 107 

que estaba aterrado) : mi marido, el Corregidor de la 
Ciudad, llegó á esta su casa hace dos horas, con su som- 
brero de tres picos, su capa de grana, su espadín de 
caballero y su bastón de autoridad. . . . Los criados 

5 y alguaciles que me escuchan se levantaron, y lo salu- 
daron al verlo pasar por el portal, por la escalera, y por 
el recibimiento. Cerráronse en seguida todas las puer- 
tas, y desde entonces no ha penetrado nadie en mi 
hogar hasta que llegaron Vds. — ¿Es esto cierto ? — 

xo Responded vosotros. . . . 

— I Es verdad ! | Es muy verdad 1 — contestaron la 
nodriza, los domésticos y los ministriles; todos los 
cuales, agrupados á la puerta del salón, presenciaban 
aquella singular escena. 

15 — ^l Fuera de aquí todo el mundo I (gritó D. Eugenio, 
echando espumarajos de rabia). — i Garduña 1 | Gar- 
duña I I Ven y prende á estos viles que me están fal- 
tando al respeto ! i Todos á la cárcel 1 ; Todos á la 
horca ! 

20 Garduña no parecía por ningún lado. 

— Además, señor . . . (continuó Doña Mercedes, 
cambiando de tono y dignándose ya mirar á su marido 
y tratarle como á tal, temerosa de que las chanzas 
llegaran á irremediables extremos). Supongamos que 

i5 V. es mi esposo. . . . Supongamos que V. es D. Eu- 
genio de Züñiga y Ponce de León. . . . 

— I Lo soy 1 

— Supongamos, además, que me cupiese alguna 
culpa en haber tomado por V. al hombre que penetró 

30 en mi alcoba vestido de Corregidor. . . . 



io8 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— I Infames 1 — gritó el viejo, echando mano á la 
espada, y encontrándose sólo con el sitio ó sea con la 
faja de molinero murciano. 

La navarra se tapó el rostro con un lado de la man- 
tilla para ocultar las llamaradas de sus celos. 5 

— Supongamos todo lo que V. quiera . . . (continuó 
Doña Mercedes con una impasibilidad inexplicable). 
Pero dígame V. ahora, señor mío : ¿ Tendría derecho 
á quejarse ? ¿ Podría V. acusarme como ñscal ? ¿ Po- 
dría V. sentenciarme como juez ? ¿ Viene V. acaso del 10 
sermón ? i Viene V. de confesar ? ¿ Viene V. de oír 
misa ? ¿ Ó de dónde viene V. con ese traje ? ¿De 
dónde viene V. con esa señora ? ¿ Dónde ha pasado 
V. la mitad de la noche ? 

— Con permiso ... — exclamó la seña Frasquita, 15 
poniéndose de pie como empujada por un resorte, y 
atravesándose arrogantemente entre la Corregidora y su 
marido. 

Éste, que iba á hablar, se quedó con la boca abierta 
al ver que la navarra entraba en fuego. ao 

Pero Doña Mercedes se anticipó, y dijo : 

— Señora, no se fatigue V. en darme á mí explica- 
ciones .. o I Yo no se las pido á V., ni mucho menos I — 
Allí viene quien puede pedírselas á justo título . . . 

I Entiéndase V. con él I «5 

Al mismo tiempo se abrió la puerta de un gabinete, 
y apareció en ella el tío Lucas, vestido de Corregidor 
de pies á cabeza, y con bastón, guantes y espadín, como 
si se presentase en las Salas de Cabildo. 



XXXII 

LA FB MUEVE LAS MONTAÑAS 

Tengan Vds. muy buenas noches, — pronunció el 
recién llegado, quitándose el sombrero de tres picos, y 
hablando con la boca sumida, como solía D. Eugenio 
de Ziíñiga. 

s En seguida se adelantó por el salón, balanceándose 
en todos sentidos, y fué á besar la mano de la Corre- 
gidora. 

Todos se quedaron estupefactos. — El parecido del tío 
Lucas con el verdadero Corregidor era maravilloso. 

10 Así es que la servidumbre, y hasta el mismo Sr. Juan 
López, no pudieron contener una carcajada. 

D. Eugenio sintió aquel nuevo agravio, y se lanzó 
sobre el tío Lucas como un basilisco. 

Pero la seña Frasquita metió el montante, apartando 

15 al Corregidor con el brazo de marras, y Su Señoría, en 
evitación de otra voltereta y del consiguiente ludibrio, 
se dejó atropellar sin decir oxte ni moxte. — Estaba 
visto que aquella mujer había nacido para domadora 
del pobre viejo. 

» El tío Lucas se puso más pálido que la muerte al ver 
que su mujer se le acercaba ; pero luego se dominó, y, 
con una risa tan horrible que tuvo que llevarse la mano 
al corazón para que no se le hiciese pedazos, dijo, reme- 
dando siempre al Corregidor : 

109 



lio EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— I Dios te guarde, Frasquita 1 ¿ Le has enviado ya 
á tu sobrino el nombramiento ? 

I Hubo que ver entonces á la navarra 1 — Tiróse la 
mantilla atrás, levantó la frente con soberanía de leona, 
y, clavando en el falso Corregidor dos ojos como dos 5 
puñales : 

— ¡ Te desprecio, Lucas 1 — le dijo en n^itad de la 
cara. 

Todos creyeron que le había escupido. 

\ Tal gesto, tal ademán y tal tono de voz acentuaron w 
aquella frase 1 

El rostro del Molinero se transfiguró al oir la voz de 
su mujer. Una especie de inspiración, semejante á la 
de la fe religiosa, había penetrado en su alma, inundán- 
dola de luz y de alegría . . . Así es que, olvidándose 15 
por uní momento de cuanto había visto y creído ver en 
el molino, exclamó, con las lágrimas en los ojos y la 
sinceridad en los labios : 

. — ¿ Conque tú eres mi Frasquita ? 

— I No ! (respondió la navarra fuera de sí). ; Yo no « 
soy ya tu Frasquita 1 — Yo soy . . . ¡ Pregúntaselo á tus 
hazañas de esta noche, y ellas te dirán lo que has hecho 
del corazón que tanto te quería 1 . . . 

Y se echó á llorar, como una montaña de hielo que 
se hunde y principia á derretirse. 25 

La Corregidora se adelantó hacia ella sin poder con- 
tenerse, y la estrechó en sus brazos con el mayor cariño. 

La seña Frasquita se puso entonces á besarla, sin 
saber tampoco lo que se hacía, diciéndole entre sus so- 
llozos, como una niña que busca amparo en su madre : 3ft 



LA FE MUEVE LAS MONTAÑAS m 

— I Señora, señora I | Qué desgraciada soy I 

— I No tanto como V. se figura 1 — contestábale la 
Corregidora, llorando también generosamente. 

— I Yo sí que soy desgraciado 1 — gemía al mismo 
5 tiempo el tío Lucas, andando á puñetazos con sus lágri- 
mas, como avergonzado de verterlas. 

— Pues ¿y yo? (prorrumpió al fin Don Eugenio, 
sintiéndose ablandado por el contagioso lloro de los de- 
más, ó esperando salvarse también por la vía húmeda ; 

lo quiero decir, por la vía del llanto). — ¡ Ah, yo soy un 
picaro 1 I un monstruo I i un calavera deshecho, que ha 
llevado su merecido 1 

Y rompió á berrear tristemente, abrazado á la barri- 
ga del Sr. Juan López. 

15 Y éste y los criados lloraban de igual manera, y 
todo parecía concluido, y, sin embargo, nadie se había 
explicado. 



XXXIII 



PUES ¿Y TÚ? 



El tío Lucas fué el primero que salió á flote en aquel 
mar de lágrimas. 

Era que empezaba á acordarse otra vez de lo que 
había visto por el ojo de la llave. 

— I Señores, vamos á cuentas ! . . . dijo de pronto. 5 

— No hay cuentas que valgan, tío Lucas . . . (exclamó 
la Corregidora). — | Su mujer de V. es una bendita ! 

— Bien . . . , sí . . . ; pero . . . 

— ¡ Nada de pero ! . . . Déjela V. hablar, y verá cómo 

se justifica. — Desde que la vi, me dio el corazón que 10 
era una santa, á pesar de todo lo que V. me había con- 
tado . . . 

— I Bueno ; que hable ! . . . — dijo el tío Lucas. 

— I Yo no hablo ! (contestó la Molinera). \ El que 
tiene que hablar eres tú I . • . Porque la verdad es que 15 
tú . . . 

Y la seña Frasquita no dijo más, por impedírselo el 
invencible respeto que le inspiraba la Corregidora. 

— Pues ¿y tú ? — respondió el tío Lucas, perdiendo 
de nuevo toda fe. « 

— Ahora no se trata de ella . . . (gritó el Corregidor, 
tornando también á sus celos). ¡ Se trata de V. y de 
esta señora I — | Ah, Merceditas ! . . . ¿ Quién había de 
decirme que tú r* . . . 



PUES ¿Y TU? 113 

— Pues ¿y tü ? — repuso la Corregidora midiéndolo 
con la vista. 

Y durante algunos momentos, los dos matrimonios 
repitieron cien veces las mismas frases : 
5 — ¿Ytú? 

— Pues ¿y tú? 

— I Vaya que tú I 

— í No que tú ! 

— Pero ¿ cómo has podido tú ? . . • 
10 Etc., etc., etc. 

La cosa hubiera sido interminable, si la Corregidora, 
revistiéndose de dignidad, no dijese por último á D. 
Eugenio : 
— I Mira, cállate tú ahora ! Nuestra cuestión parti- 

15 cular la ventilaremos más adelante. Lo que urge en 
este momento es devolver la paz al corazón del tío 
Lucas : cosa muy fácil, á mi juicio ; pues allí distingo 
al Sr. Juan López y á Toñuelo, que están saltando por 
justificar á la seña Frasquita. 

» — i Yo no necesito que me justifiquen los hombres ! 
(respondió ésta). — Tengo dos testigos de mayor crédi- 
to, á quienes no se dirá que he seducido ni sobornado . . . 

— Y ¿dónde están ? — preguntó el Molinero. 

— Están abajo, en la puerta . . . 

25 — Pues diles que suban, con permiso de esta señora. 

— Las pobres no podrían subir . . . 

— j Ah ! I Son dos mujeres ! . . . i Vaya un testimonio 
fidedigno ! 

— lampoco son dos mujeres. Sólo son dos hem- 
30 bras . . . 



114 



EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 



— I Peor que peor I ; Serán dos niñas ! . . . Hazme 
el favor de decirme sus nombres. 

— La una se llama Piñona y la otra Liviana. 

— í Nuestras dos burras ! — Frasquita : ¿ te estás ri- 
endo de mí ? 5 

— No : que estoy hablando muy formal. Yo puedo 
probarte, con el testimonio de nuestras burras, que no 
me hallaba en el molino cuando tü viste en él al señor 
Corregidor. 

— j Por Dios te pido que te expliques ! . . . w 

— I Oye, Lucas ! . . . , y muérete de vergüenza por 
haber dudado de mi honradez. Mientras tü ibas esta 
noche desde el Lugar á nuestra casa, yo me dirigía desde 
nuestra casa «4 Lugar, y, por consiguiente, nos cruza- 
mos en el camino. Pero tü marchabas fuera de él, ó, 15 
por mejor decir, te habías detenido á echar unas yescas 
en medio de un sembrado . . . 

— í Es verdad que me detuve ! . . . — Continua. 

— En esto rebuznó tu borrica . . . 

— I Justamente ! — | Ah, qué feliz soy ! . . . i Habla, lo 
habla ; que cada palabra tuya me devuelve un año de 
vida! 

— Y á aquel rebuzno le contestó otro en el camino . . . 

— I Oh ! sí . . . sí . . . — [Bendita seas! \ Me parece 

estarlo oyendo I í5 

— Eran Liviana y Piñona, que se habían reconocido 
y se saludaban como buenas amigas, mientras que noso- 
tros dos ni nos saludamos ni nos reconocimos . . . 

— I No me digas más I . . . ; No me digas más 1 . . . 

— Tan no nos reconocimos (continuó la seña Fras- 30 



PUES ¿Y TU? 115 

quita), que los dos nos asustamos y salimos huyendo en 
direcciones contrarias ... — | Conque ya ves que yo no 
estaba en el molino 1 — Si quieres saber ahora por qué 
encontraste al señor Corregidor en nuestra cama, tienta 
5 esas ropas que llevas puestas, y que todavía estarán 
húmedas, y te lo dirán mejor que yo. — i Su Señoría se 
cayó en el caz del molino, y Garduña lo desnudó y lo 
acostó allí 1 — Si quieres saber por qué abrí la puerta . . . , 
fué porque creí que eras tü el que se ahogaba y me Ha- 
to maba á gritos. Y, en fin, si quieres saber lo del nombra- 
miento ... — Pero no tengo más que decir por la pre- 
sente. Cuando estemos solos, te enteraré de ese y 
otros particulares . . . que no debo referir delante de 
esta señora. 
15 — ¡Todo lo que ha dicho la seña Frasquita es la pura 
verdad! — gritó el señor Juan López, deseando con- 
graciarse con Doña Mercedes, visto que ella imperaba 
en el Corregimiento. 

— I Todo I I Todo I — añadió Toñuelo, siguiendo la 
90 corriente de su amo. 

— I Hasta ahora . . . , todo 1 — agregó el Corregidor^ 
muy complacido de que las explicaciones de la navarra 
no hubieran ido más lejos ... 

— I Conque eres inocente ! (exclamaba en tanto el 
25 tío Lucas, rindiéndose á la evidencia). — i Frasquita 

mía, Frasquita de mi alma ! ; Perdóname la injusticia, 
y deja que te dé un abrazo ! . . . 

— Esa es harina de otro costal . . . (contestó la Mo- 
linera, hurtando el cuerpo). — Antes de abrazarte, 

^0 necesito oir tus explicaciones . • . 



Ii6 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— Yo las daré por él y por mí . . . — dijo Doña 
Mercedes. 

— I Hace una hora que las estoy esperando ! — pro- 
firió el Corregidor, tratando de erguirse. 

— Pero no las daré (continuó la Corregidora, vqIví- 5 
endo la espalda desdeñosamente á su marido) hasta que 
estos señores hayan descambiado vestimentas . . . ; y, 
aun entonces, se las daré tan sólo á quien merezca oir- 
ías. 

— ^Vamos . . • Vamos á descambiar . . • (díjole el mur- 10 
ciano á D. Eugenio, alegrándose mucho de no haberlo 
asesinado, pero mirándolo todavía con un odio verdade- 
ramente morisco). — | El traje de Vuestrpí Señoría me 
ahoga ! ; He sido muy desgraciado mientras lo he 
tenido puesto ! . . . • 15 

— I Porque no lo entiendes ! (respondióle el Corre- 
gidor). ¡Yo estoy, en cambio, deseando ponérmelo, 
para ahorcarte á ti y á medio mundo, si no me satisfacen 
las exculpaciones de mi mujer ! 

La Corregidora, que oyó esta palabras, tranquilizó á lo 
la reunión con una suave sonrisa, propia de aquellos 
afanados ángeles cuyo ministerio es guardar á los 
hombres. 



XXXIV 

TAMBIÉN LA CORREGIDORA ES GUAPA 

Salido que hubieron de la sala el Corregidor y el tío 

Lucas, sentóse de nuevo la Corregidora en el sofá; 

colocó á su lado á la seña Frasquita, y, dirigiéndose á 

los domésticos y ministriles que obstruían la puerta, les 

5 dijo con afable sencillez : 

— I Vaya, muchachos I . . . Contad ahora vosotros á 
esta excelente mujer todo lo malo que sepáis de mí. 

Avanzó el cuarto estado, y diez voces quisieron hab- 
lar á un mismo tiempo ; pero el ama de leche, como la 
lo persona que más alas tenía en la casa, impuso silencio 
á los demás, y dijo de esta manera : 

— Ha de saber V., seña Frasquita, que estábamos yo 
y mi Señora esta noche al cuidado de los niños, espe- 
rando á ver si venía el amo y rezando el tercer Rosario 

15 para hacer tiempo (pues la razón traída por Garduña 
había sido que andaba el señor Corregidor detrás de 
unos facinerosos muy terribles, y no era cosa de acos- 
tarse hasta verlo entrar sin novedad), cuando sentimos 
ruido de gente en la alcoba inmediata, que es donde mis 

90 señores tienen su cama de matrimonio. Cogimos la luz, 
muertas de miedo, y fuimos á ver quién andaba en la 
alcoba, cuando ; ay. Virgen del Carmen ! al entrar, vi- 
mos que un hombre, vestido como mi señor, pero que 
no era él (í como que era su marido de V. I), trataba de 

"7 



Ii8 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

esconderse debajo de la cama. — n Ladrones / 1» prin- 
cipiamos á gritar desaforadamente, y un momento des- 
pués la habitación estaba llena de gente, y los alguaciles 
sacaban arrastrando de su escondite al fingido Corre- 
gidor. — Mi Señora, que, como todos, había reconocido 5 
al tío Lucas, y que lo vio con aquel traje, temió que 
hubiese matado al amo, y empezó á dar unos lamentos 
que partían las piedras . . . — a¡ A la cárcel I ¡ A la cár- 
cel fv^ decíamos entre tanto los demás. — a ¡Ladrón/ 
¡ Asesino ¡Vi era la mejor palabra que oía el tío Lucas; w 
y así es que estaba como un difunto, arrimado á la pared, 
sin decir esta boca es mía. — Pero, viendo luego que se 
lo llevaban á la cárcel, dijo ... lo que voy á repetir, 
aunque verdaderamente mejor sería para callado: — 
« Señora, yo no soy ladrón ni asesino : el ladrón y el 15 
» asesino ... de mi honra está en mi casa, acostado con 
» mi mujer.» 

— í Pobre Lucas I — suspiró la seña Frasquita. 

— I Pobre de mí ! — murmuró la Corregidora tran- 
quilamente. « 

— Eso dijimos todos . . . « | Pobre tío Lucas y pobre 
Señora ! » — Porque ... la verdad, seña Frasquita, ya 
teníamos idea de que mi señor había puesto los ojos en 
V . . . , y, aunque nadie se figuraba que V. . . . 

— I Ama ! (exclamó severamente la Corregidora). 25 
j No siga V. por ese camino ! . . . 

— Continuaré yo por el otro . . . (dijo un alguacil, 
aprovechando aquella coyuntura para apoderarse de la 
palabra). — El tío Lucas (que nos engañó de lo lindo 
con su traje y su manera de andar cuando entró en la 39 



TAMBIÉN LA CORREGIDORA ES GUAPA 119 

casa ; tanto que todos lo tomamos por el señor Corre- 
gidor), no había venido con muy buenas intenciones que 
digamos, y si la Señora no hubiera estado levantada . . . , 
figúrese V. lo que habría sucedido . . . 
5 — 1 Vamos I I Cállate tu también I (interrumpid la 
cocinera). — ; No estás diciendo más que tonterías ! — 
Pues, sí, seña Frasquita : el tío Lucas, para explicar su 
presencia en la alcoba de mi ama, tuvo que confesar las 
intenciones que traía . . . ¡ Por cierto que la Señora no 

10 se pudo contener al oirlo, y le arrimó una bofetada en 
medio de la boca, que le dejó la mitad de las palabras 
dentro del cuerpo! — Yo misma lo llené de insultos y 
denuestos, y quise sacarle los ojos . . . Porque ya conoce 
V., seña Frasquita, que, aunque sea su marido de V., 

15 eso de venir con sus manos lavadas . . . 

— ¡ Eres una bachillera ! (gritó el portero, poniéndose 
delante de la oradora). — ¿ Qué más hubieras querido 
tü ? . . . — En fin, seña Frasquita ; óigame V. á mí, y 
vamos al asunto. — La Señora hizo y dijo lo que 

20 debía . . . ; pero luego, calmado ya su enojo, compade- 
cióse del tío Lucas y paró mientes en el mal proceder 
del señor Corregidor, viniendo á pronunciar estas ó 
parecidas palabras : — « Por infame que haya sido su 
» pensamiento de V., tío Lucas, y aunque nunca podré 

25 » perdonar tanta insolencia, es menester que su mujer de 
» V. y mi esposo crean durante algunas horas que han 
» sido cogidos en sus propias redes, y que V., auxiliado 
»por ese disfraz, les ha devuelto afrenta por afrenta. 
» I Ninguna venganza mejor podemos tomar de ellos 

30 » que este engaño, tan fácil de desvanecer cuando nos 



I20 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS • 

» acomode!)» — Adoptada tan graciosa resolución, la 
Señora y el tío Lucas nos aleccionaron á todos de lo que 
teníamos que hacer y decir cuando volviese Su Señoría ; 
y por cierto que yo le he pegado á Sebastián Garduña 
tal palo en la rabadilla, que creo no se le olvidará en 5 
mucho tiempo la noche de San Simón y San Judas ! . . • 

Cuando el portero dejó de hablar, ya hacía rato que 
la Corregidora y la Molinera cuchicheaban al oído, 
abrazándose y besándose á cada momento, y no pu- 
diendo en ocasiones contener la risa. 10 

í Lástima que no se oyera lo que hablaban ! . . . — 
Pero el lector se lo figurará sin gran esfuerzo : y, si no 
el lector, la lectora. 



XXXV 



DECRETO IMPERIAL 



Regresaron en esto á la sala el Corregidor y el tío 
Lucas, vestido cada cual con su propia ropa. 

— I Ahora me toca á mí ! — entró diciendo el insigne 
D. Eugenio de Záñiga. 

5 Y, después de dar en el suelo un par de bastonazos 
como para recobrar su energía (á guisa de Anteo oficial, 
que no se sentía fuerte hasta que su caña de Indias to- 
caba en la tierra), díjole á la Corregidora con un énfa- 
sis y una frescura indescriptibles : 

10 — j Merceditas . . . , estoy esperando tus explica- 
ciones ! . . . 

Entretanto, la Molinera se había levantado y le tiraba 
al tío Lucas un pellizco de paz, que le hizo ver estrellas, 
mirándolo al mismo tiempo con desenojados y hechi- 

15 ceros ojos. 

El Corregidor, que observara aquella pantomima, 
quedóse hecho una pieza, sii^ acertar á explicarse una 
reconciliación tan inmoiivaddT' - |. "^ 

Dirigióse, pues, de nuevo á su mujer, y le dijo, hecho 

ao_jm_vinagrfi-L. 

— I Señora ! | Todos se entienden menos nosotros ! 
Sáqueme V. de dudas . . . ; Se lo mando como marido 
y como Corregidor ! 

Y dio otro bastonazo en el suelo. 



122 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

— I Conque se marcha V. ? (exclamó Doña Mercedes, 
acercándose á la seña Frasquita y sin hacer caso de D. 
Eugenio). — Pues vaya V. descuidada, que este escán- 
dalo no tendrá ningunas consecuencias. — ; Rosa 1 : alum- 
bra á estos señores, que dicen que se marchan . . . — 5 
Vaya V. con Dios, tío Lucas. 

— ¡ Oh ... no I (gritó el de Züñiga, interponiéndose). 
I Lo que es el tío Lucas no se marcha ! j £1 tío Lucas 
queda arrestado hasta que sepa yo toda la verdad ! — 

j Hola, alguaciles ! i Favor al Rey I . . . w 

Ni un solo ministro obedeció á D. Eugenio. — Todos 
miraban á la Corregidora. 

— I A ver, hombre ! \ Deja el paso libre ! — añadió 
ésta, pasando casi sobre su marido, y despidiendo á todo 

el mundo con la mayor ñnura ; es decir, con la cabeza 15 
ladeada, cogiéndose la falda con la punta de los dedos, 
y agachándose graciosamente, hasta completar la reve- 
rencia que á la sazón estaba de moda, y que se llamaba 
¡a pompa, 

— Pero yo . . . Pero tú . . . Pero nosotros . • . Pero 90 
aquellos . . . — seguía mascujando el vejete, tirándole 

á su mujer del vestido y perturbando sus cortesías mejor 
iniciadas. 

j Inútil afán 1 ; Nadie hacía caso de Su Señoría ! 

Marchado que se hubieron todos, y solos ya en el sa- 25 
lón los desavenidos cónyuges, la Corregidora se dignó 
al ñn decirle á su esposo, con el acento que hubiera 
empleado ima Czarina de todas las Rusias para fulmi- 
nar sobre un Ministro caído la orden de perpetuo des- 
tierro á la Siberia : 90 



DECRETO IMPERIAL 123 

— Mil años que vivas, ignorarás lo que ha pasado 
esta noche en mi alcoba ... Si hubieras estado en ella, 
como era regular, no tendrías necesidad de pregun- 
társelo á nadie. — Por lo que á mí toca, no hay ya, ni 

5 habrá jamás, razón ninguna que me obligue á satisfa- 
certe ; pues te desprecio de tal modo, que si no fueras 
el padre de mis hijos, te arrojaría ahora mismo por ese 
balcón, como te arrojo para siempre de mi dormitorio. 

— Conque, buenas noches, caballero. 

10 Pronunciadas estas palabras, que Don Eugenio oyó 
sin pestañear (pues lo que es á solas no se atrevía con 
su mujer), la Corregidora penetró en el gabinete, y del 
gabinete pasó á la alcoba, cerrando las puertas detrás 
de sí; y el pobre hombre se quedó plantado en medio 

15 de la sala, murmurando entre encías (que no entre 
dientes) y con un cinismo de que no habrá habido otro 
ejemplo : 

— I Pues, señor, no esperaba yo escapar tan bien ! . . . 

— I Garduña me buscará otra ! 



XXXVI 

CONCLUSIÓN, MORALEJA Y EPÍLOGO 

Piaban los pajarillos saludando el alba, cuando el tío 
Lucas y la seña Frasquita salían de la Ciudad con direc- 
ción á su molino. 

Los esposos iban á pie, y delante de ellos caminaban 
apareadas las dos burras. 5 

— El domingo tienes que ir á confesar (le decía la 
Molinera á su marido) ; pues necesitas limpiarte dcj 
todos tus malos juicios y criminales propósitos de esta 
noche . . . 

— Has pensado muy bien . . . (contestó el Molinero), w 
Pero tú, entretanto, vas á hacerme otro favor, y es dar 

á los pobres los colchones y ropa de nuestra cama, y 
ponerla toda de nuevo. — i Yo no me acuesto donde ha 
sudado aquel bicho venenoso 1 

— I No me lo nombres, Lucas ! (replicó la seña Fras- '5 
quita). — Conque hablemos de otra cosa. Quisiera 
merecerte im segundo favor . . . 

— Pide por esa boca . . . 

— El verano que viene vas á llevarme á tomar los 
baños del Solán de Cabras. « 

— ¿Para qué? 

— Para ver si tenemos hijos. 

— ¡ Felicísima idea I — Te llevaré, si Dios nos da 
vida. 

124 



CONCLUSIÓN, MORALEJA Y EPÍLOGO 125 

Y con esto llegaron al molino, á punto que el sol, sin 
haber salido todavía, doraba ya las cúspides de las 
montañas. 



Á la tarde, con gran sorpresa de los esposos, que no 
5 esperaban nuevas visitas de altos personajes después 
de un escándalo como el de la precedente noche, con- 
currió al molino más señorío que nunca. El venerable 
Prelado, muchos Canónigos, el Jurisconsulto, dos Prio- 
res de frailes y otras varias personas (que luego se 

10 supo habían sido convocadas allí por Su Señoría Ilus- 
trísima) ocuparon materialmente la plazoletilla del 
emparrado. 

Sólo faltaba el Corregidor. 

Una vez reunida la tertulia, el señor Obispo tomó la 

15 palabra, y dijo : que, por lo mismo que habían pasado 
ciertas cosas en aquella casa, sus Canónigos y él segui- 
rían yendo á ella lo mismo que antes, para que ni los 
honrados Molineros ni las demás personas allí presentes 
participasen de la censura publica, sólo merecida por 

ao aquel que había profanado con su torpe conducta una 
reunión tan morigerada y tan honesta. Exhortó pater- 
nalmente á la seña Frasquita para que en lo sucesivo 
fuese menos provocativa y tentadora en sus dichos y 
ademanes, y procurase llevar más cubiertos los brazos 

25 y más alto el escote del jubón : aconsejó al tío Lucas 
más desinterés, mayor circunspección y menos inmo- 
destia en su trato con los superiores ; y acabó dando la 
bendición á todos y diciendo : que, como aquel día no 



126 EL SOMBRERO DE TRES PICOS 

ayunaba, se comería con mucho gusto un par de racimos 
de uvas. 

Lo mismo opinaron todos . . . respecto de este último 
particular . . . , y la parra se quedó tembláiido aquella 
tarde. — ¡En dos arrobas de uvas apreció el gasto el 5 
Molinero ! 

Cerca de tres años continuaron estas sabrosas reu- 
niones, hasta que, contra la previsión de todo el mundo, 
entraron en España los ejércitos de Napoleón y se armó 
la Guerra de la Independencia. 'o 

El señor Obispo, el Magistral y el Penitenciario murie- 
ron el año de 8, y el Abogado y los demás contertulios 
en los de 9, I o, II y 12, por no poder sufrir la vista 
de los franceses, polacos y otras alimañas que invadieron 
aquella tierra j y que fumaban en pipa, en el présbite- 15 
rio de las iglesias, durante la misa de la tropa I 

El Corregidor, que nuiíca más tomó al molino, fué 
destituido por un mariscal francés, y murió en la Cár- 
cel de Corte, por no haber querido ni un solo instante 
(dicho sea en honra suya) transigir con la dominación ao 
extranjera. 

Doña Mercedes no se volvió á casar, y educó per- 
fectamente á sus hijos, retirándose á la vejez á un con- 
vento, donde acabó sus días en opinión de santa. 

Garduña se hizo afrancesado. 25 

El Sr. Juan López fué guerrillero, y mandó una par- 
tida, y murió, lo mismo que su alguacil, en la famosa 
batalla de Baza, después de haber matado muchísimos 
franceses. 



CONCLUSIÓN, MORALEJA Y EPÍLOGO 127 

Finalmente : el tío Lucas y la seña Frasquita (aunque 
no llegaron á tener hijos, á pesar de haber ido al Solán 
de Cabras y de haber hecho muchos votos y rogativas) 
siguieron siempre amándose del propio modo, y alcan- 

5 zaron una edad muy avanzada, viendo desaparecer el 
Absolutismo en 1812 y 1820, y reaparecer en 18 14 y 
1823, hasta que, por último, se estableció de veras el 
sistema Constitucional á la muerte del Rey Absoluto, y 
ellos pasaron á mejor vida (precisamente al estallar la 

10 Guerra Civil de los Siete años\ sin que los sombreros de 
copa que ya usaba todo el mundo pudiesen hacerles 
olvidar aquellos tiempos simbolizados por el sombrero 
de tres picos. 



PIM. 



NOTES 

The references are to page and Une ofthe text, 

1, 9. picaros. This word, as a substantive here, and as an adjec- 
tive elsewhere, may fairly be said to defy translation into English. 
In this place it has reference to the héroes of the so-callcd picaresque 
novéis, a singularly Spanish manifestation of the best times of letters 
in Spain, whereof a belated type or imitation occasionally shows it- 
self even to-day. The picaro is an adventurer, a rogue, a clown ; 
oftentimes a thief, almost always a swindler ; regularly a good f ellow 
of his kind, always telling his ow^n story, and usually coming to some 
rather respectable end ; and all this is suggested in the word. On the 
picaresque novel, see F. DeHaan, An Outline of the History ofthe 
Picaresque Novel in Spain, The Hague and New York, 1903, and F. 
W. Chandler, Romances of Rogíiery, Part I, New York, 1899 ; also, 
David Hannay, The Later Renaissance^ Edinburgh, 1898. 

As an adjective, the word may mean variously : low, sly, immoral, 
naughty, mischievous, perverse, shameless ; it may be a term of the 
harshest reprobation, or of the most affectionate reproof. 

2, 16. tío. The Spanish uses ofthe word are not unlike those of 
our word únele ; henee some explanation is needed f or its application 
to the miller, in whose case there can be no question of oíd age, nei- 
ther of any pejorative adumbration, the two usual suggestions. I 
think it may be said Tío Lucas was Tío Lucas because he needed 
some appelation, and was not up to Señor ; also because of his f riend- 
ly disposition. In 29, 10 tía Josefa is evidently pejorative. 

3, 12. las licencias necesarias. The censoring and licensing of 
books in Spain antedates printing by quite two hundred years. Pro- 
visión was made for it by Alfonso el Sabio in the Siete Partidas 
( 1 2 56-1 263). The f unction was gradually assumed by the Inquisition, 
after its establishment in 1480, first tacitly, and with the cooperation 

129 



130 



NOTES 



of the civil authoríties, later, after 1640, independentiy. From 1550 
on no book could be published or circulated in Spain without the 
aprobación and the other formalities whose sum constituted the licen- 
cias necesarias. The general practice went out with the Inquisition, 
though the Church maintains its Index in Spain as elsewhere. It 
may be not out of place to remarle that the licencias^ though doubt- 
less irksome oftentimes to the author and publisher, are at present as 
useful to the student of literature in the matter of determining dates 
as is the baptismal certifícate to the writer of biography. For vari- 
ous data, see Ticknor, Histary of Spanisk Literature^ vol. I, pp. 
420 sqq. 

3, 15. gracioso. The gracioso^ the " droll servant," is the essen- 
tially comic character of the Spanish classic drama, as the Clown and 
the Fool of the English. The fírst examples of ih^ gracioso are in two 
plays of Bartolomé Torres Naharro, and the type is constant from 
Lope de Vega on. 

3, 18. romances de ciego : songs and ballads printed coarsely on 
loóse sheets of paper, and sold about the streets of the larger Span- 
ish to"v\Tis by the blind beggars. 

3, 21. D. Agustín Duran. A prominent Spanish man of letters, 
author, editor, and critic, of lasting influence and importance. Son of 
a court physician, he was bom at Madrid in 1793, ^^^ 1862. His 
/Romancero General, here referred to, the standard collection of cid 
Spanish songs and ballads, was published in two volumes of the 
Biblioteca de Autores Españoles (Madrid, Rivadeneyra), in 1849 ^^^ 
1 851, and has been kept in print ever since. 

4, 21. Estebanillo González. The reference is to the closing words 
of the prólogo to the picaresque novel Vida y Hechos de Estebanillo 
GonzHleZy where the author addresses his reader : ** Donde, después 
de haberla leído y héchote más cruces que si hubieras visto al demo- 
nio, la tendrás por digna y merecedora de haber salido á luz." Este- 
banillo González is published in the second volume of Novelistas 
Posteriores á Cervantes, of the Biblioteca de Autores Españoles ; the 
passage quoted is on page 286. Compare also DeHaan, op. cit. p. 49 ; 
Chandler, op. cit., p. 243 sqq. 

5, 3. después del de (180)4 y antes del de (z8o)8. Compare 7, 6: 



NOTES 



131 



supongamos que el de 180J, As a mátter of fact, no one of the years 
suggested (i 804-1 808) quite meets all the specifícations, as the depo- 
sitions referred to in 6, 8 took place in 1806 and 1807 ; see the table 
in note to that Une. 

5, 4. Don Carlos IV de Borbón. Charles IV, King of Spam, bom 
at Naples, 1748, succeeded his father, Charles III, in 1788, abdicated 
March i8th, 1808, died at Rome, 18 19. 

5, 8-9. Louis XIV (of France) 

Louis (Dauphin) 



Louis, Dauphin, Duke of Burgundy 

Louis XV 

I , 

Louis, Dauphin | 

I Ferdinand VI 

Louis XVI (jefe de ellos) of Spain 
beheaded January 21, 1793. 



Philip, Duke of Anjou, 
Philip V of Spain 



Charles III 
of Sp 



Charles IV 

of Spain, 

deposed 1808. 



Ferdinand IV 
King of Naples, 
deposed x8o6. 



Philip, Duke 
of Parma 

Ferdinand 
of Parma 

I 

Louis 

(died 1803) 

Charles Louis 
Duke of Parma, 
deposed 1807. 

5, 1 3 sqq. Riyoli, village of Xtaly, near Verona, where Bonaparte 
defeated the Austrians, January 14, 1797. — MarengO, village 3 miles 
southeast of Alessandria in Piedmont. The battle of Marengo, f ought 
June 14, 1800, was one of Napoleon*s greatefet victories and narrow- 
est escapes. — las Pirámides ; the battle of the Pyramids was f ought 
July 2ist, 1798. — Corona de Cario Magno ; Napoleón I was crowned 
emperor December 2d, 1804. 

6, 2. The Spaniard is specially fond of parenthetical interjection 
of a votive kind, and rarely omits it in speaking of the dead. The 
phrase used here is frequent, though rather of the elabórate : / Qut 
santa gloria haya ! often abbreviated in writing to / q, s. g. k ! is one 
of the frequent simpler forms. Parentheses of another, though anal* 



132 NOTES 

bgous sort, are C.m.b. or C.p. b. — cuyas manos ^ cuyos pies beso — often 
inserted in letters after the ñame of some person; and there are 
others. The Latin absit ornen ! may be called to mind in this con- 
nection. 

6, 1 2. Gaceta. The Gazette, the official newspaper of Spain, was 
established in 1661. By decree of 12 April, 1791, all newspapers ex- 
cept this one were suppressed; and as it was not until after 181 1 
that the Cortes of Cádiz restored in some measure the liberty of the 
press, the Gaceta was at the time of the story the only source of in- 
formation accessible to Spaniards, except perhaps in one or two of 
the largest cities. Alarcón pokes a bit of fun at the Gaceta^ in the 
present passage; and Richard Ford, in the 1845 edition of his Hand- 
bookfor Travellers in Spain, vol. II, page 728, says of it: "Its pages 
for the last fifty years, the French Moniteur only excepted, are the 
greatest satire ever deliberately published by any people on itself." 

6, 21. Inquisición. The Inquisition in Spain was suspended by a 
decree of Napoleón, December 4th, 1808. Ferdinand VII made va- 
rious efforts to restore it, and it did not disappear finally until 1834. 
It had been established by a decree promulgated at Toledo in Decem- 
ber, 1480, to commissioners appointed in September of that year, and 
its first court was held at Seville in 1481. See H. C. Lea, A History 
of the Inquisition in Spain, Vol. I, New York, 1906, pp. 160 sqq. ; 
Ch. V. Langlois, V inquisition d^aprés des travaux récents, 

6, 23. fueros. The fuero was a special privilege or concession 
granted by the king to any particular province, town, or individual. 
Celebrated examples in Spanish national history are those granted to 
Aragón and to the Basque provinces. On the fuero see Rafael Alta- 
mira y C revea. Historia de España y de la Civilización Española, Bar- 
celona, 1900 and 1902, vol. I, pp. 502 sqq. The viorá fuero is also 
used to denote the body of municipal law, and as title of a collection 
of statutes, as in Fuero Juzgo, Fuero Real, etc. 

6, 26. Corregidor. In the cities of Spain in which there was 
neither roya! govemor ñor court, the corregidor was, under the oíd 
régime, the most important personage, fiUing at once the offices of 
judge, financial administrator, head of the council, and prosecutor. 
His authority, especially in the remote towns, was practically un- 



NOTES 133 

limited. He was appointed directly by the king. With constitu- 
tional govemment, he has lost importance, and when found is simply 
an cUcaldCy or mayor. 

6, 28. The unabrídged text here is : " y pagando diezmos, primi- 
cias, alcabalas, subsidios, mandas, y limosnas forzosas, rentas, renti- 
llas, capitaciones, tercias reales, gabelas, frutos-civiles, y hasta cincuenta 
tributos más, cuya nomenclatura no viene á cuento ahora." The best 
account of all these taxes is to be fouñd under the appropriate head- 
ings in Marcelino Martínez Alcubilla, Diccionario de la Administra- 
ción española^ fifth edition, Madrid, 1892. They were nearly all 
abolished by the reforms introduced by Mon in 1846. 

7, 2. la ; se, historia, 

8, 2. ciudad. On the subject of the locality, Alarcón tells us in 
the omitted portions of the preface already referred to, that the dif- 
f erent ballads assign difíerent places to the action ; the one published 
in "DMxkr^^ Romancero bears the title El Molinero de Arcos ^ and the 
scene is laid at Arcos de la Frontera; another, a romance de ciego 
this, puts it at Jerez de la Frontera, as does also a third, repeated to 
Alarcón by Hartzenbusch ; and he says that the peasant folk of £s- 
tremadura, among whom also the story is current, lócate the action 
at Plasencia, C áceres, and other towns of that province. He con- 
cludes, af ter having told us that Repela's versión mentions no ñames : 
" En tal situación, y considerando que Repela nació, vivió y murió en 
la provincia de Granada ; que su versión parece la auténtica y fide- 
digna, y que aquella es la tierra que mejor conocemos nosotros, nos 
hemos tomado la licencia de ñgurar que sucedió el caso en una ciu- 
dad, que no nombremos, del antiguo reino granadino." 

Bonilla, in the article referred to in the introduction to this book, 
publishes still another bailad which begins ** En cierto lugar de Es- 
paña," and makes no nearer reference to the place. 

Enough has been said to make it clear that the story is widely 
known in various parts of Spain, as part of local rhyme ; and, indeed, 
we have Alarcón*s word in his preface, that this is so ; we may prop- 
erly make an effort towards a nearer identifícation of the place he 
had in his mind when he wrote. To this end, compare with what 
has just been said the paragraph beginning with Une 18 of page 24, 



134 



NOTES 



rememberíng that Alarcón was bom in Guaxlix ; and, read in connec- 
tion with this last-named passage, the foUowing, taken from page 273 
of De Madrid d Ñapóles : " Guadix fué una de las más importantes 
colonias de los romanos ; después, en poder de los moros, llegó á ser 
hasta capital de un reino; veriñcada su reconquista por los Reyes 
Católicos, aún conservó durante tres siglos sus aires señoriles, y allá 
por el año de 8, cuando la invasión francesa, los graves señores que 
eran regidores perpetuos vestían sendas capas de grana, ceñían espa- 
dín y se cubrían con sombrero de tres picos. — i Yo he alcanzado á 
conocer esta vestimenta de mi abuelo, que se conservaba en mi casa 
como una reliquia, y que nosotros, los hijos de 1833, irreverentes á 
fuer de despreocupados, dedicamos á mil profanaciones en nuestros 
juegos infantiles I" Wherefrom we may safely conclude, without 
pushing matters at all to extremes, that it was Guadix that surely 
fumished most of the local coloring for our story. 

8, 5. día de precepto. Holy days of obligation are certain days 
independent of Sundays and feasts that may fall on them, on which 
it is required to hear mass, and to abstain from servile work. Those 
universally observed are : The Circumcision of Our Lord (January 
ist); Ascensión Day (forty days after Easter); the Assumption of 
the Blessed Virgin (i5th August) ; All Saints' Day (ist November) ; 
the Nativity of our Lord (Christmas Day) ; and the Feast of the Im- 
maculate Conception (8th December) ; in Spain there are numerous 
others. 

8, 5. The meáis of the Spanish household order as indicated here 
are the almuerzo^ breakfast; comida^ dinner; cena^ supper. The 
chocolate of line 1 1 is the irregular luncheon more generally called 
merienda. The more usual arrangement in the household economy 
of the larger cities of Spain to-day includes the desayuno at rising, 
usually simply a cup of chocolate ; almuerzo^ the second breakfast, 
or luncheon, at from ten o'clock to one ; the merienda^ if taken, after 
the siesta, at four or five o'clock ; and the comida at eight or after in 
the evening. This late comidáis also sometimes called cena ; though 
often the real cena is served, a very late supper. In view of this 
rather formidable list, it should be said that the Spaniard generally 
is not a heavy eater, and that he is usually more than common sober 
in the matter of drínking. 



NOTES 135 

8, 10. Rosario. The saying of the prayers of the Rosary is an en- 
tirely prívate devotion, and as such may be done at any hour (com- 
pare 117, U) ; the present passage would indícate that twilight was 
the usual season chosen to this use by the people of the Ciudad. 

8, 12. tertulia. This word is almost as difficult to transíate as 
picaro^ though quite in another way. A tertulia is a social gathering, 
of regular recurrence, for conversation or other amusement, very in- 
formal in its character, and laying the very smallest amount of social 
responsibility on the host. There is usually also a large measure of 
uniformity in the personnel of the attendance. In short, the word 
covers the ground from the aftemoon meeting of fríends for gossip 
in a Madrid bookshop, to the reception day of an embassador. Party, 
reception, gathering, club, conversazione, levee, are some of the words 
used frequently in translation ; but no one of them quite covers the 
whole ground, which is perhaps not surprís^ng, as the thing in itself 
is peculiarly Spanish. 

8, 14. Ánimas. Seven o'clock in the evening, when the De pro- 
fundís is recited for the souls of the dead. 

8, 16. guisado, *' cooked," //. of guisar^ used as substantive, and 
by antonomasia for stew, fricassee. 

9, 4. entremés, sainete, auto sacramental. The entremés is a 
very short dramatic interlude of very light character, rarely more than 
a few minutes in the acting, which was performed between the acts 
of the heavier plays : the sainete {dim. of saín : the tit-bit — bit of brain 
or flesh from the quarry, given the hawk by the falconer) was a simi- 
lar postlude. The latter ñame has been generalized in Spanish and 
French literature (French la saynite)^ to mean a very short comedy 
or fárce , with two or at most three or f our characters. The auto 
sacramental was a religious play often of allegorícal or mystical char- 
acter, written for the feast of Corpus Christi, and performed under 
the auspices of the church on that day or the dáys immediately fol- 
lowing. See Ticknor, II, pp. 449-450, and on the auto sacramental^ 
II, pp. 348 sqq. ; Casiano Pellicer, Tratado histórico sobre el origen 
y progresos del kistrionismo en España, Madrid, 1804, pp. 18 sqq.^ 
189 sqq., and for a good account of the performance of the auto^ 257 
«qq. 



136 NOTES 

9| 10. volver á las andadas, going back ffuer our traces, 
10, ///. III. Do ut des : One good turn deserves another^ or Turn 
about is fair play, 

10, 1 5. parral has two meanings, either one of which would be in 
place here. It is (i) a very larga untrimmed grape-vine» or (2) a num- 
ber ofparrasy i. e. of grape-vines, trained over trellises to f ofm an arbor. 

10, 24. macarros, macaroon, diff ering from those we know by not 
being necessarily of almond mea!, beiog rather largar and rather 
darkar in color. 

11, 3. rosetas, a Spanish popcom, so callad from tha shapes taken 
by tha kamels at bursting. " Son granos de maíz, tostados al fuego. 
Suelen colocarse, para ello, sobre una plancha cualquiera de metal, y, 
asi que se calientan, saltan, adoptando la forma de masas blancas, 
con estrias algo semejantes á las de la rosa " (Bonilla). 

11, 6. vino de pulso, home-made wine^ i. e. wine pressed by hand. 

11, 7. al amor de la lumbre, taken exactly, means just near enough 
to the fire to be well warmed, but not scorched ; trans.,./» the glow of 
ihefire. 

por Pascuas, on feast-days^ on special occasions. The word Pascua 
primarily is the ñame of four greater feasts of the church : Easter 
(Pascua de Resurección, de Flores, or Florida) ; Pentecost (Pascua 
de Espíritu Santo) ; Christmas (Pascua de Navidad) ; and Epiphany 
(Pascua de Reyes). The plural stands first for the days between 
Christmas and Epiphany. Secondarily, Pascua ha^ come to mean 
any three-day feast of the church; and in the plural, as here, any 
season of more than usual rejoicing. 

11, 9. rosco : pretzel: the more usual form is rosca, 

11, 19. personas de campanillas. The usual positiveform of the 
expression is " personas de muchas campanillas." 

11, 23 sqq. Vuestra Merced, here Your Honor^ is the courteous 
form of address to one who has no special title, or whose title is un- 
known to the speaker; Vuestra SeSoría, here Your Worship: these 
two titles in this book belong exclusively to the laity. Vuestra Re- 
verencia, Your Reverence^ is addressed indiscríminately to the more 
distinguished clergy ; Vuestra Ilustrísima, Your Lordship^ belongs 
specially to bishops ; Vuestra Paternidad was oríginally the address 



NOTES 



137 



of the humbler members of religious orders to their priora and abbots 
and other superíors. Transíate, Your Reverence, 

11, 26. subsidio, alcabala, frutos-civiles. Three of the very 
numerous taxes exacted in Spain at the time : cf, note to 6, 28. — 
The subsidio was a tax on commerce or manufactures, here on the 
output of the mili ; the alcabala was a tax on sales, fíxed at the time 
of the story at 14 per cent, of the amount involved; the frutos-civi- 
les were the tax levied on income from real estáte, royal grants, and 
prívileges of jurisdiction. 

11, 28 sqq. una poca hoja, una poca leSa, una poca madera: 
this use of poco is not literary. The meaning is perf ectly clear. 

13, 8. Ser Supremo, the Supreme Being, the usual denomination 
of God in the phUosophic writing of the time of the French Revolu- 
tion. 

Joyellanos. Gaspar Melchior de Jovellanos or Jove-Llanos, was 
bom in 1744, and died in 181 1. He has been called the most emi- 
nent Spaniard of his time ; was distinguished as a wríter in economics 
and politics, and on education ; and as a poet. He took prominent 
part in public life, was twice exiled for his political views and his 
mode of expressing them; and was minister of Justice, 1797. For a 
good appreciation of his valué in literature, see E. Mérimée, Eludes 
sur la Littérature Espagnole au XIX* Sihle — Jovellanos. Revue His- 
paniquey vol. I, 1894, pp. 34-67. 

13, 10. la seSá Frasquita. Seña is a popular corruption of the 
word señora^ used as in the present case to qualify one rather above 
the level of the common, yet unable to claim the conventional doña 
oí the gentlewoman. Compare the use of señor in the case of Juan 
López in Chapters XVII and XXIV, and the note on lio, 2, 16 above. 
Frasquita is one of several diminutives of Francisca {Paca^ Paquita, 
Frascuelay Francisquita) ; so la señd Frasquita is about equivalent to 
** Mrs. Fanny ** or " Mistress Fanny," the discounting quality of the 
seña being in English in the use of the given ñame. It may be sug- 
gested, however, that it is rarely profitable to forcé the translation of 
ordinary proper ñames. 

13, 19. golilla,/, a diminutive of gola, throat, is a high, stiff collar 
of cardboard, covered with black silk, over or on which is wom a stiff- 



138 NOTES 

starched ruff of white gauze or tulle. The golilla was a very character- 
ístic part of the dress of Spanish oíBcers of the civil govemment, and 
is, as here, used by metonymy, with change of gender, to stand for 
their persons. It is still to be seen in a very few ceremonial official 
costumes. A few hints of its place and signifícance may be f ound in 
A. Morel-Fatio, Eludes sur VEspagne^ III, París, 1904, pp. 229-278 : 
" La golille et Thabit militaire." 

14, I. The Royal Academy of History was founded under Philip 
V in 1738. It has in its building in the Calle de León at Madrid a 
museum of antiquities and a valuable library. Since 1865 it has been 
in charge of the national monuments of Spain. 

14, 2. Franciscanos : the Franciscans, Gray Friars, Minoríte Frí- 
ars, a mendicant order of preaching friars founded by St. Francis of 
Assisi in 1 2 10. 

14, 14. Niobe, Queen of Thebes, it will be remembered, had se ven 
sons and seven daughters. 

14, 16. de las que. The forcé of the preposition goes with the 
que^ although las precedes; that is the present state of the matter; 
the construction in reality goes a little deeper,being equivalent to "de 
las (aquellas) de que hay"; i. e. one of those Román matrons of which 
we still fndy or a Román matron, one of those ofwhich^ etc., the stress 
being on the characteristics, and their implied disappearance except 
in the Trastevere ; not merely a Román mairony whereof etc, 

14, 17. Trastevere (from trans Tiberim): the quarter of Rome 
lying on the north bank of the Tiber west and southwest of St. 
Peter's, at the foot of the Janiculum hill. It is of all the districts of 
Rome the one least invaded by the stranger, and has preserved more 
than other parts of the city a certain pure-blooded Román individu- 
ality. It has a dialect of its own. 

15, 8. congrua here is the temporal income that must be possessed 
by candidates for holy orders. The amount varies, ?nd is fixed by 
the synods of the respective dioceses. 

15, 10. menores. The minor orders are those below the subdia* 
conate : ostiariatus, lector atuSy acolythatus ; the major orders are suh- 
diaconatusy diaconatus^ presbyteratus. On the functions and privi- 
leges of each, see S. B. Smith, Compendium furis Canonici^ New 
York, etc., 1890. 



NOTES 139 

15, 15. Don Ventura Caro, bom about 1742, died 1808. Com- 
manded Spanish army of the West Pyrenees in 1793-94. In 1801 
became Captiain General of Valencia, and did valuable service in re- 
storing and maintaining order in the province. In 1808 he repulsed 
an attack of Marshal Moncey on the city of Valencia, f orcing a French 
retreat. 

Castillo Ptilón, in French, Cháteau Pignon^ a strongly fortified 
position in the French Pyrenees at the northem end of the valley of 
Roncesvaux. It was stormed by the Spaniards under Caro, June 6, 
179J. See Jomini, Hist&ire Critique et tnilitaire des guerres de la 
Révolutiotti París, 181 9, etc., vol. III. pp. 331 sqq. 

15, 18. Estella, town of Navarre, about 25 miles southwest of 
Pamplona. 

16, I. 607a. Francisco Goya y Lucientes, Spanish painter, the 
greatest ñame in Spanish art after Velázquez, Ribera, and Murillo. 
He was bom near Saragossa in 1746, and died at Bordeaux in 1828. 
He is best knovm for his portraits, his cartoons of popular life and 
customs and of the events of the Peninsular war, and for his etch- 
ings. His work may be seen to advantage at the Prado and the 
Academy, in Madrid, and at the Escorial. Among his paintings at the 
Prado is a large portrait of the family of King Charles IV, including 
the king himself and Queen Maria Louisa, and illustrating admirably 
the costume of the time — and, it may be said, wríting clear in the 
faces the causes of the decay of Spain. 

María Luisa, Maria Louisa Theresa, daughter of Philip of Bour- 
bon, Duke of Parma, wife of King Charles IV of Spain, bom 1754, 
married 1767, died 18 19. She is notorious in history for her evil 
part in the downfall of Spain, and especially for her relations with 
Manuel Godoy, Prince of the Peace. See M. A. S. Hume, Modem 
Spainy New York, 1900; chapters 1-3. 

16, 2. falda de medio paso, a very scant skirt, fashionable at 
about the time of the story, and for some years later. The ñame 
came from the fact that the wearer, in dancing especially, was con- 
fined to the taking of a very short step — a half-step. Falda de un 
paso solo explains Itself in view of the foregoing. 

16b 14* Sábado de Gloria. Holy Saturday, the daybefore Easter, 



140 



NOTES 



when music reappears in the Mass after its omission duríng Holy 
Week, and bells are rung at the singing of the Gloria in Excelsis^ re- 
sumed after its suspensión during Lent. 

17, I. Más feo que Picio is the most common Spanish colloquialism 
for extreme absence of personal beauty in men. The origin of the 
phrase I have not been able to fínd. There is a story of a cobbler of 
the ñame, who was more than ugly, and so Uves ; but the obvious 
resembl mee of Picio to /<?«, pitch, and to the ad jective piceo^ suggest 
that the man was invented after the fact, and named from his wax. 
For other expressions of the same kind, see Ramón Caballero, Dic- 
cionario de modismos^ frctses y metáforas^ Madrid, 1 898-1900. 

18, 20. Quevedo. Francisco Gómez de Quevedo Villegas, bom 
1580, died 1645; one of the greatest ñames of Spanish Literature — 
essayist, satirist, poet, wit, politician. His life and personality are 
not less interesting than his very varied literary work. Consult E. 
Mérimée, Essai sur la vie et les ctuvres de Francisco de Quevedo^ París, 
1886. 

19, 9. broma. For a similar use, recall Hamlet*s speech : " a fel- 
low of infinite jest," etc. (Act V, Scene i). 

20, 4. palillos, originally drum-sticks, here and familiarly in An- 
dalusia, castagnets (cctstañuelas, postizas). Brisca and tute are two- 
handed games of cards popular in Spain ; in brisca three cards are 
dealt to each player, a trump is tumed, and as the play goes on the 
hands are kept full by drawing from the pack ; tute is a rather more 
developed game of the same kind, similar in essentials to sixty-six. 

20, 6. el que; se. resultado in its secondary meaning,yá¿-/. 

20, 16. tenia algo de ingeniero: had some of the qualities of an 
engineer^ was something of an engineer, 

21, 4. jaraiz, lagar, jaraiz is primarily the wine-press, lagar the 
wine-pit, where the must is preserved before the drawing off into 
the skin or cask. 

21, 8. reales. The real at par was worth about five cents. It is 
no longer coined, but is still a favorite unit for reckoning in many 
parts of Spain, as the sou is here and there in France. The coinage 
at the time of our story was the system renewed and simplifíed by 
King Charles III, about 1770. It comprised copper coins: mar<k- 



NOTES 



141 



vedi (34 to the real) ; ochavo^ cuarto^ dos cuartos^ worth respectively 
two, four, and eight maravedís ; silver coins : real^ dos reales^ peseta 
(four reales) y medio duro (ten reales) ; duro (twenty reales) ; and gold 
coins: duro, dos duros, doblón (four duros) media onza and onza, 
(eight and sixteen duros respectively). The present decimal system, 
with the unit oxíq peseta = 100 céntimos was introduced in 1868. It 
is modeled on the system oí the Latin unión. 

22, 24. The reference throughout this passage is to Othello, 
though there is no one passage in the play where the qualities here 
suggested are enumerated or directly ascríbed to the Moor; see, 
however, specially, Act II, Scene 3, Act III, Scenes 3 and 4, and 
the Acts IV and V. It has been suggested, in view especially of 
Une 25, that Alarcón may have had in mind Hamlet^s characteríza- 
tion of his father {Hamlet, Act I, Scene 2) : "He was a man, take 
him for all in all," etc. This seems to me to come of erroneous 
reading both of the Unes of the play and the passage here in the text. 

23, 6. alpargatas are rough shoes or slippers of canvas, with 
hempen soles ; the montera is a woolen peasant's cap used in many 
provinces of Spain, and varying in form and color with the locality. 

24, 16. grana is the English grain, familiar in English literature 
as late as Milton; e. g. Moryson, Itinerary, III, i, IV, 96 (1617): 
" The Spaniards and Portugals bought Graine for Scarlet Dye.'' Cf. 
the present English ingrain and ingrained, 

24, 18. Cf. note to 8, 2. 

24, 22. Fernando VII, King of Spain, son of Charles IV and 
María Louisa of Parma. He was bom in 1784, became king on the 
abdication of his father in 1808, was prisoner in France until 18 13, 
was restored to the throne on the expulsión from Spain of Joseph 
Bonaparte, and reigned until his death in 1833. He was succeeded 
by his daughter, Isabella II. 

25, 8. Constitucionales de la de 1837. Constitutions were de- 
creed in Spain in 181 2, 1834, 1837, 1854 and 1869. The Constitution 
of 1837 was accepted by Queen Isabel on June I7th of that year; 
on its provisions, and on the events that led to its promulgation, 

, see M. A. S. Hume, op. cit., pp. 338-340. It was an essentially radi- 
cal programme, though much less broad than the Cádiz Constitution 



142 NOTES 

of 1812, and thus while it appeared reactionary and insufficient to 
the older Radicáis, it pleased the younger Liberáis with whom Alar- 
cón cast in his lot when he first went into politics. 

25, 9. la, se. constitución. 

25, 14. deshollinador, a long-handled scraper used by chimney 
sweeps to dislodge the soot. 

25, 16, 17. The reference in these linesisto Alarcón*s own public 
career, and to his changes of political faith. He began as a revolu- 
tionary, and with growing years and discretion found himself in the 
ranks of the modérate conservatives, and a devoted royalist. 

25, 30. las Castillas : the Castiles, Oíd and New Castile. Madrid 
is in New Castile, the central part of Spain, reconquered from the 
Moors after the formation of the kingdoms of Castile, León and 
Navarre. 

26, 9. D. Eugenio de Zúñiga y Ponce de León. Spanish proper 
ñames when written in full regularly include the family ñame on 
both father*s and mother*s side. Thus D. Eugenio*s father was a 
Zúñiga, his mother a Ponce de León. Women, when they marry, 
usually retain their own family ñame, adding the husband*s with the 
copulative de ; widows sign their own ñames, usually with the addi- 
tion viuda de. , , . Thus Juana Suárez on her marriage to a Fer- 
nández becomes Suárez de Fernández ; as a widow, she is Juana 
Suárez viuda de Fernández. 

26, 19. desembozarse. The Spaniard usually wears his capa 
(cape or cloak) wrapped closely about the neck and the lower part 
of the face ; this is embozarse (69, 13). Desembozarse is to throw 
back the cloak and leave the face exposed. Compare embozo, 
46,28. 

26, 19. yldose; from ver. "Han escrito buenos autores, y aun 
suele decir el vulgo, en el pretérito perfecto, yo vide, él vido, formas 
desterradas ya del buen lenguaje" {Gramática de la Lengua Caste- 
llana, por La Real Academia Española, ed. 1890, p. 139, note). 

26, 25. quirotecas. The word quiroteca — etymologically hand- 
case, — ^(cTp ^i/ki; — is a jocular, almost a slang term, for misshapen 
gloves or gauntlets. Similar but more ephemeral expressions for . 
gloves and especially for shoes and stockings are not uncommon in 
English. 



NOTES 



143 



28, 2. se descubrían hasta los pies: bowedto theground, hatin 
hand ; uncovered and bowed to the ground, 

30, 6. estaba sabido. Subido is here an adjective in connection 
with estar^ — the nearest approach possible in Spanish to the common 
Romance construction of verbs of motion with the substantive aux- 
iliary. The idea is that Únele Lucas has climbed up and is still up. 
We have the same construction in 80, 14, estoy agarrado^ and 82, 
26, estoy subido, 

31, 3. Note the pun on mono " monkey," and mono " pretty." 

32, 9. puede [ser] que : Cf. Yiench peut-Üre que, il se peut que, 

32, 1 5. pedazo de bárbaro : you wild man. Compare with this 
use oi pedazo the French use of espice: espice de vaurien, esphe de 
barbare^ etc., and espice de type. 

33, 5. ramblilla, diminutive of rambla^ originally the washed-out, 
sandy bed of a stream, lef t dry af ter f reshets. The secondary mean- 
ing, " hoUow way," " low path," comes f rom the use frequently made 
of the beds of streams in the dry season. 

33, 10. fandango. An Andalusian dance, very oíd and very lively. 
Compare Pord, op. cit., ed. 1845, P» ^^7 » Pellicer, op. cit. I, begin- 
ning p. 121. 

34, 4. tanto bueno, se. por aquly i. e., so much honor done usy lit., 
" so great a good thing here." 

35, 8. donde primero le coge : wherever it catches him ; primero 
is an adverb. 

35, 25. Pamplona or Pampeluna, the oíd capital of Navarre, 
seña Frasquita's country, and a prominent border fortress, has been 
besieged frequently in the course of its long history. It was taken 
from the Romans by Euric in 466, sacked by the Franks under 
Childebert in 542, destroyed by Charlemagne in 778 ; in 907 it beat 
off the Moors, and in 1138 the Castilians, in the war between Al- 
fonso VII and García Ramón II, after the dissolution of the 
unión with Aragón ; and it has been occupied not infrequently by 
the French, who gained possession of it by stratagem in 1808, and 
held it until October 21, 1813, General Cassan making a fine 
defence against the English and Spaniards ; and it has suff ered since 
then in the civil wars. Ignatius Loyola was one of the city*s de- 



144 



NOTES 



fenders in its seige by the French in 1521, and it is said that it was 
during convalescence from wounds in the hospital of the citadel 
that he planned the Order of Jesús. The special appositeness of 
Pamplona as an illustration here lay doubtless in the fact that seña 
Frasquita was of Navarre. 

36, 2. Rubens. Peter Paul Rubens, celebrated Flemish painter, 
bom 1577, died 1640. 

36, 19. bestia, really a feminine noun, appears as masculine here, 
in 60, 6, and elsewhere ; so also calavera^ 45, 25, 111, 11, and espia^ 
86, 15. The three words are grouped in this note as being good 
illustrations of three stages of the same tendency : a disposition 
constantly more evident in Spanish to recognize association of real 
and grammatical gender in nouns that are of very common use. 
Espía, whose masculine signiñcation is as oíd as the word itself, 
appears in Tolhausen's Dictionary (1891), andthe thirteenth edition 
of the Dictionary of the Spanish Academy (1899), asboth masculine 
and feminine. Calavera is given as masculine in the transferred 
sense by the Academy dictionary, but not by Tolhausen ; bestia is 
exclusively feminine in both. The conclusión is clear, though it 
may be tempered by the consideration that bestia in the figurative 
sense is coarser and of lower use than the other words, and so slower 
in achieving recognition, in spite of its appearance in the more col- 
loquial pages of such standard authors even as Alarcón. — un maula, 
82, 10, is to be accounted for as bestia, or perhaps better, as a care- 
less use of un by the unlettered Garduña ; un ave, p. 60, is analóg- 
ica! to el ave, a regular form ; so also un agua, 40, 16. 

38^ 20. Ave María Purísima. (Cf. p. 97, title to Chapter XXVIII). 
By proclamation of 22(i October, 161 7, the Spanish Dominions in 
Europe and America were declared to be under the protection of 
the Imnlaculate Conception of the Virgin ; henee the addition of 
the word Purísima to the Ave Maria groHa plena of the prayer. 
Henee also, doubtless, the frequent expletive us» of the words, as 
here, and their crystallization into formulas of daily Ufe, as in the 
other passage cited above. Henee also the fr^quency of the ap- 
pearance of the Conception in Spanish Art. For notes of Spanish 
customs and rites connected with this doctrine, see Ford, op. dt., ed. 



NOTES 



145 



1845, PP- 265 sqq. The doctrine of the Immaculate Conception 
was made part of the faith of the whole church by an apostolic 
Letter of Pius IX, dated December 8, 1854 ; it had been a matter of 
theological contróversy since the thirteenth century. 

38, 29. San Miguel. St. Michael the archangel, the first and 
mightiest of created spiríts, mentioned in the Bible in the books of 
Jude and Revelations. In churchly tradition he is the chief, and 
sometimes the solé archangel, and the one to whom was assigned 
the expulsión from Heaven of Satán and the other disobedient 
angels. His present office is two-fold; he is patrón saint of the 
Church on earth, and lord of the souls of the dead. His feast, 
Michaelmas, is September 29. In art he is always young and hand- 
some. His attríbutes vary with the function symbolized: as con- 
queror of Satán he stands with his foot upon his foe, who is always 
a monster, sometimes a dragón, sometimes part human, part dragón. 

39, 4. I Jesús, María y José 1 trans. : Mercy on us ! 

40, 24. derritiéndosele la gacha. Gacha is a sort of gmel made by 
boiling broken rice in a large quantity of milk. When it is about 
to boil over, a very few drops of cold water stop the boiling and 
bring the mass down again. This is called derretir la gacha. So 
here, his angerfell suddenly. 

41, 10. Ticiano, Titian. Tiziano Vecelli, bom at Cadore in Ve- 
netia, 1477, died at Venice 1 576 ; the greatest of Venetian painters. 

41, 19. Pomona, the Italian divinity of the fruits of trees, especially 
of apple-orchards. She is usually represented as a Hamadryad, 
young, and beloved of many rustic gods. Her worship was very 
important in Rome. Cf. Ovid, Metamorphoses^ XIV, 623; Varro, 
De Lingua Latina^ VII, 45. 

42, 5. quinto, the fifth of the six commandments or precepts of 
the Church, " to contribute to the support of our pastors." See 
Butler's Catechism, lessons XX and XXI. 

42, 7. The diezmo {tithe) was at this time paid to the civil author- 
ity, and by it made over to the Church. 

43, 4. Licenciado : Hcentiate. Primarily the title given to the 
holders of the second academic degree ; at the present time generally 
used in Spain, as here, to desígnate a lawyer. 



146 NOTES 

43, 12, sqq. ^'Thou hast said it^' replied the latter, with tke kinály 
severity of a sainty which they say he was indeed. " An excuse un- 
asked (ts) a manifest accusation. As is the man, so are his words. 
But enough has been said, let there be nofurther speech,*^ 

44, 6. cordonazo de San Francisco, the autumn equinox, the 
autumn equinoctial\ in the narrower sense, the four days preceding 
and the four days foUowing St. Francis' day (October 4). It is 
oríginally a marítime expression. 

44, 16. torta sobada, a cake, perfectly solid, made of dough that 
has been very much kneaded. 

44, 17. pan de aceite is bread made of dough to which olive oil 
has been added, giving a peculiar and much esteemed taste, when 
the bread is fried. Or it may be used as here, of the dough. 

45, tit. XIII. Le dijo el grajo al cuervo: The pot said to the kettle. 
The full form of the proverb is : le dijo el grajo al cuervo : quítate 
allá que tiznas ; and the Spanish has also the other sayings, nearer 
our own in form : dijo la sartén á la caldera, tírate allá, culinegra, 
and dijo la sartén al cazo, quítate allá, que me tiznas, 

45, 24. pelarla pava, topluck the turkey-hen, is to stand at night 
under the window of the beloved, and so to make love. In Anda- 
lusia it is often called also comer hierro, from the bars that protect 
almost all Windows there. Cf. R. Ford, op. cit., ed. 1845, PP- '53" 
1 54, f or admirably witty remarks. 

46, 1 2, 1 5. penitenciarlo, magistral. The Canon Penitentiary, or 
diocesan confessor, has general charge of confessions and public 
penance; he is, with the Dean, the Secretary, the Treasurer, the 
Sacristán, and the Canon Theologian, a necessary officer of the min- 
imum organization of the cathedral chapter; (a collegiate chapter 
may consist simply of Dean, Secretary, Treasurer and Sacristán). 
Cf. Rev. S. B. Smith, Compendium Juris Canonici, New York, etc., 
1890, Caput V, De Adjutoribus Episcopi, Art. VII. The Magistral, 
in the capitular organization, is the Canon whose special duty is 
preaching. Other Canons frequent in Spanish Chapters are the 
Canónigo Doctoral, the advócate and man of affairs, who must 
always be a doctor of canon law, and the Canónigo lectoral, a doc- 
tor or licentiate in theology, who expounds the Scriptures. The 



NOTES 



U7 



word magistral has other special meanings which do not concern 
US here. 

46, 29. Predicador de Oficio, the Magistral ; Confesor de la Cate- 
dral, the Penitenciario. 

48, 6 sqq. Compare with this chapter the conversations of Mr. 
Nupkins in chapters XXIV and XXV of Pickwick Papers. 

48, II. velón de Lucena. Lucena, a town of AndaJusia, in the 
Cabra Valley, about forty miles southeast of Cordova, is still noted 
for its lamps. The old-fashioned velón de Lucena was a tall brass 
aifair, with a number of wicks fítted into projecting beak-like re- 
ceptacles for the oil. 

48, 22. á lo que. Lo que here == what\ the prepositional forcé 
falls on the que, though lo precedes. That is wkat I was coming 
to, what I was getting ai. In form the construction is attracted 
from es lo á que iba. 

48, 25. I have not been able to find the origin or the details of 
the story of the "Sargento Utrera" or" Sargento de Utrera que 
reventó de feo." He belongs to Audalusia, as the town ñame Utrera 
would suggest ; and he shares his distinction with " El Sargento Cruz, 
á quién por feo tuvieron que dar los Santos Óleos con una caña." 
For Information on the whole subject I am much indebted to Sr. 
Bonilla y San Martín, and to Sr. D. Joaquín Hazañas y la Rúa, of 
Seville. Cf . reference in note to 17, 1. 

49, 27. me las compondré: Iwillfix things up. 

49, 28. la [batalla] de San Quintín. St. Quentin, an important 
French town, eighty-two miles north-north-east of Paris, was the 
scene of several battles; the one referred to here was fought in 
1557, on August 10, St. Lawrence's day, and was a great victory for 
the Spaniards, who, under the command of the Duke of Savoy, and 
with the aid of English, Flemish, and Germán auxiliarles, beat the 
French under Coligny and the Constable Montmorency. The 
Escorial was founded as a monument of the gratitude of Philip II 
for this victory, and dedicated to St. Lawrence. 

50, 6. cuando te tuvo : Wken he took youy i. e., that he took yon, 
in that he took you. So also 84, 18, cuando ha ido, when she has 
gom = since she has gone. 



148 NOTES 

50 27. Pósito Real, Pósito Pío. The pósito was the public gran- 
ary, whether national or municipal, to which regular contributions 
were due by law. The pósito real was storehouse pf forage for the 
army, the royal stables, etc. ; the pósito pió a charitable institution 
from which grain was lent without interest in kind {creces) or other 
charges {recargo)^ or given to widows, poor farmers, hospitals, asy- 
lums, etc. So, in the one case, the alcalde was simply behind in his 
taxes ; in the other he had actually taken property to which under 
no circumstances had he any right. 

54, 1 2. mañana será otro dia. A ver}' favoríte Spanish expres- 
sion, used sometimes as a gently pessimistic reflection on the transi- 
toriness oí mundane things, and more often, as here, to suggest that 
there is no hurry about anything, and that to-morrow will take care 
of itself. Cf. the Germán : SD^Íorgcn ifl oud) lülcbcr cin 2^00. 

56, 5, 6. trabuco, bocacha. It is rather diñicult to make a dis- 
tinction in translation ; blunderbuss is the word most often used in 
either case ; bocacha is really a bell-muzzled trabuco, 

56, 25. rúbrica. The rúbrica is the characteristic flourish that 
accompanies almost every Spanish signature; it has always been 
regarded as highly important as an attest of genuineness, much as 
the seal in other countries. So firma y rúbrica would be practically 
equivalent to hand and seal, 

57, 5. con más pelos y seSales : With more hairs and moles ; L e., 
" in greater detall." 

57, 18. I Qué burra ni qué demontre I What the deuce do you 
want with a burra ! 

60, 6. pajarraco. The suffix acó (more usually ajo or acho) sug- 
gests at once large size and ill-favoredness — hideousness. 

62, tit. XVII. Alcalde de Monterilla. The monterilla is a small 
cloth cap wom by peasants. Its use here is to denote a person whose 
only distinction is his office, as we speak of a beggar on horse-back. 
A " jay-alcalde " would be a fairly accurate rendering of the idea. 

64, 25. de profundis : The first words of the vulgate versión of 
the 129 (i30th) Psalm, De profundis clamavi ad te Domine^ etc., 
used in the Catholic Church as a prayer for the souls of the dead. 

64, 29. pro. This word is now more usually masculine. 



NOTES 



149 



66, tít XIX. Voces clamantes in deserto. Voices crying in the 
wildemess ; compare Matthew iii, 3, Isaiah xl, 3. 

66, I. que soy de Archena. Archena is a town oí the oíd king- 
dom of Murcia, on the Segura, about sixteen miles northwest of 
Murcia. Its introduction here by Únele Lucas has only the signifí- 
cance of native local príde. Compare the expression current in the 
United States at the present day : " I*m f rom Missouri ; I want to 
be shown." For the rest of the Une and for a speech analogous in 
spirit, see Don Quijote's outbreak in Chapter XVII of the Second 
Part : " ¿ leoncitos á mi? ¿A mi leoncitosy y á tales horas ? " etc. 

69, 7. deliberada y TOluntariamente : note the omission of the 
adverbial suffix. Cf. despertar y vestirse^ 87, 9. 

70, 1 2. habla, impersonal, as proved by colgadas following. Col- 
gadas^ adjective-participle, hanging, 

70, 20. reo en capilla. Persons under death-sentence in Spain 
have the regular attendance of priests, and are confíned in a cell 
specially arranged for religious services, whence the ñame capilla, 
The hopa is a black cassock or robe wom by the criminal at execu- 
tion. 

79, 9. I Santos y Santas ! Saints and Saintesses, though eíf ective, 
is scarcely English : ** male and f emale saints " obviously will not do ; 
We are constrained to twist the text a bit and transíate : Saints of 
heaven ! or better, Saints and angels of heaven ! 

79, 1 2. á mi ¿ qué ? IVhat is it to me ? What is that to me ? What 
do I care ? 

80, 3. cachorrillos. The cachorrillo is a very small pocket-pistol, 
something on the buUdog order. The ñame is descriptive, being a 
diminutive of cachorro^ " P^PPy*" 

81, 22. esta es la más negra : elliptical construction ; se. cosa. 

82, 10. maula. The word is regularly feminine. The short form 
of the article here is Garduña*s carelessness of speech. 

82, 1 5. talonazo is a backward kick or dig with the heel ; puntea- 
pié a forward kick with the toe. 

83, 17. lo que te dices, trans. : whatyou are saying. The reflex- 
ive pronoun is used coUoquially as implying the suggestion of aston- 
ishment and warning in the hearer, impertinence in the (fírst) speaker. 



150 NOTES 

Syntactically it seems simply expletive, as also in se anda, 67, 19, and 
elsewhere {sp, 106, 30). In andarse the influence of irse is apparent. 
86, 5. si será, si será : for classifícation of uses of si^ cf. vocabu- 
lary. 

86, 19. un alfiler de á ochavo. A farthing pin, The preposition 
de really qualifíes the distríbutive expression á ochavo which itself 
stands for " los que se venden " or " se compran á ochavo el uno," or 
some equivalent phrase. 

87, 2. mona. Cf. the Germán Affe^ in like sense. 

87, 14. téngalas ; se. noches, 

88, 3. esta su casa. The Spanish form of courtesy. A welcome 
visito r is always in his own house, 

89, 4. The expletive use of the ñame of the Virgin, as of others 
in Spanish, is well known ; it may be general or with some sugges- 
tion of personal attribute, as the Purísima of 88, 20 ; or it may be, 
as here, with reference to some particular image or shrine. The 
same thing is true of the use of Mary as a given ñame in baptism ; 
and the curious Spanish ñames Carmen, Dolores, Concepción, 
Pilar and so on, are simply the shortened form of María del Carmen, 
María de los Dolores, etc. 

89, 19. bueno, as in the vocabulary, or he is in a pretty fix, Cf. 
use of buenoy " well," " healthy." 

89, 21. Pardo, a royal country seat on the Manzanares, about six 
miles from Madrid. It was built by Charles I (Charles V), increased 
by Charles III, and was long a favorite shooting-box, with extensiva 
preserves. 

89, 24. Pedro el Cruel. Pedro I, King of Castile and León, bom 
about 1334, succeeded his father, Alfonso XI, in 1350; killed by 
his half-brother, Henry of Trastamara, in 1369; called also Pedro el 
Justiciero. Intimately associated in history with the Black Prince, 
John of Gaunt, and Bertrand Duguesclin. 

91, 4. que Tenga á preguntar : should it come to ask, The sub- 
junctive may be taken as a condensed conditional construction, or 
as characteristic ; in either case it is a subjunctive of result : if so be 
it should come,, in case it should come^ or should it be of such a kind 
as to come. 



NOTES 151 

91,8,9. I caza mayor 1 — ima3rú8culal big gamel — gante with 
abig G.! 

91, 28. I Guarda, Pablo 1 Expression denoting at once surpríse 
and the recognition of need for caution. Transíate, Holdon^ /éllo7vs ! 
Edsy there ! Go slow^ Johnny ! or something of the sort. 

95, 17. albarca. The more usual form of the word is abarca, It 
is the roughest kind of a sandal, a simple rawhide solé, with straps 
covering two of the toes and fastening about the instep and ankle. 
The abarca is very oíd in Spain : it is mentioned in the General 
Chronicle of Alfonso the Leamed, ed. 1541, folio ccLXii verso, 
and at least one King of Navarre, Sancho Abarca (905-927), had his 
súmame from the use of it among his foUowers. 

98, 25. I Dale, bola I A very familiar expression, denoting the 
irrítation or disgust experíenced at hearing a thing much repeated. 
See vocabulary, bola, 

100, tit. XXIX. Post nubila . . . Diana : Afur siorm-cloucís^ 
moonlight. 

100, 5. balcón. The Spanish balcón is not always, or indeed 
usually, a balcony in the English sense of the word. What is gen- 
erally to be understood is a window with a railing upon which one 
may lean, either with or without a very slight projection beyond the 
wall of the house. 

102, 26. había moros en la costa. The expression dates from 
the time when raids by the Moorish pirates of North África were 
frequent on the eastem and southem coasts of Spain. It has been 
generalized to signify the nearly impending, and is of frequent use. 

105, 5. mantilla: shawl or scarf wom as a head-covering by 
women of Spanish countries. There are many different kinds of 
mantillas. Those wom in the-cities are usually of lace, while in the 
country they are frequently of other materials. The one here 
spoken of is evidently of flannel covered with a mesh of chenille 
and bordered with a fringe of balls of the same. 

107, 17. me is dative of interest. 

115, 8. harina de otro costal: flour from a different sack ; i. e., 
another matter, another story, a horse of a different color, another 
pair of sleeves. Note that the miller's wife went to the mili for her 
figure. 



152 



NOTES 



117, 8. cuarto estado, the Fourth Estáte^ i. e., the laborers and 
serving-classes, the proletariat, as distinguished from the Third Es- 
táte, the Commons. 

119, I o. arrimó una bofetada: handed him a blow, 

120, 6. San Simón y San Judas. The feast-day of St. Simón 
and St. Jude, Apostles, is October aSth. Simón Zelotes the Ca- 
naanite, and Judas, also called Thaddeus, are mentioned among the 
disciples of Jesús, Matthew x, 3, Mark iii, 18, Luke vi, 16; and 
again, Acts i, 13. For a curious account of their Uves and martyr- 
dom, see Jacobus a Vorágine, Legenda aurea^ Cap. CLIX (154), ed. 
Graesse, Breslau, 1890, or the Temple reprint of Caxton's translation 
of the same work, London, Dent, 1900 (vol. VI, pp. 72 sqq.). The 
nigKt of St. Simón and St. Jude is in Spain what St. John's Eve 
(June 23) is in most of the rest of Europe, the season when ghosts, 
goblins and fairies are busiest. Compare 86, 10-12. 

121, 6. Anteo. Antseus, a giant, son of Poseidon and Gaia. He 
was invincible as long as he was on the ground, receiving added 
strength from the Earth, his mother, at every contact. He was 
killed by Hercules, who held him in the air and strangled him. 

121, 8. énfasis. This word, originally feminine, has become 
common, and is now more often found maseuline. 

122, 19. la pompa, "the peacock's tail," *'the cheese." The 
ñame is taken from the puífed circle made on the floor by the per- 
formeros skirts at the lowest point of the courtesy. 

124, 20. Solán de Cabras : thermal bath at Beteta in the prov- 
ince of Cuenca, about eighty miles eastward from Madrid. The 
Spríngs have been known since the sixteenth century, when herds- 
men found goats " suíf ering with cutaneous complaints " bathing 
in the waters. Henee the ñame. 

126, 5. arroba, in dry measure twenty-fíve pounds ; as liquid 
measure, varies in diffejent provinces. 

126, 10. Guerra de la Independencia. The Peninsular War, 
1808-1814, between England, Spain, Portugal and France. It re- 
sulted in the expulsión of the French from the Península. 

126, 17. mariscal francés. In the fírst edition, General Sebas- 
tiani is named. 



NOTES 153 

126, 28. Baza : town of province of Granada, fifty-seven miles 
northeast of Granada, an important Moorish city, taken by Isabella 
the Catholic after a seven months' seige, December 4, 1489. The 
French under Marshal Soult defeated the Spaniards here August 
10, 1810. 

127, 6 sqq. The Constitution of Cádiz was adopted in 181 2, 
suspended at the restoration of Ferdinand VII in 18 14, accepted by 
him after Riego's successful rising in 1820, and abrogated with the 
fall of the Liberáis after the French siege of Cádiz in 1823. Ferdi- 
nand VII, el Rey Absoluto, died September 29, 1833. 

127, 10. The first Carlist War, ended by the Treaty of Vergara, 
August 31, 1839. 



VOCABULARY 



155 



ABBREVIATIONS 



acct accusative. 
ad;\ adjective. 
adv.y adverb. 
ant.^ antonym. 
art.^ article. 
aux., auxilíary. 
dat,y dative. 
dem., demonstrative. 
dim.y diminutive. 
/., f eminine. 
/ig.^ fígurative. 
imp.f impersonal. 
interj.^ interjection. 
int,^ interrogative. 
m.^ masculine. 
neut.y neuter. 



«./r., proper noun. 
nutn.^ numeraL 
part.^ participle. 
pass,^ passive. 
poss,^ possessive. 
//., past participle. 
pres,^ present. 
pron.y pronoun. 
reL^ relativa. 
resp.y respectively. 
sp.f specially. 
subs.y substantive. 
trans,, transíate. 
V, a.y transitive verb. 
V. «., neuter verb. 
V, re/i.f reflexive verb. 



VOCABULARY 



* The heavy figures indícate the pages ; the light figures the linea. 



á, prep,^ to, towards^ at, by ; be- 
fare personal objects is sign of 

iicc,^ and is not translated, 

With infinitive^ if . 
abadesa,/., abbess. 
abajo, adv.y below, downward. 

cf. escalera, 
abandonar, v, a., to leave, to 

abandon, to desert; v. refl,^ 

— se, to yield, to give oneself 

up, to abandon oneself. 
abanicar, v. a., to fan. 
abeja,/., bee. 
abierto, ta, adj., open. 
abismo, m., abyss, chasm. 
ablandar, v. a.^ to soften, 111, 8. 
abochornarse, v. refl., to blush. 
abogado, m., lawyer, advócate. 
abonar, v. a., to pay, 50, ao; to 

warrant, to give security. 
abrazar, v. a., to embrace ; //., 

abrazado, da, clinging to, 

pressed against, clasping, 111, 

13. 
abrazo, m., embrace. 
abril, /»., April. 



abrir, v. a., to open. 

absolutismo, m., absolutism, 25, 
6. 

absoluto, ta, adj.^ absolute, un- 
limited. cf. licencia. 

absurdo, da, adj.,^ absurd. 

abuelo, m., grandfather; //. 
abuelos, grandparents, anees- 
tors. 

abusar, v, n., — de, to abuse, 
to take advantage of. 

abuso, m., abuse, ill-custom. 

acá, adv.f here, hither ; por — , 
hither, this way. 

acabar, v. a., to complete, to 
finish, to achieve, to end ; — 
de hacer una cosa, to have 
just done a thing ; — por hacer 
una cosa, to end by doing a 
thing, to do a thing at last; 
V. n,, to end, to come tó an 
end; — se, v, refl.s to come 
to an end. 

Académico, m., academician ; 
— correspondiente de la His- 
toria, corresponding member 
of the Academy of History; 
see note to 18, 84. 



157 



15» 



VOCABULARY 



acariciar, v, a., to caress. 
acaso, con;'., perhaps, perchance. 
acaudalado, da, adj'.y wealthy. 
accidental, adj., incidental, 8, 

23. 
acción,/., action. 
aceite, m., oil; pan de — , s¿¿ 

noU to 44, 17. 
acento, m., accent, tone, 
acentuar, v. a., to mark, 110, 10. 
acepto, ta, adj., agreeable, wel- 

come, acceptable, 26, 7. 
acequia,/., watercourse, 77, 23. 
acercarse, v. refi,, to approach, 

to draw near. 
acero, m., steel. 
acertar, v, n., to hit it right, to 

be right, 31, 3 ; to manage, to 

succeed, 121, 17. 
acomodar, v, a., to suit, to picase, 

120,1. 
acompasante, m., companion, 

escort, 100, 12. 
acompasar, v, a., to accompany. 
aconsejar, v. a., to counsel, to 

advise. 
acontecer, v. n.. to happen. 
acordarse, v. refl., to remember. 
acostar, v, a., to put to bed, 115, 

8; — se, V. refl,, to lie down, 

to go to bed. 
acostumbrado, da, adj,, accus- 

tomed, used. 
actitud, /, attitude, posture, 

gestare. 



actividad, /., activity, action, 

85, 23. 
acto, w., act ; en el — , forthwith, 

immediately. 
actual, adj., presen t, 86, 18. 
acueducto, m., aqueduct, con- 

duit, 20, 18. 
acuerdo, m., agreement, consent, 

36, 22; accord, 49, 28; estar 

de — , 49 , 5, to be in accord, 

to be of one mind, to be agreed. 
acusar, v. a., to accuse. 
adecuado, da, adj., appropríate, 

pat, 43, 8. 
adelantarse, v. rejl., to advance. 
adelante, adv., f orwards, before ; 

hacia — , forward, fon^-ards, 

35, 19 ; más — , farther on. 
ademán, m., gestare, bearing, 

125, 24. 
además, adv., besides, moreover. 
además de, prep., besides, 26, 

16. 
adiós, m., farewell, 59, 15. 
adivinar, v. a. and n.^ to guess, 

to divine, 
administrar, v, a., to administer, 

42,7. 
admirable, ad/., admirable, 
admirablemente, adv,, admira* 

bly, excellently. 
admiración,/, admiration. 
admirar, v, a., to admire, 2, 22. 
admitir, v. a,t to admit, 23, 4; to 

consent ; to accept 



VOCABULARY 



IS9 



adonde, adv,^ where, whither. 
¿ adonde ? adv. int.y where ? 

whither ? 
adoptar, v, a., to adopt. 
adorar, v, a., to adore, to wor- 

ship. 
adorno, m., adornment, orna- 

ment, decoration. 
adquirir, v. a., to acquire. 
adversario, m., adversary, 79, 31. 
advertir, v. a., to notice, to note, 

85, 3, 102, 5; to inform, 61, 

9; to warn, 56,19. 
afable, adj., aff able. 
afablemente, adv.^ afíably, pleas- 

antly, kindly. 
afán, m.f labour, efiíort. 
afanado, da,a#, sufferíng, hard- 

working, overworked, 116, ^, 
afectar, v. a., to affect, to feign, 

to make show of, 40, 13. 
afecto, fn., afíection, passion, 

desire. 
afectuoso, sa, ad;,^ affectionate, 

gentle, 104, 16. 
aficionado, da, ad/., devoted (to), 

fond (of). 
afilado, da, adj\, {part. afilar), 

slender, 16, 10. 
afligir, V, a.t to aíHict; part., 

afligido, da, as adj,, 77, 6. 
afrancesado, da, adj',, like the 

French, Frenchi£ed, 18, 9; 

partisan of the French, 126, 

26; s€enoteto\Z,9. 



afrenta, /, aííront, dishonor, 
outrage, 119, 28. 

afuera, adv.y without, outside. 

agacharse, v, refl.y to stoop, to 
squat, to crouch, 78, 20; to 
bend, to bow, 122, 17. 

agarrar, v, a., to catch hold, 
hold tight; estoy bien aga- 
rrado, 80, U, I have a good 
hold ; to pick up {of a chair\ 
85, 15; to get hold oí, 49, 3. 

agasajar, v. a,, to entertain hos- 
pitably, to pamper, 11, 22. 

agasajo, m., caress, 19, 18. 

ágil, adj., spry, agile. 

agilísimo, ma, adj., very spry, 
very agile, 26, 29. 

agitar, v. a., to agítate, to 
trouble, to quicken. 

agotar, v. «., to exhaust, 81, U. 

agradable, adj., agreeable. 

agradar, v. »., to picase, to 
charm, 22, 10. 

agravio, /»., insult, 109, 12. 

agregar, v. a., to add, 89, 24. 

agrupar, v. «., to group; part., 
agrupado, da, as adf., 107, 13. 

agua, /., water; — potable, 
drinking-water, 20, 30; la 
bocha hecha un — , his mouth 
watering, 40, 18. 

aguantarse, v. refl., to be pa- 
tient, to keep oneself in hand, 
82, 28. [for. 

aguardar, v. a», to await, to wait 



1 6o 



VOCABULARY 



agüero, m„ ornen, augury {Ht, 

XVI). 
águila,/, eagle. 
I ah I inUrj., ah 1 88, 10. 
ahí, cuiv.y here; hasta — , thus 

far, 49, 6 ; de — , f rom here, 68, 

14; there, 80, 20. 
ahogar, v. a., to stifle, tosmother, 

116, U; — se, V. refl,y to drown 

to be drowning, 116, 0; to 

smother, to be smothering, 70, 

17. 
ahora, adv,.^ now, at present; 

— mismo, in this very minute. 

128, 7; por — , for the present, 

for the time being, 77, 1. 
ahorcar, v. a., to hang; to hang 

up, 16, 10. 
ahorrar, v, a., ahorrarse, v, refl.^ 

to save, to save up, to hoard, 

11,21. 
aire, m., air ; los aires, air, upper 

air, 88, 27. 
ajeno, na, ad;\ another's ; of, be- 

longing to another. 
ajustar, v. a,, to adjust, to settle. 
alfPrep. and art,, k el. 
ala,/., wing ; tener alas, to have 

freedom, license, assurance, 

standing, 117, 10. 
alabastrino, na, adj,j alabaster, 

alabastríne. 
alambre, m., wire; patas de ^, 

spindle-shanks, 60, 12. 
alargar, v. a., to pass, to hand ¡ 



to bring ; to hold out, to ex- 

tend. 
alba,/, dawn, 184, 1. 
albafiil, m., masón, 80, 0. 
albarca, /, {more usual form 

abarca, a rough sort ^shoe or 

sandal; sei note to 96, 17. 
alcabala, /, ezdse, see noU io 

6,28. 
alcahuete, m., pander, procnrer, 

68,2. 
alcalde, m., mayor; — de mon- 

terilla, see monterilla, and note 

to tit, XVII. 
alcaldesa,/, mayoress, mayor's 

wife, wife of alcalde, 89, 28. 
alcance, m., reach, 48, 4. 
alcanzar, v, a,, to reach, to at- 

tain ; to extend, to succeed, to 

reach, 78, 22; to overtake. 
alcoba,/, bedroom, bedchamber. 
alcurnia, /, race, lineage, fam- 

Uy. 
aldaba,/, handle; knocker, 47, 

20; tener buenas aldabas, 86, 

20, to have a good " pulí." 
aldabón, m., knocker {largé) 97, 

10. 
aldea, /., hamlet {small viilage, 

largefarm), 8, Ift. 
aleccionar, v, a., to instruct, 190, 

2. 
alegrar, v, a., to rejoice, to make 

glad, to give pleasure to, 18, 21 ; 

— se, V. refl, to be glad, to be 



VOCABULARY 



x6i 



pleased, 81, 11; to rejoice, to 

be glad, lie, 11. 
alegre, o^'., joyous, cheerful, 

merry, happy. 
alegremente, adv,^ joyoasly, 84, 

24. 
alegría,/, joy, joyousness, cheer- 

f ulness ; informality, openness, 

gayness, 19, 8. 
Alemania,/ ff./r., Germany. 
alepín, m., bombazine, 101, 10. 
alfiler, m., pin. 
algo, neuter^ something, some- 

what, a little; para — , 86, 19, 

not for nothing. 
alguacil, m., bailifí, constable. 
alguien, pran.^ anybody, some- 

body. 
algnno, na, pron, adj. (algún), 

some, some or other ; — que 

Otro, one or another, occasion- 

ally one, 40, 9; alguias ve- 
ces, sometimes, 10, 6 ; . . . ^, 

any whatever, 66, 19. 
alimaSa,/, scum, rabble, 126, 14. 
alimento, m., food, 71, 23. 
alma,/, sonl; de mi — , 82, 17, 

beloved. 
almagre, m., ochre, 26, 8. 
almendra,/, almond. 
almohada, /,- pillow, cushion. 
almohadón, m., pillow, large 

cushion, 2, 22. 
almorzar, v. a., 8, 6, to breakfast 

on, to eat for breakfast. 



almuerzo, m., breakfast, lunch- 

eon, 81, 1 ; see note to 8, 6. 
alpargata,/, see note /k? 28, 6. 
alpujarreSo, fia, adj.t oí or from 

Alpujarras. 
alrededor de, prep., around, 70, 

la 
alternado, da, ad/., altérnate. 
alto, ta, adj.t high, tall; 77, 19, 

deep ; 126, 6, high, exalted ; en 

alta voz, 68, 21, alond ; en — , 

84, 7, alof t ; lo — , neuter, the 

top, 16, 7, 26, 13. 
altura,/, height. 
aludir, v. »., to alinde, 
alumbrado, m., lighting, 46, 13. 
alumbrar, v. a., to light, to illumi- 

nate, to show a light, 46, 18, 66, 

ao, 84, 18. 
alzarse, v. re/i., to ríse. 
allá, adv., there, thither, yonder ; 

í— ellosl 29, 6, that's their 

business. 
allende, /r^/., beyond, 6, 16. 
allí, adv.f there, yonder ; por — , 

yonder, 82, 28. 
ama,/, mistress; — de leche, 

98, 4, wetnnrse. 
amable, adj',, kind, good, 69, 4. 
amanecer, v, »., to dawn. 
amanecer, m., daybreak, dawn, 

62,28. 
amansarse, v. re/l., to become 

mild, to grow mild, to grow 

gentle ¡ to be pacifíed, 49, 18. 



102 



VOCABULARY 



amante, m., lover, 93, 19. 
amar, v. a.^ to love. 
amargura,/, bitterness. 
amarillento, ta, ad/.^ yellowish, 

growing y ello w, 101, 11. 
amarillo, lia, at/j,, yellow. 
amasar, v. a., to knead, to bake, 

20,3. 
ambos, bas, adj., both. 
amenaza,/, threat. 
amenizar, v. a.y to adorn, to 

make charming, 14, 29. 
amiga,/, friend, 114, 27. 
amigo, ga, adj\, fond (oí), 61, 1, 
amigo, m.^ friend. [friendly. 
amistoso, sa, adj\, friendly, 62, 22. 
amo, /»., master; //., — s, 45, 18, 

master and mistress. 
amor, m., love; al — de la 

lumbre, 11, 7, in the glow of 

the fire. 
amoroso, sa, a^'., amorous, lov- 

ing ; estratagema amorosa, 

61, 1, love-stratagem. 
amparar, v.a.,to protect. 
amparo, m., protection ; defence, 

refuge, 110, 30. 
Ana, Santa — ,/ «/r., St. Anne. 
anciano, m., oíd man, 81, 16. 
ancho, cha, adj., wide, broad ; á 

sus anchas, 18, 5, at their ease, 

at their leisure. 
andadas, fpl.^ traces, tracks of 

game ; see note to 9, 10. 
Andalucia,/ ^r., Andalusia. 



andaluz, adj.y Andalusian. 
andar, v. »., to go; to walk; to 

be; part. andando, 97, 4, on 

foot; Tamos andando, 89,18, 

let's be getting along, let's be 

making baste. 
andarín, m., fast walker, nimble 

fellow, 86, 10, 85, 29. 
anfitrión, m., host. 
ángel, m.y ángel, 
angosto, ta, adj,, narrow ; tight, 

close-ñtting, scant, 41, 12. 
angustia,/, anguish. 
angustiado, da, adj\y heart-bro- 

ken, 98, 8. 
anillo, m.y ring, 
animación, /, animation, liveli- 

ness. 
animado, da, adj.y living, ani- 

mated. 
animal, m.y animal, 18, 22. 
Animas, fpl.y the toUing of a bell, 

to announce prayers for souls 

in purgatory; usually shortly 

af ter sunset. See note to 8, 14. 
anoche, adv.y last night. 
ansiar, v. a.y to long for, to de- 

sire, 84, 13. 
ante, prep.y before, in the pres- 

ence of . 
antecesor, m.y predecessor. 
Antecristo, m.y Antichrist. 
Anteo, m.y npr.y Antaeus. 
anterior, adj.y preceding, 16, 5. 
antes, adv.^ before, beforehand; 



VOCABULARY 



163 



sooner, the sooner, 47, 5 ; 

rather. 
antes de, prep.<, before. 
antes de que, conj.y before, 60, 13» 

98, 14. 
antes que, conj.^ before; rather 

than, 69, 16. 
anticipación, /, anticipátion ; 

habían llegado con bastante 

— , 45, 4, had arrived consider- 

ably ahead, before. 
anticiparse, z/. refl.y to forestal!, 

108, 21. 
anticuado, da, adj.^ antiquated, 

grown oíd; 25, 3, discarded; 

91, 24, former, old-time. 
antigüedad,/, antiquity, 18, 23. 
antiguo, gua, adj.^ oíd, 58, 25; 

old-time, former, 91, 24. 
antojarse, v. refl.^ used only in 

the third person, to wish, to be 

pleasing; como se te antoje, 86, 

ao, as you will, any way you 

please. 
antonomasia, /, antonomasia. 
anunciar, v. a,, to inform, to de- 
clare, 72, 20. 
aSadir, v. a., to add. 
apo, tn.t year ; al — , 11, 21, by the 

year, in the course of the year; 

tener cuarenta — s, to be forty 

years oíd. [put out. 

apagar, v. a,, to extinguish, to 
aparato, m., preparation, 70, 8. 
apareado, da, adj\, paired, 124, 5. 



aparecer, v, n,, to appear, to show 

oneself. 
aparejar, v. a.^ to prepare, to get 

ready ; to saddle, 57, 17, 65, 11. 
aparición,/., appearance, 105, 10. 
apartar, v, a., to put aside, to 

push aside, push away, 109, 14 ; 

//. apartada, 99, 14, standing 

aside, apart; — se, v. refi,^ to 

go aside, turn aside, tum from, 

67, 28. 
aparte, adv.^ apart, aside, 96, 5. 
apearse, v. refl.^ to dismount, to 

get down, 67, 9. 
apegado, da, a^^'., attached, cling- 

ing, devoted, 6, 20. 
apenas, adv.^ scarcely. 
apéndice, m.y appendix, 28,2. 
aplacerse, v. refl,^ to take pleas- 

ure, 104, 26. 
aplicar, v. a., to apply, 97, 17. 
apoderado, m., plenipotentiary, 

106,9. 
apoderarse, v, refl,^ to gain pos- 

session, to get into one's power 

(de). 
aposento, m.^ room, 69, 23. 
apoyar, v, a,, to lean, to rest, 85, 

19. 
apreciar, v, ¿z., to reckon. 
aprecio, m.y esteem, 17, 13. 
apremiante, adj.^ urgent, 62, 23. 
apresurarse, v. refl.^ to basten, to 

make haste, 89, 1. 
aprovechar, v, a,^ to take advan- 



164 



VOCABÜLARY 



tage oí, to make use oí, to turn 

to account, to profít by, 41, 5, 

etc. 
apuntar, v. a., to aim at, to cover. 
aparar, v, a,,, to drain, 68, 20. 
apuro, m.t trouble, tríal, diíficulty, 

need, 88, 16. 
aquel, — Ha, adj. dem.y that. 
aquél, —WüfPron., that, the for- 

mer. 
aquello, neuter, that. 
aquí, adv., here; por — , 84,6, 

here, hereabouts ; por — , 47, 4, 

84, 20, this way, in this direc- 

tion; cf. tomar. 
Archena, /., Archena {town of 

SpatHy on the Segura., 16 miles 

N. W, of Murcia, 
arder, v. n., to burn, to glow, 70, 2. 
ardid, m., deceit, deception, 81, 9. 
argentino, na, ad;\, sllvery. 
aristocrático, ca, a<^'., arístocrat- 

ic, 28, 5. 
arma,/., weapon ; //. — s, arms ; 

c/, descansar, 
armarse, v. refl., to break out, to 

begin, 99, 7, 128, 0. 
arqueado, da, adj. y bent, bowed; 

piernas^rqueadas, 25,23, bow- 

legs, bandy-legs. 
arracada, /, pendant, earríng, 

18,9. 
arranque, m., arch, curve, 18, 4. 
arrastrar, v, a., to drag, 118, 4; 

79, 10; cf. sacar^ 



¡ arre I interj.y get up ! (cali used 

to dt^augkt-animals) tit. IX. 
arrear, v. a., (cf. arre) to drive, to 

urge {korses, etc.), 60, 4, 82, 15. 
arrebatar, z^. a. to snatch, 50, l. 
arreglar, v. a., to arrange, 80, 7, 

98, 6, 105, 4. 
arreniíangar, v. a., to pulí up the 

sleeves \pp. arremangado, Tvitk 

brazo, 15, 28, uncovered, bare, 

short-sleeved. 
arrestado, da, adj., confíned, in 

custody, 122, 9. 
arrestar, v. a., to arrest, 79, 7. 
arriba, adv., abo ve, upward; 

piso de — , 77, 9, upper story ; 

de — abajo, 80, 7, up and down. 
arriesgar, v. a., to risk. 
arrimar, v. a., to lean ; le arrimó 

una bofetada, 119, 10, dealt him 

a blow; //. animado, 118, 11, 

leaning; — se, v. refl., to lean, 

98,21. 
arriscado, da, cuij., bold, dash- 

ing, 102, 15. 
anoba,/, see note to 126, 5. 
arrogante, adj., arrogant, proud ; 

appliedto stcUure, 14, la 
anogantemente, adv., boldly, 

impertinently, 108, 17. 
arrojar, v. a,, to throw, to throw 

down. 
arrollar, v. a. y to roll up, 87, 9. 
arrugado, da, adj., wrinkled, 25, 



VOCABULARY 



165 



arruinarse, v, refl,, to become 
bankrupt, to be ruined, 12, 16. 

artero, ra, adj., sly, crafty, 26, 4. 

artísticamente, adv.^ artistically. 

asado, da, adj.^ roasted, roast. 

asador, m., spit. 

asalto, m.j assault, storm, storm- 
ing, 16, 16. 

asegurar, v. a., to secura, to 
make fast, to fasten, 65, 13. 

asesinar, v. a., to assassinate, to 
murder, to kill. 

asesino, m.y assassin, murderer. 

así, adv.f thus, so ; — ... COmO, 
as well ... as, both . . . and ; 
— que, when. 

asiento, m., seat, place, 84, 9. 

asistir, V. »., to be present, to 
attend. 

asmático, ca, ad/.^ asthmatic. 

asomar, v. a., to show, to thrust 
out, to project, 88, 24; //. 
asomada, 100, 6, leaning from, 
appearíng at; v. refl.^ aso- 
marse á, 64, 8, to lean over. 

asombrarse, v. refl,y to be aston- 
ished. 

asombro, m., astonishment, 96, 20. 

asomo, m.y suspicion, conjecture ; 
ni por — , 6, 7, not in their 
wildest dreams; 90, 17, don*t 
dream of it. 

astuto, ta, adj. astute, 90, 7. 

asuntillo, m.y little matter, little 
affair, 68, 2. 



asunto, m., matter, business ; — 
reservado, prívate matter, se- 
cret matter, 66, 20 ; vamos al 
— , 61, e, we*ll come to the 
point, let's get to business. 

asustarse, v. refi,y to be fright- 
ened, to be afraid, to take 
fright. 

atar, v, a., to bind, 27, 4 ; to tie, 
66,6. 

atención,/, attention. 

aterrado, da, adj, {pp, oí aterrar), 
thunderstruck, dumbfounded. 

atiborrado, á&jadj, (//. <?/'atibo- 
rrar,. to stuff with wool), 
stuffed, 14 8. 

atildamiento, m.y neatness, care- 
fulness, elegance, 101, 22. 

atmósfera, /., atmosphere. 

atrapar, v. a,, to catch, 61, 12. 

atrás, adv.y back, backwards, 
behind ; de — hacia adelante, 
backwards and forwards, 26, 
25. 

atravesar, v. a,y to break off, to 
interrupt, to shut off, 70, 16; 
to cut across, 66, 17; to cross, 
69, 20; — se, V, refi.y to inter- 
pose, to come between, 108' 
17. 

atreverse, v, refl^y to daré, to 
venture, to be impertinent: 
no se atrevía con su mujer, he 
dared not face his wife, dared 
not stand up to his wife, 128, IL 



i66 



VOCABULARY 



atrevido, da, culj.^ bold, daríng, 

17, 20. 
atrio, «., outer courtyard, 80, 4. 
atrocidad, /., atrocity. 
atropellar, v. a., to override, to 

thrust aside, to forcé, 109, 17. 
atroz, adj.t atrocious, frightful, 

horrible, 04, 2. 
aturdir, v. a., to deafen, 62, 25. 
aun, aún, adv,, even, still, yet, 

also. 
aunque, conj.t although, though. 
ausencia,/., absence. i 
austero, ra, adj., stem, rígid, 

78,9. 
Austria,/, «/r., Austria. 
austríaco, ca, ad/.^ Austrian. 
auto sacramental, m., s¿e note to 

9,5. 
autor, w., author. 
autoridad,/, authority ; cf. prin- 
cipio, and note to 25, 16 ; 60, 18, 

//. autoridades, 84, 7, etc, au- 

thorities, officials. 
auxiliar, v, a.<, to help, to assist, 

119, 27. 
auxilio, m., help. 
avanzado, da, adj.y advanced. 
avanzar, v. n., to ad vanee, to 

proceed, to go forward, to 

come forward. 
ave,/,bird(A/XVII). 
Ave liarla Purísima, see note to 

38,20. 
aventajar, v, a., to surpass, 22,22. 



aventura,/, ad ventare. 

avergonzado, da, adj.y ashamed. 

averiguar, v, a., to mquire into, 
to investígate, 67, 1. 

aviado, da, adj., estar — , 07, 17, 
to be in a hole, to be in a 
pretty pickle {thefirst meaning 
ofthe word is ill-situated). 

avieso, sa, adj,^ irregular, crook- 
ed ; evil, malicious. 

avío, m., preparation, equipment; 
avíos de fumar, 00, 24, smok- 
ing materials. 

avisado, da, culj.^ clever, wide- 
awake, 17, 20. 

avisar, v, a.y to inform, 87, 5. 

aviso, m., information, 68, 19. 

avivar, v. ¿z., to enliven, to aní- 
mate, to make piquant, 14, 23. 

I ay I interj\y alas, oh, alack, etc.\ 
I ay de ... 1 100, 23, alas f or, 
woe to. 

ayer, adv., yesterday. 

a3nidar, v. a., to help, to assist 

a3ninar, v, «., to fast, 43, 30. 

a3nintamiento, m., municipal 
council, 30, 13. 

A3nintamiento, m., town-hall, 
46, 8. 

azucena,/, lily, white lily, 37, 12. 

azul, adj,^ blue ; see also oro. 

B 
baboso, sa, adj.^ slobbering, 
drooling, dríveling, 40, 2& 



VOCABULARY 



167 



bachillera,/, chatterbox, 119, 16. 

bachillería, /, chatter, chatter- 
ing; déjate de bachillerias, 
50, 4, stop your nonsense. 

bachillero, m., talker, chatterer, 
68,7. 

badulaque, m., jackanapes, idiot, 
blockhead, 82, 13. 

bailar, v. »., to dance. 

baile, m., dance. 

bajar, v, a., to take down, bring 
down, carry down, 83, 4 ; v. »., 
to go down, to get down, to 
descend; — se, v, refl.^ to 
come down, to descend. 

bajo, ja, adj.y low; small (pf 
stature) ; por lo — , 39, 9, in a 
low tone, cabeza — , 76, 4, head 
bowed, head bent. 

bajo, prep.y beneath, under. 

bala,/., buUet, ball. 

balancearse, v, refl,^ to sway, 26, 

24. 

balbucear, v, n., to stammer, to 

stutter. 
balcón, m,, casement ; s^¿ note to 

100,5. 
de balde, adv.^ free, gratis, with- 

out pnce, 36, 28, 80, 27. 
banda, /, side, edge {of road)y 

67,20. 
bandolero, /»., highwayman, rob- 

ber, brígand, 46, 6. 
bl^rse, V, refl., to bathe, to take 

a bath, 20, 27. 



baSo, m., bath. 

baqueta,/, ramrod, 71, 2. 

baraja,/, pack of cards, 63, 8. 

baraúnda,/, tumult, confusión, 
hubbub, 100, 3. 

barba,/, chin. 

bárbaro, m., barbarian, savage, 
monster, 82, 15, cf, pedazo. 

barbilampiSo, Sa, adj., thin- 
bearded, sparse of beard, 18, 3. 

barra,/, bar, 60, 3. 

barrer, v, a., to sweep. 

barriga,/, belly. 

basilisco, m,, basilisk, 109, 13. 

I basta I interj.^ enough ! that will 
do! 

bastante, adj.y suíficient, consid- 
erable, 46, 4. 

bastante, adv.^ enough, quite, 
rather. 

bastar, v, n., to be enough, to be 
suíficient. 

Bastían, m., Bastian, Sebastian. 

bastón, m., stick, staff ; — de 
autoridad, 107, 4, staí! of of- 
fice, [a stick. 

bastonazo, m., blow with or from 

batalla,/, battle. 

batida,/, hunt, chase. 

batista, /, batiste, muslin, 26, 20. 

bautismo, m., baptism. 

bautizo, m.y baptism. 

Baza, / npr.f Baza, town about 
65 miles north-east of Granada, 
on the road to Mturcia. 



x68 



VOCABULARY 



beber, v, a., to drínk. 
beldad,/., beauty. 
belleza,/» beauty. 
bello, lia, adj'.f beautiful. 
bendecir, v. a., to bl.ss. 
bendición, /, benediction, bles- 

sing. 
bendito, ta, atíj'., blessed, holy; 

una bendita, 118, 7, a saint. 
berrear, v, n.j to bellow (like a 

cal/). 
besar, v, a,, to kiss. 
beso, m,t kiss. 
bestia,/, beast; animal; beast 

of burden. 

bicho, m., beast, vermin, 184, U. 

bien, adv., weU; very; about; 

hombre de — , honest man, 

man of honor; mujer de — , 

18. 12, 88, U, honest woman, 

virtuous woman; no — , scarce- 

ly, as soon as ; ó — , or else. 

bien que, c<m;\y although, though. 

bizcocho, m^ btscuit, cracker, 

zwieback. 
biznietaj/, great-granddaughter, 

108,7. 
blanco, ca, adj.^ white ; cf, carta, 
blanquear, v, 0., to whitewash. 
blonda,/, lace. 

boca,/, mouth; ~ del estóma- 
go, 46, 8, pit of the stomach ; 
de manos á — , 77^21, sudden- 
Ij, anexpectedly ; sin decir 
esta — •• mia, 118, 12, with- 



OQt speaking a word ; — sumi' 
da, 109, 3, drawn lips ; — hecha 
un agua, 40, 16, mouth all wat- 
ering ; — arriba, 88 25, — - aba- 
jo, 88, 2S, face up, face down ; 
caer de — , 96, 9, to fall on the 
face, to fall flat. 
bocacha,/, blunderbuss, 66, 4. 
boda,/, wedding. 
bodega,/, wine-cellar, 81, 4. 
bofetada,/, blow, buffet, 18, «; 
slap, slapping, 88, 21. 

bofetón, m., blow, cu£í. 

boU,/, ball; ¡dale, — 1 98, 2S, 
the same oíd story 1 there he 
goes again I 

boletín, m., bulletin. 

bombardeo, m., bombardment. 

Bonaparte, npr,y Bonaparte. 

bondadoso, sa, adj,, kindly, kind- 
hearted. 

bonito, ta, adj,, pretty. 

boquerón, m., anchovy. 

Borbón, «/r., Bourbon. 

bordado, m., embroidery. 

bordar, v. 0., to embroider. 

borde, m., edge, brínk, 86, 9. 

borla,/, tassel, 86,24. 

borracho, m., dmñkard. 

borrachón, m., drunkard. 

borrar, v, a., to erase. [pest 

borrasca, /, sqnall, storm, tem« 

borrica,/, she-ass, jenny, 96, 1. 

bostezar, v. «., to jawn. 

bostezOi m., yawn. 



VOCABULARY 



169 



bramar, v, n., to roar, to bellow 
105,26. 

brazado, m., armfal. 

brazo, m.» arm. 

brillar, v. »., to shine, 78, 21. 

brinco, m., leap, bound, spríng. 

brindar, v. a., to offer, 41, 10. 

brisca,/, brisca, a game of cards ; 
s¿€ note to 80, 4. 

broma, /, joke, jest ; sei note to 
19, 9 ; dejar la — , to put jest- 
ing aside, 106, 20; no estoy 
para— s, 87, 23, 1'm in no mood 
for joking. 

bruja,/., witch. 

brujería,/, witchcraft. 

Bruselas,/»/, w/r., Brassels. 

bruto, ta, adj,, coarse, ugly, 47, 
12 ; en — , 18, 21, in the rough. 

btf, m., bogey, bugbear, 88, 17. 

bueno, na, adj\, good; kind; 
tanto — , 84, 4, so much kind- 
ness, so great an honor, see 
noU; buenas noches, good 
evening, good night, cf, tener, 
87, u ; buena moza, cf. mOza ; 
— , a good one, a fine one, 89, 
10; cf. note, 

bufete, m., desk, writing-table, 
49,22. 

bufón, — ^na, adj.^ merry; ludic- 
rous, comical, funny. 

bufonada, /, buffoonery; scur- 
rílity ; practica! joke, 76, 6. 

bulto, OT., form, masa, 46, 22; 



escurrir el — , 68, 27, to slip 

away. 
burlarse (de), v. refl.^ to mock, 

to make fun of , 74, 28. 
burra,/, she-ass, donkey. 
burro, m., ass, donkey. 
busca,/, search. 
buscar, v, a,^ to seek, to look for; 

188, 19, to look up, to fínd. 



t ca 1 interj., 67, 8, 68, 2S, humph, 
not by a good deal, not any. 

cabalgador, dora, adj,, riding. 86, 
20. 

caballería, /, chivalry; riding 

. horse,mount; any animal com- 
monly usedfor riding, 

caballero, m., gentleman ; in di- 
rect address, 188, O, Sir. 

caballero, ra, adj^ mounted, rid- 
ing, 69, 8. 

caballo, m., horse. 

cabecera,/, bolster, 68, 28. 

cabecero, m., 78, 23, lintel, head- 
piece {of a door)^ head {of a 
bed\ 

caber, v, fr., to fall to one's share, 
to fall to, 107, 28; to have 
room, to have space ; no cabe 
duda, 78, 18, there is no room 
for doubt, there can be no 
doubt. 

cabeza, /, head ; de — , 80, 28, 
headlong, headfirst. 



170 



VOCABULARY 



cabildo, m.f town council, coun- 
cil, 86, 22. For 108, 29, see 
under sala. 

cabo, m., end, extreme; al — , 
at last ; al — de, 47, 27, at the 
end oí, after. 

cabra,/., goat 

cabrero, m., goatherd. 

cachorrillo, m.» small pisto!, bull- 
dog, 80, a 

cada, adj., each; — cual, each 
one; — uno, — una, each 
one, every one. 

caer, v. »., to f all ; — se, v rejl.^ 
to fall, to fall down, to fall 
over; se cae de su peso, 85, 
20, it Í8 self-evident, it goes 
without saying. 

caída,/, fall. 

caja,/, box ; 50, 1, snuff-box. 

calado, da, adj., soaked, drench- 
ed, 78, 30. 

calamitoso, sa, adj., unhappy, 
miserable, ill-fated. 

calavera, m., rake, debauchee, 
45, 25, 111, 11. 

calceta,/, understocking (a sort 
oflegging, wom next ihe skin, 
and reaching tothe kn€e)\ hacer 
— , 77, 8, to knit. 

calentar, v. a., to warm. 

calidad,/, quality, 48, 5. 

calma,/, calm, calmness. 

calmar, v. a., to calm, to allay, 
119,20. 



calor, m., heat, warmth; hacer 
— , to be hot {pfthe weather). 

calzado, da, adj., shod. 

calzar, v, a., to carry (said of the 
calibre o/a gun), 56, 5. 

calzón, m., breeches, trousers, 
26, 21. [82, 22. 

\ calla 1 Ínter;., hark I look I hush I 

callado, da, adj,, silent, still; 
kept silent, suppressed. 

callar, v. a,, to suppress, to pass 
over in silence, 118, 14; v. n., 
to be silent, to remain silent, 
to cease speaking. 

calle, /., Street. 

callejón, m., alley, lañe; — sin 
salida, 50, 23, blind alley, cul 
de sac. 

cama,/, bed. [ber. 

cámara, /., bedroom, bedcham- 

camarada, m,, comrade, com- 
panion. 

cambiar, v. a., to exchange, to 
change ; vt n., to change. 

cambio, m., change, exchange; 
en — , 18, 4, in exchange, on 
the other hand. 

caminar, v, fr., to go, to travel ; 
to walk. 

camino, m.» way, road ; — carre- 
tero, 10, 12, cart road, wagón 
road ; de — , 51, 14, 90, 6, on 
the way; en — de, 12, 15. on 
the way to, in the way of. 

campanilla, /, little bell; per* 



VOCABULARY 



171 



sona de campanillas, 11, 10, 

important person, personage. 
campaSa, /., campaign; salir á 

— , 62, 15, to take the field. 
campear, v. n^ to hold the field, 

to shine f orth, to be prominent, 

to be in evidence, 16, 8. 
campesino, na, adj,^ rustic, 

country, peasant, 15, 26. 
campestre, adj,<, rustic, rural, 41, 

20. 
campo, m., field, open field, 

country, countryside; á — 

trayieso, 60, 15, across country. 
canción, /., song; 12, 12, refrain. 
candeal, adj.^ white {wheat or 

bread )\ trigo — , 62, 16, winter 

wheat. 
candela, /, candle, light, fire, 

67,3. 
candil, m.y lamp. 
canónigo, m., canon, 
cantar, v. a, and m., to sing. 
cántaro, m., pitcher, wine meas- 

ure, 62, 6. 
cantidad,/., quantity; 21,8, sum. 
canturriar, v. a.^ to hum {a tuné), 

69,5. 
caSa, /, cañe, reed ; — de Indias, 

121, 7, bamboo cañe. 
caSada, /., hoUow way, narrow 

pass, 66, 18. 
caSo, m., pipe, 97, 21. 
caSón, m., barrel, gun-barrel, 

71,2. 



capa, /., cape, cloak; — de 

grana, scarlet cloak. 
capaz, adj., capable. 
capilla, /., chapel; see note to 

reo, 70, 20. 
capitación,/, poll-tax; see note 

to 6, 29. 
capitular, m., capitular, member 

oí ecclesiastical chapter, 47, 6. 
capote, m.y waterproof, cloak; 

— de monte, 94, 12, short but- 

toned overcoat. 
captar, v. a., to gain, to capture. 
cara, /., face, countenance; to- 
mar la — ,38, 8, to chuck under 

the chin, 
carácter, m., //. caracteres, 

character. 
caracterizado, da, adj,^ distin- 

guished, esteemed, 10, 10. 
carbón, m., coal, charcoal ; bone 

black, 26, 7. 
carcajada, /, laughter, violent 

laughter, burst of laughter. 
cárcel,/, prison. 
carecer (de), v. «., to be without, 

to lack ; to be in need of, 16, 7. 
carencia,/, lack, absence, 6, 24. 
cargado, da, adj., full; loaded, 

overloaded; charged; — de 

espaldas, stoop-shouldered, 

slightly hunch-backed. 
cariátide,/, caryatid. 
caricatura,/, caricature, 
caricia,/, caress. 



172 



VOCABULARY 



cariSo, m., afíection. 

cariñoso, sa, adj.^ fríendly, ami- 

able; aífectionate. 
Cario Magno, m., Charlemagne. 
Carmen, #»., Carmel. 
carne,/., meat, flesh; pl. — s, 

flesh, body, weight, embon- 

point, 15, 27, 85, 90, 82, 2, etc. 
Carnestolendas, fpl,^ camival 

time, 25, 13. 
General Caro, npr, m., see note 

to 15, 16. 
carpintería, /., carpentry, car- 

penter's trade, 21, 6. 
carpintero, m.y carpenter, 20, 8. 
carretero, ra, adj.^ passable, prac- 
ticable (for wkeeled vehicUs)^ 

cf, camino, 10, 12. 
carril, w ., track, cart-track, 65, 17. 
carro, m.» cart, wagón, 
carta,/., letter ; — blanca, 90, l, 

carte blanche, unlimited au- 

thority, permission. 
casa, /, house ; á — , at home ; 

á — , 8, 14, home, to theit 

homes. 
casaca,/, coat, tunic, dress coat, 

26,22. 
casadero, ra, adj\, unmarríed, 

marriageable, 1, 24. 
casados, m//., married people, 

2,11. 
casado, da, adj.^ married. 
casarse, v, refl.^ to marry. 
casi, adv,f almost, nearly. 



caso, w., case, event, contingen- 
cy ; hacer — de, 122, 24, to pay 
attention to, to consider, to re- 
gard; en su — , 50, 14, in your 
case, in your place, in your 
shoes ; — de, 56, 21, in case of. 

castaSa,/, chestnut. 

castañetear, v. a., to chatter {the 
ieeth), 81, 10. 

castigo, tn.y punishment, 27, 5. 

Castilla, / npr.y Castile; //. 
— s, 25, 80, the Castiles, Oíd 
and New Castile. 

Castillo PiSón, m., npr.. Cas- 
tillo Piñón, Cháteau Pignon; 
see note to 15, 16. 

casto, ta, adj,y chaste. 

casual, adj.y casual, chance, 8, 24. 

casualmente, adv,^ casually, by 
chance, 48, 7. 

catedral,/, cathedral. 

categoría,/, category, class. 

catorce, adj. num.y fourteen. 

causa,/, cause; cause, case, 24, 
20; Conocimiento de — , ac- 
quaintance with, familiarity 
with the case, the circum- 
stances. 

causar, v, a., to cause, to occa- 
sion. 

cavilar, v, »., to cavil; 67, ao, to 
ruminate, to meditate. 

caz, m., mili-race. 

caza, /, hunt, chase; game, 
quarry. 



VOCABULARY 



173 



cazar, v.a.j to hunt, to pursue; 

V. n.f to hunt. 
ceder, v. a., to cede, to yield ; — 

el paso, 54, 22, 100, 11, to make 

way, to give way. 
celeridad,/, speed, celerity, ra- 

pidity, quickness. 
celos, »*//., jealousy ; tener — , 

to be jealous. 
celoso, sa, ad/.^ jealous. 
cena,/., supper. 
cenar, v. a., to eat for supper, to 

sup on, 8, 15, 54, 8; v. m., to 

sup. 
censo, m., poll-tax, assessment, 

12,5. 
censura,/, censure, 125, 19. 
centeno, m., rye, 62, 16. 
ceñirse, v. refl,^ to gird on, to put 

on, to assume. 
CGtdLff.i wax. 
cerca,/, enclosure, 82, 1. 
cerca, adv., near. 
cerca de, prep.^ near. 
cercanía, /, neighborhood; las 

— s, 21, 1, the surrounding 

country, "round about." 
ceremonioso, sa, adj.y ceremoni- 

ous, formal, 102, 3. 
cereza,/, cherry. 
cerezo, w., cherry-tree, 10, 5. 
cerrar, v. a., to shut, to cióse ; to 

lock, to lock up ; v. n. {pfnight\ 

45, 12, etc,y to cióse in^ to fall. 
cerrojo, m., bolt, 59, 14. 



cesta,/, basket. 

cetro, m., sceptre. 

ciego, m.y blind man. 

cielo, m., sky, heaven. 

cien, ciento, adj.y num., hundred, 

one hundred, an hundred. 
ciertamente, adv.y certainly, sure- 

ly- 

cierto, ta, adj.^ certain, sure, 
trustworthy; por — , 46, 12, 
65, 10, etcy certainly, surely; 
por — que, 88, 4, surely ; has- 
ta — puntOy to a certain ex- 
tent, in a measure, 15, 29 ; es 
— , 88, 1, 107, 9, it is true, it is 
so. 

cigarro, m., cigarette. 

cimbrarse, v, refl.^ to bend, 14, 21. 

cincel, /n., chisel. 

cinco, adj, num,y fíve; las — , 
44, 13, five o*clock. 

cincuenta, adj, num,, fífty. 

cínico, ca, adj., cynical; shame- 
less. 

cinismo, m., cynicism, 128, 16. 

cintura, /, waist ; girdle, belt ; 
waistband. 

circunloquio, m., circumlocution, 
periphrasis. 

circunspección, /, circumspec- 
tion, 125, 26. 

circunstancia, /, circumstance, 
fact. 

circunstante, m., bystander. 

ciudad,/, city. 



174 



VOCABULARY 



ciudadano, m., citizen. 

civil, adj,^ civil; cf. fruto, and 

note to 6, 20. 
clamante, adj., crying ; tit. XIX, 

cf. vocea, 
claramente, adv,y clearly, 89, 28. 
claro, m., hole, aperture, opening, 

open space, 89, 16. 
claro, ra, adj.^ clear, bright ; clear, 

evident ; es — , 46, 22, of course ; 

sacar en — , 2, lO, to bring out 

clearly, to reveal, to disclose. 
clase,/., class; Ht XXX, high- 

class, distinction. 
clásico, ca, adj.^ classic. 
claustro, m., cloister, 102, 13. 
clavado, da, adj.^ fíxed, staríng. 
clavar, v. a,^ to nail, to fíx ; to 

fasten ; to drive in, to stick in, 

to thrust in, 86, 18. 
clavo, m.t nail. 
Cleopatra,/ «/r., Cleopatra. 
clérigo, »f., priest,//. — s, clergy. 
cobertizo, m., shed; shed roof, 

shelter, 66, 6. 
cobre, m., copper, brass, 80, 2. 
cocina,/, kitchen. 
cocinera,/, cook. 
coche, ^., carriage, coach. 
codiciar, v, a., to long for, to 

covet, to desire exceedingly. 
codo, tn,y elbow. 
cofrade, m,, fellow-member, col- 

league, 47, 25. 
coger, V, a., to gather ; to seize. 



to overtake, to catch, 35, 9, to 
pick up, to take hold of, 122, 16; 
to hold, 66, 10 ; to catch, pick 
up (of a disease)t 88, 18. 

cojo, ja, adj.^ lame, limping ; pa- 
recía — de los dos pies, 26, 26, 
seemed to limp with both feet. 

colarse, v. refl.^ to slip in, to glide 
in, 78, 6. 

colchón, m., mattress, 124, 12. 

cólera,/, anger; gall ; choler, 
choleríc disposition. 

colgar, V. a., to hang ; //. col- 
gado, da, hanging; v, »., to 
hang. 

colina,/, hill. 

colmena,/, hive, bee-hive. 

colocar, v, a., to place, to arrange. 

color, XV.,, color, complexión. 

colorado, da, adj'., red, deep red. 

colosal, adj\ colossal. 

comadre, /, gossip, tattling oíd 
woman, 46, 18. 

combinación, /, combination; 
contrivance; scheme; 20, 16, 
Crossing. 

comedia,/, comedy. 

comenzar, v. a. and n.^ to begin. 

comer, v, a., to eat; sp,, to eat 
for dinner, 8, 7 ; v. «., to diñe ; 
to eat ; — se, v, refl,y to eat up, 
to consume ; —se la partida, 
60, 19, to sce what's up. 

cómico, ca, adj.y comic. 

comienzo, m,^ beginning; dar 



VOCABULARY 



I7S 



— , to make a beginning, to be- 
gin. 
comisura, /, junction, joint, 
seam ; — de los labios, 14, 25, 
comer of the mouth. 
comitiva,/, escort. 
como, adv.^ as, so, just as ; about ; 
as it were ; — que, since, inas- 
much. 

como, conj,y if ; even if ; like ; as 
if; since, because; that; — 
que, since, although ; — si, as if . 

¿ cómo ? adv, int.t how, why, how 
is it, how does it come ? 

comodidad,/., convenience, com- 
fort. 

compadecerse, v, refl.y to agree, 
to be consonant, to be com- 
patible; to take pity on (de), 
119, 80. 

compaSa,/, company, assembly, 
96,6. 

compañero, m,, companion, com- 
rade, f ellow. 

compañía,/, company. 

comparable, adj,^ comparable. 

comparación,/, comparíson. 

comparar, v, a., to compare. 

comparecer, v, »., to appear (in 
court, or before authority). 

compás, m.y compass ; enclosure, 
court -yard. 

compasión, /, compassion, pity. 

compendiar, v, a., to resume, to 
epitomize, 76, 5. 



complacerse, v, refl. (de or en) to 

take pleasure in, to be pleased 

with. 
complacido, da, adj.^ pleased, 

contented, 115, 2S. 
completamente, adv,^ entirely, 

altogether, completely, quite, 
completar, v. a., to complete. 
complicidad,/, complicity. 
complot, m., plot, complot, 69, 17. 
componer, v, «., to mend, to put 

in order ; 87, 30 ; to arrange, to / 

fíx up, 49, 27. 
comprender, v, a., to understand. 
comprometer, v, a., to compro- 

mise. 
comunicar, v. a,, to communicate. 
con, prep. with ; together with ; 

by; through, by means of; 

through ; f rom ; against ; no va 

— usted, 67, 2, does not touch 
you, concern you; seealso tal; 

— tal que, on condition that. 
con, conj.y though, although ; pro- 

vided, provided only. 
concebir, v, a., to conceive, to 

understand, to comprehend; 

to devise ; to imagine ; to sus- 

pect. 
conceder, v. a., to grant. 
concluir, v. a., to conclude, to 

end; todo parecía concluido, 

all, everything seemed over, at 

an end. 
conclusión,/, conclusión. 



176 



VOCABULARY 



concurrencia, /, 48, 20, the as- 

sembly, the bystanders, those 

present, the persons present. 
concurrir, v. m., to assemble. 
concurso, m.» concourse, assem- 

bly, 44, 19. 
condenación, /., condemnation ; 

I — I, 68, 13, damnation ! 
condición, /, character, disposi- 

tion, 106, 9. 
conducir, v. a, andn.^ to lead, to 

conduct. 
conducta,/., conduct. 
confesar, v, a., to confess ; ir á 

— , 124, 6, to go to confessioD. 
confesor, m., confessor. 
confianza, /., confídence, trust- 

fulness, 19, 9. 
confirmar, v. a., to confírm. 
confite, m.f comfít, sugarplum, 

80,23. 
conforme, aiív.j as, in proportion, 

in agreement, 82, 5. 
confundir, v. a. to confuse, to 

mistake, 24, 13. 
congraciarse, v. refl., to ingratiate 

oneself, to win favor. [16, 8. 
congrua, /., income ; see note to 
conjurar, v. a., to conjure, to en- 

treat, 106, 20. 
conocer, v, a., to know; to be 

acquainted with; to become 

acquainted with ; to recognize, 

to f eel ; to learn ; to recognize, 

to distinguish. 



conocimiento, m., knowledge, 
acquaintance ; cf. causa. 

conque, conj'.t so, wherewith, 
wherefore, so that. 

conquistador, m., conqueror. 

consabido, da, adj'., aforesaid, 
aforementioned ; well-known. 

consagrarse, v, rejl,, to devote 
oneself, consécrate oneself, 19, 
4. 

consecuencia, /, result, conse- 
quence, sequel. 

conseguir, v, a., to succeed in, to 
accomplish ; v. n., to succeed, 
to attain. 

consejo, m., counsel, advice. 

consentir, v. a,i to consent to, to 
permit, to allow; v. n., to con- 
sent, to agree. 

conseryar, v. « ., to preserve ; — se, 
V. refi.t to keep, to stay, to con- 
tinué to be ; ¿se conserva tan 
guapa? is she as pretty as 
ever .> 62, W. 

considerar, v. a., to consider, to 
weigh, to think over ; 18, 15, to 
look upon, to consider. 

consiguiente, ad/., consequent, 
resultant; de — , por — , ac- 
cordingly, consequently, so. 

consistencia, /. consistency ; con- 
sistence. 

consistir, v. » ., to consist ; — en, 
22, 24, to arise f rom, to result 
from, to have reason in. 



VOCABULARY 



177 



consistoríalmente, adv,, consis- 

torially {as of a consistory^ or 

ecclesiastical c<mrt\ 8, 6. 
conspirar, v, m., to conspire. 
constante, adj..t continua!, con- 

stant, everlasting, 17, 18. 
constar, v, «., to be known, to be 

certain, to be evident. 
constitucional, adj,^ constitu- 

tionaL 
constitucional, m., supporter of 

the constitution, memberof the 

constitutional party, 26, 8. 
construir, v, a., to constmct. 
consumado, da, adj., consum- 

mate. 
contacto, m.^ contact. 
contagioso, sa, ¿idj., contagious, 

infectious. 
contar, v. a., to count; to tell, to 

relate ; v, n., to count, to keep 

accounts, to reckon ; — con, to 

count on. 
contemplar, v. a., to look at, to 

contémplate, 
contener, v. «., to contain, to re- 

strain. 
contentarse, v. refl.^ to content, 

oneself, to be content, 42, 7, 

96,26. 
contento, ta, adj., content, 

pleased, satisñed. 
contertulio, x^., fellow-guest, 126, 

12. 
contestación,/., answer. 



contestar, v. n.^ to answer. 
contigo, prep. and pron.^ with 

you, with thee. 
contiguo, gua, a¿^'., contiguous ; 

adjoining; near at hand, near 

by. 
continente, m., mien, bearing. 
continuar, v. a., to continué, to 

proceed; v. «., to continué, to 

keep on. 
contorno, m., vicinity, surround- 

ing country, 10, 13. 
contra, prep,^ against ; opposite, 

by. 
contradecir, v. a., to contradict. 
contraer, v, a.j to contract. 
contrario, ria, ad/.^ contrary ; al 

— , 19, 8, on the contrary; al 

— , 86, U, no indeed, far from 

it ; de lo — , 86, 22, in the op- 
posite case, otherwise; — , 116, 

2, opposite. 
contrastar, v. a., to contrast, 102, 

8. 
contribución,/., tax. 
contribuir, v. a.j to contribute, 
convenir, v, «., to be fitting, to 

beproper; to suit; to please; 

to agree. 
convento, tn.y convent; monas- 

tery. 
conversación, /., conversation 

intercourse. 
convertir, v.a.^ to convert, change; 

— se, V, refl,y to change, to be 



178 



VOCABULARY 



changed ; (en) to be tumed in- 
to, be converted into ; to be 
converted. 

convicto, ta, adj,^ convicted, 84, 
23. 

convocar, v, a,y to convoke, to 
cali together. 

convulsión,/., convulsión. 

convulso, sa, adj.^ convulsed. 

conyugal, adj,y conjugal, domes- 
tic. 

cónyuges, mpLy married people, 
man and wife, couple, tit, VI, 
122,26. 

copa, /., glass, goblet, drinking 
glass, tumbler; sombrero de 
— , 127, 10, tall hat, top hat. 

copla,/., verse, couplet, 69, 6. 

coquetería,/., coquetry. 

corazón, m., heart. 

corbata,/, cravat, neckcloth, 26, 
19. 

corcel, m., steed, charger. 

cordonazo de San Francisco, m., 
44, 6, autumn equinox, autumn 
equinoctial storm ; see note» 

coro, m., choir, 24, 6. 

corona,/, crown. 

coronel, #»., colon el. 

coronilla,/, crown (ofthe head)^ 
16,7. 

corral, m., yard, enclosure. 

corralón, w., large yard. 

corregidor, m., mayor ; see note to 
6,». 



corregidora, /., mayor's wife, 

mayoress, 87, 16, etc, 
corregimiento, m.^ mayor's house, 

official residence, 116, 18. 
correo, /«., post, post-office. 
correr, v. a., to overrun ; to drive, 

to urge ; to draw {a bolt) ; v. «., 

to run ; to basten ; to circuíate, 

to be in circulation. 
correspondiente, adj.^ corres- 

ponding; fítting, proper, suit- 

able ; appurtenant, proportion- 

ate ; proper, due ; destined, ap- 

pointed. 
corriente, /., current, 116, 20. 
corriente, m., 2, 26, poner uno al 

— de una cosa, to inform one 

oí something, acquaint one 

with something. 
I corriente I interj., all right 1 un- 

derstood 1 67, 6. 
corroboración, /, corroboration, 

72,3. 
corso, sa, adj,^ Corsican. 
cortar, v. a., to cut, to cut off. 
corte,/, court. 
cortesano, na, adj\j courteous, 

polite. 
cortesía,/, courtesy, 122, 28. 
cortésmente, adv,^ courteously, 

politely. 
corteza,/, rind, bark, 18, 6. 
cortijada,/, hamlet, grange. 
cortijo, #»., farmhouse; 86, 10^ 

farm. 



VOCABÜLARY 



179 



cortísimo, ma, adj.^ veiy short. 

corto, ta, adj,^ short. 

cosa, /, thing, matter, event. 

coser, V. a., to sew. 

cosquillas, ^/., tickling; hacor 
— , to tickle. 

costa, /, coast ; c/, mord ; cost, 
price, expense. 

costal, m.f sack. 

costar, V, »., to cost. 

costumbre,/., custom, habit; de 
— , 82, 2, usual. 

cotidiano, na, adj., daily. 

coyuntura,/, occasion, conj une- 
ture, juncture, 118, 28. 

crear, v. ¿z., to créate, to establish. 

creces, j5>/., growth, increase; see 
note to 60, 30. 

credencial, m.^ credential (proof ), 
78, 19. 

crédito, /w., credit. 

creencia, /., belief . 

creer, v. a,, to believe ; to think ; 
I ya lo creo I I should think so, 
rather, of course ; crea, 48, 6, 
believe, take the word of ; ^res, 
fart.f creyendo, 82, 28, thinking 
to, planning to. 

criadero, w., nursery. 

criado, m., servant, manservant ; 
— de campaSa, 17, 10, attend- 
ant in the fíeld. 

criador, #»., creator, maker. 

criar, v, ¿z., to créate ; to nurse, 
to bring up. 



criatura,/, creature, being ; little 
chUd, 14, 6. 

criminal, adj., criminal. 

cristiano, na, adj., chrístian. 

Cristo, m., Christ ; por los clavos 
de — , 106, 18, for Christ's sake. 

critica,/, criticism. 

cruel, ad/.f cruel. 

cruz, /, cross; 86, 19, withers; 
hacerse cruces, 4, 20, to cross 
oneself. 

cruzar, v, a.^ to exchange, 104, 
23; — se, V, refl,^ to meet, to 
meet and pass, 114, U. 

cuadra,/, stable. 

cuadro, m.^ picture ; — de géne- 
ro, 28, 11, genre picture. 

cual, adj,^ which; he who, she 
who; several; lo — , 24, 2, 
which ; á — más, 46, 7, each 
more than the other. 

cualquier, pron, and adj.y who- 
ever, whichever, whatever ¡ 
each, every; some or other; 
de — modo, somehow or other. 

cualquiera,/r¿7»., somebody, any- 
body ; every one. 

cuando, adv,j when ; if ; — me- 
nos, at least. 

¿ cuándo? adv, int,y when. 

cuanto, ta, adj,, so many, so much, 
so great ; as many as, all ; all 
that. 

cuanto, adv.f as much as ; as long 
as ; en — á, as to, regarding ; 



1 8o 



VOCABULARY 



en — , as soon as ; as, because. 

¿ cuánto ? adv» inty how much. 

cuarenta, adj, num., forty. 

cuartel, w., barracks ; — gene- 
ral, 62, 10, headquarters. 

cuartilla, /, sheet (pf paper) 60, 
16. 

cuartillo, m.y pint, 61, 20; qnar- 
ter (short quarter hour), 64, 11. 

cuarto, m., quarter; las dos y — , 
84, 81, quarter past two. 

cuarto, ta, adj,^ fourth. 

cuatro, adj, num,^ four; en — 
palabras, 96, 13, bríefly, in a 
word. 

cubierto, ta, adj\^ covered. 

cubrir, v, «., to cover. 

cuchichear, v, n,, to whisper. 

cuello, m.f neck. 

cuenta,/., count, account, reckon- 
ing; affair, business, 88, 20, 
108, 11 ; de — , 91, 7, oí account, 
of importance; darse — , 19, 
11, to explain, to give account; 
to take account ; to understand ; 
perdir — s, 22, 5, to ask for a 
reckoning; ¡yamosá — si 112, 
6, let US get to business. 

cuento, m.j story; venir á — , 6, 
80, to be in place. 

cuerda,/, cord. 

cuero, m., skin ; en — s, naked, 
strípped to the skin, 84, 1. 

cuerpo, m,t body. 

cuervo, fn,t crow. 



cuestión,/, question, dispute, 
cuidado, w ., care, anxiety ; i — ! 

80, 12, take care ! no hay — , 

60, 24, no danger. 
cuidadosamente, adv.^ carefully. 
cuidar, v, a., to care for. 
culebra,/, snake. 
culpa,/, blame, fault, guilt. 
cultivar, V. a., to cultivate, to till. 
cumplido, da, ad/.^ complete, per- 

fect. 
cumplir, V. a,, to complete, to 

fulfill. 
cúspide,/, peak, summit, 126, 2. 
cuyo, ya, adj., whose. 
Czarina,/, Czarina, 122, 28. 

CH 

chabacanería, /, coarseness, 
rudeness; uncleanness. 

chanza,/, joke,jest; no estoy pa- 
ra — s, 108, 7, 1 am in no mood 
for jesting, in no joking humor. 

chasco, m.^ practical joke ; fízzle ; 
disappointment ; se han lle- 
vado un solemne — , 88, 13, you 
have got joUy well lef t ; 1, 12, 
juegos de — , tricks, farce. 

chico, ca, adj'., small, little ; chica, 
78, 25, {in direct address) my 
child, little one. 

chillido, #»., whistle, screech. 

chimenea,/, fíreplace. 

China,/ npr.y China. 

chiquilla,/, little girl ; — de cua- 



VOCABULARY 



i8i 



tro a3o8, four-year oíd child, 

14.6. 
chispear, v, »., to sparkle. 
chistoso, sa, adj.^ droU, witty. 
chocolate, m., chocolate. 
chorrear, v, «., to drip, 77, 28. 
choza,/, hut. 
chupa, /, jacket, 36, 20; 40, 8, 

{infaistcoat wiik sleeves), 
chupetín, /»., jacket, waistcoat 

{usually without sleeves). 
chusco, m.i joker, tom-fool, 99, 5. 



dama,/, lady. 

daño, m., damage, harm, injury; 
hacerse — , 89, 5, to hart one- 
self ; hacer — , 72, 28, to hurt. 

dar, V. a.j to give ; to provide ; to 
furnish, 10, 22; to teD, 112, 10 ; 

— otro paso, 71, 18, to take an- 
other step ; — paso atrás, to 
take a step backwards, 80, 18 ; 

— con, 98, 6, to meet with ; — 
con el codo, 47, 9, to imdge; — 
á, 52, 17, 52, 21, 65, 3, — sobre, 
77, 18, to lead to, to open on, 
(</ a door or window) ; — la 
hora, to cali the hour, 20, 23 ; 

— las cinco, 44, 13, to stríke 
five; V. refl.y — se, 94, 16, to 
yield, to surrender ; — se cuen- 
ta, 19, 11, 75, 1, to be conscious, 
to take account, to appreciate. 

de,/n^., of, for, from, concern - 



ing, as, by, in, on, with, as to. 

De profnndis {Latín), De pro- 
fundís ; see note to 64, 25. 

Deán, m.y deán {ecclesiasticat), 

debajo, adv.y below. 

debajo tt^prep,, under, beneath. 

deber, v, 0., to owe ; v, n., to be 
obliged ; debe ir, 12, 7, he should 
go, he must go ; debemos ad< 
vertir, 85, 8, we should notice, 
we must notice ; — de, exprés- 
sion of probability : must be, 

* 64, 9, etc. ; debió de asustarse, 
67, 21, he must have been f right- 
ened; no ha debido de, 84, 26, 
cannot have, etc. 

debido,da,a^'.,due,proper,106,ll. 

débil, adj.y weak ; sexo — , 65, 8, 
weaker sex. 

decano, m ., deán ; oldest member, 
sénior member. 

decente, ad/.^ decent, proper. 

decir, v. a., to say, to tell, to speak ; 
to mention, to describe, 26, U ; 
es — , 122, 15, that is, that is to 
say ; que digamos, 119, 3, so to 
speak, to speak of , as it were ; 
diz que, 48, 13, they say, the 
story runs; he dejado dicho, 
79, 26, I left word; lo dicho, 
81, 4, yon heard what I said, 
yon hear me; dijérase, 18,6, 
it might be said. 

declaración, /, declaration, ex- 
planation, 85, Zi, 61, 1. 



l82 



VOCABULARY 



declarar, v. a., to declare ; 79, 6, 
79, 7f to admit ; to explain ; — se, 
V. refl,, —se contigo, 82, 27, to 
open his heart to yon. 

decoro, m., decorum, decency. 

decoroso, sa, tf¿^'., decorous, de- 
cent. 

decreto, m.^ decree. 

dedo, #»., fingen 

deducir, V, a., to deduct, to con- 
clude. 

defender, v. a,, to defend. 

defensa,/, defence. 

dejar, v. a., to allow, to permit ; 
to leave; — de, to cease, to 
stop ; déjeme de reyes, 87, 23, 
don't talk to me about kings, 
let me alone with your kings ; 
— , 94, 23, to let go of, to re- 
léase ; V. refl,, — se de, to get 
rid of, to stop, to leave ; déjate 
de bachillerías, 00, 4, stop your 
chattering, stop your nonsense ; 
dejémonos de latines, 48, 16, let 
US put aside this latín stuff . 

del, prep, and art^ see various 
meanings under de. 

delantal, m., apron. 

delante, adv,^ before, in front, 
first ; por — , ahead. 

delante de, prep,^ before, in front 
of, opposite, in the presence of . 

delegado, m., delégate, represent- 
ative. [ately. 

deliberadamente, adv,, deliber- 



delicadeza,/, delicacy. 
delicado, da, adj., delicate. 
demanda,/, claim, question. 
demás, adj,^ other, remaining; 

lo — , the rest; los — , the 

others, the rest. 
demás, adv.^ besides ; por lo — , 

besides ; — de, except. 
demasiado, da, adj.y too great, 

too niuch. 
demasiado, adv.y too, too much ; 

80, 17, too well. 
democrático, ca,a^'.,deniocratic. 
demonio, m.y demon, devil, fiend. 
demontre, /»., devil, deuce. 
demostrar, v. a.^ to prove, to de- 
mónstrate, to show, 
demudar, v. a., to change, to alter, 

100,15. 
denominarse, v. refl., to be called, 

to be denominated. 
dentadura,/, teeth, set of teeth, 

18,5. 
dentro, adv,^ within; por — , 

within. 
dentro de, prep.^ within, inside. 
denuesto, m.^ abuse, affront, 119, 

13. 
depender, v. »., to depend ; — de, 

to depend upon. 
depositaría,/, depository, guard- 
ián, keeper, 108, 14. 
depósito, m., deposit. 
derecha,/, right, the right sidc^ 

the right hand. 



VOCABULARY 



183 



derecho, m., ríght. 

derecho, cha, adj.^ straig^t ; right, 

ant izquierdo, left. 
derretirse, v. refl,^ to melt, to be- 
come fluid» 110, 86; /<7r 40, 24, 

see gacha, 
derribar, v. a. y to tear down ; 95, 

e, to throw down, to overturn ; 

los derribados, 96, 2S, the over- 

thrown. 
desabrido, da, adj.^ tasteless, in 

bad taste, 9, 7. 
desafío, m., challenge, sp, chal- 
lenge to a duel ; duel. 
desaforadamente, adv.^ wildly, 

violently, 118, 2. 
desalmado, m., dead man, 67, 27, 

(//. e^ desalmar, to kill). 
desaparecer, v, »., to disappear. 
desatar, v, a,, to untie, 65, 10. 
desavenido, da, adj., disagreeing, 

cliscordant, 122, 28. 
descambiar, v. a., to exchange. 
descansadamente, adv,, in peace, 

at one's ease, 64, 28, 90, 12. 
descansar, v. a.y to rest ; — armas, 

67, 29, to ground arms ; — , v, n., 

to rest, to rest one*s self. 
descanso, m., rest, repose; punto 

de — , 10, 10, see punto, 
descargado, da, adj., not loaded, 

80,24. 
descargar, v. a., to discharge, to 

un load. [8; see note. 

descendiente, m., descendant, 6, 



descolgar, v. a., to take down; 

— se, V, rejl,i to swing down, to 

slide down. 
descollar, v. m., to rise above, to 

predomínate, 100, 17. 
descomponerse, v. rejl,, to lose 

composure, 88, 16. 
descomunal, adj.j extraordinary, 

6, 4 ; oí unusnal size, huge, 27, 12. 
desconocer, v, « ., to not know, to 

fail to know, 1, 2. 
describir, v. a., to describe, 
descuartizar, v. a., to cut in quar- 

ters ; 44, 19, to cut up. 
descubierto, ta, adj\, uncovered. 
descubrir, v, a., to discover, to 

disclose, to revea! ; to uncover ¡ 

to find; — se, v. refl,^ to be dis- 

closed, to come into sight ; to 

uncover {the head\ remove hat, 

see note to 28, 2. 
descuidado, da, adj.y free oí care, 

tranquil, 122, 8. 
descuidar, v, »., to be easy, to be 

without fear; descuida, 30, 14, 

don*t be afraid. 
descuido, m., carelessness, inat- 

tention,negligence; momentof 

inattentiveness, 41, 6. 
desde, prep.^ f rom, since ; — que, 

as soon as ; — luego, 104, 1, 

immediately, from that mo» 

ment ; — arriba, 76, 20, from 

above ; — en medio, 55,2, from 

the middle. 



i84 



VOCABULARY 



Desdémona,/ npr.^ Desdemona. 
deadefioflamente, adv,^ scom- 

f ully, disdainfully. 
desear, v. a,t to wish, to desire. 
desechar, v. a.^ to throw back, 

66,12. 
desembozar, v, a., to unwrap, to 

unveil ; see note to 26, 19. 
desencajado, da, adj\, 70, 19, {of 

the eyes) staring, starting. 
desenfado, m., unconstraint, 15, 

27. 
desengaño, m., undeceiving, dis- 

appointment, 84, 16, 78, 4. 
desenojar, v, a., to appease. 
deseoso, sa, ad/.f desirous, anx- 

ious. 
desesperación,/., despair. 
desfallecido, da, adj., weak, fee- 

ble. 
desgracia, /., accident, misfor- 

tune. 
desgraciado,, da, adj.y unhappy, 

wretched, ill-starred. 
deshecho, cha, adf. (deshacer) 

violent, uncontrolled, 6, 9; ca- 
lavera — , 111, 11, utter rake, 

out and out rake. 
deshollinador, m., 26, 14, chim- 

ney-scraper. 
deshonra,/., dishonor. 
deshonrado, da, adj., dishonored, 

96, 18, perhaps better taken as 

pp. of 
deshonrar, v, a,, to dishonor. 



desierto, m., desert, wildemess. 
desigualdad, /., inequality. 
disinterés, m., disinterestedness, 

126,26. 
desinteresado, da, oiff. disinter- 

ested, unselñsh. 
deslindar, v, a., to olear up, to 

disentangle, to mark the 

bounds of, to delimit, 6, 27. 
deslizarse, v. refl.y to slip, to slip 

down, 74, 10. 
deslumbrar, v. a,, to dazzle. 
desmantelado, da, adf.^ disman- 

tled, 24, 24. 
desnaturalizarse, v. re/l., to 

changa natura, to changa char- 

actar, 4, la 
desnudar, v. a., to undress. 
desnudo, da, ad/.^ naked, bare. 
desobedecer, v, »., to disobey. 
desobediencia, /, disobedience. 
despacio, adv.j slowly. 
despachar, v. a., to dispatch, to 

attend to, 62, 4, 68, 1; — se, v. 

refl.y to bastan, to maka baste, 

to hurry; se están despachan- 
do, 86, 11, are flying about, are 

hurrying about. 
despedida,/, leava-taking, fare- 

well. 
despedir, v. «., to dismiss, 182, 14. 
despegar, v. <z., to part, to open, 

(</M^/i>j), 62, 20. 
desperezarse, v. refl.^ to stretch, 

87, 11, 90, 18. 



VOCABULARY 



iH 



despertaTi v, a ., to awaken ; — se, 

V. rejl.y to awake, to wake up, 

to wake, 87, 9. 
despotismo, #»., despotism, des- 

potic character, 26, 1. 
despreciable, adj.^ contemptible, 

despicable, 104, 20. 
despreciar, v. a., to despise, 
después, adv., after, afterwards, 

tbereafter, later. 
después de, prep., after. 
después que, conj'.f after. 
destacarse, v. rejl.y to stand out, 

to detach itself, 86, 5, 60, 8. 
destierro, tn.^ exile, banishment, 

122, 29. 
destinar, v, a., to destine, to de- 
vote,, pp, as adj.t 27, 4, des- 

tined, appointed. 
destino, tn.^ fate; destination; 

68, 9, office, position. [office. 
destituir, v. a.y to remove from 
desusado, da, adj'.j unaccus- 

tomed, unusual, 66, 5. 
desvanecer, v, a., to dispel, to 

dissolve, 119, dO. 
desventura,/., misfortune, 89, 18. 
desvergonzado, da, adj\j shame- 

less, impudent, indecent, 88, 9. 
detener, v. a.y to detain, to stop, 

to hold back; — se, v. refl.y to 

stop, to stay, to stand still. 
detrás de, prep,y behind ; after. 
devoción,/, devotion; //., —es, 

46, 6, devotions, prayers. 



devolver, v. a., to return, to re- 

pay, to give back. 
día, m., day; — de precepto, 8, 5, 

holy day of obligation ; de — , 

84, 14, by day. 
diablesa,/, she-devil, 18, 20. 
diablo, m.j devil; ¡qué — si 48, 20, 

deuce take, what the devil. 
diabólico, ca, ad/., diabolic, dev- 

ilish. 
diálogo, m.y dialogue. 
Diana,/ npr., Diana, 
diario, ria, ad/.j daily. 
dibujar, v.a.y to sketch, to out- 

line, 60, 9. 
Diciembre, m., December. 
dictado, m», title, appellation, 

1,9. 
dicha, /, happiness, good for- 
tune, 
dicho, m.y speech, saying. 
dicho, cha, adj., said, aforesaid. 
dichosísimo, ma, ad/.y most 

happy. 
dichoso, sa, adj.y happy; blessed. 
diente, m., tooth; (sp, front 

tooth ; c/. muelas, 26, 29); entre 

— s, 69, 6, between his teeth. 
diestro, m.^ halter, 96, 1. 
diez, adj., num., ten. 
diezmo, m., tithe. 
diferencia,/, difference. 
diferenciarse, v. refl.y to be dif- 

ferent, 16, 26. 
diferente, adj.y different. 



i86 



VOCABULARY 



diferir, v, n., to diífer. 

difunto, m.^ dead man. 

difunto, ta, adj., dead, defunct ; 
el — Obispo, 17, 6, the late 
bishop.' 

dignarse, v, refl,^ to deign, 122, 28. 

dignidad,/., dignity, 118, 12. 

digno, na, adj,, worthy. 

diminuto, ta, adj,^ tiny, 16, 9 ; 
defective, imperfect, degener- 
ate, 27, 1. 

dinastía,/., dynasty. 

dineral, m., large sum of money. 

diócesis, /., diocese. 

Dios, m.ypL — es, God. 

diplomacia, /., diplomacy, 68, 5. 

dirección, /, direction ; destina- 
tion ; address ; con — á, 66, 16, 
86, 29, 124, 2, etCy towards, in 
the direction of. 

dirigir, v. a.^ to direct, to super- 
vise ; to direct, to address, to 
send ; to aim ; dirigió una mi- 
rada, 41, 1, 66, 6, shot a glance ; 
— se, V. rejl.y to take one's way, 
to go ; 24, 5, etc, ; to address, 
to tum to, to speak to, 89, 24, 
108, 2S, 117, 3, eU. 

disciplina,/., scourge, 27, 2. 

discreto, ta, adj.., discreet, wise ; 
witty, bright, 10, 19, 4, 5. 

discurrir, v. m., to talk together, 
to speak together, 80, 1 ; to dis- 
course, to hold forth ; to move 
about, to move to and f ro, 46, 16. 



discurso, m., discourse; 81, 7, 

speech; 76, 2, idea, thought 
disfraz, m,y disguise, 
disfrazar, v. a., to disguise, to 

mask. 
disimuladamente, adv,, slyly, 

44,2. 
disimulado, da, adj.y disguised, 

concealed; muy disimulada, 

66, 9, well concealed, very well 

concealed. 
disimular, v, a., to conceal, to 

hide; to dissemble. 
disimulo, m., dissimulation, 

feigned innocence, 40, 1, 68, 4. 
disparar, z/. , to fíre, to shoot ; 

//.disparado, 67,21, likeashot 
dispuesto, ta, adj., ready ; deter- 

mined, capable. • 
distancia,/., distance. 
distar, v. n., to be distant. 
distinguir, v. a,, to distinguish ; 

to select; to recognize, make 

out, to distinguish, 71, U, 118, 

17, etc. 
distraer, v, a., to distract. 
diversión,/, diversión, play, 19, 

10. 
diverso, sa, adj.^ divers, diverse, 

10,8. 
divertido, da, adj.^ diverting, 

amusing, 8, 2. 
divertirse, v. rejl.^ to enjoy one- 

self, to amuse oneself, to have 

a good time ; — conmigo, 98, 



VOCABULARY 



187 



28, to trifle with me, to have 
f un with me, at my expense, to 
make sport of me. 

divinamente, adv.^ divinely. 

diyino, na, adj.^ divine. 

divisar, v. «., to descry, to per- 
ceive ; to recognize ; 60, 4, 104, 
28. 

do nt des, loHn^ tit. III, I give, 
that thou give; give and take. 

doblar, v. a., to fold. 

doblemente^ adv,^ doubly. 

doce, adj, num.y twelve ; las — , 
twelve o*clock ; las — y me- 
dia, half past twelve. 

docena,/., dozen. [ — , 2, 24. 

doctrina,/, doctrine ; libro de la 

doloroso, sa, adj.^ painful. 

domadora,/, tamer. 

domesticar, v. a., to tame. 

doméstico, m.^ domestic, servant. 

dominación,/, domination, rule. 

dominar, v, a,, to rule, to control, 
to restrain, to dominate ; — se, 
V. reji.f 109, 21, etc., to control 
oneself, keep one's temper. 

domingo, m,f Sunday. 

don, m.y gift; — de gentes, 10, 
19, gift of making friends, of 
making oneself liked, gift of 
getting ón with people. 

Don, m,, Mr., Don, Sir; usedonly 
with the given ñame. 

donaire, tn.^ grace; elegance; 
joke, witticism, 17, 17. 



Don Carlos IV, npr. m., Charles 

the Fourth. 
donde, adv., where; por — , 

through which. 
¿ dónde ? adv. int, where. 
dondequiera, adv.^ wherever; por 

— , 28, 1, wherever. 
donosamente, tidv., agreeably, 

prettily, 14, 24. 
DoSa, /, Doña; Miss, Madam; 

used only with the given ñame, 
dorar, v. a., to gild. 
dormido, da, adj,, asieep. 
dormir, v. n., to sleep ; to sleep 

off, </ mona ; —se, v. reji., to 

go to sleep. 
dormitar, v, n., to doze, 90, 11. 
dormitorio, m., sleeping room, 

bedchamber, bedroom. 
dos, adj, num.^ two ; los — , las 

— , both ; las — , two o'clock, 

8, 7, 24, 1. 
dosel, m., canopy. 
drama, m., drama, 9, 5. 
dramático, ca, a^'., dramatic. 
duda,/, doubt 
dudar, v, »., to doubt. 
dudoso, sa, adj.^ doubtful. 
duende, 1»., goblin, hobgoblin, 

sprite. 
dneSo, m.» master; possessor. 
dulce, m., sweetmeat, sweet dish. 
dulce, adj.y sweet, agreeable. 
dulzura,/, sweetness. [19. 

D. Agustín Duran, see note to 8, 



i88 



VOCABULARY 



durante, prep.^ during, through- 
out. [24, harshly. 

dureza,/, harshness ; con — , 54, 
duro, ra, adj,^ hard ; harsh. 

E 

éy conj,^ and. 

I ea I iW., come I 81, 4. 

ebrio, m., drunken fellow, 106, 27. 
' eclipsar, v. a,y to eclipse. 

echar, v. a., to throw, to cast ; to 
drive out, to throw out; to 
throw away ; to off er ; to pour ; 
to bestow; — espumarajos, 
107, 16, to foam (wM rage) ; — 
llamas, 67, 12, to flash fire ; — 
yescas, 114, 16, to light tinder; 

— mano, 91, 3, to seize ; — se 
á, 00, 16, 110, 24, to begin, to 
set oneself at ; — se á reir, 82, 
9, to burst out laughing ; — se 
A la cara, 80, 20, {pf a gun) to 
bring to the cheek, take aim ; 

— de menos, 91, 23, to miss ; 
*'^/ verbo echar es la mayor 
parte de las veces una especie de 
comodín que hace d todo,'* " the 
verb echar isfor the most part 
a sort of irump that does for 
everything^ * — Spanish saying^ 
quoted by Tolhausen. 

edad,/., age. 

edificio, m,y edifice, building. 
educar, v, a., to edúcate, to bring 
up, to train. 



efectiyamente, adv,y in fact, 77, 

18. 
efecto, m,^ effect, result ; en — , 

48, 18, etc,y in effect, in fact. 
egoísmo, m,^ egoism, selfíshness, 

100, 18. 
egoísta, adj.^t selfísh, 78, 9. 
¿ eh ? intetj. interrog.t eh, what. 
ejecución,/, execution. 
ejecutivo, va, adj.^ executive; 

54, 14, summary, authoritative. 
ejemplar, m., example, specimen, 

14,16; type, 20, 15. 
ejemplo, m., example ; por — , for 

instance, for example. 
ejercer, v. a^ to exercise, to per- 

form. 
ejercitar, v. <?., to exercise, to 

practice, to try, 87, 12. 
ejército, m.y army. 
el, la, lo, ari., the. 
él, ella, ello, pr. pers,^ he, she, it. 
el cual, la — , lo — , /r., which. 
elección,/, choice. 
elefante, m., elephant. 
elegancia,/, elegance. 
elevado, da, adj., lofty, 41, 13. 
eludir, v. a,, to elude, to avoid. 
ello, neuter^ see él. 
embargo, m., (embargo) ; sin — , 

notwithstanding, in 'spite of. 
embelesado, da, a¿^'.,spell-bound, 

85,28. 
embelesar, v, a., to astonish, to 

amaze, 1, 16w 



VOCABULARY 



189 



emborracharse, v, refl., to get 

drunk. 
embozar, v. a., to wrap up ; (used 

specially ofthe ihroat and face) ; 

cf. noie to 26, 19. [46, 28. 

embozo, tn.^ muñler; see note to 
embuste, m.^ lie, fib, 62, 11. 
emoción,/, emotlon. 
empalagoso, sa, adj.^ disgusting. 
emparrado, m.^ arbor, grape-ar- 

bor, 80, 5, etc, 
empedrado, da, adj,^ paved. 
empedrado, m., pavement. 
empeñarse, v. refl.^ to persist, 

80,1. 
empeSo, m., pledge, engagement; 

duty, business; 17, 11. 
emperador, «»., emperor. 
empezar, v, a. andv. »., to begin. 
emplear, v. a.^ to employ, to use, 

to make use oí. 
empujar, v. a., to push, 108, 16. 
empuSar, v. a., to grasp; to clasp. 
en, prep,y in ; at ; on ; with ; to ; 

by; against; among; about; 

with part. pres.y when, on. 
enamorado, da, cuij,^ enamorad, 

in love. 
enamorar, v. a., to win love, to 

win aííection; to charm, to 

please, to captivate, sp. 16, 19 ; 

— se, V. refl.^ to fall in love ; to 

be charmed. 
encadenar, v. ¿z., to chain up, to 

put in chalns, 69, 15. 



encaje, m.y lace. 

encaminarse, v, rejl., to takeone's 
way, to start, to go. [106, 30. 

encararse, v. refl., (con), to face. 

encargar, v. a., to charge, to in- 
struct, 61, 17; — se, v, refl.y to 
agree, to undertake, 11, 1, etc. 

encender, v. a., to light, to set 
fire to ; pp, encendii^O, lighted, 
burning. 

encerrrar, v. a., to contain, to en- 
dose ; — se, V, reji.f 98, 27, to 
shut oneself in, to lock oneself 
in. 

encía,/, gum, 128, 15. 

encima, adv.t above ; upon. 

encima de, por — de, prep,, 
above; upon; over. 

encogerse, v. rejl,, to shrug; de 
hombros, 68, 29. 

encontrar, v, a.^ to meet, to meet 
with, to find ; ^-se, v. reji,, to 
be, to happen to be, to find one- 
self; — se con, to meet with, 
to find, 40, 22, 108, 2, etc. 

encopetado, da, adj.y presump* 
tuous, boastful, stuck-up, 8, 12. 

encuentro, m., encounter, meet' 
ing. 

encumbrado, da, ad/., lofty, state- 
ly, 104, 29. 

ende, adv., thence ; por — , 101, 
21, thence, therefore. 

endeblillo, lia, ad/.y weakly, 26, 
22 (endeble). 



190 



VOCABULARY 



enemigo, ga, adj.^ hostile, cruel, 

unfríendly, 84, 15; unkind. 
enemigo, m., enemy. 
energía,/, energy. 
enérgicamente, adv., vigorous- 

ly, sharply, 60, 8. 
enfadarse, v. refl,, to become 

angry, to lose one*s temper. 
énfasis, m., emphasis ; seenote to 

121, 8. 
enfermedad,/., illness. 
enfermizo, za,,adj., infírm, sickiy. 
enfrente, adv.y opposite, before; 

enfrente de, prep. before, in 

front of, 41, 11. 
enfurecerse, v, refl,y to grow f uri- 

ous, to burst out. 
engaSar, v, a,^ to deceive. 
engaSo, m,y deceit, deception. 
enjugar, v, a., to dry, to wipe. 
enojo, m., anger, indignation, 

119,^0. 
enorme, adj,^ enormous, very 

large. 
enormidad,/, immensUy, huge 

size. 
ensalada,/, salad, 
ensalmo, m., spell, charm, en- 

chantment ; por — , by magic, 

68,6. 
enseSar, v. a., to teach, to show, 
entender, v. a., to understand; 

— de razones, 79, 22, to listen 

to reason ; — se, v. refl,^ to come 

to an understanding ; to agree ; 



to be agreed, to have an under- 
standing; to understand each 
other, one another; to know 
what one is about. 

entendimiento, m., understand- 
ing, intelligence. 

enteramente, adv,, entirely, quite. 

enterar, v, a., to inform, 116, is, 
etc; — se, v. refl,^ to inform 
oneself, to inquire into. 

entero, ra, adj.^ whole, entire. 

entonces, adv,^ then ; desde — , 
since then, f rom that time ; de 
— , of those times, of those 
days,42, 4, tit XXIV; en aquel 
— , 17, 24, at that time, in those 
days. 

entraSas, /»/., (bowels, intes- 
tines) heart, character, feel- 
ings, 82, 8. 

entrar, v. m., to enter, to come in, 
to go in ; to enter upon, to 
begin, 108, 8, etc.; to come 
into market, 8, 16; — en fuego, 
to open fire, 108, 20; hasta 
muy entrado el mes de Di- 
ciembre, 70, 4, until far into 
the month of December. 

entre, prep.^ between, among; 
from among. 

entregar, v.a., to hand over, to 
pass on ; — se, v. refl.^ to give 
oneself up, to surrender. 

entremés, 1»., intermezzo, entr'- 
acte; interlude; cf, notetod^i. 



VOCABULARY 



191 



entretanto, adv., meanwhile, in 

the meantime. 
entretener, v. a., to amuse, to 

occupy, 68, 9. 
entusiasmar, v. a.^ to transporta 

to enrapture, to fíll with enthu- 

siasm. 
envejecerse, v, re/l.t to grow oíd. 
envejecido, da, adj,, grown oíd, 

aged. 
enviar, v, a., to send. 
envidiable, adj.^ en viable, 74, 29. 
envidiar, v, a.^ to envy. 
epigramático, ca, adj,^ epigram- 

matic. 
epiléptico, ca, adj.y epileptic. 
epÜogo, m.^ epilogue, 
episcopal, adj,, episcopal. 
episodio, tn.y episode. 
época,/, epoch, períod, time. 
epopeya,/., epic, epopee, epic 

poem. 
equivaler, v. «., to equal; to be 

the same as, to be as much as, 

8, 11, 34, 3. 
equivocación,/, mistake. 
equivocarse, v. refl., to be mis- 

taken, 78, 14. [up, 116, 4. 

erguirse, v, refl,y to draw oneself 
errante, adj,y wandering. 
erudito, ta, adj,^ erudite, leamed. 
esbirro, m., minion, sblre, 86, 6. 
escalera,/, staircase, stairs; por 

la — abajo, 86, 21, down the 

stairs. 



escandalizar, 'v, a., to scandal* 

ize; to oííend; — se, v. refl.j 

to be offended, to be scandal - 

ized, to take oííence ; 3, 5, 61, 

2, 81, 28. 
escándalo, 1»., scandal, 126, 6. 
escapar, v. «., — se, v, refl,, to 

Qscape, to get away, to run 

away. 
escape, /, flight, hasty flight; 

á — , 67, 28, at top speed. 
escarbar, v. a., to scratch, to dig, 

to rake. 
escarola,/, escarole, 64, 4. 
escena, /., scene. 
escarnecer, v. a., to mock, to ridi- 

cule, to bring into contempt, 

26,12. 
esclarecer, v. a., to light, to illu- 

mmate, 48, 12, 60, 9. 
escoger, v. a., to select, to choose. 
esconder, v, a.j to hide, to con- 

ceal. 
escondido, da, adj., hidden, ob- 

scure, remote, 1, 5. 
escondite, m., hiding-place. 
escote, tn.t the neck {ofa tuomarCs 

dress), 16, 4, 126, 25. 
escribano, m., townderk, 11, 18. 
escribir, v, a., to write. 
escriturilla,/, note. Une, 12, 8. 
escrupuloso, sa, adj., scrupulous. 
escuchar, v, a., to listen, to listen 

to. 
escuela,/, school. 



192 



VOCABULARY 



escultural, adj,^ sculptural. 

escupir, V, »., to spit, 110, 9. 

escurrir, v, a., 64, 23, to drain ; — 
el bulto, 62, 27, to slip away, 
to get out of the way ; cf. bulto. 

ese, esa, adj\^ dem., that. 

ése, ésa, pron.^ he, she ; that ; the 
former. 

tsOjpr. neuter, that; i — es I that*s 
it! just sol; por — , for that, 
therefore, on that account, for 
that reason; — de las once, 
about eleven o'clock; — que 
no, 14, 14, that, although. 

esfera,/., sphere. 

esfuerzo, m., effort, 120, 12. 

eslabón, m.y steel {for striking 
fire\ 67, 2. 

esmerarse, v, refl.^ to take pains, 
102, 1 (en). 

esmero, m., eagemess, assiduity; 
care, attention, 19, 5, etc. 

espada, /, sword. 

espadín, 1»., rapier, dress-sword, 
26,23. 

espalda,/., shoulder; back, 87, 2, 
116, 6 ; //. — s, back ; cargado 
de — s, stoop-shoiildered, 
hunchbacked, 18, 2, etc.; 
de — s, 38, 18, 96, 6, backward, 
on his, her, back. 

espaldar, «., back {ofa chair or 
óencA, etc.), 

espanta-hombres, m.,man-scarer, 
26, 11. 



espanta-pájaros, m., scarecrow, 

26,10. 
espantajo, 1»., scarecrow, 27, 15. 
espanto, m. fright, 78, 8, etc. 
espantoso, sa, adj., fríghtfal, 

fearful, 81, 11, etc, 
España,/., Spain. 
español, ola, a^'., Spanish ; á la 

antigua — a, 6, 19, in the good 

oíd Spanish fashion. 
Español, m.j Spaniard. 
especial, ad/.^ special, especial, 
especialmente, adv.^ especially, 

specially. 
especie,/, kind, sort, species. 
espectro, m., spectre, 26, 5. 
esperanza,/, hope. 
esperar, v. a., to hope ; to expect ; 

to await ; to wait. 
espeso, sa, ad/., thick ; lo más — , 

80, 5, the thickest part. 
espetera,/, shelf, kitchen shelf, 

70, 6, 84, 6. 
espía. I»., spy. 
espinazo, 1»., spine, spinal col- 

umn. 
espíritu, m., spirit. 
esplendidez,/, splendor, display, 

86,29. 
espléndido, da, <z^'., splendid. 
esposa,/, wife. 
esposo, m., husband; //. — s, 

64, 9, husband and wife, mar- 
ried pair. [echar, 

espumarajo, 1»., foam, froth ; c/ 



VOCABULARY 



193 



esquela,/, note, 60, 17. 

esquilón, m.^ bel!; {the smalUr 
bell ofthe church) 24, 2. 

esquina,/., comer. 

esquinado, da, adj,y angular, 66, 
28. 

establecer, v. a., to establish ; as 
refl.pass,, 137,7. 

estado, m., state ; nation ; condi- 
tion, estáte ; cuarto — , 117, 8, 
fourth estáte ; en — honesto, 
4, 1, of honest, honorable con- 
dition, decent, marriageable. 

estallar, v. «., to burst out, to 
break out, 137, 9. 

estampa, /, engraving; type; 
archetype, ideal, 14, 2, 36, 29. 

estancia,/, room, 98, 5. 

estanque, w., pool, pond, 20, 28. 

estar, v, n.^ to be; ¿cómo está 
la seSora? 84, 12, how is her 
ladyship ? — para, to be in the 
mood for, to be incliñed; lo 
estoy, 80, 19, I am; —se, refl., 
to stay, 61, 10, etc, ; to remain, 
to stand still. 

estatua, /, statue. 

estatura,/, stature, height. 

este, esta, adj. dem.j this. 

tsXOypron. neut., this; en — , 88, 
23, 86, 7, 131, 1, etc., at this mo- 
ment, at this juncture ; con — , 
61, 15, herewith ; hereupon. 

éste, ésta, pron, dem.^ this one ; 
the latter. 



Estebanillo González, npr, m, 

4, 21 ; see note, 
Estella,/, Estella, town of Spain, 

province of Navarre, about 25 

miles Southwest of Pampeluna. 
esterilidad,/, barrenness. 
estilo, »!., style. 
estofa,/, stuff, material, 26, 23. 
estómago, m., stomach. 
estratagema,/, stratagem. 
estrechar, v. a., to press, to clasp. 
estrecho, cha, adj., narrow, scant, 

tight, 101, 9. 
estrella,/, star. 
estremecerse, v, rejl., to shake, 

to shiver. 
estrenar, v.a., to use for the first 

time, to initiate, to handsel. 
estropear, v. a., to disfígure, to 

cripple, 4, 14. 
eátufa,/, hot-house, 20, 29. 
estupefacto, ta, adj., stupefied, 

speechless with astonishment, 

109,8. 
estupendo, da, adj., stupendous 

77,4. 
etc.,^/ cetera,Latin conj.and adj ., 

etc. 
eternidad,/, eternity. 
eterno, na, adj., eterna!; spiri- 

tual, as opposed to temporal, 

6,28. 

D. Eugenio de ZúSiga 7 Ponce 

de León, npr, m., 26, 9, note, 
Europa,/, Europe. 



194 



VOCABULARY 



europeo, pea, adj,^ European. 

Eva,/, Eve. 

evidencia,/., evidence; 116,25. 

evitación,/, avoidance. 

evitar, v. a,, to avoid, to prevent. 

exención,/, exemption. 

excelente, adj.t excellent, estim- 
able. 

excitar, v. a., to excite ; 63, 11, to 
anímate, to stir up. 

exclamar, v, a., to exclaim. 

exculpación, /., exculpation, ex- 
planation, 116, 19. 

excusa,/, excuse, 56, 18, evasión. 

execrable, ad/.j accursed, 70^, 2ñ. 

exhortar, v. a., to exhort, 126, ísi. 

existir, V. «., to exist. 

exótico, ca, adj.^ exotic. 

explicación,/, explanation ; dec- 
laration, 32, 29. 

explicar, v. «., to explain ; — se, 
refl., to understand, to account 
for, 121, 17; to explain one- 
self, 111, 17, 114, 10. 

exponer, v. a., to expose; to ex- 
plain, to expound, 48, 3, 98, 22 ; 
— se, refl., to expose, to expose 
oneself, 86, 23, 86, 24. 

expresar, v. a., to express. 

expresión,/, expression. 

extender, v, a,, to extend. 

extensísimo, ma, adj., very long, 
26, 16. 

exterminio, m., annihilation, ez- 
tinction, 88, 5. 



extranjero, ra, €uij\^ foreign. 

extraSar, v. a., to wonder at; 
era muy de — , 24, 9, it was 
much to be wondered at. 

extraño, Sa, adj., strange, for- 
eign, 78, 7. 

extraordinario, ria, adj., extra- 
ordinary, unusual; uncommon. 

extremar, v. a., to overdo, 4, 3. 

extremo, «., end, extremity, 41, 
21, 78, 26, extreme, 107, 24. 

F 

fábula,/, fable, 48, a 

facciones,^/., features, 26, 2. 

fácil, adj., easy. 

facineroso, m., evil-doer, crimi- 
nal, 117, 17. 

facultad,/, power, license, right, 
97,2. 

faena,/, labor, task, 28, 2. 

faja,/, sash, girdle, 108, 3. 

falda,/, skirt, petticoat ; — de 
un paso, etc., see note to 16, 2; 
— s, //., 61, 2, women ; amigo 
de — s, fond of women. 

falso, sa, adj., false, counterfeit. 

falta, /, lack, absence ; hacer — , 
(English subject Spanish indi- 
rect object)y to have need ; 42, 
19, no sé qué — puedo hacer- 
te, I don't see what need yoa 
can have of me ; also 62, 13. 

faltar, v, »., to be lacking, to be 
wanting; to be absent ¡ mi •§- 



VOCABULARY 



IPS 



tan faltando al respeto, 107, 

17, who are failing in their re- 

spect to me, are being disre- 

spectf ul to me. 
faltriquera,/., pocket. 
fallarse, v. refi., to be decided 

(of a lawsuit), 12, 6. 
familia,/, family, household. 
familiar, i»., familiar, servant 

(of a priest), 41, 24. 
familiar, adj., familiar. 
famoso, sa, adj., famous. 
fandango, m., fandango, Spanish 

dance, sp, Andalusian dance; 

83, 10. 
fanega,/, fanega; Spanish land 

measure, containing about one 

third of an acre, 31, 7 ; Spanish 

dry measure, containing about 

56 quarts, 60, 27. 
farol, m., lantern. 
farolillo, m., small lantem. 
fatídico, ca, adj,^ portentous, 

fatidical, 28, 9. 
fatigar, v. a,, to weary, to wear 

out ; — se, 108, 22, to give one- 

self trouble, to take the 

trouble. 
favor, íw., favor; A mi — , 12, 5, 

in my favor, 
¡favor! ««/., help! i— al Rey! 

In the King's ñame! 94, 13, 

96, 15, 122, 10, tit XXVII. 
fe,/, faith. 
febril, adj\ feverísh. 



fecha,/, date. 

felicidad,/, happiness, felicity. 

felicísimo, ma, adj.^ very happy, 

most happy. 
feliz, ndj., happy. 
felpa,/, plush, chenille, 94, 12. 
felpón, m., see note to 106, 5. 
feminino, na, adj.^ feminine. 
feo, fea, adj.y ugly, ill-favored •, 

fea y todo, 30, 22, see todo \for 

48, 25, see reventar. 
Fernández, npr.^ Fernandez. 
Femando Vn, npr. m., Ferdinand 

the Seventh. 
ferocidad,/, ferocity. 
fértilísimo, ma, adj., very fertile. 
festonear, v, a., to festoon, 26, 21. 
fidedigno, na, adj., worthy of 

credit, 113, 28. 
fiera, /, wild beast ; hecho una 

— , 108, 8, see hacer, hecho, 
fiesta,/, feast, festival, 
figura,/, figure, 
figurarse, v. refl.^ to imagine ; to 

suppose, 31, 26. 
fijamente, adv.y definitely, cer- 

tainly. 
fijar, V, tf ., to fix, 70, U ; — se en, 

V, refl.^ to look upon, 104, 18. 
Filipinas, npr,fpl.^ Philippines. 
filo, tn.y edge. 
filosófico, ca, adj,y philosophical, 

1,20. 
filtrar, v. a., to filter. 
fin, m., end ; intention, purpose ; 



196 



VOCABULARY 



en — , at last, lastly, after all, 

in short; al — , finally, at last ; 

A — de, á — de que, to the end 

that, so that, in order that. 
finalmente, adv.y finally, last of 

all, in conclusión, 
fineza,/, flattery ; delicate atten- 

tion, courtesy. 
fingido, da, adj.^ pretended, 

feigned; mal fingida, 37, 17, 

ill-assumed. 
fino, na, adj,^ courteous, polite ; 

10, 19; delicate, fine, 26, 2. 
finura,/, elegance, 122, 15. 
firma,/, signature. 
firmar, v. a., to sign. 
fiscal, m., public prosecutor, 

state's attorney, 108, 9. 
flaco, ca, adj,y thin, 26, 29 ; weak, 

unnerved. 
flecha,/, arrow, dart, 65, 16. 
flojo, ja, adj,^ soft, indistinct, lisp- 

ing, 36, 5. 
ñOT,/.t flower. 
floricultor, m., horticulturist, 20, 

14. 
flote, m., floating; salir A — , 

112, 1, to come to the surface, 

to get afloat. 
fogata,/, blaze, 70, 2. 
fondo, m.f depth, bottom ; foun- 

dation, basis ; ttí. VII, 8, 20. 
forma, /, form ; de — que, 62, 

28, so that ; form, appearance, 

outline. 



formal, ad/.^ serious, 114, 6.' 
formar, v. a., to form. 
formidable, adj'., formidable, 

dangerous, 86, 29. 
fórmula,/, formula, statement, 

26,26. 
formular, v. a., to formúlate, to 

State, 106, 15. 
forzoso, sa, adj\, forced, obliga- 

tory, 6, 29. 
fragua,/, forge. 
fraile, m., friar, 6, 22, ftc. 
francachela, /., carouse, revd, 

28,20. 
francés, cesa, adj., French. 
Francia,/, France. 
Franciscano, 1»., Franciscan 

(fruir), 14, 2. 
franela, /., flannel, 106, 5. 
franqueza,/, frankness. 
Frascuela,/, Fanny, 87, 5. 
frase, /, phrase, remark, 40, 12, 

48, 7, rgsp,, etc. 
Frasquita,/, Fanny. 
frecuentar, v. d., to frequent, to 

visit. 
fregar, v, a,, to rub, to polish. 
frente,/, forehead. 
fresco, ca, ¿z¿^'.,*fresh, cool ; esta- 
mos — s, we're in a pretty fix, 

we're nicely left. 
fresco, m.y coolness, cool. 
frescura,/, coolness. 
fresquito, ta, adj., coolish, "nice 

and cool," 84, 7. 



VOCABULARY 



197 



frialdad,/, coidness, coolness. 

friOf fría, a<^'., cold. 

frío, m., cold. 

frisar, v. »., to draw near to (en) 
(pfage\ 14, 11, 26, 11 ; to touch, 
to border on, to be " going on." 

frito, ta, adj.y fried. 

frontera, adj.^ frontier, boundary. 

fruta,/., íruit, garden fruit, SM), 
28, etc. 

fruto, tn.y fruit; — s ciyiles, see 
note to 6, 29. 

fuego, m., fíre. 

fuente, /, fountain ; 54, 4, dish, 
bowl. 

fuera, adv.^ outside, without ; por 
— , üt, IV, etc.^ from without ; 
por — , outside 1 { fuera I out I 
getoutl78, 10,107, 15. 

fuera de, prep,^ except ; beyond ; 
beside ; 86, U, 63, 6, 114, 15, 
outside of, away from, off oí, 
off from ; — de sí, 98» 18, be- 
side himself . 

fuero, iw., right, vested right, 6, 23. 

fuerte, adj.^ strong ; sexo—, 65, 8, 
stronger sex, stemer sex. 

fuerza, /, forcé, strength ; á — 
de, 11, 21, by dint of. 

fugarse, v, refl.^ to make one's 
escape, to run away, 69, 10. 

fulminar, v, a.y to hurí, to fulmi- 
*nate, 122, 28. 

fumar, v. #»., to smoke, 126, 15. 

función,/» function. 



fundamento, m., foundation, ba- 

sis, 1, 8. 
furia,/, fury, rage. 



gabela,/, gabelle, gavel-tax, see 

note to 6, 29. 
gabinete, 1»., anteroom, boudoir, 

128,12. 
Gaceta,/, Gazette, see note to 6, 12. 
gacha,/, pap ; see note to derre- 
tirse, 40, 24. 
galán, m.y gallant, lover. 
galante, adj., gallant. 
gallardía,/, grace, elegance, 16, 8. 
gallinero, 1»., hen-house, 21, 2. 
gamuza,/, chamois skin, wash 

leather, 26, 25. 
ganar, v. a.^ to gain ; to -win. 
ganas,/»/., (gana), desire, long- 

ing, 41, 3. 
gancho, m., hook, 70, 5. 
ganoso, sa, adj.^ desirous, eager, 

15,12. 
garduSa,/, stone marten,house 

marten ; weasel, used as npr,^ 

Garduña, "the Weasel." 
garganta,/, throat. 
garra,/, claw ; fig, for hand, 71, 

17. 
garrote, 1»., short club, staff, cud- 

gel, 99, 2, 
gasto, m., waste ; expense, dam- 

age, 126, 6. 
gata,/, f emale cat ; undar á — s, 



198 



VOCABULARY 



71, 90, to go on all fours, to 
creep. 

gato, m.<t cat. 

gemir, v. n., to groan. 

general, m., general. 

generalidad,/., generality. 

sai generis {Latín), 26, 2é, pecu- 
liar, individual, oí its own kind. 

género, m,, gender, sex ; genus ; 
cuadro de — , see cuadro, 28, 11. 

generosamente, a^., generously, 
copiously, 111, 8. 

generoso, sa, adj.^ generous, 12, 
13; high spiríted, 104, 1. 

genio, m,y disposition, character, 
29,7. 

gente, /., people ; person, indi- 
vidual ; people, folk ; //., — s, 
people; the world, the public ; 
don de — s, 10, 19, sef don. 

gentílico, ca^ adj., gentile, pagan, 
101, 7. 

gesto, m., gesture. 

gigantesco, ca, adj., gigantic. 

gimnasta, m., gymnast, athlete, 
87, 12. 

girar, v. n ., to tum, to whirl, 14, 21. 

gloria,/, glory,salvation, heaven, 
6, 8, 81, 2; see also Sábado. 

gol>ernado, 1»., subject. 

gobernar, v, «., to govem. 

Gobierno, m., Government, Ad- 
ministration, 97, 7. 

golilla, m., personage, member of 
the rulingclass, 18, 19; see note. 



golpe, m., blow; stroke; knock; 

de — , 98, 16, suddenly, sharply. 
gordo, da, adj., fat; toz gorda, 

66, 17, oily voice. 
gota,/, drop. 
Goya, «/r., Francisco Goya, 

Spanish painter ; see note to 

16,1. 
gozo, m., joy, enjoyment,pleasure. 
gracia,/, grace, mercy; //. — s, 

thanks ; 86, 29, charms. 
graciosamente, adv.^ gracefully, 

122, 17. 
gracioso, sa, adj,^ gracious ; grace- 

f ul ; amusing, diverting ; witty. 
gracioso, 1»., (clown) gracioso; 

see note to 3, 15. 
gradación,/, gradation. 
grado, m., grade, degree. 
graduar, v, a., to measure ; to es- 
tímate. 
grajo, m.y jackdaw, tit. XIII. 
grana,/, scarlet, scarlet cloth. 
grande, flíír*.,(gran), large ; great; 

tal!. 
grandeza,/, greatness; size. 
grandioso, sa, adj.^ exalted, ma- 

jestic, grandiose. 
granero, iw., corn loft, granary, 

68,23. 
grano, m., grain. 
gratitud,/, gratitude. 
gravedad,/, gravity, seríousne&s, 

101, 23. [scream. 

gritar, v, n. to cfy; to shout; to 



VOCABULARY 



199 



grito, m., cry. 

grosero, ra, adj., coarse, mde 
vulgar. 

grotesco, ca, adj.y grotesque. 

grueso, sa, adj., stout, fat, thick. 

gruñido, m., grunt. 

gruSir, V. n., to growl, to grumble. 

grupa, /., cnipper; llevará — s, 

' 28, 12, to take behind ene on 
horseback. 

guantada,/., slap, 50, & 

guante, m., glove. 

guapo, pa, adj'.f handsome, good- 
looking. [look out I 

{guarda, Pablo! 91, 28, hold on I 

guardar, v. a., to keep ; to gnard ; 
to'defend, to preserve ; — ren- 
cor, to bear malice; to take 
care of, 116, 22; — se, v. re/i., 
to take care, to be caref ul ; — se 
de hacer, to take care not to do. 

guardia,/., guard, watch ; ¡en — ! 
tíí. XXI, be on your guard! 
def end yourself 1 

guarnición,/, hilt, 26, 23. 

guerra,/, war. 

guerrilla,/, band of guerrillas: 

guerrillero, m., guerrilla. 

guiar, V, a.y to guide. 

guinda,/, sweet-cherry, 10, 23. 

guindo, m.f mazzard tree, sweet- 
cherry tree ; 10, 4. 

guiSo, m., wink, 14, 28. 

guisa,/, guise, manner ; á — de, 
like, as it were. 



guisado, m»y stew, fricassee, 8, 16; 

s^e note. 
guisar, V, a.f to cook. 
guitarra,/, guitar. 
gusano, tn.t worm; — de seda, 

silk-worm. 
gustar, V. a.t to taste ; to like, to 

wish; to enjoy; — v. «., to 

please. [pleasure. 

gusto, m., taste; good taste; 



H,/ (hache), the letter H, 12, 2. 

haba,/, bean. 

haber, v. aux., to have; — de, 
to be obliged ; or as simple fu- 
ture ; ort to have to ; or, to be 
to, to be destined to; ¿cómo 
había 70 de figurarme ... 86, 6, 
howwasl to imagine, howcould 
I imagine . . .; ¿Quién había 
de decirme ? who could ever 
have told me ... , who would 
ever have said . . . , 112, 23; aj 
impersoftal, hay, había, hubo, 
habrá, etc., there is, there are, 
there was, there were, there 
will be, etc. ; no hay más que, 
49, 8, there is nothing to do but ; 
— selas con alguno, 104, 19, 
to have to do with, to have it 
out with. 

habilidad,/, skill, capability , //. 
— es, tit. VI, accomplishments, 
talents. 



200 



VOCABULARY 



habitación,/, room. 

habitar, v. a.y to inhabit ; to live 
in, to dwell in. 

hábito, m., garment ; habit, way 
of life, custom, 15, 24; //. — 8, 
vestments; ahorcar los — s, 
16, 10, to leave Orders, leave 
the príesthood. 

habitual, adj.^ usual, customary. 

hablar, v, a. and »., to speak, to 
talk. 

hacendoso, sa, adj.^ industríous, 
thrifty. 

hacer, v, a., to make, to do ; to 
commit; to cause; to have 
done; to accomplish, to bríng 
about ; impersonal^ to be; hace 
fresco, 59, 13, it is cool ; hace 
luna, 57, 00, it is moonlight , 
vnth expressions of time, ago : 
hace tiempo, 80, ll, long ago ; 
hacía rato, 48, 3, f or some little 
time ; hacía ya algún tiempo, 
it had been some time ; v. refl.<t 
— se, to be going on, to be 
happening, to happen ; ¿qué se 
ha hecho de ? 91, 20, what has 
happened to, what has become 
of? 

hacia, /r^r^., towards; — arriba, 
upward; — adelante, forward. 

hacienda, /., property; duty, 
business. 

hallar, ». «., to find; — se, ». refl,, 
to be, to happen to be. 



harina,/., flour; meterse en — , 
4, 17, to set to work; — de 
otro costal, 115, 28, flour from 
another sack, /. e, another mat- 
ter, a diíferent question, "a 
horse of a difieren t color." 

harinero, ra, adj., having to do 
with flour ; molino — , 10, 2, 
flour mili, grist mili. 

hasta, adv., even. 

hasta, prep.^ until ; as fax as, up 
to, to; as many as, no less than, 
14, 24; — luego, — maüana, 
until presently, until to-mor- 
row {forms of leave-taking). 

hasta que, conj,, until. 

hazaSa,/, deed. 

hebilla,/, buckle. 

hechicero, ra, adj\, enchanting, 
bewitching. 

hecho, m.j fact. 

hecho, cha, adj., made ; become 
(una fiera, etc.). 

helénico, ca, adj., Greek. 

hembra,/, female. 

hembra, adj., female. 

Hércules, m., Hercules, Heracles. 

hermano, m., brother. 

hermoso, sa, adj,, beautiful, 
handsome. 

hermosura,/, beauty. 

héroe, m., hero. 

herrero, m., smith, blacksmith. 

hielo, m., ice. 

hija,/, daughter. 



VOCABULARY 



20I 



hijo, m.f son, child; ¡miray — ! 

49, 19, see here, my boy! //. 

— 8, 14, 15, children. 
hinchado, da, <j^'.,swollen, 67,22. 
hipocondríaco, ca, adj., as subs. 

m., 37, 18, hypochondriac. 
historia,/, history, story. 
histórico, ca, adj.^ historie, his- 
tórica], 
historieta,/., little story. 
hito, m., boundary stone ; mark, 

target ; mirar de — en — , 84, 

22, to look at fíxedly. 
hocico, m.. snout ; nose ; retorcer 

el — , 29, 10, to turn up the 

nose. 
hogar, m.y hearth ; fíreside ; home. 
hoja,/, leaf ; una poca — , 11, 28, 

a few leaves. 
¡holal int€ry\ bo, hallo, 
hombre, m., man; — de bien, 

honorable man, honest man ; 

¡hombrel man alive, for heav- 

en*s sake, etc. 
hombro, /»., shoulder. 
hondamente, adv.y deepiy. 
honesto, ta, adj,, honorable, 

proper. 
honor, m., honor, 
honra,/, honor, 
honradez,/, honor ; uprightness, 

integrity ; virtue. 
honrado, da, adj., honored, es- 

teemed; estimable; virtuous. 
honrar, v. a., to honor, to respect, 



to do honor to, to be a credit 
to. 

hopa,/, cassock, gown, see note to 
70,27. 

hora, /., hour ; á estas — s, at this 
time of day, at this time of 
night ; at this very minute ; á 
aquellas — s, at that time of 
night, at that time of day. 

horca, /., gallows. 

homo, m., oven. 

horrible, adj., horrible, frightful. 

horror, m., horror. 

horroroso, sa, adj., frightful, 72, 
20. 

hoy, adv.^ to-day. 

hoyo, m., 35, 23, dimple. 

hoyuelo, m., dimple. 

hueco, ca, adj., hoUow; ofsleeves, 
101, 10, fuU. 

huerta, /, garden, kitchen gar- 
den; orchard; 10, 5, water- 
meadow. 

hueso, m., bone. 

huevo, m., egg. 

huir, V. n., to flee, 116, 1. 

humanizarse, v. refl,^ to become 
gentle ; to unbend, 61, 28. 

humano, na, adj.^ human. 

húmedo, da, adj.^ moist, damp ; 

humor, /»., humor, temper ; po- 
nerse de mal — , 82, 12, to lose 
one*s temper. 

hundirse, v, refl.^ to melt. 

hurón, 01., ferret, sleuth, 27, 3. 



202 



VOCABULARY 



hurtar, v.tf ., to steal ; — el cuerpo, 
115, 29, to dodge, to slip aside. 



ida,/., going. 
idea,/., idea, 
idéntico, ca, adj.^ identical, the 

same, 
idiosincrasia, /, individual dis- 

position ; idiosyncrasy. 
idiota, m., idiot, tomfool, 26, 15. 
iglesia, /, church ; la Iglesia, 

the Church. 
ignominia,/., disgrace, ignominy. 
ignominioso, sa, adj., shameful, 

ignominious. 
ignorar, v, a., to not know, to be 

ignorant of . 
igual, adj.^ equal ; like, similar ; 

such. 
igualdad,/, equality. 
ijar, m., side, flank ; meterse lOs 
puSos en los — es, 75, 21, to 

hold one's sidas, 
ilustre, adj,y illustrious, exalted, 

18, 13. 
nustrísima (Su), see note /^ 11, 28; 

írans,, his Lordship. 
ilustrlsimo, ma, adj.^ most ilhis- 

tríous, 48, 11. 
imparcialidad, /, impartiality, 

judicial tone,indiff erence, 46,26. 
impasibilidad, /, impassibility, 

108, 7. [vent. 

impedir, v, a., to hinder, to pre- 



imperar, v. »., to reign, to hold 

sway, 7, 5. 
imperial, adj.^ imperial, 
ímpetu, m., impulse ; 68, 24, vio- 

lence, vehemence. 
impetuosísimo, ma, adj., very 

swift, 77, 28. , 
imponer, v, a., to impose, 117, lo. 
importancia,/, importance. 
importante, adj., important. 
importar, v. «., to import, to 

matter ; to count, to be of con- 

sequence. 
imposible, adj., impossible. 
imposición, /, imposiition, re- 

straint, 76, 11. 
impreso, sa, a¿^'.,printed, in print. 

8,27. 
impropio, pia, adj.^ unsuitable, 

84,9. 
imprudente, adj.^ imprudent ; in- 

discreet, inconsiderate, 11, 10. 
incapaz, adj., incapable. 
incertidumbre,/, uncertainty. 
incitante, adj.y 41, 12, tempting, 

ezciting. 
inclinar, v. a., to bend, 86, 19. 
incomodar, v, a., to incommode, 

to put out, 68, 28. 
incontinenti, adv.y immediately, 

forthwith. 
incontrastable, adj., resistles , 

irresistible, 88, 17. 
indecente, adj,^ indecent; 81,4 

filthy. 



VOCABULARY 



203 



indecible, adj.^ indescribable,un- 
speakable, 19, 5. 

indefinible, adj.y indescribable, 
inexplicable. 

independencia,/, independence. 

indescriptible, adj.y indescrib- 
able. 

Indias, /!>/., Indies. 

indicación, /., suggestion, direc- 
tion, 104, 15. 

indicar, v. a,, to indicate, to 
point out, to mention. 

indignación,/, indignation. 

indisculpable, adj., inexcusable. 

indispensable, adj., indispens- 
able. 

indivisible, adj,, indivisible. 

índole,/, nature, character, 78, 
6. 

indomable, adj.^ unconquerable, 
indomitable, 80, 18. 

inducir, v. a., to persuade, to in- 
duce, 102, 10. 

indudablemente, adv.^ doubt- 
less, 61, 4. 

indulgencia, /, forbearance, for- 
giveness, 104, 23. 

inexplicable, adj., inexplicable. 

infame, adj.^ infamous, vile, 108, 
1,119,23. 

infamia,/, infamy, shame, dis- 
honor ; act of infamy, shame- 
fuldeed,e9,18. 

infantil, adj., childish, infantile, 
25,2. 



infeliz, adj.^ unhappy ; la — , 82, 

22, thc unhappy woman, the 

poor thing, the poor creature. 
inferior, m., inferior, subordin- 

ate, 49, 12. 
infierno, m., hell. 
informe, /»., investigation, in- 

formation, " character," 27, 7. 
infortunado, da, adj., unfortu- 

nate, unhappy, ill-fated. 
infortunio, m., calamity, misfor- 

tune, 100, 18. 
infundado, da, adj,^ unfounded, 

groundless. 
infundir, v, <?., to inspire, to in- 

stil. 
ingeniero, »i., engineer, 20, 16. 
ingenio, /«., wit, understanding, 

talent, disposition. 
ingenuo, ua, adj.^ ingenuous, 

frank, candid. 
inherente, adj., inherent, neces- 

sary, 87, 9. 
inhumano, na, adj.^ inhuman, 

cruel, 
iniciar, v, ¿i., to begin, to initiate, 

122, 23, etc, 
injuriar, v, a., to wrong, to in- 

jure, to insult. 
injusticia, /., inj ustice. 
inmediatamente, adv,, immedi- 

ately. 
inmediato, ta, adj.y immediate ; 

next, nearest, neighboring, 
inmejorable, ad;., beyond un- 



204 



VOCABULARY 



provement ; unsurpassed, 18, 

6. 
inmento, sa, adj.^ immense, 86, 6. 
inmodestia, /., forwardness, 

pertness, 126, 28. 
inmortal, adj.^ immortal. 
inmotivado, da, adj.^ groundless, 

without motive, incomprehen- 
sible, 121, 18. 
innoble, adj.^ base, vile, ignoble, 

48,7. 
inocencia,/., innocence. 
inocente, adj.^ innocent. 
inocentemente, adv,y innocently. 
inolvidable, adj.^ never to be 

forgotten, immortal, 8, 19. 
Inquisición,/, Inquisition. 
inseguro, ra, adj.^ uncertain, 

100, U. 
insensato, ta, adj,^ mad, insen- 

sate, 78, 10. 
insigne, adj^ distinguished, ex- 

alted. 
insistir, V, a,^ to insist, to per- 

sist (en). 
insolencia,/, insolence. 
insolente, adj., insolent. 
insolente, /»., insolent fellow, 

50, 16. 
insondable, adj., unfathomable, 

86,1. 
inspiración,/, inspiration. 
inspirar, v, a., to inspire, to 

cause {dat, of person^ acc. of 

thing). 



instante, m., instant, moment; 

al — , 87, 10, this instant, im- 

mediately. 
instinto, m.^ instinct. 
instrucción,/, instruction, 66, 10. 
instrumento, m., instrument. 
insulto, in.y insult. 
intención,/, intention. 
intenso, sa, adj,^ intense, 70, 15. 
intentar, v. a., to try, to attempt. 
interiormente, adv.^ inwardly, 

60,34. 
interlocutor, m., used as adj.^ 

67, 24, interlocutor, speaker, 

speaking, replying. 
intermitente, adj.^ intermittent. 
interminable, adj,^ interminable, 

endless, without end. 
interpelar, v. a., to speak to, to 

address; //., 60, 13, person 

spoken to. 
interponerse, v, refl.^ to inter- 

pose, to interfere. 
interrogar, v. a. and m., to ask, 

to inquire ; to question, to in- 
terrógate, 
interrumpir, v. a., to interrupt. 
íntimo, ma, adj.^ intímate, 
intransitable, adj.y im[>assable, 

diíficult of passage, 10, 12. 
intrépido, da, adj.^ intrepid, 64, 

19. 
inundar, v. a., to flood, to inun. 

date, 
inútil, adj.^ oseless. 



VOCABliLARY 



205 



invadir, v. a.^ to invade, 44, 9. 

invencible, adj.y invincible, 112, 
18. 

inventar, v. ¿z., to invent. 

invernadero, m.^ winter house, 
winter dvíelling, 20, 29. 

invierno, w., winter. 

invocar, v. a., to invoke, to cali 
upon. 

ir, V. n.y to go ; to be; to become ; 
to go, to lead (0/ a road) ; to be 
at stake ; to be, to feel {of 
health) ; to concern, to touch ; 
— á, to be about to, to be go- 
ing to; va de vencida, 5, 1, 
is almost over ; vamos á ver, 
2, 9, let's see ; vamos á ver, 
98, 22, let's see, we'll see; 
¿ cómo va de salud ? 62, 12, 
how's your health, how are 
you ; en ello me van, I have 
at stake, there are at stake, 58, 
8 ; es á lo que iba, 48, 23, this 
is what I was getting at ; ¿ qué 
tal vamos ? 84, 6, howareyou, 
how are you feeling ? no va 
con usted, 57, 2, does not 
concern you ; fué á hablar, 
35, 27, was going to speak, 
tried to speak; fué á dar 
otro paso, he was about to 
take another step; iba en, 
87, 23, was riding, was riding 
on ; \ vamos 1 i vamos I 81, 8, 
come, come 1 vamos, 58, 10, 



come on, let's go; no te vayas 
á caer, 30, 13, don't go and f all ; 
¡vaya! come, nonsense, indeed, 
impossible ; vaya que tú, 113, 7, 
can it be that you, how about 
you ; I vaya si me ahorcarían ! 
74, 20, wouldn't they just hang 
me ! vaya con Dios, expression 
of dismissal or leave taking, 
122, 6, etc. i farewell ; vaya 
mucho con Dios, 98, 12, go 
your way, go in peace; — se, 
V, refl.,, to go, to go away. 

iracundia,/, malice, spite, 40, 3. 

ironía,/, irony. 

irónicamente, adv,^ ironically. 

irremediable, adj.^ irremediable, 
beyond repair. 

irresistible, adj., irresistible, 41, 
15. 

irrisorio, ria, adj.^ ludicrous, ri- 
diculous, 25, 14. 

isla,/, island. 

Italia, /, Italy. 

izquierda, /, the left, the left 
hand. 

izquierdo, da, adj.^ left; (ant. 
derecho, cha). 



jamás, adv.y ever ; never. 

jamón, m., ham. 

jaraíz, m., wine-press; pit for 

pressing grapes ; see note to 21, 

4. 



2o6 



VOCABULARY 



jardín, m., garden, flower-garden. 
jarra,/., two-handled jar or jug ; 

ponerse en — s, 31, 29, to put 

one's hands on one's hips, to 

put the arms akimbo. 
jazmin, m., jasmine, jessamine, 

20, 27, 21, 4. 
jefe, m., chief. [39, 4. 

Jesús, m. npr,^ Jesús ; see note to 
jiba,/., hump, 74, 29. 
jicara, /., cup, sp. a chocolate 

cup, 8, 6. 
joroba,/., hump, 26, 8. 
jorobado, da, adj.y hunchbacked, 

25, 21, etc. 
jorobado, m., huncbback. 
José, npr, m.f Joseph; see note to 

39.4. 
Josefa, npr,f„ Josepha, 28, 16. 
Joyellanos, npr., see note to 18, 8. 
joven, adj.^ young. 
Juan López, npr, m., John Ló- 
pez. 
Juanete, m., 51,J9, dim, </Juan, 

John, Jack. 
jubón m., waist, shirtwaist, 87, 10. 

125,25. 
San Judas, npr. m., Saint Jude. 
Judit, npr,f,, Judith, 2, 28. 
juego, w., game, play; cf, also 

chasco, 
juez, m., judge. 
jugador, m., gambler, 61, 1. 
jugar, V. «., to play {games, etc.), 

20, 4 ; \ no se juega conmigo ! 



you can't play with me, trífle 

with me, 89, 21. 
juicio, m., judgment, common- 

sense, " senses," 17, 22, etc. ; á 

mi — , to my way of thinking, 

118, 17 ; malos — s, 124, 8, evil 

judgments. 
jumenta,/, she-ass, 69, 8. 
jumento, m., ass ; beast of bur- 
junco, m.f rusb, 14, 21. [den. 

juntamente, adv., together; at 

once, at the same time, 27, 3. 
junto, ta, adj'.y together. 
juntura,/, joint, 72, 5. 
juramento, m., oath. 
jurisconsulto, m., jurísconsolt; 

man leamed in the law ; lawyer, 

125, 8. 
jurisdicción,/, jurisdiction. 
justamente, adv.y exactly, just 

so, 114, 20. 
Justicia,/, Justice ; the Law, 66, 

4, etc. ; 106, 9. 
justificar, V. a. y to justify, to clear, 

to excúlpate, 81, 25, 118, 19, 20, 

etc. 
justo, ta, adj'., just. 
juventud,/, youth. 



kiosko, m.t kiosque, summer 
house, 20, 27. 



la, art.,pron,, see el, éh 



VOCABULARY 



207 



laberinto, m., labyrínth, maze; 

confusión, 99, 14. 
labio, m., lip. 
laborioso, sa, adj,^ laboríous, diffi- 

cult ; 90, 16, painstaking, care- 

ful, patient. 
labrador, m., fíeld worker, 

farmer, 28, 2, 60, 29; peasant. 
labranza, /., f arm ; f arming. 
labriego, m., farmer, peasant. 
ladeado, da, adf,^ crooked ; bent 

to ene side, on ene side, 86, 22. 
ladino, na, adj,, cunning, crafty, 

sly; 1, 8, fluent. 
lado, m,j side, direction. 
ladrón m., thief. 
lagar, m., wine-press, press- 

house, 21, 4; cf. jaraiz. 
lágrima,/., tear. 
lamento, m., wailing, lamenta- 

tion. 
lánguidamente, adv.^ langaidly. 
lanzar, v. a., to throw, to cast ; 

103, 20, to give vent to, to 

utter; to give, to let go, 87, 12; 

— carcajadas, 88, 1, to burst 

into laughter; — se, refi^ 79, 

81, 109, 12, to nish, to spríng. 
largo, ga, adj\, long; tan — 

como era, 96, o, at full length. 
larguísimo, ma, adj^ very long. 
lástima,/, pity. 
lastimero, ra, adj.^ doleful, piti- 
. ful. [sideways, 63, 2. 

lateralmente, adv,, sidelong. 



latín, m.. Latín, 48, 16; cf, dejar. 

lavar, v. a., to ^rash. 

lazo, m., snare. 

le, dat.f see el. 

lección,/, lesson. 

lector, m., reader, he who reads, 
120,12. 

lectora,/, reader, she who reads, 
120, 13. 

leche,/, milk. 

lecho, m.y bed. 

lechuga,/, lettuce. 

leer, v. a.^ to read. 

legar, v. a., to bequeath. 

legítimo, ma, adj,, lawful, legití- 
mate ; justífíed.grounded, well- 
founded; genuine. 

legua,/, league. 

legumbre,/, vegetable. 

leído, da, adj.^ lettered, well-read. 

lejos, adv.j far, af ar : á lo — , 104, 
28, in the distance. 

lejos de, prep,^ far f rom. 

lengua,/, tongue ; cf, morder. 

lentamente, adv.^ slowly. 

leSa,/, wood, firewood. 

leona,/, liohess. 

letra, /, letter; wríting, hand- 
writing ; //., — s, 1, 7, culture, 
letters, education ; al pie de la 
— , 60, 22, exactly, literally. 

levantar, v. a., to raise, to lift ; 
refl.^ — se, to rise, to get up ; 
estar levantada, 119, a, to be 
up, to be dressed. 



2o8 



VOCABULARY 



lere, adj,^ light, slight. 

ley,/,law. 

liar, V, a., to bind ; 67, 1, to roll 

{a cigurette.) 
libar, V, a., to suck, 21, 8. 
libertad,/., liberty. 
libertar, v. a., to free. 
libertino, na, adj., libertine, 26, 6. 
libertino, m., libertine, 78, 26. 
libra,/., pound, 66, 5. 
librar, v, ¿?., to preserve, to safe- 

guard, 4, 11. 
libre, adj.<, free. 
libreja, / {dim, of libra), little 

pound, pound or so, 64, 4. 
libro, m., book,~ de Caballerías, 

6, 6, Romance of Chivalry. 
licencia,/, license, permission ; 

las — i necesarias, see note to 

8, 12; tomarse — absoluta, 

16, 17, to obtain one*s dis- 

charge {of a soldier), 
licenciado, m.^ 48, 4, licentiate; 

see note. 
licencioso, sa, adj,^ licentious, 

106,23. 
ligereza, /, lightness ; nimble- 

ness. 
ligero, ra, a¿^'.,light; light-footed. 
limitarse, v. refl.^ to content one- 

self with, to stop with, 84, 17. 
limite, m., limit, boünd. 
limosna,/, alms. 
limpiar, v. a., to olean, 
limpio, pia, adf,, clean. 



lince, adj., sharp-eyed; acute, 
penetrating, 40, 2. 

lindo, da, a<^'.,pretty; de lo—, 
118, 29, prettily. 

linea, /., line. 

linterna,/, lantem. 

lio, m.t (pack, bundle) ; 99, 7, 
row. 

literatura,/, literature. 

Liviana, npr,/.^ liviana. 

lívido, da, adj'., livid. 

lo, ^ron. neut.t it, that; — del 
nombramiento, 116, lO, about 
the nomination, the matter 
of the nomination ; 80, 28, — 
de mi tiro, all that about 
my shooting ; — que, which, 
what; con — que, 29, 18, 
wherewith, so that; — que 
es, 82, 19, 46, 2S, 122, 8, 128, 
11, as to, as for, when it 
comes to. 

local, m., place, enclosure, room. 

locamente, adv., madly. 

loco, m., madman. 

locuaz, adj.t loquacious. 

lógico, ca, adj., logical. 

lograr, v. a., to gain, to accom- 
plish, to succeed in. 

lonja,/, slice, 11,9. 

López, npr.f López. 

loro, m., parrot. » 

Lucas, npr. fn,t Luke, Lucas. 

lucero, m., moming star, bright 
star, 91, 4. 



VOCABULARY 



209 



Lttcena, npr. /., Lacena, t€wn 
aboutj^ miles south-east of Cór- 
doba. 

Lucifer, npr, m.» Lucifer. 

ludibrio, m.y mocking, derision. 

luego, adv., then, thereupon, 
presently; afterwards; there- 
after; soon; desde — , imme- 
diately ; tan — como» 58, 17, 
98, 4, just as soon as ; hasta — , 
see hasta. 

luego que, conj.^ when ; as soon 
as. 

lugar, m., place, stead; place, 
village, hamlet ; el Lugar, the 
Village. 

lugarcillo, m,, little village. 

lugareSa, /., village woman, 28, 
12. 

lugareSo, m.^ villager, 28, 12. 

lúgubre, adj.^ lugubrious, dole- 
ful. 

lúgubremente, adj., dolefuUy. 

Luis, npr, m., Loáis. 

lujo, m.<i luzury ; de — , 20, 11, "de 
luxe,*' extra, special. 

lujoso, sa, adj.^ rích, luxuriant, 
86, ao, exuberant ; luxuríous. 

lujuria,/., sensuality, 28, 2. 

lumbre,/., fire; cf, amor. 

luna, /, moon. 

luz,/, light; á la — de, 8, 9, in 
the light of ; entre dos luces, 
8, 10, at twilight; de tan 
claras luces^ 11, 17, of such 



clear visión, of such keen per- 
ception, understanding; las 
demás luces, 45, 14, the other 
lights,/^. 

LL 

llama,/, small fíame. 

llamar, v. a., to cali; to ñame; 
— á la puerta, 52, 7, 52, 16, 
54, 17, 97, 10, to knock at the 
door; el llamado, 29, 5, the 
af oresaid ; ] me llamo ! 86, 7, 
that*s my ñame, here I am. 

llamarada,/, flash, flame ; burst 
of flame. 

llaneza,/, simpUcity, 19, 8. 

llanto, m., weeping, tears. 

llave,/, key. 

llegada,/, arrival ; cf. punto. 

llegar, v. «., to arrive ; to come ; 
to succeed ; to reach ; 88, 4, 
aquí llega, here he comes; 
llegase á quererlo, 81, 10, 
sbouldcome to love him. 

llenar, v. a., to ñll ; 119, 12, to 
heap, to cover. 

Heno, na, adj.^ full. 

llevar, v. a., to carry ; to bring ; 
to carry away; to wear; to 
carry off, to obtain, to get, 109, 
22, 111, 12 ; — puesto, to be 
wearing, to have on, 115, 5; 
llevaba cuatro (aSos) de Co- 
rregidor, 26, 12, had been for 
four years Corregidor ; to take, 



2IO 



VOCABÜLARY 



to lead, to show, to conduct, 
6é. 19, M, 24, etc, ; to receive, 
to endorse, 82, 30 ; to laíse, to 
lift, 70, 17. 

llorar, v. n^ to weep. 

lloro, m.j weeping. 



macarro, m., 10, 2i, macaroon ¡ 
/^^ ff ^/^. 

madera, /., wood ; una poca — , 
a little wood ; see note to 11, 28. 

madre,/, mother. 

Madrid, m., Madrid. 

madrileSo, m., Madrilene, na- 
tiva of Madrid, inhabitant of 
Madrid. 

magistral, m:., magistral, see note 
to 46, 22. 

magnifico, ca, adj., magniñcent. 

maiz, m,, maize, com. 

majaderia, /., nonsense, foolish- 
ness, 88, 6. 

majestuosamente adj.y majestic- 
ally. 

majestuoso, sa, adj,^ majestic, 
imposing, 100, 2. 

mal, m., evil, 67, 18. 

mal, adv,, evil, ill, 28, 16. 

maldad,/., malice,93, 13. 

maldito, ta, adj.^ cursed, damn- 
ed; maldita la falta que me 
hacian, 52, 18, damned little 
need I had ; maldita aquella, 
62, 19, devU a bit; maldita 



seas, 67, 13, damn yon, be 
damned to yon; etc. 

maUíechor, «f ., evil-doer, crimi- 
nal, 61, 12. 

malicia, /, malice ; 17, 19, sly- 
, cnnning. 
O, la, adj. (mal), bad, poor, 
ill ; wicked, evil ; ponerse — , 
88,24,tofallül;lo— ,117. 7, 
the evil, the ill. 

maltratar, v. a., to maltreat, to 
assault. [79, 10. 

mamarracho, m., booby, clown, 

mancillar, v. a., to stain. 

manda,/, donation, bequest ; see 
note to 6, 29. 

mandar, v. a., to send; to 
order ; to command. 

manera, /, way, manner. 

manga,/, sleeve. 

manía /, whim, caprice, pe- 
culiarity, 87, 30. 

maniquete, m., mitt, 101, 12. 

mano, /, hand ; — s á la obra, 
to work ! de — 8 á boca, 49, 7, 
77, 21, suddenly, unawares; 
venir con sus — s lavadas, to 
come with improper proposals 
or intentions, 119, 15; echar 
— á, 91, 3, to seize ; de — s 
de, 42, 25, from the hands of. 

manojo, m., bundle,bunch, 27, 2. 

Manolilla,/ npr,, Manolilla. 

mantecado, m., butter-cake, 
cream-cake, 11, 8. 



VOCABULARY 



211 



mantener, v, a,, to maintain, to 

keep up. 
mantilla,/., mantilla, 106, 5, see 

note, 110, 4. 
Manuel, m. npr., Emanuel. 
Manuela,/, npr., Manuela. 
maSana,/, morning. 
maSana, adv.y to-morrow; — por 

la —, 66, 2, 84, 21, early to- 
morrow morning. 
maquinalmente, adv., mechan- 

ically. 
mar, m., sea, 112, 2. 
marayilloso, sa, adj,<, marvel- 

lous. 
marcar, v. a., to mark, to indi- 
cate, 20, 21. 
marchar, v, a., to go; to go 

along ; V. refl.i — se, to leave, 

to go away. 
marchito, ta, adj., withered,pale, 

86,4. 
Marengo, m. npr.y Marengo; 

see note to 6, 14. 
margen,/, margin, border, 10, 5. 
María,/ npr,, Mary. 
María Luisa, / npr,, María 

Louisa, see note to 16, 1. 
marido, m.^ husband. 
mariscal, m., marshal, 126, 18. 
mármol, m., marble. 
marras, adv., f ormerly, recently ; 
de — , 109, 15, well known, 

hereinbefore descríbed. 
8, conj.y but« 



más, adv.y more ; el, la — , the 

most ; 88, 12, ezcept, bnt ; 82, 4, 

other, more than ; — que, 

except ; por — que, however 

much, although ; — bien, 104, 

20, rather ; 27, 7, more, f urther. 
más, adj.y more, most. 
mascujar, v, »., to mumble, 

122,21. 
matar, v. a^ to kiU. 
materialmente, adv.y materíally ; 

in the flesh ; 88, 15, 95, 18. 
matorral, tn ., stubble-field, 68, lO. 
matrimonio, m., marriage ; mar- 

ried couple, couple, 10, 7, 118, 

3. 
matrona,/, matron. 
maula, /, tríck, dodge, fake, 82, 

10. 
mayor, adj., greater, larger; 

older ; caza — , 91, 8, big game ; 

el, la — , the greatest, largest. 
mayores, mpl., elders, ancestors, 

forefathers, 6, 19. 
majTÚsculo, la, a<^'.,capital, large 

io/letters) ; see note to 91, 9. 
mecanismo, m., mechanism. 
mecer, t^. a., to rock, to swing ; 

V. refl., — se, 89, 3, to rock, 
media,/, stocking ; hacer — , 20, 

3, to knit. 
media-fanega, /., half -fanega; 

see fanega, 
mediano, na, a<^'., médium, mid- 

dle, average. 



212 



VOCABULARY 



mediar, v. «., to halve, to take 
half , 63, 16 ; //., mediado, da, 
62, 8, half done, half over. 

médico, m,, physician. 

medida, /., measure, 66, 3. 

medio, dia, adj,, half ; á media 
voz, 34, 2, in a low volee. 

medio, adv.^ half. 

medio, m., midst, middle; means; 
.de en — , 61, 6, out oí the 
way ; por — de, by means of . 

medir, v, a., to measure, 113, 1. 

meditación, /., meditation, rev- 
ene, 74, 9. 

meditar, v. «., to medítate, to 
reflect, 78, 29. , 

Mefistófeles, m. npr.^ Mephis- 
topheles. 

mejilla,/., cheek. 

mejor, a4j,^ better. 

mejor, adv.^ better, best ; por 
— decir, 46, 22, to speak 
more accurately. 

mejorar, v. «., to improve. 

melancólico, ca, adj., melan- 
choly. 

melodioso, sa, adj.^ melodious. 

melodramático, ca, adj.^ melo- 
dramatic. 

melón, m.^ melón. 

mención, /, mention, 20, 11. 

mencionar, v. a,y to mention 
//., mencionado, da, said, 
mentioned, aforesaid. 

menester, adj.^ necessary: 



menor, adj., less ; younger ,* smal- 
1er; el, la — ,the least, youngest, 
etc; — es, 16, 10, minor orders, 
see noU. 

menos, adv.^ less ; echar de — , 
91, 23, see echar ; lo — , 60, 27, at 
the least ; á lo — , cuando — , 
at least ; ni mucho — , 108, 23, 
ñor much less, not by any 
means, far from it ; — noso- 
tros, 121, 21, except ourselves. 

mentalmente, adv.^ mentally, 71, 
11. 

mente,/, mind ; estar allí en la 
— divina, 46, 15, to be in the 
bosom of the gods, on the 
knees of the gods. 

mentir, v. n.^ to lie. 

menudo, da, adj.^ small, little. 

merced,/, grace, mercy; — á, 
10, 16, thanks to ; su — , 65, 
15, his worship. 

Mercedes,/ «/r., Mercedes. 

Merceditas, / w/r., dim, of 
Mercedes. 

merecedor, dora, adj.^ deserving, 
4,23. 

merecer, v. «., to deserve, to 
merit ; to earn, to gain. 

merecido, w., desert, deserts. 

merienda,/, luncheon, coUation. 

mes, w., month. 

mesa,/, table ; en la — , 19, U, 
at the table. \case), 

meseta, /, landing {of a stair- 



VOCABULARY 



213 



mesilla,/, little table. 

meter, v. a., to place, to put ; 
metió los talones, 65, 16, kick- 
ed, spurred ; alguaciles meti- 
dos á alcahuetes, 68, 2, con- 
stables turned procurers ; — el 
montante, cf. montante; — se, 
V. refl,y to interfere ; to med- 
dle ; to mingle with ; to thrnst 
oneself in ; meterse en harina, 
4, 17, to set to work, to get to 
work. 

metódico, ca, adj.^ methodical, 
commonplace, humdrum, 14, 9. 

mi, adj. poss.f my. 

miedo, «., fear ; dar — , 26, 11, 
to frighten ; tener — , 88 8, to 
be afraid. 

mientes, /pL^ thought; reflec- 
tion; j^^ parar. 

mientras, coftj.^ while, whereas. 

mientras que, conj,, while. 

mil, adJ. num.y thousand; a 
thousand, one thousand. 

milagro, m,, miracle, marvel. 

Milán, m. npr.j Milán. 

milicias, /^/., militia. 

militar, a<^'., military. 

milsietecientos ochenta y nueve, 
adj. num.f seventeen eighty- 
nine. 

mimar, v. a.j to caress, to pam- 
per, to spoil, 19, 4. 

mimbre, m., willow-brush, scrub 
willow, 91, 26. 



miniatura,/, miniature. 

ministerio, m., office, duty, task, 
116, 22. 

ministril, /»., bailiíf, under- 
bailiíf. 

ministro, m., minister; officer, 
servant. 

minuto, m., minute. 

mío, mía, a<^'. poss,y my, mine ; 
el mío, la mía, pron, poss., 
mine. 

mira, /, view; intention, pur- 
pose, 15, 7. 

mirada, /,glance. 

mirar, v. a.^ to look. at; v. n,j 
to look ; mira, 29, 5, 80, 16, 85, 
10, 118, 14, see here, look here ; 
52. 19, 62, 29, there's ; i mira lo 
que no sel 81, 24, there's some- 
thing I don't know; { miren el 
vanidoso 1 81, 16, just see the 
vain creature, will you look at 
the vain thing. 

mirilla, /, peep-hole, 66, 9. 

misa, /, mass ; — de prima, 
early mass. 

miserable, adj\, miserable, 68, 5. 

mismísimo, ma, ad/.^ very, in 
person,46, 17. 

mismo, ma, adj.j same, the same; 
self (used in connection wiik 
the personal pronouns) ; lo — ^ 
the same thing, 40, 24 ; lo — 
que, as well as, the same 
as, just as, likej por lo — 



214 



VOCABULARY 



que, 135, 15, just because, for 

the very reason that. 
mismo, adv.^ even; ahora — , 

this very instan t. 
mitad, /, half ; middle. 
mitón, m., mitt. 
moda, /, fashion ; de — , 122, 18, 

in fashion, fashionable. 
modo, m,y way, manner, mode ; 

de — que, 89, 9, so that ; de 

otro — , 102, 12, otherwise. 
mohín, m., gesture, contemptu- 

ous gesture, 14, 28. 
mojado, da, adj,y wet, damp, 

moist. 
molde, f»., mould, matrix ; en 

letras de — , 8, 17, in print. 
mole, f»., bulk, 14, 19. 
moler, v. a.yXo grínd. 
molienda, /., grínding, milling, 

grist. 
molinera,/., miller's wife. 
molinero, miller; //., — s, the 

miller and his wife, 42, 9. 
molino, m., mili; — harinero, 

10, 2, flour-mill. 
momento, m., moment, instant. 
mona, /., she-ape, she-monkey, 

31, 2; durmiendo la — , 87, l, 

sleeping off his drink. 
moneda,/., coin, money. 
monja,/, nun. 
mono, m.^ ape, monkey, 81,2. 
mono, na, adj.^ pretty ; neat. 
monstruo, m., monster. 



montante, /»., broadsword ; me- 
ter el — , 109, U, to interfere, 
to interpose ; (said o/one loho 
interposes his sword beíween 
two combatants). 

monta9a,/., mountain. 

montar, v. a,^ to ride, 86, 16 ; v. »., 
to mount, to get up, 96, 22. 

monte, m., mountain ; wood, for- 
est,ll, 90; see also under capote. 

montera,/., peasant's cap, 28, 7. 

monterilla,/, little cap; see note 
to alcalde de — , tit, XVII. 

monumental, adj,^ monumental, 
belonging to a monument, 14, 
20. 

moral,/, moráis, good moráis; 
cf, lección, 3, 22. 

moraleja,/, moral {ofa story or 
fable). 

morder, v. <z., to bite; no se 
mordió la lengua, 2, 4, was not 
mealy-mouthed, was notabash- 
ed. 

moreno, na, adj.^ dark (o/ com- 
plexión), 18, 3. 

moreno, m., dark complexión, 
26,29. 

morigerado, da, adj\, careful of 
behaviour, 125, 21. 

morir, z/. «., to die ; v. refl,t — 86, 
to die, to be dying. 

morisco, ca, adj.^ Moorish. 

moro, m., Moor; había moros 
en la costa, 102, 18, there were 



VOCABULARY 



2IS 



Moors on the coast, there were 

Moors off the coast, /'. e, there 

were signs oí an eventto come ; 

see note to 102, 16. 
mortaja, /., shroud, winding- 

sheet, 70, 27. 
mortal, m., mortal, 
mortificar, v. a., to afflict, to 

torment, 78, 13. 
mosca,/, fly. 
mostrar, v. « ., to show, 
motivo, m., motive, reason ; con 

motivo de, 1, lO, on the occa- 

sion of. 
mover, v. «., to move; v. refl., 

— 86, to move, 89, 13. 
movible, adj., mobile. 
movilidad,/, mobility. 
movimiento, m., movement, mo- 

tion. 
mozte, 109, 17, see ozte. 
moza, /, girl; young woman; 

buena — , good-looking girl, 

handsome girl ; real — , 14, 8, 

splendid woman. 
mozo, m., youth, young man. 
muchacha,/, girl. 
muchacho, m., boy. 
muchísimo, ma, ad/.^v^ry much, 

very many. 
muchísimo, adv.y very much; 

ezeedingly. 
mucho, cha, adj., much, many; 

mucha diferencia, 88, i, a 

great difference. 



mucho, adv.^ much, very, greatly. 
mudar, v. a., to change; v. n., 

to change. 
mudo, da, adj., mute. 
muela, /, tooth ; molar, double 

tooth. 
muerte,/, death. 
muerto, ta, adj.j dead. 
muestra,/, sign, indication. 
mujer, /, woman, wife ; — de 

bien, honest woman, virtuous 

woman. 
muía,/, mulé, 
mulilla,/, little mulé. 
mulo, m., mulé. [tipiy* 

multiplicarse, v. refl.^ to muí- 
mundano, na, adj.^ worldly. 
mundo, m,, world; todo el — , 

127, 11, etc.y everybody ; medio 

— , lie, 18, half the world. 

Xiicipal, adj.^ municipal, 
alia,/, wall ; — de la China, 

7, 9, Great Wall of China. 
murciano, x»., Murcian, native of 

Murcia, 
murciano, na, adj.^ Murcian ; of, 

from Murcia, 
murmurar, v. n., to murmur ; to 

mutter. 
musculatura,/, muscles. 
mutuamente, adv.^ reciprocally. 
muy, adv., very ; too. 

N 
nacer, v. »., to be bom. 



2l6 



VOCABULARY 



nación,/., nation, state. 

nacional, adj,^ national. 

nada, adv.^ nothing; anything; 
not at all; scarcely; |nadal 
I nada ! 2, 90, 86, 15, no 1 no 1 

nadie, pron.^ nobody, anybody. 

Napoleón, tn. npr.^ Napoleón. 

narigón, ona, adj.^ big-nosed. 

natural, adj.^ natural. 

naturaleza,/., natura. 

naturalidad,/, naturalness, in- 
genuousness, 80, 18. 

naturalmente, adv,^ by nature, 
naturally. 

naufragio, /»., shipwreck. 

Navarra,/ «/r., Navarre. 

navarra,/, Navarrese woman. 

navarro, rra, adj., Navarrese, of 
Navarre, from Navarre. [46, 11. 

navegante, /»., navigator, sailor, 

necesario, ria, adj.,, necessary. 

necesidad,/, necessity, need; — 
sin — , 82, 12, uselessly. 

necesitar, v. a. y to need ; to have 
need; necesito ver, 87, 18, I 
must see. 

necio, cia, adj'.t foolish. 

negro, gra, adj'.y black; la más 
— , 81, 22, the worst yet. 

ni, conj'.f neither; ñor; not; not 
even ; ni ... ni, neither . . . ñor. 

nieta,/, granddaughter; vigé- 
sima — , twentieth deseen - 
dant; "greatest granddaugh- 
ter," 102,8. 



nieto, m., grandson ; grandchild, 

nieve,/, snow. 

ningún, adj. {before masculitu 

nouns\ no, none. 
ninguno, na, adj.^ nO) none ; no 

one, nobody ; anybody. 
niña,/, little girl; littlechíld. 
Niobe,/ npr.y Niobe. 
no, adv.y not ; — bien, scarcely ; 

— obstante, in spite of ; never- 

theless ; notwithstanding. 
I no I int.y no. 
noble, adj. y noble, 41, 12. 
nobleza/, nobility, dignity. 
noche,/, night ; evening; tenga 

V. muy buenas — s, 56, 16, a 

very good evening to you ; 

buenas — s, good evening, 

good night ; de — , by night. 
nodriza,/, nurse. 
nombramiento, m.,appointment, 

nomination. 
nombrar, v, a., to ñame, to 

appoint ; to mention, to speak 

of. 
nombre, m., ñame, 
nomenclatura, /., nomenclature. 
Norte, w., North. 
nos, pron.y US, to us. 
nosotros, tras, pron.^ we ; us. 
nota,/, note, 28, 8. 
notable, adj., notable, remark- 

able. 
notar, v, a., to note, to observe, 
noticia,/, informatipn, news. 



VOCABULARY 



217 



noticias,^/., information, news. 

notificar, v, 0., to announce, 04, 
11. 

novedad,/, novelty, new thing, 
7, 8, 77, 4 ; new tbing, thing of 
importance, 90, 18; accident, 
harm, 117, 18; accident, mis- 
hap, adventure, event, 68, 11. 

novia,/., bride. 

novio, in,y brídegroom. 

nube, /, cloud, swarm. 

nubila, LaHn neuter //., clouds ; 
///. XXIX. 

nublado, da, 0^'., cloudy. 

nuestro, tra, adj. poss.y our, 
ours ; el nuestro, la nuestra, 
pron. poss.y ours. 

nuevamente, adv.^ again, anew, 
105,20. 

nueve, adj, num.^ nine ; las — , 
nine o'clock. 

nuevo, va, adj,y new ; another, 
82, 6, etc.\ 33, 2, renewed; de 
— , again, anew ; cf. also poner. 

nuez,/, nut; walnut. 

número, /»., number. 

nunca, adv.y never ; ever. 

nupcial, adj,y nuptiaL 



ó, conj,^ or ; ó ... ó, either . . . or. 
obedecer, v. «., to obey. 
obispo, /»., bishop. 
objetar, v. a., to object. 
objeto, m„ object ; parpóse. 



obligar, v. a., to oblige, to com- 

pel. 
obra,/, work. 

Obrilla,/, little work, little book. 
Obscuridad,/, darkness. 
obscuro, ra, adj'., obscure ; dark. 
obsequiar, v a., to treat with dis- 

tinction. 
observar, v. a., to remark, to 

observe ; to say ; to watch. 
obstante, see no. 
obstinado, da, aify'., obstínate, 

stubborn. 
Obstruir, v. a., to obstruct; to 

bar, to block, 117, 4. 
ocasión, /, occasion ; moment, 

time; opportunity; en — es, 

18, 16, occasionally, once in a 

wbile. [dental, 

occidental, adj'.y westem, occi- 
OCtavo, va, adj. y eighth. 
octubre, m., October. 
ocultar, V. a.y to bidé, to conceaL 
ocupado, da, adj\, occupied, in 

use, 12, 10. 
ocupar, V, a.y to occupy. 
ocurrencia, /, idea, 17, 17; inci- 

dent, 41,4. 
ocurrir, v, n., to happen, to 

occur ; to take place, to go on ; 

to occur, to suggest itself; 

alsoz/. refl.y — se, in samemean- 

ing. 
ochavo, m., (farthing); see notes U 

21, 8 and 86, 10. 



2l8 



VOCABULARY 



ochO| adj. num.^ eight; aSo de 
— , 5, 3, the year eight : see note, 

odiar, v.a.^ to hate. 

odiO| m., hate, hatred. 

ofender, v, ¿i., to insult, to oíf end. 

oficial, adj\^ official. 

oficio, m., office, duty, function ; 
see predicador. 

ofrecer, vm.^ to offer. 

oido, m., ear; hearíng. 

oír, V. a., to hear; oye, 28, 10, 
56, 25, here, say ; oye, 30, 22, 
114, 11, listen ; he Oído decir, 
28, 20, 1 have heard it said. 

I ojalá ! int., would that, oh that. 

Ojillo, m., little eye, small eye, 
17, 18. 

Ojo, m.,eye; — de la llave, 73, 
20, 93, 2, keyhole i mucho — ! 
91, 13, keep your eyes open, 
keep a good watch, keep sharp 
eyes about you ; poner los — s 
en, 118, 23, cast one*s eyes on ; 
decirme los — s tienes negros 
29, 2, take any liberties with me. 

oler, V. a.t to smell. 

olfatear, v, a., to smell, to scent. 

olfato, nt.t scent, sense of smell. 

•lyidar, v. a., to forget ; — se de, 
V. refl.y to forget ; in imp. cons, : 
se me olyidaba 52, ll, I was 
forgetting; se me ha olvida- 
do, I forgot; olyidábasele, 
78, Id, he forgot, he was forget- 
ting. 



olyido, /»., forgetting, forgetful- 

ness, oblivion. 
once, adj. num., eleven ; las — , 

eleven o'clock. 
operación, /, operation; me 

hace la misma — , 38, 9, has 

the same effect on me, pro- 
duces the same sensation in 

me. 
opinar, v. a., to opine, 126, 3. 
Opinión, /., opinión ; 126, 24, 

reputation. 
oportuno, na, ad/.^ opportune, 

convenient, fítting. 
ora, adv., now; ora . . . ora, at 

one time . . . at another. 
Oración,/, 8, ll, sunset prayer, 

prayer at early candle-light. 
oradora, /., orator, speaker (fe- 

male), 119, 17. 
orden,/, order, command. 
orden, m., order, kind, 8, 16. 
ordenanza, m., orderly. 
ordenar, v, ¿z., to ordain, 15, 10. 
ordinariez, /, commonness, 

coarseness, 4, 16. 
ordinario, ría, adj,y ordinary; 

vulgar, common. 
oreja,/, ear. 
orejudo, da, adj'.t large-eared, 

long-eared. 
orgullo, /»., pride. 
oro, m., gold ; pusieron de — y 

azul, 2, 8, gave a neat dress- 

ing down. 



VOCABULARY 



219 



08, protu^ you {pbjective). 
Ótelo, m, npr., Othello. 
otoSada, /., autumn season, 

autumn, 44, 5. 
otro, otra, adj.^ other ; another ; 

the other {of two) ; diíferent ; 

— tanto, 50, 28, as much more ; 

see also tanto, 
oveja,/., sheep. 
ozte, int.^ sin decir — ni moxte, 

109, 17, without saying boo, 

wit out opening his mouth. 



Pablo, m. npr,y Paul; cf, guar- 
dar, 91, 28. 

paciencia,/, patience. 

pacífico, ca, adj,^ peaceful. 

padre, m., f ather ; pL — 8, fath- 
ers, ancestors ; paren ts. 

pagar, v, a., to pay ; to pay for. 

país, »í., country, land. [63, 28. 

pajar, m., straw-loft, hay-loft, 

pajarera,/, aviary. 

pajarillo, m., little bird. 

pájaro, m., bird. 

pajarraco, m.^ bird, large bird; 
see note 4o 00, 6. 

paje, w., page. 

pajizo, za, adj.<i straw-colored, 
light yellow. 

palabra, /, word; promise; 
tomar la — , 125, U, to take 
the floor; de —,50, 21, by 
word of mouth, orally. 



palacio, m., palace ; en ^, 45, 5, 

at home. 
pálido, da, adj.^ palé. 
palillo, m., drumstick ; tocar los 

— s, 20, 4, play the castagnets. 
paliza,/, beating, clubbing, 62, 

6, 99, 11, 
palo, m.^ stick, stake, palé ; blow, 

whack, 120, 5. 
palomar, m., dove-cote, pigeon- 

cote, 21, 2. 
pámpano, m., grape, grape-vine, 

grape-leaf. 
Pamplona, / npr. , Pampeluna, 

the former capital of the king- 

dom of Navarre. 
pan, m., bread; dough; — de 

aceite, see note to 44,17; más 

bueno que el — , 82, 18, "as 

good as gold." 
pantomima,/, pantomime. 
paSo, m.^ cloth, woolen stuff. 
paSoleta,/, kerchief, 101, 11. 
pañuelo, m., handkerchief. 
papel, íw., paper ; role, part ; — 

sellado, 49, 23, stamped paper. 
par, m,^ pair, couple. 
par, «<í^'., equal, like; al—, 82, 

21, meanwhile, at the same 

time. 
para, prep,^ for ; to ; in order to ; 

see also estar, 
paraje, /»., place, 77, 10. 
parar, v, 0., to stop ; — mientes, 

119, 21, to consider; v, »., to 



220 



VOCABULARY 



stop, to arríve at, to get at, 7, 
4, — se, V. refl., to stop, to halt, 
to stand still; to stop at, to 
balk at, 60, 3; sus ojos se pa- 
raron en, 75, 13, his eyes fell 
upon. 

pardo, da, adj,^ gray, dark gray, 
94,11. 

Pardo, /»., Pardo, see note to 89, 
21. 

parecer, v. »., to seem ; to 
appear ; to seem, to look, 105, 
7 ; ¿ le parece que envié, 12, li, 

shall I send, may I send ? 

se, V. rejl.f to resemble. 

parecido, m., resemblance. 

parecido, da, adj,, similar, like. 

pared,/., wall. 

pariente, m, andf.^ relative. 

parra,/, arbor. 

parral, m., grape-vine ; see note 
to 10, 15. 

parroquia, /., parish ; parish- 
church. 

parte, /., part, portion ; share ; 
la mayor — , 6, ll, the greater 
number, the majority; en 
todas — s, 87, 14, everywhere ; 
por — de, de — de, on the 
part of, on behalf oí, from; 
por mi — , por su — , for my 
part, for his part, etc, 

participar, v, a., to communi- 
cate, to annouñce ; — de, 125, 
19, to share iiu 



particular, m,, prívate citizen, 
62, 1 ; case, detail, fact, 6, 14, 
57, 4, 115, 18. 

particular, adj., prívate, 7, 7, 
113, 14; peculiar, singular, 67, 
28. 

particularísimo, ma, adj., very 
peculiar ; lo — , 24, 16, the very 
singular character. 

partida,/, band {o/ ¿ueriüas), 
126, 26 ; see also comerse. 

partir, v. «., to split, 118, 8 ; — se, 
V, refl.f to split, 83, 15. 

párvulos, mpl.^ children, little 
ones, 25, 8. 

pasar, v. a., to pass; to endure, 
to undergo, 36, 15 ; to pass, to 
spend, 24, 7, 68, 6 ; ¿ cómo lo 
pasa su señoría ? 84, 12, how 
is your worship ? pasar aquel 
trago, 72, 8, to swallow that 
draught ; v.n., to pass ; to hap- 
pen, to come to pass, to go on , to 
occur, to take place 106, 22, ete, ; 
to pass, to go ; to pass through, 
39, 17; to enter, to come in, 
100, 10, 103, 21. 

pasar, m.^ living, competence, 
11, 13. 

Pascuas,/»/., see note to\\,7, 

paseante, m.y promenader ; one 
who takes a walk for pleasure, 
idler. 

pasear, v. a., to carry about, to 
take to walk, 25, 12; to tum 



VOCABULARY 



221 



(la yista), 106, 25 ; v. «., to walk, 
to take a walk ; v. refl,^ — se, 
to take a walk ; to walk around, 
to walk up and down. 

paseo, m.^ walk, promenade; 
dar UQ — , to take a walk. 

paso, /7/., step; pace; tread; way, 
passage, 122, 13, 54,23; thresh- 
old ; de — , 73, 6, at once; al 
— , 59, 1, de — , 42, 29, in pas- 
sing, by the way ; ceder el — , 
54, 23, 100, 11, to make way. 

pastor, w., shepherd; — de 
cabras, 1, 4, goatherd. 

pata, /., leg, shank; — s de 
alambre, 60, 12, spindle- 
shanks. 

patán, m., clown, boor, rustic, 
4,4. 

paternalmente, adv,^ paternally. 

patíbulo, m., gallows. 

patio, /«., court, courtyard. 

patria, /., country, f atherland. 

pausa,/, pause. 

pava,/, pea-hen, turkey-hen ; see 
pelar. 

payasada,/., 1, 13, bufíoonery. 

paz,/, peace. 

pecado, m.^ sin. 

pecaminoso, sa, adj,^ sinful. 

pecho, /»., breast. 

pedazo, m.^ piece, portion ; 
liacerse — s, 109, 23, to break 
in pieces ; see also bárbaro, 32, 
15. 



pedernal, m., flint, 67, 2. 
pedir, V. a.^ to ask; to ask for, 

to request ; como se pide, 12, 

14, as you will, as you please, 

as yon wish. 
Pedro el Cruel, m, npr., Peter 

the Cruel, see note to 89, 24. 
pegar, v. ¿z., to strike, to hit; 

— fuego á, 61,7, to set fire toj 

— la cotidiana paliza, 62, 5, 
to give the daily beating; — 
los ojos, 64, 4, to cióse the 
eyes ; — un tiro, 79, 21, to 
shoot, to fire. 

peinar, v. a., to comb, to groom ; 

mejor peinado, 19, 14, better 

groomed. 
pelar, v. a., to strip, to pluck ; 

— la pava, 45, 24, to make 
love, to court through a win- 
dow ; see note to 45, 24. 

pelear, v, n., to fíght, to struggle. 

peligro, m.f danger. 

pelo, m,, hair ; con más — s y 

seSales, 57, 5^ more exactly, 

in more detail. [10. 

pelotera,/, quarrel, scolding, 46, 
pellizco, m.y pinch. 
pena, /, penalty, punishment; 

pain. 
penar, v. »., to suffer, 30, 12. 
pender, v, »., to hang, to be 

hanging. 
penetración,/, penetration, in- 

sight. 



222 



VOCABULARY 



penetrar, v. n., to penétrate, to 
enter, 107, 8; v. a., to pene- 
trate, to go into, 18, 7, 55, 28, 
92,6. 

Península, /., 6, 11, the Iberian 
Península. 

penitencia,/, penance. 

Penitenciaria, w., Penitentiary; 
s^e note to 46, 12. 

pensado, da, adj.^ bethought, pro- 
vided; mal pensada, 28, 16, 
evil thinking. 

pensamiento, m,^ thought. 

pensar, v, a., to think, to think 
out ; V. «., to think ; to believe; 
— en, to think of; no está 
mal pensado, 33, 1, it is not ill 
thought of, not a bad idea. 

peonza, /., top, whirligig, 14, 22. 

peor, adj., worse ; — que — , 114, 
1, worse and worse. 

pequeño, Sa, adj.^ small, little. 

percudirse, v. refl.^ to become 
. tarnished, 4, U. 

perder, v. a.^ to lose, to ruin, to 
undo. 

perdición,/., perdition, ruin, 85, 
10. 

perdidamente, adv.^ desperately, 
violently. [nerse. 

perdido, da, adj., lost; see po- 

perdiguero, ra, adj., perro — , 
48, 6, hunting dog, bird dog, 
retriever. 

perdón, m.^ pardon, forgiveness. 



perdonar, v. a.y to forgive. 
peregrinación,/, pilgrimage. 
peregrino, na, adj.^ strange, un 

usual, rare. 
perfección,/, perfection. 
perfectamente, adv., perfectly. 
pérfido, da, adj., faithless, 106, 

23. 
pericón, m., large fan, 101, 15. 
periquete, m.y en un — , 83, 22, in 

a jiffy. 
perito, »!., expert. 
perjuicio, m.y prejudice; harm; 

damage, 79, 25; sin — de, 

88, 21, without estoppel, re- 

serving my right, without giv- 

ing up my right. 
permanecer, v. n., to remain. 
permiso, m.^ permission, 113, 25; 

permit, written permission, 11, 

30; con — , 108, 15, by your 

lea ve, beg pardon. 
permitir, v, «., to permit, to 

allow. 
pero, conj.^ but; however; as 

subs, m., no liabia — que 

poner, 3, 9, there was no pos- 

sible objection to be offered; 

no liay — que valga, 87, 3, 

nada de — , 112, e, no but 

about it. 
perpetuo, tua, adj,, perpetual, 

permanent ; see Regidor, 
perro, /»., dog ; — perdiguero, 

48, 6, hunting dog, bird dog. 



VOCABULARY 



223 



persona, /,person ; en — , 84, 10, 

in person, himself ; //., — s, 

88, 5, people. 
personaje, /»., personage, great 

man, 28, 1. 
personal, adj,, personal. 
personificado, da, adj., personi- 

fíed. 
persuadir, v, 0., to persuade, to 

convince. 
pertenecer, v, »., to belong, to 

pertain, to appertain. 
perturbar, v, a., to disturb, 122, 

22. 
penrertir, v, «., to pervert. 
pesar, v, « ., to weigh ; á — de, 

in spite oí. 
pescar, v, 0., to físh. 
pescuezo, /»., neck. 
pesebre, m., manger, feeding- 

rack, críb. 
pesebrera,/., row of mangers, 65, 

6. 
peseta,/, peseta, see note to 21, 

8. 
peso, m., weight ; see caerse, 85, 

22. 
pestañear, v . »., to wink ; to 

blink. 
pestiño, m., frítter; pancake; 

sweetmeat. 
petate, m,^ bore; liar; 31, 10, 

bolster, mattress. 
pez, fn.<t ñsb. 
pezuña,/, hoof. 



piar, V, n.f to chirp. 
picado, da, adj.j pitted, 18, 4. 
picar, z/. a., to pick ; to pick up ; 

to break into bits ; to prick. 
picaresco, ca, ad/,t roguish,. will- 

f ul, 14, 28 ; see note to 1, 9. 
picaro, ra, adj,y naughty; ras- 

cally ; knavish ; see note to 1, 9. 
picaro, m.^ scoundrel, rogue. 
picatoste, m,y bread fried in oil 

orbutter, often with ham ; 8, 6. 
Picio ; más feo que — , 17, 1, 

uglier than mud, ugly as sin. 
pico, »?., point, comer; las siete 

y — , 46, 4, seven o*clock and 

after. 
pie, /»., foot ; á — , 24, 11, on 

foot ; de — , 101, 3, standing ; 

ponerse de — , 106, 5, to rise ; 

al — de la letra, 50, 22 , liter- 

ally, exactly, step for step; 

déme un — para montar, 96, 

22, give me a lif t. 
piedra,/, stone ; 71, 3, tiint. 
piel, /, skin, hide ; — de toro, 

95, 17, rawhide. 
pierna,/, leg. 
pieza,/, piece; hecho una — , 

121, 17, stiff ; buenas — s, 91, 

12, scamps, scalawags. 
pillar, V. a., to rob, to despoil. 
pinar, /»., pine-wood, pine-grove. 
pincel, m., brush, 36, 2, 101, 7. 
pintar, v. a., to paint. 
pintoresco, ca, adj\y picturesque. 



224 



VOCABULARY 



PiSona,/. npr., Piñona. 

pío, pía, adj,y pious ; see pósito, 

50,27. 
pipa,/, pipe, 
las l^irámides, fpL npr,y the 

Pyramids. 
Pirineo, m. npr.^ Pyrenees. 
Pirineos Occidentales, m, pl, n: 

pr.f Western Pyrenees ; see 

note to 15, 14. 
piso, m.) story, floor, 98, 1, etc, 
pisotear, v, a., to trample, to 

tread under foot, to stamp 

upon. 
pistola,/., pistol. 
pUcido, da, adj.y placid, calm. 
plan, m., plan, project, scheme. 
planchar, v. a., to iron. 
planeta, m., planet. 
planta,/, plant. 
plantar, v, a., to set out, to plant ; 

pp, plantada, 41, lo, standing 

firm, standing still. 
plaza,/, place, square, market- 

place ; sentar — , 15, 11, to en- 

list. 
plazoleta,/, > courtyard; lit- 
plazoletilla,/, > tle square. 
plebe,/, people, populace. 
pleito, m., law-suit. 
pleno, na, adj,y full ; complete, 
pliego, m., sheet of paper. 
pluma,/, feather; pen. 
población,/, village, settlement ; 

00, 9, 98, 6, City. 



poblar, V, a., to people, to occupy. 

pobre, adj., poor ; — hombre, 98, 
9, poor creature, simple, guile- 
less creature ; los — s, 194, 12, 
the poor. 

poco, ca, adj.t Httle, a Uttle ; few, 
afew. 

poco, adv,^ little ; á — de, soon 
after. 

poder, V, n,y to be able ; puede 
que, perhaps, maybe ; no ha- 
bían podido menos de sobre- 
saltarlo, 106, 11, had not 
failed to startle him, could not 
helpstartling bim ; como pudo, 
as best he could, 39, 8, etc. 

poder, m., power, might. 

poderoso, sa, adj,^ powerful, 
potent. 

poeta, m,t poet. 

polaco. I»., Pole. 

polilla, /, moth ; 8, 22, musti- 
ness, mouldiness. 

político, ca, adj\, political. 

polvo, m., dust ; — de rapé, 49, 
28, a grain of rappee, a pinch 
of snuff . 

pólvora,/, powder, gunpowder. 

polvorear, v, 0., to powder, to 
dust. 

Pomona, / npr.y Pomona. 

pompa,/, see note to 198, 19. 

Ponce de León, see ZúSiga. 

ponderar, v. a., to extol; to 
exaggerate. 



VOCABULARY 



225 



poner, v, a.^ to place, to put, to 
séT; to put on {pf clotkes\ 
lie, 17, etc, ; 12, 1, to write, 
to write down ; 2, 26, — al 
corriente, to inform; — en 
conocimiento, 56, 20, to com- 
municate, to bríng to the 
knowledge ; 61, 18, to put in ; 
tener puesto, llevar puesto, 
to be wearíng, to have on ; asi 
te hemos pnesto, 25, 16, this is 
the way we have treated you ; 
—la toda de nuevo, 121, 13, 
to fumish it all anew ; — se, v. 
refl.^ to become, to tum, to get ; 
cómo me he puesto, 78, 8, into 
what a State I* ve got; ponién- 
dose colorado, 37, 29, tuming 
red, blushing; se ha puesto 
perdido de polvo, 40, 6, has 
got himself all covered ^ith 
dust; 119, 16, to place one- 
self, to take one*s stand; to 
set (the surt), 

poniente, ai^'., setting, 44, 24. 

por, /r<r/., for ; by ; to ; through ; 
as to ; on account oí, because 
of ■ by means o£ ; — acá, here, 
hither, this way ; una vez — 
semana, 6, 9, once a week ; — 
infame que, 119, 28, however 
base; — los suelos, 79, 16, 
on the ground, through the 
mire ; — si, 64, 21, etct on the 
chance that. 



porque, conj\t because ; for ; that, 

in order that. 
¿porqué? or ¿por qué? con/,, 

why? 
portal, m,t house-door, street 

door ; 107, 6, entry. 
portero, m., porter, janitor, 119, 

16. 
portón, m., outer door, principal 

door. 
poseer, v.a,, to possess, to own. 
poseído, da, adj',, possessed, 

ñlled, 70, 20. 
posesión,/., possession. 
posible, aí/j.f possible. 
Pósito Pío, public storehouse. 
Pósito Real, royál storehouse, 

seí note to 50, 27. 
post, Lat. prep.^ after. 
postizo, za, adj.^ false, artificial. 
postrado, da, adj.^ prostrate. 
postrimerías, fpL^ last years. 
postura,/, posture, 
potable, adj,^ drinkable, fit to 

drink ; agua — , 20, 30, drink- 

ing water, 
potencia, /, power, strength; 

las Potencias, the Powers. 
potestad,/, power. 
precaverse, v. refl., to take pre- 

caution, to be on one*s guard, 

65,18. 
precedente, adj.^ preceding. 
preceder, v. a, and n», to pre- 
cede. 



220 



VOCABULARY 



precepto, m., rule, order, com- 

mandment; día de — , 8, 5, 

seí día. 
precio, m.t price. 
precipicio, m., precipice. 
precisamente, adv., precisely, 

exactíy, just. [tude. 

precisión, /., precisión, exacti- 
preciso, sa, adj., necessary. 
predicador, m., preacher ; sgg 

note to 46, 20. 
predilecto, ta, adj.^ favoríte. 
prefacio, m., preface. 
pregunta,/, question. 
preguntar, v, a., to ask, to in- 

quire. 
prelado, m., prelate. 
prenda,/, garment, 25, 3, 75, 28. 
prendar, v. a., to captivate. 
prender, v, a.., to arrest. 
preparar, v. a., to prepare, to 

make ready. 
presa,/, booty, prey, spoil. 
presa,/, weir, mill-dam, 20, 17. 
presbiterio, w., presbytery ; choir 

oí a church, 126, 15. 
presencia,/, presence. 
presenciar, v, a., to witness. 
presentar, v, a,^ to present, to 

profiíer; — se, v, refl,^ to ap- 

pear, to make one*;s appear- 

ance ; to enter, to present one- 

self. 
presente, adj,^ present; por la 

— , 116, 11, for the present. 



preso, m., captive, prisoner. 
prestar, v, a., to lend. 
pretender, v. a., to pretend, te 

claim, 14, 19. 
pretexto, m., pretext. 
prevenir, v. a., to inf orm, to sum- 

mon, 56, 16. 
preventivo, va, ad/.^ preventive. 
prever, v. a., to foresee. 
previo, via, adj'^ previous. 
previsión,/, expectation, 126, 8. 
prima,/, prime; c/, misa, 
primeramente, adv.^ ñrst, in the 

fírst place. 
primero, ra, adj\ (primer), first. 
primero, adv,, fírst, beforehand. 
primicia,/, first-f ruit ; — s, 82, 6, 

eU,, first-f ruits, oíf ering o£ first- 

fruits. 
primitivo, va, ad/., primitive. 
principal, adj'.y principal, chief. 
principalisimo, ma, adj.j very 

noble, very high-born, 26, 13, 

101, 6. 
principalmente, adv., principal- 

ly, above all. 
principiar, v. n^ to begin, to 

have beginning, 18, 0. 
principio, m., principie; begin- 
ning, orígin, source; entr^e, 

side-dish, 8, 7. 
prior, m.y prior, 
prisa,/, baste, hurry ; tener — , 

to be in baste, to be in a hurry. 
privilegio, m., privUege. 



VOCABULARY 



227 



pro, m. andf.y beneñt, advantage, 

good. 
probabilidad,/, probability. 
probar, v. a.y to try, to taste ; to 

prove. 
proceder, m., action, proceedingí 

conduct. 
procedimiento, w., prcceeding, 

happening. 
procurar, v. a., to see to it, to 

make sure, to take care ; v. n., 

to try, to seek, to make an ef- 

fort. 
prodigio, m., prodigy, marvel. 
producir, v. «., to produce, 
profanar, v. a., to profane, 
proferir, v. a.., to utter, to speak. 
profundo, da, adj.^ profound. 
prometer, v. a ^to promise. 
pronto, ta, adj., quick, rapid; 

hasty; ready. 
pronto, adv.^ quickly, immediate- 

ly ; right away ; de — , sudden- 

ly; tan — como, just as soon 

as. 
pronunciación,/, pronunciation, 

articulation, 35, 5. 
pronunciar, v. a., to pronounce ; 

to utter, to speak. 
propasarse, v. refl.^ to forget one- 

self, 43, 27. 
propio, pia, adj,^ own; exact, 

very ; peculiar, individual ; 

same; natural; belonging; al 

— tiempo, at the same time ; 



del — modo, in the same way ; 
la propia estampa, 14, 1, 26, 
28, the very image ; el — dor- 
mitorio, 96, 11, the very bed- 
chamber, the bedroom itself; 
la propia risa, 75, 25, the very 
laugh, etc, ; — de, 42, 3, 73, 11, 
116, 21, etc,^ peculiar to, natural 
to, etc. 

proponer, v. a., to propose ; — se, 
V. refl.t to propose, to decide, 
to intend. 

proporción,/, proportion ; á — , 
14, 12, in proportion. 

propósito, m.t intention, design. 

prorrumpir, v. «., to burst out, 
to exclaim, 14, 2, 81, 21, 106, 24. 

prosa,/, prose. 

prosaico, ca, ad/.^ prosaic, hum- 
drum. 

proseguir, v. «., to go on, to con- 
tinué. 

protector, íw., protector, patrón. 

protervo, va, adj.^ insolent, 40, 15. 

proveer, v. a.^ to provide. 

provincia,/, province. 

provocar, v. a., to provoke. 

provocativo, va, ad/.^ irrítating, 
charming, suggestive. 

próximo, ma, ad/.j 46, 10, coming, 
near at hand. 

prueba,/, proof. 

público, ca, adj,f public. 

público, m.y public ; audience. 

puchero, m.y stew; (usually 0/ 



228 



VOCABULARY 



beefor muUon^ with garbanzos; 

the traditUmal siaple dish of 

Spain), 
pudrirse, v. refl,^ to rot, 93, 16. 
pueblecillOy m., hamlet. 
pueblo, tn.t people, nation; vil- 

lage. 
puerta,/., door; gate. 
puertecilla,/, little door. 
pues, adv.<, then ; so ; according- 

ly; since; well; for; now; — 

si, 80, 8, yes indeed, I tell 

you. 
pulcro, era, adj.^ handsome, beau- 

tiful, neat, graceful. 
pulidez,/, elegance, smoothness, 

reñnement. 
pulmonia,/, pneumonia. 
pulso, m.) pulse ; yino de — , 11, 

6, home-made wine. 
ipum! bangl 97, 16. 
punta,/, point, tip. 
puntapié, m., kick, 82, 16. 
puntillas, fpL, tip-toes ; andar 

de — , 84, 3, to go on tip-tQCs. 
punto, m., point; spot ; moment ; 

en — , exactly, punctually, 

sharp, 51, 23 ; — y hora, hour 

and minute ; — de llegada y 

descanso, 10, 9, stopping and 

resting place. 
puntualmente, adv.j exactly, 

punctually, accurately. 
puñal, m,, dagger. 
puñetazo, m.f blow (from or with 



the clenched físt) ; andando de 
— 8 con sus lágrimas, 111, s, 
ñgbting his tears with his fists. 

puño, m., físt. 

pupila,/, pupil {pftkeeye\ 85, 23. 

Purisima, see María. 

puro, ra, adj.<, puré ; simple. 



Q(ue) D(ios) CKuarde), 56, 16, 
whom God preserve. 

que, pron,^ which, who, that; 
what: something; el — , la 
que, etc,^ he who, she who, ¿te, 

que, conj,^ that; so that; as; for; 
as for; so far as; to. 

que, prep.^ than, a& 

¿qué? adv.^ how, why, where, 
what, what kind; á — , why, 
wherefore ; — tal, how goes 
it, how are you } 

¿ qué ? pron. int,j who, what, 
which, what sort ; á mí, ¿ — ^,? 
79, 12, what is that tame, what 
do I care. 

\ qué ! inier.^ what, what a. 

queda, /, taps; curfew, 8, 15, 
51, 11. 

quedar, v. «., to stay, to remain, 
to be staying, to be left, to be 
reraaining; to remain, to con- 
tinué ; to be ; — se, v, refl,y to 
stay, to remain, to stop. 

quehacer, m,, business, duty, 
chore, ¿0^ 9. - 



VOCABULARY 



229 



quejarse, v. refl,^ to complain. 

"^nerer, v, a.^ to like, to love ; to 
be willing, to consent; to wish, 
to desire; toexpect, 106, 26 ; to 
try, 84, 19; qniero decir, 111, 
10, I mean; quiera el Cielo, 
96, 25, Heaven grant. 

querido, da, adj.., dear, beloved. 

Queyedo, npr., see note to 18, 20. 

quien, pron. reí. y who. 

¿ quién ? pron. int.y who ; 98, 3, 
who's there, who is it. 

quieto, ta, adj., quiet. 

quince, adj. num.^ fífteen. 

quinto, ta, adJ., fífth ; see note to 
42, 6. [S6, 25. 

quiroteca, /., glove, see note to 

quitar, v. a., to take away, to 
remove; — se, v. refl.y to take 
off, to remove, to remove one- 
self, to go away, to leave; 
(quita! get out, get away, 
stop; I quita allá ! 82, 13, get 
away. 

quizá, quizás, conj,^ perhaps, 
perchance. 

R 

rabadilla,/, mmp, 120, 6. 

rabia,/, rage. 

racimo, m., grape, bunch of 

grapes, 30, 6, etc, 
radiante, adj,^ radiant. 
rama, /., branch, stalk ; en — , 

10, 28, on tbe stalk. 



ramblilla, /., hoUow way; see 

note to 33, 6. 
ramillo, m., little branch, twig. 
ramo, m., branch; — s de lujo, 

20, 11, extra branches, fancy 

accomplishments. 
rancho, m., mess ; encampment ; 

camp ; 65, 9. 
rancio, cia, adj.^ oíd, antiquated, 

musty, 6, 20. 
rapé, m., rappee (snuff). 
rápidamente, adv.^ quickly, rap- 

idly. 
rápido, da, adj.^ swift, rapid. 
raro, ra, adj.^ rare, unusual, ex- 

traordinary, singular, peculiar ; 

cosa más rara, 58, 12, most 

singular thing. 
rascar, v. a., to scratch. 
ratero, ra, adj.y thievish, pocket- 

picking. 
ratificar, v. a., to ratify. 
rato, m.j short time, while ; buen 

— , 1, 24, good time, pleasant 

time. 
rayo, w., ray ; — visual, 73, 22, 

field of visión, 
razón, /, reason ; tener — , to be 

right; entender de razones, 

79, 22, to listen to reason. 
reacción,/, reaction. 
real, adj.y royal, real; — moza, 

14, 3, stunning girl, handsome 

woman. 
real, m^ real ; ue note to 21, 8. 



230 



VOCABULARY 



realce, m., relief embroidery ; ele- 

gant work ; de — , 26, 21, ele- 

gantly, richly. 
realidad,/., reality. 
realismo, m., realism. 
reaparecer, v, n.,Xo reappear. 
rebajar, v. a., to lower, to reduce, 
rebelde, adj.^ rebellious, 75, 10. 
rebonito, ta, adj., very pretty, 

exceedingly pretty. 
rebuznar, v. «., to bray. 
rebuzno, m., bray, braying. 
recargo, m.^ increase, extra 

charge ; see note io 50, 30. 
recato, m., honor, modesty. 
recaudo, m,^ securíty, guaran ty; 

á buen — , 85, 8, under lock 

and key. 
recelar, v. n.y to fear. 
receloso, sa, adj.^ suspicious, 

jealous. 
recibimiento, m.j reception ; an- 

techamber, anteroom. 
recibir, v. a., to receive ; to take. 
recién, adv., newly, recently ; 

— llegado, 109, 2, newcomer. 
recio, m., thick ; stout, 14, 12. 
recitar, v. a., to recite. 
recobrar, v. a., to recover. 
recogerse, v. refl,y to withdraw, 

to retire, to go home. 
recogido, da, adj., gathered, 

brought together, 16, 7. 
reconcentrado, da, adj,^ intense, 

suppressed, 39, 26. 



reconciliación, /., reconciliation. 

reconocer, v. a., to recognize. 

recordar, v. n., to recall, to re- 
member. 

recreatiyo, va, ad/., recreative. 

red, /., net, snare; network; 
wicker-work. 

redondo, da, adj'.y round. 

reducir, v.a.,to reduce; redu- 
cido, 21, 6, reduced, brought 
within, compressed. 

referir, v. <2., to recount, to re- 
late, to mention ; — se, v. refl.^ 
to refer, to have reference. 

reflexión,/, reflexión. 

reflexionar, v. n.^ to reflect, to 
think. 

refrán, »i., saw, refrain, proverb. 

refregar, v. a., to rub ; 38, 15, to 
display, to hold befo re. 

regalado, da, adj., spoüed, pam- 
pered. 

regalar, v. a., to give, to present. 

regar, v. a., to sprinkie. 

régimen, m., pl. regímenes, ré- 
gime. 

regidor, m,^ town-councilor ; mu- 
nicipal councilor. 

región,/, región. 

regocijarse, v, refl.y to rejoice, to 
be glad, to be pleased. 

regocijo, w., mirth, merriment, 
hilarity. 

regresar, v. »., to retum, to go 
back, to come back. 



VOCABULARY 



231 



regular, adj,^ regul¿ur, ordinary; 

usual, natural; 18, 4, medio- 
cre, not bad; modérate; 128, 

3, proper, fitting, decent, 
resolaridad,/, regularity, even- 

ness. 
reina,/, queen. 
reinado, m., reign. 
reinar, v, »., to reign. 
reino, /»., kingdom. 
reir, v. n.j to laugh; — se, v. 

refl.^ to laugh, to laugh heartily ; 

— se de, to laugh at. 
reja,/., grating; casement. 
relación, /, relation; counting 

up, reckoning; tale, story; 

con — á, 18, 2, in relation to, 

in comparison with. 
relampaguear, v, »., to flash, to 

sparkle, 26, 1. 
relámpago, m., flash, lightning 

flash. 
relativo, va, adj.y relative. 
relato, m.^ relation, tale, story. 
religioso, sa, adj.^ religious. 
reloj, «., clock, watch ; — de 

sol, 20, 1^, sun-dial. 
remate, m.y end, limit, 74, 22. 
remedar, v. a,, to mimic, to copy, 

109,23. 
remedio, m.., remedy, cure. 
remojón, m.^ soaking, ducking, 

99,12. 
remoto, ta, adj,^ remote, dis- 

tant. 



rencor, m., rancor, grudge; 
guardar — , 40, 18» to bear a 
grudge, to bear malice. 

rendir, v. a., to overeóme, to sub- 
due, to win, 17, 12; —se, v. 
refl.y to yield. 

renta, /., tax ; revenue, income. 
See note to 6, 20. 

rentilla,/, tax, contríbution. 

renunciar, v. a., to renounce, to 
give up. 

reñir, v. «., to fight, 6, 16. 

reo, m., criminal, 84, 23; — en 
capilla, 70, 20, criminal under 
death sentence, condemned 
criminal. 

reparar, v. n. (en), to consider, 
to remember ; to notice, to be- 
come aovare. 

repartir, v. a. y to divide, to dis- 
tribute. 

repecho, w., slope, 00, 5. 

Repela, m. npr.j Repela. 

repente, de — , adv,^ suddenly, 
75, 13. 

repentinamente, adv., suddenly. 

repetir, v, a., to repeat. 

repique, m., chime, 16, 14. 

replicar, v, a., to reply, to an- 
swer ; to contradict, to object. 

reponer, v. a., to answer, to re- 
ply, 86, 9; 89, 13, to rejoin; 
41, 1, to replace, to put back. 

reposado, da, adj.y calm, peace 
ful, ontroubled. 



232 



VOCABULARY 



rep080| OT.i repose, 
representante, m., representa- 

tivc. [parí), 

representar, v, a,, to play (a 
repugnante, a((/., repugnánt. 
requebrar, v, a.y to court, to pay 

court to, 18, 16. 
reserra, /., reserve, secrecy. 
reservado, da, adj., prívate, se- 

cret, 66, 20. 
residir, v. n., to Uve, to dwell, to 

reside. 
resistir, v, a. and »., to resist ; 

— se, V. refl.y to resist, to ob- 

ject, to make objection, 44, Zí. 
resolución,/., resolution. 
resonar, v, »., to sound, to re- 

sound. 
resorte, m., spring, 108, 16. 
respectivo, va, ad;\ respective, 
respecto de, prep.^ concerning, 

about, in respect to, on. 
respetable, adj.^ reputable, re- 

spectable, considerable, im- 

posing. 
respetar, v. «., to respect. 
respeto, m., respect ; see faltar, 
respetuoso, sa, adj.^ respectful, 

10, 18. 
resplandor, m., splendor, bril- 

liancy, 44, 24. 
responder, v. »., to answer; to 

reply; — de, to answer for, 

to guarantee, to warrant, to 

assure. 



respuesta,/., reply, answer. 
restablecer, v, a,^ to reestab- 

lish. 
restante, adj\t remaining, other. 
resto, m., remainder, rest. 
resueltamente, adv,, resolutely. 
resulta,/, result, consequence; 

sum, amount ; por resultas de, 

41, 4, in consequence of, be- 
cause oí; de resultas de, 89, 

5, by reason of, through. 
resultado, m., result. 
resultar, v. n., to result ; to fol- 

low, to proceed; to tum out, 

to come out. 
retaco, m., fowling-piece, 67, 30. 
retintín, m., special emphasis, 

added emphasis, 28, 15. 
retirar, v, a., to draw, to with- 

draw; — se, v. refl.^ to with- 

draw, to retire, 
retorcer, v, a., to twist,to wrinkle ; 

see hocico, 89, 10. 
retratar, v* a., to portray, to 

paint, to picture, to describe, 
retreta,/} tattoo, 100, 7. 
retroceder, v, »., to draw back, 

to step back. 
retrospectivo, va, ad;\, retro- 

spective, ex postfacto^ 86, 7. 
reunión, /, meeting, gatheríng ; 

assemblage, persons present, 

116, 21. 
reunir, v. a., to collect, to get 

together, to gather together, 



VOCABULARY 



233 



to assemble ; — se, v. rejl.y to 

meet, to assemble, to come to- 

gether. 
revelar, v. a,^ to reveal, to be- 

tray. 
reventar, v. a., to weary, to wear 

cut, 95, 18; V, n., to burst ; 

reventó de feo, 48, 25, was so 

ugly he burst. 
reverencia, /, reverence ; cour- 

tesy, bow, 84, 5. 
reverendo, da, a^//., reverend; 

reverendo Obispo, 44, 14, 

Right Reverend Bishop. 
revés, m., back-handed blow,95, 

8. 
revestirse, v, refl,y to clothe one- 

self. 
revolución, /, revolution; la 

Revolución, the French Revo- 

lution. 
revuelto, ta, adj.y unquiet, dis- 

ordered, stormy, 44, 10. 
rey, «., king. 

rezar, v. a. and «., to pray; re- 
zando sus devociones, 46, 5, 

performing their devotions, 

saying tbeir prayers. 
rico, ca, adj.^ rich. 
ridiculez, /, rídiculous charac- 

teristic, rídiculous quality, 100, 

19. 
ridiculo, la, adj.y rídiculous. 
ríente, adj., laughing, smiling. 
rincón, m., comer. 



riffón, m.y kidney; ríñones, 96, 

14, kidneys, small of the back. 
río, m.y river; stream. 
risa,/.| laughter. 
risotada,/., loud laughter, burst 

of laughter, 54, 7. 
rival, m.y rival. 
RÍVOli, npr.y Rivoli; see noU to 

6,18. 
robar, v. a., to rob ; to steal ; to 

kidnap, to carry off. 
rociar, v, a.y to moisten, to sprín- 

kle. 
rodar, v. »., to roll. 
rodear, v, a., to surround, to 

wrap about. 
rodilla,/, knee ; ponerse de ro^ 

dillas, to kneel, to fall on 

one's knees. 
roer, v. a., to chew ; to gnaw. 
rogativa, /, petition, prayer; 

rogativas, week of prayer; 

season of prayer. 
rojo, ja, adj\y red. 
romance, m.y bailad; se^ note to 

8, 18. 
romancero, m.y collection of bal- 

lads ; see note to 8, 18. 
romano, na, adj.y Román, 
romper, v. a. y to break, to burst ; 

V. n.y to break out, to burst 

out ; rompió á cantar, 83, 9, 

began singing; rompió á 

berrear, 111, 13, burst out bel- 

lowing. 



234 



VOCABULARY 



ronda,/» round, patrol, 51, 11. 
iQipeLff.y garments, clothes,. cloth- 

ing ; — de cama, X24, 12, bed 

clothes, bed Unen. 
Rosa,/, «/r.. Rose, 
rosario, m., rosary; see note to 

8,10. 
rosco, m., doughnut, cruller. 
roseta,/ ; — de maíz, pop-com, 

11, 3, see note. 
rostro, m.y face. 
Rubens, «/r., Peter Paul Ru- 

bens ; see note to 36, 2. 
rúbrica, /, flourish ; signature ; 

see note to 56, 24. 
rugido, m., roar, bellow. 
rugir, V. »., to roar, to bellow. 
ruido, m., noise. 
ruindad,/, baseness, meanness; 

malice. 
ruinoso, sa, adj.^ ruinous, de- 

caying, 24, 24. 
rumor, m., sound. 
Rusia,/ npr.y Russia. 
rústico, ca, adj,^ rude, rustic, 
rústico, m.y peasant ; boor. 

S 

S(u) M(ajestad), 56, 16, His 

Majesty. 
sábado, m,y Saturday; Sábado 

de Gloria, Holy Saturday, 16, 

14, see note, 
saber, r. «., to know, to leam ; 

V. «., to know how, to under- 



stand ; — se, v, refl.^ to know, 
to understand ; as passive^ to 
be known, to be well known. 

sabio, bia, adj., leamed. 

saborear, v, a., to relish, to en- 
joy, to taste. 

sabroso, sa, adj., delicious. 

sacar, v. a., to take out; to ex- 
tract, to get out ; 8, 10, se saca 
en claro, is brought out clear- 
ly, made clear ; — los ojos, 4, 
2, 119, 13, to tear out the eyes, 
scratch out the eyes ; sacaban 
arrastrando, 118, 4, were drag- 
ging out; sacando, 80, 8, puU- 
ing out, drawing ; sáqueme de 
dudas, 121, 22, relieve me of 
my doubts, bring me out of 
doubt, clear up my doubts. 

sacerdote, m., príest. 

sacramental, ad/.^ sacramental; 
see note to 9, 5. 

Sacramento, m., Sacrament. 

sacrificador, m., immolator, 78, 
10. 

sacrificio, m., sacrífíce. 

sacristán, m., sacristán, sexton. 

sacudir, v. ¿i., to shake, to shake 
oíf ; —una guantada, 50, 5, 
to slap, to give a slap. 

sagrado, da, adj., sacred, conse- 
crated. 

saínete, m., farce; see note U 
9,5. 

sal,/, salt ; wit. 



VOCABULARY 



235 



sala, /, room, drawing-room ; 
haU. 

salida,/, exit, way out, outlet; 
see callejón, 60, 23. 

salir, V, n., to go out, to come 
out, to come from, to come 
forth, to go fortb ; no había 
salido la luna, 45, 13, the 
moon had not risen, had not 
come out ; — á luz, 4, 23, to 
come to light, to become 
known, to be told; qué bien 
sale la molienda, 62, 15, how 
well the gríst comes out, tums 
out ; { ahora salimos con eso ! 
83, 16, now we're coming out 
with it ! — para, 88, 21, to set 
out for, to start for; salió 
como una flecha, 65, id, he set 
off like an arrow; salimos 
huyendo, 115, 1, we ran away, 
we started off; salió á flote, 
112, 1, came to the surface; 
— el sol, 125, 2, to rise, to 
come up. 

salón, f»., drawing-room, parlor ; 
room, hall. 

saltar, v, »., to leap, to jump, 
to hop; están saltando por 
justificar, 113, 18, are bursting 
to justify. 

salto, m., leap, spring. 

salud,/., health. 

saludable, adj.^ wholesome. 

saludar, v. a., to salute, to greet. 



salvación, /, salvation, safety, 

72, 18. 
salvar, v, a,, to save; todo se 

ha salvado, 93, 13, all is saved, 

everything is all ríght; — ^se, 

V. refl^ 111, 9, to gain safety, 

save oneself. 
San Francisco, m. npr,y St. Fran- 

cis ; see cordonazo, 44, 6. 
San Judas, m. npr.^ St. Jude. 
San Miguel, m. npr., St. Mi- 

chael ; see note to 38, 29. 
San Quintín, m. npt., St. Quen- 

tin ; see note to 48, 28. 
San Simón, m, npr,^ St. Simón, 
sanctificado, da, adj.y sanctiñed. 
sano, na, adj.^ healthy; whole- 
some ; unerríng, fítting, 4, 19. 
santa,/, saint, 126, 24, 79, 9. 
santidad,/, sanctity. 
santo, ta, adj,^ sacred, holy. 
santo, m., saint. 
sarcástico, ca, adj., bitter, iron- 

ical; sarcastic. 
sarga,/, serge, 26, 20. 
sargento, m., sergeant ; local gov- 

ernor ; see note to 48, 25. 
sarmiento, m., vineshoot, 39, 16. 
sátiro, m., satyr. 
satisfacción,/, satisfaction ; 26, 

5, self -satisfaction. 
satisfacer, v, a., to satisfy. 
sazón,/, season ; á la — , at the 

time, at that time. 
sazonar, v. a., to season. 



238 



VOCABULARY 



severidad,/., severit^. 

severo, ra, adj.y severa. 

Sevilla,/, npr.^ Seville. 

sexo, m.^ sex. 

Shakespeare, m. npr., Shake- 
speare, 28, 1. 

si, conj.^ if, even if ; whether ; in 
case that; — bien que, al- 
though, if ; — no, except ; por 
— , on the chance, to see if, 
64, 21, etc. 

si, adv., how, how very, indeed ; 
67, 6, of course. 

si, pron.y himself, herself, itself . 

si, adv.y indeed, truly; 26, 3, 
rather. 

I si I , yes. 

Siberia,/ npr.y Siberia. 

sibilante, adj.y whistling,hissing. 

siembra, /., sowed fíeld, planted 
ñeld, 65, 17. 

siempre, adv.y always; ever; — 
que, 1, 9, etc., whenever. 

sierpe,/, snake, serpent. 

siesta, /., siesta, af ternoon nap ; 
dormir la — , to take a nap. 

siete, adj. num.i seven. 

sifón, m., underground conduit, 
20, 18. 

siglo, m,y century ; age. 

significar, v. a., to signify, to 
mean. 

siguiente, adj^ foUowing. 

silbar, v. »., to hiss, 106, fSO. 

8ilenci0| m.f silence. 



silencioso, sa, úu^'., silent. 
silla,/, seat, chair. 
simbolizar, v. a., to symbolize, 

to typify. [cally. 

simétricamente, adv., symmetrí- 
simpático, ca, ad/., attractive, 

17,3. 
simple, adj., simple, plain, mere, 

22,13. 
simultáneamente, adv., simulta- 

neously, at once, 6, 25. 
sin, prep., without, except ; — 

embargo, notwithstanding, 

however; — que, conj^ with- 
out. 
sinceridad,/, sincerity. 
sincero, ra, ad;., sincere, 
singularidad, /, singularity, pe- 

CTiliarity. - 
singular, adj'.y singular, strange, 

unusual, 107, 14. 
sino, conj.j but; — que, 42, 8, 

but. 
siquiera, adv., even; at least; 

ni — , not even. 
sirena,/, siren. 
sirvienta, /, servant, maidser- 

vant. 
sistema, m., system. 
sitio, m.t situation, position; 

place, 
situación, /, situation, positíon. 
situado, da, adj., situated. 
sobar, v, a., to knead, 44, 16 ; sei 

note. 



VOCABULARY 



239 



soberanía,/, majesty, 110, 4. 
soberanOi m,, sovereign. 
soberanOi na, adj.y exquisite, ad- 
mirable, splendid, 16, 4. 
sobornar, v, ¿z., to suborn, to 

bribe, 113, 22. 
sobra,/, superfluity ; remamder ; 

de — , 19, 8, more than enough, 

not needed ; extra. 
sobre, prep,^ on, upon, above; 

about, conceming; — todo, 

above all, especially. 
sobresaltado, da, adj,, amazed, 

astonished, thunderstruck. 
sobresaltar, v, a., to startle, 105, 

11. 
sobrina,/, niece. 
sobrino, /w., nephew. 
socarronería, /, cunning, craft, 

59,2. 
sociedad, /, society ; company ; 

sociability. 
socorrer, v. a., to help, to succor. 
socorro, m., help, aid, succor. 
sofá, m.f sofá, couch. 
sofocante, ad/., stifling, choking, 

70, 16. 
sofocar, v, a., to stifle, to smother. 
sol, m., sun. 
Solán de Cabras, m. npr,^ Solán 

de Cabras, see note to 124, 20. 
soldado, tn.y soldier. 
soledad,/, solitude. 
solemne, adj., solemn, formal; 

enormous, huge, 88, 12. 



solemnemente, adv.^ solemnly. 
solemnidad,/, solemnity. 
soler, V. n.y to be accustomed, 

to be used ; solía tener celos, 

22, 4, used to be jealous. 
solicitud,/, solicitude. 
solitario, m., solitaire, game of 

solitaire, patience, 53, 10. 
solo, la, adj,^ alone ; single, solé ; 

only ; un — , just one ; á solas, 

32, 27, alone. 
sólo, adv.y alone, solely, just, but, 

only; tan — , 118, 8, exclusive- 

ly, solely, only. 
soltar, V. a.y to set down, to put 

down, 56, 1; to reléase, to set 

free, to let go of. 
sollozo, m., sob. 
sombra,/, shadow, shade. 
sombrero, m., hat; — de tres 

picos, cocked hat, threecor- 

nered hat ; — de copa, 127, 10, 

tall hat, top hat, stove-pipe hat. 
sonar, v. n., to sound, to re- 

sound. 
sondear, v. a., to sound, 71, 2. 
sonreír, v. «., to smile. 
sonrisa,/, smile. 
sopa,/, sop ; hecho una — , 83, 

14, as wet as sop, sopping wet. 
sordo, da, adj., deaf ; 79, 24, dull. 
sorprender, v. a., to surprise ; to 

take by surprise. 
sorpresa,/, surprise. 
sortear, v. a.j to guess at, 45, 11. 



240 



VOCABULARY 



sortija,/, ring, finger-ring. 
sosegado, da, adj.^ quiet, peace- 

ful, calm. 
sosegar, v. a.^ to quiet, to calm. 
sospecha,/, suspicion. 
sospechar, v. a,, to suspect. 
su, adj, poss,^ liis, lier, its, their, 

your. 
suave, adj.y gentle. 
subido, da, cuij. {p/sleeves)^ short, 

puUed up, 101, 10. 
subir, V. a,t to carry up, to take 

up, 83, 24 ; y. »., to go up, to 

climb up ; to come up ; estoy 

subido, 32,26, 1 am up ; subido, 

60, 8, mounted. 
subordinado, m., subaltem, sub- 

ordinate, 88, 16. 
subsidio, m.y subsidy. 
suceder, v, »., to happen, to take 

place, to occur. 
sucesión, /., issue, progeny, 19, 7. 
sucesivamente, adv.^ succes- 

sively. 
sucesivo, va, adj., succeeding; 

lo — , 126, 22, the future. 
sudar, v, »., to sweat. 
sudario, m., winding-sheet. 
sudor, m., sweat. 
suelo, m., ground, floor; cf, ar- 
rastrar, 70, 16. 
sueffo,m.,sleep; dream. [fortune, 
suerte, /, fate, destiny ; luck, 
suficiente, adj,^ sufficient ; large 

enough, 89, 16. 



sufrir, V, a. y to suífer, to endure. 

sumamente, adj.y exceedingly, 
extremely; very. 

sumido, adj'.f drawn, sunken« 109, 
3; ¿/Iboca. 

sumo, ma, adj.^ most, highest ; 
á lo — , at the most. 

superfino, fina, adj.^ superfluous. 

superior, m., superior. 

superlativo, va, adj., superlative. 

súplica,/, entreaty. 

suplicante, adj., suppliant, be- 
seeching. 

suponer, v, a. and v. »., to sup- 
pose. 

suposición,/, supposition ; dis- 
tinction, eminence, 8, 8. 

supremo, ma, adj.^ highest, su- 
premo. 

suprimir, v, a., to suppress, to 
abolish. 

supuesto, ta, adj., supposed; — 
que, since, inasmuch ; por — , 
of course, 13, 17 ; 62, 9, por — 
tu estarás, and you will be of 
course, you expect to be. 

suspender, v. a., to suspend, to 
cease. 

suspirar, v. »., to sigh. 

susto, w., fright. 

susurrar, v, «., to whisper. 

suyo, suya, adj. poss., his, her, 
their, your ; el suyo, la suya, 
eíCtpron., his, hers, its, yours. 



VOCABULARY 



241 



tabacOy m., tobáceo. 

taberna,/., tavem; inn; public- 
house, 61) 80. 

tabla,/., plank, 72, 6. 

táctica, /, tactics. 

tacha,/, defect, 48, 17. 

tal, adj,.t such, such a ; so and 
so ; oí such a kind, so consti- 
tuted ; — cosa, 12, 8, such and 
such a thing; — otra, 12, 9, 
such another ; el — , the said, 
the aforesaid ; — ó cual, 46, 
17, this or that, one or another ; 
con — de, 49, 3, provided that, 
on condition that, so that; 
¿qué — vamos? 84, 6, how 
are we getting along? — y 
como, 93, 1, just exactly; tra- 
tarle como á — , 107, 23, to 
treat him as such. 

talento, m., talent, capacity. 

tallón, m., retaliation, reprisal; 
pena del —, 108, Hu XXXI, 
lex talionisy law of reprisals. 

talón, m.y heel. 

talonazo, m., dig (with heel) ; cf. 
puntapié, 82, 16. 

talla,/, stature ; height; figure, 
14, U. 

taller, m., shop, workshop; — 
de carpintería, 21, 6,carpenter 
shop. 

tambalearse, v. rt/l., to stagger. 



también, conj,, also. 

tampoco, adv,^ just as little, nei- 
ther, also not. 

tan, adv,^ so ; as ; so thoroughly, 
to such an eztent, 114, 30; — 
. . . como, as ... as ; que . . . 
— , what a. 

tanto, ta, adj\j so much, so 
many ; as much, as many. 

tanto, adv»t as much, as long ; so 
much, so long ; to such an ex- 
tent ; so ; so well ; por — , 14, 
23, by so much, to the same 
degree, correspondingly ; en 
— , then, at that moment, 116, 
24. 

tapar, v. a,, to cover; — los 
oídos, 4, 1, to stop the ears. 

tardar, v. »., to delay, to be late, 
22, 5 ; el (tiempo) que tardó, 
69, 20, the time that he took ; • 
ya no puede — en venir, 106, 
2é, cannot be long in coming. 

tarde,/, aftemoon. 

tarea,/, task, care, 106, 12. 

tartamudear, v. »., to stammer. 

tasar, v, a, (en), to assess, to 
tax, to valué, 21, 8. 

tataranieta, /, great-great- 
granddaughter, 102, 8. 

\t^pron,y you, to you {acc. and 
daty 

teatral, adj., formal, 102, 2. 

teatro, m., theatre, scene. 

techo, m., roof ; ceilingi 



242 



VOCABÜLARY 



tejer, v, «., to weave. 

telar, m., loom, 81, 5. 

telaraüa,/., cobweb. 

temblar, v. «., to tiemble, 38, l ; 
to shake, 126, 4 ; — á, to trem- 
ble before, to be afraid of , 37, 
27. 

temblor, m., tremor, 66, 11. 

temer, v. a., to fear. 

temeroso, sa, adj.j fearful, timid; 

• afraid, fearíng, 107, 23. 

temporal, adj.t temporal,worldly ; 
lo — , 6, 28, things temporal. 

tempranito, adv., early, bright 
and early. 

temprano, a^/v., early. 

tender, v. a., to spread, to set, 
84, 15. 

tener, v. a., to have, to hold, to 
keep; to possess; cuando te 
tuvo, 60, 6, when he took you ; 
téngalas V. muy buenas, 87, 
14, tengan Vds. muy buenas 
noches, 109, l, a very good 
evening te you ; tenía algo de 
ingeniero natural, 20, 16, he 
was somethingof an engineer; 
tenia cuarenta y ocho affos, 
27, 10, he was forty-eight years 
oíd ; no tenemos para qué, 87, 
8, we have no reason for, there 
is no reason why we should ; 
tienes que ir, 124, 6, you must 
go; todo lo que la presente 
historia tiene que ver con, 7, 



1, all that the present story has 

to do with ; ste ver. 
tentador, dora, ad/.^ tempting. 
tentar, v. a., to feel, 116, 4. 
tercero, ra, adj. (tercer), third. 
tercia,/, third ;//. tercias, king's 

share of ecclesiastical tithe ; 

sge note to 6, 29. 
terciana,/, tertian ; tertian agüe, 

81,9. 
terminar, v, a., to end, to com- 
plete ; V, n.y to end, to come 

to án end. 
término, m.y district, limit. 
ternura,/, tenderness. 
terremoto, m., earthquake. 
terrible, adj., terrible, 
terriblemente, adv., terribiy. 
territorio, w., territory. 
terror, «., terror, fright. 
tertulia,/, assembly, coterie, cir- 

cle, club; see note to 8, 12. 
tertuliano, m., member of a ter- 
tulia, 
testamento, m., will, testament. 
testigo, m., witness. 
testimonio, /»., testimony, 113, 

27. 
tétrico, ca, adj.y gloomy, un- 

friendly, dreary, 14, 9. 
texto, m,y text. 
ti, pron,^ you, to you {acc. and 

dat.). 
ii&f/., aunt; — Josefa, 29, 10, 

see note to 11, 20. 



VOCABULARY 



243 



Ticiano, m. npr.^ Titian. 

tiempo, w., time ; season ; á — , 
39, 19, opportunely ; in time ; 
en otro — , 36, 10, in other 
times, in another time ; hacer 
— , 117, 15, to pass the time, 
to kill time. 

tienta,/., so und, probé; á tien- 
tas, 46, 11, groping. [tion, 66, 13. 

tiento, fw., caution, circumspec- 

tierno, na, adj., tender. 

tierra,/., earth; land, country. 

tigre, m., tiger. 

timbre, íw., timbre, quality, 100,2. 

tímidamente, adv.^ timidly. 

tinieblas,^/., darkness. 

tinte; f»., tint, tinge, 102, 2. 

tío, ni. y uncle ; see note to 11, 20. 

tiranía,/, tyranny. 

tirar, v. a., to throw ; to pulí, to 
puUout; to throw down; tiróse 
la mantUla atrás, 110, 3, she 
threw back her mantilla; lo 
tiró de espaldas, S8, 18, she 
overturned him, tipped him 
over backwards ; le tiraba un 
pellizco, 121, 12, gave him a 
pinch, was giving him a pinch. 

tiro, tn.y shot ; see pegar. 

titilar, V, a.y to tickle. 

titular, adj.y titular (holding emp- 
ty ñame or title) ; río — , 10, 6, 
titular river, river by courtesy. 

título, m., title, right, claim ; 8, 
13, titulary, titled person. 



tocar, V. a.y to touch ; to con- 
cern; — la guitarra, etc., 20, 
3, to play ; v. «., to fall to, to 
belong to; tocábale á él, 1, 
11, itfell to him, it was his busi- 
ness ; me toca á mí, 54, 21, 
is my business, is my concern ; 
121, 3, it is my turn ; el esqui- 
lón tocaba á vísperas, the bell 
was ringing for vespers, was 
sounding vespers, 24, 2 ; había 
tocado de camino en el corregi- 
miento, 90, 7, had stopped on 
his way at the mayores resi- 
dence; tocaba en la tierra, 
121, 7, was touching the 
ground. 
todavía, adv.^ still, yet; once 

again. 
todo, da, adj.y all, each, every, 
whole; //. todos, all, every- 
body ; fea y — , 80, 22, ugly 
and all ; — un hombre, 22, 24, 
a whole man. 
todo, adv.yVfhoWyy altogether, all ; 
ante — , 66, 17, above all, first 
of all. 
tomar, v. a., to take, to take 
away ; to eat ; — la cara, 88, 
8, 56, 7, to chuck under the 
chin, to stroke the face ; — la 
palabra, 125, 14, to take the 
floor ; — por, 119, 1, to take 
for, to mistake for; tomo por 
aquí, 47, 4, I turn this way, 



244 



VOCABUJLARY 



I go this way; tomaron por 

la escalera arriba, 100, 12, 

they went on up the stair; 

I toma I 80, ao, 46, 17, 83, 18, 

etc,^ why I well I rather 1 I 

should think so I so, so I 
tomate, m., tomato. 
tonadilla,/, interlude. 
tono, m., tone. 
tontería, /., foolishness. 
tonto, ta, adj.^ foolish, stupid. 
ToSuelO, m. npr.. Tony, 
toque, m., rínging, sounding, 

tolling, 8, 16. 
torcido, da, adj\, twisted, crook- 

ed, 81, 8. 
tormenta,/., torture. 
tomar, v, n., to retum, to go 

back. 
tomo, w., tuming; en — de, 71, 

9, round about. 
toro, fw., bull. 

torpe, adj\, base, vile, 125, 20. 
torpeza, /, stupidity, dullness, 

93, 11. 
torre,/, tower. 
torta,/, cake. 
tórtola,/, turtle-dove; color de 

^, 26, 30, dove-color. 
tos,/, cough. 

tosco, ca, adj,, rough, rude, 18, 6. 
toser, V. «., to cough. 
total, adj'.f total. 
trabajar, v. a. andv, »., to work ; 

— de carpintero, 20, 8, to work 



as a carpenter, to do carpen. 
ter*s work. 

trabuco, m., blunderbuss. 

tradición,/, tradition. 

tradicional, a^'., traditional. 

traer, v. a., to carry, to bring, to 
take ; trae escandalizado, 61, 
2, keeps scandalized; traigo 
mi capote, 68, 29, I have 
brought my cape ; I have my 
cape, my cloak with me. 

tragedia,/, tragedy. 

trágico, ca, adj.^ tragic. 

tragi-c6mico, ca, cuij,^ tragicomic. 

trago, f»., swallow, mouthful; 
drop; draught. 

traicionero, ra, adj.^ treacherous. 

traje, m., costume, clothing. 

tranca,/, bar, cross-bar. 

tranquilamente, adv.^ calmly, 
tranquilly, quietly. 

tranquilidad,/, tranquillity. 

tranquilizar, v, a., to quiet, to 
calm. 

tranquilo, la, adj,^ tranquil, quiet, 
peaceful ; easy {pfmind), 68,9. 

transfigurar, v, a., to transfigure ; 
to change form or appearance; 
— se, 118, 12, to become trans- 
figurad. 

transigir, v, »., to compromise. 

tránsito, m., transition. [clear. 

transparente, adj\j transparent, 

transcurrir, v, n., to pass (cf 
time), 97, 28. 



VOCABULARY 



245 



trascendental, <idj,^ transcenden- 
tal. 

trasladar, v, a., to remove, 16, 
23; —se, V, refl,, 16, 6, 87, 10, 
to move. 

traslucirse, v, refl.^ to be re- 
vealed, to be disclosed ; to sug- 
gest itself . 

trasluz, m., glimmer ; al — , 48, 
21, against the light 

Trastévere, f». «/r., Tras te veré ; 
set note to 14, 17. 

trastienda, /., mental reserva- 
tion, hidden intention. 

trastornar, v, a., to tum upside 
down, to tum topsy-turvy, to 
unsettle, 17, 22. 

trastorno, m., overthrow, upset- 
ting, 7, 8. 

tratamiento, m., title, 86, 29. 

tratar, v. a, and v. n., to treat, 
deal with ; to try, to attempt ; 
— se, V. refl, {tnostly imp,\ to 
to be dealt witb, to be spoken 
of, to be concerned ; to be a 
question of, to bave to do 
with, to concern, to be a mat- 
ter of ; se trata de, 67, l, it is 
about; no se trata de, 118, 21, 
never mind about. 

trato, m.y conduct, bearing, in- 
tercourse. 

travesura, /, pertness, roguish- 
ness. 

travieso, sa, adj,, capricious,* 



wayward ; bad, 96, 2 ; oblique, 

cross ; , á campo — ', 60, 16, 

across country. 
trazar, v, a., to trace, to mark; 

to mark out, to lay out. 
treinta, adj\ num.^ thirty ; los — *, 

14, 11, thirty years {pf age), 
tres, adj, num,, three ¡las — ^^ y 

media, 84, 18, half past tbree 

o'clock. 
trescientos, tas, a^'. num.t three 

hundred. 
triángulo, m., tríangle. 
tribulación,/, tríbulation, afflic- 

tion. 
tributo, m., tribute. 
trigo, m., wheat ; grain. 
triplicar, v. a., to triple. 
triste, adj'.y sad ; moumful ; de- 

pressed. 
tristemente, adv,, sadly. 
triunfar, v, »., to tríumph. 
triunfo, m.j triumph. 
trompa,/, trunk (o/an elephaní)^ 

88, 18. 
tronar, v. »., to thunder. 
tronco, «., trunk (pfa treé) ; dor- 
mido como un — , 40, ll, sleep- 

ing like a log. 
tropa, /, troop; misa de — , 

126, 16, regimental mass; //. 

tropas, troops. 
tropezar, v. n. (con), to meet, to 

encountér, 80, 15, etc, 
trotar, v, n„ to trot. 



246 



VOCABULARY 



trote, m.ftrot. 

tu, adj. poss.^ thy, your. 

tu, pron.y thou, you. 

tul, m., tulle, 101, 13. 

tunante, m.<, loafer ; vagabond. 

turbarse, v, refl.^ to become em- 

barrassed, to become conf used. 
tute, m., tute, a game of cards. 
tuyo, tuya, adj. poss.^ thy, your ; 

el — , la — fpr<m.y thine, yours. 



ú, conj\ or. 

ufanarse, v. refl,^ to be proud, 
to be puíf ed up, to brag. 

ufanía, /, complacency, self- 
satisfaction, príde, 48, 1. 

último, ma, <idj,^ last ; por — , 
lastly, ñnally, at last. 

un, adj,y a, an, one. 

único, ca, adj,^ solé, only, single. 

uniformidad,/., uniformlty. 

uno, una, adj.^ one ; a, an ; some- 
body, so and so, 12, 6 ; la — 
... la otra, 114, 3, the one . . . 
the other; lo -— , lo Otro, the 
one ... the other . . . , the one 
thing ... the other, on the one 
hand . . . on the other; la — , 
one o'clock; //. unos, unas, 
some, a few; 67, 6, some, 
about; unos y otros, 6, 27, 
each, both, all. 



uSa,/, nail, fínger-nail, 97, 13. 

urgente, adj.^ urgent, pressing. 

urgir, V. n.y to be urgent, to press, 
118, 15. 

usar, V. a., to use, to adopt, to 
wear, 16, 29, 187, 11. 

üsarcé {corruption ^yuesa mer- 
ced), you, your worship. 

Usía {corruption of vuesa seSo- 
ría), your worship, your lord- 
ship. 

uso, m., use, custom; wear ; en 
buen — , 86, 14, in good con- 
dition ; not much worn. 

Usted {corruption of vuesa mer- 
ced), you. 

útil, adj.y useful. 

Utrera,/, «/r.. Utrera; ste note 
to 48, 25. 



vacilación,/., vadllation, hesita- 
tion. 

vago, ga, adj.y vague, uncertain ; 
en — , 89, 3, without support, 
unsteadily, too near the edge. 

valer, v, a., to protect, to help; 
V, n., to be worth, to be of ac- 
count, to be of avail ; to count, 
to avail ; to be of use ; cuánto 
vales, 66, 8, what a good one 
you are. 



VOCABULARY 



247 



Talerosamente, adv,^ bravely, 

valorously. 
valeroso, sa, adj.^ valorous, 

doughty, 85, 30. 
valiente, adj., valiant, gallant, 

brave; strong, capable, excel- 

lent. 
valientemente, adv.^ valiantly. 
valor, »!., worth ; bravery, valor. 
valle, «., vale, valley. 
vanidad,/, vanity. 
vanidoso, sa, adj.^ vain. 
vara,/, ell (33.68 inches) 14, 11; 

37, 27, rod; staff, stick. 
variado, da, adj.^ varíed. 
variedad,/, variety. 
vario, ria, adj.^ varíous. 
varón, m.^ man, male. 
varonil, adj.^ manly, manlike. 
Varsovia,/ «/r., Warsaw. 
vaso, m., glass, tumbler, goblet. 
vastago, m.^ bud, shoot; oíf- 

shoot, offspring {of children)^ 

102, 15. 
I vaya ! see ir. 
vecino, m.^ neighbor ; inhabitant, 

f reeman, 57, 17. 
veinte, adj. num.^ twenty. 
vejete, tn.^ oíd man, rídiculous 

oíd man. 
vejez, /, oíd age. 
velar, v. a., to veil, to conceal. 
veleta, /, vane, weathercock, 

14, 21. 
velocidad,/, speed, rapidity. 



velón, f»., lamp, oil lamp; see 
note to Lucena, 48, 11. 

vena,/, vein, 62, 11. 

vencedor, /«., conqueror. 

vencer, v, a., to conquer, to over- 
eóme. 

vender, v, a., to sell; to betray, 
67,7. 

Venecia,/ npr.y Venice. 

venenoso, sa, adj., venomous, 
poisonoiis. 

venerable, adj,, venerable. 

veneración,/, veneration. 

venganza,/, vengeance. 

vengar, v. a., toavenge; — se, 
V. refl,^ to take revenge, to be 
avenged, to avenge oneself; 
to take vengeance. 

venida,/, coming; arrival. 

venir, v. «., to come ; venga, 63, 
12, let's have; venga, 63, 14, 
let it be, have it ; — se, v. refl,^ 
to come away, to come along. 

venta,/, sale. 

ventana,/, window. 

ventanillo, m., small window. 

ventear, v. a., to scent, to get 
wind oí, 91, 24. 

ventilar, v. a., to ventílate; to 
make clear, to have out, 113, 15. 

ventura, /, fortune; good for- 
tune ; happiness ; el, la sin — , 
the unhappy man, the unhappy 
woman, the poor fellow, the 
poor wretch. 



248 



VOCABULARY 



.Ventura Caro, »/r., see note to 
16,16. 

ver, V. a., to see; á — , helio, 
bere, let's see, come ; como 8Í 
lo viera, 47, U, 66, 23, it's as if 
I had seen it, as plain as if I 
had seen it, as it were before 
my eyes; visto que, 116, 17, 
since, seeing that; era visto, 
109, 19, it was plain ; por lo 
visto, 32, 24, as we see. 

ver, m., aspect, appearance, 48, 
23. 

verano, m., summer, summer- 
time. 

veras, jS?/., tnith, earnest, 88, 11; 
de — , .really, tnily, seríously, 
in earnest. 

V. gr. (verbi gracia or verbigra- 
cia), for example. 

verdad,/, tmth ; es — , it is tnie, 
it is so. 

verdaderamente, adv.^ tnily, 
really. 

verdadero, ra, adj,^ real, verita- 
ble, true. 

verde, adj.^ green ; unripe ; strong, 
(blue, yellow), 2, 2. 

verdoso, sa, adj.^ greenish. 

vergüenza, /., shame ; sin — , 
61, 1, shameless fellow. 

versión,/., versión. 

verso, «., verse. 

verter, v, a», to shed {tears)^ 111, 
6. 



vespertino, na, adj., eyening, 
belonging to tlie evening. 

vestido, m., eos turne; garment, 
clothes, dress. 

vestimenta,/, clothing. 

vestir, V. a., to dress, to wear, 
to have on ; v. »., to dress ; 
— se, V. reJLj to dress, to dress 
oneself. 

vez,/, time, tum ; stead ; de — 
en cuando, from time to time, 
now and then; en — de, in 
place of , instead of , by way of ; 
á su — , in his tum, in her tum ; 
otra — , once more, again; 
una — , once ; dos veces, twice, 
doubly ; alguna — , 81, 2, ever, 
sometime ; de una — , 26, 21, 
at once ; por segunda — , for 
the second time ; tal — , per- 
haps, perchance. [by way of . 

vía,/, way; por — de, 28, 16, 

viaje, m.f journey. 

víctima,/, victim. 

vida, /, lif e ; por — de ... , 
63, 6, upon my word, for heav- 
en's sake ; por — de los hom- 
bres, 88, 12, man alive, for 
heaven's sake. 

vídose, 26, 19, see note. 

viejo, ja, ad;\, oíd. 

viejo, m,y oíd man. 

vigésimo, ma, adj,, twentieth. 

vigilia, /, wakefulness, sitting- 
up, 70, 8. 



VOCABULARY 



249 



Til, adj.^ vile, low, base ; 107, 17, 

wretch, vile creature. 
villanOy na, adj.^ low, base, 102, 

3. 
▼ulano, m.^ villager; low-born 

fellow. 
vinagre, m.^ vinegar ; hecho un 

— , 121, 30, sourly. 
vino, m.y wine; — de pulso, 11, 

6, home-made wine. 
violencia, /, violence; act of 

violen ce. 
violento, ta, adj.^ violent. 
Virgen,/, the Virgin ; image of 

the Virgin ; see Carmen, 
virtud,/., virtue; en — de, by 

virtue of , as consequence óf . 
yirtuosísimo, ma, adj.,, most 

virtuous. 
viruelas, j5>/., small-pox. 
visión,/, visión, 
visita, /., visit ; volver de — , 

61, 4, to revisit. 
visitante, m., visitor. 
visitar, V. a.f to visit; to fre- 

quent. 
vísperas,.^/., vespere. 
vista,/, sight; 118, 3, glance, 

eye ; le echó la — enéima, cast 

his eyes npon him ; había se- 
guido con la — , 44, 1, had fol- 

lowed with his eye. 
vistoso, sa, adj.j brilliant, gor- 

geous; lo — , 24, 16, the gor- 

geousness. 



visual, Ad^'., visual; see rayo, 78, 
33. 

viuda,/, widow. 

viveza,/, liveliness. 

vivienda, /, dwelling, dwelling- 
place, 69, 33. 

vivir, V, «., to Uve ; vive IMos, 
86, 10, as God lives. 

vivo, va, adj'., alive; intense, 
lively. 

vocación, /, vocation. 

volar, V. «., to fly. 

voltereta, /, tumble, npsetting, 
109, 16. 

voluntad,/, will; good-will. 

voluntariamente, adv., willingly ; 
voluntarily. 

volver, V. a., to tum ; le volvió 
la espalda, turned her back 
on him; v, »., to return, to 
turn back; to go back; — á 
hacer una cosa, to do a thing 
again, to repeat an action ; no 
se volvió á casar, she did not 
marry again, 126, 33 ; — en sí, 
to come to, to come to one- 
self, to regain one*s senses; 
— se, V. refl,y to retum; to 
turn. 

vosotros, vosotras, pron,^ you. 

voto, w., vow, prayer ; — á Lu- 
cifer, 50, 18, by Lucifer, I 
swear by Lucifer. 

voz, /, voice ; á media — , 34, 
3, in a low voice, in a low tone ; 



250 



VOCABULARY 



dar TOceSy 106, 8, to scream, 
to cry. 

yaelta, /, retum ; estar de — , 
hallarse de — , to have re- 
tumed, to be back ; tomar la 
—, 91, 21, to start back. 

▼uestro, tra, aíi;\ poss,^ your; 
el — , la — , pron.^ yoars; 
Vuestíra Ilnstrisimai Vuestra 
Merced, Vuestra Paternidad, 
Vuestra Reverencia, Vuestra 
Señoría, see note to 11, 23. 

vulgar, adj,^ common. 

vulgo, m.y common people, 
common herd, 4, 12. 



y, conj.^ and. 

ya, adv.y already, now ; — que, 
since, 58, 1, etc.; — que no, 
71, 28, if not; ya, 81, 20, no 



longer; | ya 1. 79, 6, so, now 

we have it. 
yesca,/, tinder; see echar. 
jO,proH., I. 



zaño, fia, oíff't clownish, boor- 

ish, rude. 
zalameramente, adv.t coazingly, 

wheedlingly. 
zalamero, ra, adj.y excessively 

flattering, insincerely flatteríng. 
zancajada,/., stríde, 82, 20. 
zapato, »>., shoe. 
zarpa,/, claw. 
zorra,/, zorro, «., fox. 
zozobra,/, anxiety, angubh. 
zumbón, adj.j waggish, 8, 21. 
Zúñiga y Fonce de León, npr, ; 

see noU to 86, 0. 



This book should be retumed to 
the Iiibrary on or before the last date 
stamped below. 

A fine of five cents a day is inqurred 
by retaining it beyond the specified 
time. 

Flease retum promptly. 



w" m\i"S ' w 



( 




