



p:h»Google
HUCKLEBERRY FINN
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
WORKS BY MARK TWAIN.
THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER. Wiih nearly 2(
lllustmlions. Crown Svo. cloth t«lra, 71. 6^-
, The New Pilgritr
nt of ihe Stean.iliip'Quaker CilV
E and the Holy Land. With zjt llll
THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. With
Dumttoua lIluHmtion^. Ciown Svo. clnth eitra, 71. 61/.
CHATTO & W
PICCADILLY, V
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
hy Google
IIUCKLEBERRV I
.. Cc uwlf
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
hyGoogle ■ I
THE ADVENTURES
OF
HUCKLEBERRY FINN
{TOM SAIVYER'S COMRADE)
Scene : Teie Mississippi Valley
Time ; Forl'v to Fifty Years Aoo
nv
MARK TWAIN
WITH 174 ILLUSTRATIONS
3foilboil
CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY
" ivGoti^le

D,g,t,7P:hy Google
NOTICE.
PsBSON'8 attempticg to find a motive in this narrative will be prosecutad;
persons attempting to find a moral in it will be banisLed j persons attempt-
lag to find a plot in it will be shot
BY OEDER OF THE AUTHOR
PBtt G. G.. CHIEF OF ORDNAXCB.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
EXPLANATOEY.
In this book a number of dialects are used, to wit: the
Mi6 " 8ouri negro dialect ; the extremest form of the backwoods
South-Western dialect ; the ordinary " Pike-County " dialect ;
and four modified varieties of this last. The shadings have not
been done in a hap-hazard fashion, or by guess-work; but
pains- takingly, and with the trustworthy guidance and support
of persona! familiarity with these several forms of speech.
I make this explanation for the reason that without it many
readers would suppose that all these characters were trying to
talk alike and not succeeding.
THE AUTHOR.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Ciriliging Huek — Moses and the " BulruaherB " — Miss Watson — Tun
Sawyer Waits
CHAPTER II.
The Boys Escape Jim — Jim ! — Tom Sawjer's Gang — Deep-laid I'laiiB ii
CHAPTER III.
A Good Going-OTcr — Grace Triumphant — Plajing Robhera — The
Geniea — " One of Tom Sawyer's Lies " 17
CHAPTER IV.
" Slow but Snre " — Huck and the Jndge^SuperstiiJon ... 24
CHAPTER V.
Huck's Father— The Fond Parent-Reform 30
CHAPTER VI.
He Went for Jadge Thatcher — Huck Decides to Leave — Thinking it
Over — Political Economy — Thrashing Around ....
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
COXTEXrS.
CHAPTER VII.
Laying for Him— Locked in the Cabin — Prepariiig to Start— Sinking
the Body — Projecting s Plan— Resting 47
CHAPTER VIII.
Sleeping in the Wooda — Raising the Dead— Oa the Watcli ! — -Exploit
ing the lalaud — A Profitless Sleep — Finding Jim — Jim's Escape
— Signs — " Dftt one-laigged Nigger''— Baliun ....
CHAPTER IX.
The (.'ftve— The Boating House— A Good Haul
CHAPTER X.
The Find — Old Hank Btinker — In Disguise
CHAPTER XI.
Huck and the " VVonian— The Search— Prevarication —Going to Goshen
— " They're after Us I "
CHAPTER XII.
Slow Navigation— Borrowing Things — Boarding the W'reck^The
Plotters — " It ain't Good Morala " — Hunting for the Boat ,
CHAPTER Xlir
Escaping from ilia " \\'reck— The Watchman— Sinking— A Dead Sleep 109
CHAPTER XIV.
A General Good Time— Tlie Harem— French .
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER XV.
Huck Loses the lUft— In the Fof^— -Asleep on the Raft— Iluck Find$ <
the Raft— Traah 125
CHAPTER XVI.
Expectation — " Good ok Cairo " — A White Ue — Floating- Ciirreiicj —
Bunntiig by Cairo — Swimming Ashore ....
CHAPTER XVII.
An ETening Call — The Fann in Arkaasaw- — TnterioT Deeoralious —
Stephen Dowling Bota — Poetical Effusiona — A Tin Pan Piano .
CHAPTER XVIII.
Col. Grangerford — Aristocracy — Feuds — The Testament — " Water-
Moccaains I " — Recovering the Raft — The Wood Pile — Pork and
Cabbage — " Is dat you, Honey P "
CHAPTER XIX.
Tying Up Day-times — An Astronomical Theory — " Dog'sa-Coming "
— Running a Temperance Revival — The Duke of Bridgewater —
The Trouhles of Royalty
CHAPTER XX.
Huck Explains — Laying Outa Campaign —Working the Camp-meeting
— SlyCourting — A Pirate at the Camp-aiefting — The Duke aa a
Printer — Jim Wanted
CHAPTER XXI.
Sword Exercise— Hamlet's Soliloquy — They Loafed Around Town — A
LnzjTown— 01dlioggs-Ui8tliofB < ^g» 204
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
coATnyrs.
CHAPTER XXII.
SherturD— Attending'the Circus — Intoiication in the Eing— The
Thrilling Tragedy .'.
CHAPTER XXIir.
Sold — Royal Compariaona — Jim Geta Home-aiclt .... 326
CHAPTER XXIV.
Jim in Royal Robes — They Take aPaHsengur — Getting Information —
Family Grief 235
CHAPTER XXV.
Is It Them P~Singing the " Doxolojer " ~We can Spare it— Awful
Squftre— Funeral Orgies— A Bad Investment ....
CHAPTER XXVI.
A Pious King — The King's Oleigy— She Asked his Pardon — Hiding
in the Room — Huck Takes the Money
CHAPTER XXVII.
The Funeral — The Undertaker — Satisfying Curiosity ^Suspicious of
Huck-— Quick Sales and Small Protits
CHAPTER XXVIII.
The Trip to England — " The Brute 1 " — Royal Nonesuch — Mary Jane
Decides to Leave — Huck Parting -with Mary Jane — Mumps — The
Opposition Line
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHAPTER XXIX.
Contested EeldtionBhip— The^OK Esplwna the Loss— A. Question of
Handwriting— Tattooing— Digging up the Corpse— Huclf Escapes 296
CHAFTEE XXX.
The King " Went for Him— A Royal Row— Powerful Mellow . . 300
CHAPTER XXXI.
Ominous Plans — Jim Gone ! — News from Jim — Old Recollections — A
Slteep Story — Valuable Information— The Bacli Country , , 314
CHAPTER XXXII.
Still and Sunday-like — Miatalien Identity — Up a Stump— In a Klemna 328
CHAPTER XXXIII.
A Nigger Stealer— Southern^ Hospitality— " You Impudent Young
Rascal " — A Pretty Long Blesging-Tar and Feathers , . 337
CHAPTER XXXIV.
The Hut hy the Aah Hopper— Outrageous — A Simple Job — Climbing
the Lightning-Eod — Troubled with " Wiiehes .... 347
CHAPTER XXXV.
Escaping Properly — Dark Schemes — Discriminatitin in Stealing — A
Deep Hole 366
CHAPTER XXXVI.
The Lightning-Rod — His Level Best^A Bequest to Posterity — Steal-
ing Spoons — Amongst the Dogs — A High Figure ■ . ■ 367
ivGotl^le
coxTEyrs.
CHAPTER XXXVII.
The Last Shirt — -Mooning Around — " In a Tearing Waj " — Sailing
Orders— The Witch Pie
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
The Coat of Anns— A Skilled Superintan dent— Unpleasant Glory —
A Tearful Subject . . . . . . . . .386
CHAPTER XXXIX.
Rats— Lively Bedfellows— The Straw Dummy 396
CHAPTER XL.
Fishing — The Vigilance Committee — A Lively Run— Jim Advises a
Doctor 403
CHAPTER XLI.
The Doctor— Uncle Silas— Sister llotch kiss- Aunt Sally in Trouble . 413
CHAPTER XLII.
Tom Sawyer Wonnded — The Doctor's Story — Doing Jim a Good Turn
— Tom Confesses — Aunt Polly Arrives — " Hand Out Them
CHAPTER THE LAST.
Out of Bondage- Paying the Captive — Yours Truly, Huek Finn . 436
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
ILLUSTRA TIONS.
floctlebeiTy Finn . Frontitpiei.
lie Widow's
Learning aboat Moses and th
" Bolrashers''
Hisi Vatson
Hnck SteatiDg Awa;
Tlej Tip-toed Along .
Tom Sawyer's Band of Kobbers ,
Hock Creeps into his Window
HisB Watson's Lecture
The Robbers Dispersed
Bubbiog the Lanip .
Judge Thatcher Surprised
Jim listening •
" P^ " ....
Hock aod bis Father .
Befonning the Dmokard
Ming from Grace
Cwting out of the Way .
Wid Comfort
Quaking it Over
!I«iiiDg a Howl .
'Git Up "
n* Shanty .
ShwtiDg the Pig .
lUing a Best
latbe Woods.
Vttching the Boat
DUcoTering the Camp Fire
Jim and the Ohost
Hint) Btadigh's Nigger .
Eiplorii^ the Cave
In the Cave .
Jim Beei a Dead Man .
They Found Eight Dollars
Jim and the Soalce
Old Huk Banker .
" A Fair Fit "
" Come In " .
•'Him and another Man " . .
Ejhe Puts up a gnack
" Hnrnp Yoarself "
On the Raft
He Sometimes X-ifted a Chicken .
" Plea
! Don't, Bill "
Id a Fis
" HeUo, What's Up ! " .
The Wreck
We Tamed in and Slept .
Turning o»er the Tmck
Solomon and hia Million Wiv
The Story of " SoUermnn "
'■ We Would Sell the Raft .
Among the Snafrs .
Asleep OD the Raft
" It Amonnted to Sometl
being a Raftsman "
" Boy, that's a Lie "
" Hera I Is, Hnck " .
Climbing up the Bank
" Who'a There? " .
The Hoiua ....
Col. Graogeiford .
Tonng Harney Shepherdson
Hiss Charlotte
" And asked me if I Liked her "
" Behind the Wood Pile "
Hiding Day-times
" And Dogs a-Coming " .
" B; Rights I am a Duke ! "
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
ILLUSTRATIONS.
" I am the Lite Danpliin "
TmI Piece .
On the Baft .
The King as Juliet
" Courting on the Sly " .
" A Pirate for Thirty Years
AnoCher Little Job
Practising .
Hamlet's Soliloquy .
" Gimme a Chaw "
A Little Monthly Drunk ,
The Death of Boggs .
Sherbum Steps Out
A Dead Head
lie Shed Seventeen traits
Tragedy
Their Pockets Bulged .
Henry the E^hth in Boston Har-
Earmless
Adolphn9
He Faltly Emptied that Young
Fellow ...
" Alas 1 ont Poor Brother " ,
" You Bet it is "
Leaking ....
Mating up the " Defflsit "
Going for Uim .
The Doctor
The Bag of Money
The Cubby .
Supper with the Hare-Lip ,
" Honest Injun "
The Duke Looks under the Bed .
Huck Takes the Money .
A Ctack in the Dining-room Door 2
The Undertaker
•'He had a Rat 1 "
" Was you in my lloom ? "
Jawing
In Trouble
Indignation
How to Find Them.
He Wrote .
Hannet with the Mumps
The Auction
The True Brothers .
The Doctor Leads Huck
The Duke Wrote
" Gentlemen— Gentlemen I "
" Jim Let Out " . -,.
Tim King Shakes Huck
The Duke went tor Him
Spanish Moss
" Who Nailed Him? " .
Thinking .
He gave him Ten Cents .
Striking for the Back Country
Still and Sunday-like
She Hu^ed him Tight
" Who do you Reckon't i
" It was Tom Sawyer " ,
" Mr. Archibald Nichols, IPrc-
A Pretty Long Blessing .
TraveUing by Rail
VitUes ....
A Simple Job
Witches ....
Getting Wood ..
One of the Best Authorities
The Breakfast-Horn .
Smouching the Knives .
Going Down the Lightning- Bod .
Stealing Spoons
Tom Advises a Witch Pie .
The Bubbage-Pile .
" Missus, dej's a Sheet Gone
" In a Tearing Way " . .
One of his Ancestors .
Jim's Coat of Arms
A Tough Job . . .
Buttons on their Tails .
Keeping off Dull Times .
Sawdust Diet . .
Trouble is Brewing
Fishing ....
Every One had a Gun .
Tom Caught on a Splinter .
Jim Advises a Doctor
The Doctor ....
Uncle Silas in Danger .
Old Mrs. Hotchkiss .
Aunt Sally Talks to Huck
Tom Sawyer Wounded
The Doctor Speaks for Jim
Tom Rose Square np in Bed
" Hand out them Letters "
Out of Bondage .
Tom's Liberality
Yours Truly ...
n,„i,,-i > , Google

don't know about me, with-
out jou have read a book by
the name of " The Adven-
tures of Tom Sawyer, " but
that ain't no matter. That
book was made by Mr. Mark
Twain, and he told the
truth, mainly. There was
things which he stretched,
but mainly he told the
truth. That is nothing. I
never seen anybody but
lied, one time or another,
without it was Aunt Polly,
or the widow, or maybe
_ .^ ^ „ii.-.=^ - ^'^ " " y- ^^^^ Polly— Tom's
-*ff^'Aunt Polly, she is— and
]Mary, and the Widow Dou-
iM, is all told about in that book— which is mostly a true
•woli ; with some stretchers, as I said before.
Sow the way that the book winds up, is this : Tom and m©
" oond the money that the robbers hid in the cave, and it made
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
S THE ADVENTURES Olf HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
us rich. \\'e got six thousand dollars apiece — all gold. It
was an awful sight of money whep it was piled up. Well,
Judge Thatcher, he took it and put it out at interest, and it
fetched us a dollar a day apiece, all the year round — more
than a body could tell what to do with. The Widow Douglas,
she took me for her son, and allowed she would sivilise me ;
but it was rough living in the house all the time, eonsiderinjj
how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways ;
and so when I couldn't stand it no longer, I lit out. I got
into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead again, and was free
and satisfied. But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and said he
was going to start a band of lobbers, and I might join if I would
go back to the widow and be respectable. So I went back.
The widow she cried over me, and called me a poor lost
lamh, and she called me a lot of other names, too, but she never
meant no harm by it. She put me in them new clothes again,
and I couldn't do nothing but sweat and sweifl^ and feel all
cramped up. Well, then, the old thing commenced again.
The widow nmg a bell for supper, and you had to come to time.
When you got to the table you couldn't go right to eating, but
yon Imd to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and
grumble a little over the victuals, though there wam't really
anything the matter with them. That is, nothing only every- •
thing was cooked by itself. In a barrel of odds and ends it is
different ; things get mixed up, and the juice kind of swaps
around, and the things go better.
After supper she got out her book and learned me about
Moses and the " Bulrushers ; " and I was in a sweat to find out
all about him ; but by-and-by she let it out that Moses had been
dead a considerable long time ; so then I didn't care no more
about him ; because I don't take no stock in dead people.
Pretty soon I wanted to smoke, and asked the widow to let
me. But she wouldn't. She said it was a mean practice and
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
^fOSES AND THE " BULRUSHEnS.'S
TOsn't clean, and I must try to not do it any more. That is
jnst tbe way with some people. They get down on a thing
nhen they don't know nothing about it. Here she was a
bothering about Moses, which was no kin to her, and no use to
anybody, being gone, you see, yet finding a power of fault with
" BULRUSH Ens. "
me for doing a thing that had some good in it. And she took
snoff too ; of course that was all right, because she done it
herself.
Her sister, Miss Watson, a tolerable slim old maid, with
gobies on, had just come to live with her, and took a set at
me now, with a spelling book. She worked me middling hard
B 3
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
4 THE ABVEyTVRES OF IIUCKLEDEItltr FIXy.
for about an hour, and then the widow made her ease uji. I
couldn't stood it much longer. Then for an hour it was deadly
dull, and I was fidgety. Miss Watson wou'd say, " Don't put
your feet up there. Huckleberry ; " and " don't scrunch up like
that, Huckleberry— set up straight ; " and pretty soon she
Tvould say, " Don't gap and stretch like that. Huckleberry— ~
why don't you try to behave ? " Then she told me all about
the bad jitnce, and I said I wished I was there. She got mad,
then, but I didn't mean no harm. All I wanted was to go
Bomewheres; all I wanted was a change, I wam't particular.
She said it was wicked to say what I said ; said she wouldn't
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
MISS WATSOX. 5
say it for the whole world ; she waa going to live so n:^ to go to
the good place. Well, I couldn't see no advantage in going
where she was going, so I made up my mind I wouldn't try for
it. But I never said so, because it would only msike trouble,
and wouldn't do no good.
Kow she had got a start, and she went on and told me all
about the good place. Hhe said all a body would have to do
there was to go around all day long with a harp and sing for ever
and ever. So I didn't think much of it. But I never said so.
I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer would go there, and
she said, not by a considerable sight. I was gliid about that,
because I wanted him and me to be together.
^liss Watson she kept pecking at me, and it gut tiresome
and lonesome. By-and-by they fetched the niggers in and
had prayers, and then everybody was off to bed. I went up to
my room with a piece of candle and put it on the table. Then
I set down in a chair by the window and tried to think of some-
thing cheerful, but it warn't no use. I felt so lonesome I most
wished I was dead. The stars was shining, and the leaves
rustled in the woods ever so mournful; and I heard an owl,
away off, who-whooing about somebody that was dead, and a
whippowill and a dog crying about somebody that was going to
die ; and the wind was trying to wbisj^r something to me and
1 couldn't make out what it was, and so it made the cold shivers
run over me. Then away out in the woods I heard that kind
(if a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about
something that's ou its mind and can't make itself understood,
and so can't rest easy in its grave and has to go about that way
every night grieving. I got so downhearted and scared, I did
wish I had some company. Pretty soon a spider went crawling
up my shoulder, and I flipped it off and it lit in the candle ;
and before I could budge it was all shrivelled up. I didn't need
anybody to tell me that that was'an awful bad sign and would
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISX.
fetch me some bad luck, bo I was scared aad most shook the
clothes off of me. I got up and turned around in my track!!
three times and crossed my breast every time ; and then I tied
up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away.
But I hadn't no confidence. You do that when you've lost a
horse-shoe that you've found, instead of nailing it up over the
door, but I hadn't ever heard anybody say it was any way to
keep off bad luck when you'd killed a spider.
I set down again, a-shaking all over, and got out my pipe
for a smoke ; for the house was all as still as death, now, and
so the widow wouldn't know. Well, after a long time I heard
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
ro.w SAnvEit waits. 7
the clock away ofF in the town go booin^boom — boom — twelve
licks — and all etill again — stiller than ever. Pretty soon I
beard a twig snap, down in the dark amongst the trees — some-
thing was a-stirring. I set still and listened. Directly I could
just barely hear a "'me-yow ! vie-yow ! " down there. That
was good ! Says I, " me-yow ! me-yow ! " as soft as I could,
and then I put out the light and scrambled out of the window
on to the shed. Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled
in amongst the trees, and sure enough there was Tom Sawyer
waiting for me.
I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
" Gl^ajater JI *
went tip-toeing along
a, path amongst the
trees back towards the
end of the widow's
garden, stooping down
so as the branches
wouldn't scraiie our
heads. When we was
passing by the kitchen
I fell over a root and
made a noise. We ,
scrouched down and'■
laid still. Miss Wat-
son's big nigger, named
Jim, was setting in the
kitchen door ; we covild
see hira pretty clear,
because there was a
light behind him. He
got up and stretched
his neck out about a
minute,listening. Then
he says :
" Whodah? "
He listened some
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE BOYS ESCAPE JIM. ©
more; then lie come tip-toeiDg down and stood right betweeo
us ; we could a touched him, nearly. Well, likely it was
minutes and minutes that there wam't a sound, and we all
Ihere so close together. There was a place on my ankle that
got to itching ; but I dasn't scratch it ; and then my ear begun
to itch ; and next my back, right between my shoulders.
Seemed like I'd die if I couldn't scratch. Well, I've noticed
that thing plenty of times since. If you are with the quality,
or at a funeral, or trying to go to sleep when you ain't sleepy —
if you are any^vheres where it won't do for you to scratch, why
you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places. Pretty
soon Jim says :
" Say — who is you? Whar is you? Dog my cats ef I
didn'hear sumf'n. Well, I knows what I's gwyne to do. I's
gwyne to set down here and listen tell I hears it agio. "
So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom. He
leaned his back up against a tree, and stretched his legs out
till one of them most touched one of mine. My nose begun to
itch. It itched till the tears corae into my eyes. But I dasn't
Bcratch. Then it begun to itch on the inside. Jfext I got to
itching underneath, I didn't know how I was going to set
still. This miserableness went on as much as six or seven
minutes ; but it seemed a sight longer than that. I was itch-
ing in eleven different places now. I reckoned I couldn't stand
it more'n a minute longer, but I set my teeth hard and got
ready to try. Just then Jim begun to breathe heavy ; next he
begun to snore — and then I was pretty soon comfortable again.
Tom he made a sign to me — kind of a little noise with his
mouth — and we went creeping away on our hands and knees.
When we wag ten foot off, Tom whispered to me and wanted
to tie Jim to the tree for fun ; but I said no ; he might wake
and make a disturbance, and then they'd find out I wam't in.
Then Tom said he hadn't got candles enough, and he would
lU Tim ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEIiEY FISX.
slip ill the kitchen and get some more. I didn't want him to
try. I said Jim might wake up and come. But Tom wanted
to resk it ; so we slid in theie and got three candles, and Tom
laid five cents on the table for pay. Then we got out, and I
was in a sweat to get away ; but nothing would do Tom but he
must crawl to where Jim was, on his hands and knees, and
play something on him. I waited, and it seemed a good while,
everything was so still and lonesome.
As soon as Tom was back, we cut along the path, around
the giirden fence, and by-and-by fetched up on the steep toj)
of the hill the other side of the house. Tom said he slipped
Jim's hat off of his head and hung it on a limb right over him,
and Jim stirred a little, but he didn't wake. Afterwards Jim
said the witches bewitched him and put him in a trance, and
rode him all over the State, and then set him under the trees
again and hung his hat on a limb to show who done it. And
next time Jim told it he said they rode him down to New
Orleans; and after that, every time he told it he spread it
more and more, till by-and-by he said they rode him all over
the world, and tired him most to death, and his back was all
over saddle-boils. Jim was monstrous proud about it, and he
got so he wouldn't hardly notice the other niggers. Niggers
would come miles to hear Jim tell about it, and he was more
looked up to than any nigger in that country. Strange niggers
would stand with their mouths open and look him all over,
same as if he was a wonder. Niggers is always talking about
witches in the dark by the kitchen fire ; but whenever one
was talking and letting on to know all about such things, Jim
would happen in and say, " Hm I What you know'bout
witches ? " and that nigger was corked up and had to take a
back seat. Jim always kept that five-center piece around his
neck with a string, and said it was a charm the devil give to
him with his own hands and told him he could cure anybody
jim: 11
with it and fetch witches whenever be wanted to, just by say-
ing something to it ; but he never told what it was he said lo
it. Niggers would come from all around there and give Jim
anything they had, just for a sight of that five-centerpiece;
but they wouldn't touch it, because the devil had had his
hands on it. Jim was most ruined, for a servant, because he
got so stuck uj) on account of having seen the devil and been
rode by witches.
Well, when Tom and me got to the edge of the hill-top, we
looked away down into the village and could see three or four
lights twinkling, where there was sick folks, maybe ; and the
stars over us was sjKirkling ever so fine ; and down by the
12 riiii Am'ExruREs of nvcELEiiERRy Fixy.
village was the river, a whole mile broad, and awful still and
grand. We went down the hill and found Jo Harper, and Ben
Rogers, and two or three more of the boys, hid in the old fan-
yard. So vfe unhitched a skiff and pulled down the river two
mile and a half, to the big scar on the hillside, and went ashore.
We went to a clump of bushes, and Tom made everybody
swear to keep the secret, and then showed them a hole in the
hill, right in the thickest part of the bushes. Then we lit the
candles and crawled in on our hands and knees. We went
about two hundred yards, and then the cave opened up. Toio
[Kiked about amongst the iJassages and pretty soon ducked
under a wall where you wouldn't a noticed that there was a
hole. We went along a narrow place and got into a kind of
room, all damp and sweaty and cold, and there we stopped.
Tom says :
'D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
TOM SAWyi:RS GANG, IJ
" \ow well start this band of robbers and call it Tom
Sawyer's Gang. Everybody that wants to join has got to take
an oath, and write Iiis name in blood. "
Everybody waa willing. So Tom got out a sheet of paper
that he had wrote the oath on, and read it. It swore every
boy to stick to the band, and never tell any of the secrets ; and
if anybody done anything to any boy in the band, whichever
boy was ordered to kill that person and his family must do it,
and he mustn't eat and he mustn't sleep till he had killed them
and hacked a cross in their breasts, which was the sign of the
band. And nobody that didn't belong to the band could use
that mark, and if he did he must be sued ; and if he done it
again he must be killed. And if anybody that belonged to the
band told the secrets, he must have his throat cut, and then
have his carcass buml up and the ashes scattered all around,
and his name blotted off of the list with blood and never men-
tioned again by the gang, but have a curse put on it and be
forgot, for ever.
Everybody said it was a real beautiful oath, and asked Tom
if he got it out of his own head. He said, some of it, but the
rest was out of pirate books, and robber books, and every gang
that was high-toned had it.
^me thought it would be good to kill the families of boys
that told the secrets. Tom said it was a good idea, so he took
a pencil and wrote it in. Then Ben Rogers says :
" Here's Huck Finn, he hain't got no family — what you
going to do'bout him ? "
" Well, hain't he got a father ? " says Tom Sawyer.
" Yea, he's got a father, but you can't never find him, these
days. He nsed to lay drunk with the hogs in the tanyard,
bwt he hain't been seen in these parts for a year or more. "
They talked it over, and they was going to rule me out,
because they said every boy must have a fiimily or somebody
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
14 THE ADVENTURES OF IIUCKLEBERRr FIXX.
to kill, or else it wouldn't be fair and square for the others.
Well, nobody could think of anything to do — everybody was
stumped, and set still. I was most ready to cry ; but all at
once I thought of a way, and so I offered them Miss Watson —
they could kill her. Everybody said :
" Oh, she'll do, she'll do. That's all right. Hack can
come in. "
Then they all stuck a pin in their fingers to get blood to
sign with, and I made my mark on the paper.
"'Sow, " says Ben Rogers, " what's the line of business of
this Gang ? "
'* Nothing only robbery and murder, " Tom said.
" But who are we going to rob ? houses — or cattle —
or "
" Stuff! stealing cattle and such tmngs ain't robbery, it's
burglary, " says Tom Sawyer. " We ain't burglars. That ain't
no sort of style. We are highwaymen. We stop stages and
carriages on the road, with masks on, and kill the people and
take their watohes and money. "
" Must we always kill the people ? "
" Oh, certainly. It's best. Some authorities think diffe-
rent, but mostly it's considered best to kill thetn. Except some
that you bring to the cave here and keep them till they're
ransomed. "
" Ransomed ? What's that ? "
" I don't know. But that's what they do. I've seen it in
books ; and so of course that's what we've got to do. "
" But how can we do it it we don't know what it is ? "
" Why blame it all, we've got to do it. Don't I tefl you it's
in the books? Do you want to go to doing different from
what's in the books, and get things all muddled up? "
" Oh, that's all very fine to say, Tom Sawyer, but how irt
the nation are these fellows going to be ransomed if we don't
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
DEEl'-LAID PZAXS. ]5
know how to do it to them ? that's the thing / want to get at.
How what do you reckon it is ? "
" Well, I don't know. But per'apa if we keep them till
they're ransomed, it means that we keep them till they're dead. "
" Now, that's something Hke. That'll answer. Why couldn't
you said that before ? We'll keep them till they're ransomed
to death — and a bothersome lot they'll be, too, eating up every-
thing and always trying to get loose. "
" How yon talk, Ben Rogers. How can they get loose when
there's a gviard over them, ready to shoot them down if they
move a peg ? "
" A guard. Well, that is good. So somebody's got to set
up all night and never get any sleep, just so as to watch them.
I think that's foolishness. Why ean't a body take a club and
ransom them as soon as they get here ? "
" Because it ain't in the books so — that's why. Now Ben
Rogers, do you want to do things regular, or don't you ?—
that's the idea. Don't you reckon that the people that made
the books knows what's the correct thing to do? Do you
reckon you can learn'em anything? Not by a good deal.
No, sir, we'll just go on and ransom them in the regular way. "
" All right. I don't mind ; but I say it's a fool nay, any-
how. Say — do we kill the women, too ? "
" Well, Ben Rogers, if I was as ignorant as you I wouldn't
let on. Kill the women? No — nobody ever saw anything in
the books like that. You fetch them to the cave, and you're
always as polite as pie to them ; and by-and-by they fall in
love with you and never want to go home any more, "
" Well, if that's the way, I'm agreed, but I don't take no
stock in it. JVIighty soon we'll have the cave so cluttered up
with women, and fellows waiting to be ransomed, that there
won't be no place for the robbers. But go ahead, I ain't got
nothing to SLiy. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
10 TBE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY J^/XV.
Little Tommy Barnes wns asleep, now, and when they waked
him up he was scared, and cried, and said he wanted to go
home to his ma, and didn't want to be a robber any more.
So they all made fun of him, and called him cry-baby, and
that made him mad, and he said he would go straight and tell
all the secrets. But Tom give him five cents to keep quiet,
and said we would all go home and meet nest week and rob
somebody and kill soriie people.
Ben Rogers said he couldn't get out much, only Sundays,
and so he wanted to begin next Sunday ; but all the boys said
it would be wicked to do it on Sunday, and that settled the
thing. They agreed to get together and fix a day as soon as
they could, and then we elected Tom Sawyer first captain aud
Jo Harper second captain of the Gang, and so started home.
I dumb up the shed and crept into my window just before
day'?ras breaking. My new clothes was all greased up and
clayey, and I was dog-tired.
HUCK CUE EPS IS TO HIS WINBOW.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
oterlK'
If I got a good goingnaver ia
the rnorniDg, from old Misa
Watson, on account of my
clothes ; but the widow she
didn't scold, but only cleaned
off the grease and clay, and
looked so sorry that I
thought I would behave a
while if I could. Then Miss
Watson she took me in the
closet; and prayed, but noth-
ing come of it. She told
me to pray every day, and
whatever I asked for I would
get it. Kut it wam't so. I
tried it. Once I got a fish-
line, but no hooks. It wam't
any good to me without
se or four times, but somehow
ad-by, one day, I asked Miss
aid I was a fool. She never
( it out no way.
n the woods, and had a long
If, if a body can get anything
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
1« THE ADVliXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
they pray for, why don't Deacon Winn get back the money he
lost on pork ? Why can't the widow get back her silver snuff-
box that was stole ? Why can't Miss Watson fet up ? No,
sayB I to myself, there aia't nothing in it. I went and told the
widow about it, and she said the thing a body could get by
praying for it was " spiritiial gifts, "'This was too many for
me, but she told me what she meant — I must help other
people, and do everything I could for other people, and look
out for them all the time, and never think about myself. This
WEB including Miss Watson, as I took it. I went out in the
woods and turned it over in my mind a long time, but I couldn't
see no advantage about it — except for the other people — so at
last I reckoned I wouldn't worry about it any more, but just
let it go. Sometimes the widow would take me one side
and talk about Providence in a way to make a body's mouth
water ; but maybe next day Miss Watson would take hold and
knock it all down again. I judged I could see that there was
two Providences, and a poor chap would stand considerable
show with the widow's Providence, but if Miss Watson's got
him there wam't no help for him any more. I thought it all
out, and reckoned I would belong to the widow's, if he wanted
me, though I couldn't make out how he was agoing to be any
better oflf then than what he was before, seeing I was so igno-
rant and so kind of low-down and ornery.
Pap he hadn't been seen for more than a year, and that was
comfortable for me ; I didn't want to see him no more. He ,
used to always whale me when he was sober and could get his'
hands on me ; though I used to take to the woods most of the
time when he was around. Well, about this time he was found
in the river drowned, about twelve mile above town, so people
said. They judged it was him, anyway ; said this drowned man
was just his size, and was ragged, and had uncommon long hair
— which was all like pap — but they couldn't make nothing out
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
FLAYING ROBBERS. Jtf
of lie face, because it had been in the water so long it wam't
much like a face at all. They said he was floating on his back
in the water. They took him and buried him on the bank.
But I wam't comfortable long, because I happened to tbiuk of
something. I knowed mighty well that a drownded man don't
float on his back, but on bis face. , So I knowed, then, that this
wam't pap, but a woman dressed up in a man's clothes. So I
«as uncomfortable again. I judged the old man would turn
np again by-and-by, though I wiehed he wouldn't.
We played robbers now and then about a month, and then I
resigned. All the boys did. We hadn't robbed nobody, we
hadn't killed any people, but only just pretended. We used to
hop out of the woods and go charging down on hog-drovers and
wranen in carts taking garden stuff to market, but we never
hirsd any of them. Tom Sawyer called the hogs " ingots, " and
he called the turnips and stuff " julery, " and we would go to the
cave and pow-wow over what we had done and how many people
ffe had killed and marked. But I couldn't see no profit in it.
One time Tom sent a boy to run about town with a blazing
stick, which he called a slogan (which was the sign for the
{Gang to get together), and then lie said he had got secret news
by his spies that next day a whole parcel of Spanish merchants
and rich A-rabs was going to camp in Cave Hollow with two
hundred elephants, and six hundred camels, and over a thousand
" snmter " mules, all loaded down with di'monds, and they
didn't have only a guard of four hundred soldiers, and so we
iiwild lay in ambuscade, as he called it, and kill the lot and
*w > p the things. He said we must slick up our swords and
gnnss " od get ready. He never could go after even a tumip-
wt but he must have the swords and guns all scoured up for
rt; though they was only lath and broom-sticks, and you
wight scour at them till you rotted, and then they warn't worth
sinoiithfal of Jtshes more than what they was before, I didn't
r -i
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
L > 0 THE ADrEyTURES OF IIUCKLEISERRY FIKX.
lielieve we could lick such a crowd of Spaniards and A-ralis,
Ijut I wanted to see the camels and elephants, so I wag on hand
next day, Saturday, in the ambuscade ; and when we got the
word, we rushed out of the woods and down the hill. But
a
there wam't no Spaniards and A-rabs, and there warn'
camels nor no elephants. It wam't anything but a Sunday-
Rchool picnic, and only a primer-olass at that. We busted il
np, and chased the children up the hollow; but we never gd
anything but some doughnuts and jam, though Ben Rogeri
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
THE GESIES. 21
got a rag doll, and Jo Harper got a hymn-book and a tract ;
and then the teacher charged in and made us drop everything
and cut. I didn't aee no di'monds, and I told Tom Sawyer bo.
-He said there was loads of them there, anyway; and he said
there was A-rabs there, too, and elephants and things. I said,
why couldn't we see them, then? He said if I wam't so
ignorant, but had read a book called " Don Quixote, " I would
know without asking. He said it was all done by enchantment.
He said there was hundreds of soldiers there, and elephants
and treasure, and so on, but we had enemies which he called
magicians, and they had turned the whole thing into an infant
Sunday school, just out of spite. I said all right, then the
thing for us to do was to go for the magicians. Tom Sawyer
said I was a numskull.
" Why, " sayd he, " a magician could call up a lot of genies,
■and they would hash you up like nothing before you could sny
Jack Eobinson. They are as tall as a tree and as big around
as a church. "
" Well, " I says, " s'pose we got some genies to help us — ■
can't we lick the other crowd then ? "
" How you going to get them ? "
" I don't know. How do they get them ? "
" Why, they rub an old tin lamp or an iron ring, and then
the geniea come tearing in, with the thunder and lightning a-
ripping around and the smoke a-rolUng, and everything they're
told to do they up and do it. They don't think nothing of
pulling a shot tower up by the roots, and belting a Sunday
school superintendent over the head with it— or any other man.''
" Who makes them tear around so ? "
" Why, whoever rubs the lamp or the ring. They belong
to whoever ruba the lamp or the ring, and they've got to do
whatever he says. If he tells them to build a palace forty
miles long, out of di'monds, and fill it full of chewing gum, or
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
2-i THE AVVEyrUItES OF IIUCKLEnESRV FIXX.
whatever you want, and fetch an emperor's daughter from
China for jon to marry, they've got to do it — and they've got
to do it before sun-np next morning, too. And more — they've
got to waltz that palace around over the country wherever yon
want it, vou understand. "
BUBBING THE LAMP.
"'Well, " says I, " I think they are a piick of flatheads for
not keeping the palace themselves'stead of fooling them away
like that. And what's more — if I was one of them I would see
a man in Jericho before I would drop my business and come to
him for the rubbing of an old tin lamp. "
hyGoogle
" 0-V£ OF TOM & .i WYER'S LIES. " 23
" How you talk, Huck Fiiin. Why, you'd Aave to come when
he mbbed it, whether you wanted to or not. "
" What, and I aa high as a tree and as big as a church ?
AU right, then ; I would come ; but I lay I'd make that man
climb the highest tree there was in the country. "
" Shucks, it ain't no use to talk to you, Huck Finn. You
don't seem to know anything, somehow — perfect sap-head. "
I thought all this over for two or three days, and then I
reckoned I would see if there was anything in it. I got an
old tin lamp and an iron ring and went out in the woods and
nibbed and rubbed till I sweat like an Injun, calculating to
build a palace and sell it ; but it wani't no use, none of the
genies come. So then I judged that all that stuff was only
jiist one of Tom Sawyer's lies. I reckoned he believed in the
A-rabs and the elephants, but as for me I think different. It
had all the marks of a Sunday school.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
Gf(abteT Jm
WklL, throe or four
mouths run along,
and it ft-as well into
the winter, now. I
had been to school
most all the time,
and could spell, and
read, and writejust
a little, and could
say the niultiiili-
cation table up to
six times seven is
thirty-five, and I
don'treckon I could
ever get anyfurther
than that if I was
to live for ever. I
don't take no stock
in mathematics,
anyway.
•■'■'■'-'■ At first I hateil
the school, but by-and-by I got so I could stand it. Whenever
I got uncommon tired I played Lookey, and the hiding I got
next day done me good and cheered me up. So the longer I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
••SLOW BUT SURE.- 95
went to school the easier it got to be. I was geltiDg sort of
used to the widow's ways, too, and they warn't so raspy on me.
Living in a house, and sleeping in a bed, pulled on me pi-etty
tight, mostly, but before the cold weather I used to slide out
and sleep in the woods, sometimes, and so that was a rest to
me. I liked the old ways best, but I was getting so I liked
the new ones, too, a little bit. The widow said I was coming
along slow but sure, and doing very satisfactory. She said she
warn't ashamed of me.
One morning I happened to turn over the saltcellar at
breakfast. I reached for some of it as quick as I could, to
throw over my left shoulder and keep off the bad kick, but
Miss Watson was in ahead of me, and crossed me off. She
tays, " Take your hands away. Huckleberry — what a mess you
are always making I " The widow put in a good word for me,
but that warn't going to keep off the bad luck, I knowed that
well enough. I started out, after breakfast, feeling worried
and shaky, and wondering where it was going to fall on me,
and what it vas going to be. There is ways to keep otF some
kinds of bad luck, but this wasn't one of them kind; so I never
tried to do anything, but just poked along low-spirited and on
the watch-out.
I went down the front garden and clumh over the stile,
where you go through the high board fence. There was an
inch of new snow on the ground, and I seen somebody's tracks.
They had come up from the quarry and stood around the stile
awhile, and then went on around the garden fence. It was
funny they hadn't come in, after standing around so. I
couldn't make it out. It was very curious, somehow. I was
going to follow around, but I stooped down to look at the
tracks first, I didn't notice anything at iirst, but next I did.
There was a cross in the left boot-heel made with big nails, to
keep off the devil.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
^0 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
I was up in a second and shinning down the hill. I looked
over my shoulder every now and then, but I didn't see no-
body. I was at Judge Thatcher's as quick as I could get there.
He said :
" Why, my boy, you are all out of breath. Did you come
for your interest ? "
JUDGE THATCHER SUHrniSED.
** Xo, sir, " I says ; " is there some for me ? "
" Oh, yes, a half-yearly is in, last night. Over a hundred
and fifty dollars. Quite a fortune for yon. Vou better let me
invest it along with your six thousand, because if you take it
you'll spend it. "
" No, sir, " I fays,'* I don't want to spend it. I don't want
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
JUDGE THATCHER SURPJtlSED. 27
it at all — Bor the six thousand, nuther. I want you to take
it ; I want to give it to you — the sis thousand and all. "
He looked surprised. He couldn't seem to make it out.
He says :
" Why, what can you mean, my boy ? "
I says, " Don't you ask me no questions about it, please.
You'll take it — won't you ? "
He says :
" Well, I'm puzzled. Is something the matter ? "
" Please take it, " says I, " and don't ask me nothing — then
I won't have to tell no lies. "
He studied a while, and then he says :
" Oho-o. I think I see. You want to xell all your pro-
perty to me — not give it. That's the correct idea. "'
Then he wrote something on a paper and read it over, and
says:
" There — you see it says'for a consideration.'That means
I have bought it of you and paid you for it. Here's a dollar
for you. Now, you sign it. "
80 I signed it, and left.
Miss Watson's nigger, Jim, had a hair-ball as big as your
fist, which had been took out of the fourth stomach of an ox,
and he used to do magic with it. He said there was a spirit
inside of it, and it knowed everything. So I went to him that
night and told him pap was here again, for I found his tracks
in the snow. What I wanted to know, was, what he was going
to do, and was he going to stay ? Jim got out his hair-ball,
and said something over it, and then he held it up and dropped
it on the floor. It fell pretty solid, and only rolled about an
inch. Jim tried it again, and then another time, and it acted
just the same. Jim got down on his knees and put his ear
against it and listened. Eut it wam't no use ; he said it
wouldn't talk. He said sometimes it wouldn't talk without
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
28 THE ADVENTURES OF IIUCELEBESRY FiyS.
money. I told him I had an old slick counterfeit quarter that
\varn't no good hecause the brass showed through the silver a.
little, and it wouldn't pass nohow, even if the brass didn't
show, because it was so slick it felt greasy, and so that would
tell on it every time. (I reckoned I wouldn't say nothing
about the dollar I got from the judge.) I said it was pretty
bad money, but maybe the hair-ball would take it, because
inaybe it wouldn't know the diflference. Jim smelt it, and bit
it, and rubbed it, and said he would manage so the hair-ball
would think it was good. He said he would split open a raw
Irish potato and stick the quarter in between and keep it there
all night, and next morning you couldn't see no brass, and it
wouldn't feel greasy no more, and so anybody in town would
take it in a minute, let alone a hair-ball. Well, I knowed a
potato would do that, before, but I had forgot it.
Jim put the quarter under the hair-ball and got down and
listened again. This time he said the hair-ball waa all right.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
sur£RsnTioy. 20
He said it would tell my whole fortune if I wanted it to. I
says, go on. So the hair-ball talked to Jim, and Jim told it to
me. He says : ■
" To'ole father doan'know, yit, what he's a-gwyne to do,
■Sometimes he spec he'll go'way, en den agin he spec he'll
stay. De bes'way is to res'easy en let de ole man take bis
own way. Dey's two angels hoverin'roun''bout him. One uv
■'em is white en shiny, en t'other one ia black. De white one
gits him to go right, a little while, den de black one sail in en
Iwst it all up. A body can't tell, yit, which one gwyne to fetch
iiim at de las'. But you is all right. You gwyne to have con-
sidable trouble in yo'life, en considable joy. Sometimes you
gwyne to git hurt, en sometimes you gwyne to git sick ; but
every time you's gwyne to git well agin. Dey's two gals flyin'
'bout you in yo'life. One uv'em's light en t'other one is dark.
One is rich en t'other is jx)'. You's gwyne to marry de po'one
fust en de rich one by-en-by. You want to keep'way fum de
water as much as you kin, en don't run no resk,'kase it's down
in de bills dat you's gwyne to git hung. "
When I lit my candle and went up to my room that night,
there set pap, his own self!
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
Chabter V
'I HAD shut the door to-
Then I turned around,
and there he was. I
used to be scared of
him all the time, he
tanned me so much. I
reckoned I was scared
now, too ; but in a
minute I see I was
mistaken. That is,
after the first jolt, as
you may say, when my
breath sort of hitched
— he being so unex-
pected ; but right a-
way after, I see I wam't
scared of him worth
bothering about.
He was most fifty,
" I'*'" - " and he looked it. His
bair was long and tangled and greasy, and hung down, and you
could see his eyes shining through like he was behind vines.
It was all black, no gray ; so was his long, mixed-up whiskers.
There wam't no colour in his & ce, where his face showed ; it
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
vas white ; not like anotlier man'ij white, but a white to make
a body sick, a white to make a body's fiesh crawl — a tree-toad
white, a fish-belly whit«. Aa for his clothes — just rags, that
B'aa all. He had one ankle resting on t'other knee ; the boot
on that foot was busted, and two of his toes stuck through,
and he worked them now and then. His hat was laying on
the floor ; an old black slouch n-ith the top caved in, like a
.lid.
I stood a-looking at him ; he set there a-looking at me,
with his chair tilted back a little. I set the candle down. I
noticed the window was up ; so he bad dumb in by the shed.
He kept a-looking me all over. By-and-by he says :
" Starchy clothes — very. You think you're a good deal of
I a big-bug, dmi't you ? "
I " Slaybe I am, maybe I ain't, " I says.
" Don't you give me none o'your lip, " says he. " You've
put on eonsiderble many frills since I been away. I'll take
you down a peg before I get done with you. You're educated,
too, they say ; can read and write. You think you're better'n
yonr father, now, don't you, because he can't? I'll take it out
of you. Who told you you might meddle with such hifalut'n
foolishness, hey ? — who told you you could ? "
" The widow. She told me. "
" The widow, hey ? — and who told the widow she could put
in her shovel about a thing that ain't none of her business ? "
" Nobody never told her. "
" Well, I'll learn her how to meddle. And looky here —
you drop that school, you hear ? I'll learn people to bring ui >
a boy to put on airs over his own father and let on to be better'n
what he is. Y'ou lemme catch you fooling around that school
again, you hear ? Your mother couldn't read, and she couldn't
write, nuther, before she died. None of the family couldn't,
before tkey died. / can't ; and here you're a-swelling yourself
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
.13 THE AVVEXrURES OF nUCKLEBERRY FINN.
lip like this. I ain't the man to stand it — you hear ? Say —
leinme hear you read. "
I took up a book and begun something abaut General
Washington and the wars. When I'd read about a half minute,
he fetched the book a whack with his hand and knocked it
across the house. He says :
" It's BO. You can do it. I had my doubts when you told
me. Now looky here ; you stop that putting on frills. I won't
have it. I'll lay for you, my smarty ; and if I catch you about
that school 111 tan you good. Fu^t you know you'll get religion,
too. I never see such a son. "
He took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and
a boy, and says :
" What's thia? "
" It's something they give me for learning my lessons good. "
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
THE FOy'D PAREXT. Z'A
He tore it up, and says :
" I'll give yoo something better — I'll give you ii cowhide. "
He set there a-miimbling and a-growling a minute, and
then he says :
" AinH you a sweet-scented dandy, though ? A bed ; and
bedclothes ; and a look'n-glass ; and a piece of carjtet on the
floor— and your own father got to sleep with the hoga in the
tanjard. I never see such a son. I bet I'll take some o'tliese
frills out o'you before I'm done with you. Why, there ain't no
end to your airs — they say you're rich. Hey ? — how's that ? "
" They lie — that's how. "
" Looky here — mind how you talk to me ; I'm a-standing
about all I can stand, now — so don't gimme no sass. I've been
I JD town two days, and I hain't heard nothing but about you
I bein'rich. I heard about it away down the river, too. Thiit's
why I come. You git me that money to-morrow — I want it. "
*'I hain't got no money. "
*'It's a lie. Judge Thatcher's got it. You git it. I want
it. "
" I hain't got no money, I tell you. You ask Judge That-
cher ; he'll tell you the same. "
" All right. I'll ask him ; and I'll make him piingle, too,
or 111 know the reason why. Say — how much you got in your
pocket ? I want it. "
" I liain't got only a dollar, and I want that to "
" It don't make no difference what you want it for — you just
ehell it out. "
He took it and bit it to see if it was good, and then he said
he was going down town to get some whisky; said he liadn't
had a drink all day. When he had got out on the shed, he put
his head in again, and cussed me for putting on frills and lay-
ing to be better than him ; and when I reckoned he was gone,
he came back and put his head in again, and told me to mind
r >
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
3* THE Al)r£STURES OF 21UCKLEBERRY /-/.VA'.
about that school, because he was going to lay for me and lick
me if I didn't drop that.
Next daj he was druuk, and he went to Judge Thatcher's
and bullyragged him and tried to make him give up the
money, bnt he couldn't, and then he swore he'd m»ke the law
force him.
The judge and the widow went to law to get the conrt to
fake Die away from him and let one of them be my guardian ;
but it was a new judge that had just come, and he didn't know
the old man ; so he said courts mustn't interfere and separate
families if they could help it ; said he'd druther not take a
child away from its fether. So Judge Thatcher and the widow
had to quit on the business.
That pleased the old man till he couldn't rest. He said he'd
cowhide me till I was black and blue if I didn't raise some
money for him. I borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher,
and pap took it and got drunk and went a-blowing around and
cussing and whooping and carrying on ; and he kept it up all
over town, with a tin pan, till most midnight ; then they jailed
him, and next day they had him before court, and jailed him
again for a week. But he said Ae was satisfied; said he was
boss of'his son, and he'd make it warm for him.
When he got out the new judge said he was agoing to make
a man of him. So he took him to his own house, and dressed
him up clean and nice, and had him to breakfast and dinner
and supper with the family, and was just old pie to him, so to
speak. And after supper he talked to him about temperance
and such things till the old man cried, and said he'd been a
fool, and fooled away his life ; but now he was agoing to turn
over a new leaf and be a man nobody wouldn't be ashamed of,
and he hoped the judge would help him and not look down on
him. The judge said he could hug him for them words ; so he
cried, and his wife she cried again ; pap said he'd been a man
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
that had aways heen misunderstood hefore, and the judge said
he believed it. The old man said that what a man wanted that
was down, was sympathy ; and the judge said it was so ; ao
they cried i^ain. And when it was bedtime, the old man rose
ap and held out his* hand, and gays :
" Look at it, gentlemen, and ladies all ; take ahold of it ;
shake it. There's a hand that was the hand of a hc^ ; but it
i DItUSKARD.
ain't so no more ; it's the hand of a man that's started in on a
new life, and 11 die before he'll go baek. You mark them
words — don't forget I said them. It's a clean hand now; shake
it — don't be afeard. "
So they shook it, one after the other, all around, and cried.
The judge's wife she kissed it. Then the old man he signed a
pledge — made his mark. The judge said it was the holiest
time on record, or something like that. Then they tucked the
hyGoogle
so THE ADVENTURES OF IIVCKLEBERJtY FIXX.
old man into a beautiful room, whicK was the spare room, and
in the night sometime he got powerful thirsty and dumb out
on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his
new coat for a jug of forty-rod, and clumb back again and had
a good old time ; and towards daylight he crawled out again,
drunk as a fiddler, and rolled off the porch and broke his left
arm in two places and was most froze to death when somebody
found him after sun-up. And when they come to look at that
spiire room, they had to take soundings before they could navi-
gate it.
The judge he felt kind of sore. He said he reckoned a
body eould reform the ole man with a shot-gun, maybe, but he
didn't know no other way.
FALLING ritoji cr..vc
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

, pretty soon the old man was up
and around again, and tlien
he went for Judge Tliatcher
in the courts to make him
give up that money, and he
went for me, too, for not
stopping Bchooh He catched
me a couple of times and
thrashed me, hut I went to
school just the same, and
dodged him or out-run him
most of the time. I didn't
want to go to school much,
before, but I reckoned I'd
go now to spite pap. That
law trial was a alow business ;
GETTisG OUT OF THE WAY. appeared like they warn't
ever going to get started on
it; BO every now and then I'd borrow two or three dollars 08 of
the judge for him, to keep from getting a cowhiding. Every time
he got money he got drunk ; and every time he got drunk lie
raised Cain around town; and every time he raised Cain he
Rot jailed. He was just suited — this kind of thing was right in
'lis line.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
38 THE ADVEXTUItES OF MUCKLESERItY FISN.
He got to hanging around the widow's too much, and so
she told him at last, that if he didn't quit using around there
she would make trouble for him. Well, vjosn^t he mad ? He
said he would show who was Huck Finn's boas. So he watched
'._ out for me one day in the spring, and catched me, and took
me up the river about three mile, in a skiff, and crossed over
to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there wam't no
houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so
thick you couldn't find it if you didn't know where it was.
He kept me with him all the time, and I never got a chance
to run off. We lived in that old cabin, and he always locked'
the door and put the key under his head, nights. He had a
gun which he had stole, I reckon, and we fished and hunted,
and that was what we lived on. Every little while he locked .
me in and went down to the store, three miles to the ferry, ;
and traded fish and game for whisky and fetched it home and'
got drunk and had a good time, and licked me. The widow
she found out where I was by-and-by, and she sent a man over
to try to get hold of me, but pap drove him off with the gun,
and it wam't long after that till I was used to being where I j
was, and liked it, all but the cowhide part. ;
It was kind of lazy and jolly, laying off comfortable all day,
smoking and fishing, and no books nor study. Two months or
more run along, and my clothes got to be all rags and dirt, and
I didn't see how I'd ever got to like it so well at the widow's,
where you had to wash, and eat on a plate, and comb up, and
go to bed and get up regular, and be for ever bothering over a
book and have old Miss Watson pecking at you all the time'.
I didn't want to go back no more. I had stopped cussing,
because the widow didn't like it ; but now I took to it again
because pap hadn't no objections. It was pretty good times
up in the woods there, take it all around.
But by-and-by pap got too handy with his hick'ry, and I
BUCK DECIDES TO LEAVE. 30
couldn't stand it. I was all over welts. He got to going away
so much, too, and locking me in. Once he locked me in and
was gone three days. It was dreadful lonesome. I judged he
had got drowned and I wasn't ever going to get out any more.
I was seared. I made up my mind I would fix up some way to
leave there. I had tried to get out of that cabin many a time,
but I couldn't find no way. There waru't a window to it big
enough for a dog to get through. I couldn't get up the
chimbly, it was too narrow. The door was thick solid oak slabs.
Pap was pretty careful not to leave a knife or anything in the
cabin when he was away ; I reckon I had hunted the place over
as much as a hundred times ; well, I was " most all the time at
it, because it was about the only way to put In the time. But
this time I found something at last; I found an old rusty
wood-saw without any handle ; it was laid in between a rafter
and the clapboards of the roof. I greased it up and went to
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
40 THE ABVESTVKEH OF HUCKlEnERHr FIXK.
work. There was an old horse-blanket niiiled against the logs
at the far end of the cabin behind 4he table, to keep the wind
from blowing through the chinke and putting the candle'out.
I got under the table and raised the blanket and went to
work to saw a section of the big bottom log out, big enough to
let me through. Well, it was a good long job, bat I was getting
towards the end of it when I heard pap's gun in the woods. 1
got rid of the signs of my work, and dropped the blanket and
hid my siiw, and pretty soon pop come in.
I*;ip warn't in a good humour — so he was his natural self.
He said he was down to town, and everything was going wrong.
His lawyer said he reckoned he ■ would win liis lawsuit and get
the money, if they ever got started on the trial ; but then
there was ways to put it off a long time, and Judge Thatcher
knowed how to do it. And he said people allowed there'd be
another trial to get me away from him and give me to the
widow for my guardian, and they guessed it would win, this
time. This shook me up considerable, because I didn't want
to go back to the widow's any more and be so cramped up, and
siviljsed, as they called it. Then the old man got to cussing,
and cussed everything and everybody he could think of, and
then cussed them all over again to make sui'e he hadn't skipi > ed
any, and after that he polished off with a kind of a general cuss
all round, including a considerable parcel of people which he
didn't know the names of, and so called them what'a-his-name,
when he got to them, and went right along with his cussing.
He said he would like to see the widow get me. He said
he would watch out, and if they tried to come any such game
on him he knowed of a place six or seven mile otF, to stow me
in, where they might hunt till they dropped and they couldn^
find me. That made me pretty uneasy again, but only for n
minute ; I reckoned I wouldn't stay on hand till he got that
chance.
D,g,t,7P:h»Google ■
TIIINKIAO IT OVER. *l
The old man made me go to the skifif and fetch the things
he had got. There was a fifty-pound sack of com meal, and a
side of bacon, ammunition, and a four-gallon jug of whisky,
and an old book and two newspapers for wadding, besides some
tow. I toted up a load, and went back and set down on the
bow of the skiff to rest. I thought it all over, and I reckoned
I would walk off with the gun and some lines, and take to the
woods when I run away. I guessed I wouldn't stay in one
place, but just tramp right across the country, mostly night
times, and hunt and tish to keep alive, and so get so far away
that the old man nor the widow couldn't ever find me any more.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
42 THE ADVENTURES OF nUVKLEBERRY FINN.
I judged I would saw out and leave that night if pap got drouk
eaough, and I reckoned he would. I got bo full of it I didn't
notice how long I was staying, till the old man hollered and
asked me whether I was asleep or drownded.
I got the things all up to the cabin, and then it was about
(lark. While I was cooking supper the old man took a swig or
two and got sort of warmed up, and went to ripping again.
He had been dmnk over in town, and laid in the gutter alt
night, and he was a sight to look at. A body would a thought
he was Adam, he was just all mud. Whenever his liquor begun
to work, he most always went for the govment. This time he
*'Call this a govment ! why, just look at it and see what it's
like. Here's the law a-standing ready to fake a man's son away
from him — a man's ofrn son, which he has had all the trouble
and all the anxiety and all the expense of raising. Yes, just
as that man has got that son raised at last, and ready to go to
work and begin to do suthin'for him and give him a rest, the
law up and goes for him. And they call that govment ! That
ain't all, nuther. The law backs that old Judge Thatcher up and
helps him to keep me out o'my property. Here's what the
law does. The law fakes a man worth sis thousand dollars and
uparde, and jams him intx) an old trap of a cabin like this, and
lets him go round in clothes that ain't fitten for a hog. They
call that govment ! A man can't get his rights in a govment
like this. Sometimes I've a mighty notion to just leave the
country for good and all. Yes, and I told'em so ; I told old
Thatcher so to his face. Lots of'em heard me, and can tell
what I said. Says I, for two cents I'd leave the blamed country
and never come anear it agin. Them's the very words. I says,
look at ray hat — if you call it a hat — but the lid raises up aod
the rest of it goes down till it's below my chin, and then it ain't
•rightly a hat at all, but more like my head was shoved up
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
POLITICAL ECOXOMV. 4»
through a jint o'stove-pipe. iMok at it, says I — such a hat for
me to wear — one of the wealthiest men in this tonn, if I could
git my rights.
" Ob, yes, this is a wonderful govment, wonderful. Why,
looky here. There was a free nigger there, from Ohio ; a
mulatter, must as white as a white man. He had the whitest
shirt en you ever see, too, and the shiniest hat ; and there
ain't a man in that town that's got as fine clothes as what he
had ; and he had a gold watch and chain, and a silver-headed
cane — the awfuUest old grey-headed nabob in the State. And
what do you think ? they said he was a p'fessor in a college,
and could talk all kinds of languages, and knowed everything.
And that ain't the wust. They said he could vote, when he
was at home. Well, that let me out. Thinks I, what is the
country a-coming to ? It was'lection day, and I was just about
to go and vote, myself, if I warn't too drunk to get there ; but
when they told me there was a State in this country where
they'd let that nigger vote, I drawed out, I says I'll never
vote agin. Them's the very woitls I said ; they all heard me ;
and the country may rot for all rae — I'll never vote agin as long
as I live. And to see the cool way of that uigger^why, he
wouldn't a give me the road if I hadn't shoved him out o'the
way. I says to the people, why ain't this nigger put up at
anction and sold ? — that's what I want to know. And what do
yon reckon they said? Why, they said he couldn't be sold
till he'd been in the State six months, and he hadn't been
there that long yet. There, now— that's a specimen. They
call that a govment that can't sell a free nigger till he's been
in the State six months. Here's a govment that calls itself a
govment, and lets on to be a govment, and thinks it is a gov-
ment, and yet's got to set stock-still for six whole months
before it can take ahold of a prowling, thieving, infernal, white-
shirted free nigger, and "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
44 THE ADVEXrURES OF HUCKLEBESSY FIXN.
Pap was agoing on so, he never noticed where hia old limber
legs was taking him to, so he went head over heels over the
tub of salt pork, and barked both shins, and the rest of bis
si > eech was all the hottest kind of language — mostly hove at
the nigger and the govment, though he give the tubs some.
too, all along, here and there. He hojiped around the cabin
considerable, first on one leg and then on the other, holding
first one shin and then the other one, and at lost he let out
■with his left foot all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling
kick. But it warn't good judgment, because that was the boot
Uiat had a couple of his toes leaking out of the front end of it ;
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google I
TIIRASJIING ABOiyi). 45
so now be raised a howl that fairly mnde a body's hair raise,
and down he went in the dirt, and rolled there, and held his
toes ; and the cussing he done then laid over anything he had
ever done previous. He said so liia own self, afterwards. He
had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days, and he said it
laid over him, too ; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on,
maybe.
After supper pap took the jug, and said he had enough
whisky there for two drunks and one delirium tremens, lliat
was always his word. I judged ho would be blind drunk in
nbont an hour, and then I would steal the key, or saw myself
out, one or t'other. He drank and drank, and tumbled down
on his blankets, by-and-by ; bnt luck didn't run my way. He
didn't go sound usieep, but was uneasy. He groaned, and
moaned, and thrashed around this way and that, for a long time.
. At last I got so sleepy I couldn't keep my eyes open, all I
could do, and so before I knowed what I was about I was sound
asleep, and the candle burning.
I don't know how long I was asleep, but all of a sudden
there was an awful scream and I was up. There was pap,
looking wild and skipping around every which way and yelling
about snakes. He said they was crawling up his legs; and
then he would give a jump and scream, and say one had bit
him on the cheek — but I couldn't see no snakes. He started
and run round and round the cabin hollering " take him off!
take him off! he's biting me on the neck!''I never see a man
look so wild in the eyes. Pretty soon he was all fiigged out, and
. fell down panting; then he rolled over and over, wonderful
fast, kicking things every which way, and striking and grabbing
at the air with his hands, and screaming, and saying there was
devils ahold of him. He wore out, by-and-by, and laid still a
while, moaning. Then he laid stilier, and didn't make a sound.
I could hear the owls and the wolves, awsy off in the wooda
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
40 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERliY J7JV.V.
and it seemed terrible still. He was laying over by the comer.
By-and-by he raised up, part way, and listened, with his head
to one side. He says very low :
" Tramp — tramp — tramp; that's the dead; tramp — tramp
— tramp; they'recoming after me; but I won't go — Oh, they'll
here ! don't touch me — don't ! hands off — they're cold ; let go— r
Oh, let a poor devil alone ! "
Then he went down on all fours and crawled off begging them
to let him alone, and he rolled himself up in his blanket and
wallowed in under the old pine table, still a-begging ; and
then he went to crying, I could hear him through the
blanket.
By-and-by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking
wild, and he see me and went for me. He chased me round and
round the place with a clasp-knife, calling me the Angel of Death,
and saying he would kill me, and then I couldn't come for him no
more, I begged, and told him I was only Huck, but he laughed
such a screechy laugh, and roared and cussed, and kept on
chasing me up. Once when I turned short and dodged under
his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my
shoulders, and I thought I was gone ; but I slid out of the
jacket quick as lightning, and saved myself. Pretty soon he
was all tired out, and dropped down with his back against the
door, and said he would rest a minute and then kill me. He
put his knife under him, and said he would sleep and get strong,
and then he would see who was who.
So he dozed off, pretty soon. By-and-by I got the old split-
bottom chair and dumb up, as easy as I coold, not to make any
noise, and got down the gun. I slipped the ramrod down it to
make sure it was loaded, and then I laid it across the tomip
barrel, pointing towards pap, and set down behind it to wait
for him to stir. And how slow and still the time did drag
along.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
,V]
up! vhat you TaoutI "
I opened my eyes
and looked around,
trying to make out
where I was. It was
after sun-up, and I
had been sound asleep.
Pap was standing over
me, looking sour —
and sick, too. He
says —
" What yon doin "
with this gun ? "
I judged he didn't
know nothing about,
what he had been
doing, so I says :
was laying for him. "
I couldn't budge you. "
re palavering all day, but
in the lines for breakfast.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
48 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERHr FlXy.
He unlocked the door and I cleared out, up the river bank.
I noticed some pieces of limbs and such things floating down,
and a sprinkling of bark ; so I knowed the river had begun to
rise. I reckoned I would have great times, now, if I was over
at the town. The June rise used to be always luck for me ;
because as soon aa that rise begins, here comes eord-wood float-
ing down, and pieces of log rafts — sometimes a dozen logs
together ; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them
to the wood yards and the sawmill.
I went'along up the bailk with one eye out for pap and
t'other one out for what the-rise might fetch along. Well, all
at once, here comes a canoe; just a beauty, too, about thirteen
or fourteen foot long, riding high like a duck. I shot head first
off of the bank, like a frog, clothes and all on, and struck out
for the canoe. I just expected there'd be somebody laying
down in it, because people often done that to fool folks, and
when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they'd raise up
and laugh at liim. But it warn't so this time. It was a drift-
canoe, sure enough, and I dumb in and paddled her ashore.
Thinks I, the old man will be glad when he sees this — she's
worth ten dollars. But when I got to shore pap wasn't ia
sight yet, and as I was running her into a Utile creek like a
gully, all hung over with vines and willows, I struck another
idea ; I judged I'd hide her good, and then, stead of taking to
the woods when I run off, I'd go down the river about fifty mile
and camp in one place for good, and not have such a rough time
tramping on foot.
It was pretty close to the shanty, and I thought I heard
the old man coming, all the time; but I got her hid ; and
then I out and looked around a bunch of willows, and theie
was the old man down the path apiece just drawing a bead on
a bird with his gun. So he hadn't seen anything.
When he got along, I was hard at it taking up a " trot "
D,g,t,7P:h»Gobgle
, THE SIIAXTl'. W
line. He abused me a little for being so slow, but I told him
I fell in the river and that was what made me so long. I knowed
he would see I was wet, and then he would be asking questions.
We got five cat-fish off of the lines and went home.
While we laid oflF, after breakfast, to sleep up, both of us
being about wore out, I got to thinking that if I could fix up
tome way to keep pap and the widow from tijing to follow
me, it would be a certainer thing than trusting to luck to get
fer enough off before they missed me ; you see, all kinds of
things might happen. Well, I didn't see no way for a while,
hot by-and-by pap raised up a minute, to drink another barrel
of water, and he says :
" Another time a man comes a-prowling round here, yon
E
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
60 THE ADVENTURES OF SUCKLESERRY FISA\
roust me out, you hearV That man warn't here for no good.
I'd a shot him. Next time, you roust me out, you hear? "
Then he dropped down and went to sleep again — but what
he had been sayingf give me the very idea I wanted. I says to
■myself I can fix it now so nobody won't think of following me.
About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the
bank. The river was coming up pretty fast, and lots of drift- ^
wood going by. on the rise. By-and-by, along comes part of a |
log raft — nine logs fast together. We went out with the skiff ■j
and towed it ashore. Then we had dinner. Anybody but pap
would a waited and seen the day through, so as to catch more
stuff; but that warn't pap's style. Nine logs was enough for
one time ; he must shove right over to town and sell. So he
locked me in and took the skiff and started oiF towing the raft
about half-past three. I judged he wouldn't come back that
night. I waited till I reckoned he had got a good start, then
I out with my saw and went to work on that log again. Before
he was t'other side of the river I was out of the hole ; him and J
his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder.
I took the sack of com meal and took it to where the canoe
was hid, and shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in ;
then I done the same with the side of bacon ; then the whisky
jug; I took all the coffee and sugar there was, and all the
ammunition ; I took the wadding ; I took the bucket and
gourd, I took a dipper and a tin cup, and my old saw and two
blankets, and the skillet and the coffee-pot. I took fish-linee
■and matches and other things — everything that was worth a
cent. I cleaned out the place. I wanted an axe, but there
wasn't any, only the one out at the wood pile, and I knowed
why I was going to leave that. I fetched out the gun, and noff
I was done.
I had wore the ground a good deal, crawling out of the hole
and dragging out ao many things. So I fixed that as good aa
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google
PliEPARIXO TO START. 61
I could from the outside by scattering dust on the pliice,
which covered up the smoothness and the sawdust. Then I
fixed the piece of log back into its place, and put two rocks
under it and one against it to hold it there, — for it was bent
up at that place, and didn't quite touch ground. If you stoofl
four or five foot away and didn't know it was sawed, you
wouldn't ever notice it ; and besides, this was the back of the
BIIUOTISO THE PIG.
cabin and it wam't likely anybody would go fooling around
there.
It was all grass clear to the canoe ; so I hadn't left a trtick.
I'followed around to see. I stood on the bank and looked out
over the river. All safe. So I took the gun and went up a
piece into the woods and was hunting around for some birds,
when I see a wild pig ; hogs soon went wild in them bottoms
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
62 THE ADVEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRV FINN.
after they had got away from the prairie faTms. I shot this'
fellow and took him into camp.
I took the axe and smashed in the door. I beat it and
hacked it considerable, a-doing it. I fetched the pig in and
took him back nearly to the table and backed into his throat
with the axe, and laid him down on the ground to bleed — I aay
ground, because it was ground — hard packed, and no boards-
Well, next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks in it,—
all I could drag — and I started it from the pig and dragged it to
the door and through the woods down to the river and dumpal
it in, and down it sunk, out of sight. You could easy see that
something had been dragged over the ground. I did wish Tom
Sawyer was there, I knowed he would take an interest in this
kind of business, and throw in the fancy touches. Nobody
could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as that.
Well, last I pulled out some of my hair, and bloodied the
axe good, and stuck it on the back side, and slung the axe ii
comer. Then I t < mk up the pig and held him f o my breast witi
my jacket (so he couldn't drip) till I gota good piece below
house and then dumped him into the river. Now I thought of
something else. So I went and got the bag of meal and my old
saw out of the canoe and fetched them to the house. I ttmk the
bag to where it used to stand, and ripped a hole in the bottom
of it with the saw, for there wam't no knives and forks on tie
place — pap done everything with his clasp-knife, about the
cooking. Then I carried the sack about a hundred yards across
the grass and through the willows east of the house, to a shallo*
lake that was five miles wide and full of rushes — and ducks too,!
you might say, in the season. There was a slough or a creek!
leading out of it on the other side, that went miles away, I
don't know where, but it didn't go to the river. The men!
sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake, I
dropped pap's whetstone there too, so as to look like it haii
PROJECTING A I'LAX. 63
been done by accident. Then I tied up tlie rip in the meal
sack with a etring, so it wouldn't leuk no more, and took it and
mj saw to the canoe again.
It was about dark, now ; so I dropped the cfmoe down the
river under some willows that hung over the bank, and waited
for the moon to rise. I made fast to a willow ; then I took a
bite to eat, and by-aud-by laid down in the canoe to smoke a
pipe and lay out a plan. I says to myself, they'll follow the
track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the
river for me. And they'll follow that meal track to the lake
and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the
robbers that killed me and took the things. They won't ever
hunt the river for anything hut my dead carcass. They'll soon
get tired of that, and won't bother no more about me. All
right ; I can stop anywhere I want to. Jackson's Island is good
enough for me ; I know that island pretty well, and nobody
ever comes there. And then I can paddle over to town, nighta,
and slink around and pick up things I want. Jackson's Island's
the place.
I was pretty tired, and the first thing I knowed, I was
asleep, When I woke up I didn't know where I was, for a
minute. I set up and looked around, a liltle scared. Then I
remembered. The river looked miles and miles across. The
moon was so bright I could a counted the drift logs that went
a slipping along, black and still, hundreds of yards out from
■ shore. Everything was dead quiet, and it looked late, and
■ wneU late. You know what I mean — I don't know the words
. to put it in.
I took a good gap and a stretch, and was just going to un-
'bitch and start, when I heard a sound away over the water. I
'■ liBtened. Pretty soon I made it out. It was tliat dull kind of
a regular sound that comes from oars working in rowlocks when
'it'g A still night. I i > eeped out through the willow branches^
Google
U TlIJi ADVJESTUSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
and there it was — a skiff, away across the water. I couldn't
tell how many was in it. It kept a-coming, and when it was
abreast of me I see there warn't but one man in it. Thinks I,
maybe it's pap, though I warn't expecting him. He dropped
helow me, with the current, and by-and-by he come a-s winging
up shore in the easy water, and he went by so close I could a
reached out the gun and touched him. Well, it was pap,
sure enough — and sober, too, by the way he laid to his oars.
I didn't lose no time. The next minute I was a-spinning
down stream soft but quick in the shade of the bank. I made
two mile and a half, and then struck out a quarter of a mile or
more towards the middle of the river, because pretty soon I
would be passing the ferry landing and people might see me
and hail me. I got out amongst (he drift-wood and then laid
down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float. I laid there
D,g,t,7P:hyGOOglC
and bad a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe, looking away
into the sky, not a cloud in it. The sky looks ever so deep
when you lay down on your back in the moonshine ; I never
knowed it before. And how far a body can hear on the water
such nights ! I heard people talking at the ferry landing. I
iieard what they said, too, every word of it. One man said it
was getting towjmla the long days and the short night*, now.
T'other one said this wam't one of the short ones, he reckoned
—and then they laughed, and he said it over again, and they
laughed again; then they waked up another fellow and told
bim, and laughed, but he didn't laugh ; he ripped out some-
thtng brisk and said let hira alone. The first fellow said he
lowed to tell it to his old woman — she would think it was pretty
good ; but he said that warn't nothing to some things he had
said in his time, I heard one man say it was nearly three
o'clock, and he hoped daylight wouldn't wait more than about a
week longer. After that, the talk got further and further away,
and I couldn't make out tlie words any more, but I could hear
ihe mumble ; and now and then a laugh, too, but it seemed a
long ways off.
I was away below the ferry now. I rose up and there was
Jackson's Island, about two mile and a half down stream, heavy-
timbered and standing up out of the middle of the river, big
and dark and solid, like a steamboat without any lights. There
wara't any signs of the bar at the head — it was all under water
now.
It didn't take me long to get there. I shot past the head
at a ripping rate, the current was so swift, and then 1 got into
tbe dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois
shore. I run the canoe into a deep dent in the bank that I
knowed about ; I had to part the willow branches to get in ;
and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe from the
outride.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
50 THE Am-EyruJlES OF IIUCKLEVJEltltV FiyX.
I went up and set down on a log at the head of the isla'od
and looked out on the big river and the black driftwood, and
away over to the town, three mile away, where there was three-
or four lights twinkling. A monstroue big .lumber raft was "
about a mile up stream, coming along down, with a lantern io
the middle of it. I watched it come creeping down, and when
it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say, " Stem
oars, there ! heave her head to stabboard ! " I heard that just'
as plain as if the man was by my side. -M
There was a little gray in the sky, now ; so I stepped intfir
the woods and laid down for a nap before breakfast.
i
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
'^.^^1

sun wns up so liigti when I
waked, that I judged it was
after eight o'clock. I laid
there in the grass and the cool
shade, thinking about things
and feeling rested and ruther
comfortable and satisfied. I
could see the sun out at one
or two holes, but mostly it
was big trees all about, and
gloomy in there amongst
rthem. There was freckled
„, places on the ground where
'■J tlie light sifted down through
''the leaves, and the freckled
places swapped about a little,
THE WOODS showing there was a little
breeze uji there. A couple of
Eqniirels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly.
1 was powerful lazy and comfortable — didn't want \a get up
and cook breakfast. Well, I was dozing off again, when I
lliinkB 1 hears a deep sound of " Iwom ! " away up the river. I
rouses up and rests on my elbow and listens ; pretty soon I hears
e:ocwie
rw^ THE AVVESrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIKK.
it iigfiin. I hopped up and went and looked out at a hole in
the leaves, and I see a bunch of smoke laying on the irater a
long ways up — about abreast the ferry. And there was the
ferry-boat full of people, floating along down. I knowed what
waa the matter, now. " Boom ! " I see the white smoke squirt
out of the ferry-boat's side. You see, they was firing cannon
over the water, trying to make my carcass come to the top.
I was pretty hungry, but it wam't going to do for me to
start a fire, because they might see the smoke. So I set there
and watched the cannon-smoke and listened to the boom. The
river was a mile wide, there, and it always looks pretty on a
summer morning — so I was having a good enough time seeing
them hunt for my remainders, if I only had a bite to eat.
Well, then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver
in loaves of bread and float them off because they always go
right to the drownded carcass and stop there. So says I, I'll
keep a look-out, and if any of them's floating around after me,
I'll give them a show. I changed to the Illinois edge of the
island to see what luck I could have, and I wam't disappointed.
A big double loaf come along, and I most got it, with a long
stick, but my foot slipped and she floated out further. Of
course I was where the current set in the closest to the shore —
I knowed enough for that. But by-and-by along comes another
one, and this time I won. I took out the plug and shook out
the little dab of quicksilver, and set my teeth in. It was
" baker's bread " — what the quality eat — none of your low-down
■corn-pone.
I got a good place amongst the leaves, and set there on a
log, munching the bread and watching the ferry-boat, and very
well satisfied. And then something struck me. I says, now 1
reckon the widow or the parson or somebody prayed that this
bread would find me, and here it has gone and done it. So
there ain't no doubt but there is something in that thing.
Oy TBE WATCll!
That is, there's something in it when a. body like the widow or
the parson prays, but it don't work for me, and I reckon it
don't work for only just the right kind.
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke and went on watch-
WATCKINO T
ing. The ferry-boat was floating with the current, and I allowed
I'd have a chance to see who was aboard when she come along,
because she would come in close, where the bread did. When
flhe'd got -pretty well along down towards me, I put out my pipe
and went to where I fished out the bread, and laid down behind
00 TBE ADVENTUltES OF nUCKLEBEBltY FlXy.
a log on the bank in a little open place. Where the log forked
1 could peep through.
By-and-by she come along, and she drifted in so close that
they could a niri out a plank and walked ashore. Most every-
body was on the boat. Pap, and Judge Thatcher, and Bessie
Thatcher, and Jo Harper, and Tom Sawyer, and his old Aunt
I'oUy, and Sid and Mary, and plenty more. Everybody was
talking about the murder, but the captain broke in and says :
" Look sharp, now; the current sets in the closest here, and
maybe he's washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush
at the water's edge. I hope so, anyway. "
I didn't hope so. They all crowded up and leaned over the
rails, nearly in my face, and kept still, watching with all their
might. I could see them first-rate, but they couldn't see me.
Then the captain sung out :
" Stand away! " and the cannon let off such a blast right
before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near
blind with the smoke, and I judged I was gone. If they'd a
had some bullets in, I reckon they'd a got the corpse they was
after. Well, I see I warn't hurt, thanks to goodness. The
boat floated on acd went out of sight around the shoulder of
the island. I could heju- the booming, now and then, further
and further off, and by-and-by after an hour, 1 didn't hear it
no more. The island was three mile long. I judged they had
got to the foot, and was giving it up. But they didn't yet a-
while. They turned around the foot of the island and started
up the channel on the Missouri side, under steam, and booming
once in a while as they went. I crossed over to that side and
■watched them. When they got abreast the head of the island
they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and
went home to the t«wn.
I knowed I was all right now. Nobody else would come a-
hunting after me. I got my traps out of the canoe and made
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
EXPLORING THE ISLAXD. 61
me a nice camp in the thick ^oods. I made a kind of a tent
out of my bknkets to put my things under so the rain couldn't
get at them. I eatched a cat-iish and haggled him open with
my saw, and towards sundown 1 started my camp fire and had
Hupper. Then I set ont a line to catch some fish for break-
When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking, and feel-
ing pretty satisfied ; but by-and-by it got sort of lonesome, and
80 1 went and set on the bank and listened to the currents
washing along, and counted the stars and drift-logs and rafts
that come down, and then went to bed ; there ain't no better
way to put in time when you are lonesome j you can't stay so,
yon soon get over it.
And so for three days and nights. No difference — just the
same thing. But the next day I went exploring around down
through the island. I was boss of it ; it all belonged to me, so
to say, and I wanted to know all about it ; but mainly I wanted
to put in the time. I found plenty strawberries, ripe and
prime ; and green summer-grapes, and green razberries ; and
the green blackberries was just beginning to show. They
would all come handy by-and-by, I judged.
Well, I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged
I wam't far from the foot of the island. I had my gun along,
but I hadn't shot nothing ; it was for protection ; thought I
would kill some game nigh home. About this time I mighty
near stepjwd on a good-sized snake, and it went sliding off
through the grass and flowers, and I after it, trying to get a
shot at it. I clipped along, and all of a sudden I bounded
right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking.
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs. I never waited
for to look further, but uncocked my gun and went sneaking
hack on my tip-toes as fast as ever I could. Every now and
then I stopped a second, amongst the thick leaves, and listened ;
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
03 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEEHY FINN.
but my breath come so Iiard I couldn't hear nothing else. I
elunk along another piece further, then listened again ; and so
on, and so on ; if I gee a stump, I took it for a man ; if I trod
on a stick and broke it, it made me feel like a person had cut
one of my breaths in two and I only got half, and the short
half, too.
When I got to camp 1 wam't feeling very brash, there
wam't much sand in my craw ; but I says, this ain't no Time to
be fooling around. , So I got all my traps into my canoe again
so as to have them out of sight, and I put out the fire and
D,g,t,7R:h»Google
A PROFITLESS fiLEEV. (KS
scattered the ashes aruund to look like an ol < l last year's camp,
and then dumb a tree.
I reckon I was up in the tree two liours ; but I didn't sec
nothing, I didn't hear nothing — I only thougfd I heard and
seen as much as a thousand things. Well, I couldn't stay up
there for ever ; so at last I got down, but I kept in the thick
woods and on the look-out all the time. All I could get to eat
■was berries and what was left over from breakfast.
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry. So when it
was good and dark, I slid out from shore before moonrise and
paddled over to the Illinois bank — about a quarter of a mile. I
went out in the woods and cooked a supjier, and I bad about
I made up my mind I would stay there all night, when I hear a
pluiiJcety^lv/nk, plunkdy-^lv,nk, and says to myself, horscH
coming ; and next I hear people's voices. I got everything
into the canoe as quick as I could, and then went Creeping
through the woods to see what I could find out. I hadn't got
far when I hear a man say :
" We better camp here, if we can find a good place; the
horses is about beat out. Ijet's look around. "
I didn't wait, but shoved out and paddled away easy. I
tied up in the old place, and reckoned I would sleej) in the canoe.
I didn't sleep much. I couldn't, somehow, for thinking.
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had nie by the
neck. So the sleep didn't do me no good. By-and-by I sayd
to myself, I can't live this way ; I'm agoing to find out who it
is that's here on the island with me ; I'll find it out or bust.
^Vel], I felt better, right off.
So I took my jjaddle and slid out from shore just a step or
two, and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the
shadowB.-rThe moon was shining, and outside of the shadows
it made it most as light as day. I poked along well on to an
hour, everything still as rocks and sound asleep. AVell, by this
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
04 THE AVrEXTURES OF IIUCKLEBERUY FISX.
time I was most down to the foot of the island. A little ripply,
cool breeze begun to blow, and that was as good as saying tbf
night was about done. I give her a turn with the paddle and
bruDg her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out
and into the edge of the woods. I set down there on a 1 < ^ and
looked out through the leaves, I sge the moon go off watch
and the darkness begin to blanket the river. Bnt in a little
while I see a iwle streak over the tree-tops, and knowed the
day was coming. So I took my gun and slipped oflF towards
where I had run across that camy fire, stopping every minute
or two to listen. But I hadn't no luck, somehow ; I couldn't
seem to find the place. Hut by-and-by, sure enough, I catched
a glimpse of fire, away through the trees. I went for it, cautious
and slow. By-and-by I waa close enough to have a look, and
there laid a man on the groimd. It most give me the fan-tods.
Ite had a blanket around his hend, and his head was nearly in
the fire. I set there behind a clump of bushes, in about six
foot of him, and kept my eyes on him steady. It was getting
gray daylight, now. Pretty soon he gapped, and stretched
himself, and hove off the blanket, and it was Miss Watson's
Jim ! I bet I was glad to see him. I says :
" Hello, Jim ! " and skipped out.
He bounced up and stared at me wild. Then he drops
down on his knees, and puts his bands together and says :
" Doan'hurt me^don't ! I hain't ever done no harm to a
ghos'. I awluz liked dead people, en done all I could for'em.
You go en git in de river agin, wfaah you b'longs, en doan'do
nuffn to Ole Jim,'at'uz awluz yo'fren'. "
Well, I wam't long making him understand I warn't dead. ■
I was ever so glad to see Jim. I wam't lonesome, now. I told
him I wam't afraid of him. telling the people where I was. I
talked along, but he only set there and looked at me ; never
said nothing. Then I says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
hyGoogle
68 THE ADVESTVRES OF MUCKLEBBRItY FINN.
*'Well, you must be most starved, ain't you ? "
" I reck'u I could eat a hoss. I think I could. How long
you ben on de islan'? "
** Since the nigbt I got killed. "
'* No ! yf'y, what has you lived on ? But yon got a gun ?
Oh, yes, you got a gun. Dat's good. Now you kill sumfn'en
I'll make up de fire. "
So we went over to where the canoe was, and while he built
a fire in a grassy open place amongst the trees, I fetched meal
and bacon and coflfee, and coflfee-pot and frying-pan, and sugar
and tin cups, and the nigger was set back considerable, because
he reckoned it was all done with witchcraft. I catehed a good
big cat-fish, too, and Jim cleaned him with his knife, and fried
bim.
When breakfast was ready, we lolled on the grass and eat it
smoking hot ; Jim laid it in with all his might, for he was moet
about starved. Then when we had got pretty well stuffed, we
laid off and lazied.
By-and-by Jim says :
*'But looky here, Huck, who wuz it dat'uz killed in dat
shanty, ef it wara't you ? "
Then I told bim the whole thing, and he said it was smart.
He said Tom Sawyer couldn't get up no better plan than what
I had. Then I says :
" How do you come to be here, Jim, and how'd you get
here? "
He looked pretty uneasy, and didn't say nothing for ■
minute. Then he says :
" Maybe I better not tell. "
" Why, Jim ? "
** Well, dey's reasons. But you wouldn'tell on me ef I'lu
to tell you, would you, Huck? "
*'Blamed if I would, Jim. "
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
JIM'S ESCAPE. 07
" Well, I b'lieve you, Hucb. I — I run ofi.^'
" Jim ! "
" But mind, you said you wouldn't tell — you know you said
you wouldn't tell, Huck. "
" Well, I did. I said I wouldn't, and I'll stick to it. Honest
i»jun I will. People would call me a low dom Ablitionist and
despUe me for keeping mnm — but that don't make no diffe-
rence. I ain't agoing to tell, and I ain't agoing back there
anyways. So now, le's know all about it. "
" Well, you see, its'uz dis way. Ole Missus— dat's Miss
M'atson — she pecks on me all de time, en treats me pooty rough,
bat she awluz said she wouldn'sell me down to Orleans, But
I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader roun'de place considable,
lately, en I begin to git oneasy. Well, one night I creeps to
de do', pooty late, en de do'wam't quite shet, en I hear ole
HUKsus tell the widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans,
bat she didn* want to, but she could git eight hund'd dollars
fiw me, en it'uz sich a big stack o'money she couldn'resis " .
De widder she tiy to git her to say she wouldn'do it, but I
never waited to hear de res'. I lit out mighty quick, I tell
jon.
" I tuck out en shin down de hill en'spec to steal a skift
long de sho'som'ers'bove de town, but dey wuz pe()ple a-
Btirrin'yit, so I hid in de ole tumble-down cooper ohop on de
bank to wait for everybody to go'way. Well, I wuz dah all
night. Dey wuz somebody roun'all de time.'Long'bout six
in the mawnin', skifta begin to go by, en'bout eight er nine
every skift dat went'long wuz talkin''bout how yo'pap come
over to de town en say you's killed. Dese las'skifts wuz full o'
ladies en genlmen agoin'over for to see de place. Sometimes
dej'd pull up at de sho'en take a res'b'fo'dey started acrost,
80 by de talk I got to know all'bout de killin'. I'uz fwwerful
Boiry you's killed, Huck, but I ain't no mo', now.
r 2
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
68 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
" I laid dah under de shavina ail day. I'uz hungry, bat I
wam't afeared ; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder vnz
goin'to start to de camp-meetu'right arter break & s'en be
gone all day, en dey knows I goes oflf wid de cattle'bout day-
light, so dey wouldn''spec to see me roun'de place, en so dey
woiildn'miss me tell arter dark in de evenin'. De yutho:
servants vouldn'misa me, kase dey'd shin out eu take holiday,
soon as de olevfolka'uz out'n de way.
" Well, when it come dark I tuck out up de river road, en
went'bout two mile er more to whah dey warli't no houses. I'd
made up my mine'bout what I's agwjne to do. You see ef I
kep'on tryin'to git away afoot, de dogs'ud track me ; ef I
stole a skifb to cross over, dey'd miss dat'sldft,'you see, en
dey'd know'bout whah I'd Ian'on de yuther side en whah to
pick np my track. So I says, a raff is what I's arter; it doan'
make no track.
" I aee a light a-comin'rouu'de p'int, bymeby, so I wade'in
en shove'a log ahead o'me, en swum more'n half-way acrost de
river, en got in'mongst de driit-wood, en kep'ray head doini
low, en kinder swum agin de current tell the raff come along.
Den I gwnm to de stern uv it, en tuck aholt. It clouded np
©n'dz pooty dark for a little while. So I dumb up eu laid down
on de planks. De men'uz all'way yonder in de middle, whah
de lantern wuz. De river wuz arisin'en dey wuz a good current ;
so I reck'n'd'at by fo'in de mawnin'I'd be twenty-five mile
down de river, en den I'd slip in, jis'b'fo'daylight, en swim
asho'en take to de woods on de lUinoi side.
" But I didn'have no luck. When we'uz mos'down to de
head er de islan', a man begin to come aft wid de lantern. I
see it wam't no use fer to wait, so I slid overboard, en struck
out fer de islan'. Well, I had a notion I could Ian'mos'anj-
whers, but I couldn't — bank too bluff. I'uz mos'to de foot er
de ielfui'b'fo'I- foun'a good place. I went into de wottds en'
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
jedged I wouldu'fool wid raffs no mo', long as dey move de
liintem Foun'so. I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg, en gome
inatchesin my cap, en dey wara't wet, bo I'uz all right. "
" And so you ain't had no meat nor bread to eat all this
time ? Why didn't you get mud-tnrkles ? "
" How yoa gwyne to git'm ? You can't slip up on um en
grab am ; en how's a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock ? How
could a body do it in de night ? en I wam't gwyne to show
oi;»ef on de bank in de daytime. "
" Well, that's so. You've had to keep in the woods all the
time, of course. Did you hear'em shooting the cannon? "
" Oh, yes. I knowed dey was arter you. I see um go by
heah ; watched um thoo de bushes. "
Some young birds come along, flying a yard or two at a
time and lighting. Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain.
He said it was a sign when young chickens flew that way, and
so he reckoned it was the same way when young birds done it,
I was going to catch some of them, but Jim wouldn't let me.
He Baid it was death. He said his father lay mighty sick once,
and some of them eatched a bird, and his old granny said his
Either would die, and he did.
And Jim said you musn't count the things you are going to
cook for dinner, because that would bring bad luck. The same
if jon shook the tablecloth after sundown. And he said if a
nan owned a bee-hive, and that man died, the bees must be
told about it before sun-up next morning, or else the bees
wonid aU weaken down and quit work and die. Jim said bees
wonldn't sting idiots ; but I didn't believe that, because I had
tried them lots of times myself, and they wouldn't sting
aie.
I had heard about some of these things before, but not all
of them. Jim knowed all kinds of signs. He said he knowed
most everything. I said it looked to me like all the signs was
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
70 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEISERKY FINX.
about bad luck, and so I asked him if there wam't auj good-'
luck eigna. He says :
" Mighty few — an'dey ain'no use to a body. What joa
want to know when good luck's a-comin'for? want to keep it
off? " And he aaid: " Ef you'a got hairy arms en a hairy
breaa', it's a sign dat you's agwyne to be rich. Well, dey's
some use in a sign like dat,'kase it's so fur ahead. You see,
maybe you's got to be po'a long time fuat, en so you might git
discourage'en kill yo'self'f you didn'know by de sign dat yon
gwyne to be rich bymeby. "
" Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast, Jim ? "
" What's de use to ase dat question ? don'3'ou see I has ? "
" Well, are you rich ? "
*'No, but I been rich wunst, and gwyne to be rich agin.
Wunst I had foteen dollars, but I tuck to speculat'n*, en got
busted out. "
" What did you speculate in, Jim ? "
" Well, fuat I tackled stock ? "
" What kind of stock? "
*'Why, live stock. Cattle, you know. I put ten dollars ia i
a cow. But I ain'gwyne to resk no mo'money in stock. De
cow up'ii'died on my ban's. "
" So you loat the ten dollars. "
" No, I didn'lose it all. I on'y los''bout nine of it. I sole
de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents. "
" You had five dollars and ten cents left. Did you speculate
any more ? "
*'Yes. You know dat one-laigged nigger dat b'longs to old
Misto Bradish ? well, he sot up a bank, en say anybody dat put
in a dollar would git fo'doUara mo'at de en'er de year.
Well, all de niggers went in, but dey didn'have much. I wui
de on'y one dat had much. So I stuck out for mo'dan ft >'
dollars, en I said'f I didn'git it I'd start a bank mysef. WeJl
D,g,t,7P:h»GOOglC
" DAT OXE-LAIOOEO SIGGER.'71
o'course dat Digger want'to keep me out er de business,
bekase he say dey wam't business'nougb for two banks, so be
say I could put in my fire dollars en he pay me tbitty-five at de
en'er de year.
" So I done it. Den I reck'n'd I'd inves* de thirty-five
UISTO bradish'b nigqeb.
dollars right off en keep things a-movin'. Dey wuz a nigger
lume'Bob, dat had ketched a wood-flat, en his marster didn'
know it ; en I bought it oETn him en told him to take de
thirty-five dollars when de en'er de year come ; hut some-
body stole de wood-flat dat night, en nex'day de one-laigged
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
72 THE ADVENTUSES OF SUCKLEBESRY FISK.
nigger say de bank'a busted. So deydidn'none uv ns git no
money. "
'* Tftliat did you do with the ten cents, Jim ? "
" Well, I'uz gwyne to spen'it, but I had a dream, en de
dream tole mie to give it to a nigger nanie'Balum — Balum'a
Ass dey call him for short, he's one er dem chuckle-heads, you
know. But he's lucky, dey say, en I see I wam't lucky. De
dream say let Balnm inves'de ten cents en he'd make a raise
for me. Well, Balum he tuck de money, en when he wuz in
church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po'lee'
to de Lord, en houn'to git his money back a hund'd times.
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po', en laid low to
see what wuz gwyne to come of it. "
" Well, what did come of it, Jim ? "
" Nuffn'never come of it. I couldn'manage to kleck dal
mocey no way ; en Balum he couldn'. I ain't gwyne to len'
mo'money'dout I see de security. Boun'to git yo'mone;
back a hund'd times, de preacher says ! Ef I could git de tei
cents back, I'd call it squab, en be glad er de chanet. "
" Well, it's all right, anyway, Jim, long as you're going I
be rich again some time or othjr. "
" Yes — ^en I's rich now, come to look at it. I owns mysal
en I's wuth eight hund'd dollars. I wisht I had de money,
wouldn'want no mo'. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

WANTED to go and
look at a place right
about the middle of
the island, that I'd
found when I was
exploring ; bo we
started, and soon got
to it, because the
island was only three
miles long and a
quarter of a mile
wide.
This place waS a
tolerable long steep
hill or ridge, about
forty foot high. We
had a rough time
getting to the top,
the sides was so steep
and the bushes so
thick. We tramped
and clumb around all
oTer it, and l^-and-by found a good big cavern in the rock,
most up to the top on the side towards Illinois. The davem
Co()j^le
74 THE ADTENTURES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN.
was aa big as two or three rooms bunched t(^ether, and Jim
could stand up straight in it. It was cool in there. Jim was
for putting our traps in there, right away, but I said we didn't
want to be climbing up and down there all the time.
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place, and had
all the traps in the cavern, we could rush there if anybody
was to come to the island, and they would never find us with-
out dogs. And besides, he said them little birds had said it
was going to rain, and did I want the things to get wet?
So we went back and got the canoe and paddled np abreast
the cavern, aiid lugged all the traps up there. Then we bunted
up a place close by to hide the canoe in, amongst the thick
willows. We took some fish off of the lines and set them again,
and begun to get ready for dinner.
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead
in, and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit
and was flat and a good place to build a fire on. So we built it
there and cooked dinner.
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet, and eat our
dinner in there. We put all the other things handy at the
back of the cavern. Pretty soon it darkened up and begun to
thunder and lighten ; so the birds was right about it. Directly
it begun to rain, and it rained like all fury, too, and I never
see the wind blow so. It was one of these regular summer
storms. It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black out-
side, and lovely ; and the rain would thrash along by so thick
that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webbj ;
and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees
down and turn np the pale underside of the leaves ; and then a
perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches
to tossing their arms as if they was just wild ; and next, when
it was just about the bluest and blackest— /st / it was as bright
as glorj and you'd have a little g}impse of tree-tq)S a-plnngisg
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google
about, away off yonder in the atonn, hundreds of yards farther
thmi you could see before ; dark as sin again in a second, and
noir you'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash and then
go rambling, grnmbling, tumbling down the sky towards the
under aide of the world, like rolling empty barrels downstairs,
where it's long stairs and they bounce a good deal, you know.
" Jim, this is nice, " I says. " I wouldn't want to be no-
?- —
where else but here. Pass me along another hunk of fish and
K > me hot com-bread. "
" Well, you wouldn't a ben here,'f it hadn't a ben for Jim,
Tou'd a ben down dab in de woods widont any dinner, en gittin'
mos'drownded, too, dat you would, honey. Chickens knows
when its gwyne to rain, en so do de birds, chile. "
The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
70 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
till at last it was over the banks. The water was tliree or four
foot deep on the island in the low places and on the IllinoiB
bottom. On that side it was a good many miles wide ; bnt on
the Missoari side it was the same old distance across — a half
a mile — because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high
bluffs.
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe. It
was mighty eogl and shady in the deep woods even if the sun
was blazing outside. We went winding in and out amongst the
trees ; and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back
away and go some other way. Well, on every old broken-down j
tree you could see rabbits, and snakes, and such things ; and j
when the island had been overflowed a day or two, they got so ^
tame, on account of being hungry, that you could paddle right \
up and put your hand on them if you wanted to j but not the j
snakes and turtles — they would slide off in the water. The i
ridge our cavern was in was full of them. We could a had pels i
enough if we'd wanted them. *
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft — nice
pine planks. It was twelve foot wide and abouf > fifteen or sii-
teen foot long, and the top stood above water six or seven
inches, a solid level floor. We could see saw-logs go by in the
daylight, sometimes, but we let them go ; we didn't show our-
selves in daylight.
Another night, when we was up at the head of the island,
just before daylight, here comes a frame house down, on the
west side. She was a two-storey, and tilted over, considerable.
We paddled out and got aboard — dumb in at an upstairs win-
dow. But'it was too dark to see yet, so we made the canoe
fast and set in her to wait for daylight.
The light begun to come before we got to'the foot of the
island. Then we looked in at the window. We could make
out a bed, and a table, and two old chairs, and lots of things
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle j
hy Google
78 THE ADVEXTVRES OF BUCKLEBERnY FINX.
waa heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor,
and old vbieky bottles, and a couple of masks made out of black
cloth ; and all over the walls was the i^oranteet bind of words and
pictures, made with charcoal. There was two old dirty calico
dresses, and a sun-bonnet, and some women's under-clothes, hang-
ing against the wall, and some men's clothing, too. We put the
lot into the canoe ; it might come good. There was a boj's
old speckled straw hat on the floor ; I took that too. And
there was a bottle that had had milk in it ; and it had a rag
stopper for a baby to suck. We would a took the bottle, but
it was broke. There was a seedy old chest, and an old hair
trunk with the hinges broke. They stood open, but there
wam't nothing left in them that was any account. The way
things was scattered about, we reckoned the people left in a
hurry and wam't fixed so as to carry o£F most of their stuff.
We got an old tin lantern, and a butcher knife without any
handle, and a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any
store, and a lot of tallow candles, and a tin candlestick, and a
gourd, and a tin cup, and a ratty old bed-quilt oflT the bed, and
a reticule with needles and pins and beeswax and buttons and
thread and all such truck in it, and a hatchet and some nails,
and a flsb-line as thick as my little flnger, with some monstrous'
hooks on it, and a roll of buckskin, and a leather dog-collar,
and a horse-shoe, and some vials of medicine that didn't have
no label on them ; and just as we was leaving I found a toler-
able good curry-comb, and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-how,
and a wooden leg. The straps was broke off of it, but barring
that, it waa a good enough leg, though it was too long for me
and not long enough for Jim, and we couldn't find the other
one, though we hunted all around.
And so, take it all around, we made a good haul. When
we was ready to shove off, we was a quarter of a mile below the
island, and it was pretty broad day ; bo I made Jim lay down
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A GOOD HAUL. 70
in the canoe and cover up with the quilt, because if he set up,
pef^e conld tell he was a nigger a good ways off. I paddled
«ver to the Illinois shore, and drifted down most a half a mile
doing it. I crept np the dead water under the bank, and
badn't no accidents and didn't see nobody. We got home all
tafe.
D,g,t,7P:h»Goog]e
:r
X
R breakfkst I wanted
alk about the dead
I and guess out hem
!ome to be killed, but
didn't want to. He
it would fetch bad
:; aud besides, be
, he might come and
it us ; he said a man
; wam't buried was
e likely to go a-ha'nt-
around than one tbat
planted aud com-
ible. That sounded
ty reasonable, so I
I't say no more ; but
iouldn't keep from
lying over it and
wisbiug I knowed who
T > ., too™ .,»,T DOIUB.. ,^^j j^^ ^^^^ ^j ^^^j
they done it for.
We rummaged the clothes we'd got, and found eight dollars
in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overooat.
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat,
'D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
I'becanse if they'd a knowed the money waa there they wouldn't
a left it. I said I reckoned they. killed him, too; but Jim
didn't want to talk about that. I says :
" Now yoa think it's bad luck ; but what did you say when
I fetched in the snake-ekin that I found cm the top of the ridge
d»y before yeaterdtry ? You said it was the worst bad luck in
tiie world to tonch a aiake-skin with my hands. Well, here's
your bad luck ! We've raked in all this truck and eight dollars
besides. I wish we could have some bad luck like this every
day, Jim. "
" Never you mind, honey, never you mind. Don't you git
too peart. It's a-comin'. Mind I tell you, it's a-comin'. "
It did come, too. It was a Tuesday that we had that talk.
Veil, after dinner Friday, we was laying around in the grass at
tie npper end of the ridge, and got out of tobacco. I went to
the cavern to get some, and found a rattlesnake in there. I
Idlled him, and curled him up on the foot of Jim's blanket,
«er so natm'al, thinking there'd be some fun when Jim found
there. Well, by night I forgot all about the snake, and
lien Jim flang himself down on the blanket while I struck a
ligbt, the snake's mate waa there, and bit him.
He jumped up yelling, and the first thing the light showed
Ma the varmint curled up and ready for another spring. I
■lid him out in a second with a stick, and Jim grabbed pap's
vhiBky jug and begun to poitt it down.
He waa barefooted, and the snake bit him right on the
leel. That all comes of my being such a fool as to not re-
■Kinber that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always
ftitnea there and curls around it. Jim told me to chop ofif the
•Hake's head and throw it away, and then skin the body and
i*'»*t a piece of it. I done it, and he eat it and said it would
«lp core him. He made me take off the rattles and tie them
wwnd his wrist, too. He said that -that would help. Then I
a
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
82 TUB A1)FESTUB£S OF nVCKLEBERRY FIN6,'.
slid out quiet and tbrowed the simkes clear away amooget tiki
bushes ; for I wara't going to let Jim find out it was all nj
fault, not if I could help it.
D THE SNAKE.
Jim sucked and sucked at the jug, and now and then hi
got out of his head and pitched around and yelled ; but eveq
time be come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again
His foot swelled up pretty big, and so did his leg ; but by-ani
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
OLD BAlSK BUNKER.
r by the drnnk begun to come, and bo I judged he was all right ;
'bnt Fd dnitber been bit with a snake than pap's whisky.
Jim was laid up for four days and nights. Then the swell-
ing vas all gone and he was around again. I made up my
■ mind I wouldn't ever take aholt of a snake-ekin again ^ith my
luuids, now that I seewhat hadcomeof it. Jim said he reckoned
I would believe him next time. And he said that handling a
tnake-skin was such awful bad lack that maybe we hadn't got
to the end of it yet. He said he druther see the new moon
his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take
*ip a snake-skin in his hand. Well, I was getting to feel that
• 3
D,r,,t,7=^- In Google
81 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK.
way myeelf, though I've always reckooed that lookiDg at t1
new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest u
foolishest things a body can do. Old Hank Blinker done il
once, and bragged about it ; and in less than two years he gul
drunk and fell off of the shot tower and spread himself out al
that he was just a kind of a layer, as you may say ; and tlii^
slid him edgeways between two bam doors for a coffin,
buried him so, so they say, but I didn't see it Pap told
But anyway, it all come of looking at the moon that way, lik(
a foot.
Well, the days went along, and the river went down be
tween its banks again ; and about the first thing we done
to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set t
and catch a cat-fish that was as big as a man, being six fba
two inches long, and weighed over two hundred pounds,
couldn't handle him, of course; he would a flung us into IDinoii
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till 1
drownded. We found a brass button in his stomach, and
round ball, and lots of rubbage. We split the ball open md
the hatchet, and there was a spool in it. Jim said he*d had il
there a long time, to coat it over so and make a ball of it. i
was as big a fish as was ever catched in the Mississippi,
reckon. Jim said he hadn't ever seen a bigger one. He woui
a been worth a good deal over at the village. They peddi
out such a fish as that by the pound in the market hooa
there ; everybody buys some of him ; his meat's as white
snow and makes a good fry.
Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull, and 1
wanted to get a stirring up, some way. I said I reckoned
would slip over the river and find out what was going oft
Jim liked that notion ; but he said I must go in the dark and
look sharp. Then he studied it over and said, Couldnt I pot
on some of them old things and dress up like a girl ? Tbrf
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
ly DISGUISE. 8S
m a good notion, too. So we shcntened up one of the calico
pms and I tamed up my trowser-legs to mj knees and got
■to it. Jim hitched it behind with the hooks, and it was a
lir fit. I put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my cMn,
nd then for a bod; to look in and see my & ce was like looking
iown a joint of stove-pipe. Jim said nobody would know me,
»ea in the daytime, hardly. I practised around all day to get
ie hang of the things, and by-and-by I could do pretty well
» > them, only Jim said I didn't walk like a girl ; and he said I
mait quit polling up my gown to get at my britches pocket.
1 took notice, and done better.
I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark.
1 started across to the town from a little below the ferry
'^^g, and the drift of the current fetched me in at the
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
at , THE AVVESTUSES OF HUCKLEBBRRT FIKX.
bottom of the town. I tied up and started along the banlc.
There was a light buroiog in a tittle shanty that hadn't been
lived in for a long time, and I wondered who bad took up
quarters there. I slipped up and peeped in at the window.
There was a woman about forty year old in there, knitting
a candle that was on a pine table, I didn't know her fa
she was a stranger, for you couldn't start a face in that ti:
that I didn't know. Now this was lucky, because I was weak
ing; I was getting a & aid I had come; people might know
voice and find me out. But if this woman had been in sue
little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to knc
so I knocked at the door, and made up my mind I woul < :
forget I was a girl.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
terXL
7
COME in, " says the
woman, and I did.
She BajB :
" Take a cheer. "
I done it. She
looked me all over with
her little ehiay eyes,
und says :
" What might your
name be ? "
" Sarah Williams. "
" Where'bouts do
3'oulive? In this neigh-
bourhood ? "
" No'm. In Hoo-
kerville, seven mile be-
low. I've walked all
the way, and I'm all
tired out. "
1 you something. "
hungry I had to atop two
't hungry no more. It's
;r's down sick, and out of
to tell my ancle Abner
of the town, she says. I
1 know him ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
83 .THE ADVENTURES OF HUCELEBERRT FINX.
" No; but I don't know everybody yet. I haven't lived
here quite two weeks. It's a i considerable ways to the upper
end of the town. You better stay here all night. , Take off
your bonnet. "
" No, " I says, " I'll rest awhile, I reckon, and go on. I
ain't afeard of the dark. "
She said she wouldn't let me go by myself, but her husband
would be in by-and-by, maybe in a hour and a half, and she'd
send him along with me. Then she got to talking about her
husband, and about her relations up the river, and her relations
down the river, and about how much better oflf they used to
was, and how they didn't know but they'd made a mistake
coming to our town, instead of letting well alone — and so on
and so on, till I was afeard I bad made a mistake coming to
her to find out what was going on in the town ; but by-and-by
she dropped on to pap and the murder, and then I was pretty
willing to let her clatter right along. She told about me and
Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars (only she got it
ten) and all about pap and what a hard lot he was, and what a
bard lot I was, and at last she got down to where I was murdered.
I says :
" ■^Tio done it? We've heard considerable about these
goings on, down in Hookerville, but we don't know who'twas
that killed Huck Finn. "
•'Well, I reckon there's a right smart chance of people
here that'd like to know who killed him. Some thinks old
Finn done it himself. "
*'No-^is that so ? "
" Most everybody thought -it at first. Hell never know how
nigh he cOme to getting lynched. But before night they-
changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger
named Jim. " - -
. " WhyAe ; " ■
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
UUCK AND THE WOMAN. 89
I stopped. I reckoned I better keep still. She nin on,
and never noticed I had put in at all.
" The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed.
So there's a reward out for him — three hundred dollars. . And .
there's a reward out for old Finn too — two hundred dollars..
You see, he come to town the morning after the murder, and
told about it, and was out with'em on the ferry-boat hunt, and
right away after he up and left. Before night they wanted to
:]jiieh htm, but he was gone, you see. Well, next day they
fonndoutthe nigger was gone; theyfound out he hadn't benseen
Bence ten o'clock the night the murder was done. So then
they put it on him, you see, and while they was full of it, next
^diy back comes old Finn and went boo-hooing to Judge
llatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois
ifith. The judge give him some, and that evening he got
drank and was around till after midnight with a couple of
mighty hard looking strangers, and then went off with them.
Well, he hain't come back sence, and they ain't looking for him
back. till this thing blows over a Uttle, for people thinks now
that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think
wbbere done it, and then he'd get Huck's money without having
to bother a long time with a lawsuit. People do say he wam't
snjtoo good to do it. Ob, he'8 sly, I reckon. If he don't
ewne back for a year, he'll be all right. You can't prove any-
thing on him, you know; everything will be quieted down
tben, and hell walk into Huck's money as easy as nothing. "
" Yes, I reckon bo,'m. I don't see nothing in the way of
it- Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it? "
" Oh, no, not everybody. A good many thinks he done it. ■
But theyTl get the nigger pretty soon, now, and maybe they
< an scare it out of him. "
" Why, are they after him yet ? "
" Well, yon're innocent, ain't you ! Does three hundred
00 TOL'ADVENTUHES OF UVCKLEBERRr FISN.
doUara lay toodcI ever; day for people to pick up ? Some folks
thinks the nigger ain't ikr from here. I'm one of them — bat I
hain't talked it arooBd. A few days ago I was talking with an
old couple that Uvea next door in the Ic^ shanty, and they
happened to say hardly anybody ever goea to that island over
yonder that they call Jackson's Island. Don't anybody live
there? says L No, nobody, says they. I didn't say any more,
but I done some thinking. I was pretty near certain I'd seen
smoke over there, about the head of the island, a day or two
before that, so I says to myaelf, like aa not that nigger's hiding
over there ; anyway, says I, it'a worth the trouble to give the
place a hunt. I hain't seen any smoke sence, ao I reckon
maybe he's gone, if it was him ; but husband's going over to
see — him and another man. He was gone up the river ; bnt
he got back to-day and I told him as soon aa he got here two
hours ago. "
I had got 80 uneasy I couldn't set still. I had to do some-
thing with my hands ; so I took up a needle off of the table
and went to threading it. My hands shook, and I was making
a bad job of it. When the woman stopped talking, I looked
up, and she was looking at me pretty curious, and smiling a
little. I put down the needle and thread and let on to be in-
terested — and I waa, too — and says :
" Three hundred dollara is a power of money. I wish my
mother could get it. la your husband going over there to-
night ? "
*'Oh, yes. He went up town with the man I was telling
yon of, to get a boat and aee if they could borrow another gun.
They'll go over after midnight. "
" Couldn't they see better if they waa to wait till day-
time? "
" Yes. And couldn't the nigger see better, too? After
midnight he'll likely be asleep, and they can slip around through
n,r,i,7=-i > ,Goi:)^le
TI[E SEASCa. 01
the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark,
if he's got one. "
" I didn't think of that. "
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious, and I didn't
feel a hit comfortable. Pretty soon she says:
" What did you say your name was, honey ? "
'■ UIH AND AKOTHER a
" M— Mary Williams. "
Somehow it didn't seem to me that I said it was Mary
be{(»e, BO I didn't look up ; seemed to me I said it was Sarah ;
> o I felt sort of cornered, and was afeared maybe I was looking
it, too. I wished the woman would say something more ; the
longer she set still, the uneasier I vas. Bat now she says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
02 THE ADVESTUREB OF SUCSLEBERRY FINS.
" Honey, I thought yoa said it was Sarah ■whenyoa first
come in ? "
" Oh, yes'm, I did. Sarah Mary Williams. Sarah's my firet
name. Some calls me Sarah, some calls me JVfary. "
" Oh, that's the way of it ? "
" Yes'm. "
I was feeling better, then, but I wished I was out of there,
anyway. I couldn't look up yet.
Well, the woman fell to talking about how hard times was,
and how poor they had to live, and how the'rats was as free as
if they owned the place, and so forth, and so on, and then I got
easy again. She waa right about the rats. You'd see one stick
his nose out of a hole in the comer every little while. She said
she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was
alone, or they wouldn't give her no peace. . She showed me a
bar of lead, twisted up into a knot, and said she waa a good shot
with it generly, but she'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago,
and didn't know whether she could throw true, now. But she
watched for a chance, and directly she banged away at a rat,
but she missed him wide, and said *'Ouch ! " it hurt her arm so.
Then she told me to try for the next one. I wanted to be
getting away before the old man got back, but of course 1
didn't let on. I got the thing, and the first rat that showed
his nose I let drive, and if he'd a stayed where he was he'd a
been a tolerable sick rat. She said that that was first-rate, and
she reckoned I would hive the next one. She went and got
the lump of lead and fetched it back and brought along a hank
of j'am, which she wanted me tx > help her with. I held up my
two hands and she put the hank over them and went on
talking about her and her husband's matters. But she broke
ofl " to say :
" Keep your eye on the rats. You better have the lead in
your lap, handy. "
D,g,t,7P:h»GOQgle
PRUrAJtlCATIOlf.
So she dropped the lump ioto my lap, jnsb at that a
and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking.
But only about a minute. Then she took off the hank and
looked me straight in the face, but very pleasant, and says :
" Come, now — what's your real name ? "
" Wh-what, mum ? "
" What's your real name? Is it Bill, or Tom, or Bob? — or
what ia it ? "
I reckon I shook like a leaf, and I didn't know hardly what
io do. But I says :
" Please to don't poke fun at a poor girl like me, mum. If
I'm in the way, here, I'll "
" No, you won't. Set down and stay where you are. I ain't
going to hurt you, and I ain't going to tell on you, nuther.
Yoa jnst tell me your secret, and trust me. I'll keep it ; and
what's more. 111 help you. So'll my old man, if you want him
to. You see, you're a runaway'prentice — that's all. It ain't
anything. There ain't any harm In it. You've been treated
bad, and you made up your mind to cut. Bless you, child, I
wouldn't tell on you. Tell me all about it, now— that's a good
boy. " •
So I said it wouldn't be no use to try to play it any longer,
ind I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything,
but she mustn't go back on her promise. Then I told her my
kiha and mother was dead, and the la^ had bound me out to
a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the
wer, and he treated me so bad I couldn't stand it no longer ;
be went away to be gone a couple of days, and so I took my
< bance and stole some of his daiighter's old clothes, and cleared
out, and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles ; I
travelled nightg, and hid day-times and slept, and the bag of
bfead and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way and
I had a plenty. , I said I believed, my uncle Abner Moore would
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
04 THE ABVENTVRBS OF HVCKLEBERltV FISN.
take care of me, and so that was why I struck out for this town
of Goshen.
" Goshen, child? This ain't Goshen. This is St. Peters-
hnrg. Goshen's ten mile further up the river. Who told you
this was Goshen ? "
" Why, a man I met at day-break this morning, just as I
was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep. He
told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand, and
five mile would fetch me to Goahen. "
" He waa drunk I reckon. He told you just exactly wrong. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
GOING TO QOSHEN. 66
" Well, he did act like he was drunk, but it ain't no matter
DOIT. I got to be moving along. I'll fetch Goshen before day-
light "
" Hold on a minute. Ill put you up a snack to eat. You
might want it. "
So she put me up a snack, and BayB :
" Say — when a cow's laying down, which end of her gets up
first? Answer up prompt, now — don't stop to study over it.
mijch end gets up first ? "
" The hind end, mum. "
" Well, then, a horse ? "
" The for'rard end, mum. "
" Which side of a tree does the most moss grow on ? "
" North side. "
" If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside, how many of them
eats with their heads pointed the same direction ? "
" The whole fifteen, mura. "
" Well, I reckon you have lived in the country. I thought
maybe you was trying to hocus me again. What's your real
name, now ? "
" George Petera, mum. "
" Well, try to remember it, George. Don't forget and tell
me it's Elesander before you go, and then get out by saying it's
George -Elexander when I catch you. And don't go about
women in that old calico. You do a girl tolerable poor, but
yon might fool men, maybe. Bless you, child, when you set
out to thread a needle, don't hold the thread still and fetch the
needle np to it ; hold the needle still and poke the thread at
it — that's the way a woman most always does; but a man
always does t'other way. And when you throw at a rat or any-
thing, hitch yourself up a tip-toe, and fetch your hand up over
yotir head as awkard as yon can, and miss your rat about six or
■even foot. Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder, like there
D,g,t,7P:hyGOOglC
96 THE ADVENTUSES OF BUCKLEBERRT FINN.
was a pivot there for it to turn on — like a girl j not from the
wrist and elbow, with your arm out to one side, like a boy.
And nund you, when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap,
she throws her knees apart ; she don't clap them together, the
way you did when you catched the lump of lead. Why, I
spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle ; and
I contrived the other things just to make certain. Now trot
along to your uncle, Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander
Peters, and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs.
Judith Loftus, which is me, and I'll do what I can to get yon
out of it. Keep the river road, all the way, and next time you
tramp, take shoes and socks with you. The river road's a rocky
one, and your feet'll be in a condition when you get to Groshen,
I reckon. "
I went up the bank about fifty yards, and then I dotibled
on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was, a good
piece below the house, I jumped in and was off in a faoiry.
I went up stream far enough to make the head- of the idJand,
and then started across. I took off the son-bonnet, for I i^lfesi^
want no blinders on, then. When I was about the mid < ttl^I
hear the clock begin to strike; so I stops and listens^ JHte
■ sound come feint over the water, but elear-^eleven, Whe* I
struck the head of the island I never waited to blow, thoogf^I
was most winded, but I shoved right into the timber where^
old camp used to be, and started a good fire there on a high-
and-dry spot.
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place a
mile and a half below, as hard as I could go. I landed, and
slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the
cavern. There Jim laid, sound asleep on the ground. I roused
him out and says ;
" Git up and hump yourself, Jim ! There ain't a minute to
lose. They're after us ! "
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
hy Google
tXI
8t a beeD tlose oa to one
;lock when we got below the.
land at ]ast, and the raft did
em to go mighty slow. If a
> & t was to come along, we was
ling to take to the canoe and
eak for the Illinois shore ; and
was well a boat didn't come,
r we hadn't ever thought to
it the gun into the canoe, or
fishing-line or anything to
t. We was in ruther too
ach of a sweat to think of so
uiy things. It wam't good
igment to put everi/thing on
. e raft.
If the men went to the
island, I just expect they found
the camp iire I built, and watched it all night for Jim to come.
Anyways, they stayed away from us, and if my building the fire
never fooled them it warn't no fault of mine. I played it as
low-down on them as I could.
When the first streak of day begun to show, we tied up to
a tow-head in a big bend on the Illinois side, and backed oA
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SLOW NAVWATWy. 0! >
cottoa-wood branches with the hatchet and covered up the ruft.
with them bo she looked like there had been a cave-in in the
bank there. A tow-head ia a sand-bar that has cotton-woods
;on it as thick as harrow-teeth.
I We had mountains on the Missouri tthore and heavy timber
OQ the Illinois side, and the channel was down the Missouri
shore at that place, so we warn't afraid of anybody running
across us, We laid there all day and watched the rafts and
steamboats spin down the Missouri shore, and up-bound steam-
boats fight the big river in the middle. I told Jim all about
the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she
was a smart one, and if she was to start after us herself she
wouldn't set down and watch a camp fire — no, sir, she'd fetch
a dog. Well, then, I said, why couldn't she tell her husband
to fetch a dog ? Jim said he bet she did think of it by the
time the men was ready to start, and he believed they must a
Bone up town to get a dog, and so they lost all that time, or
ielse we wouldn't be here on a tow-head sixteen or seventeen
[mile below the village — no, indeedy, we would be in that same
lold town again. So I said I didn't care what was the reason
they didn't get us, as long as they didn't.
When it was beginning to come on dark, we poked our
heads out of the cottonwood thicket and looked up, and down,
and across ; nothing in sight ; so Jim took np some of the top
.planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in
blazing weather and rainy, and to keep the things dry. Jim
made a floor for the wigwam, and raised ifc a foot or more above
ithe level of the raft, bo now the blankets and all the traps was
out of the reach of steamboat waves. Bight in the middle of
the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches
deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place ; this was
to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly ; the wigwam
would keep it from being seen. We made an extra steering
n ■!
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
100 THE ADVENTVMBS OF SUCKLEBERRY J7AW.
oar, too, because one of the others might get broke, on a snag
or something. We fixed np a short forked stick to hang the
old lantern on ; because we must always light the lantern
whenever we see a steamboat coming down stream, to ke^
from getting run over ; but we wouldn't have to light it f«l
up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a
" crossing ; " for the river was pretty high yet, very low banks
being still a little underwater; so up-bound boats didn't alwaji
run the channel, but hunted easy water.
This second night we ^un between seven and eight hour^
with a current that was making over four mile an hour. W^
catched fish, and talked, and we took a swim now and then l^
keep off sleepiness. It was kind of solemn, drifting down th^
big still river, laying on our backs looking up at the stars, ani
we didn't ever feel like talking loud, and it wam't often tha
we laughed, only a little kind of a low chuckle. We ha4
mighty good weather, as a general thing, and nothing evm
happened to us at all, that night, nor the next, nor the next.
Every night we passed towns, some of them away up on black
hillsides, nothing but jnst a shiny bed of lights, not a house
could you see. The fifth night we passed St. Louis, and it wai
like the whole world lit up. In St. Petersburg they used ti
'say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis, bnl
I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights al
two o'clock that still night. There wam't a sound there ; every^
body was asleep.
Every night, now, I used to slip ashore, towards ten o'clocl^
at some little village, and buy ten or fifteen cents'worth of
meal or bacon or other stu£F to eat ; and sometimes I lifted a
chicken that wam't roosting comfortable, and took him aloo^.
Pap always said, take a chicken when you get a chance, becauat
if you don't want him yourself yon can easy find somebody thai
does, and a good deed aint ever forgot. I never see pap who
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BORMOWING TMIXGS. 101
he didn't want the chicken himself, bnt that is what he used
to say, anyway.
Mornings, before daylight, I slipped into corn-fields and
borrowed a watermelon, or a mushmeloa, or a pnnkin, or some
new com, or things of that kind. Pap always said it wam't no
HE BOHRTIHSe L
barm to borrow things, if you was meaning to pay them back,
Bometime; but the widow said it wam't anything but a soft
■ame for stealing, and no decent body would do it. Jim said
he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly
iright ; so the best way wotild be for us to pick out two or three
things from the list and say we wouldn't borrow them any more
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
109 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEHnr FI &'N.
— then he reckoned it woalda't be no harm to borrow
others. So we talked it over all one night, drifting along down
the river, trying to make up our minds whether to drop the
watermelons, or the eantelopes, or the muBhmelons, or what.
But towM-ds daylight we got it all settled satisfactory, and con-
cluded to drop crabapples and p'simraons. We wam't feeling
just right before that, but it was all comfortable now. I
glad the way it came out, too, because crabapples ain't ewet
good, and the p'simmons wouldn't be ripe for two or thre(
months yet.
We shot a water-fowl, now and then, that got up too earlj
in the morning or didn't go to bed early enough in the evening.
Take it all around, we lived pretty high.
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm afta
midnight, with a power of thunder and lightning, and the rail
poured down in a solid sheet. We stayed in the wigwam anJ
let the raft take care of itself. When the lightning glared oal
we could see a big straight river ahead, and high rocky bluffi
on both sides. By-and-by says I, " Hel-io, Jim, looky yonder
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock. We wai
drifting straight down for her. The L'ghtning showed her very
distinct. She was leaning over, with part of her upper de < i
above water, and you could see every little chimbly-gny clean
and clear, and a chair by the big bell, with an old slouch hat
hanging on the hack of it when the flashes come.
Well, it being away in the night, and stormy, and all
mysterious-like, I felt just the way any other boy would a felt
when I see that wreck laying there bo mournful and lonesome
in the middle of the river. I wanted to get aboard of her and
slink around a little, and see what there was there. So I
says:
" Le's land on her, Jim. "
But Jim was dead against it, at first. He says ;
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOARDINO THE WRECK. 103
" I doftn'want io go fool'n long er no wrack. We'a doin'
blame'well, en we better let blame'well alone, as de good book
says. Like as not dej's a watchman on dat wrack. "
'* Watchman your grandmother ! " I says ; " there ain't
nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house; and do
you reckon anybody's going to resk his life for a texas and a
pilot-house such a night as this, when it's likely to break up
and wash off down the river any minute ? " Jim couldn't say
nothing to that, so he didn't try. " And besides, " I says, " we
might borrow something worth having, out of the captain's
stateroom. Seegars, 7 bet you — and cost five cents apiece, solid
cash. Steamboat captains is always rich, and gets sixty dollars
a month, and they don't care a cent what a thing coats, you
know, long as they want it. Stick a candle in your pocket ; I
can't rest, Jim, till we give her a rummaging. Do you reckon
.Torn Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? Not for pie, he
wouldn't. He'd call it an adventure — that's what he'd call
it; and he'd land on that wreck if it was his last act. And
wouldn't be throw style into it ? — wouldn't he spread himself,
nor nothing? Why, you'd think it was Christopher C'lum-
bus discovering Kingdom-Come. I wish Tom Sawyer was
here. "
Jim he grumbled a little, but give in. He said we mustn't
talk any more than we could help, and then talk mighty low.
The h'ghtning showed us the wreck again, just in time, and we
fetched the stahboard derrick, and made fast there.
The deck was high out, here. We went sneaking down the
slope of it to labboard, in the dark, towards the texas, feeling
our way slow with our feet, and spreading our hands oat to
fend off the guys, for it was so dark we couldn't see no sign of
them. Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight,
and dumb on to it ; and the next step fetched us in front of the
captain's door, which was open, and by Jimminy, away down
104 THE ADVEXTURES OF SUCKLESERRY JYA'A.
through the texas hall we see a light! and all in the same
second we seemed to hear low voices in yonder !
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick, and
told me til come along. I says, all right ; and was going to
start for the raft ; but just then I heard a voice wail out and
say:
" Oh, please don't boys : I swear I won't ever tell ! "
Another voice said, pretty loud :
*'It's a lie, Jim Tomer. You've acted this way befwe.
You always want more'n your share of the truck, and you've
always got it, too, because you've swore't if you didn't you'd
tell. But this time you've said it jest one time too many.
You're the meanest, treacherouaest hound in this country. "
By this time Jim was gone for the raft. I was just a-biling
with curiosity ; and I says to myself, Tom Sawyer wouldn't
back out now, and so I won't either ; I'm agoing to see what's
going on here. So I dropped on my hands and knees, in the
little passage, and crept aft in the dark, till there wam't but
about one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas.
Then, in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied
hand and foot, and two men standing over him, and one of
them had a dim lantern in his hand, and the other one had a
pistol. This one kept pointing the pistol at the man's head on
, the floor and saying—
" I'd like to ! And I orter, too, a mean skunk ! "
The man on the floor would shrivel up, and say : " Oh, please
don't. Bill — I hain't ever goin'to tell. "
And every time he said that, the man with the lantern
would laugh, and say :
"'Deed you ain't ! You never said no truer thing'n that,
you bet you. " And once be said : " Hear him beg ! and yit if
we hadn't got the best of him and tied him, he'd a killed ns
both. And what /or? Jist for noth'n. Jist because we stood
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TBE PLOTTERS. 105
on our rights — that's vhat for. But I lay you ain't agoin'to
threaten nobody anymore, Jim Turner. Put up that pistol,
Bill. "
Bill says :
" I don't want to, Jake Packard. I'm for killin'him — and
didn't he kill old Hatfield jiat the same way — and don't he
sit? " -
" But I don't want him killed, and I've got mj leasoBS
for it. "
" Bless yo'heart for them words, Jake Packard ! I'll never
forgit you, long's I live ! " says the man on the floor, sort of
blahbering.
Packard didn't take no notice of that, but hung up his lan-
tern on a nail, and started towards where I was, there in the
dark, and motioned Bill to come. I crawfished as & st as I
i > , Google
106 THE ADrESTURES OF nUCKLBBESItY FINK.
could, about two yards, but the boat slanted so that I cotUdn't
make very good time ; bo to keep from getting run over and
catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side. The
mau come a-pawiog along in the dark, and when Packard got
to my stateroom, he says :
" Here — come in here. "
And in he came, and Bill after him. But before they got in,
I was up in the upper berth, cornered, and sorry I come. Then
they Btood there, with their hands on the ledge of the berth, and
talked. I couldn't see them, but I could tell where they was,
by the whisky they'd been having, I was glad I didn't drink
whisky ; but it irouldn't made much difference, anyway, because
most of the time they couldn't a treed me because I didn't
breathe. I was ioo scared. And besides, a body covldiCt
breathe, and hear such talk. They talked low and earnest.
Bill wanted to kill Turner. He says:
" He's said he'll tell, and he will. If we was to give both
our shares to him now, it wouldn't make no difference after the
row, and the way we've served him. Shore's you're bom, he'll
turn State's evidence ; now you hear me. I'm for putting him
out of his troubles. "
" So'm I, " says Packard, very quiet.
" Blame it, I'd sorter begun to think you wasn't. Well,
then, that's all right. I^e's go and do it. "
" Hold on a minute ; I ain't had my say yit. You listen to
me. Shooting's good, but there's quieter ways if the thing's
got to be done. But what / say, is this ; it ain't good sense to
go court'n around after a halter, if you can git at what you're
up to in some way that's jist as good and at the same time dont
bring you into no resks. Ain't that so? "
" You bet it is. Buthowyougoin'to manage it this time? "
" Well, my idea is this ; we'll rustle around and gether up
whatever pickins we've overlooked in the staterooms, and shove
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
" IT AIN'T GOOD MORALS. " ]07
Tor shore and hide the truck. Then Tell wait. Now I say it
ain't agoin'to be more'n two hours befo'this wrack breaks uji
and washes off down the river. See ? He'll be drownded, and
won't have nobodj to blame for it but his own self. I reckon
that's a considerble sight better'n killin'of him. I'm unfavour-
able to killin'a man as long as you can git around it ; it ain't
good sense, it ain't good morals. Ain't I right? "
" Yes — I reek'n you are. But s'pose she doi^t break up
and wash ofif? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
108 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
" Well, we can wait the two hours, anyway, and see, can't
we? "
" All right, then ; come along. "
So they started, and I lit out, all in a cold sweat, and
ecrambled forward. It was dark as pitch there ; but I said in
a kind of coarse whisper, " Jim ! " and he answered up, right at
my elbow, with a sort of moan, and I Bays ;
" Quick, Jim, it aint no time for fooling around and moan-
ing ; there's a gang of murderers in yonder, and if we don't hunt
up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these
fellows can't get away from the wreck, there's one of'em going
to be in a bad fix. But if we find their boat we can pnt all of
'em in a bad fix — for the Sheriff'11 get'em. Quick — hurry !
I'll hunt the labboard side, you hunt the stabboard. You start
at the raft, and "
" Oh ! my lordy, lordy ! Raf ? Dey ain'no raf'no mo', she
done broke loose en gone ! —'en here we is ! "
'• OH 1 LOKDY, LOKDY 1 "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
I catched my
1 and most faint-
hut up on a wreck
sucli a gang as
But it wam't
me to be aenti-
iring. We'd got
d that boat, now
i to have it for
Ives. So we went
king and shaking
the stabboard
and alow work it
too — seemed a
before we got to
tern. No sign of
,t. Jim said he
:, believe he could
IK A ?ix. go any further — so
scared he hadn't hardly any strength left, he said. But I said
come on, if we get left on this wreck, we are in a fii, sure.
So on we prowled, again. We struck for the stem of the texas,
imd found it, and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight,
hanging on from shutter to shutter, for the edge of the sky-
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
110 THE ADVE^'TURES OF HUCEIEBERRY FIHTX.
light was in the water. When we got pretty close to the cross-
hall door, there was the skiff, sure enough ! I could just barely
see her, I felt ever so thankful. In another second I would
a been aboard of her ; bat just then the door opened. One of
the men stuck his head out, only about a couple of foot from
me, and I thought I was gone ; bat he jerked it in again, and
says;
" Heave that blame lantern out o'sight. Bill I "
He flung a bag of sometbiag into the boat, and then got in
himself, and set down. It was Packard. Then Bill he come
out and got in. Packard says, in a low voice :
" All ready — shove off! "
I couldn't hardly hang on to the shutters, I was so weak.
Bat Bill says :
" Hold on —'d yon go through him? "
" No. Didn't you? "
" No. So he's got his share o'the cash, yet. "
" Well, then, come along — no use to take truck and leave
money. "
" Say — won't he suspicion what we're up to ? "
" Maybe he won't. But we got to have it anyway. Come
along. "
So they got out and went in.
The door slammed to, because it was on the careened side;
and in a half second I was in the boat, and Jim come a tum-
bling after me. I out with my knife and cut the rope, and
away we went !
We didn't touch an oar, and we didn'. speak nor whisper,
nor hardly even breathe. We went gliding swift along, dead
silent, past the tip of the paddle-box, and past the stem ; then
in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the
wreck, and the darkness soaked ber up, every last sign of her,
and we was safe, and knowed it.
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
ESCAPING FJtOM THE WRECK. Ill
Wben we was three or four hundred yards down stream, we
eee the lantern ehow like a little spark at the texas door, for a
eecond, and we knowed by that the rascals had missed their
boat, and was beginning to vinderstand that they was in just as
mach trouble,. now, as Jim Turner was.
Then Jim manned the oars, and we took out after onr raft.
Sow was the first time that I begun to worry about the men —
I reckon I hadn't had time to before. I begun to think how
dreadful it was, even for murderers, to be in such a fix. I says
to myself, there ain't no telling but I might come to be a
mimierer myself, yet, and then how would I like it ? So says
I to Jim :
" The first light we see, we'll land a hundred yards below
it or above it, in a place where it's a good hiding-place for you
and the skiff, and then I'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn,
and get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of
their scrape, so they can be hung when their time comes. "
But that idea was a failure ; for pretty soon it begun to
8t*ffni again, and this time worse than ever. The rain poured
down, and never a light showed ; everybody in bed, I reckon.
We boomed along down the river, watching for lights and
watching for our raft. After a long time the rain let up, but
the clouds staid, and the lightning kept whimpering, and
,by-and-by a flash showed us a black thing ahead, floating, and
we made for it.
It was the raft, and mighty glad was we to get aboard of
it again. We seen a light, now, away down to the right, on
shore. So I said I would go for it. The skiff was half full of
lilander which that gang had stole, there on the wreck. We
hustled it on to the rafc in a pile, and I told Jim to float along
down, and show a light when he judged he had gone about two
mile, and keep it burning till I come ; then I manned my oars
and shoved for the light. As I got d^wn (o^crJs it, three or
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
112 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
four more showed — up on a hillside. It was a village. I ;
closed in above the shore-light, and laid on my oars and floated.
As I went by, I see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of
a double-hull ferry-boat. I skimmed around for the watchman,'
a-wondering whereabouts he slept ; and by-and-by I found him
roosting on the bitts, forward, with his head down between his
" HBLLO, WHAT'S UP 1 "
knees. I give his shoulder two or three little shoves, and
begun to cry.
He stirred up, in a kind of a startlish way j but when he
see it was only me, he took a good gap and stretch, and then
he says :
" Hello, what's up ? Don't cry, bub. What's the trouble ? "
I says:
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TBH WATCSMA^. 113
" Pap, and mam, and sis, and "
Then I broke down. He says :
" Oh, dang it, now, don't take on so, we all has to have onr
jboablefl and this'n'11 come out all right. What's the matter
with'em ? "
! " They're — they're — are you the watchman of the boat ? "
" Yee, " he says, kind of pretty-well-satiaBed like. " I'm
die captain and the owner, and the mate, and the pilot, and
vatchman, and bead deck-hand : and sometimes I'm the freight
and passengers. I ain't as rich as old Jim Homback, and I
lein't be so blame'generous and good to Tom, Dick, and Harry
I what he is, and slam around money the way he does ; but
Pve told him a many a time't I wouldn't trade places with
i; for, says I, a sailor's life's the life for me, and I'm demed
[ rd live two mile out o'town, where there ain't nothing ever
'on, not for all his epondulicks and as much more on top
. Says I "
I broke in and says ;
" They're in an awful peck of trouble, and "
" Fftois? "
" Why, pap, and mam, and sis, and Miss Hooker; and if
you'd take your ferry-boat and go up there "
" Up where ? Where are they ? "
" On the wreck. "
" What wreck ? "
" Why, there ain't but one. "
" What, you don't mean the Walter Scott ? "
" Yes. "
" Good land ! what are they doin'there, for gracious sakee ? "
" Well, they didn't go there a-purpose. "
" I bet they didn't ! Why, great goodness, there ain't no
ehance for'em if they don't get oflf mighty quick ! Why, how
in the nation did they ever git into such a scrape ? "
I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
lU THE ADVENTURES OF ItUCKLEBERRY FINN.
" Easy enough. Miss Hooker was a-viaiting, up there tc
the town "
" Yea, Booth's Landmg — go on. "
" She was a-visiting, there at Booth's Landing, and just ii
the edge of the evening she started over with her nigge
woman in the horse-ferry, to stay all night at her friend "
house, Miss What-you-may-call-her, I disremember her name
and they lost their steering-oar, and swung around and wen
a-floating down, stem-first, about two mile, snd saddle-baggse(
on the wreck, and the ferry man and the nigger woman ami
the horses was all lost, hut Miss Hooker she made a grab ani
got aboard the wreck. Well, about an hour after dark, w^
3ome along down in our trading-scow, and it was so dark we didal
notice the wreck till we was right on it ; and so w« saddle!
baggsed ; but all of us was saved but Bill Whipple — and obj
he was the bestcretur! — I most wish't it had been me, I do. "
" My George ! It's the beatenest thing I ever struck. An^
then what did you all do ? "
" Well, we hollered and took on, but it's so wide there, wfl
couldn't make nobody hear. So pap said somebody got to get
ashore and get help somehow. I was the only one that coold
swim, so I made a dash for it, and Miss Hooker she said if 1
didn't strike help sooner, come here and hunt up her uncle^
and he'd fix the thing. I made the land about a mile below,
and been fooling along ever since, trying to get people to dd
something, but they said,'What, in such a night and such ■
current ? there ain't no sense it ; go for the steam-ferry.'No«
if you'll go, and "
" By Jackson, I'd like to, and blame it I don't know bat
will; but who in the'dingnations agoin'to pay for it?
you reckon your pap "
" Why, that's all right. Miss Hooker she told me, pari
cvlar, that her uncle Homback "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
p-hy Google
lie THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
proud of me for helping these rapscallions, because rapscallions
and dead beats is the kind the widow and good people takes
the most interest in.
Well, before long, here cornea the wreck, dim and dusky,
sliding along down ! A kind of cold shiver went through me,
and then I struck out for her. She was very deep, and I ?ee
in a minute there wam't much chance for anybody being aliye
in her. I pulled all around her and hollered a little, but there
vM.; ■,:,-/ , /,'iSKart„*ii
^i|
n
wasn't any answer; all dead still. I felt a little bit heavy-j
hearted about the gang, but not much, for I reckoned if they!
could stand it, I could.
Then here comes the ferry-boat ; so I shoved for the middl^
of the river on a long down-stream slant ; and when I judged!
I was out of eye-reach, I laid on my oars, and looked back and
see her go and smell around the wreck for Jliss Hooker's
remainders, because the captain would know her uncle Horn-
back would want them ; and then pretty soon the ferry-boat;
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
A DEAD SLEEP. 117
give it up and went for shore, and I laid into mj work and
went a-booming down the river.
It did seem a powerful long time before Jim's light showed
< up ; and when it did show, it looked like it was a thousand
mile off. By the time I got there the sky was beginning to
get a little gray in the east ; so we struck for aa island, and
bid tbe raft, and sunk the skiff, and turned in and slept like
dead people.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

I'-and-by, when we got
up, we turned over the
truck the gang had stole
(iff of the wreck, and
found boots, and blan-
kets, and clothes, and
all sorts of other thing;,
and a lot of books, and
a spyglass, and three
liDies of seegars. Ve
hadn't ever been this
rich before, in neither
of our lives. The see-
gars was prime. \Ve
laid off all the after-
noon in the woods talk-
ing, and me reading the
books, and having a
TUCNISG OVBU THE TEUCK. S^^^ " ^ S'^ *^™«- ^
told Jim all about what
happened inside the wreck, and at the ferry-boat ; and I said ;
these kinds of things was adventures ; but he said he didn't
want no more adventures. He said that when I went in the
texaa, and he crawled back to get on the raft and found her
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A GB2SERAL GOOD TIME. 119
gone, he nearly died ; because he judged it was all up with
Aim, anyv & y it could be fixed ; for if he didn't get saved he
iroold get drownded ; and if he did get saved, whoever saved
him would send him back home so as to get the reward, and
then Misa Wateon would sell him Sonth, sure. Well, he was
right ; he was most always right ; he had an uncommon level
head, for a nigger.
I read considerable to Jim about kiogs, and dukes, and
earld, and such, and how gaudy they dressed, and how much
style they pot on, and called each other your majesty, and your
grace, and your lordship, and so on,'stead of mister ; and Jim's
eyes bugged out, and he was interested. He says :
" I didnt know dey was so many un um. I hain't beam
*bout none un um, skasely, but ole King Sollermun, onlees you
coimts dem kings dat's in a pack er k'yards. How much do a
king git ? "
" Get ? " I says ; " why, they get a thoiisand dollars a month
if they want it; they can have just as much as they want;
everything belongs to them. "
" AinH dat gay ? En what dey got to do, Huck ? "
" Tkqf don't do nothing ! Why, how you talk. They just
set around. "
" No — is dat so? "
" Of course it is. They just set around. Except maybe
when there's a war ; then they go to the war. But other times
they just lazy around ; or go hawking — ^just hawking and sp —
Sh I — d'you hear a noise ? "
We skipped out and looked ; but it wam't nothing but the
flutter of a steamboat's wheel, away down coming around the
point; so we come back.
" Yes, " says I, *'and other times, when things is dull, they
fuss with the parlyment ; and if everybody don't go just so he
whacks their heads off. But mostly tbey hang round the harem. "
n,3-t,7=^- In Google
120 THE ADVENTUnES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
" Roun'de which ? "
" Harem. "
" What's de harem'i "
" The place where he keep his wives. Don't you knoir
about the harem ? Solomon had one ; he had about a million
wives. "
_ J - ,,
B UILLION WIVES.
" Why, yes, dafc's so ; I — I'd done forgot it. A harem's a
bo'd'n-house, I reck'n. Mos'likely dey has rackety times in
de Qussery. En I reck'n de wives quarrels considable ; en dat
'crease de racket. Tit dey say SoUermun de wises'man dat
ever live'. I doan'take no stock in dat. Bekase why : would
a wise man want to live in de raids'er sich a blimblammin'alt
de time? No —'deed he wouldn't, A wise man'ud take en
rUE HAMEM. 121
buil'a biler-Eactiy ; en den he eonld shet down de biler-feetry
when he want to res'. "
" Well, but he was the wisest man, anyway ; because the
widow she told me so, her own self. "
" I doan k'yer what de widder say, he wan^t no wise man,
nuther. He had some er de dad-fetchedes'ways I ever see.
Does you know'bout dat chile dat he'nz gwyne to chop in
" Yes, the widow told me all about it. "
" Well, den ! Warn'dat de beatenes'notion in de wmrl'?
VoQ jes'take en look at it a minute. Dah's de stump, dah —
dat's one er de women ; heah's you — dat'a de yuther one ; I's
SoUennun ; en dish-yer dollar bill's de chile. Bofe un you
claims it. What does I do ? Does I shin aroun'mongs'de
neighbours en fine out which un you de bill do blong to, en
123 TBE ADVEHTURES OF SUCKLEBEBBT FINN.
han'it over to de ri^t one, all safe en aoun', de way dat any-
body dat had any gomption would ? No — I take ea whack de
bill in Uoo, en give half un it to you, en de yuther half to de
yuther woman. Dat's de way SoUermun was gwyne to do wid
de chile. Now I want to ast you : what's de use er dat half a
bill ? — can't buy noth'n wid it. En what use is a half a chile ?
I would'n give a dem for a million un um. "
" But hang it, Jim, you've clean misaed the point — blame
it, you've missed it a thousand mile. "
" Who? Me? Go long. Doan'talk to me'bout yo'
pints. I reck'n I knows sense when I sees it ; en dey ain'no
sense in sich doin's as dat. De'spute wam't'bout a half a
chile, de'spute was'bout a whole chile ; en de man dat think
he kin settle a'spate'bout a whole chile wid a half a chile,
doan'know enough to come in out'n de rain. Doan'talk to
me'bout Sollermun, Huck, I knows him by de back. "
" But I tell you you don't get the point. "
** Blame de pint I I reck'n I knows what I knows. En
mine you, de real pint is down furder — it's down deeper. It
lays in de way Sollermun was raised. You take a man dat's
got on'y one er two chillen ; is dat man gwyne to be wasefiil o'
chillen ? No, he ain't ; he can't'ford it. He know how to
value'em. But you take a man dat's got tnut five millioa
chillen runnin'roun'de house, en it's diffunt. He as soon chop
a chile in two as a cat. Dey's plenty mo'. A chile er
two, mo'er less, wam't no consekens to Sollermun, dad fetch
I never see such a ni^er. If he got a notion in his bead
once, there wam't no getting it out again. He was the most
down on Solomon of any nigger I ever see. So I went to talk-
ing about other kings, and let Solomon slide. I told about
Louis Sixteenth that got his head cut off in France long time
ago ; and abont his little boy the dolphin, that would a been a
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
king, but tbey took and shut him up ia jail, and some say he
died there.
" Po'little chap. "
" But aome says he got out and got away, and come to
America. "
" Dat's good ! But hell be pooty lonesome — dey ain'no
fcings here, is dey, Huck ? "
" No. "
" Den he cain't git no situation, ^Tiat he gwyne to do? "
" Well, I don't know. Some of them gets on the police,
and some of them leams people liow to talk French. "
" ^^Tiy, Huek, doan'de French people talk de same way we
does? "
** jVo, Jim ; you couldn't understand a word they said — not
a single word. "
" Well, now, I be ding-busted ! How do dat come ? "
" / don't know ; but it's so. I got some of their jabber out
ofa book. S'poae a man was to come to you and 8ay PoUy-voo-
fnmsy — what would you think ? "
" I wouldn'think nuffa; I'd take en bust him over de
Head. Dad is, if he wam't white. I wouldn't'low no nigger
lo call me dat. "
" Shucks, it ain't calling you anything. It's only saying
do yon know how to talk French. "
" Well, den, why couldn't he 8ay it ? "
" Why, he is a-aaying it. That's a Frenchman's way of
Mjing it. "
" Well, it's a blame'ridicklous way, en I doan'want to hear
no mo'Ijout it. Dey ain'no sense in it. "
" Looky here, Jim ; does a cat talk like we do ? "
" No, a cat don't. "
" Well, does a cow ? "
" No, a cow don't, nuther. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
124 TOE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
" Does a cat talk like a cow, or a cow talk like a cat ? "
" No, dej don't. " «
" It's natural and right for'em to talk different from each
other, ain't it ? "
"'Course. "
'* And ain't it natural and right for a cat and a cow to talk
different from uaf "
" Why, mos'sholy it is. "
** Well, then, why ain't it natural and right for a French-
inan to talk different frnm us P You answer me that. "
" Is a cat a man, Huck ? "
" No. "
" Well, den, dey ain't no sense in a cat talkin'like a man.
Is a cow a man ? — er is a cow a cat ? "
" No, she ain't either of them. "
" Well, den, she ain't got no business to talk like either'
one er the yuther of'em. Is a Frenchman a man ? "
" Yes. "
" Well, den ! Dad blame it, why doan'he talk like a man?
You answer me dat ! "
I see it wam't no use wasting words — you can't learn a
nigger to argue. So I quit.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

^ 11/
E judged that three nights
more would fetch us to
Cairo, at the bottom
of Illinois, where the
Ohio River coiueB in,
and that was what
we was after. We
would sell the raft and
get on a steamboat
and go way up the
Ohio amongst the free
States, and then be
out of trouble.
Well, the second
night a fog begun to
come on, and we made
for a tow-head to tie
to, for it wouldn't do
^- to try to run in fog ;
bnt when I paddled ahead in the canoe, with the line, to make
feat, there wam't anything but little saplings to tie to. I
passed the line around one of them right on the edge of the
cnt bank, but there was a stiflf current, and the raft come
booming down so lively she tore it out by the roots and away
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
" WK WOULD S
120 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
sbe went. I see the fog closing down, and it made me so Edck
and scared I couldn't budge for most a half a minute it seemed
to me — and then there wam't no raft in sight j you conldn't
see twenty yards. I jumped into the canoe and run back to
the 6tem and grabbed the paddle and set her back a stroke.
But she didn't come. I was in such a hurry I hadn't untied
her. I got up and tried to untie her, but I was so excited mj
hands shook so I couldn't hardly do anything with them.
As soon as I got started I took out after the raft, hot and
heavy, right down the tow-head. That was all right as for as
it went, but the tow-head wam't sixty yards long, and the
minute I flew by the foot of it I shot out into the solid white
fog, and hadn't no more idea which way I was going than a
dead man. j
Thinks I, it won't do to paddle ; iirst I know 111 run into |
the bank or a tow-head or something ; I got to set still and
float, and yet it's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your
hands still at such a time. I whooped and listened. Away
down there, somewheres, I hears a small whoop, and up comes
my spirits. I went tearing after it, listening sharp to hear it
again. The next time it come, I see I wam't heading for it
but heading away to the right of it. And the next time, I was
heading away to the left of it — and not gaining on it much,
either, for I was flying around, this way and that and t'other,
but it was going straight ahead all the time.
I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan, and beat
it all the time, but he never did, and it was the still places
between the whoops that was making the trouble for me.
Well, I fought along, and directly I hears the whoop behiml
me. I was tangled good, now. That was somebody else's
whoop, or else I was turned around.
I throwed the paddle down. I heard the whoop again ; it'
was behind me yet, but in a different place ; it kept coming,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BUCK LOSES TBE SAFT. 127
, and kept changing its place, and I kept aoBwering, till bj-and-by
it vas in frodt of me again and I knowed the cnrrent bad swnng
I the canoe's bead down stream and I was all right, if that was
I Jim and not some other raftsman hollering. I couldn't tell
! nothing about voices in a fog, for nothing don't look natnral
nor sound natutal in a fog.
The whooping went on, and in about a minute I come a
booming down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees
on it, and the cnrreut throwed me oflF to the left and shot by,
amongst a lot of snags that fiiirly roared, the current was tear-
ing by them so swift.
In anotber second or two it was solid white and still again.
I set perfectly still, then, listening to my heart thump, and I
; reckon I didn't draw a breath while it thumped a hundred.
I just give up, then. I knowed what the matter was.
That cut bulk was an island, and Jim had gone down t'other
side of it. It wam't no tow-head, that you could float by in
ten minutes. It had the big timber of a regular island ; it
might be five or six mile long and more than a half a mile
wide,
I kept quiet, with my ears cocked, about fifteen minutes, I
reckon. I was floating along, of course, four or five mile an
hour; but you don't ever think of that. No, yon feel like you
are laying dead still on the water ; and if a little glimpse of a
snag slips by, you don't think to yourself how fast you're going,
but you catch your breath and think, my ! how that snag's
tearing along. If you think it ain't dismal and lonesome out
in a fog that way, by yourself, in the night, you try it once —
jou'll see.
Next, for about a half an hour, I whoops now and then ; at
last I hears the answer a long ways off, and tries to follow it,
but I couldn't do it, and directly I judged I'd got into a nest
of tov-head8 > for I bad little dim glimpses of them on both
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
128 THE ADVENTUBES OF aUCKLEBERRT FINN.
sides of me, sometimes jost a narrow cfaannel betveen ; imd
8(mie that I couldn't eee, I knowed was there, because I'd hear
the WEith of the current against the old dead brush aud trash
that hung over the banks. Well, I wam't long losing the
whoops, down amongst the tow-heads ; and I only tried to
chase them a little while, anyway, because it was worse than
chasing a Jack-o-lantem. You never knowed a sound dodge
around so, and swap places so quick and bo much.
AUOKG TBE BKAG8.
I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively, four or five
times, to keep from knocking the islands out of the river ; and
so I judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now
and then, or else it would get farther ahead and clear out of
hearing — it was floating a little faster than what I was.
Well, I seemed to be in the open river again, by-and-by,
but I couldn't hear no sign of a whoop nowheres. I reckoned
D,g,t,7P:hyGOOglC
hy Google
180 TH£ ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY Fim.
when I got to it it wam't nothiDg but a couple of eaw-l(^
made fast together. Then I see another speck, and chased
that; then another, and this time I was right. It was the
raft.
When I got to it Jim was Bitting there with his head down
between his knees, asleep, with his right arm hanging over the
steering oar. The other oar waa smashed off, and the raft was
littered np with leaves and branches and dirt. So she's had a
rough time,
I made fast and laid down under Jim's nose on the raft,
and begun to gap, and stretch my fists out against Jim, and
says:
" Hello, Jim, have I been asleep ? Why didn't you stir
me up ? " I
" Goodness gracious, ia dat you, Huck ? En you ain'dead
■ — you ain'drownded — ^you's back agin ? It's too good for true, I
honey, it's too good for true. Lemme look at you, chile, .
lemme feel o'you. JJo, you ain'dead ! you's back agin', live
en soun', jis de same ole Huck — de same ole Huck, thanks to
*'What's the matter with you, Jim ? You been a drink-
ing ? "
" Drinkin'? Has I ben a drinkin'? Has I had a chance |
to be a drinkin'? " ,
" Well, then, what makes you talk bo wild ? "
*'How does I talk wild ? "
" How f why, hain't you been talking about my coming
back, and all that stuff, as if I'd been gone away ? "
" Huck — Huck Finn, you look me in de eye ; look me in
de eye. Hain't you ben gone away ? "
" Gone away ? Why, what in the nation do you mean ? /'
hain't been gone anywheres. Where would I go to ? "
'= Well, looky here, boss^ dey's sumfn wrong, dey is. I» I
D,g,t,7P:hyGOOglC -
aUCK FINDS THE RAFT. 131
me, or who ial'i Is I heah, or whah is I ? Now dat's what
I wants to know ? "
" Well, I think you're here, plain enough, but I think you're
a tangle-headed old fool, Jim. "
" I is, IB I ? Well you answer me dis. Didn't you tote out
de line in de canoe, fer to make fas'to de tow-head ? "
" No, I didn't. What tow-head? I hain't seen no tow-
head. "
" You hain't seen no tow-head ? Looky here — didn't de
line pull loose en de raf go a hummin'down de river, en leave
jou en de canoe behine in de fog ? "
" What fog? "
" Why de iiyg. De fog dat's ben aroun'all night. En
didn't you whoop, en didn't I whoop, tell we got mil'up in de
ifilands en one un us got los'en t'other one was jis'as good as
Ids','kase he didn'know whah he wuz ? En didn't I bust up
agin a lot er dem islands en have a tumble time en mos'git
drownded ? Now ain'dat so, boss — ain't it so ? You answer
me dat. "
" Well, this is too many for me, Jim. I hain't seen Ho fog,
nor no islands, nor no troubles, nor nothing. I been setting
liere talking with you all night till you went to sleep about
ten minutes ago, and I reckon I done the same. You couldn't
drank in that time, so of course you've been dreaming. "
Dad fetch it, how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten
oinnteB ? "
Well, hang it all, you did dream it, because there didn't
•nj of it happen. "
" But Huck, it's all jis'as plain to me as "
" It don't make no diCFerence how plain it is, there ain't
Bothing in it. I know, because I've been here all the time. "
Jim didn't say nothing for about five minutes, but set there
studying over it. Then he says :
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
132 THE ADVEJIfTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINlf.
" Well, den, I reck'n I did dream it, Hock ; but dog my
cata ef it ain't de powerfiillest dream I ever see. En I baint
ever had no dream b'fo'dat's tired me like dis one. "
" Oh, well, that's all right, because a dream does tire a body
like everything, sometimes. But this one was a staving dream
— tell me all about it, Jim. "
So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing rigM
through, just as it happened, only he painted it up eonsider-
able. Then he said he most start in and "'terpr & t " it, because
it was sent for a warning. He said the first tow-head stood for
a man that would try to do us some good, but the current was
another man that would get us away from him. The whoope
was warnings that would come to us every now and then, and
if we didn't try hard to make out to understand them they'd
just take ua into bad luck,'stead of keeping ua out of it. The
lot of tow-heads was troubles we was going to get into with
quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks, but if we
minded our business and didn't talk back and aggravate them,
we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big
clear river, which was the free States, and wouldn't have no
more trouble.
It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the
rait, but it was clearing up again, now.
" Oh, well, that's all interpreted well enough, as Jar as it
goes, Jim, " I says ; " but what does these things stand for ? "
It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft, and the smashed
oar. You could see them first rate, now.
Jim looked at the trash, and then looked at me, and back
at the trash again. He had got the dream fixed so strong in
his head that he couldn't seem to shake it loose and get the
facts back into its place again, right away. But when he did
get the thing straightened around, he looked at me steady,
without ever smiling, and says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TRASH. 133
" Mliat do dey stan'for ? I'a ^yne to tell you. When I
got all wore out wid work, en wid de callin'for you, en went
to sleep, my heart wuz moa'broke bekaee yon wnz loa', en I
didn'k'yer no mo'what become er me en de raP. En when I
mke up en fine you back agin', all safe en soun', de tears come
en I could a got down on my kneea en kiss'yo'foot I'b ao
thankful. En all you wuz thinldn'bout wuz how yoa could
make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie. Dat truck dah is traak ; en
trash is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren's
en makes'em ashamed. "
Then he got up slow, and walked to the wigwam, and went
in there, without saying anything but that. But that was
enongh. It made me feel so mean I could almost kissed hie
foot to get biTn to take it back.
It was fifleen minutes before I conld work myself up to go
and humble myself to a nigger — but I done it, and I wam't
fiTer Bony for it afterwards, neither. I didn't do him no more
mean tricks, and I wouldn't done that one if I'd a knowed it
TOttld make him feel that way.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
,^/ < |j^a > feTME^
E slept most all day, and
started out at night, a
little ways behind a
monstrous long raft
that was as long going
by as a procession.
She had four long
sweeps at each end, so
we judged she carried
as many as thirty men,
likely. She had five
big wigwams aboard,
wide apart, and an
open camp fire in the
middle, and a tall
flag-pole at each end.
There was a power of
^„- style about her. It
" IT AMOUNTED TO BOMBTHiKG BEiso A amouuted to some-
B4FT8MAN. " thing being a raftsman
on such a craft as that.
" We went drifting down into a big bend, and the night
clouded up and got hot. The river was very wide, and was
walled with solid timber on both sides ; you couldn't see a
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
EXPECTATION. 136
break in it hardly ever, or a light. We talked about Cairo,
nnd wondered whether we would know it when we got to it.
I said likely we wouldn't, because I had heard say there warn't
bat about a dozen houees there, and if they didn't happen to
fiave them lit up, how was we going to know wc was passing a
town ? Jim said if the two big rivers joined together there,
that would show. But I said maybe we might think we was
passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old
river again. That disturbed Jim — and me too. So the ques-
tion, was, what to do ? I said, paddle ashore the first time a
light showed, and tell them pap was behind, coming along with
a trading-scow, and was a green hand at the business, and
wanted to know how far it was to Cairo. Jim thought it was a
good idea, so we took a smoke on it and waited.
There wam't nothing to do, now, but to look out sharp for
the town, and not pass it without seeing it. He said he'd be
mighty sure to see it, because he'd be a free man the minute
he seen it, but if he missed it he'd be in the slave country
again and no more show for freedom. Every little while he
jumps up and says :
" Dah she is ! "
But it wam't. It was Jack-o-lantems, or lightning-bugs ;
so he set down again, and went to watching, same as before.
Jim said it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so
close to freedom.'Well, I can tell you it made me all over
trembly and feverish, too, to hear him, because I begun to get
it through my bead that he was most free — and who was to
blame for it ? Why, Tue. I couldn't get that out of my con-
science, no how nor no way. It got to troubling me so I
couldn't rest ; I couldn't stay still in one place. It hadn't ever
come home to me before, what this thing was that I was doing.
Bat now it did; audit staid with me, and scorched me more
and more. I tried to make out to myself that / wam't to blame,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
13C THE ADVEJUTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.'
because 1 didn't run Jim off from his rightful owner ; but it
wam't no use, conscience up and says, every time, " But yoa
knowed he was running for his freedom, and you could a
paddled ashore and told somebody. " That waa so — I couldn't
get around that, no way. That was where it pinched. Conscience
says to me, " What had poor Miss Wataon done to you, that
you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never
say one single word ? What did that poor old woman do to
you, that you could treat her so mean ? Why, she tried to learn :
yon your book, she tried to learu you your manners, she tried j,
to he good to you every way she knowed how. Tha^e what she j.
done. "'•-
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I
was dead. I fidgeted up and down the raft, abusing myself to
myself, and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me. We
neither of ue could keep still. Every time he danced around
and says, " Dah's Cairo ! " it went though me like a shot, and I
thought if it woB Cairo I reckoned I would die of miserable-
Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to my-
self. He was saying how the first thing he would do when he
got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never
spend a single cent, and when he got enough he would buy his
wife, which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson
Uved ; and then they would both work to buy the two children,
and if their master wouldn't sell them, they'd get an Ablitionist
to go and steal them.
It most iroze me to hear such talk. He wouldn't ever
dared to talk such talk in his Ufe before. Just see what a
difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about
free. It was according to the old saying, " Give a nigger an
inch and he'll take an ell. " Thinks I, this is what comes of
my not thinking. Here was this nigger which I had aa good
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
" QOOD 01^ CAIRO. " 1^7
as helped fo run away, coming right out flat-footed and saying
he would steal hia children — children that belonged to a man
I didnt even know ; a man that hadn't ever done me no harm.
I I was sorry to hear Jim say that, it was sach a lowering of
him. My conscieQce got to stirring me up hotter than ever,
! nntil at last I says to it, " Let up on me — it ain't too late,
jet— ril paddle ashore at the first light, and tell. " I felt
easy, and happy, and light as a feather, right off. All my
tioablea was gone. I went to looking out sharp for a light,
and sort of singing to myself. By-and-by one showed. Jim
sings oat :
" We'B safe, Huck, we's safe ! Jump up and crack yo'heelsj
dat'a de good ole Cairo at las', I jis knows it ! "
I Bays :
" ni take the canoe and go see, Jim. It mightn't be, you
; know. "
He jumped and got the canoe ready, and put his old coat
I in the bottom for me to set on, and give me the paddle ; and
! as I shoved off, he says :
" Pooty soon I'll be a-shout'n for joy, en I'll say, it's all on
•wnuits o'Huck ; I's a free man, en I couldn't ever ben free ef
ithadn'ben for Huck; Huck done it. Jim won't ever forgit
Jon, Huck ; you's de bes'fren'Jim's ever had ; en yon's de
niy fren'ole Jim's got now. "
I was paddling off, all in a sweat to tell on him ; hut when
te says this, it seemed to kind of take the tuck aU out of me.
I went along slow then, and I wam't right down certain
whether I was glad I started or whether I wam't. When I was
fifty yards off, Jim says :
" Dah you goes, de ole true Huck ; de on'y white genlman
j ^t ever kep'his promise to ole Jim. "
Well, I just felt sick. But I says, I got to do it — I can't
j get out of it. Bight then, along comes a skiff with two men
'D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
138 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
in it, with gUQB, and they stopped and I stopped. Ooe of them
says:
" What's that, yonder ? "
" A piece of a raft, " I says.
" Do you belong on it ? "
" Yes, sir, "
" Any men on it ? "
" Only one, sir. "
" Well, there's five niggers run off to-night, up yonder abore
the head of the bend. Is your man white or hlack ? "
I didn't answer up prompt. I tried to, hut the words wouldn't
come. I tried, for a second or two, to brace up and out with it,
but I wam't man enough — hadn't the spunk of a rabbit. I
see I was weakening ; so I just give up trying, and up and says : i
" He's white. "
" I reckon we'll go and see for ourselves. " I
" I wish you would, " says I, " because it's pap that's there,
and maybe you'd help me tow the raft ashore where the ligbt
is. He's sick — and so is mam and Mary Ann. "
" Oh, the devil ! we're in a hurry, boy. But I s'pose we've
got to. Come — buckle to your paddle, and let's get along. "
I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oara. When
we had made a stroke or two, I says :
" Papll be mighty much obleeged to you, I can tell you.
Everybody goes away when I want them to help me tow tbe
raft ashore, and I can't do it by myself, "
" Well, that's infernal mean. Odd, too. Say, boy, what's
the matter with your fether ? "
" It's the — a — the — well, it ain't anything much. "
They stopped pulling. It wam't but a mighty ways to the
raft, now. One says :
" Boy, that's a He, What is the matter with your pap?
Answer up square, now, and it'll be the better for you. "
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle I
A WHITE LIE. 139
'* I will, sir, I will, honCBt — but don't leave uh, please. It's
the — the — gentlemen, if you'll only pull ahead, and let me
heave you the head-line, you won't have to come a-near the
raft — please do. "
" Set her back John, set her back ! " says one. They backed
water. " Keep away, boy — keep to looard. Confound it, I
just expect the wind has blowed it to us. Your pap's got the
Fmall-pojc, and you know it precious well. Why didn't you come
out and say so ? Do you want to spread it all over ? "
" Well, " says I, a-blubbering, " I've told everybody before,
and then they just went away and left us. "
" Poor devil, there's something in that. We are right down
sorry for you, but we — well, hang it, we don't want the small-
pox, yoii, see. Look here, I'll tell you what to do. Don't you
try to land by yourself, or you'll smash everything to pieces.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
140 THE ADVENTURES OF SUCKLEBERSV FIXN.
You float along down about twenty miles and you'll come to a
town on the left-hand side of the river. It will be long after
sun-up, then, and when you ask for help, you tell them your
folkB are all down with chills and fever. Don't be a fool again,
and let people guess what is the matter. Now we're trying to
do you a kindness ; so you just put twenty miles between us,
that's a good boy. It wouldn't do any good to land yonder
where the light is — it's only a wood-yard. Say — I reck < M
your father's poor, and I'm bound to say he's in pretty ban
luck. Here — 111 put a twenty dollar gold piece on this board
and you get it when it floats by. I feel mighty mean to leai
you, but my kingdom ! it won't do to fool with small-pox, donl
you see ? "
" Hold on, Parker, " says the other man, " here's a twang
to put on the board for me. Good-bye, boy, you do as Mx^
Parkra- tdd you, and joull be all right. "
" That's BO, my boy — good-bye, good-bye. If you see anj
runaway niggers, you get help and nab them, and you
make some money by it. "
" Good-bye, sir, " says I, " I won't let no runaway niggen
get by me if I can help it. "
They went off and I got aboard the raft, feeling bad and
low, because I knowed very well I had done wrong, and I see it
wam't no use for me to try to learn to do right ; a body that don't
get started right when he's tittle, ain't got no show — when the
pinch comes there ain't nothing to back him up and keep him
to his work, and so he gets beat. Then I thought a minute, and
says to myself, hold on, — s'pose you'd a done right and give
Jim up ; would you felt better than what you do now ? No, says
I, I'd feel bad — I'd feel just the same way I do now, WeU, then,
says I, what's the use you learning to do right, when it's
troublesome to do right and ain't no trouble to do wrong, and
the wages is just the same ? I was stuck. I couldn't answer
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
FLOATING CURRENCY.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
UB THE ADVENTURES OF BUCKLEBERRY FINN.
gwyne to swim to de raF agin when dey was gone. But lawsy,
how you did fool'em, Huck ! Dat wuz de smartes'dodge ! I
tell you, chile, I'speck it save'ole Jim — ole Jim ain't gwyne to
forgit you for dat, honey. "
Then we talked ahout the money. It was a pretty good
raise, twenty dollars apiece. Jim said we could take deck
passage on a steamboat now, and the money would last m as
far as we wanted to go in the free States. He said twenty
mile more warn't far for the raft to go, bat he wished we was
already there.
Towards daybreak we tied up, and Jim was mighty par-
ticular about hiding the raft good. Then he worked all
day fixing things in bundles, and getting all ready to quit
rafting.
That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a
town away down in a left hand bend.
I went off in the canoe, to ask about it. Pretty soon I
fosnd a man out in the river with a skiff, setting a trot-line. I
ranged up and says :
" Mister, is that town Cairo ? "
*'Cairo? no. " You must be a blame'fool. "
" What town is it, mister ? "
" If you want to know, go and find out. If you stay here
botherin'around me for about half a minute longer, you'll get
something you won't want. "
I paddled to the raft. Jim was awful disappointed, but I
said never mind, Cairo would be the next place, I reckoned.
We passed another town before daylight, and I was going
out again ; but it was high ground, so I didn't go. No high
ground about Cairo, Jim said. I had forgot it. We laid up for
the day, on a tow-head tolerably close to the left-hand bank.
I begun to suspicion something. So did Jim. I says :
" Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
RVNNIXa BY CAIRO. i«
He says :
" Doan'lees'talk about it, Huck. Po'aiggers can't have
DO lack. I awluz'spected dat rattle-auake ekin warn't done
wid its work. "
" I wish I'd never seen that snake-skin, Jim — I do wish I'd
nerer laid eyes on it. "
" It ain't yo'& u1t, Huck; yon didn'know. Don't you
blame yo'aelf'bout it. "
^Tien it was daylight, here was the clear Ohio water in
ahore, sure eaongh, and outside was the old regular Muddy !
So it was all up with Cairo.
We talked it all over. It wouldn't do to lake to the shore ;
we couldn't take the raft up the stream, of course. There warn't
no way but to wait for dark, and start back in the canoe and
fake the chances. So we slept all day amongst the cotton-wood
thicket, so as to be fresh for the work, and when we went back
to the raft about dark the canoe was gone !
We didn't say a word for a good while. There warn't any-
thing to say. We both knowed well enough it was some more
work of the rattle-snake skin ; so what was the use to talk about
it? It would only look like we was finding fault, and that
wonid be bound to fetch more bad luck — and keep on fetching
% too, till we knowed enough to keep still.
By-and-by we talked about what we better do, and found
there warn't no way but just to go along down with the raft
till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in. We warn't
going to borrow it when there warn't anybody around, the way
pq» would do, for that might set people after us.
So we shoved out, after dark, on the raft.
Anybody that don't believe yet, that it's foolishness to
handle a snake-skin, after all that that snake-skin done for us,
" ill believe it now, if they read on and see what more it done
forug.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
1« THE ADVESTUBES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying ap at shore.
But we didn't see no rafts laying up ; so we went along during
three hours and more. Well, the night got gray, and nither
thick, which is the next meanest thing to fog. You can't tell
the Bhape of the river, and you can't see no distance. It got to
be very late and still, and then along comes a steamboat op
the river. We lit the lantern, and judged she would see it.
Up-stream boats didn't generly come close to us; they go
out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs ;
but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the
whole river.
We could hear her pounding along, but we didn't see her
good till she was close. She aimed right for us. Often they
do that and try to see how close they can come without touching ;
sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep, and then the pilot sticks ■;
his head out and laughs, and thinks he's mighty smart. Well,
here she comes, and we said she was going to try to shave us ;
but she didn't seem to be sheering off a bit. She was a big one,
and she was coming in a hurry, too, looking like a black cloud
with rows of glow-worms around it ; but all of a sudden she
bulged out, big and scary, with a long row of wide-open furnace
Aoors shining like red-hot teeth, and her monstrous bows and
guards hanging right over us. There was a yell at ns, and
a jingling of bells to stop the engines, a pow-wow of cussing,
and whistling of steam — and as Jim vent overboard on one
side and I on the other, she come smashing straight through
the raft.
I dived — and I aimed to find the bottom, too, for a thirty-
foot wheel had got to go over me, and I wanted it to have
plenty of room. I could always stay under water a minute ;
this time I reckon I staid under water a minute and a half.
Then I bounced for the top in a hurry, for I was nearly busting.
I popped out to my arm-pits and blowed the water out of my
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
SWIMMING ASHOSE. 116
nose, and puffed a bit. Of course there was a booming cnrrent ;
and of course that boat started her engiues again ten seconds
after she stopped them, for they never cared much for raftsmen ;
so now she was choming along up the river, out of sight in the
thick weather, though I could hear her.
I sung out for Jim about a dozen times, but I didn't get
any answer ; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was
CLIUBINQ UP TH£ BANK.
" treading water, " and struck out for shore, shoving it ahead of
me. But I made out to see that the drift of the current was
towards the le^hand shore, which meant that I was in a
crossing ; so I changed off and went that way.
It was one of these long, slanting, two-mile crossings ; so I
was a good long time in getting over. I made a safe landing,
and clam up the bank. I couldn't see but a little ways, but I
p-hy Google
140 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINX.
went poking along over rough ground fof a quarter of a mile or
more, and then I run across a big old-fashioned donble log
house before I noticed it. I was going to rush by and get
away, but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and
barking at me, and I knowed better than to move another peg.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
.r'l.flk.si
about lialf a minute
somebody spoke out
of a window, without
putting his head out,
and says :
" Be done, boys !
Who's there ? "
I says :
,| " It's me. "
1 " Clio's me? "
j " George Jackson,
1 sir, "
) " What do you
want ? "
) " I don't want no-
thing, sir. I only want
" WHO'S THBBE?- t« S^ ^lo^g ^J > * " •*
the dogs won't let me. "
" What are you prowling around here this time of night,
for — hey ? "
" I wam't prowling around, sir ; I fell overboard off of the
" Oh, you did, did you ? Strike a light there, somebody.
Vt'ha.t did you say your name was ? "
L 2
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
148 TBE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FJNJf.
" George Jackson, sir. I'm only a boy. "
" Look here ; if you're telling the truth, you needn't be
afraid — nobody'11 hurt you. But don't try to budge ; stand
■ right where you are. Rouse out Bob and Tom, some of yon,
and fetch the guns. George Jackson, is there anybody with
you? "
" No, sir, nobody. "
I heard the people stirring around in the house, now, and
see a light. The man sung out :
" Snatch that light away, Betsy, you old fool — ain't you got
any sense ? Put it on the floor behind the front door. Bob,
if you and Tom are ready, take your places. "
" All ready. "
" Now, George Jackson, do you know the Shepherdsons ? " ,
" No, sir — I never heard of them. " 1
" Well, that may he so, and it mayn't. Now, all ready, i
Step forward, George Jackson. Afld mind, don't you hurry-
come mighty slow. If there's anybody with you, let him keep
back — if he shows himself hell be shot. Come along, now.
Come slow; push the door open, yourself — just enough to
squeeze in, d'you hear ? "
I didn't hurry, I couldn't if I'd a wanted to. I took one
slow step at a time, and there wam't a sound, only I thought I
could hear my heart. The dogs were as still as the humans,
but they followed a little behind me. When I got to the three
log door-steps, I heard them unlocking and unbarring and un-
bolting. I put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and .
a little more, till somebody said, " There, that's enough — ^put
your head in. " I done it, but I judged they would take it off.
The candle was on the floor, and there they all was, looking
at me, and me at them, for about a quarter of a minute. Three
big men with guns pointed at me, which made me wince, I tell ■
you J the oldest, gray and about sixty, the other two thirty M
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
I AN EVENING CALL. 140
I more — all of them fine and handsome — and the sweetest old
gray-headed lady, and back of her two young women which I
couldn't see right well. The old gentleman Bays :
" There — I reckon it's all right. Come in. "
As soon as I was in, the old gentleman he locked the door
and barred it and bolted it, and told the young men to come in
vitb their guns, and they all went in a big parlour that had a
new rag carpet on the floor, and got together in a comer that
was out of range of the front windows— there wam't none on
the side. They held the candle, and took a good look at me,
and all said, " Why he ain't a Shepherdson — no, there ain't any
ShepherdaoQ about him. " Then the old man said he hoped I
wouldn't mind being searched for arms, because he didn't mean
no harm by it — it was only to make sure. So he didn't pry
into my pockets, but only felt outside with his hands, and said
it was all right. He told me to make myself easy and at home,
and tell all about myself; Ijut the old lady says :
" Why bless you, Saul, the poor thing's as wet as he can
be ; and don't you reckon it may be he's hungry ? "
" True for you, Rachel — I forgot. "
So the old lady says :
" Betsy " (this was a nigger woman), " you fly around and
get him something to eat, aa quick as you can, poor thing ; and
one of you girls go and wake up Buck and teU him — Oh,
tere he is himself. Buck, take this little stranger and get the
wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours
that's dry.''
Buck looked about as old as me — thirteen or fourteen or
along there, though he was a little bigger than me. He hadn't
on anything but a shirt, and he was very frowsy-headed. He
come in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes, and he was
df^lging a gun along with the other one. He says :
" Ain't they no Shepherdaons around ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
160 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
They said, no,'twas a false alann.
" Well, " he says, " if they'd a ben some, I reckon I'd a got
one. "
They all laughed, and Bob saya:
" Why, Buck, they might have scalped us all, you've been
so slow in coming. "
" Well, nobody come after me, and it ain't right. Fm
always kep'down ; I don't get no show. "
" Never mind, Buck, my boy, " says the old man, " you'll
n,r,„.=-i > ,Google
THE^FARM IN ARKANSAW. 161
hare show enough, all in good time, don't you fret about that.
Go long with you now, and do as your mother told jou. "
When we gob upstairs to his room, he got me a coarse shirt
and a roundabout and pants of his, and I put them on. While
I vas at it he asked me what my name was, but before " I could
tell him, he started to telling me about a blue jay and a young
rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday, and
be asked me where Moses was when the candle went out. 1
sdd I didn't know ; I hadn't heard about it before, no way.
" Well, guess, " he says.
" How'm I going to guess, " says I, " when I never heard
tell about it before ? "
" But you can guess, can't you? It's just as easy. "
" Which candle ? " I says.
" Why, any candle, " he saya.
" I don't know where he was, " says I ; " where was he ? "
" Why, he was in the dark ! That's where he was ! "
" Well, if you knowed where he was, what did you ask me
for? "
" Why, blame it, it's a riddle, don't you see ? Say, how
long are you going to tXay here ? You got to stay always.
Ve can just have booming times — they don't have no school
noff. Do you own a dog ? I've got a dog — and he'U go in
the river and bring out chips that you throw in. Do you like
to comb up, Sundays, and all that kind of foolishness ? You
bet I don't, but ma she makes me. Confound these old
britches, I reckon I'd better put'em on, but I'd ruther not, it's
w warm. Are you all ready? All right — come along, old
hoBB.'*
Cold corn-pone, cold oom-beef, butter and butter-milk—
that ie what they had for me down there, and there ain't nothing
better that ever I've come across yet. Buck and his ma and
ill of them smoked cob pipes, except the nigger woman, which
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
162 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK.
waB gone, and the two young women. They all smoked and
talked, and I eat and talked. The young women had quilts
aroand them, and their hair down their backs. They all asked
me questions, and I told them how pap and me and all the
family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of Aikan-
saw, and my sister Mary Ann run oflf and got married and
never was heard of no more, and Bill went to hunt them and
he wam't heard of no more, and Tom and Mort died, and then
there wam't nobody but just me and pap left, and he was just
trimmed down to nothing, on account of his troubles ; so when
he died I took what there was left, because the farm didn't
belong to us, and started up the river, deck passage, and fell
overboard ; and that was how I come to be here. So they said
I could have a home there as long as I wanted it. Then it was
most daylight, and everybody went to bed, and I went to bed
with Buck, and when I waked up in the morning, drat it all,
I had forgot what my name was. So I laid there about an
hour trying to think, and when Buck waked up, I says :
" Can you spell, Buck ? "
" Yes, " he says.
" I bet you can't spell my name, " says I.
" I bet you what you dare I can, " says he.
" All right, " says I, " go ahead. "
" G-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n — there now, " he says..
" Well, " says I, " you done it, but I didn't think yoa could.
It ain't no slouch of a name to spell — right off without study-
ing. "
I set it down, private, because somebody might want me to
spell it, next, and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it
off like I was used to it.
It was a mighty nice family, and a mighty nice house, vm-
I hadn't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice
and had so much style. It didn't have an iron latch on the
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
INTERIOR DECORATIONS. 163
front door, nor a wooden one with a buckskin string, bat a
braes knob to tnrn, the same as houses in a town. There
wamt DO bed in the parlour, not a sign of a bed ; but heaps of
parlours in towns has beds in them. There was a big fireplace
that was bricked on the bottom, and the bricks was kept clean
and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with
another brick; sometimes they washed them over with red
water-paint that they call Spanish-brown, same as they do in
town. They bad big brass dog-irona that could hold up a saw-
log. There was a clock on the middle of the mantel-piece,
with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass
front, and a round place in the middle of it for the sun, and
you could see the pendulum swing behind it. It waa beautiful
to hear that clock tick ; and sometimes when one of these
peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in
good shape, she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty
before she got tuckered out. They wouldn't took any money
fgr her.
Well, there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the
clock, made out of something like chalk, and painted up gaudy.
By one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery, and a crockery
dog by the other ; and when you pressed down on them they
squeaked, but didn't open their mouths nor look different nor
intetested. They squeaked through underneath. There was
a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those
things. On a table in the middle of the room was a kind of a
lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches
and grapes piled up in it, which was much redder and yellower
and prettier than real ones is, but they wam't real because you
could see where pieces had got chipped off and showed the
white chalk or whatever it was, underneath.
This table had a cover made out of beautiful oil-cloth, with
a red and blue spread-eagle painted on it, and a painted border
Google
164 THE ABVENTUSES OF BUCKLEBERST FINN.
all around. It come all the way from Philadelpbia, they sdd.
There was some books too, piled up perfectly exact, on each
corner of the table. One was a big femily Bible, full of pic-
tures. One was " Pilgrim's Progress, " about a man that left
his iamily it didn't say why, I read considerable in it now and
then. The statements was interesting, but tough. Another
was " Friendship's OfiFering, " full of beautiful stuff and poetry ;
but I didn't read the poetry. Another was Henry Clay's
Speeches, and another was Dr. Gann's Family Medicine, which
told you all about what to do if a body was sick or dead. There
was a Hymn Book, and a lot of other books. And there ^as
nice split-bottom chairs, and perfectly sound, too — not bagged
down in the middle and busted, like an old basket.
They had pictures hung on the walls — mainly Washingtons
and Lafayettes, and battles, and Highland Marys, and one
called " Signing the Declaration. " There was some that they
called crayons, which one of the daughters which was dead
made her own self when she was only fifteen years old. They
was different from any pictures I ever see before; blacker,
mostly, than is common. One was a woman in a slim black
dress, belted small under the arm-pits, with bulges like a cal >
bage in the middle of the sleeves, and a large black scoop-
shovel bonnet with a black veil, and white slim ankles crossed
about with black tape, and very wee black slippers, like a chisel,
and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on her right elbow,
under a weeping willow, and her other hand hanging down her
side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule, and undei^
neath the picture it said, " Shall I Never See Thee More Alas ? "
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed op
straight to the top of her head, and knotted there in front of a
comb like a chair-back, and she was crying into a handkerchief
and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with
its heels up, and underneath the picture it said, " I Shall Never
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
INTJESIOR DECOSATIOSS. 156
Hear Thy Sweet Chirmp More Alas ! " There was one where a
joung lady was at a window looking up at the mooD, and tears
running down her cheeks ; and she had an open letter in one hand
with black sealing-wax showing on one edge of it, and she was
mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth, and under-
neath the picture it said, " And Art Thou Gone Yea Thou Art
Gone Alas ! " These was all nice pictures, I-reckon, but I didn't
somehow seem to take to them, because if ever I was down a
little, they always give me the fan-tods. Everybody was sorry
she died, because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
150 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCELEBERMY FINN.
to do, and a body could see by what she had done what they
had lost. But I reckoned, that with her disposition, she was
haviug a better time in the grave-yard. She was at work on
what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick,
and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed
to live till she got it done, but she never got the chance. It
was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown, standing
on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump off, with her hair all
down her back, and looking up to the moon, with the tears
running down her face, and she had two arms folded across her
breast, and two arms stretched out in front, and two more
reaching up towards the moon — and the idea was, to see
which pair would look best and then scratch out all the other
arms ; but, as I was saying, she died before she got her mind
made up, and now they kept this picture over the head of the
bed in her room, and every time her birthday come they hung
flowers on it. Other times it was hid with a little curtain.
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet
fece, but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery,
seemed to me.
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and
used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suf-
fering in it out of the'Presbyterian Observer,'and write poetiy
after them out of her own head. It was very good poetry.
This is what she wrote about a boy by the name of Stephen
Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded :
Ode to Stephen Dowlius Botb, Dec'd.
And did joang Stephen Bickeu,
And did joung Stephen die P
And did the sad hearts tliiclieii.
And did the mourners cry P
Ko ; such was not the fate of
Voung Stephen Dowling Bots;
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
STEPHEN DOWLINO BOTS.
Though sod heartx round him thickened,
Twtts not from sickneaa'shote.
No whooping-cough did rack his frame,
Nor measles drear, with spots :
Kot these impaired the sacred name
Of Stephen Dowling Bots,
HUT SOT HIM OUT AND EMPTIED HIM
Despised bve struck not with woe
That bead of curlj knots,
Not stomach troubles laid him low,
Toung Stephen Dowling Bota.
hy Google
158 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
Oh no. Then list vith l«arful eje,
'\\'hil8t I hia ftte do Mil.
His soal did from this cold wotld flj,
By foiling down ■ well.
They got him out and emptied him ;
Alae it was too late ;
Hia epirit wbs gone for to sport ttloft
In the realms of the good and greftt.
If Emmeliae Grangerford could make poetry like that
before Bhe was fourteen, there ain't no telling what she could
a done by-and-by. Buck said she could rattle o£F iwetry like
nothing. She didn't ever have to stop to think. He said she
would slap down a line, and if she couldn't find anything to
rhyme with it she would just scratch it out and slap down
another one, and go ahead. She warn't particular, she could
write about anything you choose to give her to write about,
just so it was aadful. Every time a man died, or a woman
died, or a child died, she would be on hand with her " tribute "
before he was cold. She called them tributes. The neighbours
said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline, then the undertaker
— the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once, and
then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name, which
was Whistler. She warn't ever the same, after that ; she never
complained, but she kind of pined away and did not live long.
Poor thing, many's the time I made myself go up to the little
room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book
and read in it when her pictures had been aggravating me and
I had soured on her a little, I liked all that family, dead ones
and all, and warn't going to let anything come between ua.
Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when
she was alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody
to make some about her, now she was gone ; bo I tried to sweat
out a verse or two myself, but I couldu't seem to make it go,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A TIN PAN PIANO. 150
somehow. They kept Emmetme'B room trim and nice aod all
the thiogs fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when
she was alive, and nobody ever slept there. The old lady took
care of the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers,
and ehe sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there,
moBtiy.
Well, as I was saying about the parlour, there was beautiful
curtains on the windows : white, with pictures painted on them,
of castles with vines all down the walls, and cattle coming down
to drink. There was a little old piano, too, that had tin pans
in it, I reckon, and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the
young ladies sing, *'The Last IJnk is Broken " and play " The
Battle of Prague " on it. The walls of all the rooms was plas-
tered, and most had carpets on the floors, and the whole house
was whitewashed on the outside.
It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them
ms roofed and floored, and sometimes the table was set there
in the middle of the day, and it was a cool, comfortable place.
Nothing couldn't be better. And wam't the cooking good,
ind just bushels of it too !
THE HOUBB.
p:h»Google
Vll
GRANGEEFORD w
a gentleman, yon see.
He was a gentleman
all over; and bo was
liis family. He was
well bora, as the say-
ing is, and that's ffortb
ag much in a man as
it is in a horse, so the
Widow Douglass said,
and nobody ever de-
nied that she was of
the first aristocracy io
our town ; and pap te
always said it, too,
though he wamt »'*
more quality than a
COL. aEANGBBPOHD. mud-cat, himself. Col.
Grangerford was very tall and very slim, and had a darkish-paly
complexion, not a sign of red in it anywheres ; he was clean-
shaved every morning, all over bi8 thin fece, and he had the
thinnest kind of lips, and the thinnest kind of nostrils, and a
high nose, and heavy eyebrows, and the blackest kind of eyes,
sunk Bo deep back that they eeemed like they was looking o«t
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
COLONEL QRANGERFOSD. 101
of caverns at you, as yon maysay. His forehead was higt, and
his hair was black and straight, and huDgto his shouldera. His
hands was long and thin, and every day of his life he put on a
clean shirt and a full suit irom head to foot made out of linen
so white it hurt your eyes to look at it ; and on Sundays he
wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it. He carried a
mahogany cane with a silver head to it. There wam't no
ftivolishness about him, not a hit, and he wam't ever loud. He
iras as kind as he could be — you could feel that, you know, and
BO you had confidence. Sometimes he smiled, and it was good
to see ; but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole,
and the lightning begun to flicker out from under hia eyebrows
you wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what the matter
was afterwards. He didn't ever have to tell anybody to mind
their manners — everybody was always good-mannered where he
was. Everybody loved to have him around, too ; he was sun-
shine most always — I mean he made it seem like good weather.
When he turned into a cloud-bank it was awful dark for a half
a minute and that was enough ; there wouldn't nothing go
wrong again for a week.
When him and the old lady come down in the morning, all
the femily got up out of their chairs and give them good-day,
.and didn't set down again till they had set down. Then Tom
and Bob went to the sideboard where the decanters was, and
miied a glass of bitters and handed it to him, and he held it in
his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and then
they bowed and said,'* Our duty to you, air, and madam ; " and
'^ bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you, and
so they drank, all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of
*ater on the sugar and the mite of whisTty or apple brandy in
the bottom of their tumblers, and give it to me and Buck, and
»e drank to the old people too.
Bob vras the oldest, and Tom next. Tall, beautiful men
ICa THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISN.
with very broad shoulders and brown faces, and long black hair
and black eyes. They dressed in white linen froto head to foot^
like the old gentleman, and wore broad Panama hats.
Then there was Miss Charlotte, she was " twenty-five, and tall
and proud and grand, but as good as shft could he, when she
wam't stirred up ; but when she was, she had a look that would
make yoa wilt in your tracks, Hke her father. She was bean-
tiful.
So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.
She was gentle and sweet, like a dove, and she was only twenty.
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them — ^Bnck,
too. My nigger had a monstrous easy time, because I iram't
used to having anybody do anything for me, but Buck's was on
the jump most of the time.
This was all there was of the ffttnily, now ; but there tised
to be more — three sons ; they got killed ; and Emmeline that
died.
The old gentleman owned a lot of farms, and over a hundred
niggers. Sometimes a stack of i > eople would come tiere, horse-
back, from ten or fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days,
and have such junketings round about and on the river, and
dances and picnics in the woods, day-times, and balls at the
house, nights. These people was mostly kin-folks of the family.
The men brought their guns with them. It was a handsome
lot of quahty, I tell you.
There was another clan of aristocracy around there — five or
six fiimilies — mostly of the name of Shepherdson. They was as
high-toned, and well bom, and rich and grand, as the tribe of
Grangerfords. The Shepherdsons and the Grangerfoids need
the same steamboat landing, which was about -Cwo mile abovtf
Our house ; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot < ^
our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons* there, on their
fine horses.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
ASISTOCEACr. 163
One day Buck and me was away out in the woods, hunt-
ing, and heard a horee coming. We was crossing the road.
Buck says :
" Quick ! Jump for the woods ! "
" We done it, and then peeped down the woods throngh the
leaves. Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping
down the road, setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier.
He had his gun across his pommel. I had Been him before. It
was yooDg Harney Sbepberdson; I heard Buck'« gun go off at
mj ear, and Harney's hat tumbled off & om his head. He
m2
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
IM THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIA'X:
grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where -ve was
hid. But we didn't wait. We started through the woods on a
run. Tlie wooda wam't thick, so I looked over my shoulder, to
dodge the bullet, and twice I seen Hamej cover Buck with bis
gun; and then he rode away the way he come— to get his hat,
I reckon, but I couldn't see. We never stopped running till
we got home. The old gentleman's eyes blazed a minute —
t'was pleasure, mainly, I judged — then his face sort of smoothed
down, and he says, kind of gentle :
*'I don't like that shooting from behind a bush. VTby
didn't you step into the road, my boy ? "
*'The Sbepherdsons don't, father. They always take ad-
Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while
Buck was telling his tale, and her nostrils spread and her eyes
snapped. The two young men looked dark, but never said
nothing. Miss Sophia she turned pale, but the colour come
back when she found the man wam't hurt.
Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the
trees by ourselves, I says :
" Did you want to kill him, Buck ? "
" Well, I bet I did. "
" What did he do to you ? "
" Him ? He never done nothing to me. "
" Well, then, what did you want to kill him for ? "
" Why, nothing— only it's on account of the fend. "
" What's a feud ? "
" Why, where was you raised? Don't you know what a
feud is ? "
" Never heard of it before — tell me about it. "
" Well, " says Buck, " a fpud is this way. A man has a
quarrel with another man, and kills him ; then that other man's
brother kills him ; then the other brothers, on both sides, goes
for one another; then the eoudna chip in — and by-and-by
everybody's killed off, and there ain't no more feud. But it's
kind of alow, and takes a long time. "
" Has this one been going on long, Buck ? "
" Well, I should reckon ! it started thirty year ago, or
Bom'ere nlong there. There was trouble'bout something and
then a lawsuit to settle it ; and the suit went agin one of the
men, and so he up and shot the man that won the suit— which
he would naturally do, of course. Anybody would. "
*'What was the trouble about, Buck ? — land ? "
*'I reckon maybe — I don't know. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
166 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCEZEBESRl'FINA'.
" Well, who done the shooting? — was it a Grangerford or a
Shepherdson ? "
" Laws, how do / know ? it was so long ago. "
" Don't anybodj- know ? "
" Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old
folks; bat they don't know now what the row was about in the
first place. "
" Has there been many killed, Buck ? "
" Yes — right smart chance of funerals. But they dont
always kill. Pa's got a few buck-shot in him ; but he don't
mind it'cuz he don't weigh much anyway. Bob's been carved
up some with a bowie, and Tom's been hurt once or twice. "
*'Has anybody been killed this year. Buck ? "
" Yes, we got one and they got one.'Bout three months ;
ago, my cousin Bud, fourteen year old, was riding through the'
woods, on t'other side of the river, and didn't have no weapon j
with him, which was blame'foolishness, and in a lonesome [
place he hears a horse a-coming behind him, and sees old Baidy I
Shepherdson a-linkin'after him with his gun in his hand and |
his white hair a-flying in the wind j and'stead of jumping off ■
and taking to the brush. Bud'lowed he could outrun him ; so
they had it, nip and tuck, for five mile or more, the old man a-
gaining all the time ; so at last Bud seen it wam't any use, »
he stopped and faced around so as to have the bullet holes in
front, you know, and the old man he rode up and shot him
down. But he didn't git much chance to enjoy his luck, f«
inside of a week our folks laid kim out. "
*'I reckon that old man was a coward, Buck. "
" I reckon he wam'i a coward. Not by a blame'sight. There
ain't a coward amongst them Shepherdsons — not a one. And
there aint no cowards amongst the Grangerfords, either. ^Tiji
that old man kep'up his end in a fight one day, for a half an
hour, against three Grangerfords, and come out winner. They
THE TESTAMENT. 1C7
was all a-horseback ; he lit off of his horae and got behind a little
wood-pile, aad kep'bis horse before him to stop the bullets ;
but the Grangerforde etaid on their horses and capered around
the old nuiD, and i)eppered away at him, and he peppered away
at them. Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and
crippled, but the Grangerfords had to be fetched home — and
one of'em was d -id, and another died the next day. No, sir,
if a body's out hunMng for cowards, he don't want to fool away
anytime amongst them Shephersonsjbecuz they don't breed any
of that kind "
Next Sunday we all went to church, about three mile,
everybody a-horseback. The men took their guns along, so did
Buck, and kept fhem between their knees or stood them handy
against the wall. The Shepherdsons done the same. It was
pretty ornery preaching — all about brotherly love, and such-like
tiresomeness ; but everybody said it was a good sermon, and
they all talked it over going home, and had such a powerful lot
to say about faith, and good works, and free grace, and prefore-
ordestination, and I don't know what all, that it did seem to
me to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet.
Abont an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around,
some in their chairs and some in their rooms, and it got to be
pretty dull. Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in
the sun, sound asleep. I went up to our room, and judged I
would take a nap myself. I found that sweet Miss Sophia
standing in her door, which was next to ouria, and she took me
in her room and shut the door very soft, and asked me if I
liked her, and I said I did ; and she asked me if I would do
something for her and not tell anybody, and I said I, would.
Then she said she'd forgot her Testament, and left it in the
seat at church, between two other books, and would I slip out
quiet and go there and fetch it to her, and not say nothing to
nobody. I said I would. So I shd out and slipped off up the
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
108 THE ABVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK.
road, and there wam't anybody at the church, except maybe a
hog or two, for there wam't any lock on the door, and hogs
likes a puncheon floor in summer-time because it's cool. If
you notice, most jblka don't go to church only when they've got
to ; but a. hog is different.
Says I to myself something's up — it ain't natural for a girl
to be in such a sweat about a Testament; so I give it a shake,
and out drops a little piece of paper with " Salf-past-two "
wrote on it with a pencil. I ransacked it, but couldn't find
anything else. I couldn't make anything out of that, bo I pat
the paper in the book again, and when I got home and up-
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
" WATEH'MOCCASIXSJ " ICO
stairs, there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me. Hhe
pulled me in and shut the door ; then she looked in the Testa-
ment till she found the paper, and as soon as she read it she
looked glad ; and before a body could think, she grabbed me
and give nae a squeeze, and said I waa the best boy in the
world, and not to tell anybody. She was mighty red in the
fece, for a minute, and her eyes lighted up, and it made her
powerful pretty. I was a good, deal astonished, but when I got
my breath I asked her what the paper was about, and she
asked me if I bad read it, and I said " no, " and she asked me if I
could read writing, and I told her " No, only coarse-hand, " and
then she said the paper wam't anything but a book-mark to
keep her place, and I might go and play now.
I went oS down to the river, studying over this thing, and
pretty soon I noticed that my nigger was following along he-
bind. When we was out of sight of the house, he looked back
and around a second, and then comes a-nmning, and says : —
" Mars Jawge, if you'll come down into de swamp, I'll show
jon a whole stack o'water-moccasins. "
Thinks I, that's mighty curious ; he said'that yesterday.
He oughter know a body don't love water-moccasins enough to
go around htmting for them. What is he up to anyway ? So I
sajB —
" All right, trot ahead. "
I followed a half a mile, then he struck out over the swamp
and waded ankle deep as much as another half-mile. We come
to a little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with
trees and bushes and vines, and he says —
" You shove right in dah, jist a few steps, ilars Jawge,
dah's whah dey is. I's seed'm befo', I don't k'yer to see'em
no mo'. "
Then he slopped right along and went away, and pretty
won the trees hid him. I poked into the place a-ways, and
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
170 TKB ABVEXTURES OF BUCKLEBERRT FINX.
com£ to a little open patch as big as a bedroom, all hung around
with vines, and found a man laying there aeleep — and by jings
it was my old Jim !
I wHked him up, and I reckoned it was going to be a grand
sorprise to him to see me again, but It wam't. He nearly
cried, he was so glad, but he wam't surprised. Said he swam
along behind me, that night, and heard me yell every time, but
daen't answer, because he didn't want nobody to pick hiia up,
and take bim into slavery again. Says he —
" I got hurt a little, en couldn't swim & s', so I wnz a con-
sidable ways behine you, towards de las'; when yon landed I
reck'ned I could ketch up wid you on de Ian''doubt havin'to
shout at you, but when I see dat house I begin to go slow. I
'uz off too fur to hear what dey say to you — I wnz'fraid o'de
dogs — but when it'uz all quiet agin, I knowed yon's in de
house, so I struck out for de woods to wait for day. Early in
de mawnin'some er de niggers come along, gwyne to de fields,
en dey tuck me en showed me dis place, whah de doge can't
track me on accounts o'de water, en dey brings me truck to
eat every night, en tells me how you's a gitt'n along. "
" Why didn't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner,
Jim ? "
" Well,'twam't no use to'sturb you, Huck, tell we could do
sumfn — but we's all right, now. I ben a-buyin'pots en pans
en vitties, as I got a chanst, en a patchin'up de raf', ni^^ts,
when "
" What raft, Jim ? "
** Our ole raf. "
" Tou mean to say our old raft wam't smashed all to
flinders ? "
" No, she wam't. She was tore up a good deal — one en'of
her was — but dey wam't no great harm done, on'y onr traps
was mos'all los'. Ef we hadn'dive'so deep en swum so fur
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SSCOmSIA'O THE RAFT. 171
under water, en de night hcd'n ben so dark, en we wam't so
ek'yerd, en ben sich punkin-heads, as de eayin'is, we'd a seed
de raf . But it's jis'as well we didn't,'kase now she's all fixed
up agin mos'as good as new, en we's got a new lot o'stuCF, too,
in de place o'what'uz Ids'. "
" Why, how did you get hold of the raft again, Jim — did
jou catch her ? "
" How I gwyne to ketch her, en I out in de woods ? No,
some er de niggers foun'her ketched on a snag, along heah in
de ben', en dey hid her in a crick,'mongst de willowa, en dey
wuz BO much jawin''bout which «n'um she b'long to de mos',
dat I come to heah'bout it pooty soon, so I ups en settles de
trouble by tellin''um she don't b'long to none uv um, but to
you en me ; en I ast'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white
genlman's propaty, en git a hid'n for it ? Den I gin'm ten
cents apiece, en dey'uz mighty well satisfied, en wisht some
mo'rars'ud come along en make'm rich agin. Dey's mighty
good to me, dese niggers is, en whatever I wants'm to do fur
me, I doan'have to ast'm twice, honey. Dat Jack's a good
nigger, en pooty smart. "
" Yes, he is. He ain't ever told me you was here ; told
me to come, and he'd show me a lot of water-moccasins. If
snything happens, he ain't mixed up in it. He can say he
never seen us together, and itil be the truth. "
I don't want to talk much about the next day. I reckon
111 cut it pretty short. I waked up about dawn, and was agoing
to turn over and go to sleep again, when I noticed how still it
ifas — didn't seem to be anybody stirring. That wam't usual.
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone. Well, I gets up,
a-wonderiog, and goes downstairs — nobody around ; everything
as Btilt as a mouse. Just the same outside ; thinks I, what
doea it mean ? Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack,
and eays :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
172 THF. ADVEXTURES OF IIUCKLEBERnr FISK.
'< \\Tiat'sit all about? "
Says be :
" Don't you know, Mara Jawge? "
" No, " says I, " I don't. "
" Well, den, Miss Sophia's run oflF!'deed she has. She run
oflf in de night, sometime — nobody don't know jis'when — run
oflf to git married to dat young Harney Shepherdson, you know
— leastways, so dey'spec. De fambly foun'it out,'bout half an
hour ago — maybe a little mo'— en'I tell you dey wam't no
time los'. Sieh another hurryin'up guns en hosses yov- never
see! De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations, en ole
Mare Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river
road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him'fo'he kin
git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia. I reck'n dey's gwyne to be
mighty rough times. "
" Buck went off'thout waking me up. "
" Well, I reck'n he did ! Dey wam't gwyne to mix you up
in it. Mars Euck be loaded up bis gun en'lowed he's gwyne
to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust. Well, dey'll be plenty un
'm dab, I reck'n, en you bet you he'll fetch one ef he gits a
ebanst. "
I took up the river road as hard as I could put. By-and-by
I begin to bear guns a good ways off. When I come in sight
of the log store and the wood-pile where the steamboats land, I
worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good
place, and then I dumb up into the forks of a cotton-wood that
was out of reach, and watched. There was a wood-rank four
foot high, a little ways in front of the tree, and first I was
going to hide behind that'; but maybe it was luckier I didn't.
There was four or five men cavorting around on their
horses in the o^wn i > lace before the log store, cussing audyelling,
and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind
the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing — ^but they
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
THE WOOD PILE. 173
couldn't come it. Every time one of them showed himself on
tlie river side of the wood-pile he got shot at. The two boys
was squatting back to back behind the pile, so they could
watch both ways.
By-and-by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling.
They started riding towards the store ; then np gets one of the
boys, draws a steady bead over the wood-rank, and drops one of
them out of his saddle. All the men jumped oEF of their horses
and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store ;
and that minute the two boys started on the run. They got
half-way to the tree I was in before the men noticed. Then
the men see them, and jumped on their horses and took out after
them. They gained on the boys, but it didn't do no good, the
hoys had too good a start ; they got to the wood-pile that was
in front of my tree, and slipped in behind it, and so they had
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
174 THE ADVEirrVRES OF HUCKLEBERRr FINK.
the bulge on the men again. One of the boys was Bnck, and
the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old.
The men ripped around awhile, and then rode away.
As soon as they was out of sight, I sung out to Buck and told
him. He didn't know what to make of my voice coming out of
the tree, at first. He was awful surprised. He t«ld me to
watch out sharp and let him know when the men came in gi^t
again ; said they was up to some devilment or other — wouldn't
be gone long. I wished I was out of that tree, but I dasn't
come down. Buck begun to ciy and rip, and'lowed that him
and his cousin Joe (that was the other young chap) would
make up for this day, yet. He said his father and his two
brothers was killed, and two or three of the enemy- Said the
Shepherdsons laid for them, in ambueh. Buck said his father
and brothers oughttowaited for their pelatjons— the Shepherd-
sons was too strong for th^n. I asked him what was become
of yoang Harney and Miss Sophia. He said they'd got across
the river and was safe. I was glad of that ; but the way Buck
did take on because he didn't manage to kill. Harney that day
he shot at him — I hain't ever heard anything like it.
All of a sudden, bang! bangl bang! goes three or four gans
— the men had slipped around through the woods and come in
from behind without their horses ! The boys jumped for the
river — both of them hurt — and as they swum down the current
the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing cot,
" Kill them, kill them 1 " It made me so sick I most fell out
of the tree. I ain't agoing to tell < dl that happened — it would
make me sick again if I was to do that. I wished I hadn't ever
come ashore that night, to see such things. I ain't ever going
to get shut of them — lots of times I dream about them.
I staid in the tree till it begun to get dark, afraid to.ccane
down. Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods ; and
twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log stcat with
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
" 7S DAT YOU, HONEYf " 176
guns ; so I reckooed the trouble was still agoing on, I was
mighty down-hearted ; eo I made up my mind I wouldn't ever
go anear that hous3 again, because I reckoned I was to blame,
somehow. I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss
Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at haUr{ > ^t two and
ran off J and I judged I ought to told her Mher abont that
paper and the curious way she acted, and then maybe he would
a locked her up and this awful mess wouldn't ever happened.
When I got down out of the tree, I crept along ^down the
river bank a piece, and found the two bodies layiug in the edge
of the water, and tugged at them till I got them ashore ; then
1 corered up their faces, and got away aa quick as I could. I
cried a little when I was covering up Buck's face, for he was
mighty good to me.
It was just dark, now. I never went near the house, but
struck through the woods and made for the swamp. Jim
wini't on his island, so I tramped off in a hnny for the'crick,
and crowded through the willows, red-hot to jump aboard.and
get out of that awful country — the raft was gone ! My souls,
bnt I was scared ! I couldn't get my breath for most a minute.
Then I nuBed a yell. A voice not twenty-five foot from me, says —
" Good Ian'! is dat you, honey? Doan'make no noise. "
It was Jim's voice — ^nothing ever sounded so good before,
1 ran along the bank a piece and got aboard, and Jim he
grabbed me and hugged me, he was so glad to see me. He
says —
" Lawa bless you, chile, I'uz right down Bho'you's dead
agin. Jack's been heah, he say he reck'n you's ben shot, kase
jou didn'come home no rao'; so I's jes'dis minute a startin'
deraf down towards de mouf er de crick, so's to be all ready for
to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for
certain you is dead. Lawsy, I'a mighty glad to git you hack
agin, honey. "
D,g,t,7P:hyGQOgle
170 TRE ADVENIVRES OF HUCKLEBEREY FINX.
I eays —
" All right — that'a mighty good ; they won't find me, and
they'll think I've been killed, and floated down the river —
there's something up there that'll help them to think so — so
don't you lose no time, Jim, but just shove off for the big
water as fast as ever you can. "
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and
out in the middle of the Mississippi. Then we hung up our
signal lantern, and judged that we was free and safe once more.
I hadn't had a bite to eat since yesterday ; so Jim he got out
some corn-dodgers and butter-milk, and pork and cabbage, and
greens — there ain't nothing in the world so good, when it's
cooked right— and whilst I eat my supper we talked, and had
a good time. I was powerful glad to get away from the feudei'
and so was Jim to get away from the swamp. We said there \
wam't no home like a raft, after all. Other places do seem so'
cramped up and smothery, but a raft don't. You feel mighty
free and easy and comfortable on a raft.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

WO or three days and
nights went by; I
reckon I might say
they swum by, they
slid along so quiet
and smooth and lovely.
Here is the way we
put in the time. It
was a monstrous big
river down there —
sometimes a mile and
a half wide; we run
nights, and laid up
and hid day-times ;
soon as night was most
gone, we stopped navi-
gating and tied up —
nearly always in the
dead water under a
tow-head ; and then
d hid the raft with them,
lid into the river and had
iff; then we set down on
as about knee-deep, and
p:h»Google
178 TBE ADVENTURES OF MVCKLEBERRY FINX.
iratched the daylight come. Not a Bound anywheres — perfectly
Btill — ^jUBt like the whole world was asleep, only BometimeB the
boll-froga a-elattering, maybe. The first thing to see, looking
away over the water, was a kind of dull line — that was the
woods on t'other side — you couldn't make nothing else out;
then a pale place in the sky ; then more paleness, spreading
around ; then the river Boftened up, away ofif, and wam't black
any more, but gray ; you could see little dark spots drifting
along, ever so ^ away — trading scows, and auch things ; and
long black streaks— rafts ; sometimes you could hear a sweep
screaking ; or jumbled up voices, it was so still, and sounds
come so fer ; and by-and-by you could see a streak on the
water which yon know by the look of the streak that tbere'g
a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and
makes that streak look that way ; and you see the mist curl ap
off of the water, and the east reddens np, and the river, and
you make out a log cabin in the edge of the woods, away on the
bank on t'other side of the river, being a wood-yard, likely, and
piled by them cheatB so you can throw a dog through it any-
wheres ; then the nice breeze springs up, and comes fenning
you & om over there, so cool and fresh, and sweet to smell, on
account of the woods and the flowers ; bat sometimes not that
way, because they've left dead fish laying around, gara, and
Buch, and they do get pretty rank ; and next you've got the
full day, and everything smiling in the Bun, and the song-birds
just going it !
A little smoke couldn't be noticed, now, so we would take
some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast. And
afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river, and
kind of lazy along, and by-and-by lazy off to sleep. Wake ixf,
by-and-by, and look to see what done it, and maybe see a
steamboat, coughing along up stream, so far off towards the
other side you couldn't tell nothing about her only whether she
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TYING UP DAY-TIMES. 179
lAs stem-wheel or side- wheel-; then for ahont an hoar there
vonldn't be nothing to hear nor nothing to see — just solid
lonesameness; Next you'd see a raft sliding by, away oflf yonder,
and maybe. a galoot on it chopping, because they're most always
doiag it on a laft ; you'd see the axe flash, and come down — you
doa't hear nothing ; you see that axe go up again, and by the
time it's above the man's head, then you hear the k'chujik! — it
had took all that time to come over the water. So we would
put in the day, lazying around, hstening to the Btillness. Once
there was a thick fog, and the rafts and things that went by
ifas beating tin pans so the steamboats wouldn't run over them.
A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking
md cus^ng and laughing — heard them plain ; but we couldn't
see no sign of them ; it made you feel crawly, it was like spirits
carrying on that way in the air. Jim Baid he believed it was
spirits ; but I says :
*'No, spirits wouldn't say,'dem the dem fog.'"
Soon as it was night, out we ehoved ; when we got her out
to about the middle, we let her alone, and let her float where-
erer the current wanted her to ; then we lit the pipes, and
dangled our legs in the water and talked about all kinds of
tiiiogS: — we was always naked, day and night, whenever the
mosquitoes would let us — the new clothes Buck's folks made
for me was too good to be comfortable, and besides I didn't go
nmeh on clothes, nohow.
Sometimes we'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the
longest time. Yonder waa the banks and the islands, across
the water ; and maybe a spark — which was a candle in a cabin
vindow — and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or
two — on a raft or a scow, you know ; and maybe you conld hear
a^ fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crdts. It's
lovely to live on a raft. We had the sky, up there, all speckled
with stars, and we used to lay on our backs and look up at
Cfu-sle
180 THE ABVENTVRES OF nUCKLEBEKRY FINN.
them, and discuss about whether they was made, or only just
happened — Jim he allowed they was made, but I aUowed they
happened ; I judged it would have took too long to make bo
many. Jim Raid the moon could a laitJ them ; well, that looked
kind of reasonable, so I didn't say noticing against it, because
Fve seen a frog lay most as many, so of course it could be done.
We used to wateh the stars that fell, too, and see them streak
down. Jim allowed they'd got spoiled and was hove out of the
nest.
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slIppiDg
along in the dark, and now and then she would belch a whole
world of sparks up out of her chimblejs, and they would rain
down in the river and look awful pretty ; then she would turn a
corner and her lights would wink out and her pow-wow shut off
and leave the river still again ; and by-and-by her waves woold
get to us, a long time after she was gone, and joggle the raft a
bit, and after that you wouldn't hear nothing for you couldn't
tell how long, except maybe frogs or something.
After midnight the people on shore went to bed, and Uien
for two or three hours the shores was black — no more sparks in
the cabin windows. These sparks was our clock — the first one
that showed again meant morning was coming, so we hunted a
place to hide and tie up, right away.
One morning about day-break, I found a canoe and crossed
over a chute to the main shore — it was only two hundred yards
— and paddled about a mile np a crick amongst the cypress
woods, to see if I couldn't get some berries. Just as I was pass-
ing a place where a kind of cow-path crossed the crick, here
comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they
could foot it. I thought I was a goner, for whenever anybody
was after anybody I judged it was me — or maybe Jim, I was
about to dig out from there in a hurry, but they was pretty close
to me then, and sung out and begged me to save their lives —
" DOGS A-COMINO. " 181
aaid they hadn't been doing nothing, and was being chased for
it — said there was men and dogs a-coming. They wanted to
jump right in, but I says —
" Don't you doit. I don't hear the dc^s and horses yet;
you've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the
crick a little ways ; then you take to the water and wade down
to me and get in — that'll throw the dogs off the scent. "
They done it, and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our
tow-head, and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs
and the men away off, shouting. We heard them come along
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
183 TBE ADrESTXmSS OF BUCKLESERHY FlNIf.
towards the crick, but couldn't see them ; they seemed to stop
and fool around a while ; then, as we got further and further
away all the time, we couldn't hardly hear them at all ; by the
time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the river,
everything was quiet, and we paddled over to the tow-head and
hid in the cotton-woods and was safe.
One of these fellows was about seventy, or upwards, and had
a bald head and very gray whiskers. He had an old battered-
up slonch hat on, and a greasy blue woollen shirt, and ragged
old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot tops, and home-
kiut galluses — no, he only had one. He had an old loiig-tailed
blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons. Hung over his arm, and
both of them had big fat ratty-looking carpetbags.
The other fellow was about thirty and dressed about as
ornery. ARfir breakfast we all laid off and talked, and the first
thing that come out was that these chaps didn't know one
another.
" What got you into trouble ? " says the baldhead to t'other
chap.
" Well, I'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the
teeth— and it does take it off, too, and generly the enamel
along with it— but I staid about one night longer than I ought
to, and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you
on the trail this side of town, and you told me they were
coming, and begged me to help you to get off. So I told you
I was expecting trouble myself and would scatter out with you.
That's the whole yam— what's youm ? "
" Well, I'd ben a-mnnin'a little temperance revival thar,
'bout a iweek, and was the pet of the women-folks, big and little,
for I was makin'it mighty warm for the rummies, I tdi yon,
and takin'as much as five or six dollars a night— ten ceuts a
head, children and niggers free — and business a growin'all the
time ; when somehow or another a little repwt got around, lut
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
JiUXmNG A TEMPERAKCE REVIVAL. 188
iu^, that'I had a way of puttin'in my time with a private
jog, -(HI the sly. A nigger rousted me out this tnomin', and
told, me the people was getherin'on the; quiet, with their dogs
and horses, and they'd be along pretty soon and give me'bout
half an hour's start, and then run me down, if they could ; and
if they got me they'd tar and feather me and ride me on a rail,
sure. I didn't wait for no break & st — I wam't hungry, "
" Old man, " says the young one. " I reckon we might
doable-team it together ; what do yon think ? "
" I ain't nndisposed. What'a your line — mainly ? "
" ^our printer, by trade ; do a little in patent medicines ;
theatre-actor — tragedy, you know ; take a turn at mesmerism
and phrenology when there's a chance ; teach singing geography
school for a change ; sling a lecture, sometimes — oh, I do lots
of things — most anything that comes handy, so it ain't work.
What's your lay ? "
" I've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time.
Layin'on o'hands is my best holt — for cancer, and paralysis,
and aich things ; and I k'n tell a fortune pretty good, when I've
got somebody along to find out the facts for me. Preachin's
my line, too; and workin'camp-meetin's ; and missionaryin'
around. "
Nobody never said anything for a while ; then the young
man hove a sigh and says—
" Aks! "
" What're you alassin'about ? " says the baldhead.
" To think I should have lived to be leading such a life, and
be degraded down into such company. " And he begun to wipe
the comer of his eye with a rag.
" Dem your akin, ain't the company good enough for you ? "
says the baldhead, pretty pert and uppish.
" Yes, it is good enough for me ; it's as good as I deserve j
■ for who fetched me so low, when I was so high ? / did myself
Google
184 TILE ADVENTVRES OF SVCKLEBERRT FINS.
I don't blame you, gentlemen — far from it ; I don't blame any-
body. I deserve it all. Let the cold world do ita worst ; one
thing I know — there's a grave somewhere for me. The world
may go on just as its always done, and take everytbingfrom me
— loved ones, property, everything — but it can't take that.
Some day I'll lie down in it and forget it all, and my pw
broken heart will be at rest. " He went on a-wiping.
" Drot your pore broken heart, " says the baldhead : " wbat
are you heaving your pore broken heart at ii« f r? We haint
done nothing, "
" Ko, I know you haven't. I ain't blaming you, gentie-
n,3t,7=^- In Google
THE DUKE OF BRIDQEWATER. 183
■men. I brought myself down — yea, I did it myself. It's right
I should aaffer^ — perfectly right — I don't make any moan. "
" Brought you down from whar ? Whar was you brought
down from ? "
" Ah, you would not believe me j the world never believes
—let it pasB —'tis no matter. The secret of my birth "
" The secret of your birth ? Do you mean to say "
" Gentlemen, " says the young man, very solemn, " I will
reveal it to you, for I feel I may have confidence in you. By
rights I am a duke ! "
Jifli's eyes bugged out when he heard that ; and I reckon
mine did, too. Then the baldhead says: " Jio! you can't
mean it ? "
" Yes. My great-grandfather, eldest son of the Duke of
Bridgewater, fled to this country about the end of the last cen-
tury, to breathe the pure air of freedom ; married here, and
died, leaving a son, his own father dying about the same time.
The second son of the late duke seized the title and estates —
the infant real duke was ignored. I am the lineal descendant
of that infant — I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater ; and
here am I, forlorn, torn from my high estate, hunted of men,
despised by the cold world, ragged, worn, heart-broken, and
degraded to the companionship of felons on a raft ! "
Jim pitied him ever so much, and bo did I. We tried to
comfort him, but he said it wam't much use, he couldn't be
much comforted ; said if we was a mind to acknowledge him,
that would do him more good than most anything else ; so we
said we would, if he would tell us how. He said we ought to
bow, when we spoke to him, and say " Your Grace, " or " My
Lord, " or " Your Lordship " — and he wouldn't mind it if we
« & Ued him plain " Bridgewater, " which he said was a title,
anyway, and not a name ; and one of ns ought to wait on him
at dinner, and do any little thing for him he wanted done.
18C THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRT FINS.
Well, that was all easy, so we done it. All through diniiK
Jim Btood around and waited on him, and says, ^'Will yo'
fliace have some o'dis, orj some o'dat ? " and ao on, and a body
•jould see it was mighty pleasing to him.
But the old man got pretty silent, by-and-by — didnt have
much'to say, and didn't look pretty comfort^ible over all that
petting that was going on around that duke. He seemed to
have something on his mind. So, along in the afternoon, he
says:
" Looky here, Bilgewater, " he says, " I'm nation sorry fw
you, but you ain't the only person that's had troubles like that. "
" No? "
" No, you ain't. You ain't the only person that's ben snaked
down wrongfully oot'n a high place. "
" Alas! " ^
" No, you ain't the only person that's had a secret of his |
birth. " And by jings, he begins to cry. j
" Hold! What do you mean? "
*'Bilgewater, kin I trust you ? " says the old man, still sort (
of sobbing.
« To the bitter death ! " He took the old man by the kaad
and squeezed it, and says, " The secret of your being : speak I ■■
" Bilgewater, I am the late Dauphin ! "
You bet you Jim and me stared, this time. Then the duke
says:
" You are what ? "
" Yes, my friend, it is too true — your eyes is lookin'at this
very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin, Looy tbe
Seventeen, son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonet-te. "
*'You ! At your age I No ! You mean you're the late
Ch^lemagne ; you must be six or seven hundred years old, »t
the very least. "
^ Trouble has done it, Bilgewater, trouble has done it i
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE TROUBLES OF ROYALTY. 187
tronble has brung these gray hairs and this premature baldittide.
Yea, gentlemeD, joo see before you, in blue jeans and misery,
the wanderin', exiled, tramplednsn, and safierin'rightful King
of France. "
Well, he cried and took on so, that me and Jim didn't know
haidly what to do, we was so sorry — and so glad and proud we'd
(//
" I AU THE LATB DAUPHIS.'
got him with us, too. So we set in, like we done before with
the duke, and tried to comfort Aim. But he said it wam't no
me, nothing bnt to be dead and done with it all could do him
any good ; though he said it often made him feel easier and
bett» for a while if people treated him according to his rights,
. Chk^j^Ic
188 THE ADFEATUJIES OF BVCKLEBERRY FINN.
and got down on one knee to speak to him, and always called
him " Your Majesty, " and waited on him first at meals, and
didn't set down in his presence till he asked them. So Jim
and me set to majestying him, and doing this and that and
t'other for him, and standing np till he told us we might set
down. This done him heaps of good, and so he got cheerfal
and comfortable. But the duke kind of soured on him, and
didn't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going ; still,
the king acted real friendly towards him, and said the duke's
great-grandfather and all the otiier Dukes of Bilgewater was a
good deal thought of by his father, and was allowed to come tu
the palace considerable ; but the duke staid huffy a good while,
till by-and-by the king says :
" Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time, on
this h-yer raft, Bilgewater, and so what's the use o'your bein'
sour ? Itll only make things oncomfortable. It ain't my fault
I wam't bom a duke, it ain't your fault you warn't bom a king
— 80 what's the use to worry? Make the beat o'things the
way you iind'em, says I— -that's my motto. This ain't no bad
thing that we've struck here — plenty grub and an easy life-
come, give us your hand, Duke, and less all be friends. "
The duke done it, and Jim and me was pretty glad to see
it. It took away all the nncomfortableness, and we felt mi^ty
good over it, because it would a been a miserably business to
have any unfriendliness on the raft ; for what you want, above
all things, on a raft, is for everybody to be xatiafied, and feel
right and kind towards the others.
It didn't take me long to make up my mind that these liars
wam't no kings nor dukes, at all, but just low-down humbugs
and frauds. But I never said nothing, never let on ; kept it to
myself; it's the best way; then you don't have no quaireU,
and don't get into no trouble. If they wanted us to call them
kings and dukes, I hadn't no objections,'long as it would keep
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE TROVBLES OF ROYALTY. 189
peace in the family ; and it warn't no use to tell Jim, so I didn't
tell liim. If I never learnt nothing else out of pap I learnt
that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let
them have their own way.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google

8 considerable
nations; wanted
what we covered
if t that way for,
by in the day-
saA of nmning
im a runaway
Says I—
> dness sakes,
runaway nigg*^! "
,hey allowed be
, I had to ac-
T things some
. says:
folks was living
County, in Mis-
o» THE BAFT. aouri^ ^jigre I was bom,
and they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike. P8 >
he'lowed he'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben,
■who's got a little one-horse place on the river, forty-four mile
below Orleans. Pa waa pretty poor, and had some debts ; so
when he'd squared up there wam't nothing left but sixteen
dollars and our nigger, Jim. That wam't enough to take as
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
HUCK EXPLAINS. 101
fbiirteeD hundred mile, deck passage nor qo other way. Well,
Then the river rose, pa had a streak of luck one day j hft
ketched this piece of a raft ; so we reckoned we'd go down to
Orleans on it. Fa's luck didn't hold out ; a steamboat run
over the forraid comer of the raft, one night, and we all went
overboard and dove under the wheel ; Jim and me come up, all
right, but pa was drunk, and Ike was only four years old, so
they never come up no more. Well, for the next day or two
ve had considerable trouble, because people was always coming
oat in skifig and trying to take Jim away from me, saying they
believed he was a runaway nigger. We dcn't run day-times
no more, now ; nights they don't bother us. "
The duke says —
" Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the:
day-time if we want to. I'll think the thing over — I'll invent
a plan that'll fix it. We'll let it alone for to-day, because of
course we don't want to go by that town yonder in daylight — it
mightn't be healthy. "
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain :
the heat lightning was squirting around, low down in the sky,
and the leaves was beginning to shiver — it was going to be pretty
ugly, it was easy to see that. So the duke ^and the king went
to overhauling our wigwam, to see what the beds was like. My
bed was a straw tick — better than Jim's, which was a eom-shuck
tick ; there's always cobs around about in a shqck tick, ajid they,
poke into you and hurt; and when you roll over, the dry
shncka sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves ;
it makes such a rustling, that you wake up. Well, the duke,
allowed he wQnld take my bed ; but the king allowed he
wouldn't. He says —
*'I eboald a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested
to yon that a,coni-ahuck bed wam'tjust fitten for me to sleep
on. Your Crmcell take the shuck bed yourself, "
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
103 THE AVVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIA'S.
Jim and me waa in a sweat again, for a minute, being afraid
there was going to be aome more trouble amongst them ; so we
waa pretty glad when the duke says —
" Tis my fate to be always ground into the mire under the
iron heel of oppression. Misfortune has broken my once haughty
spirit ; I yield, I submit ;'tis my fate. I am alone in the world
— let me suffer ; I can bear it. "
We got away as soon as it waa good and dark. The king
told uB to stand well out towards the middle of the river, and
not show a light till we got a long ways below the town. We
come in sight of the little bunch of lights by-and-by — that was
the town, you know — and slid by, about a half a mile out, all
right. When we was three-quarters of a mile below, we hoisted
up our signal lantern ; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain
and blow and thunder and lighten like everything ; so the king
told ua to both stay on watch till the weather got better ; then
him and the duke crawled into the wigwam and turned in for
the night. It was my watch below, till twelve, but I wouldn't
a turned in, anjnray, if I'd had a bed ; because a body don't see
such a storm as that every day in the week, not by a long sight.
My souls, how the wind did scream along ! And every second
or two there'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for half
a mile around, and you'd see the islands looking dusty through
the rain, and the trees thrashing around in the wind ; then
comes a h-wack! — bum! bum! bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-
bum-bam — and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling
away, and quit — and then rip comes another flash and another
sockdolager. The waves most washed me off the raft, some-
times, but I hadn't any clothes on, and didn't mind. We
didn't have no trouble about snags ; the lightning was glaring "
and flittering aroimd so constant that we could see them plenty
soon enongh to throw her head this way or that and miss them.
I had the middle watch, you know, but I was pretty sle^y
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
LAi'ING OUT A CAMrAlGN. 103
by that time, so Jim he said he would ^tand the first half of it
for me ; he was always mighty good that way, Jim was. I
crawled into the wigwam, but the king and the duke had their
legs sprawled around so there wam't no show for me ; so I laid
outside — I clidn't mind the rain, -because it was warm, and the
waves wam't running so high, now. About two they come up
again, though, and Jim was going to call me, but he changed
his mind because he reckoned they wam't high enough yet to
do any barm ; but he was mistaken about that, for pretty soon
idl of a sudden along comes a regular ripper, and washed me
overboard. It most killed Jim a-laughing. He was the easiest
nigger to laugh that ever was, anyway.
I took the wat«h, and Jim he laid down and snored away ;
and by-and-by the storm let up for good and all ; and the first
cabin-light that showed, I rousted him out and we slid the raft
into hiding-quarters for the day.
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards, after breakfast,
and him and the duke played seven-up a while, five cents a
game. Then they got tired of it, and allowed they would " lay
out a campaign, " as they called it. The duke went down into
hie carpet-bag and fetched up a lot of little printed bills, and
read them out loud. One bill said " The celebrated Dr. Amiand
de Montalban, of Paris, " would " lecture on the Science of
Phrenology " at such and such a place, on the blank day of
blank, at ten cents admission, and " furnish charts of character
at twenty-five cents apiece, " The duke eaid that was Aim. la
another bill he was the " world renowned Shaksperean tragedian,
Garrick the Younger, of Drury Lane, London. " In other bills
he had a lot of other names and done other wonderful things,
like finding water and gold with a " divining rod, " " dissipating
witch-spells, " and so od. By-and-by he says —
" But the histrionic muse is the darling. Have you ever
trod the boards, Royalty ? "

D,g,t,7P:hy Google
104 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINX.
" No, " says the king.
" Yoii shall, then, before you're three days older, Fallen
Grandeur, " saya the duke. " The firBt good town we come to,
we'll hire a hall and do the sword-fight in Hichard III. and the
balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet. How does that strike
you ? "
" Fm in, up to the hub, for anything that will pay, Bilge-
water, but you Bee I don't know nothing about play-actn', and
hain't ever seen much of it. I waa too small when pap used to
have'era at the jmlace. Do you reckon you can learn me ? "
" Easy I "
" All right. I'm jist a-freezn'for something iiresh, anyway.
Less commence, right away. "
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was, and who
Juliet waa, and said he was used to being Romeo, so the king
could be Juliet.
" But if Juliet's such a young gal, duke, my peeled head
and ray white whiskers is goin'to look oncommon odd on her,
maybe. "
" No, don't you worry — these country jakes won't ever think
of that. Besides, you know, you'll be in costume, and that
makes all the difiference in the world ; Juliet's in a balcony,
enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed, and she's got
on her night-gown and her rufBed night-cap. Here are the
costumes for the parts, " .
He got out two or three curtain -calico suits, which he said
was meedyevil armour for Richard III. and t'other chap, and a
long white cotton night-shirt and a ruBled night-cap to match.
The king was satisfied ; so the duke got out his book and read
the parts over in the moat splendid spread-eagle way, prancing
around and acting at the same time, to show how it had got to
be done ; then he give the book to the king and told him to get
his part by heart.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google'
WORKISa THE CAMP-MEETING. 105
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down
the bend, and after dinner the duke said lie had ciphered out
his idea about how to run in dayUght without it being danger-
some for Jim ; ho he allowed he would go down to the town
and fiK that thing. Thtt king allowed he would go too, and see
1 AB JULIET.
if he couldn't strike something. We was out of coffee, ao Jim
said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some.
When we got there, there warn't nobody stirring ; streets
empty, and perfectly dead and still, like Sunday. We fouijd a
sick ni^er sunning himself in a back yard, and be suid eveiy-
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
19G THE ABVENTURES OF liUCKLEBEMRY FINN.
body that warn't too young or too sick or too old was gone to
camp-meeting, about two mile back in the woods. The king
got the directions, and allowed he'd go and work that cami > -
meeting for all it was worth, and I might go, too.
The duke said what he was after was a printing office. We
found it ; a little bit of a concern, up over a carpenter shop —
carpenters and printers all gone to the meeting, and no doors
locked. It was a dirty, littered-up place, and had ink marks,
and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on
them, all over the walls. The duke shed his coat and said he
was all right, now. So me and the king lit out for the camp-
meeting.
We got there in about a half an hour, fairly dripping, for it
was a m(«t awful hot day. There was as much as a thousand
people there, from twenty mile around. The woods was full of
teams and wagons, hitched everywheres, feeding out of the
wagon troughs and stomping to keep off the flies. There was
sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches, where
they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell, and piles of water-
melons and green com and such-like truck.
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds,
only they was bigger and held crowds of people. The benches
was made out of outside slabs of logs, with holes bored in the
round side to drive sticks into for legs. They didn't have no
backs. The preachers had high platforms to stand on, at one
end of the sheds. The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some
had linsey-woolsey frocks, some gingham ones, and a few of the
young ones had on calico. Some of the young men was bare-
footed, and some of the children didn't have on any clothes bub
just a tow-linen shirt. Some of the old women was knitting,
and some of the yobng folks was courting on the sly.
The. first shed we come to, the preacher was lining out a
hjiQi^. He lined out two lines, everybody song it, and it was
n,3t,7=^- In Google
SZr COURTING.- 19-
kind of grand to hear it, there was so man; of them and they
done it in such a rousing way ; then he lined out two more for
them to sing — and so on. The people woke up more and more,
and siuig louder and louder ; and towards the end some begun
to groan, and some begun to shout. Then the preacher begun
" COUETING ON THK BLY. "
to preach ; and begun in earnest, too ; and went weaving first
to one side of the platform and then the other, and then a lean-
ing down over the front of it, with his arms and his body going
all the time, and shouting his words out with all his might ;
and every now and then he would hold up his Bible and f^read
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
198 TUE ADVENrUSES OF UVCKLEBERRY FIKN.
it open, and kind of pass it around this way and that, shouting,
" It's the brazen serpent in the wilderness I Look upon it and
live! " And people would shout out, " Glory! — A-a-men/ "
And so he went on, and the people groaning and crying and
saying amen :
" Oh, come to the mourners'bench ! come, black with sin !
(amen!) come, sick and sore! (^amenf) come, lame and halt,
and blind ! (amen /) come, pore and needy, sunk in shame !
{a-a-mtm. .'} come all that's worn, and soiled, and suffering ! —
come with a broken spirit ! come with a contrite heart ! come
in your rags and sin and dirt ! the waters that cleanse is free,
the door of heaven stands open — oh, enter in and be at rest ! "
(a-a-men! glory, glory haUelujah!)
And HO on. Yon couldn't make out what the preacher said,
any more, on account of the shouting and crying. Folks got
up, everywheres in the crowd, and worked their way, just by
main strength, to the mourners'bench, with the tears running
down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there
to the front benches in a crowd, they smig, and shouted,
and flung themselves down on the straw, jnst crazy and
vild.
Well, the first I knowed, the king got agoing ; and you
could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging
up on to the platform and the preacher he begged him to speak
to the people, and he done it. He told them he was a pirate —
been a pirate for thirty years, out in the Indian Ocean, and his
crew was thinned out considerable, last spring, in a fight, and
he was home now, to take out some fresh men, and thanks to
goodness he'd been robbed last night, and put ashore off of &
•steamboat without a cent, and he was glad of it, it was the
blessedest thing that ever happened to him, because he waa a
changed man now, and happy for the iirst time in his life ; and
poor as he was, he was going to start right off and work bis way
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
A riliATF. AT THE CAMP-MEETIXG. 100
back to the Indian Ocean and put in the rest of his life trying
to turn the pirates into the true path : for he could do it better
than anybody else, being acquainted with all tho pirate crews
in that ocean ; and though it would take him a long time to
get there without money, he would get there anyway, and every
time he convinced a pirate he would say to him, " Don't you
" k PIRATE FOB TnlBTY YBAES. "
thank me, don't you give me no ciedit, it all belongsta them
dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting, natural brothers and
benefactors of the race— and that dear preacher there, the truestf
friend a pirate ever had 1 "
And then he busted into tears, and so did everybody. Then
somebody sings out,'^ Take up a collection for him, take up a
D,g,t,7P:h»GoV)gle
203 TSE ADVEXTURBS OF BVCKLEBERRY FINX.
collection \ " Well, a half a dozen made a jump to do it, but
somebody sings out, " Let hira pass the hat around ! " Then
everybody said it, the preacher too.
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat, swab-
bing his eyes, and blessing the people and praising them and
thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off
there ; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls, with
the tears running down their qheeka, would up and ask him
would he let them kiss him, for ttj remember him by ; and he
always done it ; and some ■ of them "'he hugged and kissed as
many aa five or six times — and he was invited to stay a week ;
and everybody wanted him to live io their houses, and said
they'd think it was an honour ; but he said as this was the last
day of the camp-meeting he couldn't do no good, and besides
he was in a sweat to get to the Indian'Ocean right off and go
to work on the pirates.
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up, be
found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five
cents. And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug .of
whisky, too, that he found under a wagon when we was starting
home through the woods. The king said, take it all around, it
laid over any day he'd ever put in in the missionarying line.
He said it wain't no use talking, heathens don't amount
to shucks, alongside of pirates, to work a camp-meeting
with.
The duke was thinking Ae'd been doing pretty well, till
the king come to show up, but after that he didn't think so so
much. He had set up and printed off two little jobs for fenners,
in that printing oflBce — horse bills — and took the money, four
dollars. And he had got in ten dollars'worth of advertisements
for the paper, which he said he would put in for four dollars if
they would pay in advance — so they done it. The price of
the. paper was two dollars a year, hut he took in three Bubecrip-
THE DUKE AS A J'UINTEIt. 201
tioDs for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him
in advance ; they were going to pay in cord-wood and onions,
as usual, but he said he had just bought the concern and
knocked down the price as low as he could afford it, and was
gtuDg to run it for cash. He set up a little piece of poetry,
which he made, himself, out of his own head — three verses —
kind of sweet and saddish — the name of it was, " Yes, crush,
told world, this breaking heart " — and he left that all set up
and ready to print in the paper and didn't charge oothing for
it. Well, he took in nine dollars and a half, and said he'd done
a pretty square day's work for it.
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
202 TUB ADVEXTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIX2i'.
Then lie showed us another little job he'd printed and
hadn't charged for, because it was for us. It had a picture of
a runaway nigger, with a bundle oU a stick, over his shoulder,
and " ^200 reward " under it. The reading was all about Jim,
and just described him to a dot. It said he run away froEQ St.
Jacques'plantation, forty mile below New Orleans, last winter,
and likely went north, and whoever would catch him and send
him back, he could have the reward and expenses.
" Now, " says the duke, " after to-night we can rim in the
daytime if we want to. Whenever we see anybody coming, we
can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope, and lay him in the wig-
wam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the
river, and were too poor to travel on a steamboat, so we got this
little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to get
the reward. Handcuffs and cliains would look still better on
Jim, but it woiildn't go well with the story of us being so jKxir.
Too much like jewellery. Kopes are the correct thing — we
must preser\-e the unities, as we say on the boards. "
We all said the duke was pretty smart, and there couldn't
be no trouble about running daytimes. We judged we could
make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the
pow-wow we reckoned the duke's work in the printing office was
going to make in that little town — then we could boom right
along, if we wanted to.
We laid low and kept still, and never shoved out till nearly
ten o'clock ; then we slid by, pretty wide away from the town,
and didn't hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight
of it.
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morn-
ing, he says —
" Huck, does you reck'n we gwyne to run across any mo'
kings on dis trip ? "
" No, " I says, " I reckon not. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
JIM WAyTED. 203
" Well, " says he, " dat's all right, den. I doao'mine one er
two kings, but dat's enough. Dis one's powerful drunk, en de
duke ain'much better. "
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French, so
he could hear what it was like ; but he said he had been in this
country so long, and had so much trouble, he'd forgot it.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
after xxi
raa after sun-up,
low, but we went
ight on, and didn't
ie up. The king
md the duke turned
tut, by-and-by, look-
ngpretty rusty; but
ifter they'd jumped
iverboard and took a
iwim, it chippered
hem up a good deal.
Vfter breakfast the
ting he took a seat
m a comer of the
raft, and pulled off
bis boots and rolled
pEACTisiNO. ^p j,iB britches, and
let his legs dangle in the water, so as to be comfortable, and
lit his pipe, and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by
heart. When he had got it pretty good, him and the duke
begun to practise it together. The duke had to learn _^him over
and over again, how to say every speech ; and he made him
high, and put his hand on bis heart, and after while he said he
done it pretty well ; *'only, " he says, " you musn't bellow out
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SWOJW EXERCISE. 205
Ronieo ! that way, like a bull— yoii must say it soft, and sick,
«nd languishy, so — R-o-o-meo ! that ia the idea ; for Juliet's a
dear sweet mere child of a girl, you know, and she don't bray
like a jackass. "
Well, next they got out a couple of long swords that the
duke made out of oak laths, and begun to practise the sword-
fight — the duke called himself Richard III. ; and the way they
laid on, and pranced around the raft was-grand to see. But
by-and-by the king tripped and fell overboard, and after that
they took a rest, and had a talk about all kinds of adventures
they'd had in other times along the river.
After dinner, the duke saya :
" Well, Capet, well want to make this a first-class show, yoa
know, so I guess we'll add a little more to it. We want a little
something to answer encores with, anyway. "
" What's onkores, Bilgewater? "
The duke told him, and then says ;
" I'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor's
hornpipe ; and you — well, let me see — oh, I've got it — you can
do Hamlet's soliloquy. " -
" Hamlet's which ? "
" Hamlet's soliloquy, you know ; the most celebrated thing
in Shakespeare. Ah, it's sublime, sublime! Always fetches
the house. I haven't got it in the book — I've only got one
volume— but I reckon I can piece it out from memory. I'll
just walk up and down a minute, and see if I can call it back
from recollection's vaults. "
So he went to marching up and down, thinking, and frown-
ing horrible every now and then; then he would hoist up his
eyebrows ; nest he would squeeze his hand on his forehead Mid
stagger back and kind of moan ; next he would sigh, and next
he'd let on to drop a tear. It was beautiful to see him. By-
and-hy he got it. He told us to give attention. Then he
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
200 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
strikes a most noble attitude, with one leg shoved forwards, and
his arms stretched away up, and his head tilted back, looking
up at the sky ; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his
teeth ; and after that, all through his speech he howled, and
spread around, and swelled > ip his chest, and just knocked the
HAMLIN'S BOLIU)QUr.
spots out of any acting ever 7 see before. This is the speech —
I learned it, easy enough, while he was learning it to the king :
To be, or cot to be ; that is the bare bodkin
That niukcs calamity of so long life ;
For who woitld fardels bear, till Bimam Wocd do ci
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
HAMLETS SOLILOQ t'l'. 207
Jiiit that the fear of something after dottli
Murders -the innocent sleep,
Great nature's second course,
And makes ns rather sling the arrows of outrageous fortune
Than fly to others that we know not of.
There's the respect must give us pause :
Wake Duncan with thy knocking ! I would thou couldat ;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time.
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man'd contumely.
The law's dday, and the quietus which hia pan^ might take,
In the dead waste and middle ol the night, when churchyards yawn
In customary suits of solemn black,
But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveller returns,
Itreathea forth contagion on the world,
And thus the native hue of resolution, like the poor cat i'the adage,
Is sicklied o'er with care,
And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops,
With this regard their currents turn awry.
And lose the name of action.
'Tia a consummation devoutly to bo wishcil. But soft you, the fair Ophelia :
Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaw»,
Itiit get thee to a nunnery— go !
Well, the old man he liked that speech, and hs mighty soon
got it BO he could do it fir^t rate. It seemed like he, was just
bom for it ; and when he had his hand in and was excited, it
was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up
behind when he was getting it off.
The first chance we got, the duke he had some show bills
printed ; and after that, for two or three days as we floated
along, the raft was a most uncommon lively place, for there wam't
nothing but sword-fighting and rehearsing — as the duke called it
— going on all the time. One morning, when we was pretty well
down the State of Arkansaw, we come in sight of a little one-
liorse town in a big bend ; so we tied up about three-quarters
of a mile above it, in the mouth of a crick which was shut in
like a tunnel by the cjpresa trees, and all of us but Jim took
the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance
in that place for our show.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
203 TJiE ABVESTVRES OF HVCKLEBERItY FIXX.
We struck it mighty lucky ; there was going to be a circus
there that afternoon, and the country people was already begin-
ning to come in, in all kinds of old shackly wagons, and on
horses. The circus would leave before night, so our show would
have a pretty good chance. The duke he hired the court house,
and we went around and stuck up our bills. They read like
this:
Shaksperean Bcvirol I I I
Wonderful Attraction 1
For OoeJJight Onlj-!
The world renowned tragedi^pj,
David Qarriok the younger, of Drury Lane Theatre, London,
Edmand Kcan the elder, of the Boyal Haym^et Theatre, ^Vhitc-
chflpel, Podding Lan^ Piccadilly, Londttn, and tie
Royal Continental Theatres, in their ^blime
Khalcsperean Spectacle entitled
The Balcony Scene
Borneo and Juliet t I 1
Homeo Mr. Garrick
Juliet Mr. Kean
AEsiated by the whole strength of the company t
New costumes, new scenery, new appointments 1
Also:
The thrilling, masterly, and blood-ciudling
, Broad-sword conflict
In Richard III. r ! I
Kichardlll Mr. Garrick.
Richmond Mr. Kean.
(by special request,)
Hamlet's Immortal Soliloquy 1 I
By the Dliulrions Kean I
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris I
For One Night Only,
On account of imperative European engagements 1
Admission S6 cents children and servants, 10 cents.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THEY LOAFED AROUND TOWN. 200
■Tben ire went loafing around the town. The stores anil
houses was most all old shackly dried-up frame concerns that
hadnt ever been painted ; they waa set up three or four foot
above ground on stilts, bo as to be out of reach of the water
when the river was overflowed. The houses had little gardens
around them, but they didn't seem to raise hardly anything in
them but Jimpson weeds, and sunflowers, and ash-pilea, and
old curled-up boots and shoes, and pieces of bottles, and rags,
and played-out tin-ware. The fences was made of different
kinds of boards, nailed on at different times ; and they leaned
every which-way, and had gates that didn't generly have but
one hinge — a leather one. Some of the fences had been white-
washed, some time or another, but the duke said it was in
C'lumbus's time, like enough. There was generly hogs in the
garden, and people driving them out.
All the stores^was along one street. They had white-
domestic awnings in front, and the country people hitched their
horses to the awning-posts. There was empty dry-goods boxet)
tinder the awnings, and loafers roosting on them all day long,
■whittling them with their Barlow knives ; and chawing tobacco,
and gaping and yawning and stretching — a mighty ornery lot.
They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an
umbrella, but didn't wear no coats nor waistcoats ; they called
one another Bill, and Buck, and Hank, and Joe, and Andy, and
talked lazy and drawly, and used considerable many cuss-
worda. There was as many as one loafer leaning up against
every awning-post, and he most always had his hands in his
britches pockets, except when he fetched them out to lend a
chaw of tobacco or Ecratch, What a body was hearing amongst
them, all the time was —
" Crimme a chaw'v tobacker. Hank. "
" Cain't — ^I hain't got but one chaw left. Ask Bill. "
-Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw ; maybe he Ue« and says
p
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
210 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEBRY FINN.
he ain't got none. Some of them kinds of loafera never has a
cent in the world, nor a chaw of tobacco of their own. They
get all their chawing by borrowing — they say to a fellow, " I
wisht you'd len'me a ehaw, Jack, I jist this minute give Ben
Thompson the last chaw I had " — which is a lie, pretty much
every time j it don't fool nobody but a stranger ; but Jack ain't
no stranger, so he says —
" Tov. give him a chaw, did you? so did your sister's cat'8
grandmother. You pay me back the chaws you've awready
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A LAZY TOWN. 211
boiry'd ofF'n me, Lafe Euckner, then 111 loan yoa one or two
ton of it, and won't chaise you no back intrust nuther. "
" Well, I did pay you back some of it wunat. "
" Yes, you did—'bout six chaws. You borry'd store tobacker
and paid back nigger-head. "
Store tobacco is flat black plug, but these fellows mostly
chaws the natural leaf twisted. When they borrow a chaw,
they don't generly cut it ofif with a knife, but .they set the
plug in between their teeth, and gnaw with their teeth and
tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two — then
sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it
when it's handed back, and says, sarcastic — :
" Here, gimme the chaw, and you take the plug. "
All the streets and lanes was just mud, they wam't nothing
else hut mud — mud as black as tar, and nigh about a foot deep
in some places ; and two or three inches deep in all the places.
The hogs loafed and grunted around, everywheres. You'd see
a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street
and whollop herself right down in the way, where folks had to
walk around her, and she'd stretch out, and shut her eyes, and
wave her ears, whilst the pigs was milking her, and look as
happy as if she was oa salary. And pretty soon, you'd hear a
loafer sing out, " Hi ! so boy ! sick him, Tige ! " and away the
sow would go, squealing most horrible, with a dog or two
swinging to each ear, and three or four dozen more a-coming ;
and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the
thing out of sight, and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the
noise. Then they'd settle back again till there was a dog-fight.
There couldn't anything wake them up all over, and make them
happy all over, like a dog-fight — unless it might be putting
turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him, or tying a
tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death.
On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over
ri
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
212 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERSY FINK.
the bank, and they was bowed and bent, and about ready to
tumble in. The people had moved out of them. The bank
was caved away under one comer of some others, and that
comer was hanging over. People lived in them yet, but it was
dangersome, because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a
house caves in at a time. Sometimes a belt of land a quarter
of a mile deep will start in and cave along and cave along till
it all caves into the river in one summer. Such a town as that
has to be always moving back, and back, and back, because the
river's always gnawing at it.
The nearer it got to noon that day, the thicker and thicker
was the wagons and horses in the streets, and more coming all
the time. Families fetched their dinners with them, from the
country, and eat them in the wagons. There was considerable
whisky drinking going on, and I seen three fights. By-and-by
somebody sings out —
" Here comes old Boggs ! — in from the eoantry for his little
old monthly drunk — here he comes, boys ! "
All the loafers looked glad — I reckoned they was used to
having ftm out of Boggs. One of them says —
*'Wonder who he's a gwyne to chaw up this time. If he'd
a chawed up all the men he's ben a gwyne to chaw up in the
last twenty year, he'd have considerble ruputation, now. "
Another one says, " I wisht old Boggs'd threaten me,'cuz
then I'd know I wam't gwyne to die for a thousan'year. "
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse, whooping and yel-
ling like an Injun, and singing oat —
" Gler the track, thar. I'm on the waw-path, and the price
uv coffins is a gwyne to raise. "
He was drunk, and weaving about in his saddle ; he was
over fifty year old, and had a very red face. Everybody yelled
at him, and laughed at him, and sassed him, and he sassed
back, and said he'd attend to them and lay them out in their
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
OLD BOGQS. 218
regular turns, but he couldn't wait now, because he'd come to
town to kill old Colonel Slierbum, and his motto was, " Meat
first, and spoon vittles to top off on. "
He see me, and rode up and says —
" Whar'd you come Tm, boy ? You prepared to die ? "
Then he rode on. I was scared ; but a man says —
" He don't mean nothing ; he's always a carryin'on like
that, when he's drunk. He's the best-naturedest old fool in
Arkansaw — never hurt nobody, drunk nor sober. "
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town and bent his
head down so he could see under the curtain of the awning, and
yells —
" Come out here, Sherbum ! Come out and meet the man
you've swindled. You're the houn'I'm after, and I'm a gwyne
to have yon, too ! "
And so he went on, calling Sherbum everything he could
GlKwIc
214 THE ADVEXTVRES OF JIUCELEBERHY FIX^\
lay his tongue to, and the whole street packed with people
listening and laughing and going on. By-and-by a proud-
looking man about fifty-five — and he was a heap the best-dressed
man in that town, too — steps out of the store, and the crowd
drops back on each side to let him come. He eays to Boggs,
mighty calm and slow — he says :
" I'm tired of this ; but I'll endure it till one o'clock. Till
one o'clock, mind — no longer. If you open your mouth against
me only once, after that time, you can't travel so far but I will
find you. "
Then he turns and goes in. The crowd looked mighty sober ;
nobody stirred, and there wam't no more laughing, Boggs
rode off blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell, all
down the street; and pretty soon back he comes and stops
before the store, still keeping it up. Some men crowded
around him and tried to get him to shut up, but he wouldn't ;
they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes,
and so he m,ust go home — he must go right away. But it
didn't do no good. He cussed away, with all his might, and
throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it, and pretty
soon away he went a-raging down the street again, with his
gniy hair a-flying. Everybody that could get a chance at him
tried their best to coax him off'of his horse so they coiUd lock
him up and get him sober ; but it waxn't no use— up the street
be would tear again, and give Sherburn another cussing. By-
and-by somebody says :
" Go for his daughter I — quick, go for his daughter ; some-
times he'll listen to her. If anybody can persuade him, she
can. "
So somebody started on a run. I walked down street a
ways, and stopped. In about five or ten minutes, here comes
Boggs again — but not on his horse. He was a-reeling across
the street towards me, bareheaded, with a friend on both sides
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
DEATH OF BOGGS. 215
■of him aholt of his arms and hurrying him along. He waa
^juiet, and looked uneasy ; and he wam't hanging back any, but
was doing some of the hurrying himself. Somebody sings out—
" Boggs! "
I looked over there to see who said it, and it was that
Cokmel Sherburn. He was standing perfectly still in the street,
and had a pistol raised in his right hand — not aiming it, but
holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky. The
same second I see a young girl coming on the run, and two men
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
21G THE ADVENTURES OF HUCELEBERRT FIXN.'
with faer. Boggg and the men turned round, to see who called
him, and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side,
and the pistol barrel come down slow and steady to a level-:—
both barrels cocked. Boggs throws up both of his hands, aiid
saya, " Lord, don't shoot ! " Bang ! goes the first shot, and
he staggers back clawing at the air— bang ! goes the second
one, and he tumbles backwards on to the ground, heavy and
solid, with his arms spread out. That young girl screamed out,
and comes rushing, and down she throws herself on her father,
crying, and saying, " Oh, he's killed him, he's killed him ! "
The crowd closed up around them, and shouldered and jammed
one another, with their necks stretched, trying to see, and people
on the inside trying to shove them back, and shouting, " Back,
back ! give him air, give him air ! "
Colonel Sherbum he tossed his pistol on to the ground, and
turned around on his heels and walked off.
They took Boggs to a little drug store, the crowd pressing
around, just the same, and the whole town following, and I
rushed and got a good place at the window, where I was close
to him and could see in. They laid him on the floor, and put
one large Bible under his head, and opened another one and
spread it on his breast — but they tore open his shirt first, and I
seen where one of the bullets went in. He made about a dozen
long gasps, his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in
his breath, and letting it down again when he breathed it out
— and after that he laid still ; he was dead. Then they pulled
his daughter away from him, screaming and crying, and took
her off. She was about sixteen, and very sweet and gentle-
looking, but awful pale and scared.
Well, pretty soon the whole town was there, squirming and
scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and
have a look, but people that had the places wouldq,'t give them
up, and folks behind them was saying all the time, " Say, now,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
DEATH OF BOGGS. 217
you've looked enough, you fellows ;'taint right and'taint fair,
■ for you to stay tliar all the time, and never give nobcdy a
chance ; other folks has their rights as well as you. "
There was considerable jawing back, so 1 slid out, thinking
maybe there was going to be trouble. The streets was full,
and everybody was excited. Everybody that seen the shooting
waa telling how it hapi > ened, and there was a big crowd packed
around each one of these fellows, stretching their necks and
listening. One long lanky man, with long hair and a big white
fur atove-pipe hat on the back of his head, and a crooked-
handled cane, marked out the places on the ground where Bogga
stood, and where Sherbum stood, and the people following him
around from one place to t'other and watching everything he
done, and bobbing their heads to show they understood, and
Btoopingalittle, and resting their hands on their thighs to watch
him mark the places on the ground with his cane ; and then he
stood up straight and stiff where Sherbum had stood, frowning
and having his hat-brim down over his eyes, and sung out,
*'Bogga ! " and then fetched his caue down slow to a dead level,
and says " Bang ! " staggered backwards, says " Bang ! " again,
and fell down flat on his back. The people that had seen the
thing said he done it perfect; said it was just exactly the way
it all happened. Then as much as a dozen people got out their
bottles and treated him.
Well, by-and-by somebody said Sherbum ought to be
lynched. In about a minute everybody was saying it; so
away they went, mad and yelling, and snatching down every
clothes-line they come to, to do the hanging with.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
i[)terXXI
swarmed up the street
towa rds Sherb lira's ho use,
a-whooping and yelling
and raging like Injuns,
and everything had to
clear the way or get run
over and tromped to
mush, and it was awful
to see. Children was
heeling it ahead of the
mob, screaming aud try-
ing to get out of the
way; and every window
along the road was full
of women's heads, and
there was nigger boys in
every tree, and bucks and
wenches looking over
SHEKBUBN STEPS ot'T. Bvcry fenco ; and as soon
as the mob would get
nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of reach-
Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on, scared
most to death.
They swarmed up in front of Sherbum's palings as thick as
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SKEEBURX. 2X0
they could jam together, and you couldn't hear yourself think
for the noise. It was a little twenty-foot yard. Some sung
out, " Tear down the fence ! tear down the fence ! " Then there
was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing, and down she
goes, and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave.
Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little
front porch, with a double-barrel gun in his hand, and takes
his stand perfectly calm and deliberate, not saying a word.
The racket stopped, and the wave sucked back.
Sherbum never said a word — ^just stood there, looking down.
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable. Sherbum
ran his eye slow along the- crowd ; and wherever it struck, the
people tried a little to outgaze him, but they couldn't ; they
dropped their eyes and looked sneaky. Then pretty soon Sher-
bum sort of laughed ; not the pleasant kind, but the kind that
makes you feel like when you are eating bread that's got sand
in it.
Then he says, slow and scornful :
" The idea of you lynching anybody ! It's amusing. The
idea of you thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a man !
Because you're brave enough to tar and feather poor friendless
cast-out women that come along here, did that make you think
yon had grit enough to lay your hands on a man ? Why, a
man's safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind — as long
as it's daytime and you're not behind him.
" Do I know you ? I know you clear through. I was bom
and raised in the Sovlth, and I've lived in the North; so I
Itnow the average all around. The average man's a coward. In
the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to, and
goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it. In the
Sonth one man, all by himself, has stopped a stage full of men,
in the daytime, and robbed the lot. Your newspapers call you
a brave people so much that you think you are braver than any
2L > 0 THE ABVENTVREB OF HUCKLEBERRY FIUN.
other people — whereas you're just as brave, and no braver.
Why don't yonr juries hang murderers ? Because they're afraid
the man's friends will shoot them in the back, in the dark —
and it's just what they would do.
" So they always acquit ; and then a man goes in the night,
with a hundred masked cowards at his back, and lynches the
rascal. Your mistake is, that you didn't bring a man with
you ; that's one mistake, and the other is that you didn't come
in the dark, and fetch your masks. You brought part of a
man — Buck Harkness, there — and if you hadn't had him to
start yon, you'd a taken it out in blowing.
" You didn't want to come. The average man don't like
trouble and danger. You don't like trouble and danger. But
if only half a man — like Buck Harkness, there — shouts'Lynch
him, lynch him !'you're afraid to back down — afraid you'll be
found out to be what you are — cowards — and so you raise a
. yell, and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man's coat tail, and
come raging up here, swearing what big things you're going to
do. The pitifullest thing out is a mob ; that's what an army is
— a mob ; they don't fight with courage that's bom in them,
but with courage that's borrowed firom their mass, and from
their oflSeers. But a mob without any ma/n at the head of it,
is beneath pitifulness. Now the thing for you to do, is to
droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole. If any real
lynching's going to be done, it wOl be done in the dark,
Mouthem fashion ; and when they come they'll bring their
masks, and fetch a Tuan along. Now'leave — and take your
half-a-man with you " -^tossing his gun up across his left arm
and cocking it, when he says this.
The crowd washed back sudden, and then broke all apart
and went tearing off every which way, and Buck Harkness he
heeled it after them, looking tolerable cheap. I could a staid,
if I'd a wanted to, but I didn't want to.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
ATTENDING THE CIRCUS. 221
I went to the circus, and loafed around the back Bide till
the watchman went by, and then dived in tinder the tent. I
had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some other money, but I
reckoned I better save it, because there ain't no telling how-
soon you are going to need it, away from home and amongst
strangers, that way. You can't be too careful. I ain't opposed
to spending money on circuses, when there ain't no other way,
but there ain't no use in waatiiig it on them.
It was a real bully circus. It was the splendidest sight
that ever was, when they all come riding in, two and two, a
gentleman and lady, side by side, the men just in their
drawers and nnder-shirts, and no shoes nor stirrups, and resting
their hands on their thighs, easy and comfortable — there must
a'been twenty of them — and every lady with a lovely com-
plexion, and perfectly beautiful, and looking just like a gang of
real sure-enough queens, and dressed in clothes that cost
miUions of doilara, and just littered with diamonds. It was a
powerful fine sight j I never see anything so lovely. And then
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
222 THE ADVENTURES OF IlUCKLEDERlir FINN.
one by one they got up and stood, and went a-weaving around
the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful, the men looking ever
BO tall and airy and straight, with their heads bobbing and
glummiDg along, away up there under the'tent-roof, and every
lady's rose-leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips,
and she looking like the most loveliest parasol.
And then fester and faster they went, all of them dancing,
first one foot stuck out in the air and then the other, tlie
horses leaning more and more, and the ring-master going round
and round the centre-pole, cracking his whip and shouting
" hi! — hi! " and the clown cracking jokes behind him j and
by-and-by all hands dropped the reins, and every lady put her
knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his anns,
and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves !
And so, one after the other they all skipped off into the ring,
and made the sweetest bow I ever see, and then scampered
out, and everybody clapped their hands and went just about
wild.
Well, all through the circus they done the most astonishing-
things ; and all the time that clown carried on so it most killed
the people. The ring-master couldn't ever say a word to him
but he was hack at him quick as a wink with the funniest
things a body ever said; and how he ever cowid- think of so
many of them, and so sudden and so pat, was what I couldn't
noway understand. Why, I couldn't a thought of them in a
year. And by-and-by a drunk man tried to get into the ring
— said he wanted to ride; said he could ride as well as any-
body that ever was. They argued and tried to keep him out,
but he wouldn't listen, and the whole show come to a stand-
still. Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun
of him, and that made him mad, and he begun to rip and tear ;
80 that stirred up the people, and a lot of men begun to pile
down off of the benches and swarm towards the ring, saying,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
isToxicATioy ly the siifG. ei-'s
'* Knock him down ! throw him out ! " and one or two women
begun to scream. So, then, the ring-master he made a littl &
speech, and said he hoped there wouldn't be no disturbance,
and if the man would promise he wouldn't make no more
trouble, he would let him ride, if he thought he could stay on
the horse. So everybody laughed and said all right, and the
man got on. The minute he was on, the horse begun to rip
and tear and jump and cavort around, with two circus men
• banging on to his bridle trying to hold him, and the drunk
man hanging on to his neck, and his heels flying in the air
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
224 THE ABVENTUliES OF HUCKLEBERMY FISX
every jump, and the whole crowd of people standing uj» shout-
ing fmd laughing till the tears rolled down. And at last, sure
enough, all the circus men could do, the hoiee broke looee, and.
away he went like the very nation, round and round the ring,
with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck,
with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side, and
then t'other one on t'other side, and the people just crazy. It
wam't funny to me, though ; I was all of a tremble to see his
danger. But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed
the bridle, a-reeling this way and that ; and the next minute
he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood ! and the horse
agoing like a house afire too. He just stood up there, a-sailing
around as easy and comfortable as if he wam't ever drunk in
his life — and then he begun to pull off his^ clothes and sling
them. He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up the
air, and altogether he shed seventeen suits. And then, there
he was, slim and handsome, and dressed the gaudiest and
prettiest you ever saw, and he lit into that horse with his whip
and made him fairly hum — and finally skipped off, and made
his bow and danced off to the dressing-room, and everybody
just a-howling with pleasure and astonishment.
Then the ring-master he see how he had been fooled, and
he waa the sickest ring-master you ever see, I reckon. Why,
it was one of his own men ! He had got up that joke all out
of his own head, and never let on to nobody. Well, I felt
sheepish enough, to be took in so, but I wouldn't a been in
that ring-master's place, not for a thousand dollars. I don't
know ; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was,
but I never struck them yet. Anyways it was plenty good
enough for me ; and wherever I run across it, it can have all of
•my custom, every time.
Well, that night we had our show ; but there wam't only
about twelve people there ; just enough to pay expenses And
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE TIlRlLLIXa TRAGEDY. 223
they laughed all the time, and that made the duke mad ; and
everybody left, anyway, before the show was over, but one boy
which was asleep. So the duke said these Arkanaaw lunkheads
couldn't come up to ghakspeare ; what they wanted was low
comedy — and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy,
he reckoned. He said he could size their style. So next morn-
ing he got some big sheets of wrapping-paper and some black
paint, and drawed off some handbills and stuck them up all
over the village. The bills said:
AT THE COUUT HOUSE!
fOR 3 NIGHTS OKLY I
The World-Reiumaed Tragediaii»
DAVID GARKICK THE YOUNGER I
EDMUND KEAN THE ELDER!
Of the London and C'ontinciital
Tieatret,
In their Thrilling Tragedy of
THE KING'S CAMELOPABD
THE ROYAL NONESUCH 1 ! 1
Admitnim GO centi.
Then at the bottom was the biggest line of all — which
said :
LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED
" There, " says he, " if that line don't fetch them, I don't
know Arkansaw ! "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
all day him and tlie
king was hard at it,
rigging up a stage, and
a curtain, and a row of
candled for foot-lights ;
aud that night the house
was jam full of men in
no time. When the
place couldn't hold no
more, the duke he quit
tending door and went
around the back way
and come on to the
stage and stood up be-
fore the curtain, and
made a little speech,
_^_-;^r:-— — and praised up this
TBAGBDY. tragedy, and said it was
the most thrillingest
one that ever was ; and so he went on a-bragging about the
tragedy, and about Edmund Kean the Elder, which was to
play the main principal part in it ; and at last when he'd got
everybody's expectations up high enough, he rolled up the
curtain, and the next minute the king come a-praucing out on
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
" SOLD.- 227
all fours, naked ; and he was painted all over, ring-streaked-and-
striped, all eorts of colours, as splendid as a rainbow. And —
but never mind the rest of his outfit, it was juBt wild, but it
was awful funny. The people most killed themselves laughing ;
juid when the king got done capering, and capered off behind
the scenes, they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed
till he come back and done it over again ; and after that, they
made him do it another time. Well, it wonld a made a cow
laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut.
Then the duke he lets the curtain down, and bows to the
l > eople, and says the great tragedy will be performed only two
nights more, on accounts of pressing London engagements,
where the seats is all sold aready for it in Drury Lane ; and
then he makes them another bow, and says if he haa Bucceeded in
pleasing them and instructing them, he will be deeply obleeged
if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come and
see it.
Twenty people sings out :
" What, is it over ? Is that all ? "
The duke says " yea. " Then there was a fine time, ^veiy-
body sings out " sold, " and rose up mad, and was agoing for
that stage and them tragedians. But a big, iine-looking man
jumps up on a bench, and shouts :
" Hold on ! Just a word, gentlemen. " Tliey stopped to
listen. " We are sold — mighty badly sold. But we don't
want to be the laughing-stock of this whole town, I reckon,
and never hear the last of this thing as long as we live. No.
^Miat we want, is to go out of here quiet, and talk this show up,
and sell the rest of the town ! Then we'll all be in the same boat.
Ain't that sensible ? " ( " You bet it is ! — the jedge is right ! "
everybody sings out.) " All right, then — not a word about
iiny sell. Go along home, and advise everybody to come and
see the tragedy. "
Q 2
D,Q,t,7=^- In Google
22:^ THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
Next day you couldn't hear nothing around that town but
how splendid that show was. House was jammed again, that
night, and we sold this crowd the same way. When me and
the king and the duke got home to the raft, we all had a
supper; and by-and-by, about midnight, they made Jim and
me back her out and float her down the middle of the river and
fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town.
The third night the house was crammed again — and they
wam't new-comers, this time, but people that was at the show
the other two nights. I stood by the duke at the door, and I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
JtOJ'AL CO.VPARISOXS. Sii)
fice that every man that vent in had his pockets bulging, or
something muffled up under his coat — and I see it warn't no
perfumery neither, not by a long sight. I smelt sickly eggs by
the barrel, and rotten cabbages, and such things ; and if I know
the signs of a dead cat being around, and I bet I do, there was
sixty-four of them went in, I shoved in there for a minute,
but it was too various for me, I couldn't stand it. W'^ell, when
the place couldn't hold no more people, the duke be give a
fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for him a minute,
and then he started around for the stage door, I after him ; but
the minute we turned the comer and was in the dark, he says :
" Walk fast, now, till you get away from the houses, and
then shin for the raft like the dickens was after you ! "
I done it, and he done the same. We struck the raft at the
■ same time, and in leas than two seconds we was gliding down
stream, all dark and still, and edging towards the middle of
the river, nobody saying a word. I reckoned -the poor king
was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience ; but nothing
of the sort ; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam,
and says :
" Well, bow'd the old thing pan out this time, Duke ? "
He hadn't been U2 > town at all.
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below
that village. Then we lit up and had a supper, and the king
and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they'd
served them people. The duke says :
" Greenhorns, fiatheads ! I knew the first house would
keep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in ; and I
knew they'd lay for us the third night, and consider it was
their turn now. Well, it is their turn, and I'd give something
to know how much they take for it. I %vould just like to know
how they're putting in their opportunity. They can turn it
into a picnic if they want to — they brought plenty provisions. "
Google
230 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five
dollars in that three nights. T never see money hauled in by
the wagon-load like that, before,
Bj-and-by, when they was asleep and snoring, Jim says ;
" Don't it'sprise you, de way dem kings carries on, Huck ? "
" No, " I says, " it don't. "
" Why don't it, Huck? "
" Well, it don't, because it's in the breed, i reckon they're
all alike. "
" But, Hack, dese kings o'oum is regular rapscallions ;
dat's jist what dey is ; dey's reglar rapscallions. "
" Well, that'a what I'm a-saying ; all kings ia mostly rap-
scallions, as fur as I can make out. "
" Is dat so ? "
" You read about them once — you'll see. Look at Henry
the Eight ; this'n's a Sunday-School Superintendent to Am,
And look at Charles Second, and-Louis Fourteen, and Loui. <
Fifteen, and James Second, and Edward Second, and Eiehanl
Third, and forty more ; besides all them Saxon heptarchies
that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain. Jly,
you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he w-as in
bloom. He was a blossom. He used to marry a new wifit
every day, and chop off her liead next morning. And he
would do it just as indififerent as if he was ordering up eggs.
'Fetch up Nell Gwynn,'he says. They fetch her up. NeSt
morning,'Chop off her head !'And they chop it off,'Fetch
up Jane Shore,'he says ; and up she comes. Next morning
'Chop off her head'— and they chop it off.'Ring up Fair
Eosamun.'Fair Rt^amun answers the bell. Next morning,
'Chop off her head.'And he made every one of them tell him
a tale every night ; and he kept that up till he had hogged a
thousand and one tales that way, and then he put them all in a
book, and called it Domesday Book — which was a good name
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SOVAL COMPAHISOA'S. 2-Jl
and stated the case. You don't know kings, Jim, but I know
them; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I've
struck in history. Well, Henry he takes a notion he wants to
get up some trouble with this country. How does he go at it
— give notice? — give the country a show? No. All of a
BENKV TUB EISHIH IN BOSTON HAIlllOUR,
sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbour overboard, aim
whacks out a declaration of independence, and dares them to
come on. That was his style — he never give anybody a chance.
He had suspicions of his father, the Duke of Wellington. Well,
what did he do ?— ask him tfl show up ? No— ^drownded him
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
232 TEE ADVEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
in a butt of mainsey, like a cat, S'pose people left, money
laying around where he was — what did he do ? He collared it.
S'pose he contracted to do a thing; and you paid him, and
didn't Bet down there and see that he done it — what did he do ?
He always done the other thing, S'pose he opened his mouth
— what then ? If he didn't shut it up powerful quick, he'd
lose a lie, every time. That's the kind of a bug Henry was ;
and if we'd a had him along'stead of our kings, he'd a fooled
that town a heap worse than ourn done. I don't say that oum
is lambs, because they ain't, when you come right down to the
cold facts ; but they ain't nothing to that old ram, anyway.
All I say is, kings is kings, and you got to make allowances.
Take them all around, they're a mighty omery lot. It's the
way they're raised- "
" But dis one do smell so like de nation, Huck. "
" Well, they all do, Jini. We can't help the way a king
smells ; history don't tell no way. "
" Now de duke, he's a tolerble likely man, in some ways. "
" Yes, a duke's different. But not very different. This
one's a middling hard lot for a duke. When he's drunk, then'
ain't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king. "
" Well, anyways, I doan'hanker for no mo'un um, Huck.
Dese is all I kin stan'. "
" It's the way I feel, too, Jim. But we've got them on our
hands, and we got to r«rmember what they are, and make allow-
ances. Sometimes I wish we could hear of a coimtry that's out
of kings. "
What was the use to tell Jim these wara't real kings and
dukes ? It wouldn't a done no good ; and besides, it was just
as I said ; you couldn't tell them from the real kind,
I went to sleep, and Jim didn't call me when it was my
turn. He often done that. When I waked up, just at day-
break, he was setting there with his head down betwixt his
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
J1.V GETS HOMESICK. 233
knees, moaning and mourning to himself. I didn't take
notice, nor let on. I knowed what it was about. He was
thinking abont his wife and his children, away up yonder,
and he was low and homesick ; because he hadn't ever been
away from home before in his life ; and I do believe he
cared just as much for his people as white folks does for
ther'o. It don't seem natural, but I reckon it's so. He
was often moaning and mourning that way, nights, when he
judged I was asleep, and saying, " Po'little'Lizabeth! po'
little Johnny ! it's mighty hard ; I spec'I ain't ever gwyne to
see you no mo', no mo't " He was a mighty good nigger, Jim
was.
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his
wife and young ones ; and by-and-by he says :
" What makes me feel so bad dis time,'uz hekase I hear
sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack, er a slam, while
ago, en it mine me er de time I treat my little'Lizabeth so
ornery. She wam't on'y'bout fo'year ole, en sht^ tuck de
sk'yarlet-fever, en had a powful rough spell ; but she got well,
en one day she was a-stannia'aroun', en I says to her, I says :
"'Shet de do'.'
" She never done it ; jis'stood dab, kiner smilJn'uii at me.
It make me mad ; en I says t^in, mighty loud, I says :
" * Doan'you hear me ? — shet de do'!'
" She jis'stood de same way, kiner smilin'up. I was
a-bilin'! I says :
" * I lay I make you mine ! "
" En wid dat I fetch'her a slap side de head dat sont her
a-sprawlin'. Den I went into de yuther room, en'uz gone
'bout ten minutes ; en when I come back, dah wa^ dat do'
a-stannin'open yit, en dat chile stannin'mos'right in it,
a-lookin'down and mournin', en de tears runnin'down. My, but
I waz mad, I was agwyne for de chile, but jis'den — it was a do'
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
234 THE ADFEXTUSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINS.
dat open innerds — jis'den,'long come de wind en slam it to,
behine de chile, ker-frtem, .'— en my Ian', de chile never move'I "
My brefF inos'hop outer me ; en I feel so — so — I doan'know
how I feel. I crope out, all a-tremblin', en crope aroun'en
open de do'easy en slow, en poke my head in behine de chile,
soF en still, en all uv a sudden, I says'pow ! jis'as loud as I
could yell. She never budge ! Ob, Huck, I bust out a-cryin'
en grab her up in my arms, en say,'Oh, de po'little thing !
de Lord God Amighty fogive po'ole Jim, kaze he never gwyne
to fogive bisself as long's he live !'Oh, she was plumb deef
en dumb, Huck, plumb deef en dumb— en I'd ben a-treat'n
her so ! "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
KaJDterXXlV
day, towards night, we
laid up under a little
wiUow tow-head out in
the middle, where there
was a village on each
side of the river, and the
duke and the king begun
to lay out a plan for
working them towns.
Jim lie spoke to the
duke, and said he hoped
it wouldn't take but a
few hours, because it got
mighty heavy and tire-
some to him when he
had to lay all day in
the wigivam tied with
the rope. You see, when
we left him all alone we
had to tie him, because if anybody happened on him all by
himself and not tied, it wouldn't look much like he was a
runaway nigger, you know. So the duke said it was kind of
hard to have to lay roped all day, and he'd cipher out some way
to get around it.
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
231 THE ADVEXrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISX.
He was uncommon bright, the duke was, and he soon struck
it. He dressed Jim up jn King Lear's outfit — it was a long
curtain-calico gown, and a white horse-hair wig and whi & kers ;
and then he took his theatre-paint and painted Jim's face and
Iiands and ears and neck all over a dead dull solid blue, like a
man that's been drownded nine days. Blamed if he wam't the
liorriblest looking outrage I ever see. Then the duke t-ook and
wrote out a sign on a shingle so —
Sick Arah—hiit liarnilegi ithen net eu,t of hit head.
And he nailed that shingle to a lath, and stood the lath up
four or five foot in front of the wigwam. Jim was satisfied.
He said it was a sight better than laying tied a couple of years
every day and trembling all over every time there was a sound.
The duke told him to make himself free and easy, and if any-
body ever come meddling around, he must hop out of the wig-
wam, and carry on a little, and fetch a howl or two like a wild
bea'st, and he reckoned they would light out and leave him
alone. Which was sound enough judgment ; but you take the
average man, and he wouldn't wait for him to howl. Why,
he didn't only look like he was dead, he looked considerable
more than that.
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again,
because there was so much money in it, but they judged it
wouldn't be safe, because maybe the news might a worked
along down by this time. They couldn't hit no project that
suited, exactly ; so at last the duke said he reckoned he'd lay
off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he couldn't
put up something on the Arkansaw village ; and the king he
allowed he would drop over to t'other village, without any plan,
but just trust in Providence to lead him the profitable way —
meaning the devil, I reckon. We had all bought store clothes
where we stopped last ; and now the king put bis'a on, and he
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
JIM IN ROYAL ROBES. 237
told me to put mine on. I done it, of comse. The king'fi diida
vas all black, and he did look real swell and starchy. I never
knowed how clothes could change a body before. Why, before,
he looked like the omerlest old rip that ever was ; but now,
when he'd take off bis new white beaver and make a bow and
do a smile, he looked that grand and good and pious that you'd
say he bad walked right out of the ark, and maybe was old
Leviticus himself. Jim cleaned up the canoe, and I got my
paddle ready. There was a big steamboat laying at the shore
away up under the point, about three mile above town —
i > een there a couple of hours, taking on freight. Says the
king:
" Seein'how I'm dressed, I reckon maybe I better arrive
dovn from St. Louis or Cincinnati, or some other big place.
(to for the steamboat, Huckleberry; we'll come down to the
village on her. "
I didn't have to be ordered twice, to go and take a steam-
boat ride. I fetched the shore a half a iriile above the village,
and then went scooting along the bluff hank in the easy water.
I'retty soon we come to a nice innocent- looking young country
jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face, for it
was [wwerful warm weather ; and he had a couple of big carpet-
bags by him.
" Run her nose in shore, " says the king. I done it. " Wher'
you bound for, young man ? "
" For the steamboat ; going to Orleans. "
" Git aboard, " saya the king. " Hold on a minute, my ser-
vant'11 he'p you with them bags. Jump out and be'p the gen-
tleman, Adolphus " — meaning me, I see.
I done so, and then we all three sbirted on again. The
young chap was mighty thankful ; said it was tough work
toting his baggage such weather. He asked the king where
he was going, and the king told him he'd come down the river
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
a38 TRE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXK.
and landed at the other village this morning, and now he vtas
going up a few mile ta see an old friend on a farm up there,
The young fellow saya ;
" When I first see you, I saya to myself,'It's Mr. Wilks,
sure, and he come mighty near getting here in time.'But
then I Bays again,'No, I reckon it ain't him, or else he
wouldn't be paddling up the river.'You ain^t him, are you ? "
" No, my name's Blodgett — Elesander Blodgett — Reverend
Elesander Blodgett, I s'pose I must say, as I'm one o'the
Jjord's poor servants. But still I'm jist as able to be sorry
for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time, all the same, if he'K
missed anything by it — which I hope he hasn't. "
" Well, he don't miss any property by it, because he'll get
that all right ; but he's missed seeing his brother Peter die —
which he mayn't mind, nobody can tell aa to that — but his
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
GETTIXO IX FORMATION. 230
brother -would a give anything in this world to Bee Aim before
he died; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks;
hadn't seen him since they was boys together— and hadn't ever
seen his brother William at all — that's the deef and dumb one
— William ain't more than thirty or thirty-five. Peter and
(leorge was the only ones that come out here ; George was the
married brother ; him and his wife both died last year.
Harvey and William's the only ones that's left now ; and, as I
wa? saying, they haven't got here in time. "
" Did anybody send'em word ? "
" Oh, yes ; a month or two ago, when Peter was first took ;
because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he wam't going
to get well this time. You see, he was pretty old, and George's
g'yirls was too young to be much company for him, except Mary
Jane the red-headed one ; and so he was kinder lonesome after
treorge and his wife died, and didn't seem to care much to live.
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey — and William too,
for that matter — because he was one of them kind that can't
bear to make a will. He left a letter behind for Harvey, and
said he'd told in it where his money was hid, and how he wanted
the rest of the property divided up so George's g'yirls would be
all right — for George didn't leave nothing. And that letter
was all they could get him to put a pen to. "
" Why do you reckon Harvey don't come ? Wher'does he
live? "
" Oh, he lives in England— Sheffield — preaches there —
hasn't ever been in this country. He hasn't had any too much
time — and besides he mightn't a got the letter at all, you
know. "
" Too bad, too bad he couldn't a lived to see his brothers,
poor soul. You going to Orleans, you say? "
" Yes, but that ain't only a jort of it. I'm going in a ship,
next Wednesday, for Ryo Janeero, where my uncle lives. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
2i0 THE AliVENTUSES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN.
" It's a pretty long journey. But it'll be lovely ; I wlsht
I was agoing. Is Mary Jane the eldest ? How old is the
others ? "
" Mary Jane's nineteen, Susan's fifteen, and Joanna's about
fourteen — that's the one that gives herself to good works and
has a hare-lip. "
" Poor things ! to be left alone in the cold world so. "
HE FAISLY EMPTIED THAT XOL'>'a FELLOW.
" Well, they could be worse off. Old Peter had friends,
and they aint going to let them come to no barm. There's
Hobson, the Babtis'preacher; and Deacon Lot Hovey, and
Ben Eucker, and Abner Shackleford, and Levi Bell, Uie lawyer;
and Ur. Bobinson, and their wives, and the widow Bartley,
and — well, there's a lot of them ; but these are the ones that
Peter was thickest with, and used to write about sometimes,
hyGoogle
GEITIXG ISFORMATlOy. 241
when he wrote home ; so Harvey 11 know where to look for
friends when he get's here.''
Well, the old man he went on asking questions till he just
fairly emptied that young fellow. Blamed if he didn't inqnire
about everybody and everything in that blessed town, and all
about all the Wilkses ; and about Peter's business — which was
n tanner ; and about George's — which was a carpenter ; and
about Harvey's — which was a dissentering minister ; and so on,
and 80 on. Then he says :
" What did you want to walk all the way np to the steam-
boat for? "
" Because she's a big Orleans boat, and I was afeard she
mightn't stop there. When they're deep they won't stop for
a hail. A Cincinnati boat will, but this is a St. I^ouis one. "
" Was Peter Wilka welt off? "
" Oh, yes, pretty well off. He had houses and land, and
it's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash'hid up
" When did you say he died ? "
" I didn't say, but it was last night. "
" Funeral to-morrow, likely ? "
" Yes,'bout the middle of the day. "
" Well, it's all terrible sad ; but we've all got to go, one
time or another. So what we ^vant to do is to be prepared ;
then we're all right. "
" Yes, sir, it's the best way. Ma used to always say that. "
When we struck the boat, she was about done loading, and
pretty soon she got off. The king never said nothing about
going aboard, so I lost my ride, after all. When the boat was
gone, the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome
place, then he got ashore, and says :
" Now hustle back, right off, and fetch the duke up here,
and the new carpet-bags. And if he's gone over to t'other side,
B
'D,Q,t,7=^- In Google
243 TME ADVEJfTVJlES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
go over there and git Mm. And t«ll him to git himself up
regardless. Shove along, now. "
I see what, Ae was up to; but I never said nothing, of course.
When I got back with the duke, we hid the canoe and then
they set down on a log, and the king told him everything, just
like the young fellow had said it— every last word of it. Aad
all the time he was a doing. it, he tried to talk like an English-
man ; and he done it pretty well too, for a slouch, I can't imi-
tate him, and so I ain't agoing to try to ; but he really done it
pretty good. Then he says :
" How are you on the deef and dumb, Bilgewater ? "
The duke said, leave him alone for that; said he had
played a deef and dumb person on the histrionic boards. So
then they waited for a steamboat.
About the middle of the'afternoon a couple of little boats
come along, but they didn't come from high enough up the
river ; but at last there was a big one, and they hailed her.
She sent out her yawl, and we went aboard, and she was from
Cincinnati ; aud when they found we only wanted to go four
or five mile, they was booming mad, and give us a cussing, and
said they wouldn't land us. But the king was calm. He
says:
" If gentlemen kin afford to i > ay a dollar a mile apiece, to
be took on and put off in a yawl, a steamboat kin afford to
carry'em, can't it ? "
So they softened down and said it was all right ; and when
we got to the village, they yawled us ashore. About two dozen
men flocked down, when they see the yawl a coming ; and when
the king says —
" Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher Mr. Peter Wilks
lives ? " they give a glance at one another, and nodded their
heads, as much as to say, " What d'I tell you ? " Then one of
them says, kind of soft and gentle :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
rAMIZr GRIEF. 243
" I'm sorry, air, but the best we can do ia to tell you wlieie
lie did live yesterday evening. "
Sudden aa winking, the ornery old cretur went all to emaeh,
and fell up against the man, and put his chin on his shoulder,
and cried down liis back, aud says :
" Alas, alas ! our poor brother — gone, and we never got to
see him ; oh, it's too, too hard ! "
Then lie turns around, blubbering, and makes a lot of idiotic
signs to the duke on his hands, and blamed if he didn't drop a
caqiet-bag and bust out a-CTying. If they warn't the beatenest
lot, them two frauds, that ever I struck.
Well, the men gethered around, and sympathised with them,
h2
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
L'44 THE ABTEyTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISX.
and said all sorts of kind things to them, and carried their
tarpet-bags up the hill for them, and let them lean on them
and cry, and told the king all about his brofcher'a last moments,
'and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke,
and both of them took on about that dead tanner like they'd
lost the twelve disciples. Well, if ever I struck anything like
it, I'm a nigger. It was enough to make a body ashamed of
the human race.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
terXXy
news was all over town in two
miniiteB, and you could see
the people tearing down on
the run, from everj whieh
way, some of them putting on
their coats as they come.
Pretty soon we was in the
middle of a crowd, and the
noise of the tramping was like
a soldier-march. The windows
and door-yards was full ; and
every minute somebody would
say, over a fence :
" Is it tkem? "
And somebody trotting
along with the gang would
answer back and say :
'• vou BET IT IE. " " ^'ou het it is. "
When we got to the house,
the street in front of it was packed, and the three girls was
standing in the door. Mary Jane was red-headed, but that
don't make no difference, she was most awful beautiful, and
her face and her eyes was all lit np like glory, she was bo glad
her uncles was come. The king he spread hia arms, and Mary
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
iilG THE AUVEXTURBS OF BUCKLEBEJtRY FINN.
Jane she jumped for them, and the hare-lip jumiied for the
duke, and there they had it ! Everybody most, leastways
women, cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have
such good times.
Then the king he hunched the duke, private — I see him
do it — and then he looked around and see the coffin, over in
the comer on two chairs ; so then, him and the duke, with a
hand across each other's shoulder, and t'other hand to their
eyes, walked slow and solemn over there, everybody dropping
back to give them room, and all the talk and noise stopping,
people saying " Sh ! " and all the men taking their hats o£f and
drooping their heads, so you could hear a pin fall. And when
they got there, they bent over and looked in the coffin, and
took one sight, and then they burst out a crying so you could
a heard them to Orleans, most ; and then they put their arms
around each other's necks, and hung their chins over each
other's shoulders ; and then for three minutes, or maybe four,
I never see two men leak the way they done. And mind you,
everybody was doing the same ; and the place was that damp I
never see anything like it. Then one of them got on one side
of the coffin, and t'other on t'other side, and they kneeled down
and rested their foreheads on the coffin, and let on to pray all
to theirselves. Well, when it come to that, it worked the crowd
like you never see anything like it, and so everybody broke
down and went to sobbing right out loud — the poor girls, too ;
and every woman, nearly, went up to the girls, without saying
a word, and kissed them, solemn, on the forehead, and then
put their hand on their head, and looked np towards the sky,
with the tears running down, and then busted out and went
off sobbing and swabbing, and give the next woman a sliow. I
never see anything so disgusting.
Well, by-and-by the king he gets up and comes forward a
little, and works himself up and slobbers out a speech, all full
SIA'GINO THE » DOXOLOJER. " 247
of tears and flapdoodle about its beiog a sore trial for bim and
his poor brother to lose the diseased, and to miss seeing diseased
alive, after the long journey of four thousand mile, but it's a
trial that's sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy
and these holy tears, and so he thanks them out of bis heart
and out of his brother's heart, because out of their mouths
tkey can't, words being too weak and cold, and all that kind
of rot and slush, till it was just sickening; and then he blubbers
out a pious goody-goody Amen, and turns himself loose and
goes to crying fit to bust.
And the minute the words was out of his mouth somebody
over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer, and everybody joined
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
SIS THE ADJ'ESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
in with all their might, and it just warmed you up and made
you feel as good as church letting out. Music ia a good thing ;
and after all that soul-butter and hogwash, I never see it
freshen up things so, and sound so honest and bully.
Then the king begins to work his jaw again, and says how
him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal
friends of the family would t,ike supper here with them this
evening, and help set up with the ashes of the diseased ; and
says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak, he knows
who he would name, for they was names that was very dear to
him, and mentioned often in his letters ; and so he will name
the same, to wit, as follows, viz. : — Rev. Mr. Hobson, and
Deacon Lot Hovey, and Mr. Ben Rucker, and Abner Shackle-
ford, and I^vi Bell, and Dr. Robinson, and their wives, and the
widow Bartley.
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the
town, a-hunting together ; that is, I mean the doctor was ship-
ping a sick man to t'other world, and the preacher was pinting
him right. Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on some
business. But the rest was on hand, and so they all come and
shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him ;
and then they shook hands with the duke, and didn't say no-
thing but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a
paasel of sapheada whilst he made all sorts of signs with his
hands and said " Goo-goo — goo-goo-goo, " all the time, like a
baby that can't talk.
So the king he blatted along, and managed to inquire about
pretty much everybody and dog in town, by his name, and
mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or
another in the town, or to George's family, or to Peter ; and
he always let on that Peter wrote him the things, but that was
a lie, he got every blessed one of them out of that young flat-
head that we canoed up to the steamboat.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
" Jt'E CAN SPARE IT. " 241)
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left
behind, and the king he read it out loud and cried over it. It
give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars, gold, to
the girls ; and it give the tanyard (which was doing a good
business), along with some other houses and land (worth about
seven thousand),and three thousand dollars in gold to Harveyand
William, and told where the six thousand cash was hid, down
cellar. So these two frauds said they'd go and fetch it up, and
have everything square and above-board ; and told me to come
with a candle. We shut the cellar door behind us, and when
they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor, and it was a
lovely sight, all them yaller-boys. My, the way the king's
eyes did shine! He slaps the duke on the shoulder, and
says:
" Oh, this ain't bully, nor noth'n ! Oh, no, I reckon not !
Why, Biljy, it beats the Konesuch, don't it? "
The duke allowed it did. Tliey, pawed the yaller-boys, and
sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on
the floor ; and the king says :
" It ain't no use talkin'; bein'brothers to a rich dead man,
and representatives of furrin heirs that's got left, is the line
for you and me, Bilge. Thish-yer comes of trust'n to Provi-
dence. It's the best way, in the long run. I've tried'em all,
and tber'ain't no better way. "
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile, and
took it OD trust ; but no, they must count it. So they counts
it, and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short. Says
the king :
*'Dem him, I wonder what he done with that four hundred
and fifteen dollars ? "
They worried over that a while, and ransacked all around for
if. Then the duke says :
" Well, he was a pretty sick man, and likely he made a
Google
i'oO THE ADVEXTUItES OF SUCKLEBESSY FINX.
mistake — I reckon that's the way of it. The best way's to let
it go, and keep still about it. We can spare it. "
" Oh, shucks, yes, we can spore iL I don't k'yer Eoth'n
'bout that — it's the count I'm thinkin'about. We want to be
awful square and open and above-board, here, yoa know. We
want to lug this h-yer money upstairs and count it before
everybody — then ther* ain't noth'n suspicious. But when the
dead man says ther's six thous'n dollars, you know, we don't
wan't to "
" Hold on, " says the duke. " Leas make up the deffisit "
— and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his podcet,
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
AWrUZ SQUASE. Ml
" It's a most amazV good idea, duke — you have got a
tattlin'clever head on you, " says the kiug. *'Blest if the old
Nonesuch ain't a heppin'us out agin " — and he begun to haul
out yaller-jackets and stack them up.
It most busted them, but they made up the six thousand
clean and clear.
" Say, " says the duke, " I got another idea. Le's go ui > -
stairs and count this money, and then take and give it to the
girls "
" Good lan^, duke, lemme hug you ! It's the most dazz-
ling idea'at ever a man struck. You have cert'nly got the
most astonishin'head I ever see. Oh, this is the boas dodge,
ther'ain't no mistake " bout it. Let'em fetch along their sus-
picions now, if they want to — this'll lay'em out. "
When we got up stairs, everybody gethered around the
table, and the king he counted it and stacked it up, three hun-
dred dollars in a pile — twenty elegant little piles. Everybody
looked hungry at it, and licked their chops. Then they raked
it into the bag again, and I see the king begin to swell himself
up for another speech. He says :
*'Friends all, my poor brother that lays yonder has done
generous by them that's left behind in the vale of sorrers. He ■
has done generous by these-yer poor httle lambs that he loved
and sheltered, and that's left fatherless and motherless. Yes,
and -we that knowed him, knows that he would a done more
generous by'em if he hadn't ben afeard o'woundin'his dear
" William and me. Now, wouldn't he ? Ther'ain't no question
Txrat it, in my mind. Well, then — what kind o'brothers would
it be, that'd stand in his way at sech a time ? And what kind
o'uncles would it be that'd rob — yes, rob — sech poor sweet
lambs as these'at he loved so, at sech a time ? If I know
William — and I tkink I do — he — well, I'll jest ask him. " He
turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the doke
25-2 THE ADVEyiURES OF HVCKLEBEllEY FIXX.
with his hands; and the duke he looks at him stupid and
leather-headed a while, then all of a sudden he seems to catch
his meaniDg, and jumps for the king, goo-gooing with all his
might for joy, and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets
up. Then the king says, " I knowed it ; I reckon that'II con-
vince anybody the way he feels about it. Here, Mary Jane,
Susan, Joanner, take the money — take it aU. It's the gift of
him that lays yonder, cold but joyful. "
Mary Jane she went for him, Susan and the hare-lip went
for the duke, and then such another hugging and kissing I
never see yet. And everybody crowded up with the tears in
Google
FUXERAL ORGIES. 25.(
their eyes, and most shook the hands off of them fi-auds, saying
iill the time :
" You dear good souls I — how lovely .'^how could you ! "
Well, then, pretty soon all hands got to talking about the
diseased again, and how good he was, and what a loss he was,
and all that ; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked
himself in there from outside, and stood a listening and look-
ing, and not saying anything; and nobody saying anything to
him either, because the king was talking and they was all busy
listening. The king w^is saying — in the middle of something
he'd started in on —
" — they bein'partickler friends o'the diseased. That's
why they're invited here this evenin'; but to-morrow we want
aU to come — everybody ; for he respected everybody, he liked
everybody, and so it'a fitten that his funeral orgies sh'd be
public. "
And 80 he went a-mooning on and on, liking to hear himself
talk, and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies
again, till the duke he couldn't stand it no more ; go he writes
on a little scrap of i > aper, " obsequies, you old fool, " and folds
it up and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people's
heads to him. The king he reads it, and puts it in his ]K)cket,
and says :
*'Poor William, afflicted as he is, his heart's aluz right.
Asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral — wants me
to make'em all welcome. But he needn't a worried — it was
jest what I was at. "
Then he weaves along again, perfectly calm, and- goes tn
dropping io his funeral orgies again every now and then, just
like he done before. And when he done it the third time, he
says:
" I say orgies, not because it's the common term, because
it ain't — obsequies bein'the common term — but because orgies
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
254 THE ADVENTURES OF JIUCKLEBERRY FINX.
is the right term. Obsequies ain't used in England no more,
now — it's gone out. We say orgies now, in England. Orgiesi
is better, because it means the thing you're after, more exact.
It's a word that's made up out'n the Greek orgo, outside, opes,
abroad ; and the Hebrew jeesum, to plant, cover up ; hence
inter. So, you see, funeral orgies is an open er public funeral. "
He was the worst I ever struck. Well, the iron-jawed nmn
he laughed right in bis face. Everybody was shocked. Every-
body says, " Why doctor ! " and Abner Sbackleford says :
" Why, Robinson, hain't you heard the news ? This is
Harvey Wilks. "
The king he smiled eager, and shoved out his flapper, and
says:
" Is it my poor brother's dear good friend and physician ?
I "
" Keep your hands off of me ! " says the doctor. " You
talk like an Englishman — don't you ? It's the worse imitation
I ever heard. Yov, Peter Wilks'brother. You're a fraud, that's
what you are ! "
Well, how they all took on ! They crowded Eu^imd the
doctor, and tried to quiet him down, and tried to explain to
him, and tell him bow Harvey'd showed in forty ways that he
waa Harvey, and knowed everybody by name, and the names
of the very dogs, and begged and begged him not to hurt Har-
vey's feelings and the poor girls'feeUngs, and all that ; but it
warn't no use, he stormed right along, and said any man that
pretended to be an Englishman and couldn't imitate the lingo
no better than what he did, was a fraud and a liar. The poor
girls was hanging to the king and crying ; and all of a sudden
the doctor ups and turns on them. He says :
" I was your father's friend, and I'm your friend ; and I
warn you aa a iiriend, and an honest one, that wants to protect
you and keep you out of harm and trouble, to turn your backs
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A BAD INVESTMENT. 266
on that scoundrel, and bave nothing to do with him, the igno-
rant tramp, with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew as he calls it.
He is the thinnest kind of an impostor — has come here with a
lot of empty names and facta which he has picked up somewheres,
imd you take them for proofs, and are helped to fool yourselves
by these foolish friends here, who ought to know better. Mary
Jane Wilke, you know me for your friend, and for your unsel & sh
friend, too. Now listen to me ; turn this pitiful rascal out — I
beg you to do it. Will you ? "
Mary Jane straightened herself up, and my, but she was
handsome ! She says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
•2r,G THE ABVEXrURES OF HUCKLEBERRr I'IKS.
" Here is my answer. " She hove up the bag of money and
put it in the king's hands, and says, " Take this six thousand
dollars, and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to
and don't give us no receipt for it. "
Then she put her arm around the king on one side, and
iSusan and the harelip done the same on the other. Everybody
clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect
storm, whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud,
The doctor says :
" All right, I wash iny hands of the matter. But I warn
you all that a time's coming when you're going to feel sick
whenever you think of this day " — and away he went.
" All right, doctor, " says (he king, kinder mocking him,
" we'll try and get'era to send for you " — which made them all
laugh, aud they said it was a prime good hit.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
XXVI
len they was aJL gone,
he king he asks Mary
ane how they was off
or spare rooms, and she
aid she had one spare
oom, which would do
or Uncle William, and ■
he'd give her own room
i > Uncle Harvey, which
.as a little bigger, and
he would turn into the
oom with her sisters
nd sleep on a cot ; and
ip garret was a little
ubby, with a pallet in
t. The king said the
ubby would do for his
alley — meaning me,
80 Mary Jane took us
:, which was plain but
id a lot of other traps
le Harvey'sway, hut he
said they wam't. The frocks was hung along the wall, and
before them was a curtain made out of calico tliat hung down to
s
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
258 THE ADVEyruSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXS.
tlie floor. There was an old Imir trunk in oae comer, and i
guitar box in another, and all sorts of little knick-knacks an*
jimcracka around, like girls brisken up a room with. The kia)
said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for tbesi
iisings, and bo don't disturb them. The duke's room was pretlj
small, but plenty good enough, and so was my cubby,
That night they had a. big supper, and all them men am
women was there, and I stood behind the king and the duke'i
chairs and waited on them, and the niggers waited on the rest
Mary Jane she set at the head of the table, with Susan alonj;
side of her, and said how bad the biscuits was, and how iikh
the preserves was, and how ornery and tough the fried chick I'tu
was — and all that kind of rot, the way women always do for M
force out compliments ; and the people all knowed everythiii)
was tip-top, and said so — said " How do you get biscuits t'
brown so nice ? " and " Where, for the land's sake, did you j^e
these amaz'n pickles ? " and all that kind of humbug talky-talfc
just the way people always does at a supper, you know.
And when it was all done, me and the hare-lip had siip|H'i
in the kitchen off of the leavings, whilst the others was Lel])iDj;
the niggers clean up the things. The hare-lip she got t«
pumping me about England, and blest if I didn't think the i«
was getting mighty thin, sometimes. She says :
" Did you ever see the king ? "
" Who ? William Fourth ? Well, I bet I have— he goes to
our church. " I knowed he was dead years ago, but I never let
on. So when I says he goes to our church, she says :
" What; — regular ? "
" Yes — regular. His ppw's right over oppoEite oum— oo
t'other side the pulpit. "
" I thought he lived in London ? "
" Well, he does. Where would he live ? " j
" But I thought yoti lived in Sheffield ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A PIOUS A'/.vr;. aw
I sue I was up a stump. I had to let on to get choked with
ii chicken bone, so as to get time to tliink how to get down
again. Then I says :
" I mean he goes to our church regular when he's in
Sheffield. Tliat'a only in the summer-time, when he comes
there to take the sea baths. "
ff^if^'m
BUPPBE WITH THE H
" Why, how you talk — Sheffield a
" Well, who said it was ? "
" Why, you did. "
" I didn't, nuther. "
" You did ! "
D,Q,t,7=^- In Google
200 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERJiY FT XX
" I dida't. "
r^ " You did. "
" 1 never said nothing of the kind. "
\ " Well, what did you say, then ? "
ASaid he come to take the sea irtfAa^that's what I said. "
" Well, then ! how'a he going to take the sea baths if it
ain't on the sea ? "
" Looky here, " I says ; " did you ever see any Congress
water ? "
" Yes. "
" Well, did you have to go to Congress to get it ? "
" Why, no. "'
" Well, Q«!ither does William Fourth have to go to the sea
to get a sea bath. "
" How does he get it, then ? "
" Gets it the way people down here gets Congress water —
in barrels. There in the palace at Sheffield they've got furnaces,
and he wants his water hot. They can't bile that amount of
water away off there at the sea. Tliey haven't got no conveni-
ences for it. "
" Oh, I see, now. You might a said that in tlie fir^t place
and saved time. "
When she said that, I see I was out of the woods again,
and so I was comfoilable and glad. Ne.\t, she says ;
" Do you go to church, too ? "
" Yes — regular. "
" Where do you set ? "
*'Why, in our pew. "
" Whose pew ? "
" Why, < mm — your Uncle Harney's. "
" Hia'n ? What does Ac want with a i > ew ? "
*'Wants it to set in. What did you ■i'eckon he wanted with
it? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE KISGS CLEBOr. -201
*'" Why, I thought he'd be in the pujpit. "
Rot him, I forgot he was a preacher. I Bee I was tip a
8tump again, so I played another chicken bone and got another
think. Then I says :
" Blame it, do you supiwse there ain't but one preacher to a
church ? "
" ^Vhy, what do they nant with more ? "
" What ! — to preach before a king ! I never see such a girl
as you. They don't have no less than seventeen. "
" Seventeen ! My land ! Why, I wouldn't set out such a
string as that, not if I never got to glory. It must take'em a
week. "
" Shucks, they don't all of'era preach the game day — only
one of'em. "
" Well, then, what does the rest of'em do ? "
" Oh, nothing much. Loll around, pass the plate— and one
thing or another. But mainly they don't do nothing. "
" Well, then, what are they for? "
" Why, they're for style. Don't you know nothing ? "
" Well, I don't want to know no such foolishness as that.
How is servants treated in England ? Do they treat'em better
'n we treat our niggers ? "
" No ! A servant ain't nobody there. They tre-.tt them
worse than dogs. "
" Don't they give'ein holidays, the way we do, Christmas
and New Year's week, and Fourth of July ? "
" Oh, just listen ! A body could tell you hain't ever been
to England by that. Why, Hare-1 — why, Joanna, they never
see a holiday from year's end to year's end ; never go to the
circus, nor theatre, nor nigger shows, nor nowheres. "
" Nor church ? "
" Xor church. "
" But yoti always went to church ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
362 THE ADIENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
Well, I was gone up again. I forgot I was the old man's
servant. But next minute I whirled in on a kind of jin explana-
tion how a valley was different from a common servant, and had
to go to church whether he wanted to or not, and set with the
family, on account of its being the law. But I didn't do it
" HONEST INJUN, "
pretty good, and when I got done I see she warn't satisfied.
She says :
*'Honest Injun, now, hain't you been telling me a lot of
lies ? "
" Honest Tnjun, " says I.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SUE ASKED JUS PARDON. L'03
" None of it at ail ? "
'■ None of it at all. Not a lie in it, " eays I.
" Lay jonr hand on this book and say it. "
I see it vam't nothing but a dictionary, so I laid my hand
on it and said it. So then she looked a little better satisfied,
and says :
" Well, then, I'll believe some of it ; but I hope to gra-
cious if I'll believe the rest. "
" What is it you won't believe, Joe ? " says Mary Jane,
stepping in with Susan behind her. " It ain't right nor kind
for you to talk eo to him, and him a stranger and so far from
liis people. How would you like to be treated so ?''
" That's always your way, Maim^always sailing in to help
somebody before they're hurt. I hain't done nothing to him.
He's told some stretchers, I reckon ; and I said I wouldn't
swallow it all ; and that's every bit and grain I did say. I
reckon be can stand a little thing like that, can't iie? "
" I don't care whether it'twas little or whether'twas big,
he's here in our house and a stranger, and it wasn't good of
you to say it. If you was in his place, it would inake you feel
ttshamed ; and so you oughtn't to say a thing to another person
that will make them, feel ashamed. "
" Why, Maim, he said "
" It don't make no difference what be said — that ain't
the thing. The thing is for you lo treat him kind, and not be
saying things to make him remember he ain't in his own
country and amongst his own folks. "
I says to myself, this is a girl that I'm letting that olo
reptle rob her of her money !
Then Susan she waltzed in ; and if you'll believe me, she
did give Hare-lip hark from the tomb !
Says I to myself, And this is another one that I'm letting
him rob her of her .money!
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
i:«4 THE ADriaXTUJiES OF HUCELEBERkT FINN.
Then Mary Jane she took another inning, and went in sweet
and lovely again — which was her way — but when she got done
there wam't hardly anything left o'jKior Hare-lip. So she
hollered.
" All right, then, " says the other girls, " you just ask his
pardon. "
She done it, too. - And she done it beautiful. She done it
so beautiful it was good to hear ; and I wished I could tell her
a thousand lies, so she could do it again.
I says to myself, this is another one that I'm letting him rob
lier of her money. And when she got through, they all jest
laid themselves out to make me feel at home and know I wiis
amongst friends. I felt so ornery and low down and mean, that
I says to myself, My mind's rnade up ; I'll hive that money for
them or bust.
So then I lit out — for bed, I said, meaning some time or
another. When I got by myself, I went to thinking the thing
over. I says to myself. Shall I go to that doctor, private, and
blow on these frauds? No — that won't do. He might tell
who told him ; then the king and the duke would make it warm
for me. Shall I go, private, and tell Mary Jane? No — I
dasn't do it. Her face would give them a hint, sure ; they've
got the money, and they'd slide right out and get away with it.
If she was to fetch in help, I'd get mixed up in the business,
before it was done with, I judge. No, there ain't no good way
but one. I got to steal that money, somehow; and I got to
steal it w.me way that they won't suspicion that I done it.
They've got a good thing, here ; and they ain't agoing to leave
tilt they've played this family and tbia town for all they're
worth, so I'll find a chance time enough. I'll steal it, and hide
it ; and by-and-by, when I'm away down the river, I'll write a
letter and tell Mary Jane where it's hid. But I'd better hive
it to-night, if I can, because the doctor maybe hasn't let np as
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
HIBISG IX THE ROOM. 205
mnch as he lets on he lias ; he might scare them out of here,
yet.
So, thinks I, I'll go and search them rooms. Upstairs the
hall was dark, but I found the duke's room, and started to [law
around it with my hands ; but I recollected it wouldn't be much
like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but
THE DUKE LOOKS DXD1
his own self; so then I went to his room and begun to [law
around there. But I see I couldn't do nothing without a
candle, and I dasn't light one, of course. So I judged I'd got
to do the other thing — lay for them, and eavesdrop. About
that time, I hears their footsteps coming, and was going to skip
under the bed ; I reached for it, but it wasn't where I thought
it would be ; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane's
n,3t,7=^- In Google
eOO THE ADVEyTURES OF UUCKLEBERttY FIXN.
frocks, so I jumijed in behind that and snuggled in amongst
the gowns, and stood there [«rfectly still.
They come in and 8hut the door ; and the first thing the
duke done was to get down and look nnder the bedi Then I
WIS glad r hadn't found the bed when I wanted it. And yet,
you know, it's kind of natural to hide under the bed when yon
are up to anything private. They sets down, then, and the
king says :
" Well, what is it ? and cut it niiddlin'short, because, it's
better for ub to be down there a whoopin'-up the inournin',
than up here givin''em a chance to talk us over. "
" Well, this is it, Capet. I ain't easy ; I ain't comfortable.
That doctor lays on my mind. I wanted to know your plans.
I've got a notion, and I think it's a sound one. "
" What ia it, duke ? "
" That we better glide out of this, before three in the
morning, and clip it down the river with what we've got.
{specially, seeing we got it so easy — given back to us, flung at
our heads, as you may say, when of coittse we allowed to have
to steal it back. I'm for knocking ofi " and lighting out. "
That made me feel pretty bad. About an hour or two ag " .
it would a been a little different, but now it made me feel bad
and disappointed. The king rips out and says :
" What ! And not sell out the rest o'the property ? Slureli
off like a pasael o'fools and leave eight or nine thous'n'dollais'
worth o'property layin'around jest sufferin'to be scooijcd in ?
— and all good saleable stuff, too. "
The duke he grumbled ; said the bag of gold was enough,
and he didn't want to go no deeper — didn't want to rob a lot of
orphans of everything they had.
" ^ " liy, how you talk'. " says the king. " We slian't rob'em
of nothing at all but jest this money. The people that buyr
the property is the suff'rers ; because as soon's it's found out
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
IIUCK TAKi:.S THE MOSEi'. 267
'at we didn't own it — which won't be long after we've slid — the
Kile won't be valid, and it'll all go back to the estate. These-
yer orphans'II git their Louse back agin, and that'a enough for
them ; they're young and ( < pry, and k'n easy earn a livin " .
They ain't agoing to suffer. Why, jest think — there's thous'n'H
and thous'n's that ain't nigh so well off, Bleaa you, they ain't
got noth'n to coini»Iain of. "
" Well, the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in,
and said all right, but said he believed it was blame foolishness
to stay, and that doctor hanging over them. But the king
says:
" Cuss the doctor ! What do we k'yer for him ? Hain't we
got all the fools in town on our side? and ain't that a big
enough majority in any town? "
Ho they got ready to go downstaus again. The duke
says:
" I don't think we put that money in a good place. "
That cheered me up. I'd begun to think I wiu-n't going to
get a hint of no kind to helj) me. The king says :
" Why ? "
" Because Slary Jane'11 be in mourning from this out ; and
first you know the nigger that d(tes up the rooms will get an
order to box these duds up and put'em awayj and do you
reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of
it ? "
" Your head's level agin, duke, " says the king ; and he
come a fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where
I was. I stuck tight to the wall, and kept mighty still, though
quivery ; and I wondered what them fellows would say to roe if
they catched me ; and I tried to think what I'd better do if
they did catch me. But the king he got the bag before I
could think more than about a half a thought, and he never
suspicioned I was around. They took and shoved the bag
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
1»08 THE AliVESTVRES OF IWCKLEBEURY FISS.
through a.rip in the straw tick that was under the feather bed,
and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it
was all right, now, because a nigger only makes up the feather
bed, and don't turn over the straw tick only about twice a year,
and so it wam't in no danger of getting stole, now,
lint I knowed better. 1 had it out of there before they was
lialf-way downstairs. I groped along up to my cubby, and hid
it there till I could get a chance to do better. I judged I
better hide it outside of the house somewheres, because if they
missed it they would give the house a good ransacking. I
knowed that very well. Then I turned in, with my clothes all
on ; but I couldn't a gone to sleep, if I'd a wanted to, I was in
n,3t,7=^- In Google
HUCK TAKES THE MOSEY. 200
8ucb a sweat to get through with the business. By-and-by I
beard the king and the duke come up ; so I rolled off of my
pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder and waited
to see if anything was going to happen. But nothing did.
So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early
ones hadn't begun, yet ; and then I slipi^ed down the ladder.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CREPT to their dooi-s
and listened; they was
snoring, bo I tip- toed
along, and got down-
stairs all right. There
wam't a sound any-
wheres. I peeped
through a crack of the
dining-room door, and
see the men that was
watching the corpse all
sound asleep on their
chairs. The door was
open into the parlour,
-^ where the corpse was
Ij^ t - — laying, and there was a
■ " candle in both rooms,
A CGACK iH THE DiNiNQ-BooM DOOR. j passcd aloug, and the
parlour door was open j but I see there wam't nobody in there
but the remainders of Peter ; so I shoved on by ; but the front
door was locked, and the key wasn't there. Just then I heard
somebody coming down the stairs, back behind me. I run
in the parlour, and took a swift look around, and the only place
I see to hide the bag was in the coffin. The lid was shoved along
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE rryERAL. 271
about a foot, showing the dead man's face down in there, with
a wet cloth over it, and his shroud on. I tucked the money-
bag ia .under the lid, just down beyond where his hands was
crossed, which made me creep, they was so cold, and then I
run back across tlie room and in behind the door.
The person coming was Mary Jane. She went to the
coRiD, very soft, and kneeled down and looked in ; then she put-
up her handkerchief and I see alie begun to cry, though I
couldn't hear her, and her back was to me. I slid out, and as
I passed the dining-room I thought I'd make sure them watchers
hadn't seen me ; so I looked through the crack and everything
was all right. They hadn't stirred.
I slipped up to bed, feeling ruther blue, on accounts of the
thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble
and run so mnch resk about it. Sa-s I, if it could stay where
it is, all right ; because when we get down the river a hundred
mile or two, J could write back to Mary Jane, and she could dig
him lip again and get it ; but that ain't the thing that's going
to happen ; the thing that's going to happen is, the money'11
be found when they come io screw on the lid. Then the king
'H get it again, and it'11 be a long day before he gives anybody
another chance to smouch it from him. t)f coune I wanted to
slide down and get it out of there, but I dasn't try it. Every
minute it was getting earlier, now, and pretty soon some of them
watchers would begin to stir, and I might getcatched — catched
with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody hadn't hired
me to take care of. I don't wish to be mixed up in no such
business as that, I says to myself.
When I got downstairs in the morning the parlour was shut
ap, and the watchers was gone. Tliere wam't nobody around
but the femily and the widow Bartley and our tribe. I watched
their facesto see if anything had been hapiwning, but I couldn't
tell.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
2Ti THE AlirEXTURES OF HUfKLEBERnV FIXX.
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come, with
his man, and they eet the coffin in the middle of the room on a
couple of chairs, and then set all onr chairs in rows, and bor-
rowed more from the neighbours till the hall and the parlour
and the dining-room was full. I see the coffin lid was the way
it was before, but. I dasn't go to look in under it, with folks
around.
Then the people begun to flock in, and the beats and the
girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin, and
for a half an hour the people filed around slow, in single rank,
and looked down at the dead man's face a minute, and some
dropped in a tear, and it was all very still and solemn, only the
girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and
keeping their heads bent, and sobbing a little. There wam't
no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor, and
blowing noses — because people always blows them more at a
4 funeral than they do at other places except church.
When the place was packed full, the undertaker he slid
around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways, put-
ting on the last touches, and getting people and things all
shipshape and comfortable, and making no'more sound than a
cat. He never spoke ; he moved ) > eopIe around, he squeezed
in late ones, he opened up jias sage -ways, and done it all with
nods and signs with his hands. Then he took his place over
against the wall. He was the softest, glidingeat, stealthiest
man I ever see ; and there wam't no more smile to him than
there is to a ham.
They had borrowed a melodeum — a sick one ; and when
everything was ready, a young woman set down and worked it,
and it was pretty skreeky and colicky, and everybody joined in
and sung, and Peter was the only one that hadja good thing,
according to my notion. Then the Reverend Hobson opened
up, slow and solemn, and begun to talk ; and straight off (he
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE UNDERTAKER.
most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever
heard; it waa only one dog, but he made a most powerful
racket, and he kept it up, right along ; the parson he had to
stand there, over the coffin, and wait — you couldn't hear your-
self think. It was right down awkward, and nobody didn't
seem to know what to do. But pretty soon they see that long-
legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to
say, " Dont you worry — just depend on me. " Then he stooped
down and begun to glide along the wall, just his shoulders
nhowing over the people's heads. So he glided along, and the
pow-wow and racket getting more and more outrt^eoas all the
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
374 THE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINX.
time; snd at last, when he tad gone aiouDd two sides of'the
room,'he disappears down cellar. Then, in about two eecond*
we heard a whack, and the dog he finished up with a most
amazing howl or two, and then everything was dead still,
and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off. In a
minute or two here comes this undertaker's back and shoulders
gliding along the wall again ; aud so he glided, and glided,
around three sides of the room, and then rose np, and shaded
his mouth with his hands, and stretched his neck out towards
the preacher, over the people's heads, and says, in a kind of
a coarse whisper, " He had a rat! " Then he drooped down
and glided along the wall again to his place. You could see it
was a great satisfaction to the people, because naturally they
wanted to know. A little thing like that don't cost nothing/
and it's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up
to and liked. There warn't no more popular man in town than
what that undertaker was.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SATISFl'lNO CURlOSITi: 275
'Well, the funeral sermon was very good, but pisoD long and
tiresome ; und then the king he shoved in and got off some of
his usual rubbage, and at last the job was through, and the
undertaker begun to sneak up on the coffin with his screw-
driver. I was in a sweat then, and watched him pretty keen.'
But he never meddled at all ; juat slid the lid along, as soft as-
miiah, and screwed it down tight and fast. So there I was ! I
didn't know whether the money was in there, or not. So, says
I, a'pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly ? — now how-
do /know whether to write to Mary Jane or not? S'pose she
dug him up and didn't find nothing — what would she think of
me ?'Blame it, I says, I might get hunted up and jailed ; I'd
better lay low and keep dark, and not write at all ; the thing's
awful mixed, now ; trying io better it, I've worsened it a hun-
dred times, and I wish to goodness I'd just let it alone, dad
fetch the whole business !
They buried him, and we come back home, and I went to
watching faces again — I couldn't help it, and I couldn't rest
«asy. But nothing come of it; the faces didn't tell me
nothing.
The king he visited around, in the evening, and sweetened
everybody up, and made himself ever so friendly ; and he give
out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in
a sweat about him, so he must hurry and settle up the estate
right away, and leave for home. He was very sorry he was so
pushed, and so was everybody ; they wished he could stay
longer, but they said they could see it couldn't be done. And he
said of course him and William woidd take the girls home with
them ; and that pleased everybody too, because then the girls
would be well fixed, and amongst their own relations ; and it
pleased the girls, too — tickled them so they clean forgot they
ever had a trouble in the world ; and told him to sell out as
quick as he wanted to, they would be ready. Them poor things
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
370 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCELEBE & RY IINX
was that glad and happy it made my lieart ache to see them
getting fooled and lied to so, but I didn't see no safe way for
me to chip in and change the general ttme.
Well, blamed if the king didn't bill, the house and the
niggers and all the property for auction straight off — sale two
■ days after the funeral ; but anybody could buy private before-
hand if they wanted to.
So the. next day after the funeral, along about noontime,
the girls'joy got the first jolt ; a couple of nigger traders come
lUong, and the king sold them the niggers reasonable, for three-
day drafts as they called it, and away they went, the two sons
up the river to Meinphis, and their mother down the river to
Orleans. I thought them poor girls and them niggers would
break their hearts for grief; they, cried around each other, and
took on so it most made me down sick to see it. The girls said
they hadn't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold
away from " the town. I can't ever get it out of my memory,
the sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging
around each other's necks and crying ; and I reckon I couldn'
a stood it all but would a had to bust out and tell on our
gang if I hadn't knowed the sale wam't no account and the
niggers would be back home in a week or two.
The thing made a big stir in the town, too, and a good
many come ont flat-fooled and said it was scandalous tq separate
the mother and the children that way. It injured the frauds
some ; but the old fool he bulled right along, spite of all the
duke could say or do, and 1 tell you the duke was powerful
uneasy.
Next day was auction day. About broad-day in the morn-
ing, the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke
me up, and I see by their look that there was trouble. The
king says :
*'Was you in my room night before last ? "
D,£,,t,7P.-hyGoogle
nusncious OF nucK. 2?7
" Xo, your majesty " — which was the way I always called
1 when nbbody but our gang wam't around.
" Was you in there yisterday er last night? "
'* No, your majesty, "
*'Honour bright, now — no lies, "
** Honour bright J your majesty, I'm telling you the truth. I
liain't been anear your room since Miss Jlarj- Jane took you
and the duke and showed it to you. "
The duke says ;
" Have you seen anybody else go in there ? " ■
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
SrS THE ADrESTVUES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
" No, your grace, not as I remember, I believe. "
" Stop and think. "
I studied a while, and see my chance, then I says :
" Well, I see the niggers go in there several times. "
Both of them give a little jump ; and looked like they
hadn't ever expected it, and then like they had. Then the duke
says;
" What, aM of f hem? "
" No — leastways not all at once. That is, I don't think 1
ever see them all come out at once but just one time. "
" Hello— when was that? "
" It was the day we had the funeral. In the morning. It
wam't early, because I overslept. I was just starting down the
ladder, and I see them. "
" Well, go on, go on — what did they do ? How'd they
act? "
" They didn't do nothing. And they didnt act anyway,
much, as fur as I see. They tip-toed away ; so I seen, easy
enough, that they'd shoved in there to do up your majesty's
room, or something, s'posing you was up ; and found you wam't
lip, and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble
without waking you up, if they hadn't already waked you up. "
" Great guns, this is a go! " says the king; and both of
them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly. They stood there
a thinking and scratching their heads a minute, and then the
duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle, and says;
" It does beat all, how neat the niggers played their band.
They let on to be eom/ they was going out of this region ! and
I believed they «'«« sorry. And so did you, and so did every-
body. Don't ever tell me any more that a nigger ain't got any
histrionic talent. Why, the way they played that thing, it
would fool anybody. In my opinion there's a fortune in'em.
If I had capital and a theatre, I wouldn't want a better lay out'
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
QUICK SALES AND SMALL PROFITS. 270
than that — and here we've gone and sold'em for a song. Yes,
and ain't privileged to sing the song, yet. Say, where is that
song ?— that draft ? "
" In the bank for to be collected. Where would it be? "
" Well, that's all right then, thank goodness. "
Says I, kind of timid-like:
" Ib something gone wrong ? "
The king whirls on me and rips out :
" None o'your business ! You keep your head shet, and
mind y'r own affairs — if you got any. Long as you're in this
town, don't you forgit that, you hear ? " Then he says to the
duke : " We got to jest swaller it, and say noth'n : mum's the
word for ws. "
As they was starting down the ladder, the duke he chuckles
again, and says:
" Quick sales and small profits! It's a good business —
yes. "
The king snarls around on him and says :
" I was trying to do for the best, in selHu''m out so quick.
280 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
If the profits has turned out to-be none, lackin'eonsidable,
and none to carry, is it my fiiult any more'n its youm? "
" Well, they'd be in Ibis house yet, and we tvoukhCtii I
could a got my advice listened to. "
The king gassed back, as mucli as was safe for him, and
then swapped around and lit into me again. He give me down
the banks for not coming and telling him I see the niggera
come out of his room acting that way — said any fool would
a knowed something was up. And then waltzed in and cussed
himself a while ; and said it all come of him not laying late
and taking liis natural rest that morning, and he'd be blamed
if he'd ever do it again. So they went off a jawing ; and I felt
dreadful glad I'd worked it all off on to the niggers, and yet
hadn't done the niggers no hnrm by it.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
mm
-and-by it was getting-up
time ; so I come down
the ladder and started
for downstairs, but as I
come to the girls'room,
the door was open, and
I see Wary Jane set-
ting by her old hair
trunk, which was open
and she'd been packing
things in it — -getting
ready to go to England,
But she had stopped
now, with a folded gown
in her lap, and had her
face in her hands, cry-
ing. I felt awful bad
to see it ; of course
• anybody would. I
went in there, and says :
: to see people in trouble
bout it. "
Diggers — I just expected
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
y82 THE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN'.
it. She said the beautiful trip to England was most about
spoiled for her ; she didn't know how she was ever going to be
happy there, knowing the mother and the children wam't ever
going to see each other no more — and then basted out bitterer
than ever, and flung up her hands, and says :
" Oh, dear, dear, to think they ain't ever going to see each
other any more ! "
" But they will — and inside of two weeks — and I know it !
says I,
Laws it was out before I could think !—- and before I could
budge, she throws her arms around my neck, and told me to
say it again, say it again, say it again !
I see I had spoke too sudden, and said too much, and was
in a close place. I asked her to let me think a minute ; a
she set there, very impatient and excited, and handsome, but
looking kind of happy and eased-up, like a person that's had a
tooth pulled out. So I went to studying it out. I says to my-
self, I reckon a body that ups and tells the truth when he is in
a tight place, is taking considerable many reeks, though I ain't
had no experience, and can't say for certain ; but it looks so to
■me, anyway ; and yet here's a case where I'm blest if it don't
look to me like the truth is better, and actually safer, than a lie.
I must lay it by in my mind, and think it over some time or
other, it's so kind of strange and unregular. I never see nothinjr
like it. Well, I says to myself at lust, I'm agoing to chance
it ; I'll up and tell the truth this time, though it does seem
most like setting down on a kag of powder and touching it off
just to see where you'll go to. Then I says :
" Miss Mary Jane,- is there any place out of town a litfie
ways, where you could go and stay three or four days ? "
" Yes— Mr. Lothrop's. Why ? "
" Never mind why, yet. If 111 tell you how I know tbe
niggers will see each other again — iu^de of two weeks-^— here io
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google
" THE BRL'TE! " SSa
thia house— and prove how I know it — will you go to Mr.
Lothrop's and stiiy four days ? "
*'Four days ! " she says ; " I'll stay a year ! " ■
" All right, " I saya, " I don't want nothing more out of you
than just your word — I druther have it than another man's kiss-
^^
INDIGSATION'.
the-Bible. " She smiled, and reddened up very sweet, and I
says, " If you don't mind it, lit shut the door — and bolt it. "
Then I come back and set down again, and says :
" Don't you holler. Just set still, and take it like a man.
I got to tell the truth, and you want to brace up, Miss Mary,
because it's a bad kind, and going to be hard to take, but
there, ain't no help for it. These uncles of yoam ain't no
384 TJIE ADFEXTURES OF BUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
uncles at all — they're a couple of frauds — regular dead-beats.
There, now we're over the worst of it — ^you can ^tand the rest
middling eaay. "
It jolted her up like everything, of course ; but I was over
^he shoal water now, so I went right along, her eyes a blazing
higher and higher all the time, and told her every blame thing,
from where we first struck that young fool going up to the
steamboat, clear through to where she flung herself on to the
king's breast at the front door, and he kissed her sixteen or
seventeen times — and tlion up she jumps, with her face afire
like sunset, and says :
" The brute ! Come — don't waste a minute — not a secoTui
— we'll have them tarred and feathered, and flung in the river ! "
Says I:
" Cert'nly. But do you mean, be/ore you go to Mr.
Lothrop's, or "
" Oh, " she says, " what am I tkhiling about ! " she says,
and set right down again. " Don't mind what I said — please
don't — you u'on't, now, tvill you ? " Laying her silky hand on
mine in that kind of a way that I said 1 would die first. " I
never thought, I was so stirred up, " she says ; " now go on,
and I won't do so any more. You tell me what to do, and
whatever you say, I'll do it. "
" Well, " I says, " it's a rough gang, them two frauds, and
I'm fixed so I got to travel with them a while longer, whether I
want to or not — I drutlier not tell you why^and if you was ta
blow on them this town would get me out of their claws, and fd
be all right, but there'd be another person that you don't know
about who'd be in big trouble. Well, wegot to save him, hain't
we ? Of course. Well, then, we won't blow on them. "
Saying them words put a good idea in my head. I see how
maybe I could get me and Jim rid of the frauds ; get them
jailed here, and then leave. But I didn't irant to run the raRi
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
IIOI'AL KONESUCH. 28i
in daj-time, vithout ai] >'body aboard to aoBwer questions but
me ; so I didn't want the plan to begin working till pretty late
to-night. I says :
" Miss Mary Jane, I'll tell you what we'll do — and you won't
have to stay at Mr. Lothrop's so long, nuther. How fur is it ? "
" A little short of four miles— right out in the country, back
here. "
" Well, that'll ajiswer. Now you go along out there, and
lay low till nine or half-past, to-night, and then get them to
fetch you home again — tell them you've thought of something.
If you get here before eleven, put a candle in this window, and
if I don't turn up, wait till eleven, and then if I don't txvra up
it means I'm gone, and out of tlie way, and safe. Then you
come out and spread tlie news around, and get these beats
jailed. "
" Good, " she says, " I'll do it. "
" And if it just happens bo that I don't get away, but get
took up along with them, you must up and say I told you the
whole thing beforehand, and you must stand by me all you can. "
" Stand by you, indeed I will. They shan't touch a hair of
your head ! " she says, and I see her nostrils spread and her eyes
snap when she said it, too.
" If I get away, I shan't be here, " I says, " to prove these
rapscallions ain't your uncles, and I couldn't do it if I was here.
I could swear they was beats and bummers, that's all ; though
that's worth something. Well, there's others can do that better
thw) what I can — and they're people that ain't going to be
doubted as quick as I'd be. I'll tell you how to find them.
Gimme a pencil and a piece of paper. There—* Royal Sonesuchy
Brickeville.'Put it away, and don't lose it. When the court
wants to find out something about these two, let them send up
to Bricksville and say they've got the men that played the
Royal Nonesuch, and ask for some witnesses — why, youll have
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
ass THE ADVEKTUItES OF UUCKLEBERltY FIXX
that entire town down Iiere before you can hardly wink, Miss
Mary. And they'll come a-hiling, too. "
I judged we had got everything fixed about tight, now. So
I saye :
" Just let the auction go right along, anil don't worry. Ko-
body don't have to pay for the things they buy till a whole day
after the auction, on accounts of the short notice, and they ain't
going out of this fill they get that money— and the way we'v
fixed it the sale ain't going to count, and they ain't going to
get no money. It's just like the way it was with the niggers-
it warn't no sale, and the niggers will be back before long.
Why, they can't collect the money for the niggers, yet — they're
in the worst kind of a lis, Mi-^s JMary, "
" Well, " sho says, " I'll run down to breakfast now, and then
III start straight for Mr. Lothrop's. "'
**'Deed, that ain't the ticket. Miss Mary June, " I says, " by
no manner of means ; go before breakfast. "
" Why? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
MARY JANE DECIDES TO LEAVE. 387
" What did you reckon I wanted you to go at all for, Miss
Mary ? "
" Well, I never thought— and come to think, I don't know.
What was it ? "
" Why, it's because you ain't one of these leather-face people.
I don't want no better book than what your face is. A body can
set down and read it off like coarse print. Do you reckon you
can go and face your uncles, when they come to kiss you
good-morning, and never "
" There, there, don't ! Yes, I'll go before breakfast— I'll be
glad to. And leave my sisters with them ? "
" Yes-r^never mind about them. They've got to stand it
yet a while. They might suspicion something if all of you was
to go. I don't wan't you to see them, nor your sisters, nor no-
body in this town^if a neighbour was to ask how is your uncles
this morning, your face would tell something. No, you go right
along, Miss Mary Jane, and 111 fix it with all of them. Ill tell
Miss Susan to give your love to your uncles and say you've
went away for a few hours for to get a little rest and change, or
to see a friend, and you'll be back to-night or early in the
morning. "
" Gone to see a friend is all right, but I won't have my love
given to them. "
" Well, then, it shan't be. " It was well enough to tell her
so — no harm in it. It was only a little thing to do, and no
trouble ; and it's the little things that smoothes people's roads
the most, down here below ; it would make Mary Jane comfort-
able, and it wouldn't cost nothing. Then I says: " There's one
more thing — that bag of money. "
" Well, they've got that ; and it makes me feel pretty silly
to think how they got it. "
" No, you're out, there. Tbey hain't got it. "
" Why, who's got it ? " ■
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
283 rilE ADVESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISX.
" I wish I knowed, but I don't. I had it, because I stole it
from them : and I stole it to give to jou ; and I know where I
hid it, but I'm afraid it ain't there no more. I'm awful sorry,
Jliss Mary Jane, I'm just as sorry as I can be ; but I done the
beat I could ; I did, honest. I come nigh getting caught, and
I had to shove it into the first place I eome to, and run — and it
wam't a good place. "
" Ob, stop blaming yourself — it's too bad to do it, and I won't
allow it — you couldn't help it ; it wasn't you fault. Where did
you hide it ? "
I didn't ivant to set her to thinking about her troubles
again ; and I couldn't seem to get my mouth to tell her what
would make her see that corpse laying in the coffin with that
bag of money on his stomach. So for a minute I didn't say
nothing — then I says :
" I'd nither not tell you where I put it, Miss Mary Jane, if
you don't mind letting me ofif ; but I'll write it for you on a
piece of paper, and you can read it along the road to Mr.
Lothrop's, if you want to. Do you reckon that'll do ? "
" Oh, yes. "
So I wrote : " I put it in the co£Sd. It was in there when
you was crying there, away in the night. I was behind the
door, and I was mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane. "
It made my eyes water a little, to remember her crying
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
UVCK FAKTINO WITS MARY JANE. 260
there all by heraelf in the night, and them devils laying there
right under her own roof, shaming her and robbing her ; and
-when I folded it op and give it to her, I see the water come
into her eyes, too ; and she shook me by the hand, hard, and says ;
" Oood-hye — I'm going to do everything jnat as you've told
me ; and if I don't ever see you again I sha'n't ever forget you,
and 111 think of you a many and a many a time, and I'll pray
for you, too ! " — and she was gone.
Pray for me ! I reckoned if she knowed me she'd take a
job that was more nearer her size. But I bet she done it, just
the same — she was just that kind. She had the grit to pray
for Judus if she took the notion — there wam't no backdown to
her, I judge. You may say what you want to, but in my
opinion ahe had more sand in her than any girl I ever see ; in
my opinion she was just full of sand. It sounds like flattety,
but it ain't no flattery. And when it comes to beauty — and
goodness too^sbe lays over them all. I hain't ever seen her
since that time that I see her go out of that door ; no, I hain't
ever seen her since, but I reckon I've thought of her a many and
a many a million times, and of her saying she would pray for
me ; and if ever I'd a thought it would do any good for me to
pray for her, blamed if I wouldn't a done it or bust.
Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon ; because
nobody see her go. When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I
saya:
" What's the name of them people over on t'other side of
the river that you all goes to see sometimes? "
They says :
" There's, several ; but it's the Proctors, mainly. "
" That's the name, " I says ; " I most forgot it. Well, Miss
Mary Jane she told me to tell you she's gone over there in a
dreadful huny — one of them's sick. "
" Which one ? "
V
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
230 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLESERBT FINN.
" I don't know ; leastways I kinder forget ; Imt I thinl
it's—— "
" Sakes alive, I hope it ain't Hanner ? "
" Tin Borty to say it, " I says, " but Hanner's the very one. "
" My goodness — and she so well only last week ! Is she
took bad ? " j
" It ain't no name for it. They set up with her all nigbt,'
WITH THE IfUMFS.
Miss Mary Jane said, and they don't think shell last many
hours. "
" Only think of that, now ! What's the matter with her? "
I couldn't think of anything reasonable, right off that wayi
90 I says :
** Momps. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
MUMPS. 201
" Mumps your granny ! They don't set up with people
that's got the mumps. "
" They don't, don't they ? You better bet they do irith
these mumps. These mumps is different. It's a new kind, -Miss
Mary Jane said. "
" How's it a new kind ? "
" Because it's mixed up with other things. "
" What other things ? "
" Well, measles, and whooping-congh, and erysipelas, and
consumption, and yaller janders, and brain fever, and I don't
know what all. "
" My land! And they call it the mwrnpe? "
" That's what Miss Mary Jane said. "
" Well, what in the nation do they call it the mumpa for ? "
" Why, because it ia the mumps. That's what it starts with. "
" Well, ther'ain't no sense in it. A body might stump his
ioe, and take pison, and fall down thewell, and break his neck,
4tid bust hiB brains out, and somebody come along and ask
what killed him, and some numskull up and say,'Why, he
stumped his toe.'Would ther'be any sense in that? No.
And ther'ain't no sense in ikia, nuther. Is it ketching? "
" Is it ketching ? Why, how you talk. Is a harrow catch-
ing ? — in the dark ? If you don't hitch on to one tooth, you're
tound to on another, aint you ? And you can't get away with
that tooth without fetching the whole harrow along, can you ?
Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a harrow, as you may
say — and'it ain't no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you come to
get it hitched'on good. "
" Well, it's awful, 1 think, " says the hare-lip. " I'll go to
Uiicle Harvey and "
'" Ot, yes, " I aaya, " I icouM. Of course I would. Iwouldu't
lose no time. "
" Well, why wouldn't you ? "
293 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEREY FINN.
" Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see. Hain
your uncles obleeged to get along home to Kngland as fcist
they can ? And do you reckon they'd be mean enough to f
off and leave you to go all that journey by yoorselves ? Yc
know they'll wait for yon. So fur, so good. Your nne
Harvey'a a preacher, ain't he ? Very well, then ; is a freach
going to deceive a steamboat clerk ? is he going to deceit
a ehip-derkf — so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane
aboard ? Now you know he ain't. What vdll he do, then
Why, he'll say,'It's a great pity, but my church matte
has got to get along the best way they can ; for my niece
been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps,
so it's my bounden duty to set down here and wait the thr
months it takes to show on her if she's got it,'But never mii
if you think it's beat to tell your Uncle Harvey "
" Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all
having good times in England whilst we was waiting to &
out whether Mary Jane's got it or not ? Why, yon talk like
*'Well, anyway, maybe you better tell some of the neij
bonrs. "
" Listen at that, now. You do beat all, for natural atuja
nesB. Can't you see that they'd go and tell ? Ther'ain't
way but just to not tell anybody at all. "
" Well, maybe you're right — yes, I judge you are right, "
" But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she'e gM
out a while, anyway, bo he won't be unea^ about her ? "
" Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that S
says,'Tell them to give Uncle Harvey and William my love
a kiss, and say Fve run over the river to see Mr. — Mr. — what
the name of that rich family your uncle Peter used to thinlc'
much of? — I mean the one that "
" Why, yon must mean the Apthorps, ain't it? "
■ D,£,,t,7P-h»Google
THE OPPOSITION LIXE. 293
" Of course ; bother them kind of names, a body can't ever
seem to remember them, half the time, somehow. Yes, she
said, Bay she has run over for to ask the Apthorps to be sore
and come to the auction and buy this house, because she
THE AUCTION.
allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had it than anybody
else ; and she's going to stick to them till they say they'll come,
and then, if she ain't too tired, she's coming home ; and if she
is, shftll be home in the morning anyway. She said, don't say
nothing about the Proctors, hut only about the Apthorps —
294 TBE ADVENTUItES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
— whichll be perfectly true, because ehe is going there to speal
about their buying the house ; I know it, because she told i
so, herself. "
" All right, " they said, and cleared out to lay for thi
uncles, and give them the love and the kisses, and tell the:
the message.
Everything was all right now. The girls wouldn't sa
nothing because they wanted to go to England ; and the kin
and the duke would ruther Mary Jane was off working for U
auction than around in reach of Doctor Eobinson. I felt
good ; I judged I had done it pretty neat— I reckoned Toi
Sawyer couldn't a done it no neater himself. Of course h
would a throwed more style into it, but I can't do that ve:
handy, not being brung up to it.
Well, they held the auction in the public square, along 1
wards the end of the afternoon, and it strung along and sttoi
along, and the old man he was on hand and looking his lei
pisonest, up there longside of the auctioneer, and chipping ia
little Scripture, now and then, or a little goody-goody sayinj
of some kind, and the duke he was .ground goo-gooing for syn
pathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself generly.
But by-and-by the thing dragged through, and everythj
was sold. Everything but a little old trifling lot in the gra
yard. So they'd got to work that off — I never see such a gira
as the king was for wanting to swallow everything. Wi
whilst they was at it, a steamboat landed, and in about tw(
minutes up comes a crowd a whooping and yelling and laugbinj
and carrying on, and singing out :
" fiere'eyour opposition line ! here's your two sets o'hi
to old Peter Wilks — and you pays your money .and, yoi;
your choice \ "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
Chabte^r }^

ifeif Wis fetching'a very
nice-looking old gen-
tleman along, and a
nioe-looking younger
one, with his right
arm in a Bling. And
my souls, how the
people yelled, and
laughed, and kept it
np. But I didn't see
'no joke about it^ and
I judged it would
strain the duke and
the king some to see
any. I reckoned
they'd turn pale. But
. no, nary a pale^ did
they turn. The duke
he never let on he
suspicion^l what web up, but just went a goo-gooing aioand,
happy and satiB & ed, like a jug that's googling out buttermilk ;
and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed.down swrowful on
them new-comers like it give him the . stomach-ache in his
very heart to think there could be such frauds and ta^icala in
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
B TEUK BEOTHKBe.
296 TJIE ADVENTURES OF SVCKLEBERST FISS.
the world. Ob, he done it admirable. Lots of the printipal
people gethered around the king, to let him see they was on
bis side. That old gentleman that had just come looked all
puzzled to death. Pretty soon he begun to epeak, and I see,
straight off, be pronounced like an Englishman, not the king's
way, though the king's waa pretty good, for an imitation. I
can't give the old gent's words, nor I can't imitate him ; but
be turned around ia the crowd, and says, about like this :
" This is a BUiprise to me which I wasn't looking for ; and HI
acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain't very well fixed to meet
it and answer it ; for my brother and me has had misfortunes,
he's broke his arm, and our baggage got put off at a town above
here, last night in the night by a mistake. I am Peter Wjlks's
brother Harvey, and this is his brother " William, which can't
hear nor speak — and can't even make signs to amount to much,
now't he's only got one hand to work them with. We are who
we say we are ; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I
can prove it. But, up till then, I won't say nothing more, but
go to the hotel and wait. "
So him and the new dummy started off; and the king he
laugbs, and blethers out :
" Broke his arm — very likely airCt it ? — and very convenient,
too, for a fraud that's got to make signs, and hain't learnt how.
Lost their baggage ! That's -mighty good ! — and mighty in-
genious—under the circwmstancea ! "
So he laughed again ; and so did everybody else, except three
or four, or maybe half a dozen. One of these was that doctor ;
another one was a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag
of the oId- & shioned kind made out of carpet-stuff, that had just
come off of the steamboat and was talking to him in a low voice,
and glancing towards the king now and then and nodding their
heads — it was Levi Bell, the lawyer that was gone np to Louis-
ville ; and another one was a big rough husky that come aim;
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
COSTESTED RELATIONSHIP, 297
and listened to all the old gentleman said, and wa,s listenisg to
the king now. And when the king got done, this hnsky up
and says :
" Say, looky here ; if you are Harvey Wilks, when'd you
come to this town ? "
" The day before the funeral, friend, " says the king.
" But what time o'day ? "
" In the evenin'—'bout an hour er two before sundown. "
" How'd you come ? "
" I come down on the Susan PowfU, from Cincinnati. "
" Well, then, how'd you come to be up at the Pint in the
morrum'— in a canoe ? "
" I wam't up at the Pint in the momin', "
*'It's a lie. "
Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk
that way to an old man and a preacher.
" Preacher be hanged, he's a fraud and a liar. He was up
at the Pint that momin'. I live up there, don't I ? Well, I
was up there, and he was up there. I see him there. He
come in a canoe, along with Tim Collins and a boy. "
The doctor he up and says ;
" Would you know the boy again if you was to see him,
Hines ? "
*'I reckon I would, but I don't know. Why, yonder he is,
now. I know him perfectly easy. "
It was me he pointed at. The doctor says ;
''Neighbours, I don't know whether the new couple is frauds
or not ; but if these two ain't frauds, I am an idiot, that's all.
I think it's our duty to see that they don't get away from here
till we've looked into this thing. Come along Hines; come
along, the rest of you. Well take these fellows to the tavern
and afiront them with t'other couple, and I reckon well find
out something before we get through. "
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
^e THE ADVENTURES OF SncXZXBESBJtr FIXS.
It was nut«'for the crowd, thoagh maybe not for the king's
friends ; so we all started. It was about sundown. The
doctor he led me along by the hand, and was plenty kind
enough, but he never let go my hand.
We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit »p some
ft. < £^'J < )j':
THE DOCTOR LKADS HUOK. . I ,
candles, and fetched in .the new oouple.; ■ first,! the doetot
Sftys J .,,,,; :,. o;'
" I don't wish to be too hard on these, twe men, bnt / think
they're frauds, and tbpy io*y have'oompUces that we dw't
know nothing about. If they. have, Ton't. tbe'conplices S^
p:h»Google
TME KINQ EXPLAINS TME LOSS. 20»
away with that bag of gold Peter Wilka left ? It ain't nnlikely.
If these men ain't frauds, they won't object to sending for that
money and letting us keep it till they prove they're all right —
ain't that so ? "
Everybody agreed to that. So I judged they had our gang
in a pretty tight place, right at the outstart. But the king he
only looked sorrowful, and says :
" Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain't got
no disposition to throw anything in the way of a fair, open,
out-and-out investigation o'this misable business ; but alas 1
the money ain't there ; you k'n send and see, if you want to. "
" Where is it, then ? "
" Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her, I took
and hid it inside o'the straw tick o'my bed, not wishin'to bank
it for the few days we'd be heie, and considerin'the bed a
safe place, we not bein'used to niggers, and suppos'n''em
honest, like servants in England. The niters stole it the very
next momin'after I had went downstairs; and when I sold
'em I hadn't missed the money yit, so they got clean away with
it. My servant here k'n tell you'bout It, gentlemen. "
The doctor and several said " Shucks ! " and I see nobody
didn't altogether believe him. One man asked me if I see the
niggers steal it. I said " uo, " but I see them sneaking out of the
room and hostJing away, and I never thought nothing, only I
reckoned they was afraid they had waked up my master and was
trying to get away before he made troable with thetn. That
was all they asked me. Then the doctor whirls on me and
says:
" Are you English too ? " i
I saya " yes ; " and him and some others laughed,'and said,
" Stuff! "
Wellj then they sailed in on the general investigation, and
there .we: had it, up and down, hour in, hoiu out, and nobody
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
300 THE ADFEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
never said a word about supper, nor ever seemed to think about
it — and so they kept it up, and kept it up ; and it ««w the
worst miied-up thing you ever see. They made the king tell ,
bis yam, and they made the old gentleman tell his'n; and
anybody but a lot of prejudiced cbuckleheads would a seen that
the old gentleman was spinning truth and t'other one lies.
And by-and-by they had me up to tell what I Imowed, The
king he give me a left-handed look out of the comer of his eye,
and so I knowed enough to talk on the right side. I begon to
tell about Sheffield, and how we lived there, and all about the
English Wilkses, and eo on ; but I didn't get pretty fur till the
doctor begun to laugh ; and Levi Bell, the lawyer, says:
*'Set down, my boy, I- wouldn't strain myself, if I was jou.
I reckon you ain't used to lying, it don't seem to come handy;
what you want is practice. You do it pretty awkward. "
I didn't care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to
be let ofiF, anyway.
The doctor he started to say something, and turns and
says;
" If you'd been in town at first, Levi Bell "
The king broke in and reached out his hand, and says :
*'Why, is this my poor dead brother's old & iend that he's
wrote so often about ? "
The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled
and looked pleased, and they talked right along a while, and
then got to one side and talked low ; and at last the lawyer
speaks up and eays :
" That'll fix it. I'll take the order and send it, along with
your brother's, and then they'll know it's all right. "
So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set
down and twisted his head to one side, and chawed bis tongue,
and scrawled off something ; and then they give the pen to the
duke — and then for the first time, the dake looked sick. Bat
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
A QUESTION OF HANDWRITING. 301
he took the pen and wrote. So then the lawyer turns to the
new old genlieman and says :
" You and your brother please write a line or two and sign
joor names. "
Tho old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn't read it. The
lawyer looked powerful astoniehed, and says :
" Well, it beats me " — and snaked a lot of old letters out of
his pocket, and examined them, and then examined the old
man's writing, and then them again ; and then siiys : " These
THE DUKE WBOXB.
old letters is from Haxvey Wilks ; and here's these two's hand-
writings, and anybody can see they didn't write them " (the
king and the duke looked sold and foolish, I tell yon, to see
how the lawyer had took them in), " and here's this old gentle^
man's handwriting, and anybody can tell, easy enough, he didn't
write them — fact is, the scratches he makes ain't properly
■writi/fig at all. Now here's some letters iirom "
The new old gentleman says :
" If yon please, let me explain. Nobody can read my hand
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google — ^
803 THE ADVENTURES OF HVCELEBERRT FINN.
but my brother there — bo he copies for me. It's Ms hand you've
got there, not mine. "
" Wdl ! " says the lawyer, " this is a state o( things. I've
got some of William's letters too ; so if youll get him to write
a line or so we can com "
" He can't write with his left hand, " says the old gentleman.
" If he conld use his right hand, you would see that he -wrote his
own letters and mine too. Look at both, please — they're by
the same hand. "
The lawyer done it, and says :
" I believe it's so — and if it ain't so, there's a heap stronger
resemblance than I'd noticed before, anyway. Well, well, well !
I thought we was right on the track of a slution, but it's gone
to grass, partly. But anyvray, one thing is proved — these two
ain't either of'em Wilksea " — and he wagged his head towards
the king and the duke.
Well, what do you think? — that jnuleheaded old fool
■wouldn't give iu then! Indeed he wouldn't. Said it wam't
no feir test. Said his brother William was the eossedest joker
in the world, and hadn't tried to write — he see William was
going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the pen to
paper. And so he warmed up and went warbling and warbling
right along, till he was actually beginning to believe what he
was saying, himself — but pretty soon the new old gentleman
broke in, and says :
" I've thought of something. Is there anybody here that
helped to lay out my br — helped to lay out the late Peter Wilts
for burying ? "
" Yes, " Bays somebody, " me and Ab Turner dune it. We re
both here. "
Then the old man turns towards the king, and says :
" Per'apa this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on
his breast ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TATTOOINO. S08
Blamed if the king didn't liare to brace up miglily quick,
or he'd a squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut
under, it took him so sudden — and mind you, it was a thing
that was calculated to make mo8t anybody squsb to get fetched
such a solid one as that without any notice—becanse how was
he going to know what was tattooed on the man ? He whitened
a little ; he couldn't help it ; and it was mighty still in there,
and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him.
Says I to myself, Now he'll throw up the sponge — there ain't
no more use. Well, did he? Abody can't hardly believe it, but
he didn't. I reckon he thought he'd keep the thing up till he
tired them people out, so they'd thin out, and him and the
duke could break loose and get away. Anyway, be set there,
and pretty soon be b^un to smile, and says :
" Mf I It's a very tough question, ain't it ! Yes, sir, I k'n
tell you what's tattooed on bis breast. It's jest a small, thin,
blue arrow— that's what it is ; and if you don't look clost, you
can't see it. Now what do you say — hey ? "
Well I never see anything like that old blister for clean
ou(^and-out cheek.
The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and
his paid, and bis eye lights up like he judged he had got the
king f^is time, and says :'
" There — you've heard what he aaid ! Was there any such
mark on Peter Wilks's breast? "
Both of them spoke up and says :
" We didn't see no such mark. "
" Good! " Bays the old gentleman, " Now, what you did
see on his breast was a small dim P, and a B (which is an
initial he dropped when he was young), and a W, with dashes
lietween them, so : P — B — ^W " ; — ^d be mailed them that way
on a piece of paper. " Come — ain't that what you saw ? "
Both of them spoke up again, and says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
304 TSE ADVENTURES OF BVCKLEBERRY FINN.
" No, we didn't. We never seen any marks at all. "
Well, everybody waa in a state of mind now ; and they singi
out:
" The whole 6iim'of'm's frauds! Le's dnck'em ! le's drown
'em ! le's ride'em on a rail ! " and everybody was whooping at
" eENXLEHEH— GEHTLEMEN 1 "
once, and there was a rattling pow-wow. But the lawyer h(
jumps on the table and yells, and says :
" Gentlemen — gentlemen/ Hear me just a word — ^just t
amgle word— if you please ! There's one way yet — let's gt
and dig up the corpse and look, "
That took them.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
mOOING UP THE CORPSE. 305
" Hooray ! " they all shouted, and was atartiug right off ;
Imt the lawyer and the doctor aung out :
*'Hold on, hold on ! Collar all these four men and the boy,
and fetch them, along, too ! "
" We'll do it! " they all shouted: " and if we don't find
them marks we'll lynch the whole gang ! "
I was scared, now, I tell you. But there wam't no getting
sway, you know. They gripped us all, and marched us right
along, straight for the graveyard, which was a mile and a half
down the river, and the whole town at our heels, for we made
noise enough, and it was only nine in the evening.
As we went by our house I wished I hadn't sent Mary Jane
out of town; because now if I could tip her the wink, she'd
light out and save me, and blow on our dead-beats.
Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying
on like wild-cats ; and to make it more scary, the sky was
darking up, and the lightning beginning to wink and flitter,
and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves. This was the tnost
awful trouble and moat dangersome I ever was in ; and I was
kinder stunned ; everything was going so different from what
I had allowed for ; stead of being fixed so I could take my own
time, if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane
at my back to save me and set me free when the close-fit
come, here was nothing in the world betwixt me and sudden
death but just them tattoo-marks. If they didn't find them —
I couldn't bear to think about it; and yet, somehow, I
couldn't think about nothing else. It got darker and darker,
and it was a beautiful time to give the crowd the slip ; but that
big husky had me by the wrist — Hines — and a body might as
well try to give Goliar the slij). He dragged me right along,
he was BO excited ; and I had to run to keep up.
When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and
washed over it like an overflow. And when they got to the
X
n,3t,7=^- In Google
306 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINlf.
grave^ they found they had about a huodred times as man;
shovels as they wanted, bat nobody hadn't thought to fet«h i
lantern. But they sailed into digging, anyway, by the flicka
of the lightning, and sent a man to the nearest house a half i
mile off, to borrow one.
So they dug and dug, like everything; and it got awH
dark, and the rain started, and the wind swished and Bwushe)
along, and the lightning come brisker and brisker, and tlui
thunder boomed ; but them people never took no notice of it
they was so full of this business ; and one minute you couU
see everything and every fece in that big crowd, and the
shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of the grave, and the neit
second the dark wiped it all out, and you couldn't see nothisj
ataU.
At last they got out the coffin, and begun to unscrew the
lid, and then such another crowding, and shouldering, sni
shoving as there was, to aorouge in and get a sight, you nevs
see ; and in the dark, that way, it was awful. Hines he hurt
my wrist dreadful, pulling and tugging so, and I reckon he
clean forgot I was in the world, he was so excited and pantisg-
All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white
glare, and somebody sings out :
" By the living jingo, here's the bag of gold on his breast !
Hines let out a whoop, like everybody else, and dropped mj'
wrist and give a big surge to bust hia way in and get a look^J
and the way I lit out and shinned for the road in the dait,
tiiere ain't nobody can tell.
I had the road all to myself, and I fairly flew — leastways I
had it all to myself except the solid daric, and the now-and-theii
glares, and the buzzing of the rain, and the thrashing of th'
wind, and the splitting of the thunder ; and sure as yon are
bom I did clip it along !
When I struck the town, I see there wam't nobody out in
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
HUCK ESCAPES. 907
the storm, so I never hunted for no back streets, bat humped
it straight through the main one; ^d when I begmi to get
towards our house I aimed my eye and set it. No light there ;
the house all dark^ — ^which made me feel sorry and disappointed,
I didn't know why. But at last, just as I was sailing hy^Jlash
cornea the light in Mary Jane'B window I and my heart swelled
up sudden, like to bust ; and the same second the house and
all was behind me in the dark, and wasn't ever going to be
before me no more in this world. She was the best girl I ever
see, and had the moBt sand.
The minute I was (ar enough above the town to see I could
make the tow-head, I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow ;
md the first time the lightning showed me one that wasn't
chained, I snatched it and shoved. It was a canoe, and wam't
fastened with nothing but a rope. The tow-head was a rattling
big distance off, away out there in the middle of the river, but
I didn't lose no time ; and when I struck the raft at last, I
was so tagged I would a just laid down to blow and gasp if I
conld afforded it. But I didn't. As I sprung aboard I sung out ;
" Out with you, Jim, and set her loose ! Glory be to good-
ness, we're shut of them ! "
Jim ht out, and was a coming for me with both arms spread,
tie was so fall of joy ; but when I glimpsed him in the lights
ning, my heart shot up in my mouth, and I went overboard
backwards ; for I forgot he was old King Lear and a drownded
A-rab all in one, and it most scared the livers and lights out of
me. But Jim fished me out, and was going to hug me and
bless me, and so on, he was so glad I was back and we was shut
of the king and the dake, but I says :
" Not now — have it for break^t, have it for break & st !
Cut loose and let her slide 1 "
So, in two seconds, away we went, a sUding down the
river, and it did seem so good to be & ee again and all by our-
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
808 THE ADVESTVRES OF SXJCKLEBERRY FISN.
selves on the big river and nobody to bother us. I had to ski]
aroimd a bit > and jump up and crack my heels a few times,
couldn't help it ; but about the third crack I noticed a soun
that I knowed mighty well — and held my breath and hstene
and waited — and sure enough, when the next flash busted
" JIM LET OUT. "
over the water, here they come ! — and just a laying to tha
oars and making their skiff hum ! It was the king and tit
duke.
So I wilted right down on to the planks, then, and give up
and it was all I could do to keep from crying.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
they got aboard, the
king went for me, and
shook me by the col-
lar, and says ;
" Tryin'to give us
the slip, was ye, you
pup ! ,Tired of our
company — hey ? "
I says:
" No, your majes-
ty, we wam't — please
don't, your majesty ! "
" Quick, then, and
tell us what was your
idea, or I'll shake the
insides out o'you ! "
" Honest, m teU
you everything, just ae
it happened, year ma-
jesty. The man that had aholt of me was very good to me,
and kept saying he had a boy about as big as me that died last
year, and he was sorry to see a boy in such a dangerous fix ;
and when they was all took by surprise by finding the gold,
and made a rush for the cofiRn, he lets go of me and whispers,
B KINO SHAKES HUCE.
G
o^lc
SIO THE ADVENTVRES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN.
* Heel it, now, or they'll hang ye, eure !'and I lit out. It
didn't seem no good for me to stay — I couldn't do nothing, and
I didn't want to be hung if I could get away. So I nevei
stopped niDuing till I found the canoe ; and when I got here
I told Jim to hurry, or they'd catch me and hang me yet, and
said I was afeard you and the duke wasn't alive, now, and 1
was awful sorry, and so was Jim, and was awful glad when we
Bee you coming, you may ask Jim if I didn't. "
Jim said it was bo ; and the king told him to shut np,
and said, " Oh, yes, it's mighty likely ! " and shook me up
again, and said he reckoned he'd drownd me. But the duke
says:
" Leggo the boy, you old idiot ! Would you a done any
different? Did you inquire around for Aim, when you got 1
loose ? / don't remember it. "
So the king let go of me, and begun to cus$ that town and
ererybody in it. But the duke says :
" You better a blame sight give yowraelf a good cussing,
for yoa'ro the one that's entitled to it most. You hain% done
a thing, from the start, that had any sense in it, except coming
outso cool and cheeky with that imaginary blue-arrow mark.
" Kiat Was bright — it was right down bully ; and it w^ the thing
that saved us.- For if it hadn't been for that, they'd a jailed us
till them Englishmen's baggage come — and then — the peniten-
tiary, you bet ! Bat that trick took'em to the graveyard, and
the gold done ns a still bigger kindnessj forif the excitedfools
bkdn't let go all holts and made that rush to get a look, we'd a
slept in onr cravats to-night — cravats warranted to wear, too —
longer than we'tl need'em. "
They was still a minute — thinking — then the Isxag eay^
kiiid of absent-minded like :
- ■ ^.Mf I And we reckoned the niggera stole it ! "
'Tbftt made me squirm !
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A ItOTAL ^OW. 311
" Yes, " says the duke, kinder slow, and deliberate, and ear-
caBtic, " We did. "
After about a half a minute, the king drawla out :
" Leastways — / did. "
The duke says, the same way :
" On the coatrary — / did. "
The king kind of ruffles up, and says :
" Looky here, Bilgewater, what'r you referrin'to ? "
The duke says, pretty brisk :
" ^Tien it comes to that, maybe you'll let me ask, what was
you referring to ? "
" Shucks I " says the king, very sarcastic ; " but I don't know
— maybe you was asleep, and didn't know what you was
about. "
The'duke bristle right up now, and saya :
<'Oh, let up on this cussed nonsense— do you take me for a
blaine'fool ? Don't yon reckon / know who hid that money in
that coffin ? "
" Tea, BIT ! I know you do know — because you done it
yoniaelf ! "
*'It's a lie ! " — and the dnke went for him. The king sings
out:
" Take y'r hands off! — leggo my throat! — I take it all
back! "
The duke says :
" Well, you jnst own up, first, that yon did hide that money
there, intending to give me the slip one of these days, and come
back and dig it up, and have it all to yourself. "
" Wait jeet a minute, duke — answer me this one question,
honest and feir ; if you didn't put the money there, say It, and
111 blieve you, and take back everything I said. "
" You old scoundrel, I didn't, and you know I didn't. There,
now! "
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
312 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISH.
" Well, then, I blieve you. But answer me only jest this
one more — now don't git mad; didntyou have it in yourmtwi
to hook the money and hide it ? "
The duke never said nothing for a little bit ; then he Baye :
" Well — I don't care if I SAd, I didn't do it anyway. But
you not only had it in mind to do it, but you done it. "
" I wieht I may never die if I done it, duke, and that's
honest. I won't say I wam't goiyC to do it, because I was ;
but you — I mean somebody — got in ahead o'me. "
S WEST FOE HIM.
" It's a lie ! You done it, and you got to aay you done it,
or "
The king begun to gurgle, and then he gasps out:
'^'Kough ! — I own up I "
I was very glad to hear him say that, it made me feel much
more easier than what I was feeling before. So the duke took
his hands off, and says :
" If you ever deny it again, 111 drown you. It's well for
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
POWESFVL MELLOW. 313
you to Bet there and blubber like a baby — it's fittea for you,
after the way youVe acted. I never see such an old ostrich for
wanting to gobble everything — and I a trusting you all the time,
like you was my own father. You ought to been ashamed of
yourself to stand by and hear it saddled on to a lot of poor
niggere and you never Bay a word for'em. It makes me feel
ridiculous to think I was soft enough to believe that mbbage.
Cuss you, I can see, now, why you was so anxious to make up
the deffesit — you wanted to get what money I'd got out of the
Nonesuch, and one thing or another, and scoop it all ! "
The king says, timid, and stiU a snuffling :
" Why, duke, it was you that said make up the deffersit, it
warn't me. "
" Dry up ! I don't want to hear no more out of you ] " says
the duke. " And now you see what you got by it. They've
got all their own money back, and all of ourn but a shekel or
two, besides. Glong to bed — and don't you deffersit me no
more deEfersits, long's you live ! "
So the king sneaked into the wigwam, and took to his bottle
for comfort ; and before long the duke tackled hie bottle ; and
BO in about a half an hour they was as thick as thieves again,
and the tighter they got, the loWnger they got ; and went off
a snoring in each other's arms. They both got powerful mellow,
but I noticed the king didn't get mellow enough to forget to
remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag again. That
made me feel easy and satisfied. Of course when they got to
snoring, we had a long gabble, and I told Jim everything.
D,£,.,7P-hy Google

top again at any
Tor daya and days;
■igbt along down
:iver. We was
wuth in the warm
3r, now, and a
J long ways from
We begun to
to trees with
ih mosa on them,
ig down from the
like long gray
I. It Was the first
■ see it growing,
made the woods
demn and dismal'
ow the frauds
gPAKun MOBS. reckoned they was out
of danger, and they l > egun to work the villages again.
First they done a lecture on temperance ; but they didn't
make enough for them both to get drunk on. Then in another
village they stArted a dancing school ; bnt they didn't know no
more how to dance than a kangaroo does ; bo the first prance
they made, the general public jumped in and pranced them out
n,„i,,-i > , Google
OMINOUS PLANS, 316
of town. Another time they tried a go at yellocution ; but they
didn't yellocote long till the audience got up and give them a
solid good cusBiDg and made them skip out. They tackled
missionarying, and mesmeriBering, and doctoring, and telling
fortunes, and a little of everything ; but they couldn't seem to
have no tuck. So at last they got just about dead broke, and
laid around the raft, as she floated along, thinking, and thinking,
and never saying nothing, by the half a day at a time, and
dreadful blue and desperate.
And at last they took a change, and begmi to lay their beads
together in \h & wigwam and talk low and confidential two or
three hours at a time. Jim and me got uneasy. We didn't
like the look of it. We judged they was studying up some
kind of worse deviltry than ever. We turned it over and over,
and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into
somebody's bouse or store, or was going into the counterfeit-
money business, or something. So then we was pretty scared,
and made up an agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in
the world to do with such actions, and if we ever got the least
ehow we would give them the cold shake, and clear oiit and
leave them behind. Well, early one morning we hid the raft
in a good'safe place about two mile below a little bit of a shabby
village, named Pikesville, and the king he went ashore, and
told U8 all to stay bid whilst he went up to town and smelt
around to see if anybody had got any wind of the Royal None-
such there yet. ( " House to rob, you msan " says I to myself;
" and when you get through robbing it youll come back here and
wonder what's become of me and Jim and the raft — and you'll
have to take it out in wondering. " ) And he said if he wam't
back by midday, the duke and me would know it was all rights
and we was to come along.
So we stud where we was. The duke he fretted and sweated
anmnd, and was in a mighty sour way. He scolded us iyr every-
n,3t,7=^- In Google
310 THE ABVENTURES OF STJCKLEBERRY FINK,
thing, and we couldn't seem to do nothing right; be foand
fault with every little thing. Something was a-brewing Bore.
I was good and glad when midday come and no king ; we could
have a change, anyway — and maybe a chance for the change,
on top of it. So me and the duke went up to the village, and
hunted around there for the king, and by-and-by we found him
in the back room of a little low doggery, very .tight, and a lot
of loafers bullyragging him for sport, and he a cussing and
threatening with all his might, and so tight he couldn't walk,
and couldn't do nothing to them. The duke he begun to abnee
him for an old fool, and the king begun to sass back ; and the
minute they was fairly at it, I Ht out, and shook the reefs out
of my hind legs, and spun down the river road like a deer — for
I see our chance ; and I made, up my mind that it would be a
long day before they ever see me and Jim again. I got down
there all out of breath but loaded up with joy, and sung out —
" Set her loose, Jim, we're all right, now I "
But there wam't no answer, and nobody come out of the
wigwam. Jim was gone ! I set up a shout — and then another
and then another one ; and run this way and that in the
woods, whooping and screeching; but it wam't no use — old Jim
was gone. Then I set down and cried ; I couldn't help it. But
I couldn't set still long. Pretty soon I went out on the road,
trying to think what I better do, and I run across a boy
walking, and asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger, dressed
so and so, and he says :
" Yes. "
" Wherebouts ? " says I.
" Down to Silas Phelps'place, two mile below here. He's
a nmaway nigger, and they've got him. Was you looking for
him? "
*'Yon bet I wn't. I run across him in the woods about an
hour or two ago, and he said if I hollered he'd cut my liven out
JIM GONEI 317
— aud told me to lay down and stay where I was ; and I done
it. Been there ever since ; afeard to come out. "
" Well, " he saya, " you needn't be afeard no more, becuz
they've got him. He run off f'm down South, som'ers. "
" WHO HAILED HUir'
" It's a good joh they got him. "
" Well, I redam ! There's two hunderd dollars reward on
him. It's like picking up money out'u the road. "
" Yes, it is — and / could a had it if I'd been big enough ; I
see ^m first. Who nailed him ? "
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
318 THE ADVENTURES OF SUCKLEBERSY FINN.
" It was an old fellow — a stranger-^— and he- sold on^hia
chance in him for forty dollars, becuz he's got to- go up the riyer
and ^^n'fc wait. Thij^ o* that, now! You beb iZ'ci wajt,'if it
was seven year. "
" That's me, every time, " says I. " But maybe his chance
ain't worth no more than that, if he'll sell it so cheap. Maybe
there's something ain't straight about it. "
" But it is, though — straight as a string. I see the hand-
bill myself. It tells all about him, to a dot — paints him like a
picture, and tells the plantation he's frnm, below Newr(ea?w.
No-sirree-6t > 6, they ain't no trouble'bout that speculation, you
bet you. Say, gimme a ehaw tobaeker, won't ye? "
I didn't hare none, so he left. I went to the raft, and set
down in the wigwam to think. But I couldn't come to nothiEg.
I thought till I wore my head sore, but I couldn't see no way
out of the trouble. After all this long journey, and after all
we'd done for them acoimdrela, here was it all come to nothing,
everything all busted up and ruined, because they could have
tbe heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make him a
slave again all his life, and amongst strangers, too, for forty dirty
dollars.
Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times bett <'J
for Jim to be s slave at home where, his femily was, as long as
he'd got to be a slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom
Sawyer, and teU him'to tell Miss Watson where he was. But
I soon give up that notion, for two things ; she'd be mad and
disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her,
and BO she'd sell him straight down the river again ; and if she
didn't, everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger,-and
they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery
and disgraced. And then think of me! It would get all
around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to get his freedran ;
and if I was to ever see anybody from that town .again, J'd be
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle ■
OLD RECOLLECTIONS. SID
ready to get down and lick bis boots for shame. Tttat'erjnst
the way ; a person does a low-down things and then he don't
want to take no coneequences of it. Thinks as long a? he can
hide it, it ain't no disgrace. That was my fix exactly. The
more I studied about this, the more my conscience went to
grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I
got to feeling. And at last, when it hit me aU of a sudden
that here was the plain band of Providence slapping me in the
face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all
the time from up there in heaven, whilst I was stealing a poor
old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now
was showing me there's One that's always on the look-out, and
ain't agoing to allow no such miserable doings to go only just
so fur and no further, I most dropped in my tracks I was so
scared. Well, I tried the best I conld to kinder soften it up
somehow for myself, by saying I was brung up wicked, and so
I wam't 80 much to blame ; but somethiiig inside of me kept
saying, " There was the Sunday-school, yon could a gone to it ;
and if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you, there, that people that
acts as I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire. "
It made me shiver. And I about made up my mind to pray ;
and see if I couldn't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was,
and be better. So I kneeled down. But the words wouldn't
come. Why wouldn't they? It wam't no use to try and hide
it from Him. Nor from me, neither. I knowed very well why
they wouldn't come. It was because my heart wam't right ;
it was because I wam't square ; it was because I was playing
double. I was letting OTito give up sin, but away inside of me
I was holding on to the biggest one of all. 1 was trying to
make my mouth say I would do the right thing and the clean
thing, and go and write to that nigger's owner and tell where he
was ; but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie — and He
knowed it. You can't pray a lie — I found that out;
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
330 THE ADVENTVRES OF SJJCKLEBEREY FINN.
So I was full of trouble, full as I could be ; and didn't know
what to do. At last I had an idea ; and I says, 111 go and
write the letter — and then see if I can pray.'Why, it was
astonishing, the way I felt as light as a feather, right straight
off, and my troubles all gone. So I got a piece of paper and a
pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote :
Miss Watson yaxa rnnaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikee-
ville and Mr. Flielps has got him and he will give Mm np for tlie reward if
yon send. Hdck Fjmb.
I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I
had eyer felt so in my life, and I knowed I could pray noff.
But I didn't do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
OLD RECOLLECTIONS. 321
there thinking — thinking how good it was all this happened so,
and how near I come to being lost and going to hell. And
went on thinking. And got to thinking over our trip down
the river; and I see Jim before me, all the time, in the day,
and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight, sometimes storms,
and we a floating along, talking, and singing, and laughing.
But somehow I couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me
against him, but only the other kind. I'd see him standing
my watch on top of his'n, stead of calling me, so I could go on
sleeping ; and see him how glad he was when I come back ont
of the fog ; and when I come to him again in the swamp, up
there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would
always call me honey, and pet me, and do everything he could
think of for me, and how good he always was ; and at last I
struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small-
pox aboard, and he was so grateful, and said I was the best
friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the only one he's
got now ; and then I happened to look around, and see that
paper.
It was a close place. I took it up, and held it in my hand.
I was a trembling, because I'd got to decide, for ever, betwixt
two things, and I knowed it. I studied a minute, sort of hold-
ing my breath, and then says to myself:
" All right, then, 111 go to hell " — and tore it up.
It was awful thoughts, and awful words, but they was said.
And I let them stay said ; and never thought no more about
reforming. I shoved the-whole thing out of my head; and
said I would take up wickedness again, which was in my line,
being brung up to it, and the other wam't. And for a starter,
I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again ; and if
I could think up anything worse, I would do that; too ; because
as long as I was in, and in for good, I might as well go the
whole hog.
T
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
322 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIA'S.
Then I set to thinking over how to get, at it, and turned
over considerable many ways in my mind ; and at last fixed up
a plan that suited me. So then I took the hearings of a woody
island that was down the river a piece, and as soon as it was
fairly dark I crept out with my raft afid went for it, and hid it
there, and then turned in. I slept the night through, and got
up before it was light, and had my breakfast, and put on mj
store clothes, and tied up some others and one thing or another
in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore. I landed
below where I judged was Phelps'place, and bid my bundle in
the woods, and then filled up the canoe with water, and loaded
rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her again when
I wanted her, about a quarter of a mile below a little steam
sawmill that was on the bank.
Then I struck up the road, and when I passed the mill I
see a sign on it, " Phelps'Sawmill, " and when I come to tlie
farm-houses, two or three hundred yards further along, I kept
my eyes peeled, but didn't see nobody around, though it wa«
good daylight, now. But I didn't mind, be^-ause I didn't want
to see nobody just yet — I only vranted to get the lay of thf
land. According to my plan, I was going to turn up there
from the village, not'from below. So I just took a look, and
shoved along, straight for town. Well, the very first man I see,
when I got there, was the duke. He was sticking up a bill
for the Royal Nonesuch — three-night performance — like that
other time. They had the cheek, them frauds ! I was right
on him, before I could shirk. He looked astonished, and says
" Hel-io / Wher'd you come from ? " Then he says, kind
of glad and eager, " Where's the raft? — got her in a go
place ? "
I says ;
" Why, that's just what I was agoing to ask your grace. "
Then he didn't look so joyful — and says :
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
A SHEEP STOSy. 323
" What was your idea for asking vie ? " he says.
" Well, " I says, " when I see the king in that doggery yes-
terday, I says to myself, we can't get hiui home for hours, till
he's soberer ; so I went a loafing around town to put in the
time, and wait. A man up and ofifered me ten cents to help
him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch a sheep, and
so I went along ; but when we was dragging him to the boat,
and the man left me aholt of the rope and went behind him to
shove him along, he was too strong for me, and jerked loose
and run, and we after him. We didn't have no dog, and so we
had to chase him all ov*::r the country till we tired him out. We
never got him till dark, then we fetched him over, and I started
down for the raft. When I got there and see it was gone, I
says to mytelf,'they've got into trouble and had to leave ; and
they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger I've got in
the world, and now I'm in a strange country, and ain't got no
property no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living ;'
fio I set down and cried. I slept in the woods all night. Bat
what did become of the raft then ? — and Jim, poor Jim ! "
" Blamed if / know — that is, what's become of the raft.
That old fool had made a trade and got forty dollars, and when
we foimd him in the doggery the loaftrs had matched half
dollars with him and got every cent but what he'd spent for
wbisliy ; and when I got him home late last night and found
the raft gone, we said,'That little rascal has stole our raft and
shook us, and run off down the river.'"
" I wouldn't shake my nigger, would I ? — the only nigger I
had in the world, and the only property. "
" We never thought of that. Fact is, I reckon we'd come
to consider him our nigger; yes, we did consider him so
— goodness knows we had trouble enough for him. So when
we see the raft was gone, and we flat broke, there wam't any-
thing for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another shake. And
n24 THE AVVENTVEES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
I've pegged aloDg ever since, dry as a powder-horn. Where's that
ten cents ? Give it here. "
I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but
begged him to spend it for something to eat, and give me some,
because it was all the money I had, and I hadn't had notliing
to eat since yesterday. He never said nothing. The next i
minute he whirls on me and says : I
" Do you reckon that nigger would blow on as ? We'd I
skin Tiim if he done that ! "'
" How can he blow ? Hain't he run off ? "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
VALUABLE INFORMATION. 825
" No ! That old fool sold him, and never divided with me,
and the money's gone, "
" Sold him ? " I says, and begun to cry ; " why, he was
my nigger, and that was my money. Where is he ? — I want
my ni^er. "
" Well, you can't get your nigger, that's all — so dry up your
blubbering. Looky here — do you think you'd venture to blow
on us ? Blamed if I think I'd trust you. Why, if you waa to
blow on us — "
He stopped, but I never eee the duke look ao ugly out of
his eyes before, I went on a-whimpering, and says :
" I don't want to blow on nobody ; and J ain't got no time
to blow, nohow. I got to turn out and find my nigger. "
He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills
fluttering on his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead.
At last he says :
" I'll tell you something. We got to be here three days.
If you'll promise you won't blow, and won't let the nigger blow,
111 tell you where to find him. "
So I promised, and he says :
" A farmer by the name of Silas Ph " and then he
stopped. Yon see he started to tell me the truth ; but when
he stopped, that way, and begun to study and think again, I
reckoned he waa changing Ms mind. And so he was. He
wouldn't trust me ; he wanted to make sure of having me out
of the way the whole three days. So pretty soon he says :
" The man that bought Mm is named Abram Foster — Abram
(jr. Foster — and he lives forty mile back here in the country, on
the road to Lafayette. "
" All right, " I says, " I can walk it in three days. And I'll
start this very afternoon. "
" No yon won't, you'll start tww ; and don't you lose any
time about it, neither, nor do any gabbling by the way. Just
S20 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
keep a tight tongue ia your head aud move right along, and
then you won't get into trouble with ub, d'ye hear ? "
That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played
for. I wanted to be left free to work my plans,
" So clear out, " he nays ; " and you can tell Mr. Foster
whatever you want to. Maybe you can get him to believe that
Jim ia your nigger — some idiots don't require documeDts —
FOE THE BACK
leastways I've heard there's such down South here. And when
you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus, maybe he'll
believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for
getting'em out. Go'long, now, and tell him anything you
want to ; but mind you don't work your jaw any between here
and there. "
So I left, and struck for the back countiy. I didn't look
around, but I kinder felt like be was watching me. But I
knowed I could tire him out at that. I went straight out in
the country as much as a mi'.e, before I stopped ; then I doubled
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE BACK COVXTRY. 327
back through the woods towards Phelps'. I reckooed I better
start ii^ on my plan straight off, without fooling arcund, because
I wanted to stop Jim's mouth till these fellows could get away.
I didn't want no trouble with their kind. I'd seen all I wanted
to of them, and n'anted to get entirely shut of them.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CKaJDter XXX
I got there it was all
still and Sunday - like,
and hot and sunshiny
— the hands was gone
to the fields ; and there
was them kind of feint
dronings of bugs and
flies in the air that
makes it seem so lone-
some and like eveiy-
bodj's dead and gone;
and if a breeze fans along
and quivers the leaves,
it makes you feel mouro-
ful, because you feel like
it's spirits whispering-
spirits that's been dead
ever so many years—
and yon always think they're talking about you. As a general
thing it makes abody wish Ae was dead, too, and done with itall.
Phelps'was one of these little one-horse cotton plantationp;
and they all look aUke. A rail fence roxind a two-acre yard ;
a stile, made out of logs sawed off and up-ended, in steps, like
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
STILL AND SUNDAY-LIKE. 320
[ barrels of a different length, to climb over the fence with, and
for the women to stand on when they are going to jump on to a
horse ; some sickly grass-patches in the big yard, but mostly it
was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the nap rubbed off;
big double log house for the white folks — hewed logs, with the
chinks stopped op with mud or mortar, and these mnd-stripes
been whitewashed some time or another ; round-log kitchen,
with a big broad, open but roofed passage joining it to the
'house ; log smoke-house back of the kitchen ; three little log
nigger-cabina in a row t'other side the smoke-house ; one little
hut all by itself away down against the back fence, and aome
outbuildings down a piece the other side ; ash-hopper, and big
j kettle to bile soap in, by the little hut ; bench by the kitchen
d(X > r, with bucket of water and a gourd ; hound asleep there, in
] the sun ; more hounds asleep, round about ; about three shade-
[ trees away oflf in a comer ; some currant bushes and gooseberry
j bushes in one place by the fence ; outside of the fence a garden
and a water-melon patch ; then the cotton fields begins ; and
after the fields, the woods.
I went around and dumb over the back stile by the ash-
hopper, and started for the kitchen, Mlien I got a little ways,
I heard the dim hum of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and
sinking along down again ; and then I knowed for certain I
wished I was dead — for that is the lonesomest sound in the
whole world.
I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but
just trusting to Providence to put the right words in my mouth
when the time come ; for I'd noticed that Providence always
did put the right words in my mouth, if I left it alone.
Wlion I got half-way, first one hound and then another got
up and went for me, and of course I stopped and faced them,
and kept still. And such another pow-wow as they made ! In
a quarter of a minute I was a kind of a hub of a wheel, as you
330 THE AHVESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN. .
may say — spokes made out of dogs — circle of fifteen of them
packed together around me, with their necks and noses stretehed
up towards me, a barkiDg and howling ; and more a coming;
you could see them sailing over fences and around comers iioin
everywheres.
A nigger woman come tearing out of the kichen with a
rolling-pin in her hand, singing out, " Begone ! you Tige ! yon
Spot ! begone, sah ! " and she fetched first one and then another
of them a clip andsent him howling, and then the rest followed; .
and the next second, half of them come back, wagging their i
tails around me and making friends with me. There ain't no i
harm in a hound, nohow. |
And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two !
little nigger boys, without anything on but tow-linen shirts,
and they hung on to their mother's gown, and peeped out bojn
behind her at me, bashful, the way they always do. And here
comes the white woman running from the house, about forty- ,
five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick in her I
hand ; and behind her comes her little white children, acting ,
the same way the little niggers was doing. She was smiling
all over so she could hardly stand — and says :
" It's you, at last ! — ainH it ? "
I out with a " Yea'm, " before I thought.
She grabbed me and hugged me tight ; and then gripped
me by both hands and shook and shook ; and the tears come
in her eyes, and run down over ; and shf couldn't seem to hug
and shake enough, and kept saying, " You don't look as mndi
like your mother as I reckoned you would, but law sakes, I
don't care for that, I'm no glad to see you ! Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up ! Childem, it's your Cousin
Tom ! — tell him howdy. "
But they ducked their heads, and put theif fingers in their
mouths, and hid behind her. So she run on ;
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
MISTAKEN IBBXTITY. 331
*'liize, harry up and get him a hot breakfast, right away — ■
or did yon get your breakfast on the boat ? "
I said I had got it on the boat. So then she started for
the house, leading me by the hand, and the children tagging
after. When -we got there, she set me down in a split-bottomed
chair, and set herself down on a little low stool in front of me,
holding both of my hands, and says :
" Now I can have a good look at you ; and laws-a-me, I've
been hungry for it a many and a many a time, all these loug
jears, and it's come at last ! We been expecting you a couple
«f days and more. What's kep'you ? — boat get aground ? "
" Yes'm — she "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
33a THE ADVENTUItES OF SUCKLEBERRY FINA\
" Don't say yes'm — say Aunt Sally. Wliere'd she get
aground ? "
I didn't rightly know what to say, because I didn't know
whether the boat would be coming up the river or down. But
I go a good deal on iuBtinct ; and my instinct said she would
be coming up — from down towards Orleans. That didn't help
me much, though ; for I didn't know the names of bars down
that way. I see I'd got to invent a bar, or forget the name of
the one we got aground on — or — Now I struck an idea, and
fetched it out :
" It wam't the grounding — that didn't keep us back but a
liltle. We blowed out a cylinder-head. "
" Good gracious ! anybody hurt ? "
" No'm. Killed a nigger. "
" Well, it's lucky ; because sometimes people do get hurt.
Two years ago last Christmas, your Uncle Silas was coming up
from Newrleans on the old LaUy Rook, and she blowed out »
cylinder-head and crippled a man. And I think he died after-
wards. He was a Babtist. Your Uncle Silas knowed a family
in Baton Eonge that knowed his people very well. Yes, I re-
member, now he d/id die. Mortification set in, and they had
to amputate him. But it didn't save him. Yes, it was morti-
fication — that was it. He turned blue all over, and died in
the hope of a glorious resurrection. They say he was a sigbt
to look at. Your uncle's been up to the town every day to fetch
you. And he's gone again, oot more'n an hour ago : he'll ^
back any minute, now. You must a met him on the road,
didn't you ? — oldish man, with a "
" No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally. The boat landed
just at daylight, and I lefL my baggage on the wharf-boat and
went looking around the town and out a piece in the country,
to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come
down the back way. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
UP A STUMP. 333
" Who'd you give the baggage to ? "
" Nobody.'
" Why, child, it'll be stole ! "
" Not where 7 hid it I reckon it won't, " I says.
" How'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat ? "
It was kinder thin ice, but I says :
" The captain see me standing around, and told me I better
have something to eat before I went ashore ; so he took me in
the texaa to the officers'lunch, and give me all I wanted, "
.1 wag getting so uneasy I couldn't listen good. I had my
mind on the children all the time ; I wanted to get them out
to one side, and pump them a little, and find out who I was.
But I couldn't get no show, Mrs. Phelps kept it up and run on
so. Pretty soon she made the cold chills streak all down my
back, because she says ;
" But here we're a runuiug on this way, and you hain't told
me a word about Sis, nor any of them. Now I'll rest my works
a little, and you start up yourn ; just tell me everything — tell
me all about'm all — every one of'm ; and how they are, and
what they're doing, and what they told you to tell me ; and
every last thing you can think of. "
W^ell, I see I was up a stump — and up it good. Providence
had stood by me this fur, all right,.but I was hard and tight
aground, now. I see it warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead
— I'd got to throw up my hand. So I says to myself, here's
another place where I got to resk the truth. I opened my
mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and htistled me in behind
the bed, and says ;
" Here he comes ! stick your head down lower—there,
that'll do ; you can't be seen, now. Don't you let on you're
here. I'll play a joke on him. Childern, don't you say a
■word. "
I see I was in a fix, now. But it wam't no use to worry ;
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
K4 THE AJiVEKTVRES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
tliere wara't nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be
ready to stand from under when the lightning struck.
I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he
come in, then the bed hid him. Mrs. Phelps she jumps for
him and says :
" Has be come ? "
" No, " says her husband.
" QiKid-neea gracious ! " she says, " what in the world can
have become of him ? "
" I can't imagine, " says the old gentleman ; " and I must
say, it makes me dreadful uneasy. "
" Uneasy ! " she says, " I'm ready to go distracted ! He
must a come ; and you've missed him along the road. I kiKnv
it's so — something tells me so. "
" Why Sally, I couldn't miss him along the road— ^it
know that. "
" But oh, dear, dear, what iviU Sis say ! He must a come I
You must a missed bim. He "
" Oh, don't distress me any more'n I'm already distressed.
I don't know what in the world to make of it. I'm at my wit's
end, and I don't mind acknowledging't I'm right down scared.
But there's no hope that's he come ! for he couldn't come and
me miss him. Sally, it's terrible — just terrible — something's
happened to the boat, sure ! "
" Why, Silas! Look yonder!— up the road I — ain't that
somebody coming ? "
He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that
give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted. She stooped doini
iguick, at the foot of the bed, and give me a pall, and out I
come ; and when he turned back from the window, there she
stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a hoose afire, and I stand-
ing pretty meek and sweaty alongside. The old gentlemsn
stared, and says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
IN A DILEMMA. SSfi
« Why, who's that ? " ,
" Who do you reckon't is ? "
" I hain't no idea. Who i« it ? "
" It's Tom Sawyer ! "
By jings, I most slumped though the floor. But there
" WHO IK) YOU B
warn't no time to swap knives ; the old man grabbed me by the
hand and shook, and kept on shaking ; and all the time, how
the woman did dance around and laugh and cry ; and then how
they both did fire oflF questions about Sid, and Mary, and the
rest of the tribe.
But if they was joyful, it warn't nothing to what I was ; for
D,g,wp:h»Google
306 TBE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
it was like being bom again, I was so glad to find out who I
was. Well, they froze to me for two hours ; and at last when
my cbin was so tired it couldn't hardly go, any more, I had told
them more about my family — I mean the Sawyer family — than
ever happened to any six Sawyer families. And I explained all
about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of
White Eiver and it took us three days to fix It.'WTiich was all
right, and worked first rate ; because they didn't know but
what it would take three days to fix it. If I'd a called it a
bolt-head it would a done just as well-
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side,
and pretty uncomfortable all up the other. Being Tom Sawyer
was easy and comfortable ; and it stayed easy and comfortable
till by-and-by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the
river — then I says to myself, s'pose Tom Sawyer come dovm on
that boat ? — and s'pose he steps in here, any minute, and sings
but my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet?
Well, I couldn't have it that way — it wouldn't do at all. I
must go up the road and waylay him. So I told the folks I
reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my bag-
gage. The old gentleman was for going along with me, but I
said no, I could drive the horse myself, and I druther he
wouldn't take no trouble about me.
I
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
J I started for town, in the
wagon, and when I was
half-way I see a wagon
coming, and sure enough
it was Tom Sawyer, and I
stopped and waited till he
come along. I says, " Hold
on ! " and it stopped along-
side, and his month opened
like a trunk, and staid so ;
and he swallowed two or
three times like a person
that's got a diy throat, and
then says :
" I hain't ever done
you no harm. You know
that. So, then, what you
•'ITWABTOM8AWTEB. " ^^,^ ^^ ^^^^ ^^ ^^^
ha'nt me for ? "
I says:
" I hain't come back — I hain't been gone.'"
When he heard my voice, it righted him up some, but he
Wm't quite Batiefied yet. He says :
z
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
338 THE ABFENTURES OF nuCKLEBERRY FINN.
" Don't you play nothing on me, because I wouldn't on you.
Honest injuii,'now, you ain't a ghost? "
" Honest injiin, 1 ain't, " I says.
" Well — I — I — well, that ought to settle it, of course ; but
I can't somehow seem to Understand it, no way. Looky here,
wam't you ever murdered at all ? "
" No. I wam't ever murdered at all^I played it on them.
You come in here and feel of me if you don't believe me. "
So he done it, and it satisfied him ; and he was that glad to
see me again, he didn't know what to do. And he wanted to
know all about it right off ; because it was a grand adventm*,
and mysterious, and so it hit him where he lived. But I said,
leave it alone till by-and-by ; and told his driver to wait, and
we drove off a little piece, and I told him the kind of a fixiwa?
in, and what did he reckon we better do ? He said, let liii
alone a minute, and don't disturb him. So he thought and
thought, and pretty soon he says :
" It's all right, I've got it. Take my trunk in your wagon.
and let on it's your'n ; and you turn back and fool along alCi
so as to get to the house about the time you ought to; andH!
go towards town apiece, and take a fresh start, and get there i'
quarter or a half an hour after you ; and you needn't let on l»
know me, at first. "
I aays :
" All right ; but wait a minute. There's one more thing-
a thing that nobody don't know but me. And that is, there's'
a nigger here that I'm a trying to steal out of slavery — and " i^
name is Jim — old Miss Watson's .Tim. "
He says:
" What! Why Jim is "
He stopped, and went to studying. I says :
" 7 know what you'll say. You'll say it's dirty low-dowD
business ; but what if it is ? — J'm low down ; and I'm agoing
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A NIOGER STEALER. 330
to steal him, and I want you to keep mum and not let on. Will
you ? "
His eye lit up, and he saye :
" ril help you steal him ! "
Well, I let go all holts then, like I waa shot. It was the
most astonishing speech I ever heard — and I'm bound to say
Tom Sawyer fell, conaiderable, in my estimation. Only I
couldn't believe it. Tom Sawyer a nigger stealer !
" Oh, shucks, " I says, " you're joking. "
" I ain't joking, either. "
" Well, then, " I says, " joking or no joking, if you hear any-
thing said about a runaway nigger, don't forget to remember
that yov, don't know nothing about him, and / don't know
nothing about him, "
I'hen we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he
drove off his way, and I drove mine. But of course I forgot all
about driving slow, on accounts of being glad and full of think-
ing ; so I got home a heap too quick for that length of a trip.
The old gentleman was at the door, and he says :
" Why, this is wonderful. Who ever would have thought it
was in that mare to do it. I wish we'd a timed her. And she
hain't sweated a hair — not a hair. It's wonderful. Why, I
wouldn't take a hunderd dollars for that horse now ; I wouldn't,
honest ; and yet I'd a sold her for fifteen before, and thought
t'ffas all she was worth. "
That's all he said. He was the innocentest, best old soul I
;ver see. But it wam't surprising ; because he wam't onlyjust
a farmer, he was a preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log
rhurch down back of the plantation, which he built it himself at
his own expense, for a church and school-house, and never
charged nothing for his preaching, and it waa worth it, too.
There was plenty other farmer-preachers like that, and done
the same way, down South
t 2
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
340 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERUY FIKS.
In about half an hour Tom's wagon drove up to the front
stiU, and Aunt Sally she see it through the window because it
was only about fifty yards, and says :
" Why, there's somebody come ! I wonder who'tis ? \^1iy,
I do believe it's a stranger. Jimmy " (that's one of the children),
" run and tell Lize to put on another plate for dinner. "
Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course,
a stranger don't come e^ery year, and so he lays over the yaller
fever, for interest, when he does come. Tom was over the stile
and starting for the house ; the wagon was spinning up the
road for the village, and we was all bunched in the front door.
Tom had his store clothes on, and an audience — and that was
always nuts for Tom Sawyer, In them circumstances it ffani't
no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was Buit-
able. He wam't a boy to meeky along up that yard hke a
sheep; no, he come calm and important, like the ram. Whente
got afront of us, he lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty^
like it was the lid of a box that had butterflies asleep in it, arf
he didn't want to disturb them, and says:
" Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume ? "
" No, my boy, " says the old gentleman, " I'm sorry to say
't your driver has deceived you. ; Nichols's place is down a
matter of three mile more. Come in, come in. " \
Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, " Tw
late — he's out of sight. "
" Tes, he's gone, my son, and you must come in and «•
your dinner with us ; and then well hitch up and take y«
down to Nichols's. "
" Oh, I can't make you so much trouble, I couldn't think of
it. Ill walk — I don't mind the distance. "
" But we won't let you walk — it wouldn't he Southern'
hospitality to do it. Come right in. "
" Oh, do " says Aunt Sally j " it ain't a bit of trouble to us,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SOUTHESN nOSPITALITY. 341
not a bit in the world. You viinst stay. It's a long, dusty
three mile, and we can't let you walk. And besides, I've
already told'em to put on another plate, when I see you
coming ; so you mustn't disappoint us. Come right in, and make
yourself at home. "
So Tom he thanked them very hearty and handsome, and
let himself be persuaded, and come in ; and when lie was in, he
said he was a stranger from Hicksville, Ohio, and his name was
William Thompson — and he made another bow.
Well, he run on, and on, and on, making up stufif about
Hicksville and everybody in it he could invent, and I getting a
little nervious, and wondering how this was going to help me
out of my scrape ; and at last, still talking along, he reached
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
313 THE ABVENTUSES OF HUCKLEBEBRY FISS.
over and kissed Aunt Sally right on the mouth, and then settled
back again in his chair, comfortable, and was going on talking;
but she jumped up and wiped it off with the back of her hand,
and says :
" You owdaeious puppy I "
He looked kind of hurt, and says :
" I'm surprised at you, m'am. "
" You're s'rp — Why, what do you reckon / am ? I've a
good notion to take and — say, what do you mean by kissing
me ? "
He looked kind of humble, and says :
" I didn't mean nothing, m'am. I didn't mean no harm. I
— I — thought you'd like it. "
" Why, you bom fool ! " She took up the spinning-stick,
and it looked like it was all she could do to keep from giving
him a crack with it. " What made you think I'd like it? "
" Well, I don't know. Only, they — they — told me you
would. "
" They told you I would. Whoever told you's another
lunatic. I never heard the beat of it. Who's (Aey? "
" Wliy — everybody. They all said so, m'am. "
■ It was all she could do to hold in ; and her eyes snapped,!
and her fingers worked like she wanted to scratch him; wii
she says :
" Who's'everybody?'Out with their names — or therTIi
be an idiot short. " :
He got up and looked distressed, and fumbled his hat, and i
says : !
" I'm sorry, and I wam't expecting it. They told me to,
They all told me to. They all said kiss her ; and said shell
like it. They all said it — every one of them. But I'm sorrr,
ma'm, and I won't do it no more — I won't, honest. "
" You won't, won't you? Well, I sh'd reckon you won't I "
GlKwIc
" rOU IMPUDEST YOVKG JtASCAL. " 313
'* No'm, I'm honest about it ; I won't ever do it again. Till
you ask me.''
" Till I a«^ you ! Well, I never see the beat of it in my
bom dajs ! I lay you'll be the Methu sal em-uum skull of crea-
tion before ever 1 ask you — or the likes of you. "
*'Well, " he Bays, " it does surprise me so. I can't make it
out, somehow. They said you would, and I thought you
would. But — " He stopped and looked around alow, like he
wished he could run across a friendly eye, somewhere's ; and
fetched up on the old gentleman's, and says, " Didn't you think
fihe'd like me to kiss her, sir ? "
" Why, no, I — I — well, no, I b'lieve I didn't. "
Then he looks on around, the same way, to me — and says :
" Tom, didn't you think Aunt Sally'd open out her arms
and say,'Sid Sawyer''
" My land ! " she says, breaking in and jumping for him,
" you impudent young rascal, to fool a body so — " and was
going to hug him, hat he fended her off, and says :
" No, not till you've asked me, first, "
So she didn't lose no time, but asked him ; and hugged him
and kissed him, over and over again, and then turned him over
to the old man, and he took what was left. And after they got
a little quiet again, she says :
" Why, dear me, 1 never see such a surprise. We warn't
lookiog for you, at all, but only Tom. Sis never wrote to me
about anybody coming but him. "
" It's because it warn't intended for any of us to come but
Tom, " he says ; " but I begged and begged, and at the last
minute she let me come, too ; so, coming down the river, me
and Tom thought it would be a first-rate surprise for him to
come here to the house first, and for me to by-and-by tag along
and drop in and let on to be a stranger. But it was a mistake.
Aunt Sally. This ain't no healthy place for a stranger to come. "
D,g,t,7P:h»Google _
344 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLESESSY FINN.
" No — not impudent whelps, Sid. You ought to had your
jaws boxed ; I hain't been so put out since I don't know when.
But I don't care, I don't mind the terms^I'd be willing to
stand a thousand such jokes to have you here. Well, to think
of that performance ! I don't deny it, I was moat putrified
with astonishment when you give me that smack. " I
We had dinner ont in that broad open passage betwixt the
house and the kitchen ; and there was things enough on that
TlliirTT'
table for seven famihes — and all hot, too ; none of your flabby 1
tough meat that's laid in a cupboard in a damp cellar all night
and tastes Hke a bunk of old cold cannibal in the morning. Uncle
Silas he asked a pretty long blessing over it, but it was worth
it ; and it didn't cool it a bit, neither, the way I've seen them
kind of interruptions do, lota of times.
There was a considerable good deal of talk, all the after-
noon, and me and Tom was on the look-out all the time, but it
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TAS AXB FEATHERS. 34 J
wam't DO use, they didn't happen to say nothing about any
runaway nigger, and we was afraid to try to work up to it. But
at snpper, at night, one of the little boys says ;
" Pa, mayn't Tom and Sid and me go to the show ? "
" No, " says the old man, " I reckon there ain't going to be
any ; and you couldn't go if there was ; because the runaway
nigger told Burton and me all about that scandalous show, and
Burton said he would tell the people ; so I reckon they've drove
the owdacious loafers out of towu before this time. "
So there it was ! — but I couldn't help it. Tom and me was
to sleep in the same room and bed ; so, being tired, we bid
good-night and went up to bed, riglit after supper, and dumb
out of the window and down the lightning-rod, and shoved for
the town ; for I didn't believe anybody was going to give the
king and the duke a hint, and so, if I didn't hurry up and give
them one they'd get into trouble sure.
On the road Tom he told me all about how it was reckoned
I was murdered, and how pap disappeared, pretty soon, and
didn't come back no more, and what a stir there was when Jim
mn away ; and I told Tom all about our Royal Nonesuch rap-
scallions, and as much of the raft-voyage as I had time to; and
aa we struck into the town and up through the middle of it —
it was as much as half-after eight, then — here comes a raging
rush of people, with torches, and an awful whooping and yelling,
and banging tin pans and blowing horns; and we jumped to
one side to let them go by ; and as they went by, I see they
had the king and the duke astraddle of a rail— that is, I knowed
it was the king and the duke, though they was all over tar and
feathers, and didn't look like nothing in the world that was
human — just looked like a couple of monstrous big soldier-
plumes. Well, it made me sick to see it ; and I was sorry for
them poor pitiful rascals, it seemed like I couldn't ever feel
any hardness against them any more in the world. It was a
n,„i,,-i > , Google
34(i THE ADVENTURES OF BUCKLEBERltr FINN.
dreadful thiDg to see. Human beings can be awful cruel to
one another.
We see we was too lafe^-eouldn't do no good. We asked
some stragglers about it, and they said everybody went to the
show looking very innocent ; and laid low and kept dark till the
poor old king was iri the middle of his cavortings on the stage;
then somebody give a signal, and the house rose up and went
for them.
So we poked along back home, and I wara't feeling so brash
as I was before, but kind of ornery, and humble, and to blame,
somehow — though I hadn't, done nothing. But tliat's always
the way ; it don't make no difference whether you do right or
wrong, a person's conscience ain't got no sense, and just goes
for him anyway. If I had a yaller dog that didn't know no
more than a person's conscience does, I would pison him. It
takes up more room than all the rest of a person's insides, and
yet ain't no good, nohow. Tom Sawyer he says the same.
D,r,,t,7=^- In Google
CKal3.XXXI
i/e stopped talking, and
1 got to thinking. By-
and-by Tom says :
" Looky here,
Huck, what fools we
are, to not think of
it before ! I bet
I know where Jim
is. "
" No! WTiere? "
" In that hut down
by the ash-hopper.
Why, looky here.
When we was at din-
ner, didn't you see a
^_ ^^ TtiggeT man go in there
with some vittlea? "
" Yes. " .
" What did you think the vittles was for ? "
" For a dog. "
" So'd I. Well, it wasn't for a dog. "
" Why ? "
" Because part of it was watermelon. "
" So it was — I noticed it. Well, it does beat all, that I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
348 THE ADVENTURES UF HUCKLEBERRY JV.V.Y.
never thought about a dog not eating watermelon. It shows
how a body can see and don't see at the same time. "
" Well, the nigger unlocked the padlock when he went in,
and he locked it again when he come out. He fetched uncle
a key, about the time we got up from table— same key, I bet.
Watermelon shows man, lock shows prisoner; and it ain't likely
there's two prisoners on such a little plantation, and where the
people's all so kind and good. Jim's the prisoner: All right —
I'm glad we found it out detective fashion ; I wouldn't give
shucks for any other way. Now you work your mind and study
out a plan to steal Jim, and I will study out one, too ; and we'll
take the one we like the best. "
What a head for just a boy to have ! If I had Tom Sawyer's
head, I wouldn't trade it off to be a duke, nor mate of a steam-
boat, nor clown in a circus, nor nothing I can think of. I went
to thinking out a plan, but only just to be doing aomething ; I
knowed very well where the right plan was going to come from.
Pretty soon, Tom says :
" Keady ? "
" Yes, " I says.
" All right — bring it out. "
" My plan is this, " I says. " We can easy find out if it's
Jim in there. Then get up my canoe to-morrow night, and
fetch my raft over from the island. Then the 6rst dark night
that comes, steal the key out of the old man's britches, after
he goes to bed, and shove off down the river on the raft, with
Jim, hiding day-times and running nights, the way me and Jim
used to do before. Wouldn't that plan work? "
" Work f Why cert'nly, it would work, like rats a fighting.
But it's too blame'simple ; there ain't nothing to it. What's
the good of a plan that ain't no more trouble than that ? It's
as mild as goose-milk. Why, Huck, it wouldn't make no more
talk than breaking into a soap factory. "
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
OUTRAGEOUS. 340
I never said nothing, because I wam't expecting nothing
different ; but I knowed mighty well that whenever he got his
plan ready it wouldn't have none of them objections to it.
And it didn't. He told me what it was, and I see in a
minute it was worth fifteen of mine, for style, and would make
Jim just as free a man as mine would, and maybe get us all
killed besides. So I was satisfied, and said we would waltz in
on it, I needn't tell what it was, here, because I knowed it
wouldn't stay the way it was. I knowed he would be changing
it around, every which way, as we went along, and heaving in
new bullinesses wherever he got a chance. And that is what
he done.
Well, one thing was dead sure ; and that was, that Tom
Sawyer was in earnest and was actuly going to help steal that
nigger out of slavery. That was the thing that was too many
for me. Here was a boy that was respectable, and, well brung
up ; and had a character to lose ; and folks at home that bad
characters ; and he was bright and not leather-beaded ; and
knowing and not ignorant ; and not mean, but kind ; and yet
here he was, without any more pride, or rightness, or feeling,
than to stoop to this business, and make himself a shame, and
his femily a shame, before everybody. I couldn't understand
it, no way at all. It was outrageous, and I knowed I oiight to
just up and tell him so ; and so be his true friend, and let him
quit the thing right where he was, and save himself. And I
did start to tell him ; but he shut me up, and says :
" Don't you reckon I know what I'm about ? Don't I
generly know what I'm about ? "
« Yee. "
" Didn't I say I was going to help steal the nigger? "
" Yes. "
" Wdl, then. "
That's all he said, and that's all I said. It wam't no use to
D,g,t,7P:h»Google
350 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
say any more ; because when he said he'd do a thing, he always
done it. But / couldn't make out how he was willing to go
into this thing ; so I just let it go, and never bothered no more
about it. If he was bound to have it so, / couldn't help it.
When we got home, the house was all dark and still ; so we
went on down to the hut by the ash-hopper, for to examine it.
We went through the yard, so as to see what the hounds would
do. They knowed us, and didn't make no more noise than
country dogs is always doing when anything comes by in the
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
A SIMPLE JOB. 3H
night. When we got to the cabin, we took a look at the front
and the two sides ; and on the side I wam't acquainted with —
which was the north side — we found a square window-hole, up
tolerable high, with just one stout board nailed across it, I says ;
" Here's the ticket. This hole's big enough for Jim to get
through, if we wrench off the board. "
Tom says :
" It's as simple as tit-tat-toe, three-in-a-row, and as easy as
plaj ing hooky. I should hope we can find a way that's a little
more complicated than that, Huck Finn. "
" Well, then, " I says, " howll it do to saw him out, the way
I done before I was murdered, that time ? "
" That's more like, " he says. " It's real mysterious, and
troublesome, and good, " he says ; " but I bet we can find a way
that's twice as long. There ain't no hurry ; le's keep on look-
ing around. "
■ Betwixt the hut and the fence, on the back side, was a lean-
to, that joined the hiit at the eaves, and was made out of plank.
It was as long as the hut, but narrow — only about six foot wide.
The door to it was at the south end, and was padlocked. Tom
he went to the soap kettle, and searched around and fetched
back the iron thing they lift the lid with ; so he took it and
prized out one of the staples. Tbe chain fell down, and we
opened the door and went in, and shut it, and struck a match,
and see the shed was only built against the'cabin and hadn't
no connection with it ; and there wam't no floor to the shed,
nor nothing in it but some old rusty played-out hoes, and
spades, and picks, and a crippled plow. The match went out,
and so did we, and shoved in the staple again, and the door was
locked as good as ever. Tom was joyful. He says :
" Now we're all right. We'll dig him out. It'll lake about
a week ! "
Then we started for the house, and I went in the back door
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
352 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISX.
—you only have to pull a buckskin latch-string, they don't
fasten the doors — but that wam't romantical enough for Tom
Sawyer : no way would do him but he must climb up the light-
ning-rod. But after he got up half-way about three times, and
missed fire and fell every time, and the last time most busted
hia brains out, he thought he'd got to give it up ; but after he
was rested, he allowed he would give her one more turn for
luck, and this time he made the trip.
In the morning we was up st break of day, and down to the
nigger cabina to pet the dogs and make friends with the ni^r
that fed Jim — if it was Jim that was being fed. The niggers
was just getting through breakfast and starting for the fields;
and Jini's nigger was piling up a tin pan with brsad and meat
and things ; and whilst the others was leaving, the key come
from the house.
This nigger had a good-natured, chuckle-headed face, and
his wool was all tied up in little bunches with thread. That
was to keep witches off. He said the witches was pestering
hira awful, these nights, and making him see all kinds of
strange things, and hear all kinds of strange words and noises,
and he didn't believe he was ever witched so long, before, in
his life. He got so worked up, and got to running on so about
his troubles, he forgot all about what he'd been agoing to do.
So Tom says :
" What's the vittles for ? Going to feed the dogs? "
The nigger kind of smiled around graduly over his face, like
when you heave a brickbat in a mud puddle, and he says :
" Yes, Mars Sid, a dog. Cm-'us dog, too. Does you want
to go en look at'im ? "
" Yes. "
I hunched Tom, and whispers :
" You going, right here in the day-break ? Thai wam't
the phin. "
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
CLIMSiya TSE LIGBTXiyO-ROD. 363
'* No, it wam't — but it's the plan now. "
So, drat him, we went along, but I didn't like it mnch.
v\^heu we got in, we couldn't hardly see auythiug, it was so
dark ; bat Jim was there, Bure enough, and could see as ; and
he sings out:
" Why HvAik ! En good Ian'! ain'dat Miato Tom ? "
I just knowed bow it would be; I just expected it. /
iidn't know nothing to do ; and if I had, I couldn't a done it ;
cause that nigger busted in and says :
" Why, de gracious sakes ! do he know you genlmen ? "
We could see pretty well, now. Tom he looked at the
nigger, steady and kind of wondering, and says :
" Does who know ua ? "
" Why, dish-yer runaway nigger. "
** I don't reckon he does ; but what put that into your
head? "
" What put it dar ? Didn'he jis'dis minute sing out like
he knowed you ? "
Tom says, in a puzzled-up kind of way :
" WpU, that's mighty curious. Who sung out ? When
did he sing out ? What did he sing out ? " And turns to me,
perfectly calm, and says, " Did you hear anybody sing out ? "
Of course there wam't nothing to be said but the one thing ;
so I says ;
" No ; / ain't heard nobody say nothing. "
Then he turns to Jim, and looks him over like he never see
him before ; and says :
" Did you sing out ? "
" No, sab, " says Jim ; " 1 hain't said nothing, aah. "
" Not a word ? "
" No, aah, I hain't said a word. "
" Did you ever see ub before ? "
" No, aah ; not as / knows on. "
: , Cixi'^le
354 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY EISA.
So Tom tuniB to the nigger, which was looking wild and
diBtressed, and eays, kind of severe :
■'*What do you reckon'* the matter with you, anyway?
What made you think somebody sung out ? "
" Oh, it's de dad-blame'witohea, sah, en I wishfc I was dead,
I do. Dey's awluz at it, sah, en dey do mos'kill me, dey
sk'yera me so. Please to don't tell nobody'bout it sah, er ole
Mars Silas he'll scole me ;'kase he says dey avrCt no witches.
I jis'wish to goodness he was heah now — dffti what would he
say ! I jis'bet he couldn'fine no way to git aroun'it dis time.
But it's awluz jis'so; people dat's eot, stays sotj dey wont
D,g,t,7P-hyGoogle .
TROUBLED WITH WITCHES. 365
look into nottrn'en fine it out f r deyselves, en when you fine
it out en tell um'bout it, dey doan'b'lieve you. "
Tom give him a dime, and said we wouldn't tell nobody ;
and told him to buy some more thread to tie up his wool with ;
and then looks at Jim, and says :
** I wonder if Uncle Silas is going to hang this nigger. If
I was to cateh a nigger that was ungrateful enough to run
away, I wouldn't give him up, I'd hang him. " And whilst the
nigger stepped to the door to look at the dime and bite it to
see if it was good, he whispers to Jim, and says :
" Don't ever let on to know ira. And if you hear any dig-
ging going on nights, it's us : we're going to set you free. "
Jim only had time to grab us by the hand and squeeze it,
then the nigger come back, and we said we'd come again some
time if the nigger wanted us to ; and he said he would, more
particular if it was dark, because the witches went for him
mostly in the dark, and it was good to have folks around then.
iXiOti^le
Cha|3,XXXV
would be tnoEt an hour,
yet, till breakfast, so we
left, and struck down
into the woods ; becaose
Tom said we got to have
some light to see bow
to dig by, aud a lan-
tern makea too much,
and might get us into
trouble ; what we must
have was a lot of them
rotten chunks that't
called fox-fire and jmt
makes a soft kind of
a glow when you hj
them in a dark place.
We fetched an armful
and hid it in the weeds,
— and set down to rest,
^^- and Tom says, kind of
dissatisfied :
" Blame it, this whole thing is just as easy and awkard «
it can be. And so it makes it so rotten difficult to get Dp i
difficult plan. There ain't no watchman to be drugged — nof
there ought to be a watchman. There ain't even a dog to give
n,„i,,-i > ,GO()J^lc
ESCAPING FROPESLY. 357
a Bleeping^mixtare to. And there's Jim chained by one leg,
with a ten-foot chain, to the leg of hia bed : why, all you got
to do is to lift up the bedstead and slip off the chain. And
Uncle Silas he trusts everybody ; sends the key to the punkin-
headed nigger, and don't send nobody to watch the nigger.
Jim could a got out of that window hole before this, only there
wouldn't be no use trying to travel with a ten-foot chain on his
leg. Why, drat it, Huck, it's the stupidest arrangement I ever
see. Yoa got to invent all the difficultiee. Well, we can't
help it, we got to do the best we can with the materials we've
got. Anyhow, there's one thing— there's more honour in
getting him out through a lot of difficulties and dangers, where
there warn't one of them furnished to you by the people who
it was their duty to furnish them, and you had to contrive
them all out of your own head. Now look at just that one
thing of the lantern. When you come down to the cold & cts,
we simply got to let on that a lantern's resky. Why, we could
work with a torchlight procession if we wanted to, / believe.
Now, whilst I think of it, we got to hunt up something to
make a saw out o^ the first chance we get. "
" What do we want of a saw ? "
" What do we want of it ? Hain't we got to saw the leg of
Jim's bed off, so as to get the chain loose ? "
" Why, you just said a body could lift up the bedstead and
slip the chain off. "
" Well, if that ain't just like you, Huck Finn, You can
get up the in & nt-schooliest ways of going at a thing. Why,
hain't you ever read any books at all ? — Baron - Trenck, nor
Casanova, nor Benvenuto Chellefeny, nor Henri IV., nor none of
them heroea ? WTioever heard of getting a prisoner loose in
each an old-maidy way as that ? No ; the way all the best
authorities does, is to saw the bed-leg in two, and leave it just
ao, and swallow the sawdust, so it can't be found, and put some
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
368 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEREr FINN.
dirt and grease around the sawed place so the very keenest
seneskal can't see no sign of it's being sawed, and thinks the
bed-leg is perfectly sound. Then, the night you're ready, fetch
the leg a kick, down she goes j slip off your chain, and there
you are. Nothing to do but hitch your rope-ladder to the
battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the moat — becaase
a rope-ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know— and there's
your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
fiing you across a saddle and away you go, to your native Lan-
gudoc, or Navarre, or wherever it is. It's gaudy, Huck. I
wish there was a moat to this cabin. If we get time, the night
of the escape, well dig one. "
I says :
" What do we want of a moat, when we're going to snake
him out from under the cabin ? "
Bnt he never heard me. He had forgot me and everything
else. He had his chin in his ha,nd, thinking. Pretty soon,
he sighs, and shakes his head ; then sighs again, and says :
" No, it wouldn't do — there ain't necessity enough for it; "
" For what ? " I says :
" Why, to saw Jim's leg off, " he says.
" Good land ! " I says, " why, there ain't no necessity for it.
And what would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway ? "
" Well, some of the best authorities has done it. They
couldn't get the chain off, so they just cut their hand off, and
shoved. And a leg would be better still. Bnt we got to let
that go. There ain't necessity enough in this case ; and besides,
Jim's a nigger and wouldn't understand the reasons for it, and
how it's the custom in Europe ; so well let it go. Bat there's'
one thing — he can have ar rope-ladder; we can tear up oor
sheets and make him a rope-ladder easy enough. And we on
send it to him in a pie ; it's mostly done that way. And I'w
et worse pies. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
DARK SCHEMES. 339
*'Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk, " I says ; " Jim ain't got
no use for a rope-ladder. "
" He has got use for it. " How yov, talk ; you better say
you don't know nothing about it. He's got to have a rope-
ladder ; they all do. "
" What in the nation can he do with it ? "
i BEST AUTHOBITIBB.
" i > owithit? He can hide it in his bed, can't he ? That's
^hat they all do ; and Ae'a got to, too. Huck, you don't ever
seem to want to do anything that's regular ; you want to be
stoxtin^ something fresh all the time. S'pose he dorCt do
uotbiug with it? ain't it there in his bed, for a clew, after he's
gone ? and don't you reckon they'll want clews ? Of cotu-se
they will. And you wouldn't leave them any ? That would be
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
8(10 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
A pretty howdj^lo, wouldn't it! I never heard of such a
thing. "
*'Well, " I says, " if it's in the regulations, and he's got to
have it, all right, let him have it ; because I don't- wish to go-
back on no regulations ; but there's one thing, Tom Sawyer — ■
if we go to tearing up our sheets to make Jim a rope-ladder,
we're going to get into trouble with Aunt Sally, just as sure as
you're bom. Now, the way I look at it, a hickry-bark ladder
don't coBt nothing, and don't waste nothing, and is just as good
to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick, as any rag
ladder you can start ; and as for Jim, he ain't had no experience,
and so ke don't care what kind of a — — "
" Oh, shucka, Huck Finn, if I was aa ignorant as you, I'd
keep still — that's what I'd do. Who ever heard of a state
prisoner escaping by a hickry-bark ladder ? Why, it's perfectly
ridicalous. "
" Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way ; but if you'U
take my advice, you'll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothes-
line. "
He said that would do. And that give him another idea,
and he says :
" Borrow a shirt, too. "
'* What do we want of a shirt, Tom ? "
" Want it for Jim to keep a journal on. "
" Journal your granny— /-im can't write. "
*'S'pose he cOTi'f write — he can make marks on the shirt,
can't he, if we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a
piece of an old iron barrel-hoop ? " I
" Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make ;
him a better one ; and quicker, too. "
" Prisoners don't have geese running around the doajeo*
keep to pull ■ pens out of, you muggins. They always mskt
their pens out of the hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
DASK SCHEMES. 381
old brass candlestick or something like that thej can get their
hands on ; and it takes them weeks and weeks, and months
and months to file it out, too, because they've got to do it by
mbbing it on the wall. They wouldn't use a goose-quill if they
had it. It ain't regular. "
" Well, then, what'll we make him the ink out of? "
** Many makes it oat of iron-rust and teats ; but that's the
common sort and women ; the best authorities uses their own
blood. Jim cau do that ; and when he wants to send any little
common ordinary mysterious message to let the world know
where'a he's captivated, he can write it on the bottom of a tin
plate with a fork and throw it out of the window. The Iron
Mask always done that, and it's a blame'good way, too, "
" Jim ain't got no tin plates. They feed him in a pan. "
" That ain't anything; we can get him some. "
" Can't nobody read his plates ? "
" That ain't got nothing to do with it, Huck Finn. All he's
got to do is to write on the plate and throw it out. You don't
have to be able to read it. Why, half the time you can't read
anything a prisoner writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else. "
" Well, then, what's the sense in wasting the plates ? "
" Why, blame it all, it ain't the prisoner's plates. "
" But it's soTTiebody's plates, ain't it ? "
" _^Well, spos'n it is? What does the " prisoner care
whose "
He broke off there, because we heard the breakfest-hom
blowing. So we cleared out for the house.
Along during that morning I borrowed a sheet and a white
shirt off of the clothes-line ; and I found an old sack and put
them in it, and we went down and got the fox-fire, and put
that in too. ■! called it borrowing, because that was what pap
^ways called'it ; but Tom said it wam't borrowing, it was
stealing. He said we was representing prisoners ; and ]^soner3
302 THE ADVESTURES OF SUCKLEBERRY FISN.
don't care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody don't
blame them for it, either. It ain't no. crime in a prisoner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said ; it's his
right ; and so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we
TBB BBBAKFAST-HOBN.
had a perfect right to steal anything on this place we had the
least use for, to get ourselves out of prison with. He said if
we wam't prisoners Jt would be a very different thing, and
nobody but a mean ornery person would steal when he waro't
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
mSCSIMINATlON IN STEALING. 36*
a jffiBoner. So we allowed we would steal everything there
was that come handy. And yet he made a mighty fusa, one
day, after that, when I stole a watennelon out of the aigger
patch and eat it ; and he made me go and give the niggers a
dime, without telling them what it was for. Tom said that
what he meant was, we could steal anything we needed. Well,
I says, I needed the watermelon. But he said I didn't need it
to get out of prison with, there's where the diflference was. He
said if rd a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to
Jim to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right. So I
let it go at that, though I couldn't see no advantage in my
representing a prisoner, if I got to set down and chaw over a
lot of gold-leaf distinctions like that, every time I see a chance
to hog a watermelon.
Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till every-
body was settled down to business, and nobody in sight around
the yard ; then Tom he carried the sack into the lean-to whilst
I stood off a piece to keep watch. By-and-by he come out,
and we went and set down on the wood-pile, to talk. He says :
" Everything's all right, now, except tools ; and that's easy
fixed. "
'* Tools ? " I says.
" Yes. "
" Tools for what ? "
" Why, to dig with. We ain't agoing to gnatv him out, are
we? "
" Ain't them old crippled picks and things in there good
enough to dig a nigger out with? " I says.
He turns on me looking pitying enough to make a body cry,
and says:
" Huck Finn, did you ever hear of a prisoner having picks
aod shovels, and all the modem conveniences in his wardrobe
to dig himself out with ? Now I want to ask you — if you got
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
364 THE ABVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
any reasonableness in jou at all — what kind of s. show voold
thai, give him to be a hero ? Why, they might as well lend him
the key, and done with it. Picks and shovels — why they wonldnt
fnmieh'em to a king. "
" Well, tben, " I says, " if we don't want the picks and shovels,
what do we want? "
" A couple of case-knives. " ■
" To dig the foundations out from under that cabin, with ? "
" Yes. "
" Confound it, it's foolish, Tom. "
" It don't make no difference how foolish it is, it's the right
way — and it's the regular way. And there ain't no otiier way,
that ever I heard of, and I've read all the books that gives any
information about these things. They always dig out with a
case-knife — and not through dirt, mind you; generly it's
through solid rock. And it takes them weeks and weeks and
weeks, and for ever and ever. Why, look at one of them prisoners
in the bottom dungeon of the Gastle Deef^ in the harbour of
Marseilles, that dtig himself out that way ; how long was As
at it, you reckon ? "
" I don't know. "
" Well, guess. "
" I don't know. A month and a half? "
" Tki'rty-8eve}i year — and be come out in China. Thad
the kind. I wish the bottom of thie fortress was solid rock. "
" Jim, don't know nobody in China. "
" What's that got to do with it ? Neither did that other
fellow. But you're always a-wandering off on a side issue.
Why can't you stick to the raesa point ? "
" All right — / don't care where he comes out, so he cfftMi
cut; and Jim don't, either, I reckon. But there's one thing,
anyway — Jim's too old to be dug out with a case-knife. He
won't last. "
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
A DEEP SOLE, S86
" Yes he will laat, too. You doa't reckon it's going to take
thirty-seven years to dig out through a dirt foundation, do
you ? "
" How long will it take, Tom ? "
BMOUCHINO THE KNIVES.
" Well, we can't resk being aa long as we ought to, because
it mayn't take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down
there by New Orleans. Hell hear Jim ain't from there. Then
his next move will be to advertise Jim, or something like that.
So we can't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
see THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBEHRY FINN.
By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years ; but we
can't. Things being so uncertain, what I recommend is this :
that we really dig right in, as quick as we can ; and after that,
we can let on, to ourselves, that we was at it thirty-seven years.
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time
there's an alarm. Tes, I reckon that'll be the best way. "
" Now, there's senae in that, " I says. " Letting on don't
cost nothing; letting on ain't no trouble; and if it's any object,
I don't mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year.
It wouldn't strain me none, after I got my hand in. So 111
mosey along now, and smouch a couple of case-knives. "
" Smouch three, " he says ; " we want one to make a saw
ont of. "
" Tom, if it ain't unregular and irreligious to aejest it, " I
says, " there's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking
under the weatherboarding behind the smoke-honse. "
He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says :
" It ain't no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck. Enn
along and smouch the knives — three of them. " So I done it.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
XXXVl
7\3 Boon as we reckoned
everybody was asleep, that
night, we went down the
lightning-rod, and shut our-
selves up in the lean-to, and
got out our pile of fox-fire,
and went to work. We cleared
everything out of the way,
about four or five foot along
the middle of the bottom log.
Tom said he was right behind
Jim's bed now, and we'd dig
in under it, and when we got
through there couldn't nobody
in the cabin ever know there
waa any hole there, because
Jim's counterpin hung down
most to the ground, and you'd
have to raise it up and look
GOING DOWN THE LIGHTNING-ROD. ^^^^j. j^, ^^ ^j^^ j^^j^^ g^ ^^
dug and dug, with the case-knives, till most midnight ; and
then we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet
you couldn't see we'd done anything, hardly. At last I says :
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
868 THE ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBEBRY FISX.
" This ain't no thirty-seven year job, this is a thirty-eight*
year job, Tom Sawyer. "
He never eaid nothing. But he sighed, and pretty goon he
stopped digging, and then for a good little while I knowed he
was thinking. Then be says :
" It ain't no nse, Huck, it ain't agoing to work. If we was
prisoners it would, because then we'd have as many years as we
wanted, and no hurry ; and we wouldn't get but a few minutes
to dig, every day, while they was changing watches, luid so our
hands wouldn't get blistered, and we could keep it up right
along, year in and year out, and do it right, and the way it
ought to be done. But we can't fool along, we got to rush ;
we ain't got no time to spare. If we was to put in another
night this way, we'd have to knock off for a week to let our
hands get well — couldn't touch a case-knife with them fetoner. "
" Well, then, what we going to do, Tom ? "
" I'll tell you. It ain't right, and it ain't moral, and I
wouldn't like it to get out — but there ain't only just the one
way; we got to dig him out with the picks, and let on it's case-
knives. "
^ Now yovHre talking ! " I says; " yonr head gets leveller
and leveller all the time, Tom Sawyer, " I says. " Picks is the
thing, moral or no moral ; and as for me, I don't care shocks
for the morahty of it, nohow. When I start in to steal a nigger,
or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school book, I ain't no ways
particular how it's done so it's done. What I want is my
ni^er ; or what I want is ray watermelon ; or what I want is
my Sunday-school book ; and if a pick's the handiest thing,
that's the thing I'm agoing to dig that nigger or that waters
melon or that Sunday-school book out with ; and I don't give
a dead rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther. "
" Well, " he says, " there's excuse for picks and letUng-on
in a case like this ; if it wam't eo, I wouldn't approve of it, wx
mis LEVEL BE & T. 369
I wouldn't staod by ftnd see the rules broke — because right is
right, and wrong is wrong, and a body ain't got no -bueiness
doing wrong when he ain't ignorant and knows better. It
might answer for yov. to dig Jim out with a pick, without any
letting-on, because you don't know no better ; but it wouldn't
for me, because I do know better. Oimme a case-knife. "
He had his own by him, but I handed him mine. He flung
it down, and aays:
" Gimme a caae-lenife "
I didn't know just what to do — but then I thought. I
scratched around amongst the old tools, and got a pick-axe and
give it to him, and he took it and went to work, and never said
a word.
He was always just that particular. Full of principle.
So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shovelled,
turn about, and made the fur fly. We stuck to it about a half
an hour, which was as long as we could stand up ; but we had
a good deal of a hole to show for it. When I got upstairs, I
looked out at the window and see Tom doing his level best
with the lightning-rod, but he couldn't come it, his hands was
so sore. At last he says :
" It ain't no use, it can't be done. What you reckon I
better do? Can't you think up no way ? "
" Yes, " I says, " but I reckon it ain't regular. Come up the
stairs, and let on it's a lightning-rod. "
So he done it.
Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick
ih the house, for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six
tallow candles ; and I hong around the nigger cabins, and laid
for a chance, and stole three tin plates. Tom said it wasn't
enough ; but I said nobody wouldn't ever see the plates that
Jim throwed out, because they'd fall in the dog-fennel and
jimpson weeds under the window-hole — then we could tote
370 TBE ADVESTUSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISN.
them back and be could use them over again. So Tom was
satisfied. Then he saya :
" Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to
Jim. "
" Take them in through the hole, " I saya, *'when we get it
done. "
STEALING SPOONS.
He only just looked acomful, and said something about
nobody ever heard of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to
studying. By-and-by he said he had ciphered out two or three
ways, but there wam't no need to decide on any of them yet.
Said we'd got to post Jim first.
That night we went dcwn the lightning-rod a little after
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
STEALING SPOONS. 371
tea, and took dae of the candles along, and listened under the
window-hole, and heard Jim anoring; so we pitched it in, and
it didn't wake him. Then we whirled in with the pick foid
shovel, and in about two hours and a half the job was done.
We crept in under Jim's bed and into the cabin, and pawed
around and found the candle and lib it, and stood over Jim a
while, and foiftid him looking hearty and healthy, and then we
woke him up gentle and gradual. He was so glad to see us he
most cried ; and called us honey, and all the pet names he
could think of; and was for having us hunt up a cold chisel to
cut the chain off of his leg with, right away, and clearing out
without losing any time. But Tom he showed him how un-
regular it would be, and set down and told him all about our
plans, and how we could alter them in a minute any time there
was an alarm ; and not to be the least afraid, because we would
see he got away, sure. So Jim he said it was all right, and we
set there and talked over, old .times a while, and then Tom
asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told him Uncle Silas
come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt Sally
come in to see if he was comfortable and bad plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says :
" Nmu I know bow to fix it. We'll send you some things
by them. "
I said, " Don't do nothing of the kind ; it's one of the most
jackass ideas I ever struck ; " but he never paid no attention
to me ; went right on. It was his way when he'd got his plans
set.
So he told Jim how we'd have to smuggle in the rope-ladder
pie, and other large things, by Nat, the nigger that fed him,
and he must be on the look-out, and not be surprised, and not
let Nat see him open them ; and we would put small things in
uncle's coat pockets and he must steal them out; and we would
tie things to aunt's apron strings or put them in her apron
373 TBE ADVENTnSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
pocket, if we got a chance ; and told him what they would be
and what they was for. And told him how to keep a journal
on the shirt with his blood, and all that. He told him every-
thing. Jim he .couldn't see no sense in the most of it, but he
allowed we was white folks and knowed better than him ; so he
was satisfied, and said he would do it all just as Tom said.
Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco ;* so we had a
right down good sociable time ; then we crawled out through
the hole, and so home to bed, with hands that looked like
they'd been chawed. Tom was in high spirits. He said it was
the best fun he ever had in his life, and the most intellectoral;
and said if he only could see his way to it we would keep it up i
all the reBt of our lives and leave Jim to our children to get I
out ; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and
better the more he got used to it. He said that in that way it I
could be strung out to as much as eighty year, and would be
the best time on record. And he said it would make us all
celebrated that bad a hand in it.
In the morning we went out to the wood-pile and chopped
up the brass candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them
and the pewter spoon in his pocket. Then we'went to the
nigger cabins, and while I got Nat's notice off, Tom shoved s
piece of candlestick into the middle of a corn-pone that was in i
Jim's pan, and we went along with Nat to see how it ironld
work, and it just worked noble ; when Jim bit into it it most !
mashed all his teeth out ; and there wam't ever anything could
a worked better. Tom said bo himself. Jim he never let on
but what it was only just a piece of rock or something like that I
that's always getting into bread, you know ; but after that he I
never bit into nothing but what he jabbed his fork into it in |
three or four places, first. |
And whilst we was a standing there in the dimmish light,
here comes a couple of the hounds bulging in, & om under Jim's
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
AliOyGST THE DOGS.
bed ; and they kept on piling in till there was eleven of them,
and there warn't hardly room in there to get your breath. By
jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to door. The nigger Nat
he only just hollered " witches ! " once, and keeled over on to
the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
dying. Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim's
meat, and the dogs went for it, and in two seconda he was out
himself and back again and shut the door, and I knowed he'd
fixed the other door too. Then he went to work on the nigger,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
874 THE ADVEISTVSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
coaxing him and petting him, and asking him if he'd been
imagining he saw something again. He raised up, and blinlted
hia eyes around, and says :
" Mare Sid, you'll say I's a fool, but if I didn't b'Ueve I see
most a million dogs, er devils, er some'OjIwisht I may die right
heah in dese tracks. I did, mos'sholy. Mars Sid, Ifdt um —
\fdt um, sah ; day was all over me. Dad fetch it, I jis'wisht
I could git my ban's on one er dem witches jis'wunst — on'y
jis'wunst — it's all i'd ast. But mos'ly I wisht dey'd lemme
lone, I does. "
Tom says :
" Well, I tell you what / think. MTiat makes them come
here just at this runaway nigger's breakfast-time ? It's because
they're hungry ; that's the reason. You make them a witch
pie ; that's the thing for you to do. "
" But my Ian', Mars Sid, how's / gwyne to make'm a witch
pie ? I doan'know how to make it. I hain't ever beam er
sich a thing b'fo', "
" Well, then, I'll have to make it myself. "
" Will you doit, honey? — will you? Ill wussbup de groun'
«nd'yo'foot, I will ! "
" All right, 111 do it, seeing it's you, and you've been good
to us and showed us the runaway nigger. But you got to be
mighty careful. When we come around, you turn your back ;
and then whatever we've put in the pan, don't you let on yon
see it at all. And don't you look, when Jim unloads the pan —
something might happen, I don't know what. And above all,
don't you handle the witch-things. "
" ffannel'm Mars Sid ? What is you a talkin''bout ? I
wouldn'lay de weight er my finger on um, not fr ten hand'd
thous'n'billion dollars, I wouldn't. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
(XMI
alt fixed. So then
went away and went
the mbbage-pile in
back yard where
f beep the old boots,
raga, and pieces of
JeB, and wore-out tin
igs, ■ and all such
;k, and scratched
md and found an old
nrash-pan and stopped
the boles as well as
could, to bake the
in, and took it down
ar and stole it full of
nour, and started for
lireakfaBt and found a
couple of shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a
prisoner to acrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls
with, and dropped one of tbem in Aunt Sally's apron pocket
which was hanging on a chair, and t'other we stuck in the band
of Uncle Silas's hat, which was on the bureau, because we heard
the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway
nigger's house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
376 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
Tom dropped the pewter spoon in Uncle Silas's coat pocket, and
Aunt Sally wasn't come jet, so we had to wait a little while.
And when she come she was hot, and red, and cross, and
couldn't hardly wait for the blessing ; and then she went to
sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest
child's head with her thimble with the other, and says :
*'I've hunted high, and I've hunted low, and it does beat
all, what ha^ become of your other shirt. "
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things,
and a hard piece of com- crust started down my throat after it
and got met on the road with a cough and was shot across the
table and took one of the children in the eye and curled him
up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry out of him the size of a
war-whoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around the gills,
and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about
a quarter of a minute or as much as that, and I would as old
out for half price if there was a bidder. But after that we was
all right again — it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked
us so kind of cold. Uncle Silas he says :
" I's most uncommon curious, I can't understand it. I
know perfectly well I took it off^ because "
" Because you hain't got but one on. Just listen at the
man ! 1 know you took it off, and know it by a better way
than your wool-gethering memory, too, because ifwas on the
elo'es-line yesterday — I see it there myself. But it's gone —
that's the long and the short of it, and you'll just have to change
to a red flanni one till I can get time to make a new one. And
it'll be the third I've made in two years ; it just keeps a body on
the jump to keep you in shirts ; and whatever you do manage to
do with'm all, is more'n / can make out. A body'd think you
would learn to take some sort of care o£'em, at your time of
life. "
" I know it, Sally, and I do try all I can. But it oaghtn't
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE LAST SBIST. S77
to be altogether my iault, becanse you know I don't see them
nor have nothing to do with them except when they're on me-;
and I don't believe I've ever lost one of them off of me. "
" Well, it ain't your fault if you haven't, Silas — you'd a
done it if you could, I reokon. And the shirt ain't all that's
gone, nuther. Ther's a spoon gone ; and that ain't all. There
was ten, and now ther's only nine. The calf got the shirt I
reckon, bat the calf never took the spoon, that's certain. "
" Why, what else is gone, Sally ? "
" Ther's six candles gone — that's what. The rats could a
got the candles, and I reckon they did ; I wonder they don't
walk o£f with the whole place, the way you're always going to
stop their holes and don't do it; and if they wam't fools they'd
sle^p in your hair, Silas — y(m'd never find it out ; but you
can't lay the spoon on the rats, and that I hnow.^'
" Well, Sally, I'm in fault, and I acknowledge it ; I've been
remiss ; but I won't let to-morrow go by without stopping np
them holes, "
" Oh, I wouldn't hurry, next yearll do. Matilda Angelina
Araminta Pkdpa ! "
Whack comes the thimble, and the child snatches her claws
out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any. Just then,
the nigger woman steps on to the passage, and says :
" Missus, dey's a sheet gone. "
" A sheet gone ! Well, for the land's sake ! "
" 111 stop up them holes to-day, " says Uncle Silas, looking
sorrowful.
" Ohj do shet up !- s'pose the rats took the sheet ? Where's
it gone, Lize ? "
" Clah to goodness I hain't no noti(m, Miss Sally. She
wuz on de clo's-line yistiddy, but she done gone ; she ain'dah
no mo', now, "
" X reckon the world is coming to an end. I never see the
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
878 THE ABVESTURES OF HVCKLEBERRY FINN.
beat of it, in all my bom daya. A shiit, and a sheet, and a
spoon, and six can "
" MiasuB, " comes a young yaller wench, " dey's a brass
eannelstick miss'n. "
" Cler out from here, you hussy, er I'll take a skillet
to ye ! "
Well, she was just a biling. I heguu to lay for a chance;
I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the
weather moderated. She kept, a raging right along, runiiiQg
her insurrection all by herself, and everybody else mighty meek
and quiet; and at last Uncle Silas, looking kind of foolish,
MOOXINO AROUND. 3 " »
fishes up that epoon out of hie pocket. She stopped, with her
mouth open and her hands up ; and as for me, I wished I was
in Jeruslem or somewheres. But not long; because she
says:
" It's juat as I expected. So you had it in your pocket all
the time ; and like as not you've got the other things there,
too. How'd it get there ? "
" I reely don't know, Sally, " he says, kind of apologising,
" or you know I would tell. I was a-studying over my text in
Acts Seventeen, before breakfast, and I reckon I put it in
there, not noticing, meaning to put my Testament in, and it
must be so, because my Testament ain't in, but I'll go and see,
and if the Testament is where I had it, I'll know I didn't put
it in, and that will show that I laid the Testament down and
took up the apoon, and "
" Oh, for the land's sake ! Give a body a rest ! Go long
now, the whole kit and biling of ye ; and don't come nigh me
again till I've got back my peace of mind. "
Vd a heard her, if she'd a said it to herself, let alone speak-
ing it out; and I'd a got up and obeyed her, if I'd a been dead.
As we was passing through the setting-room, the old man he
took up his hat, and the shingle-nail fell out on the floor, and
he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf, and
never said nothing, and went out. Tom see him do it, and
remembered about the spoon, and says :
■ " Well, it ain't no use to send things by hhn no more, he
ain't rehable. " Then he says : " But he done us a good turn
with the spoon, anyway, without knowing it, and so well go
and do him one without him knowing it — stop up his rat-
holes. "
There was a noble good lot of them, down cellar, and it
took US a whole hour, but we done the job tight and good, and
ship- shape. Then we heard steps on the stairs, and blowed out
888 THE ADVESTUBES OF BUCKLBBERRT FlNJf.
our light, and hid ; and here cornea the old man, with a candle
in one hand and a bundle of staff in t'other, looking as absent-
minded as year before last-. He went a mooning around, first
to one rat-hole and then another, till he'd been to them all,
Then he stood about five minutes, picking tallow-drip off of
his candle and thinking. Then he turns off slow and dream;
towards the stairs, saying :
" Well, for the life of me I can't remember when I done it.
I could show her now that I wam't to blame on account of the
rats. But never mind — let it go. I reckon it wouldn't do no
good. "
And 80 he went on a mumbling upstairs, and then we left
He was a mighty nice old man. And always is.
Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon,
but he said we'd got to have it ; so he took a think. When he
had ciphered it out, he told me how we was to do ; then ffe
went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see Aunt
Sally coming, and then Tom went to counting the spoons and
laying them out to one side, and I slid one of them up mj
sleeve, and Tom says :
" Why, Aunt Sally, there ain't but nine spoons, yet. "
She says :
'*Go'long to your play, and don't bother me. I know
belter, I counted'm myself, "
" Well, I've counted them twice. Aunty, and / can't make
but nine. "
She looked out of all patience, but of course she come io
count — anybody would.
" I declare to gracious ther'ain^t but nine \ " she says.
" Why, what in the wotH — plague take the things, I'll count
'm again, "
So I slipped back the one I had, and when she got done
counting, she says :
D,£,,t,7P-hyGoogle
•'IN A TMARISQ WAY. " 381
" Hang the troubleaome rubbage, ther's ten, now ! " and she
looked huflfy and bothered both. But Tom aajs :
" WTiy, Aunty, / don't think there's ten. "
" You numskull, didn't you see me count'm ? "
" I know, but "
" Well, I'll count'm againJ^
" IN A TEABINO WAT. "
So I smouohed one, and they come out nine same as the
other time. Well, she was in a tearing way — just a trembling
all over, she was so mad. But she counted and counted, till
she got that addled she'd start to count-in the basket for a spoon,
aometimes ; and so, three times tlieycome out right, and three
times they come out wrong. Then she grabbed up the basket
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
383 THE ADVENTURES OF HVCKLEBERRY FIXH.
and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-
west ; and she paid cle'r out and let her have some peace, and
if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner,
she'd skin us. So we had the odd spoon ; and dropped it in
her apron pocket whilst she was a giving us our sailing-orderE,
and Jim got it all right, along with her shingle-nail, before
noon. We was very well satisfied with this business, and Tom
allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took, because he said
now she couldn't ever count them spoons twice alike again to
save her life ; and wouldn't believe she'd counted them right,
if she did ; and said that after she'd about counted her head
off, for the nest three days, he judged she'd give it up and offer
to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more.
So we put the sheet back on the line, that night, and stole
one out of her closet : and kept on putting it back and steahng
it again, for a couple of days, till she didn't know how many
sheets she had, any more, and said she didn't care, and wam't
agoing to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it, and
wouldn't count them again not to save her life, she dmther die
first.
So we was all right now, as to the shirt and the sheet and
the spoon and the candles, by the help of the calf and the rats
and the mixed-up counting; and as to the candlestick, it wam't
no consequence, it would blow over by-and-by.
But that pie was a job ; we had no end of trouble with that
pie. We fixed it up away down in the woods, and cooked it
there ; and we got it done at last, and very satisfactory, too ;
but not all in one day ; and we had to use up three wash-pans
full of ftonr, before we got through, and we got burnt pretty
much all over, in places, and eyes put out with the smoke ;
because, you see, we didn't want nothing but a crust, and we
couldn't prop it up right, and she would always cave in. But
of course we thought of the right way at last; which was to
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
THE WITCH PIE. 383
cook the ladder, too, id the pie. So then we laid in with Jim,
the second night, and tore up the sheet all in little strings, and
twisted them together, and long before daylight we had a lovely
rope, that you could a, hung a person with. We let on it took
nine months to make it.
And in the forenoon we toak it down to the woods, but it
ONE OF HIS ANCBSTOBS.
wouldn't go in the pie. Being made of a whole sheet, that way,
there was rope enough for forty pies, if we'd a wanted them, and
plenty left over for soup, or sausage, or anything you choose.
We could a had a wliole dinner.
But we didn't need it. All we needed was juat enough for
the pie, and so we throwed the rest away. We didn't cook
none of the pies in the washpan, afraid the solder would melt ;
p-hy Google
384 THE ABFEATUItES OF HVCELEBERRY FINK
but Uncle Silas lie had a noble brass warming-pan which he
thought considerable of, because it belonged to one of his
ancestors with a long wooden handle that come over from
England with William the Conqueror in .the Mayflower or one
of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot (f
other old pots and things that was valuable, not on account of
being any account because they wam't, but on account of them
being relicts, you know, and we Buaked her out, private, and
took her down there, bat she fiiiled on the first piea, because
we didn't know how, but she come up smiling on the last one.
We took and lined her with dough, and set her in the coals,
and loaded her up with rag-rope, and put on a dough roof, and
shut down the lid, and put hot embers on top, and stood off
five foot, with the long handle, cool and comfortable, and in
fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to
look at. But the person that et it would want to fetch »
couple of kags of toothpicks along, for if that rope-ladder
wouldn't cramp him down to business, I don't know nothing
what I'm talking about, and lay him in enough stomach-ache
to last him till next time, too.
Nat didn't look, when we put the witch-pie in Jim's pan;
and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under
the vittlea ; and so Jim got everything all right, and as soon
as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope-
ladder inside of his straw tick, and scratched some marks on a
tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
GK.at3.XXXVlll
f
I'Ulya3 them pens was a
distressid-tough job,
and ao waa the saw ;
and Jim allowed the
inscription was going
to be the toughest of
all. That's the one
which the prisoner
has to scrabble on the
wall. But we had to
h.ive it ; Tom said
we'd got to : there
wam't no case of a
state prisoner not
scrabbling his inscrip-
tion to leave behind,
and his coat of arnis.
" Look at Lady
Jane Grey, " he says ;
JIM'S COAT OP AE3C3. « look at Gilford Dud-
ley ; look at old North-
umberland ! Why, Huck, a'pose it i% considerble trouble ? —
what you going to do? — how you going to get around it?
Jim's got to do his inscription and coat of arms. They all do. "
CC
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
^
e'WwpY.
880 THE ADVEyrURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIA'K
Jim says :
" Why, Mars Tom, I hain't got no coat o'arms ; I hain't
got DufTn but dish-yer ole shirt, en you kno«-3 I got to keep de
jonmal on dat. "
" Oh, you don't understand, Jim ; a coat of arms is very
different. "
" Weil, " I says, " Jim's right, anyway, when he says he
hain't got no coat of arms, because he hain't. "
" I reckon / knowed that, " Tom says, " but yon bet bell
have one before he goes out of this — because he's going out
right, and there ain't going to be no flaws in his record. "
So whilst me and Jim filed away at the i > enB on a brickbat
apiece, Jim a making his'n out of the brass and I making mine
out of the spoon, Tom set to work to think out the coat of
arms. By-and-by he said he'd struck so many good ones he
didn't hardly know which to take, but there was one which he
reckoned he'd decide on. He says :
" On the scutcheon we'll have a bend or in the dexter base,
a saltire murrey in the fesa, with a dog, couchant, for common
charge, and under his foot a chain embattled, for slavery, with
a chevron vert in a chief engrailed, and three invected lines on
a field azure, with the nombril points rampant on a dancette
indented ; crest, a runaway nigger, sable, with his bundle over his
shoulder on a bar sinister : and a couple of gules for supporters,
which is you and me ; motto, Maggiore frelta, ffiinore oii***
Got it out of a book — means, the more haste, the less speed. "
" Geewhillikins, " I says, " but what does the rest of it
mean ? "
" We ain't got no time to bother over that, " he says, " we
got to dig in like all git-out, "
" Well, anyway, " I says, " what's some of it ? What's a fess ? "
" A fess — a fess is — you don't need to know what a fess is.
Ill show him how to make it when he gets to it. "
n,r,„.=-i > , Google
THE COAT or ASMS. 387
" Shucks, Tom, " I says, " I thiak you might tell a person.
What's a bar sinister ? "
" Oh, 7 don't know. But he's got to have it. All the
nobility does. "
That was just his way. If it didn't suit him to explain a
thing to you, he wouldn't do it. You might pump at him a
week, it wouldn't make no difference.
He'd got all that coat of arms business fixed, so now he
started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work, which
was to plan out a mournful inscription — said Jim got to have
one, like they all done. He made up a lot, and wrote them
out on a paper, and read them off, so :
1. Here a captive heart busted.
2. Here a poor prisoner, fareooJc by the world aTid friends,
fretted out his sorrowful life,
3. Here a lonely heart broke, and a worn spirit went to
its rest, after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity.
4. Here, homeless and friendless, after thirty-seven years
of bitter cajiUvity, perished a noble stranger, natural son of
Louis XIV.
Tom's voice trembled, whilst he was reading them, and he
most broke down. When he got done, he couldn't no way make
up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall, they
wa;a all so good ; but at last be allowed he would let him scrabble
them all on. Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble
such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail, and he didn't
know how to make letters, besides ; but Tom said he would
block them out for him, and then he wouldn't have nothing
to do but just follow the lines. Then pretty soon he says :
" Come to think, the logs ain't agoing to do ; they don't
have log walls in a dungeon : we got to dig the inscriptions into
a rock. Well fetch a rock, "
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
388 THE AHVENTURBS OF HUCKLESERRY FINN.
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs ; he said it would
take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock, he
wouldn't ever get out. But Tom said he would let me help
him do it. Then he took a look to see how me and Jitn was
getting along with the pens. It was moat pesky tedious hard
work and alow, and didn't give lay hands no show to get well
of the sores, and we didn't seem to make no headway, hardly.
So Tom says ;
" I know how to fix it. We got to have a rock for the coat
of arms and mournful inscriptions, and we can kill two hiid«
with that same rock. There's a gaudy big grindstone down at
the mill, and well smouch it, and carve the things on it, and
file out the pens and the saw on it, too. " I
It waru't no slouch of an idea ; and it wam't no slouch of a
grindstone nuther ; but we allowed we'd tackle it. It warn't I
quite midnight, yet, so we cleared out for the mill, leaving Jim
at work. We smouched the grindstone, and set out to roll ber
home, but it was a most nation tough job. Sometimes, do
what we could, we couldn't keep her from falling over, and she
come mighty near mashing us, every time. Tom said she was
going to get one of us, sure, before we got through. We got
her half way ; and then we was ;^Iumb played out, and most
drownded with sweat. We see it wam't no use, we got tfl go
and fetch Jim. So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off
of the bed-leg, and wrapt it round and round his neck, and we
crawled out through our hole and down there, and Jim and me
laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothiog;
and Tom superintended. He could out-superintend any boy I
ever see. He knowed how to do everything.
Our hole was pretty big, but it waro't big enough to get
the grindstone through ; but Jim be took the pick and booh
made it big enough. Then Tom marked out them things on
it with the nail, and set Jim to work on them, with the nail for
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A SKILLED SUPEJaXTEXDEXT. SiiO
a chisel and an iron bo]t from the rubbage in the lean-to for a
hammer) and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit
on him, and then he could go to bed, and bide the grindst'ODe
under his straw tick and sleep on it. Then we helped him fix
his chain back on the bed-leg, and was ready for bed ourselves.
Bat Tom thonght of something, and says :
A TOUQH JOB.
" You got any spiders in here, Jim ? "
" No, sah, thanks to goodness I hain't, Mars Tom. "
" All right, well get you some. "
" But hless you, honey, I doan'want none. I's afeard un
D. I jis''b soon have rattlesnakes aroun'. "
Tom thought a minute or two, and says :
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
300 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK.
" It's a gc»od idea. And I reckon it's been done. It inmt
a been done ; it stands to reason. Yes, it's a prime good idea.
Where could you keep it ? "
" Keep what, Mars Tom ? "
" Why, a rattlesnake. "
" De goodness gracious alive. Mars Tom ! Why, if dey was
a rattlesnake to come in heah, I'd take en bust right out th-w
dat log wall, I would, wid my head. "
" Why, Jim, you wouldn't be afraid of it, after a little.
You could tame it. "
" Tame it ! "
" Yes — ea-sy enough. Every animal is grateful for kindness
and petting, and they wouldn't thiiik of hurting a person that
pets them. Any book will tell you that. You try— that'
I ask ; just try for two or three days. Why, you can get him
so, in a little while, that he'll love you ; and sleep with yon
and won't stay away from you a minute ; and will let you wraj
him round your neck and put his head in your mouth. "
'^'- Pleaae, Mars Tom — doan'talk so! I can't stan'it
He'd let me shove his head in my mouf — fer a favour, liain'l
it ? I lay he'd wait a pow'ful long time'fo'I ast him. En
mo'en dat, I doan'want him to sleep wid me. "
" Jim, don't act so foolish. A prisoner's got to have Bome
kind of a dumb pet, and if a rattlesnake hain't ever been tried,
why, ther's more glory to be gained in your being the first to
ever tiy it than any other way you could ever think of to save
your life. "
" Why, Mars Tom,- I doan'tvant no sich glory. JSnake
take'n bite Jim's chin off, den whah is de glory ? No, sah, I
doan'want no sich doin's, "
" Blame it, can't you (i-y? I only want you to fry— you
needn't keep it up if it don't work. "
" But de trouble all done, ef de snake bite me while I's a
UNPLEASANT GLORY. 3U1
tryin'him. Mars Tom, Ve willin'to tackle mos'anything'at
ain't onreanonable, but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in
heah for me to tame, I's gwyne to leave, dat's shore. "
" Well, then, let it go,letitgo, ifyou'resobuUheadedabout
it. We can get you some garter-snakes and you can tie some
buttons on their tails, and let on they're rattlesnakes, and I
reckon that'll have to do. "
'* I k'n stan'dem. Mars Tom, but blame''f I couldn'get
along widout nm, I tell you dat. I never knowed b'fo','t was
so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner. "
" Well, it always is, when it's done right. You got any
rats around here ? "
" No, sah, I hain't seed none. "
" Well, we'll get you some rats. "
" Why, Mars Tom, I doan'want no rats. Dey's de dad-
blamedeat creturs to'sturb a body, en rustle roim'over'im, en
bite his feet, when he's tryin'to sleep, I ever see. No, sah,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
302 THE ADrESTURES OF BUCKLEBERRi'FINN.
gimme g'yarter-snakes *f I'a got to have'm, but doan'gimme
no rata, I ain'got no use fr um, sfcasely. "
" But Jim, you got to have'em — tlieyall do. So don't make
no more fuss about it. Prisonera ain't ever without lats.
There ain't no instance of it. And tliey train them, and pet
them, and learn them tricko, and they get to be as sociable aa
flies. But you got to play music to them. You got anything
to play music on ? "
" I ain'got nufifn but a coase comb en a piece o'paper, en
a juice-harp; but I reck'n dey wouldn'take no atock in a juice-
harp. "
" Yes they would. They don't care what kind of music'tia.
A jew-sharp's plenty good enough for a rat. All animals likes
music — in a priBon they dote on it. Specially, jiainful muaic ;
and you can't get no other kind out of a jews-liarp.'It always
interests them ; they come out to see what's the matter with
you. Yes, you're all right ; you're fixed very well. You want
to set on your bed, nights, before you go to sleep, and early in
the mornings, and play your jews-haqi ; play The Last Link is
Broken — that's the thing that'll scoop a rat, quitker'n anything
else ; and when you've played about two minutes, you'll see all
the rata, and the snakes, and spiders, and things begin to feel
worried about you, and come. And they'll just fairly swarm
over you, and have a noble good time. "
" Yes, dey will, I reck'n, i\fara Tom, but what kine er time
is Jim ha\'in'? Blest if 1 kin see de pint. But I'll do it ef I
got to. I reck'n I better keep de animals satisfied, en not <
have no trouble in de house. "
Tom waited to think over, and see if there wasn't nothing
else ; and pretty soon he says :
" Oh — there's one thing I forgot. Could you raise a flower
here, do yon reckon ? "
" I doan'know but maybe I could, Mars Tom ; but it's
D,£,,t,7P-h»Google'
A TEASFUL SUBJECT. 303
tolable dark in ]ieal), en I ain'got no use fr no Bower, nohow,
en she'd be a pow'ful eight o'trouble. "
*'Wel], you try it, anyway. Some other prisoners has
done it. "
" One er dem big cat-tail-lookin'mullen-stalkg would grow iti
beah. Mars Tom, I reck'n, but she woulda'be wuth half de
trouble she'd cose. "
" Don't you believe it. Well fetch you .1 little one, and you
plant it in the comer, over there, and raise it. And don't call
it mullen, call it Pitchiola — that's its right name, when it's in
a prison. And you want to water it with your tears. "
" Why, I got plenty spring water, Mars Tom. "
" You don't want spring water ; you want to water it with
your tears. It's the way they always do. "
" Why, Mars Tom, I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-
stalks twyste wid spring water whiles another man's a start'n
one wid tears. "
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle ■
30i TSE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
" That ain't the idea. You got to do it with teare. "
*'She'll die on my ban's, Mars Tom, she sholy vill ; kase I
dcKin* akasely ever cry. "
So Tom was stumped. But he studied it over, and then
said Jim would have to worry along the best he could with an
onion. He promised he would go to the nigger cabins and
drop one, private, in Jim's coffee pot, in the morning. Jim
said he would " jis''s soon have tobacker in bis coffee ; " and
found 80 much fault with it, and with the work and bother of
raising the mullen, and jews-harping the rats, and petting
and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things, on top
of all the other work he bad to do on pens, and inscriptions,
and journals, and things, which made it more trouble and
worry and responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he
ever undertook, that Tom moat lost all patience with him ;
and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier
chances than a prisoner ever bad in the world to make a
name for himself, and yet be didn't know enough to appre-
ciate them, and they was just about wasted on him. So Jim
he was sorry, and said he wouldn't behave so no more, and then
me and Tom shoved for bed.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
XXXIX
N the morning we went up to
■ the village and bought a wire
rat trap and fetched it down,
and unstopped the best lat
hole, and in about an hour we
had fifteen of the bulliest kind
of ones ; and then we took it
and put it in a safe place under
Aunt Sally's bed. But while
we was gone for spiders, little
Thomas Franklin Benjamin
JeflFerson Elexander Phelps
found it there, and opened the
door of it to see if the rats
would come out, and they
did ; and Aunt Sally she come
in, and when we got back she
was a standing on top of the
bed raising Cain, and the rats
was doing what they could to
So she took and dusted us both
IS much as two hours catching
that meddlesome cub, and they
sause the first haul was the pick
n,r,„.=-i > , Google
300 THE ADVEXTUSES OF HUCKLEBERRY FISH.
of the flock. I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that
first haul was.
We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders, and bugs, and
frogs, and caterpillars, and one thing or another ; and we like-to
got a hornet's neat, but we didn't. The family was at home.
We didn't give it right up. but staid with them as long as we
could ; because we allowed we'd tire them out or they'd got to
tire us out. and they done it. Then we got allycumpain and
rubbed on the places, and was pretty near all right again, but
couldn't set down convenient. And so we went for the snakes,
and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes, and
put them in a bag, and put it in our room, and by that time it
was supper time, and a rattling good honest day's work ; and
hungry? — oh, no, I reckon not! And there wam't a blessed
snake up there, when we went back — we didn't half tie the
sack, aud they worked out, somehow, and left. But it didn't
matter much, because they was still on the premises some-
wheres. So we judged we could get some of them again. No,
there wam't no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a
considerble spell. You'd see them dripping from the rafters
and places, every now and then ; and they generly landed in
your plate, or down the back of your neck, and most of the time
where you didn't want them. Well, they was handsome, and
striped, and there wam't no harm in a million of them ; but
that never made no difference to Aunt Sally, she despised
snakes, be the breed what they might, and she couldn't stand
them no way you could fix it ; and every time one of them
flopped down on her, it didn't make no difference what she was
doing, she would just lay that work down and light out. I
never see such a woman. And you could hear her whoop to
Jericho. You couldn't get her to take aholt of one of them
with the tongs. And if she turned over and found one in bed,
she would scramble out and lift a howl that you would think
n,3t,7=^- In Google
LIVELY SEI)FELL0W6. 307
the house was afire. She disturbed the old man so, that he
said he could most wish there hadn't ever been no snakes
created. Why, after every last snake had been gone clear out
of the house for aa much as a week, Aunt Sally wara't over it
yet ; she wam't near over it ; when she was setting thinking
about something, you could touch her on the back of ber neck
with a feather and she would jump right out of her stockings.
It was very curious. But Tom said all women was just so.
He said they was made that way ; for some reason or other.
We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her
wiy; and she allowed these lickings wam't nothing to what
she would do if we ever loaded up the place again with them.
I didn't mind the lickings, because they didn't amount to
nothing j but I minded the trouble we had, to lay in another
lot. But we got them laid in, and all the other things ; and
you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim's was when they'd all
swarm out for music and go for him. Jim didn't like the
spiders, and the spiders didn't like Jim ; and so they'd lay for
him and make it mighty warm for him. And he said that
between the rats, and the snakes, and the grindstone, there
wam't no room in bed for him, skasely ; and when there was, a
body couldn't sleep, it was so lively, and it was always lively,
he said, because they never all slept at one time, but took turn
about, 80 when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck, and
when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch, so he always
had one gang under him, in his way, and t'other gang having a
circus over him, and if he got up to hunt a new place, the
spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over. He
said if he ever got out, this time, he wouldn't ever be a prisoner
again, not for a salary.
Well, by the end of three weeks, everything was in pretty
good shape. The shirt was sent in early, in a pie, and every
time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
308 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
journal whilst the ink was fresh j the pens was made, the in-'
scriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone ; the hed-
leg was sawed in two, and we had et up the sawdust, and it
give us a most amazing stomach-ache. We reckoned we was
all going to die, but didn't. It was the most undigestible saw-
dnst I ever see ; and Tom said the same. But as I was saying,
SAWDUST DIET,
we'd got all the work done, now, at last ; and we was all pretty
much fa^ed out, too, but mainly Jim. The old man had
wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come
and get their runaway nigger, but hadn't got no answer, because
there wam't no such plantation; eo he allowed he would ad-
vertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers ; and
when he mentioned the St. Louis ones, it give me the cold
D,Q,t,7=^- In Google
THE STSAW DUMMY. 399
shivers, and I see we hadn't no time to lose. So Tom said,
now for the nonnamons letters.
" What's them ? " Ei^ays.
" Warnings to the jleople that something is up. Sometimes
it's done one way, sometimes another. But there's always
somebody spying around, that gives notice to the governor of
the castle. When Louis XVI. was going to light out of the
Tooleries, a servant girl done it. It's a very good way, and so
is the nonnamous letters. We'll use them both. And it's
usual for the prisoner's mother to change clothes with him, and
she stays in, and he slides out in her clothes. Well do that
too. "
" But looky here, Tom, what do we want to warn anybody
for, that's something's up ? Let them find it out for themselves
— it's their look-out. "
" Yes, I know ; but you can't depend on them. It's the
way they've acted from the very start — left us to do everyUivng.
They're so confiding and mullet-headed they don't take notice
of nothing at aU. So if we don't give them notice, there won't
be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us, and so after all our
hard work and trouble this escape 11 go oflf perfectly flat : won't
amount to nothing — won't be nothing to it. "
" Well, as for me, Tom, that's the way I'd like. "
" Shucks, " he says, and looked disgusted. So I says :
" But I ain't going to make no complaint. Anyway that
suits you suits me. What you going to do about the servaut-
girl? "
" You'll be her. You slide in, in the middle of the night,
and hook that yaller girl's frock. "
" Why, Tom, that'll make trouble next morning ; because
of course she prob'bly hain't got any but that one. "
" I know ; but you don't want ib but fifteen miuutes, to
carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door. "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
400 THE ABVENTUSES OF HVCKLEBEHItY FINN.
" All right, then, ni do it; but I could carry it just as
handy in my own togs. "
" .You wouldn't look like a servant-girl, then, would you ? "
" No, but there won't be nobody to see what I look like,
anyway. " ■ ■
" That ain't got nothing to do with it. The thing for us
to do, is just to do our d/aty, and not worry about whether any-
body sees us do it or not. Hain't you got no principle at all ? "
" All right, I ain't eaying nothing ; I'm the servant-girl.
Who's Jim's mother ? "
" I'm his mother. I'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally. "
" Well, then, youll have to stay in the cabin when me and
Jim leaves. "
" Not much. I'll stuff Jim's clothes full of straw and lay
it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise, and Jim'11
take the nigger woman's gown off of me and wear it, and we'll
all evade together. When a prisoner of style escapes, it's called
an evasion. It's always called so when a king escapes, frinstance.
And the same with a king's son ; it don't make no difference
whether he's a natural one or an unnatural ong, "
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter, and I smouched
the yaller wench's frock, that night, and put it on, and shoved
it under the front door, the way Tom told me to. It said :
Benare. Trotible it breieiny. Keep a »!iarj > looiaut. Unknown Fbibnd.
Next night we stuck a picture which Tom drawed in blood,
of a skull and crossbones, on the front door ; and next night
another one of a cofBn, on the back door. I never see a family
in such a sweat. They couldn't a been worse scared if the
place had a been full of ghosts laying for them behind every-
thing and under the beds and shivering through the air. If a
door banged. Aunt Sally she jumped, and said " ouch ! " if any-
thing fell, she jumped, and said *'ouch ! " if you happened to
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE STRAW UUMAtr. 401
touch her, when she warn't noticing, she done the same ; she
couldn't face noway and be satisfied, because she allowed there
was something behind her every time — so she was always a
whirling around, sudden, and saying " ouch, " and before she'd
get two-thirds around, she'd whirl back again, and say it again ;
and she was afraid to go to bed, but she dasn't set up. So the
thing was working very well, Tom said ; he said he never see
a thing work more satisfactory. He said it showed it was done
right.
So he said, now for the grand bulge ! So the very next
n D
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
4C2 THE ADrESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
morning at the streak of dawn we got another letter ready, and
was wcmdering what we better do with it, because we heard
them say at supper they was going to have a nigger on watch
at both doors all night. Tom he went down the lightning-rod
to spy around ; and the nigger at the back door was asleep,
and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back. This
letter said :
Don't betrajr vu, Iidth to he your friend. There i» a deipraie gang of i;st-
thnmt* frvm oter in the Ingean Territory going to iteal yavr Tuiuiway nigger to-
nighi, AHil tiey iate been trying to Mcare yon to at yon nitt tfay ia the keme
ami not hotker tkttn. I am one of the gang, b«t hare got religgion and iriai to
gnU it and lead a lUmett life again, and nrill betray the heOth detiyn. Thej
teitl nufait dmrni front northardt, along the fence, at midnight exact, rcitk •
falte key, and go in the nigger't cabin to get him. I am, to be e^ a piece oni
hloie a tin hern if I tee any danger; bvt xtead of that, I vxU ba. like a thtrg
toon at they get in and not blow at ail; then trhiUt they are getting hit cIoiaM
loote, you tlip there and lock them in, and can hiU them at your leatnre. S " ^
do anything but jutt the Kay I am telling you, if yea do they KtU tvipiiifm
lomething and raite Tchoopjambarechoo. I di naf rriih any reward hut to turn
I ham done the right thing. 1
USKSOWS FBIBNIt.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
KL
: pretty good,
reakfast, and
y caqoe and
a: the river a
witli a lanch,
a good time,
: a look at the
found Iier all
i got home late
;r, and found
such a sneat
ry they didn't
Icli end they
ding on, and
go right oflf
le minute we
■■ supper, and
tell UB wliat
le new letter,
nut aian x neea to, occause we knowed as much about it as any-
body did, and as soon as we was half upstairs and her back
was turned, we slid for the cellar cubboard and loaded up a good
lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed, and got up
1 > D 2
D,£,,t,7=-i > , Google
404 THE ADVEXTUSES OF SUCKLEBESSY FINN.
about half-pcut eleven, and Tom put on Aunt Sally's dress
th & t he stole and was going to start with tbe lunch, but says :
" Where's the butter ? "
" I kid out a hunk of it, " I says, " on a piece of a corn-
pone. "
" Well, you left it laid out, then^t nin't here, "
" We can get along without it, " I says.
" We can get along ivitk if, too, " he says ; " just you slide
down cellar and fetch it. And then mosey right down the
lightniag-rod and come along. Ill go and stuff the straw into
Jim's clothes to represent his mother in disguise, and be ready
to ba like a sheep and shove soon as you get there. "
So out he went, and down cellar went I. The hunk of
butter, big as a person's fist, was where I had left it, so I took
up the slab of corn-pone with it on, and blowed out my light,
and started upstairs, very stealthy, and got up to the main
floor all right, but here comes Aunt Sally with a candle, and I
clapped the truck in my hat, and clapped my hat on my head,
and the nest second she see mc ; and she says :
" You been down cellar ? "
" Yes'm. "
" What you been doing down there ? "
" Noth'n. "
" Noth'n!'"
" No'm. "
" Well, then, what jxissessed you to go down there, this
time of night ? "
" I don't know'm. "
" You don't hnow ? Don't answer me that way, Tom, I
want to know what you been doing down there ? "
" I hain't been doing a single thing, Aunt Sally, I hope to
gracious if I have. "
" ^ I reckoned she'd let me go, now, and as a generl thing ate
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
THE riGILAXCE COMMITTEE. 4C5
would ; but I s'pose there was so many strange things going on
she -was jast in a sweat about every little thing that warn't
yard-stick straight ; so she aays, very decided :
** You just march into that setting-room and stay there till
I come. You been np to something you no business to, and I
lay ni find out what it is before Fm. done with you. "
So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the
setting-roora. My, but there was a crowd tht'iel Fifteen
feirraers, and ^way one of them had a gun. I was most power-
fiU sick, and slunk to a chair and set down. They was setting
around, some of them talking a little, in a low voice, and all of
them fidgety and uneasy, but trying to look like they warn't ;
but I knowed they was, because they was always taking oflf
their hats, and putting them on, and scratching their heads,
and changing their seats, and fumbling with their buttons.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
4CC THE ADVESTVUBS OF JIVCKLESrJiliT FINN.
I warn't easy myselF, but T didn't take my hat oflF, all the
same.
I did wish Aunt Sally would come, and get done with'me,
and lick me, if she wanted to, and let me get away and tell
Tom how we'd ovehione this thing, and what a thundering
hornet's nest we'd got ourselves into, so we could stop fooling
around, straight off, and clear out with Jira hefore these rips
got out of patience and come for us.
At last she come, and begun to ask me questions, but I
couldn't anewer them straight, I didn't know which end of me
was up ; because these men was in such a fidget now, that some
was wanting to start right now and ky^or them desperadoes,
and saying it warn't but -'a fe^v minutes to midnight; and
others was trying to get them'to hold on and wait for the
sheep-signal ; and here was aunty pegging away at the ques-
tions, and me a shaking all over and ready to sink down in my
tracks I was that scared ; and the place getting hotter and
hotter, and the butter beginning to melt and run down my
neck and behind my ears ; and pretty soon, when one of them
flays, " Fm for going and getting in the cshin first, and right
now, B,nd catching them when they come, " I most dropped ;
and a streak of butter come a trickling down my forehead, and
Aunt Sally she see it, and turns white as a sheet, and says ;
*'For the land's sake what is the matter with the child ! —
he's got the brain fever as shore as you're born, and they're
oozing out ! "
And everybody runs to see, and she snatches off my hat,
and out comes the bread, and what was left of the butter, and
she grabbed me, and hugged me, and says :
" Oh, what a turn yoti did give me! and how glad and
grateful I am it ain't no worse ; for luck's against us, and it
never rains but it pours, and wbeti I see that track'I thought
we'd lost you, for I knowed by the colour and all, it was jnst ■
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
A LIVELY RUN. 407
like your braiQs would be if — Dear, dear, whydu't yoa'tell
me that was what you'd been down there for, / wouldn't a cared.
Now cler out to bed, and don't lemme see no more of you till
morning ! "
I waa upstairs in a second, and down the lightning-rod in
another one, and shinning through the dark for the lean-to. I
couldn't hardly get my words out, I was so anxious ; but I
told Tom as quick as I could, we must jump for it, now, and
not a minute to lose — the house full of men, yonder, with
guns !
His eyes just blamed ; and he says:
« No !— is that so ? Ain't it bully ! Why, Hack, if it was
to do over again, I bet I could fetch two hundred ! If we could
put it off till "
" Hurry ! hurry ! " I says. " Where's Jim ? "
" Eight at your elbow ; If you reach out your arra you can
touch him. He's dressed, and everything's ready. Now we'll
slide out and give the sheep-signal. "
But then we heard the tramp of men, coming to the door,
and beard them begin to fumble with the padlock ; and heard
a man say :
" I told you we'd be too soon ; they haven't come — the
door 18 locked. Here, I'll lock some of you into the cabin and
you lay for'em in the dark and kill'em when they come ; and
the rest scatter around a piece, and listen if you can hear'em
coming. "
So in they come, but couldn't see ns in the dark, and most
trod on us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed. But
we got under all right, and out through the hole, swift but-
soft — Jim first, me next, and Tom lastj which was according to
Tom's orders. Now we was in the lean-to, and heard trampings
dose by outside. So we crept to the door, and Tom stopped
us there and put his eye to the orack, but couldn't make out
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
400 rilE ADJ'EXTUSSS OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXS.
nothing, it was so dark ; aod whispered and said he would listen
for the steps to get further, and when he nudged us Jim must
glide out first, and him last. So he set his ear to the crack
and listened, and listened, and listened, and the steps a scraping
around, out there, all the time ; and at last he nudged us, and
we slid out, and stooped down, not breathing, and not making
the least noise, and slipped stealthy towards the fence, in Injun
file, and got to it, all right, and me and Jim over it ; but Tom's
britches catched fast on a splinter on the top rail, and then he
hear the steps coming, so he had to pull loose, which snap{ > ed
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
A LIVELY SUA'. 400
the BpUnter and made a noise ; and aa he dropped in our tracks
and started, somebody sings out :
" Who's that ? Answer, or I'll shoot ! "
But we didn't answer; we just unfurled our heels and
shoved. Then there was a rush, and a bang, bang, bang ! and
the bullets fairly whizzed around us ! We heard them sing
out :
" Here they are ! They've broke for the river ! after'em,
boys ! And turn loose the dogs ! "
So here they come, full tilt. We could hear them, because
they wore boots, and yelled, but we didn't wear no boots, and
didn't yell. We was in the path to the mill ; and when they
got pretty close on to us, we dodged into the bush and let them
go by, and then dropped in behind them. They'd had all the
doge shut up, so they wouldn't scare off the robbers ; but by
this time somebody had let them loose, and here they come,
making pow-wow enough for a million ; but they was our dogs ;
so we stopped in our tracks till they catched up ; and when
they see it wam't nobody but us, and no excitement to offer
them, they only just said howdy, and tore right ahead towards
the shouting and clattering ; and then we up steam again and
whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the mill, and
then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was tied,
and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of
the river, but didn't make no more noise than we was obleeged
to. Then we struck out, easy and comfortable, for the island
where my raft was ; and we could hear them yelling and bark-
ing at each other all up and down the bank, till we was so far
away the sounds got dim and died out. And when we stepped
on to the raft, I says :
" Noio, old Jim, you're a free man again, and I bet you
won't ever be a slave no more. "
" En a mighty good job it wuz, too, Huck. It'uz planned
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
-110 TUB ADVEXTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FlliX.
beautiful, en it " uz done beautiful ; en dey ain't nobody kin git
u;) a plan dat's mo'mised-up en splendid den vhat dat one
wuz. "
We was all as glad aa we could be, but Tom was the glad-
dest of ail, because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg.
When me and Jim heard that, we didn't feel so bntEh as
what we did before. It was hurting him considerble, and
bleeding ; so we laid hini in the wigwam and tore up one of
the duke's shirts for to bandage him, but he says :
*'Gimme the rags, I can do it myself. Don't stop, now ;
don't fool around here, and the evasion booming along so hand-
some ; man the sweeps, and set her loose ! Boys, we done it
elegant I —'deed we did. I wish we'd a had the handling of
Louis XVI., there wouldn't a been no'Son of Saint Louis,
ascend to heaven I'wrote down in his biography ; no, sir, we'd
a whooped him over the border — that's what we'd a done with
him — and done it just as slick as nothing at all, too. Man the
sweeps — man the sweeps I "
But me and Jim was consulting — and thinking. And after
we'd thought a minute, I says :
" Say, it Jim. "
So he says :
" Well, den, dis is de way it look to me. Hack. Ef it wm
him dat'uz bein'sot free, en one er de boya wuz to git shot,
wotild he say,'Gro on en ^ve me, nemmine'bout a doctor f'r
to save dis one ?'Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer ? Would he
saydat? You bet he wouldn't I Well, den, is Jim gwyneto
say it ? Noj.sah — I doan'budge a step out'n dis place,'dout a
doctor ; not if it's forty year ! "
I knowed he was white inside, and I reckoned he'd say what
he did say — so it was all right, now, and I told Tom I was
Bgoing for a doctor. He raised considerble row about it, but'
me and Jim stuck to it and wouldn't budge ; so ;he was for
JIM ADVISES A DOCTOR. 411
crawling out and settingthe raft looae himself; but we wouldn't
let him. Then he give us a piece of his mind — but it didn't do
no good.
So when be sees me getting the canoe ready, be says :
" Well, then, if you're bound to go, I'll tell you the way to
do, when you get to the village. Shut the door, and blindfold
the doctor tight and fast, and make him swear to be silent as
the grave, and put a pinrse full of gold in his hand, and tben take
and lead bim all around the back alleys and everywheres, in the
dark, and then fetch him here in the canoe, in a roundabont
413 THE ADl'ESTVRES OF HVCKLEBERRY FISN.
way amongst the islands, and search him, and lake his chalk
away from him, and don't give it back to him till jou get him
back to the village, or else be will chalk this raft so he can find
it again. It's the way they all do. "
So I said I would, and left, and Jim was to hide in the
woods when he see the doctor coming, till he was gone again.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
Cha[)ter XLI
il^B'doctor was an old man;
a very nice, kind-look-
ing old man, when I got
him up. I told him me
and my brother was over
on Spanish Island hunting,
yesterday afternoon, and
camped on a piece of a raft
we found, and about mid-
night he must a kicked his
gun in his dreams, for it
went off and shot him in
the leg, and we wanted him
to go over there and fix it
^ and not say nothing about
^ it, nor let anybody know,
because we wanted to come
home this evening, and surprise the folks.
'* Who ia your folks ? " be says.
" The Phelpses, down yonder. "
" Oh, " he says. And after a minute, he says : " How'd you
say he got shot ? "
" He had a dream, " I says, " and it shot him. "
" Singular dream, " he says.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
414 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
So he lit up bis lantera, and got his saddle-bags, and we
started. But when he see the cauoe, he didn't like the look of
her — said she was big enough for one, but didn't look pretty
safe for two. I says :
" Oh, yon needn't be afeard, sir, she carried the three of
us, easy enough. "
" What three ? "
" Why, me and > Sid, and— and — and the guns ; that's what
I mean. "
" Oh, " he says.
But be put his foot on the gunnel, and rocked her ; and
shook his head, and said be reckoned he'd look around for a
bigger one. But they was all locked and chained ; so he took
my canoe, and said for me to wait till he come back, or I could
hunt around further, or maybe I better go down home and get
them ready for the surprise, if I wanted to. But I said I
didn't ; so I told him just how to find the raft, and then he
started.
I struck an idea, pretty soon. I says to myself, spos'n he
can't fix that leg just in three shakes of a sheep's tail, as thi
saying is ? spos'n it takes him three or four days ? What iire
we going to do ? — lay around there till he lets the cat. out of
the bag ? No, sir, I know what I'U do. I'll wait, and when
he comes back, if be says he's got to go any more, I'll get down
there, too, if I swim; and well take and tie him, and keep
him, and shove out down the river ; and when Tom's done with
him, we'll give him what it's worth, or all we got,,4nd then let
him get ashore.
So then I crept into a lumber pile to get some sleep; and
next time I waked up the sim was away up over my bead ! I
shot out and went for the doctor's house, but they told me he'd
gone away in the night, some time or other, and warn't back
yet. Well, thinks I, that looks powerfiil bad for Tom, and 111
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
UyCLE SILAS. 415
dig out for the iBlaad, right off. So away I shoved, and turned
the comer, and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas's
stomach ! He says ;
" Why, Tom, ! Where you been, all this time, you rascal ? "
" / hain't been nowheies, " I says, " only just hunting for
the runaway nigger — me and Sid. "
1-NCI.E 61LAS i:
" Why, where ever did you go ? " he saya. " Your aunt's
been mighty uneasy. "
" She needn't, " I says, " because we was all right. We
followed the men and the dogs, but they outrun ua, and wc
D,g,t,7P:hyGoogle
4ia THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINK.
lost them ; but ve thought wc lieard them on the water, so we
got a canoe and took oat after them, and crossed over but
couldn't find nothing of them ; bo we cruised along up-shore
till we got kind of tired and beat out ; and tied up the canoe
and went to sleep, and never waked up till about an hoar ago,
then we paddled over here to hear the newa, and Sid's at the
post-oflSee to see what he can hear, and I'm a branching out to
get something to eat for us, and then we're going home. "
So then we went to the poat-office to get " Sid " ; but just
aslsuspicioned, he warn't there; so the old man he got a letter
out of the oflSce, and we waited a while longer but Sid didn't
come ; so the old man said come along, let Sid foot it home, or
canoe-it, when he got done fooling around — but we would ride.
I couldn't get him to let me stay and wait for Sid ; and he said
there warn't no use in it, and I must come along, and let Aunt
Sally see we was all right.
Wlien we got home. Aunt Sally was that glad to see me
she laughed and cried both, and hugged me, and give me one
of them lickings of hem that don't amount to shucks, and said
she'd serve Sid the same when he come,
And the place was plumb full of farmers and fanners'wives,
to dinner; and such another clack a body never heard. Old
Mrs. Hotchkiss was the worst ; her tongue was agoing all the
time. She says:
" Well, Sister Phelps, I've ransacked that-air cabin over an'
I blieve the nigger was crazy. I says so to Sister Damrell —
didn't I, Sister Damrell ? — s'l, he's crazy, s'l — them's the very
words I said. Yon all heam me: he's crazy, s'l; everything
shows it, s'l. Look at that-air grindstone, s'l ; want to tell
ine *t any cretur'ts in his right mind's agoin'to scrabble all
them crazy things on to a grindstone, si? Here sich'n'dcha
person busted his heart;'n'here so'n'so pegged along for
thirty-seven year,'n'all that — natcherl son o'Louis somebody,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SISTES HOTCHKISS. 417
'n'sich everlast'n rubbage. He's plumb crazy, s'l ; it's what I
says in the fust place, it's what I says ia the middle,'n'it's
what I says last'n'all the time — the nigger's crazy — crazy's
Nfibokoodneezer, b'I. "
*'An'look at that -air ladder made out'n rags, Sister Hotch-
Idss, " says old Mrs. Damrell, " what in the name o'goodness
could he ever want of "
*'The very words I was a-sayin'no longer ago th'n this
minute to Sister Utterback,'n'she'll tell you bo herself. 8h-
she, look at that-air rag ladder, sh-she ;'n's'l, yes, look at it,
s'l — what could he aiwanted of it, s'l ? Sh-she, Sister Hotchkisp,
sh-she ■ "
" But how in the nation'd they ever git that grindstone in
there, any-w^y ?'n'who dug that-air hole f'n'who "
" My very words. Brer Penrod ! I was a-sayin'— pass that-
air sasser o'm'Jasses, won't ye ? — I was a-sayin'to Sister
Dunlap, jiet this minute, how did they git that grindstone in
there, b'I. Without help, mind you —'thout help ! Thar'a
r^^ I
418 Tllli ADVENTURES OF BUCKLEBERRY FIXN.
wher*'tis. Don't tell me., s'l ; there ivuz help, s'l ;'n'tber'
wuz a'plenty help, too, s'l ; ther'a ben a dozen a-helpin'that
nigger,'n'I lay I'd skin every last nigger on this place, but Vd
find out who done it, s'l ;'n'moreover, s'l "
" A dozen says you \— forty couldn't a done everything
that's been done. Ixwk at them case-knife saws and things,
how tedious they've been made ; look at that bed-leg sawed off
with'in, a week's work for six men ; look at that nigger made
out'n straw on the bed ; and look at "
*'i & li may well say it. Brer Hightower \ It's jist as I was
a-sa^n'to Brer Phelps, his own self. S'e, what do yov. think
of it, Sister Hotchkiss, s'e ? think o'what, Brer Phelps, s'l ?
think o'that bed-leg sawed off that a way, s'e ? think of it,
b'I ? I lay it never sawed itself off, s'l — somebody aawed it,
b'I ; that's my opinion, take it or leave it, it mayn't be no
'count, s'l, but sich as't is, it's my opinion, b'I,'n'if anybody
k'n start a better one, s'l, let him do it, s'l, that's all. I says
to Sister Dunlap, s'l "
*'Why, dog my cats, they must a ben a house-^uU o'niggers
in there every night for four weeks, to a done all that woft, Sister
Phelps. Look at that shirt — every last inch of it kivfered over i
with secret African writ'n done with blood ! Must a ben a raft
uv'm at it right along, all the time, amost. Why, I'd give
two dollars to have it read to me ;'n'as for the niggers that
wrote it, I'low I'd take'n'lash'm tH "
" People to help him, Brother Marples ! Well, I reckon
you'd think so, if you'd a been in this house for a while back.
Why, they've stole everything they could lay their hands on —
and we a watching, all the time, mind you. They stole that
shirt right off o'the line ! and as for that sheet they made the
rag ladder out of ther'ain't no telling how many times they
didn't steal that ; and flour, and candles, and candlesticks, and
Bpoons, and the old warming-pan, and most a thousand things
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
SISTER HOTCHKISS. 410
that I disremember, now, and my new calico dreaa ; and me,
and Silas, and my Sid and Tom on the constant watch day a'nd
night, as I was a telling you, and not a one of ua could catch
hide nor hair, nor sight nor sound of them ; and here at the
last minute, lo and behold yon, they slides right in under our
noses, and fools us, and not only fools vs but the Injun Terri-
tory robbers too, and actuly gets away with that nigger, safe
and sound, and that with sixteen men and twenty-two dogs
right on their very heels at that very time ! I tell yfl^-it just
bangs anything I ever heard of. Why, sperUe couldn't a done
better, and been no smarter. And I reckon they must a been
sperits — because, you know our dogs, and ther'ain't no better ;
well, them d(^ never even got on the track of'm, once ! You
explain that to me, if you can \~-any of you ! "
*'Well, it does beat "
" Laws alive, I never "
" So help me, I wouldn't a be "
*'ifoiwe-thieves as well as "
" GoodnessgraciouBsakea, I'd a ben afeard to live in sich
a "'
"'Fraid ia live ! — why, I was that scared I dasn't hardly go
to bed, or get up, or lay down, or set down. Sister Eidgeway.
Why, they'd steal the very — why, goodness sakes, you can
guesswhatkindof afluster /wasinby the time midnight come,
last night. I hoj)e to gracious if I wam't afraid they'd steal
some o'the family \ I was just to that pass, I didn't have no
reasoning faculties no more. It looks foolish enough, tiow^ in the
day-time ; but I says to myself, there's my two poor boys asleep,
'way upstairs in that lonesome room, and I declare to goodness
I was that uneasy't I crep'up there and locked'em in ! I did.
And anybody would. Because, you know, when you get scared,
1 that way, and it keeps running on, and getting worse and worse,
all the time, and your wits gets to addling, and you get to doing
420 THE ADVENTURES OF UUCKLEBEBRY FINN.
all sorts o'wild things, and by-and-by you think to yourself,
Bpos'n / was a boy, and was away np there, and the door ain't
locked, and you " She stopped, looking kind of wondering,
and then she turned her head around slow, and when her eye
lit on me — I got up and took a walk.
Says I to myself, I can explain better how we come to not
be in that room tbis morning, if I go out to one side and study
over it a little. So I done it. But I dasn't go fur, or she'd a
sent for me. And when it was late in the day, the people all
went, and then I come in and told her the noise and shooting
waked up me and *'Sid, " and the door was locked, and we
wanted to see the fun, so we went down the lightning-rod, and
both of us got hurt a little, and we didn't never want to try
that no more. And then I went on and told her all'what I
told Uncle Silas before ; and then she said she'd forgive us,
and maybe it was all right enough anyway, and about what a
body might expect of boys, for all boys was a pretty bamm-
Bcarum lot, as fur as she could see ; and so, as long as no barm
hadn't come of it, she judged she better put in her time being
grateful we was alive and well and she had us still, stead of
fretting over what was past and done. So then she kissed me,
and patted me on the head, and dropped into a kind of a brown
study ; and pretty soon jumps up, and says :
" Why, lawsamercy, it's most night, and Sid not come yet !
What has become of that boy ? "
I Bee my chance ; so I skips up and says :
'■ I'll run right up to town and get him, " I says.
" No you won't, " she says. " You'll stay right wher'yon
are ; one's enough to be lost at a time. If he ain't here to
supper, your uncle'11 go. "
Well, he wam't there to supper ; so right after supper'
uncle went.
He come back about ten, a little bit uneasy ; hadn't n
AUNT SALLY IN TROUBLE. 421
across Tom's track. Aunt Sally was a good d & il uneasy ; but
Uncle Silas he said there warn't no occasion to be— boys will be
boys, he said, and you'll see this one turn up in the morning,
all sound and " right. So she had to be satisfied. But she said
she'd set up for him a while, anyway, and keep a light
burning, so he could see it.
And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and
fetched her candle, and tucked me in, and mothered me bo
good I felt mean, and like I couldn't look her in the face ; and
she set down on the bed and talked with me a long time, and
said what a splendid boy Sid was, and didn't seem to want to
ever stop talking about him ; and kept asking me every now
and then, if I reckoned he could a got lost, or hurt, or maybe
GlKwIc
422 THE ADVEyTURES OF HUCKLEBEBRY FINX.
drownded, and might be laying at this minute, somewberes,
suffering or dead, and sbe not by him to help him, and so the
teare would drip down, silent, and I would tell her that Sid was all
right, and would be home in the morning, sure ; and she would .
squeeze my hand, or maybe kiss me, and tell me to say it again,
and keep on saying it, because it done her good, and she was in
80 much trouble. And when she was going away, she looked
down in my eyes, so steady and gentle, and says :
" The door ain't going to be locked, Tom ; and there's the
window and the rod ; but you'll be good, won't you ? And you
won't go ? For my sake. "
Laws knows I wanted to go, bad enough, to see about Tom,
and was all intending to go ; but after that, I wouldn't a Went,
not for kingdoms.
But she was on my mind, and Tom was on my mind ; so I
slept very restless. And twice I went down the rod, away in
the night, and slipped around front, and see her setting there
by her candle in the window with her eyes towards the road
and the tears in them ; and I wished I could do something for
her, but I eoulda't, only to swear that I wouldn't never do
nothing to grieve her any more. And the third time, I waked
up at d^^iii ^ii < l ^^^ down, and she was there yet, and her candle
was most out, and her old gray head was resting on her hand,
and she was asleep.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
Ct\^bteirXLTI
old man was up tovn
again, before breakfast,
but couldn't get no
track of Tom ; and
both of them set at
the table, thinking,
and not saying no-
thing, and looking
mournful, and their
coffee getting cold,
and not eat anything.
And by-and-by the old'
man says ;
" Did I give you
the letter ? "
" What letter? "
" The one I got
yesterday out of the
]X)st-office. "
" So, you didn't give me no letter. "
" Well, I must a forgot it. "
So he rummaged his pockets, and then went off somewheres
where he had laid it do > vn, and fetched it, and give it to her.
She says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
4-2i THE ADl'ESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FI^'N.
" Wiiy it's from St. Petersburg — it's from Sis. "
I allowed another walk wotild do me good ; but I couldn't
stir. But before she could break it open, she dropped it and
run — for she see something. And so did I. It was Tom Saw-
yer on a mattress ; and that old doctor ; and Jim, in her calico
dress, with his hands tied behind him ; and a lot of people, I
hid the letter behind the first thing that come handj, and
mshed. She flung herself at Tom, crying, and says :
" Oh, he's dead, he's dead, I know he's dead ! "
And Tom he turned his head a little, and muttered some-
thing or other, which showed lie wam't in his right mind ;
then she flung up her hands, and says :
" He's alive, thank God ! And that's enough ! " and she
snatched a kiss of him, and flew for the house to get the bed
ready, and scattering orders right and left at the niggers and
everybody else, as fast as her tongue could go, every jump of
the way.
I followed the men to see what they was going to do with
Jim ; and the old doctor and uncle Silas followed after Tom
into the house. The men was very huffy, and some of them
wanted to hang Jim, for au example to all the other niggers
around there, so they wouldn't be trying to run away, like Jim
done, and making such a raft of trouble, and keeping a whole
family scared most to death for days and nights. But the
others said, don't do it, it wouldn't answer at all, he ain't oar
nigger, and his owner would turn up and make ns pay for him,
sure. So that cooled them down a little, because the people
that's always the most anxious for to hang a nigger that hain't
done just right, is always the very ones that ain't the most
anxious to pay for him when they've got their satisfaction out
of him.
They cussed Jim considerble, though, and give him a cnff
or two, side the head, once in a while, but Jim never said
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
TSE DOCTOR'S STOSl'. 435
nothing, and he never let on to know me, and tbey took him
to the same cabin, and put his own clothes on him, and chained
him again, and not to no bed-leg, this time, but to a hig staple
drove into the bottom log, and chained his hands, too, and
both legs, and said he wam't to have nothing but bread and
water to eat, after this, till his owner come or he was sold at
auction, because he didn't come in a certain length of time,
and filled up our hole, and said a couple of farmers with guns
must stand watch around about the cabin every night, and a
bull-dog tied to the door in the daj-time ; and about this time
they was through with the job and was tapering off with a kind
of generl good-bye cussing, and then the old doctor cOmes and
takes a look, and says :
" Don't be no rougher on him than you're obleeged to,
because be aiu't a bad nigger. When I got to where I found
the boy, I see I couldn't cut the bullet out without some help,
and he warn't in no condition for me to leave, to go and get
help ; and he got a little worse and a little worse, and after a
long time he went out of his head, and wouldn't let me come
anigh him, any more, and said if I chalked his raft he'd kill
me, and no end of wild foolishness like that, and I see I couldn't
do anything at aU with him ; so I says, I got to have kelp,
somehow ; and the minute I says it, out crawls this nigger from
aomewheres, and says hell help, and he done it, too, and done
it very well. Of com'se I judged he must be a runaway nigger,
and there I was ! and there I had to stick, right straight along
all the rest of the day, and all night. It was a fix, I tell you !
I had a couple of patients with the chills, and of course I'd of
liked to run up to town and see them, but I dasn't, because the
nigger might get away, and then I'd be to blame ; and yet
never a skiff come close enough for me to hail. So there I had
to stick, plumb tUl daylight this morning ; and I never see a
nigger that was a better nuss or_ faithfuller, and yet he was
420 THE ABrJiSTURES OF HUCKLEBESRY FINN.
resking his freedom to do it, and was all tired out, too, and I
see plain enough he'd been worked main bard, lately. I liked
the nigger for that ; I tell you, gentlemen, a nigger like that
is worth a thousand dollars — and kind treatment, too. I had
everything I needed, and the boy was doing as well there as he
would a done at home — better, maybe, because it was so quiet ;
but there I was, with both of *m on my bauds ; and there I
had to stick, till about dawn this morning ; then some men in
a skiflf come by, and as good luck would have it, the nigger
was setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees,
sound asleep ; so I motioned them in, quiet, and they slipped
up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
DOiyG JIM A GOOD TURN. 41 > 7
what he was about, and we never had no trouble. And the hoy
being in a kind of a flighty sleep, too, we muffled the oare and
hitched the raft on, and towed her over very nice and quiet, and
the nigger never made the least row nor said a word, from the
start. He ain't no bad nigger, gentlemen ; that's what I think
about him. "
Somebody says :
" Wei!, it sounds very good, doctor, I'm obleeged to say. "
Then the others softened up a little, too, and I was mighty
thankful to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn ; and
I was glad it was according to my judgment of him, too ;
because I thought he had a good heart in him and was a good
man, the first time I see him. Then they all agreed that Jim
had acted very well, and was deserving to have some notice
took of it, and reward. So every one of them promised, right
out and hearty, that they wouldn't cuss him no more.
Then they come out and locked bun up. I hoped they was
going to say he could have one or two of the chains took off,
because they was rotten heavy, or could have meat and greens
with his bread and water, but they didn't think of it, and I
reckoned it wam't best for me to mix in, but I judged I'd get
the doctor's jam to Aunt Sally, somehow or other, as soon as
I'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of
me. Explanations, I mean, of how I forgot to mention about
Sid being shot, when I was telling how him and me put in that
dratted night paddling around hunting the runaway nigger.
But 1 had plenty time. Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-
room all day and all night ; and every time I see Uncle Silas
mooning around, I dodged him.
Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better, and
they said Aunt Sally was gone to get a nap. So I slips to the
sick-room, and if I found him awake I reckoned we could put
up a yam for the family that would wash. But he was sleeping^
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
438 THE ADT'ESTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
and sleeping very peaceful, too ; and pale, not fire-faced the
way lie was when he come. So I set down and laid for him to
wake. In about a half an hour, Aunt Sally comes gliding in,
and there I was, up a stump again ! She motioned me to be
etill, and set down by me, and begun to whisper, and said we
could all be joyful now, because all the symptoms was first rate,
and he'd been Bleeping like that for ever so long, and looking
better and peacefuller all the time, and ten to one he'd wake
up in his right mind.
So we set there watching, and by-and-by he stirs a bit, and
opened his eyes very natural, and takes a look, and says :
" Hello, why I'm at home ! How's that ? Where's the raft ? "
*'It's all right, " I says.
" And Jim? "
" The same, " - 1 says, but couldn't say it pretty brash. But
he never noticed, but says :
" Good ! Splendid ! Xo%v we're all right and safe ! Did
you tell annty ? "
I was going to say yes ; but she chipped in and says :
" About what, Sid ? "
*'Why, about the way the whole thing was done. "
" What whole thing ? "
" Why, the whole thing. There ain't but one ; how we set
the runaway nigger free — nie and Tom. "
*'Good land ! Set the run — What is the child talking
about ! Dear, dear, out of his head again ! "
" No, I ain't out of my head ; I know all what I'm talking
about. We did set him free — me and Tom. We laid out to do it,
and we < lone it. And we done it elegant, too. " He'd got a start,
and she never checked him up, just set and Btared and stared,
and let him clip along, and I sen it warn't no use for me to pat
in. " Why, Aunty, it cost ns a power of work — weeks of it —
houTB and hours, every night, whilst you was all asleep. And
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
TOM COyi'ESSES. 420
we had to steal candles, and the sheet, and the shirt, and yonr
dress, and spoons, and tin plates, and case-knives, and the
warming-pan, and the grindstone, and flour, and just no end of
things, and you can't think what work it was to make the
saws, and pens, and inscriptions, and one thing or another, and
you can't think half the fun it was. And we had to make up
the pictures of coffins and things, and nonnamous letters from
the robbers, and get up and down the lightning-rod, and dig
the hole into the cabin, and make the rope-ladder and send it
in cooked up in a pie, and send in spoons and things to work
with, in your apron pocket "
" Mercy sakes ! "
" and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so
on, for company for Jim ; and then you kept Tom here so long
with the butter in hia hat that jou come near spiling the whole
business, because the men come before we was out of the cabin,
and we had to rush, and they heard us and let drive at us, and
I got my share, and we dodged out of the path and let them
go by, and when the dc^s come they wam't interested in us,
but went for the most noise, and we got our canoe, and made
for the raft, and was all safe, and Jim was a free man, and we
done itall by ourselves, and wasn't it bully. Aunty ! "
" Well, I never heard the likes of it in all my bom days !
So it was you, you little rapscallions, that's been making all this
trouble, and turned everybody's wits clean inside out and scared
us all most to death. I've as good a notion as ever I had in my
life, to take it out o'you this very minute. To think, here I've
been, night after night, a— j/ou just get well once, you young
scamp, and I lay I'll tan the Old Harry out o'both o'ye ! "
But Tom, he was so proud and joyful, he just coutdn't hold
in, and his tongue just went it— she a-chipping in, and spit-
ting fire all along, and both of them going it at once, like a catr
convention ; and she says :
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
430 TME ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
" WM, you get all the enjoyment you can out of it
•now, for mind I tell you if I oat«h you meddling with him
again—- - "
" Meddling with who ? " Tom says, dropping his smile, and
looking surprised.
" With who f Why, the runaway nigger, of course.'Who'd
yon reckon ? "
^^\
Tom looks at me very grave, and says :
" Tom, didn't you just tell me he was all right ? Hasn't he
got away ? "
" Him ?'■ says Aunt Sally ; " the runaway nigger ?'Deed
he hasn't. They've got him back, safe and sound, and he's in
that cabin again, on bread and water, and loaded down with
chains, till he's claimed or sold ! "
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
AUST POLLY ASSIVES. 431
Turn rose square up in bed, with his eye hot, and his nostrils
opening and shutting like gills, and sings out to me :
" They hain't no right to shut him up ! Shove ! — and dou't
you lose a minute. Turn him loose ! he ain't no slave ; he's as
free as any cretur that walks this earth ! "
" What does the child meau ? "
" I mean every word I say. Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't
go, DX go. I've knowed him all his life, and so has Tom, there.
Old Miss Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed
she ever was going to sell him down the river, and aaid so ;
and she set him free in her will. "
" Then what on earth did ymi want to set him free for,
seeing he was already free? "
" Well, that is a question, I must say ; and just like
women ! Why, I wanted the adventure of it ; and I'd
a waded neck-deep in blood to — goodness alive — Aunt
Polly I "
If she wara't standing right there, just inside the door, look-
ing as aweet and contented as an angel half-full of pie, I wish
I may never !
Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off
of her, and cried over her, and I found a good enough place for
me under the bed, for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed
to me. And I peeped out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly
shook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over
her spectacles — kind of grinding him into the earth, you know.
And then she says :
" Yes, you better turn y'r head away — I would if I was you,
Tom. "
" Oh, deary me ! " says Aunt Sally ; " is he changed so ?
Why, that ain't Tom it's Sid ; Tom's — Tom's — why, where is
Tom ? He was here a minute ago. "
" You mean where's Huck Finn — that's wliat you mean ! I
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
432 THE ADVEmURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
reckon I hain't raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years,
not to know him when I see him. That would be a pretty
howdy-do. Come out from under that bed, Huck Finn. "
So I done it. But not feeling brash.
Aimt Sally she was one of the miied-upest looking persons
I ever see ; except one, and th & t was Uncle Silas, when he
come in, and they told it all to him. It kind of made him
drunk, as you may say, and he didn't know nothing at all the
rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting sermon th^
night that give him a rattling mputation, because the oldest
man in the world couldn't a understood it. So Tom'a Aunt
Polly, she told all about who I was, and what ; and I had to up
and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps
took me for Tom Sawyer — she chipped in and says, " Oh, go on
and call me Aunt Sally, I'm used to it, now, and'tain't no need
to change " — that when Aunt Sally t^xik me for Tom Sawyer, I
had to stand it — there wam't no other way, and I knowed he
wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him, being a
mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it and be perfectly
satisfied. And so it turned out, and he let on to be Sid, and
made things as soft as he could for me.
And bis Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss
Watson setting Jim free in her will ; and so, sure enough, Tom
Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a
free nigger free ! and I couldn't ever understand, before, until
that minute and that talk, how he could help a body set a
nigger free, with his bringing-up.
Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aimt Sally wrote to
her that Tom and Sid had come, all right and safe, she says to
herself:
" Look at that, now ! I might have expected it, letting
him go off that way without anybody to watch him. So now I
got to go and trapse all the way down the river, eleven hundred
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
" SAyD OUT TSEM LETTEHS. 433
mile, and find out what that creetur's up to, tkia time ; as long
as I couldn't seem to get any answer oat of you about it. "
" Why, I never heard nothing from you, " says Aunt Sally.
" Well, I wonder ! ^^'hy, I wrote to you twice, to ask you
what you could mean by Sid being here. "
" Well, I never got'em. Sis. "
" HAND OUT TMKM LETTEltS.'
Aunt Polly, she turns around nbw-atid severe, and says:
" You, Tom! "
" Well — what f* he says, kind of pettish.
" Don't you what me, you impudent thing — hand out them
letters, "
" What letters ? "
D,£,,t,7=-i > ,Coogle
■ & i THE AlfVEXTVRES OF HVCKLESEREY TlSi^'.
" Them, letters. I be bound, if I have to take aholt of jou
I'll "
" They're in the trunk. There, now. And they're just the
same as they was when I got them out of the office. I hain't
looked into them, I hain't touched them. But I knowed
they'd make trouble, and I thought if you wam't in no hurry,
I'd "
" Well, you do need skinning, there ain't no mistake about
it. And I wrote another one to tell you I was coming ; and I
s'pose he "
" No. it come yesterday ; I hain't read it yet, but it'e all
right, I've got that one. "
I wanted to offer to bet two dollars she hadn't, but I reckoned
maybe it was just as safe to not to. So I never said nothing.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
£/ first time I catched
Tom, private, I asked
him what was his idea,
time of the evauoa?
— what it was he'd
planned to do if the
evasion worked all
right and he managed
to set a nigger free
that was already free
before ? And he said,
what he had planned
in his head, from the
start, if we got Jim
out all safe, was for
us to run him down
the river, on the raft,
and have adventures
plumb to the mouth
of the river, and then
tell him about, his
lome on a steamboat, in
nd write word ahead and
D,g,t,7P:h»Google ■
480 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FIXX.
get out all the niggers around, and have them waltz him into
town with a torchlight procession and a braas band, and then
he would be a hero, and so would we. But I reckoned it was
about as well the way it was.
We had Jim out of the chains in no time, and when Aunt Polly
and Uncle Silas and Aunt Sally found out how good he helped
the doctor nurse Tom, they made a heap of fuss over him, and
fixed him up prime, and give him all he wanted to eat, and a
good time, and nothing to do. And we had him up to the
TOM'S LIBERALITY.
sick-room ; and had a high talk ; and Tom give Jim forty
dollars for being prisoner for us so patient, and doing it up so
good, and Jim was pleased most to death, and busted out, and
says:
'■ Dah, now, Huck, what I tell you ? — what I tell you up
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
PAriNG THE CAPTIVE. 487
dah on Jackson islan'? I iole jou I got a hairy breae', en
what's de sign un it ; en I tole yon I ben rich wnnst, en gwineter
to be rich agin ; en it's come true ; en heah she is ! Dak,
now ! doan'talk to me — signs is signa, mine I tell yon ; en I
knowed jis''s well'at I'uz gwineter be rich agin as I's a
stannin'heah dia minute ! "
And then Tom he talked along, and talked along, and says,
le's all three slide out of here, one of these nights, and get an
outfit, and go for howling adventures amongst the Injuns, over
in the Territory, for a couple of weeks or so ; and I says, all
right, that suits me, but I ain't got no money for to buy the
outtit, and I reckon I couldn't get none from home, because it's
likely pap's been back before now, and got it all away from
Judge Thatcher and drunk it up.
" No he hain't, " Tom says ; " it's all there, yet — six
thousand dollars and more ; and your pap hain't ever been
back since. Hadn't when I come away, anyhow. "
Jim says, kind of solemn :
" He ain't a comin'back no mo', Huck. "
I says:_
" Why, " Jim? "
" Nemmine why, Huck — but he ain't comin'back no mo'. "
But I kept at him ; so at last he says :
" I > oan'you'member de bouse dat was float'n down de river,
en dey wuz a man in dah, kivered up, en I went in en un-
kivered him and didn'let you come in ? Well, den, you k'n git
yo'money when you wants it ; kase dat wuz him. "
Tom's most well, now, and got his bullet around his neck
on a watch-guard for a watch, and is always seeing what time it
is, and so there ain't nothing more to write about, and I am rotten
glad of it, because if I'd a knowed what a trouble it was to
make a book I wouldn't a tackled it and ain't agoing to no more.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
488 THE ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN.
But I reckon I got to light out for the Territory ahead of the
rest, because Aunt Sally she's going to adopt me and sivilise
-me, and I can't stand it, I been there before.
a TBULV, HUCK FINN.
arMHmotili it Ca. PriiUiri, Aw-iowl Sqvatt, lendaK.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
p:hy Google
p:h»Google
CHATTO & WiNDUS'S
L/ST OF Books.
Translated by Sir
limp, Zl.ai.
Adams {W. Davenport), Worha
A Dtotronaiv of the prama. Being
Playwrifihia, Players, and Play-
hausea of tbe UmMd Kingdgm sod
Prewnl Times. Crown Gvo, balf.
bODnd, I2«. ed. iPriparing.
Lattar-Day Uyi-lcs. Ediud by W.
limp, Zs. 6d,
Quipa and Qulddtttea, SelEcted by
eio'ih limp, 2s. ea.'"'" ^
AdvertlBing, A History of, from
Anecdotes. Curi
Agony Column (The) of " The
TImaa, " from iBt» to 1870, Edited,
^th an Introdudtian, by Atica Cl»t.
PoKSvo, cloth limp, 2a. Sd.
Aide (Hamilton), Works by:
Can- of Capplyon. Post Sto, illos-
tralsd boards, 2a,
Confldaneaa. Fast tn, DIutnlBd
Ar > o > iiteotural Styles, A Hand-
book of. Tranjlated from the Ge.man
of A. RoSEBOTaH, by W. Cor-LEIT-
Sto, cloth eatn, IT 6d. "'"'" "
Ai^amua War\I:
Artomua Ward's Woi-ka : The Worka
of Cm»i,e5 FARRia Browbe, belter
known as Arteuus W*«d. Wilb
Portrait and Facsimile. Crown Bvo,
clolb eilra, Ts. 6d.
ArtemuB-WaPd's Leetupa on tha
Moi-Fvions. Wiib aa lllustiatlons.
Edited, nith Prebce, by EDwauj P.
HiBOSTOK. Crowpgyo,M.
The Oenlal Showman: Life andAd.
vantures ot Arlamus Ward, B^
Frontispiece. C[ownSvo,clotliaitn,
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
£00^5 PUBLISHED BY
Aahton (John), Works by:
A History or the Ctiap-Boaka of tha
ElghtMHth Contury. With nsirlj
the original ™?*Bvo,'cI. ei., " »,''B(L
SlMlat Utt \n tha Rgign of 9 < nmn
o " "'j loom usli. Cr.e4!d™.Tl.ftl.
Humour, Wit, and Sstlre of ths
Seventsentn Century. WlthnearU
roolllusts. Cr. B*o. c!.eilr»,7 > . 6d.
Engllih Csrloatura and Satlps on
Bacteria. — A Synopeia of the
Bucterli and Yesal Fungi and Alllad
8p«l«. By W, B. Gbovk. B.A, Wiih
g7lllmn. CrownSvQ.cl.tilra.ii.aa.
Balzao's " Comedie Humatne "
and it« Aotbor. WithTrjiutation < br
H.H.W.LMS. Poaiavo.cl.iiinp.ai.Bct
Bankers, A Handbook of Lon-
don; together with Liiti c€ Banken
from jSn. By F. G. HiLTOB Psic«.
Crown gvo. clolh am, 7». Bd.
Bardsley ( Rev. C.WO.Works by :
Eng1l«h Supnamea: TlielrSoatceiand
SlgnLfiMtLons. Third Ed., revised.
Cr. Sto. cl. eitrs.7B. Sd. [Prtf trine.
Cuploaltlaa of Puritan h omen da-
tura. Crown gvo, clolli eilra, 7l. U .
Bartholomew Fair, Memoira
or. Bt Hihrt MoiiuT. WItii im
lUosta. CrowoBtg,elnHmtrg,7l. Ba.
leauchamp. — Gcantlf
amnge: A Novel. Bv Shelhl
Nolicea of the Artiits, by s'ydk
a. gill and'gijl «dge
Bechateln. — As Pretty as
Saven. uid other German Slaries.
Collected by LuEwio BBdHST.m,
Willi Additional Talei by the BrothaiB
Guuu, and too Uioata. be Sichibk.
SmaJ] 4(0, gieeu and gold, Gs. SA. :
gill tdgei, 11.80.
IfarODghoul the year. Tbia NiunbM
will caaain aho the Opening Chapter!
of a New Story by Cicil Powti, Ao-
Ihor of " Pbitiitia, " entitled aataylon,
and Illnatrated by P. MiG " -
Belgravltt Annual. With Stories
Wilson, Juetih H. HcCAaTMV, B.
Besant (Walter) and James
Rlao, NovBfe by. Post Sto, iltnat.
boards, 2a. each ; clolh ilmp, Sa. 0d.
By Cella'a Apt»up.
The Monka of Ttielema.
Twaa In TrafBlgap'a Bay.
TMa Tun Ym™'Tenant.
The Cha plain of tha Flaat
Besant (Walter*), Novele by:
All Sopia and Conditions of Men
An Impossible Slpry. With IJlustra.
tions by Fvao. B.^ihir
■ " - - - — . 8d.
lathi
m, ( .
fra^Sl^id "'" " "
cl!liip,ii.S?'
■w and CheaMr
1. en™, Sa. 8*.
Bi* uid CfaeaiHic
itrations by C^.
Demr Bto, ta.
CHATTO «• WINDUS, PICCAOILLY.
B«tham-EdwaF^e (M.). Novels
by. Ccowa 8vo, cloth eina, Ss. M.
each, i post Svo, lUosl. bda., Ii. each.
Fellola. I Kitty.
Bewick (Tho8.) and hia Puplla.
ByAuBTiKDoBSDM, With 9j muslri-
tioci. SquafaBvo, clolh antra. ll)»,6a.
Birthday Books:—
Tha Starry Heaven*: A Poetical
Birthday Booli. Squaro Svo, hand.
BOmely tound id doLh, 2b. 64,
Birthday Flov™™: Their Langaags
^d Legends. By W. J.-Gordom,
Boaulifully Illustrated in Colours h.
Viou BouoHTnN. Id lUimioatea
cover, drown 410, ft.
The LowbJI Birthday Oook. With
Illusia., small Svj. doth extra, 4l. 6(L

IB, 1875-79, ComploU
OroavanorNotefl.se parate years, Irom
Qrosvenop Nates, 1884. With 78
UluatrallODa. ll.
OmvenoF Notes, 1S77-82. With
Dpwardsof 30olliusUatioa9. Demy
Svo, cloth limp, 61.
Ploturesst South Kendngtan. With
;o lUcstraUoDS. U,
The English Plotupeeat the National
Qallery. i^mastralions. ll.
The Old Masters at tha National
Gallery. ii3 Illastcatiaaa. li. Bd.
A Complata lllijatrated Cataloeua
to the National Qallery, With
lUiutL Demy Bvc, doth limp, Sl
IJIuttratBd Catalogue ofthe Luxem-
Drawings of lb* Artists, Edited by
F.G, Duii«s. Demy Svo, Bfc Sa.
ThaPaplaSalon,1884, Wlthoversoo
Illasta. Edited by F. Q. DUUAI.
pemy Svo, Ss.
Blake (William): Eichiogs from
Bowera'(G.) Hunting Sketches:
Canter* In CrampBhIra. Oblong 410,
balfbouiLd bnai^s, 3U.
Brand's Obsecvatlons on Pop-
ular Antiquities, chieBy llluilraling
Ihe Origin of out Vulgar Customs,
Cerempnies. and Superstitions. With
the Additions of Sir Henri Ellis.
Crnwn 8vo, cloth sura, eUt, with
nurperous lllnslraliona, 7s. ed.
Brat Hants, Works by:
Bret Harte'B Col | net ad Work
Complete in Five Vols,, croi
ciotb eitra, 6l each.
toiy Essay by ]. M. BsLLaw. Portrait
Crfiwn Svo, doth eitm, It. Cd.
abrlal Conroy: A NoviL FoUSro,
lIlDstratvd bouit, tt,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED B1
doth (iiIra,°Si. «lL''
Sketcbi».'*Pos't'S«],'ui^i.bd3., 2b.
rtIT BpIu*'* Love Story. Ffap. Swo,
pK4ure com. la. ; clolhaitra.Ia.ea.
Flip. Post Svo, illustiated bouda, ta. ;
cLotb limp, Sa. ti.
CallTomlBn Storle* (InclndlDg The
TwtHa or T»blb Houkt*in, JiFr
Bmooi'a Lovi Sioby, 4c) Tost
Brewer (Rev. Dr-.], Warke by :
ThaRsuJep > (H > ndboo) < orAI]UBlona,
Aulhora uid their Works, with th
" Tb?R«d«^ HLdl^ " " " i?pa
■tel;prinled. Cr. Svo, cloifalimp. 2
A Dlotjonary or Mlracjea: Im^lBtiv
Brewster (SirDavId), Works by:
More Worlds th > n Ona: Tbe Creed
tha Cbrislian. Wilh Platea. Post
Bvo, clotb eiira, la. 8d.
The Martyra of Sclanoe: Uvea of
Brlllat-Savarln.— Gastronomy
u K FIna Art. By Br.llat.Savarin.
Trmslaled by R. E. Akdehson, M.A.
Burnett (Mrs.), Novels by:
Llndasy'a Luck. Fcap. 8vo, picture
Pretty Pally pamtorton. Fcap. Svo^
Buchanan's (Robert) Works:
HuoHiV a™n'SI^cloi eilra. *.
8el acted Poema of Hobart Buchanan.
With Frontispiece b < T. Dauul.
CrowD Svo, clotb eitn, 6*.
Undertonse. Cr. Svo. clotb extra, M.
London Poem*. Cr. Bro, cL extra, Si.
The Book of Orm. CronRi Svo, clotb
extra, tt.
White RoH and Red: A Love Star-
Croon Bvo, clotb extra. Gl
Idylla and Lagenda of Invaptaum.
Tl. ad. [In i)u prai.
The Kebrld lalea; Wanderio^ in tba
brides. Wilfa'pronlSTieco''b» W.
Shall. Crown Sva, clotb extra, Ga,
irBK. ■Cr.gvo,clolhMlr^i.S < L,'
: Sto, illnstralod boards, la.
Mb for Ever. Wicb a Frontia-
Surton (Robert):
The Anatomy of Melaitoholy. A
and enriched by Translations of the
ClaBsici) Eilracla. Demy Svo, cloUl
eilra. Ta. 6a.
Abridgment, for popular use, of BuK-
TOh's AhaTDUV of HlLAMOBOLr.
PoBi Svo, cloth limp, ti. H.
CHATTO & ■ WINDUS. PICCADILLY.
Burton (Captain), Wor-ka by:
To the Qold Cout toe Gold ; A Per.
Wilh Mipa anJ Frontispiece, Two
Vols,, crown 6vo, cloth eiira, Mb. .
Tha Book of the SwoH: Being a
Hittorr at (he Snord and Ub Vie in
all Counlries, fiom the Earliest
Times. By Richxkd F. Buktoh.
With over (Dolllustialiona. Square
8vo.clattiBitrB,a2a.
Dunyan's PilgHm'e Progress.
Edileii by Rev. T, ScOIt. Wilh 17
S^eel Plates by Stothard, engraved
d-own 8vo. eknb eilra, gill, 7b. 6a.
Syron (Lord) :
Bypon'B Letters and Journ
Notices of bis Life. By
dilion, neniy revised, wilh Twelve
ill-p^e Plates, Crown Bvo, cloth
[tra. gilt. n. Sd.
" " post e¥o, " c'loth limp, la.
leron (Commander) and
Cameron (Mra. H. Lovett),
Crown Svo, cloih eiira, Sa. fid. each;
Campbell.— White and Black;
Travels in the United States, By Sit
Geokcs Cmpbell, M.P. Demy Svo,
Carlyle (Thomas) :
Thomae Carlyio: Letters and Ra-
w*T " M.A?''Crown 8vo, " cloth'eii™^
Iiliislnted,ll.6d.
The Correepondeno* of ThomBi
CaHyleand Ralph Waldo EmePBon,
1834 10 SS71. Edited by Charles
EtVoiNoRTOK. With Portraits. Two
V9IS., crown 8to, clath extra, ZU.
. Three Vols., ci
C h atto & J ac kso n . — A T peati Be

!• Children: A Coldea
ir Sehools. By Mrs. H. R.
Cobban.— The Cure of Soula:
Collins (Mortimer & Frances),
cloth eitra, !a. fid.
You Play Kb False'. Post 8vo| Uiust.
boa rds, as.; cr, Bvo, cloth extra, 3«.6 d.
Collins (Mortimer), Novels by :
Sweet Anno Page. Post 8vd, illus-
eitra. 3b. Cd.'"
From Midnight ti
i night. Post
: rated boards li.
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
cloth lii

clolhattra, lUmlnied, Ss.ed.
Antonlna. Illnsl.by A. Cohcakkb.
Bull. Illustnted by Sir John Gti^
BMI and J. MiBOKKY.
Hide and Seek. Illusualed by Sir
John Giuebt and J. Mahohey.
The Dead Seo«t. lllustraled by Sir
JOHB GlLBRilT Bad A. C0NC*NEM.
duaen of Hearts llluatraied by Sir
JoHB Gilbert and A. Coboaben.
G. Du Maubii
HUOHES.
Mlas OP MPS.? VI
Present Time. Crown Evo, elotta
extra, U. 60.
" I Say No. " Thiee Vols., crown 8vo.
SlaSd. jSha rlly.
Colman'a Humorous Works:
" Broad Grins. " " My Nigbtgown and
51ippera. " andolbEr Humorous Works,
Pio« and Poelital, ot George Col-
and Froniispiece by Hogarth. Crown
Bvo, clolh eilra, gilt, Ts. fid.
Convalescent Cookery : A
Family Handbook. By Cathkrihb
Ry ah. Po5i8vQ,l8.; cLlimp , Is.Bd^
Conway (Moncure D.), Works
by:
BWAV'3 IM. D.1 WOBIIS, coBfii™.
1 Necklace or Staples. Illus:
by W. J. Hekhessy. Squari
cloth eitia, fls.
rhe WandBPlng Jew. Ctowt
Cook (Dutton), Works by:
Coopef.— Heart Salvage, by
Copyright. —A Handbook of
English and Foralen Copypisht In
LIterapy and Dpamatia Works. By
SiDMEj JEHBOLD, of Ihe Middle
Temple, & sa., U^rrisler-aC-Law. Post
B vo. cloih limp. 2». 6d.
Cornwall. — PopularRomances
or the West of England; or, Tbs
Droils, Traditions, and Superslitions
of Old Cornwall . Collecledand Ediled
GlORQ
Cruik!,
lb extra, Ti. fid-

Creasy.— Memoirs of Eminent
Etonians : with Notices of the Early .
History of Eton College. By Sir
EOWARD Creasv, Author of'■ The
Fifteen Decisive Bailies of Ihe World. "
Crown Svo, cloth Bilra. gilt, with 13
Portraits, Ta. fid.
CHATTO * WINDVS, PICCADtLLT.
CtiTnisruKx (G.]i c«nlfntiid~-
Roblnaon
Indu proofs
/l beantifal y
wo SletJ f'lfllf
_ SHABK, choiCBl
PedigieM and Decifheimg Anc.enl
HSST 4o. By JoHK E. Cus5*»S.
Hmirelv Ne» and Revised Killt.on,
lUostiated nilb over 40° Woodculs
Mid Coloured Plates. Crona Sro,
dotheiini. 7». 64^
Gyplfls^Hearts of Gold:
NoreL Bj William Ctfus. Cro
8vo, clotb eitra, la. Sd.
D & nlel.— MerHe England In
th« Olden Time. BtGeohge Damiel.
Witb llliiBtralioni by Koht. Cnuiit-
BHAHi. Croon Byo, ctolb eilra, 3l. 60.
Oaudet Popt Salvation ; or,
TbB Evangelist. Bt Alpho»s«
Daven ant. — What shall my
Son beP Hints lor PareaU on the
Cboice of a ProfessioD or Trade ior
Iheir Sons. By F > ancis Davubaki,
U.A. Post avo, clotb lisp, H. M.
Davies (Op. N, E.), Works by :
CrownBvo.U.; clolh.U.Bd.
Nursery Hint*: A Moiber's Guide.
Cro < ni Bio, Is.; cloth, U. M.
i Life. Croim Bto, li. ;
'-■ IShcrUy.
o Long LIf
limp,^. B
Davias'(Sir John) Complete
Poetloal Work a, inclgdin(| Psalms 1.
Collected and Hdiied, nilb Memorlal-
iDtroductioa and Notes, by the Rer.
A. B. GBoaART, D,D. Two Vols.,
De MalHtrA,— A JourneyRound
Tr'nsltwdby ^HitBYATTWILL. P0«
Bvo.do.hliiop, Si. M. ^^_^__^
De Mllle A Castle In Spain.
ANorel. By Janes D > UiLLE. With
ear^^''iL
Derwent (Lelth], Novels by:
Our Lady el Tbhpl Ct, Evo, cloth
eitra, 3», 60. ; post Bvo, illust.bds., Ja.
extra, Bb. «d.'
Dickens rChaples), Novels by:
Post Bvo, illustrated boards, £a. each.
Skato
Plokw
hat by Bo^ 1 Nio
holaa
NlcWeby.
The
('
a > /j''i''> " " > 0
splaa
vo, cloth
The Spaechee of Ch
iB < i-i87o. WiihaNe
Pre'f^ed'by r " ™'. " -
oth'e
iled and
NE Skef-
lira. U.
Abo
t England »Hh Die
IUK« and others. Sq,
■ra, ide. Bd.
Tl'Sst™'
DIctlonaHes;
A Dictionary of Mleaalea: ImilatiTa,
Reallslic. and DoBmatic B^ Iha
Storloa. By the Rev. E. C. BEEWBt
LL.D. FoLrih Edition, teviwd
CDn'tlLin'i\ Complete'EDgE^^Bifc
Authoiv and their Woi«a, with ths
rately printed. By the Rev. E. C.
Famlliap AIIUBlona: A Hsndbcok
Bra cloth eiin, Ti. Sd.
D,g,t,7P:h»Google ,
^OOKS PUBLISHED BIT
* a »mp'?^n5v6 Guide t " lhE P;a " s*
of Iha Uni < ed Kingdain and America,
from the Earliest to the Preseot
Timra. Bf W. Davehfdrt Adaus.
dotal. Crom
Oobson (W. T.), Works by r
Llteps™ Frivolitlea, Fancies, Folllea,
and nvlloa. Post Sva. cl. [p., 2s. 6i.
- Memofies of
and Cheaper eJ., cr. s'vo. cl'.™!.', 7l. M.
Drama, A Dictionary of the.
._. {Uniform with Bbeweii-»
" Reader's Haqdbook " ) Crown Ivo,
half-bound. 12». aa. llafrctarafon.
Dramatists, The Old. Cr.
graphical Memcdr bj Wh. Cifforc
Etffi.b]FCol.C™KiHCH»ii. 3V0I1
Chapmim'a Woplia. Complete li
Three Vols. Vol. I. contains thi
PlaTS complete, incladioe doubtfu
ones; Vol. II,, Poems and Mmoi
byA.C.SwmauRNE; VoLllrtians
lation* of tbe Iliad and Od jssey.
DiAMATisTS, The Oli > , iwillHiui—
Marlowe's Worke. iDcludiag hi*
TrauBlalious. Edited, with Sole,
and luiroduciioD, b; Col. CimNtHa-
Dyer. — The Folk - Lore of
Plants. By T. F. Thisblton Disk,
78. 6^.''° " ° - " ^n prtparafion'
Early English Poets. Edited,
Fletcher's (piles,'B.D.J Complata
rhtee'voll
Vorks. TtaieeVols.
Eegleston,— Roxy: ANovel, Bjr
Emi
nuel. — On Diamonds and
Precious Stonest their HiEtoTT, Value,
and Propeilies;, with Simple -fesls foe
Illustrations, liDled and plain. Ciowa
full Estimates of Cost. Quaniilies, Sc
ByC J.Richardson. Third Edition.
Ewald (Alex. Charles, F.S.A.),
Works by:
Stoploa from the State Pap«r*.
ChaPlea Stuart, Count of Albany,
commonly callod the Voung Pre-
■ " ^ " Cheaper
Edition, with a Porlr
clolh eitia, Ti, Sd.
ivGoti^le
CHATTO * WINDUS. PICCADILLY.
Eyes, The.— How to Use our <
£y«i, ud How la Preserve Tbem. Bj
JoHH Browmihq, F.R.A,S.. Ac. With
37 IllnatTiitioiii. Clown 8vo, li.; cloth,
FalF-hoIt
—Tobacco: It
His-
antra, Si.
haALlhor. Crown »
Faraday (Michael), Wonka by :
Lee 1 u res ddi v erld'b^f ore a Juvenile'
Ediled°by W.LL'AU(!«ooBPa.'F-C.s!
Living and Dialog. By Fi
6vo, cloth limp, 2a. GA.
Fitzgerald (Per > cy), Works by :
The RecreattonsotRLItarary Man;
or, Does Writiog Pay? With Re-
collections of some tileraiy Men,
end A Vie» of a Literary Man's
I WorkingLKe. Cr.Svo, cloth eitra,Bl.
The World Behind the Soenet
Crown Svo, cloth extra, 3l. ed.
Llttla Esaaya: Passages from the
Letters of^ Chabi.es Laub. Poll
Svo, cloth limp, la. Gd.
Caventy-flve Broaka Straet.
Th < Lady of Brantoma.
Fletch«i
Plate P
Heaven, Christ's Vlctorle on B;
Christ's Triomph over Death,
Minor Poems. With Uemorisl-Ii
(Giles, B.D.) Com.
Fbnblanque.— Filthy Lucre; A
Novel. Bv Albabv d "
jlllon (H. e.). Novels by;
ARea
Queen. Cr.e
o,ol.eiira,SsM.
French Lltet^tu
By Henkv Vah La
3Vol,.,de[nyBvo,cl
•e, History Of.
Frere.
Svo, 11
— Pandura
ng HaH
" .Ac*
post
Fivjst (Thomas], Works by ;
Crowo 8vo, cloth e.tra, 3*. Sd. each.
CIpcus Life and Circus CelahrltlBB.
The Lives of the Conjurers.
urold. Post Svo, clotli
lortlcultupa: A Gossip
ers. ByToH and Jane
ust. Pasttivo,c1.1p.4a.ed.
doth a > tra, St. ; fill edges, M,
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Manlhif.
item Seiiid Story, enlllled " Phlllstle^ "
by Cicu, PowEn, ii now ippearing.
at Ubsah, are also
■•Ik, " by SiLVAKUB
German Popular StoHes. Col-
LVm " ^^ " 3

aloth eilrs, Si. 6d. ; gilt edgea, Tb. 6d.
OJbbon ]chaMo8)7Novel8 by :
The Golden Shaft.
Of Hiah Defiroo-
Fancy Free.
Loving B Dream.
By Moul^BnH St««m. TllTM Vols.,
Found Out'Tbieo Vols., crown Svo.
Gilbert (Wi
Post 8V0. illu
Dp. Auitir
ThaWlzar
Ham), Novels by . ■
Hated boards, a. each.
Gilbert (W. S.), Original Plays
by; In Two Series, eaoh complalo in
Tl» First Series cooIium — The
■ Wicked WoDd-PyBOlalioD Md Ga.
Utea-Chiuity-Tho Princesa-Tho
Palace of Trulli— Trial by T iir,.
The Saco-D Series coVlaL£,-Hro.
ken H carts-En gaRed-S waelhBarls—
P/w "';^^'!. " "''^ "''°f " ™-Toio Cobb—
Glenny— A Year's Work In
Oapdan and Oreenhouse: Practical
Godwin— Lives of the Necro-
Foa " " o%lolh?iaip,'2»'!'"
BayBFd Taylort Dlvaralona of th«
Eaho Club.
Bennett'! (Dr. W. OJ Ballad History
of England.
Bennett's (Of.) Songs for ShIIops.
Hnlmas's Autocrat of the Break-
fast Tabia Wilb an latroduclloii
Holmaa'B ProHissor at ttM Break
d Oddities. Com-
li-vlng's (Washington) Tales of th*
Jeaee'e (Edward) Scenaa and Oo-
cupatlona of a Country Life.
Lajnb'a Essays of EIIb, Both Series
Ulah Hunt's Essays: A Tale for a
Cfiininey Cnrner, and other Pieces.
Pascal's Provincial Letters. A New
TranalatioD, with Hisloricai Intro-
ductionaiidNote3,byT.M'CBIK,D.D.
Pope's Poetical Works. Complete.
Roe befoucau Id's Maxims and Mora]
troduclnry Essay by SxinTE-Bauvs'
St. Pisrre'a Paul and Virginia, and
Lid b lh?Rc'?*l'c ^'" " "'■'"'''
Mab. With Essay by Liiqh Humt.
Shelley Papers, & c.
D,g,t,7P.:hy Google
CHATTO & ■ WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
,IT, Tub, omtBHici-
Coantriea. Seleclsd Bnd Edited b;
TheodoriTavloii. CrDwoBc(i,clotB
gill Md Kill edgea, 7l. Ed.
Gordon Cu m mlng(C. F.). Works
Oreoka and Romans, The Life
□rtha, Deiciibed from Aallqne MoaD-
Bieoli. Bt Eunsi Guml »Dd W.
KONBB. Translaled froiD tba Third
Genniin. Edition, snd Edited by Dr.
F. HuBFran. With 54; i 11 uslra lions.
Nan and Chsiper Edilioa, dem; Svo,
Greenwood (Jamee),Works by:
The Wtldm of London. Crown Svo,
eJalh eitra. ft. BA.
Guyot,— The Earth and Man ;
< *r, FbTBtciLl GfogTBpby ip ita relation
to tba HlBIorr o( , Uanlilnd. By
BDIDS loured, Bod t
!irtra,gilt, < a.6d.
Hair (The): Its Treatment in
Health, Weakness, and Disease.
TransUted from the Gemiao of Di. J.
PiHcua. Crown 8vo, la.
Hake (Dr. Thomas Gordon),
Maiden Eoataty. Small ,|tt > , clotli
Legend, of
clotb e.U:
ofthaMorrow. CrownB'
HhII
—Sketches
of IrtshCha-
(111, V.
HandwHtlng, Tha Philosophy
Hanky. Panky; A Collection of
VervEasvTriclis.VoryDifficgllTriqki,
White j/agic, Sleigfal at Hand & o.
Edited & » W. H. Casms. Wilt uo
Illuta. fcrown 8to, oloih eiitrB,4a. W.
Hapdy (Lady Duffus). — Paul
Hardy (Thomas), — Under the
Gpsenwood Trea. BvTuouas Haiii¥,
Author of " Far (rQa the Maddioj
Hawela (Mrs. H. R.), Wofka by:
Illustration., Small Bvo. illusKated
cover, lB,i clotta limp, Ii. M.
ThoArt of Beauty. NewandCheapar
The Art of OMOntlon. Square Bra,
h^ndaomelr bonnd and proftiselT
llluslraled, lOi. Sd,
Cbauoar for Chlldrani A Golden
Key, With Eight Colonred Pictures
and nnmerous Woodcuts, New
HawelslRev, H. R.}.— American
Humorlata, Including Wabhiuqtok
Bi'thi ReV h " {( " hawii*, MA.
Crown Bio, ckMh aitta, 61.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
a Saronl't Wlft.
Marcy Holland, and other Siories.
Three VoTs., crown gvo. [,Sh Btlly.
IMPORTANT NEW BIOGRAPHY.
Hawthorne (Nathaniel) and
hlB WtfB. Br JULUN HawtHOBBK.
Willi 6 Sleel-plale Portrails. Two
;apsf.'ar|B I
Heath (F. Q.). — My Garden
ii.. Gs. ; c1, gill, gilt edges, 6s.
Helps (Sir Arthup), Works by :
Heptalogla (The);
Herbert— The Poems of Lord
Herrick's (Robert) Hesperldi
Noble Numbers, and Complete C
Gbos*rt, p.D„ SleJ Porlraiti Inc
& C. ThiM Vols., CI
Hesse - Wartegg (Chevalier
ErnitvonX Works by;
Tunim: The Lend Bud tha Peopla.
With 21 Illuslrations. Cionn lio,
cloth eilra, 3i. ed.
HIndley (Charles), Works by :
Taverns, Coffee
With lilustratior
The Life and Ad v <
jdotos and Sayingi : In-
e Origin o( Siens, and
ituresoTaChaap
Hoey.— The Lover';
ts (O.Wendell), Works by :
lis. lUusTrated by J, Goiinon
8d.: another Edition in tmajlet
i.wilh an Introduclion bvG.A.
Proressor at the GreakfoAt-
> )e; wilblheStoiyofliia. Post
Uia of Speakers and SinEsrs. By
GOBDOH Holmes, M.D. With lllus-
trationa. Cr. 8vo, !(. ; cl. Ump. U. 6*.
Hood (Thomas);
Hood'i Choice Worka, in Prose and
Verse. Iricluding the Cream of the
Comic Annuali. With Lite of the
Author, Potttail, and loo Illuslra-
tiona. Croiirn 8vo, cloth eilra. la. 60.
m), Works byr
hero to the North Pole:
Illustrations by w'BnuSl
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHATTO & ■ WINDUS. PICCADILLY.
Hook'a(Theodore) Choice Hu-
Hooper'. — The House of Raby :
A Hovel. By Mia. Gaoiioe Hooi-aa.
Pq51 8to. Illustrated boards, ta.
Home.— OHon : An Epic Poem,
b Tbree Books. By Richard IIeh-
Poiltail from'a MEdallion by Suu-
UEE3. Tentli Ediliop, crown Svo,
FroEi'su, ConatitutioD, Bud Objeci
tbdi Political, Sooi.-'"
and lodmtriaj Aflpei
Howtu.. Cr. Bvo. el'
Hunt (Mrs. Alfred), ^□ve1B by :
Cnxm Gto, clolb extra. 3a. 60. eichi
poll Bvo, illnslrated boards, ll. BBCb.
p, 31. £d.
lng(Wa8hlngton),Workaby:
Jay (Hafplett), Novels by. Each
ciawD avo, clotb eitra, 3l 6d. j or posl
Sid, illoslrated boards, 21.
Tha Queen or Conn«ilht.
Jennings (H. J,), Works by :
Jet > Pold (Tom), Worka by:
about FIowe " . °By Tov and Jmk
Jerbold. IlIusI,pDstSto.cl.lp.,2s.ed.
Our Kitchen Barten; The Plants
wa Grow, and How w* Cook Tbem.
By Ton JeRROLD. Post 8yo, cloth
Jesse,— Scenes and Occupa*
tlotnof^Coonti-y Ufa. By Edw*bd
s (Wm.p F.S.A.), Works by:
Animals, Birds, Eggs, Lock. 4c.
With u Elcbed Frontispiece. Crown
8vo. cloth eitra, 7a. Si.
Crowns and Coronation! : A Hiator*
of Regalia io all Times and Coua'
tries. With One BuDdred Illu»-
trations. Cr. 6to. cl oth e.lta, 7i. 6 < L
Jonson'a (Ben) Works. With
a Biograpbical " Memoir by* wTlliam
GiFFORD. Edited by CoIddbI Cub-
Josephus.TheCompleteWorka
of. Translated by Whistob. CoD-
?«?Vo1s'" sTo'H " ?*!^ " -''" ^'
tod Maps,'elglb'Mtia, gilt, lS«. "
D,g,t,7P.:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Kavanagh — Tha Psarl Foun-
Knlght— The Patient's Vade
from " Medicai Advice. Bj Wiu-iAii
liriona of Lamb's eoA Colcridfta'i
PMtry tor Chlldrei
Ira,T(.ed.
ilelfl Edi.
,3^
Little Ewhyb: SkMches anct Chara.
lers, Bj CniBLEs Lamb. Selccle
from bis Leltera by Percy F.t
OEiUU). PcstSro.clolhlimp.a.a
Lane's Arabian Nights, & o.;
s,.a
Wood, from Original DesigDS bT
Wii. BAHrir. AfJewEdiiion.from
• CopT annoialed by the Trarislalor,
Bdited bj bis Nepben, Edkisd
St.suv I^NtPooLi. Tbrae^ols.,
dam; Svo, cloib eius, 7i. 6d. eacb.
Arabli > nSoclat]|i
Ona Nigbls. " C
Egypiiaas, " te.
If ■'ThB Mod.
Ed (lad br SiAHt
Larwood (Jacob), Works by:
eitri, la. Gd.
Cleploal AnecdotM. Posl
s. CrowaSvo, cloth
I Anaodotae. Post Sro, clotb
Leigh (Henry S.), Works by:
l^rol* of Coskoyna
lUusiraiioQs, Posi
2a. El.
Jbux d'Eeprlt. CoU
by HumyS.LHiei
or, The History
whalB of Ckui«-
> a, in Coloun, after
torpor Juhua Da.vldaon.
Dib eiira,3a. CkLeacbi post
Locke and Keys. — Od ttis D».
velopcnent and DuttiburioD of Piiai-
due Locki and Kays. Bjr Ua«.-G < D.
lUustrailoiu. Demj 410, half Km-
bncgha, isi.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHATTO «■ WINDUS. PICCADILLY.
Longfellow :
Longra I low's Com plate Ppom Works.
With Ponnii and llliuir^iiana bV
ViLMiiBi B«oai,KV. CtownSvo,
cl«b uir*. 71. 60.
Lonitallow'a Poetloal Works. Cue-
fal\y Rsprinted from the Originat
EdillfHii, Witb DDiueraiii fine Illiis-
mtioDi OD Sleal and Wood. Croira
Lucy.— Gideon Fleyoe: A Novel.
By HnKiiY W. Lucv. Crown 8vo,
c].ai!lra.3».gd.;p o itflvQ,illLni. bda,|3i.
Lualad (The) or Camoens.
TruBlated lata Eneli^b Speaaerian
Ver» bf ROBIST Pixhch Duff.
pemr Svo, wiih Fourteen fall-page
PUiM, cloih boarda, IBa. _ _
McCarthy (Justin, M.P.)^Work8
The Comet
iKld o
clot h
McCarthy (Justin H., M.PX
Work, b^:
Seraplon, and other Poema. Crown
evD, cloth ewra. 6b.
An Outline of the History of Iraland,
from the Eiiliest Time* to the Pre;
hJaBd.
St^ tlolH gi tn,'(| < k'

crown 9vo, doib eiira. Si.
Qutta-ParchK Willie, the Working
Geeiua. With g IllnBInlioni br
ABTHUa HuoHis, Square 8vo, clolt
Paul F & ber, Supgeon. With a Fron-
tispiece bj J. E. MiLuis. down
Bvo, clolb Bitra, 3s, fliLi poil Svo,
mmlrated boards, H. ^
Thomas Wlngtold, Curate. With a
Frontispiece b. C, J. St*hiland.
Crown Svo, cloth eiira, 8l.6d.; poit
8td, illuitraled boards, 3a.
Macdonell. — Quaker Coualna:
CiDwo aio, cloth eilra, B».*eil. impost
Macgregor. — Paatlmea and
Players. Nnaa on Popular Games.
By ROBlBT MACaBEGOB. Post Bvo,
e Portrait-Gallery (Tha)
of the Oleianire of the former
■Vith ij Por-
Macquold (Mrs.), Works by :
In the Ardsnnes. Witb jo Sne lUna-
Squaro Bvo, cloth eilia,'l(ta.^ " ^
Plotures and Legends from Noi-
mandy and BrItUny. Widi nnmer-
Dns IlluEttaiiDm bj Tuohas R.
MicguDiD. Sqnato Bto, cloth (ill,
> r-mandy. Wlihgolllng.
T. K.Macouoid. Sqaar*
Htra,T.L«l:.
Throulh Brittany. With numerous
Illustrations b; T. R. Macouoid.
Square Bvo, dotli eitm., 7a. 64.
About Yorkshire'Witb 67 lllusira-
bv SwAiM, Square Bto, cloth extra,
10s. Si "
> ll Evo. and 01
3s. 6d.i
The Evil Eye, and
^lualnled bauds, i.
D,g,t,7P.:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
MaglcFart's Own Book (The):
PerloTDiaiiccs with Cupi sod Balls,
Eggi, Hata, HandkTcfaiflfs, Ac, All
from aclgal E.perienqe. Edited by
W. H. Ckeueb. Wibioo llliiEimioaa.
Magic No Mystery: Tricks with
ra.rtn. nin- Rail. «c.. With fully
laioiud In Gold anil CoIdqis.
Mallock (W. H.), Works by:
The New Republic; or.Culiure.Faitli
andPhilosophyinanEnElishCouniiy
House. Pi»llvo,clotlilinip,ZB. 6a. ;
The New Paul andVlrginls; or, Posi-
tivism on an Island. Poal Svo, cloth
limp, as. U.
Poema. Small 4to, bound in patcb-
MaJlory'e (Sir Thomas) Mort
d'Apthur : The Stories ol King Arthar
sndof IbeKnif^lils ol tbs Roun^ Table.
ce), Novels by:
lra,Ss.ea.eacb;or,
■d boards, li.
Post Svo.Ulustrated boanti.Si. each.
A Harveit oT Wild Okta.
A Little Stepun.
Fighting the AIf.
Masterman. — Half a Dozen
Oaughters: ANovBl. Byl.MisTBS-
.... edtMrda,!!.
HAH. PqsI Bvojillmiraiedlx
rreclEdl
Ih Life,
i)nrait,Bna
a of To
ated bo
the Pa
raliooe.
tn SBwyw.
ZTiii
)r,ThoNe-
1 " Qoaker
:ra(ed boards, 2t.
Ulfeon ttis MlHBleelppl. With about
^OG Original lllusiralions. Ctowd
Svo, clotli extra, Ts.ed.
The Adveriturea of Huckleberry
■a, It. & L iPrtparlmg,
Masslnger'B Plays. From Iha
Ten of WiLiiiu Gilford. Edited
b! Col. CUNKINQHAU. CrowB 8vo,
Mayhew. — London Characters
and the Humopoue Side of London
Llia. By Henrv Mayhhw. With
namerous Illuattations. Crown Svo,

it Uelancli
■BH. TtanslaleS
'Edited by W.
es. Selected by
D,g,t,7P.:hy Google
CHATTO «. WINDOS. PICCADILLY.
FlBST
orld —
— ChariW — Tbe Priooess—
The PalacB of Trqtli— TriaJ by Jnrr.
Opiglnal Playa b; W. S. Gilbibt.
Heam-EnMK=d- SweeihearB-
CrelEhen-DjiiT Dnice— Tom Cobb
— H.M.S. Pinafor* — Ths Soicsier
—Tbo PirafES of Peniance,
Gong* of IrHh Wit ■nd HumouF.
CoUeBtedudEdhedb^A.PiitcivAi.
Animals and their Maitepa. B7 Sii
ill and Palett«. By Robbrt
e Eisayi : Sketches aod Charac-
itrlcal Aneodotea, By J«c
la of Cookayns. B; Henit
d'Esprit. Edited by Hbhut
New Paul and Virginia. By
m Psgasua. By H. CbolhohqI'
UAmtm LiiaAST. amtiimtil-'
PMa«ua Rs-Saddlad. Bv H. Cnoi^
uoHDELiy-PsHHSLi.. Illustrated b*
Geords Du Mauri IB.
Muaea of Mayfali-. Edited bj H.
Punlana. By the Hoa. Huan Rowlbi.
« Punlw
, Bytli
The Philosophy Bf HandwrKIn). By
By Stream and Sea. By Willuu
Old Stories Re told. By Waltu
Booli. -By Dr. AaoRsw Wilsqm.
Medicine, FamUy.— Ono Thon-
upd Medical Maiimi and Surgical
■'"'■ Old Asa^'
Merry Clrale (The) : A Book of
mealg. By Clara Bellew. With
Mexican Mustang (On a).
Through Teias, from the Galf 10 (he
Rio Grande, A New Bookof Ameil-
can Humour. By Alei. E. Sweet and
MIddlemaeB (JsEin), Novels by:
Touch and Oo. Crown Svo, cloth
eitr > ,Ia.ea,:pastSvo, tllu9t.bdi,,3t.
Milton (J. L), Works by:
The Hygiene of the Skin. A Coodse
Setc^Rnlea for the ManigemeBCof
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS ■PUBLISHED BY
MonoplefT. — Th» Abdication;
MacWhirtII., A.R.A.. COLIB HCHTEH.
«lo. boupd in biickrain, iU.
Murray (D. Christte), Navels
[D. Christie), ^
A Mfe'a Atoname
A Modal FHther.
Joaaph'm Co«t.
CobI* of FIra.
BythaQateof tt
ValStrai'
War.
By Mrs.
Squira Svo, cloth eitn,
ler Nip (Storlea about),
Spiri. of tlie Gi«.t Mounaipi.
Nursery HInta:
Guide iu Healih and D
E. D*viBs, L,R.C.P. C
Ollphant — Whlteradlfls; A
Novel. Willi Illu9iratiaD9bjAiiTiiui
Haplll^3 and Hehrv Woods. Crown
8yo, dolh e > lra, S > . Gd.; posl B»o,
O'Connor— Lord Beaoonsfleld
ABiographv. ByT.P.O'COBnaii.M.P,
Sixlh Bditioi, with a New Prelkcs,
brineiqe the book down lo Iha Deatli
ot Lord Beacousfield. CiawD Bvo.
clQd i eiira.7 a. Gd. ____ ;
O'Reilly.— PhcQbe'B Fortunes:
A Novel. Witb lllustratioBs br Menbv
Tuck. PqsI evo, illmlrai ed bo aids, 2a,
O'Shaughneasy (Arth.). Works
by!
GonB* or a WorKcP. Fcap. Svo, dotli
extra, 7b. Sd.
Mualo and Moonllsht. Fcap, BrOi
eloih B.tra. 7a, 6d. -^ " ■
Laya of Fronce. Crown 8vD, clotb
wo nag*.
CiLBtla-
'•Gage,
TwoLlttlaWoodsn
I Dogof Flandera.

eimbi 1 PiBi
8vo, e- ■
71. Sd.
Princm NaDrulm
crown flio, 8U. 6 < l.
Wladon
from
dolh gilt, ciimainaD edga%
Thraa Vote,
Wladoni, Wtl,
clotb ai
and Pathoa. Selected
'orks of OuiDi br F.
'^3. Small crown Bvo,
Page (H. A.),WopkB by:
Thoreau: HisLiieand Aimai AStndi.
r''Pwuait Post Bvo, clolli
Bv ita late J, H. /
. bdited by H. A. i
Pascal's Provincial Letters, A
New TranalatioE, with HiMorical lo-
trodaction and Notea, by T, U'Cus,
P;D. PoBt Bvo, cloth fcmp, at. ^
Patient's (The) Vade Meoui
How to ;al most Benefit from Ue
cal AdviCflL By WiLLUu Khioi
Paul — Gentle and Simple. :
illustntsd boudi, ja,
D,£,,t,7P,-hy Google
CHATTO * WINDUS. PICCADILLY.
Payn (James), Novels by.
Crown Bvo, cloin eittra, 3s. M. eacb;
HarvBB. I Fallen Fortunaa.
What Ha Cent Hei > .
LsM Black than wa'n Painted.
By Pnwy. j High Spirit*.
Und«p One Roof, | Carlyon'a Year.
AConrldentlal Agent.
A Orapa rrom ■ Thom.
Foe CMh Only. | From Exile.
Poet Bto, illDjtraied boanle, ti. each.
A Perfest Treasure.
Bentlnek'a Tutor.
MurpHy'a Maater.
A County Family. | At Har Maroy.
A Woman's Veniaanaa.
Cecil'a Tryst.
The Clyffapdi of Clyffh,
The Family Seapegras*
The Foster Brathera.
Humoroua Stories.
Like Father, Like Son.
A Marina Rsaldenee.
Married Beneath Him.
Mirk Abbey.
Not Wooed, but Won.
Two Hundred Pounds Rewanl.
Kit: A Memory. Ciowa Siro, clolh
extra, U. Sd
The Canon's Ward. With Portrait
ot Author. Cr.Gvo, cloth eilra, Ss.eiL
In Peril and PHvatron: A Book for
Boys. With QumeroDi lUualia.
lioiii. Crown Sro, cloib extra. 6s.
5ocH < t£, Sele
C. Pehnell.
Pegasus Re-Saddled. With Ton fail-
page lllosta. b) > Q. Dc Utouii.
Planche (J. R.), Works by:
A Dlctionarj of D ress- Regal ,'e
closiasIical.Civil.apdMmiaiy— fro
■Dd Plain Platti and Woodcnla,
£T Ti. The Vols, mai also be had
The Pursuivant of Arms ; or, H.
Coloured Pronii
extra, 7s. SO.
Songs and Poems, from 1819 to iSm
Edited, with u rntroducliou, b; hu
Plutapoh's Lives of Illustrious
Msn. Tianalated from the Greek,
with Notes CriUca] and Hialorical, and
Sto, clolh ectra, with Portraiu, lOi. U.
Poe (Edgar- Allan):—
Mysta^ of Marie Roget, and
erSlonei. Post B > o, it]agt.b < l > ,,Ss.
PMoe (E. C), Novels by:
Vatentlna: A Sketch, With s Fron-
tiipioca bf Hii. Ludlow. Or. Bvo,
c1. ei.,Ss. ed..; postSvo.illnstbds,,!!.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS PV BUSHED BY
Proctor (Richd. A.), Works by ;
FIOW*r*otthaSky. With sj Illnsts.
Small crown B.o, eloih eitra, 4a. 6d.
Euy Star Lessons. With Stu Maps
for Every Night in ths Vear, Dra«-
Crown Sto, cloth eifia, ei.'''
Familiar Sclenoe Studies. Crown
8vD, cloth sitra, 7b. SI.
Rough WuFS mado Smooth: A
laled bv C. B. Piiuan. Crown I
cloth gill, with numeroui lUustrati.
and a beautifully eiecuied Chari
Spectra, 7l. Ed.
RlohanJaon. — A Ministry of
Health, and other Papers. By Bbw.
JAMII. Ward Richardson, M.D, Ac.
Crown Svo, clolli eitia, 61.
Reade (Charlea, O.C.L.), Novel*
by. PosISvD, mnit..bds.,3l.eachi
or cr. Sni, cl. «., illDsl.BB, M. each.
PuWofflngton. lUuGtraled by 5. U
aledby G. l.PlMWBLL.
Revised BditioD.wiih 13 Steel Plates.
Demy Svo, cloth extra, I0». Bd.
tratioES. Crowa Bvo, cloth eitra, 6s.
MystarleeorTlmeandSpBce. With
lUusta. Ci.Svo, clolheiIta.7aad.
The Unlvai-ae of Suns, and other
Science Gleanings. \Viih Illusts.
C < .Svo,clothei.ia.7s,6a. IShotity.
Hara'^CMh. !lhiarbyF!w'-''LiwBOH.
FiLDBs, A.R,A., and Wu. Sbaj-i..
Foul Play. Illust. bj Du Maurihr.
Put Yourself In Hl > Ptaea. Il!u».
A Ter. > Iblo TemptBllon. illustrated
Tha Wandering Heir. Illustrated by
A Simpleton. " IllaBtrat«l''by Kat >
A WomaThlataF. lUnstrated by
Pyrotaohn rat's Treasury (The);
or, Complete An of Making Fireworks.
Rabelais'Works. Faithfully
TrMslaied from the French, witb
D™t Crown'8vTclolhextra " 7s'6a!
Readtana. With a Steel-plalB Portiait
Go^''sto''r'i»''of Men and other
Pbrcv lJAont.oiD,and > Wf b Nasm.
byJoskpHNAsn'"'■ " ^^
Riddel! (Mrs. J. H.), Novels by:
Crown Svo, doth eilra, 3s. Sd. each ;
post Svo, illustteled boards, U. each.
Her Mother's Darling.
WelPd Stories. Crown Svo, cloth
RltnmerrAirred), Works by:
Our Old Country Towna With oi "
jolllusls. Sq,8 " 0, clolhgill, lOs.6
Ramblsa Round Eton una Harroi
so Illusts. Sq.Svo.olotbgilt, 10a. a
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHAttO & ■ WWDVS, PICCADILLY.
Robinson (F. W.), No'
b.1.
Rob
neon (Phil), Works
by:
'«
K'S'^'" * "'^E?:7
8vo,c
" ^.
Robinson Crusoe : A beautiful
reproductjdn of Maior'ft EdUiop, wiih
P Woodcuts and Two Steel Plalei bv
CnSJn 8vo " cloth extra, 7^61^, A few
I-aree-Papet copies, printed on hmd-
Rochefoucauld's Mai
Roll of Battle Abbey, The ;
Rowley (Hon. Hugh), Works by:
Post Svo, clolb Ump, 2b. Ga. eacb.
Punlanai RTddlea end Jokei. Witb
Sa.nson. — Seven Generations
of Exeoutlonan: Memoiii of tbe
SanBon Family l.6Bfl 10 1847). Edited
by Hkm BY Sam BOH. Cr.Bvo.el.er.ai. & l .
Saunders (John), Novels by:
pou Evo, Dlastrsled bosids, 2g. eacK,
One Aeilnit ths World.
Tha Lion < n the Path.
Thi Two Dpcamer*.
at
SaunderB (Katharine), Novels
by:
Crown Bvo, cloth extra, Si. fid. each.
Margsret and ElUabeth.
The Hi gh Mllla.
Heart Selvage, by Ses and Land.
nice QosBlp: An Illustrated
dinm of Interchange for Students
Lovers of Nature. Edited by J, E,
(Loit,F.L.S.,4o, Devoted to Geo-
r, Botany. Physiology, Chemistry,
ilogy. Microscopy, Telescopy, Pby-
iraphy, & c. Price 4d. Monthly : or
Wins a ColouredPlate^nd mimef
Scott's (Sir Walter) Marmlon,
and popo£r r^em, wj'tli'over'mTe "
Illustrations by leadina Artists. Elo-
4to,cLtheit^a!ia«!^^^ ™''
[Tbe Immcdiflt. success of'■Tha
Lady of the Lake, " published in iSSi.
has encouraged Messrs. Chatto and
Ed'itioa'of''lhi " nDt™esa'popu^M°and
famoos poem. Produced in the same
style, and with the same careful and
Ihewoikls^'e^ntMdtlstefiilaBwell
" Secret Out " Series, The:
The Pyrotechnist'* Treasury; or,
B™ " o " «9 K° " isH. "'^ith n*™r.
The Art of Amusing: A Collection of
Graceful Arls,GamesTrick9,Puizles,
WilbjMllhiattali'ons.
Hanky Panky: Very Eaaj- Tricks,
D,£,,t,7P-h;Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
'LS^:sLt "
111
...^ Iwn Book; Porfoi
with Cup« and Bills. EgKS, Hsu,
EiperiencB. Edited bj W. H. Ckx-
UEK. loo IllDstriltonB.
No Myateiy: Tiicki ifltli
Cuds, Di«, Bsllt, Ac, w
'.! " " /.
Seorei Wntiogi Trainina of Per
forming Aaimals, «c. With Co
IcnrEdFroDtitpiecs and man; Illut
Senior (Wtlllam), Works by :
TPBval Knd Trout In tha AntlpodM.
Cnxm SvB, ololh «lia, Sa.
By Stream and Saa. Post Bto, cloth
limp, & . sa.
Seven Gagas (The) of Prehle-
toHo Man. By Jahis H. Stoddart,
Anthorof'ThefriUagBLifo. " Crom
Sto, cloth BiUa, SB.
Shftkespeane :
Ths Flnt Fo)lo Shakganare.— Ma.
WiT.Li.li Shuespeahe's Comediea,
Histories, sod Tragedies. Publiahsd
■ccordinelolhelnieOriBinallCopies.
LondDB, Vein ted b; Iguc Iaggabd
phio prooBSB-ensuri'ng the itricteal
accuiKcy ID every detail. Small Svo,
balf-Roiburgbe,Ta. Gd.
ThaLansdowns Shakespeare. Beaa-
(ifnllv printed in red and Mack, in
Email but very dear lype. With
J, Mo¥i SiiiTH. Crown 4I0, cloth
_ gill, 6a.
: or ShBlmepaarB
A Study of Shakeapeare. Br Alokii-
HOH Charles Swthbupuib. Crown
Shelley's Complete Works, in
Foar Vols,, pcsl Svo, clotb limp, 8a.;
or «!paralely, is. each. Vol, 1. con-
laiiia bii Earl; Poems, Queen Mab,
Ac,, wilb an IntioduclioD by Leiok
Laon Bod CjlhTia, ftc.; Vol. III.,
PosthamoosFDems.tbe SbelleT Papers,
eluding X Refnuiion of Deism, Zai-
Iroizi, St. Irryne. Ac.
Sheridan :—
Sheridan's Complete Worto, wltfa
Prose and Poelrf, Translaliona,
CollsctinnofSh'eiidan'iani. Crown
Svo, cloth extra, gilt, with to Fall-
pags Tmted Illustrations, Ta. 6A,
BdlKd, with an Introduction and
Notsa 10 each Fl», and a Bio-
graphical Sketch of Sheridan, by
tration'r'Demy™vi^ ci. bff . U». 6d.
Demy flyo. cloth ei
Sidney's (Sir Philip) Complete
Signboards : Their History.
With Anecdotes irf Pamons Tavema
•ad Remarkable Cbaractan. B;
jicoa Laswood and John Csupih
with 100 Itlnatratious, Ta. Si.
Sims [G. R.)-How the Poop
Live. WithfclllostraUooabjFaaD.
Sketohley.— A Matoh
Dai*. BjAaTHnaSnitTom
Bvo. illnatrsted boards, la.
(n the
.■T. Pan
Slang Dictionary, The : Ety.
motogical. Historical, and Anecdonl,
Crown Bvo, c loth eitla, gilt. St. B d.
Bmlth {J. Moyr), Works by:
The Prince or Argolls: AStcnofiha
Old Greek Fsiry Time. BjjtMoia
Smith. Small Sto, cloth eitn,iritfa
130 IllnslnlioDa, 3a. Bd.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHATTO * WINDUS, PICCADILL7.
SmTH'a (J. MoYi
Tare* of Old THuls. Collected and
lUuitmed by ]. UoYR Smith. Cr.
Svo, clolb gill, pTDfuseljr lUusl.. fii.
A Nonhern Odditr. ByEvAHD^L^
Sm ith! Sni^l7vo, c]oihe«Ta.6».
Spaldlng.-EJIzabethan Demon-
ology: An Esitav in llluRlralion of
the belief In
Speight. ~ The Myster-les of
Spenser for Children. BtM.
H. TowKT. With Illuimtloiia b*
WaltixJ. UOIGAH. CfawnJlo,wilIl
Staunton. — Laws and Praotlce
Sterndale.—T he Afghan Kilfe:
DALE. Cr.lviiclotheitra.3a.cil.; post
Stevenson (fl. Louis), Works by :
Ti-aveli with a Donkey In ths
CBvennM. Fromiipiece h, W*ltk«
Ckabk. Posiavo, cloth limp, 2a. 64.
An Inland Voyage. With Front, b*
W, Ciw»«. tost Bvo, el. Ip., A 8d.
Vipglnlbui Puerlsque, and olhec
Crovra Bvo, cloth e.lra, 6a.
New Ambltui Nllhta. Crann Svo,
cl. eilr., 6l. ; post Bvo, illnst bda., li.
St. John — A Levantine Family.
Br Baylb St. Johh. Post Svo. illbS'
8todda( > d. — Summer Cruising
In ths South Seu. Bt Chaius
WtiniH-STODQAllD. lUiut.lly Willis
Mackay, Crown Bvo, cl. eitra, Js. 84.
St. Pierre.— Paul and Virginia " ,
NARDIN St. PUBRl, Edited, whb Lffe,
brRer. E. CUKU. Ft > staTD,cl.lp.,ll.
Stories from Foreign Novel-
Stnutt's Sports and Pastimes
SpecULclei, from Ihs Earliest Period
to ths Pieseni Time. With 140 llluc
^- - -■■ 1 by WiLUAu Hoiim.
;lcth e:
a. Tg.6J.
Suburban Homes (The) of
Loncfon: A Residential Guide to
Favourite London Locjdilios, their
SocietT, Celebritiat, and Assoctationa.
With Notes on Ibeir Rental, Rates.and
House AccoramodaUoo, WitbMapof
Subnrbin London. Ct,lvo,ci.ei.,7i.6(L
Original Edilinn ol " Gulliver's
Travels. " Cr. Bvo. clolh eilra. 7». M,
Swinburne (Algernon C),
The Qusan MattiBC tuid Rotamond.
olhwoll: ATragedv. Cr.8vo,i2sj
A Note on Charlotte Bronte. Ciowo
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BT
Symonds — Wine, Women and
UediBTBl LRtin Stndealt'
. NowfirilttamlatediiitoEiig-
h > er«e. with u, Esiav by J. Ad-
lOTON Stuohdi. SduiUSvo,piuc1i-
lishVeri
Syntax's (Dc) Three Tooto:
Wife. With the whole of RoHtAHD-
Talne's History of English
Llteratups. TTantritud bT Hinit
" --'" — " -'-, uiuU Svo.
lards. KB.— PoputiR Ediiiok,
Taylor (Dr. J. E., F.LS.), Works
by:
The Suuilty and Morality of
PlantBTA Sketch of the Life and
Our Common British Fossils: A
Complete KsDdboak. With na-
eloih eilra, 7a. M.'[j'w^qfing!
Taylor's (Bayard) Diversions
of ths Echo Club: Burlssques of
■■ Modem Writers. I'ostlho, cJoihUmp,
Thackerayana: Notes and Adcc-
dotes. Uluitmted by Hundreds of
Sketches by Williau Maufiacb
iDCideDta in bis " ^ sSSool-lifo, ind
e Charaeters in the books of
ry-day re
.8vQ,dl. e
Ih Colouii
a, T > . 6 < 1.
Thomas (Bertha], Novels by.
Crown 8vo, elolh eitta, 3l. fld. each]
post SvD, illustrated boaidi, ti.Bacb.
Proud Mslsia.
Tha ViellnPlayon
a, pit edges. Ti. 6d.
I ^S'low " A'rSdemicLi.
facsimiled fiom Turner's Origliiai
Drawings. Cr. Bvo.el. e.lra. 71.60.
Old Stories Re-told. Post Sio, cloth
limp, b. Gil.
Tales for the Murine*. Post Sto,
Tlmba (John), Wofks by:
liationB. Cr. Bvo.clothetlra, 7b. el.
trIcltiM: Stories of Wealth and
Fashion, DeluEious. [mpostures, and
Faaatic Missions, Slraage Sights
and Sportiui; Scenes, Eccentric
Letters, & c With nearly so lllDUt.
Crown Bva, clolh eitra. 7a. fid.
Torrerts. — The Marqueas >
Historic*f > oitrait. By W. M. Ton-
■ENS,M.P. Demyg»o,eloltieilra,Ha.
Trollope (Anthony), Novels by:
Cruwn gvo, cloth eitra. S*. 60. sacli
post Svo, illustrated boards, 2l. each.
The Way We Live Now.
The Amerlaan Senaton
Frau Frohmann.
Tt^ Land Leaju ere.
Trollope(FrancesE.),Novelsby
Like Shipa upon tha Sea. Crown
Mabel'a ProgfMa.'Crown Bvo, doth
eitra, 1(1. M.
AniwFumeoa. Cr.8T0,Gl.(j.,lih«a.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CUATtd * WlNLVS, FldCADILLY.
TpollopeiT. A.)-— Diamond Cut
Diamond, and othei Stories. By
Tho«»sAd < .i.phu9Tro[.lo™. Crown
8vo, clolb ej!T3, Ss. ed.; poii 8vo,
illujlraled boardj, 2a.
Walfokd'sCEdw.. M.A-I WoBRs.eoB.—
The smiling Houme of Commons
(18841 Containing a List o( all Ihs
Member, of the BSlish Parlianeot,
Sc. " s°nio,'cioih,''l > 7 Publistuid
Tha Comcrieta Peepage, Baranet-
Tytier (Sarah), Novels by:
Crown Bvp, doth H«fl, 3.. M, each ;
What She Can
andtheBeut. TbienVols.,
iSvo.Sll. ed. IShorUy.
Tytier (C. C. Fpaaer^). — Mis-
Van Laun History of French
Literature, By Hkhkt V.ji Laun,
Complete in Three Vols., dami Svo,
Walcott Church Work and
Life In Enotlsh MInetere; and (l.o
English Stuaenl's Monagtlcon. B, the
Rev. Mackenhk S C, Walcott. S.D.
with Map a^d GfouDd-P'liUH, Hi.
Wairord (Edw.,M-A.),WQrk8by:
Mngdmn*'CM.aT'iSg NolicM of
theDescem, Birth, Marriage, Bduca-
tingiiishe^ Keadi of Families, their
He]rs Apparent or PresumpIiTe, the
OfEcei they hold or have held, Ihcir
Town and fcountij Addresses Clubs,
fto. Twentr-fonrlh Annual Edilion,
for 1BS4, cloth, full gill, SOS.
Tha Shilling PeertLge (1884). Con-
taining an Alphabeiica] List of the
HoDse of Lords, Daiea of Cresllon.
Poblisbed u
ling Bi
lally.
[ > Btag <
Alphabetical
" aphical No
, Xddresse.
■ablished an
Knightage
(1884).
List of
Klc»
lbIIt.
3 Unite
.Kin.
annually.
n.^ By Waltph
Wanderer's I
. Ill us
sia. Aftlc
n the Olden
Adventm
America, _
Savage Life. B} Fi
By GioBGi bABi.L. Wiih lilusi
lions by ROBT. CllUII5BA»».
Ctrcua Lire and CIrouB Celebrltica
.BtTbouasFkost.
Th« Live* of tha Coi > Jurcra. B]

> e found there.
Indon, By JA»
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
oTEiecutlonsra:
Wapner.— A Roundabout Joup-
belb.ud a Faufm^le of Ibe Great
S«aL Beaiilifallr printed oa paper
toimiUIelheOrigiaal MS. Price Si.
Magna Charta- An ajcact Facsimile
feet wide, witti th* Arms and Seals
■mblaioned in Gold and Coloura.
Price El,
Tha Roll of Battle Abbey; or, A LlM
Weather, How to Foretell the,
with the Poofcet SpectTOScope. By
'F. W. Com. M.K.C.S. Kiig.. F.R.Mel.
SvD.'la. i clotb, li. Bd.
Weetropp Handbook of Pot-
IbQiE Arts from*(he " karl'iBsl'Pmod.
By HoiiDEa M. Wistroff. WLlh nu-
metous Illustrations, and a List of
Marka, Crown Svo, clolh limp, 4b. Sd.
White's Natural History of
Selbome. Edited, flitb AddJtiOBS, bt
Thdhis Biiown. F.L-S. Foil Bio,
Williams (W. Mattleu, F.ftA.S.),
Works by :
Science Notsa. See the Girtliuui's
Uagazihb. U. Monthly.
Science In Stioi^ Chapter*. Crowa
8,0, cloih extra, It. 8d.
A Simple Ti'eatl»e on Heat. Ctmm
Bvo. cloth limp, nith Illusts., H. 61.
The Chemistry of Cookery. Crown
Wl ison (Dr. Andrew, F.R.S.E.),
Work! by:
Chapters on Evolution'A Popglar
ii lIlDsmtions, S(.
post Bvo, illostrated boaida, 3a. each.
_Oavalry_Llfo. I Regi mental Legenda.
Women of the Day: A Biogra-
phical Dictiooaiy. By Phahcis Hays.
Crown Bvo, clolh eitra, Sa. [I* Ike prai.
Words, Facta, and Phrs
'0,°rei.,1«.M. ; hal1?£^und^ftr'

F.S.A. Large post Bvo. cl. ai..7«.6d.
Yates (Edmund), Novels by:
PdsI gva, illuslrated boards, li. each.
Castaway. | Th« Forlorn Hop*.
D,£,,t,7P-hy Google
CHATTO S- WINDUS, PICCADILLY.
NOVELS BY THE BEST AUTHOBS.
Note in thi fuss.
WILKIE COLLItlS'S NEW NOVEL.'" "
ON'S NEW HOVE
JULIAN HAWTHORNE'S NEW
STOKIES.
Morgy Holland, and otbei SlarLea. Bt
J. ^.wTHOBSH AuihT ofGarlh/'
THE PICCADILLY NOVELS.
Popular Sloriai by the Best Authora.
ciDwn SvD, clolb eitca, U. SO. eacb.
BY MRS. ALEXANDER.
BY laORTIUER COLLINS.
Maid, Wife, («• Widow P
Swoflt Anne Page.
BY W. BESANT & JAUES RICB.
TranamlEratlon.
Ready-Money Mortlboy.
From Mldnleht to Midnight.
My Little Girl.
MORTIMER & FRANCES COLLINS.
The Case of Mr. Luoraft.
This Son of Vulcan.
The Village Comady,
With Harp and Crown.
You Play me Fal.e.
The Qoldon Buttorlly.
By Cella'a Arbour.
Basil.
Tha Frozen Deep.
Hide and Seek.
The Law and tha
Tha Seamy Side.
The Dead Secnt.
Lady.
The Ten Year.'Tenant
Queen of Heapte.
TheTwoDeetlnlea
The Chaplain of the Fleet.
Haunted Hotel.
BY WALTER BESANT.
The Fallen Leavea
All Sorta and Condition! of Men.
The Moonstone.
Jeiabel'aDaughter
The Captains'Room.
Man and Wife.
AlllnaOardenFalr.
Dorothy Foralar.
MIeeor Mra.P
BY ROBERT BOCHANAff.
BY BUTTON COOK.
A Child of Nature.
Paul Foater'a Dau£htep
BY WILLIAM CYPLBS.
The Martyrdom of Madeline.
BY ALPHONSE DAVDET.
Port Salvation.
Annan Water.
BY JAMES
BE UILLB.
30
BOOKS PUBLISHED BY
Chiaf Pofulak Novels, nxfi-ned-
BY ROBERT BUCHAKAN.
BY PERCY FITZGERALD.
Tha Shadow of tha SwonJ.
Bella Donna. | Never Forgotten.
A Child or Naturs.
Tha Second Mr.. Tllloteon.
Sod and the Man.
Polly,
Tha Martyrdom Of Madeline
Lava Ma for Ever.
The Lady of Spantome.
BY MRS. BURNETT.
BY ALBANY DE FONBLANQUR.
SuHy Tim.
Filthy Luara.
BY MRS. LOVETT CAUBROff.
BY R. B. FRANCILLON.
Olympla. 1 Queen Cophetua.
BY MACLARBH COBBAN.
One by One.
Tha Cure of Soula.
Pnfacid by Sit H. BARTLE FRERB.
fly C. ALLSlvtl COI.UNS.
The Bar Slnlatel-.
BY HAit VRJSIVELl..
BY WILKIB COLLINS.
Ona i-f -wo
BY EDWARD GARRETT
Baall.
Tha Haw Magda-
The Canal GIrla.
len.
fly CHARLES GIBBON.
Tha Daad Saopet.
The FFOian D«b.
Robin Gray. , au«n of tha Me»
Qu»n of Heai^a
Law and the Lady.
For Lack of Cold.
My MInallanlat.
ThflTwoDeBtlnlee
rnPaetureaOraan
Haunted Hotel.
World SayP
Tha Moonitona.
ThoFallenLeavea.
In Honour Sound.
Man and Wlfa.
Ja2Bbe " eOaughCar
The Dead Heart.
A Heart's Problem
Poor Mlai FInoh.
Tha SlaBk Robe.
In Love and War.
The Braee of Yar-
fly UORTIUER COLi.;HS.
For the King.
Swtt Anne Page.
BY WILLIAM GILBERT.
Dr. Austin'* Oueeta.
From Midnight to Midnight
Tha Wliard of the Mountain.
A Fight with Foptuna.
Jamea Duka.
MORTIMER & FRANCES COLLINS.
BY yAMBS GREENWOOD.
S*BBt and Twenty. | FrancM.
BY ANDREW HALLIDAY.
The Vllla«a Comedy.
Every-Day Paper*.
You Play ma Falae.
flV LADY DUFFVS HARDY.
BY BUTTON COOK.
Leo. 1 Paul Foatar'* Oaughtar.
BY THOMAS HARDY.
fly 3. LEITH DESWENT.
Under tha Oreenwood Tp«e.
Our Lady of Toara.
BY JULIAN HAWTHORNE.
BY CHARLES DICKENS,
Garth. [Sahaatlan Stroma
Sketohas by 6oz.
El Ilea Quantln. 1 Diut.
The P3ct.«tok Papara.
PHnoe Saronl'a Wife.
Oliver Twiet.
BY SIR ARTHUR HELPS.
N la ho lag Nlokleby.
Ivan da Blnm.
BY MRS. ANNIE EDfVARDES.
BY TOM HOOD.
A Point of Honour. 1 Ai-chia UovalL
A Ooldan Heart.
fly M. BETHAU-EDWARDS.
BY URS. GEORGE HOOPER.
Fellola. 1 Kitty.
Tha Houaa of Rafay,
fly EDWARD BGGLSSTON.
BY VICTOR HUGO.
Roxy.
Bf Notra Dtun^ \
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
CHATTO S- WIKDUS, PICCADILLY.
JoHph's Coat.
CokIi of Fire.
ay th» Gata of tho Saa.
BY MRS. OLIPHANT.
Whtteladle*.
BY MRS. ROBERT 0-REIL
PhiBlH's Fortuna*.
BY OUIDA.
Held in Bondoda.
BY HARRIETT JAY.
V LINTON.
if LeBm Oundat.
.PV HENRY IP. tPcr.
Bv JUSTIN McCarthy, m.p.
Deal- Lady Disdain.
Ths Watenlale NellhbaurK
My Emmy's DauEhter.
r MRS. UACDONELL.
BY W. H. MALLOCK.
BY FLORENCE MARRYAT.
Openl Spsamo! I A Llltta EtoDSOi
A Hni^Bst of wild Flghtlne Ihs Al
Oais. I Wnttsn In Firs
BY J. MASTESMAN.
Half-a-drren OaugMer*.
BY JEA\, MIDDLBUASS.
Touch and Qo, |
Sti-athmoi^
Shoe
a WlntsF City,
andshlp.
Lost Sir Masi
bard.
A Perfect ■
Clyfrwds of Clyflto
eraaa.
Beat of Hui bands
Y JAMES PAYN.
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
31 BOOKS PVSUSHED BY CSAtTO 6- WtNDUS.
Chiap Poro[-A« Hovels, coHliniud—
CHE*r POPUHB NoVKtS, COKlinuli "
BY B. C. PRICE.
BY WALTER THORNBURY.
Talea for the MaflnsB.
BY CHARLES SEAPB.
BY T. ADQLPHUS TROLLOPS.
It la Naver Too Lmf to Mand.
Hard Ca»h. .
BY ANTN0.1Y TROLLOPS,
Pag WomnB(pn.
The Way We Live How,
Orimth Qaunt.
Put Youraalf In Hl > Plaoa
Marlon Fay.
Tha Doubia Marriage.
Kapt In the Dark.
Lova Ma Little, Lave Ma LonO.
Br FRANCES SLEAKORTROLLOPB
Foul Pin/.
The Cloletar end the Heerth.
AutohlogfKphy of a ThlsT.
An Idle Excuralon.
A Toprlbia Temptation.
A Plaaaure Trip on the Continent
A «m platan.
A Tramp Abroad.
A Woman-Hater.
The Stolsn Whlta Elephant.
Readlana.
. BY SARAH TYTLBR.
BY URS. y. H. RIDDELL.
What She Came Thraugh.
Her MotheKe Darirng.
Tha Brlda's Paee.
BY J. S. WINTER.
BY F. W. KOBINSOS.
Women are Stranse.
BY LADY WOOD,
Gablna.
£1 " EDMUND YATES.
BY BAYlB ST. JOHN.
A Levantine Family.
Caataway. | Tha Forlorn Hope^
BY CEOSGB AUGUSTUS SALA,
OBBllght and Daylight.
ANONYMOUS.
BY JOHH SAUNDERS.
Paul Ferroll.
Bound to the Wheel.
Why Paul Farroll Killed hie Wife.
One Agalnat the World.
Fcap. tvo, picture coven, li. etch.
The Lion In the Path.
■ " haVt " "'''"'" " ® " " ^'^^ ^ "'
Tha Twin* of Table MounUtn. By
BY ARTHUR SKETCHLSY.
A Matoh in the Dark.
Bhbt Hakib,
BY T. W. SPEIGHT.
of •■ Thai Lisa o > Lowiie's,-
Llndaay'a Luok. By Ihe Aotboi of
BY R.A. STERNDALB.
" That Lass o'LDwrie'a. "
The A^han Knife.
Prattv Polly Pamberton. By tba
Ambot of " Tbat Lass o'Lowtia'a. "
Trooping with Crowe. By Un.
BY R. LOUIS STEVEKSON.
New Arabian NIghta.
BY BERTHA THOMAS.
CrMelde. | ppoud Malita.
GaiBAK.
The VIolln-Player. - >
A Double Bond. By Liiini ViLLUU.
Eathar'e Glove. By R. B. FiaHCiLLoH,
BY W. MOV THOMAS. J
The Garden that Paid the Awit
A right for Ufa. /
ByToi,J.R.oLj > .
n,r,„.=-i > , Google
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
D,g,t,7P:hy Google
