


H
V«
:v
y
/
/
•I
THB
ADVEKTUBBS of TOM SAWTEB.

HC\''^
^i

THE ADVENTURES
or
TOM SAWYER
BY
MARK TWAIN
THE AMERICAN PUBLISHING COMPANY,
HARTFORD, CONN. : CHICAGO. ILL. : CINCINNATI, OHIO.
1881.

^
.1 ^'■'
.lA
1)V
Till.
233205B
R

OOfTllQKT
BT SAMUXL L. CLEBOMi
1875.
AO JiighU ReseroHU
To
MY WIFE
This Book
IS
Aftsctionatbly Dedicatxh,
:j
PREFACE.
Most of the adventores recorded in this book reallj occurred ; one or two were
experiences ef my own, the rest those of boj's who were schoolmates of mine.
Hack Finn is drawn fVom life ; Tom Sawyer also, but not f^om an individual — ^he
is a combination of the characteristics of three boj's whom I knew, and therefore
belongs to the composite order of architecture.
The odd superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children and slaves
in the West at the period of this stor}'— that is to say, thirty or fortj- years ago.
Although my book is intended mainly for the entertainment of boys and girls, I
hope it will not be shunned by men and women on that account, for part of my
plan has been to try to pleasantly remind adults of what they once were them-
selves, and of how they felt and thought and talked, and what queer enterpri3es
they sometimes engaged in.
Thb Author.
Habtford, 187G.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Y-o-a-a Tom— Aant Polly Decides Upon her Daty— Tom Practices Music— The Challenge—
A Private Entrance ij
CHAPTER II.
Strong Temptations — Strategic Movements — The Innocents Beguiled 26
CHAPTER III.
Tom as a General — ^Triumph and Reward — Dismal Felicity — Commission and Omission. ... 33
CHAPTER IV.
Mental Acrobatics— Attending Sunday-School— The Superintendent — ^ " Showing off " — ^Tom
Lionised 4a
CHAPTER V.
A Useful Minister— In Church— The Climax 53
CHAPTJER VI.
Self- Examination — Dentistry — The Midnight Charm — Witches and Devils —• Cantioiis
Approaches — Happy Hours 60
CHAPTER VIL
A Treaty Entered Into— Early Lessons— A Mistake Made 72
CHAPTER VIII.
Tom Decides on his Course— Old Scenes Re-enacted 79
CHAPTER IX.
A Solemn Situation — Grave Subjects Introduced — Injun Joe Explains %
CHAPTER X.
The Solemn Oath^-Terror Brings Repentance — Mental Punishment 93
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER XI.
^^ Muff Potter Comes Himself— Tom's Conscience at Work loi
CHAPTER XH.
Tom Shows his Generosity — Aunt Polly Weakens 107
CHAPTER XIII.
The Young Pirates—Going to the Rendezvous— The Camp-Fire Talk 113
CHAPTER XIV.
Camp-Life — A Sensation— Tom Steals Away from Camp \ 121
CHAPTER XV.
Tom Reconnoiters — Learns the Situation — Reports at Camp 128
CHAPTER XVI.
A Day's Amusements — ^Tom Reveals a Secret — The Pirates take a Lesson — ^A Night Surprise
— An Indian War 134
CHAPTER XVII.
Memories of the Lost Heroes— The Point in Tom's Secret .V. 144
CHAPTER XVIII.
Tom^s Feelings Investigated — Wonderful Dream — Becky Thatcher Overshadowed — Tom
Becomes Jealous — Black Revenge 148
CHAPTER XIX.
Tom Tells the Truth 158
CHAPTER XX.
Becky in a Dilemma — Tom's Nobility Asserts Itself. 161
CHAPTER XXL
Youthful Eloquence — Compositions by the Young Ladies — A Lengthy Vision — The Boy*s
Vengeance Satisfied ,. 167
•
CHAPTER XXII.
Tom's Confidence Betrayed — Expects Signal Punishment 176
CHAPTER XXIII.
Old Muff's Friends— Muff Potter in Court— Muff Poller Saveu l8i
CONTENTS,
CHAPTER XXIV.
Tom as the Village Hero— Days of Splendor and Nights of Horror — Parsnit of Injun Joe. ...189
CHAPTER XXV.
Abont Kings and Diamonds — Search for the Treasure — Dead People and Ghosts 191
CHAPTER XXVI.
The Haunted Honse^Sleepy Ghosts— A Box of Gold— Bitter Luck 199
CHAPTER XXVII.
Doubts to be Settled— The Young Detectives 208
CHAPTER XXVIII.
An Attempt at No. Two— Huck Mounts Guard 212
CHAPTER XXIX.
The Pic-nie— Huck on Injun Joe's Track— The " Revenge " Job— Aid for the Widow 217
CHAPTER XXX.
The Welchman Reports — Huck Under Fire — The Story Circulated — ^A New Sensation — Hope
Giving Way to Despair. 226
CHAPTER XXXI.
An Exploring Expedition — Trouble Commences — Lost in the Cave — Total Darkness — Found
but not Saved 236
CHAPTER XXXII.
Tom tells the Story of their Escape — Tom's Enemy in Safe Quarters 247
CHAPTER XXXIII.
The Fate of Injun Joe — Huck and Tom Compare Notes — An Expedition to the Cave — Pro-
tection Against Ghosts— " An Awful Snug Place " — A Reception at the Widow Douglas's. 252
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Springing a Secret — Mr. Jones* Surprise a Failure 264
CHAPTER XXXV.
A New Order of Things — Poor Huck — New Adventures Planned 26S
Conclusion 275
ILLUSTRATIONS.
TABU
Tom Sawyer • • • FrmUupuee
Tom at Home I7
Annt Polly Beguiled . . .18
A Good Opportunity .... 19
Who's Afraid 23
Late Home 25
Jim 26
'Tendin'to Business . . • .28
Ain't that Work? 3©
Amusement 32
Becky Thatcher 33
Paying Off 34
After the Battle 35
" Showing Off " 36
Not Amiss 38
Mary 39
Tom Contemplating . . • • 39
Dampened Ardor 40
Youth 41
Boyhood 42
Using the " Barlow " .... 44
The Church 45
Necessities 47
Tom as a Sunday-School Hero . 5^
The Prize 52
At Church 53
The Model Boy 54
The Church Choir . * . . . .55
A Side Show 57
Result of Playing in Church ... 58
The Pinch-Bug 59
Sid . . 60
Dentistry 63
Huckleberry Finn 64
Mother Hopkins 67
Result of Tom's Truthfulness . . .69
Tom as an Artist
Interrupted Courtship
The Master
Vain Pleading .
Tail Piece
The Grave in the Woods .
Tom Meditates
Robin Hood and his Foe .
Death of Robin Hood
Midnight ....
Tom's Mode of Egress
Tom's Effort at Prayer
Muff Potter Outwitted
The Graveyard
Forewamings
Disturbing Muff's Sleep .
Tom's Talk with his Aunt
Muff Potter
A Suspicious Incident
Injun Joe*s two Victims •
In the Coils
Peter ....
Aunt Polly seeks Information
A General Good Time
Demoralized
Joe Harper
On Board Their First Prize
The Pirates Ashore .
Wild Life ....
The Pirate's Bath
The Pleasant Stroll .
The Search for the Drowned
The Mysterious Writing .
River View
What Tom Saw
Tom Swims the River
FAOS
70
71
7«
77
78
79
81
85
84
85
86
88
91
92
93
98
100
lOl
102
103
106
107
108
no
112
TI3
117
118
J2I
123
124
125
127
128
130
133
ILL USTRA TIONS.
FAOB
Taking: Lessons 134
The Pirates'Egg Market .
. 135
Tom Looking for Joe's Knife
. 139
The Thunder Storm
. 141
Terrible Slaughter .
. 143
The Mourner
. 144
Tom's Proudest Moment
• 147
Amy Lawrence
. 148
Tom tries to Remember
. 150
The Hero .
. 152
A Flirtation
. 154
Becky Retaliates
. 155
A Sudden Frost
. 156
Counter*irritation
. 157
Aunt Polly
. 158
Tom Justified .
. 160
The Discovery .
. 161
Caught in the Act
. 163
Tom Astonishes the Schoo
\
. 165
Literature
• ,
. 166
Tom Declaims
. 167
Examination Evening
. 168
On Exhibition .
. 170
Prize Authors .
. 173
The Master's Dilemma
. 174
The School House .
. 175
The Cadet
. 176
Happy for Two Days
177
Enjoying the Vacation
178
The Stolen Melons .
180
The Judge
181
Visiting the Prisoner
184
Tom Swears
186
The Court Room
•
188
The Detective .
189
Tom Dreams
190
The Treasure .
191
The Private Conference
192
A King ; Poor Fellow ! ,
194
Business ....
195
The Ha'nted House .
198
Injun Joe ....
199
The Greatest and Best
200
Hidden Treasures Uneartt
led .
205
The Boy's Salvation .
Room No. 2 . . .
The Next Day's Conference
Treasures
Uncle Jake
Huck at Home
The Haunted Room
" Run for Your Life "
McDougal's Cave
Inside the Cave
Hudk on Duty .
A Rousing Act .
Tail Piece
The Welchman
Result of a Sneeze
Cornered .
Alarming Discoveries
Tom and Becky stir up the Town
Tom's Marks* .
Huck Questions the Widow
Vampires ....
Wonders of the Cave
Attacked by Natives
Despair ....
The Wedding Cake .
A New Terror
Daylight ....
" Turn Out " to Receive Tom
The Escape from the Cave
Fate of the Ragged Man
The Treasures Found
Caught at Last .
Drop after Drop
Having a Good Time
A Business Trip . *
" Got it at Last! " .
Tail Piece
Widow Douglas
Tom Backs his Statement
Tail Piece
Huck Transformed .
Comfortable Once More
High up in Society .
Contentment
and Becky
FAOB
207
208
209
211
212
213
214
216
217
220
221
224
225
226
227
229
232
233
234
235
236
237
238
240
24a
245
247
24a
249
251
252
253
254
255
257
261
263
264
266
267
263
271
273
274




mm I
»i
No answer.
Tom ! "
No answer.
What's gone with that boy, I
wonder? You TOM! "
No answer.
The old lady pulled her spectacles
down and looked over them about
the room ; then she put them up and
loolced out under them. She seldom
or never looked through them for so
small a thing as a boy ; they were her
state pair, the pride of her heart, and
were built for " style, " not service—
'she could have seen through a pair
'of stove lids just as wclL She
looked perplexed for a moment, and
then saiir~not fiercely but still loud enough for the furniture to hear:
iS
TOM SA WYBR
" Well, Ilay if I get hold of you I'll— "
She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching
under the bed witH the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the
punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.
" I never did see the beat of that boy ! "
She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the tomato
vines and " jimpson " weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom. So she
lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for dis-
,T >'^ —~~'-^ j^^ tancc, and shouted:
" Y-o-u-u Tern! "
There was a slight noise behind her and she
turned just in time to seize a small boy by the
slack of bis roundabout and arrest his flight.
" There ! I might'a'thought of that closet.
What you been doing in there ? "
" Nothing. "
" Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at
your mouth. What is that truck ? "
" /don't know, aunt. "
" Well, /know. It's jam— that's what it is.
Forty times I've said if you didn't let that jam
alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch. "
The switch hovered in the air — the peril was
desperate —
" My! Look behind you, aunt! "
The old lady whirled round, and snatched her
skirts out of danger. The lad fled, on the
instant, scrambled up the high board-fence, and
disappeared over it
His aunt Polly smnd surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle laugh.
" Hang the boy, can't 1 never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old fools

A UNT POLL Y DECIDES UPON HER DUTY.
is the biggest fools there is. Can't leara an old dog new tricks, as the saying is.
But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days, and how is a body
to know what's coming ? He'pears to know just how long he can torment me
before I get my dander up, and he knows if be can make out to put me off for a
minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick. I
ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows.
Spare the rod and spile the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a laying up sin
and suffering for us both, / know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-mel
he's my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him,
somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and every
time I bit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is bom of
woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it*s
so. He^l play hookey this evening, * and I'll just be oble^ed to make him
work, tomorrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays,
when all the boys is having holiday, but he hates work more than he hates
anything else, and I've got to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruina-
tion of the child. "
Tom did play hookey, and he had a very good time. He got back home
barely hi season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next-day's wood and
split the kindlings before sup-
per — at least he was there in
time to tell his adventures
to Jim while Jim did three-
fourths of the work. Tom's
younger brother (or rather,
half-brother) Sid, was already
through with his part of the
work (picking up chips) for
he was a quiet boy, and had
no adventurous, troublesome
ways.
While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity offered,
• South- weslern for "'«fternoon. "

k. GOOD OPPORTDNITT
r
20 TOM SAWYER,
Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and very deep — for she
wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like many other simple-
hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent
for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most
transparent devices as marvels of low cunning. Said she:
" Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?'*
" Yes'm. "
" Powerful warm, warn't it? "
" Yes'm/'
** Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom ? "
A bit of a scare shot through Tom — a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He
searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said:
" No'm — well, not very much. "
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirty and said :
**But you ain't too warm now, though. " And it flattered her to reflect that
she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that
was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind
lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:
" Some of us pumped on our heads — mine's damp yet. See? "
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial
evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new inspiration :
" Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to pump
on your head, did you ? Unbutton your jacket ! "
The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His shirt
collar was securely sewed.
" Bother! Well, go'long with you. Fd made sure you'd played hookey and
been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a singed
cat, as the saying is — better *n you look. This time. "
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom had
stumbled into obedient conduct for once.
But Sidney said :
" Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread, but it's
black. "
TOM PR A CTICES M USIC. 2 1
" Why, I did sew it with white ! Tom ! "
But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said :
« Siddy, ril lick you for that. "
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the
lappels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them — one needle carried
white thread and the other black. He said :
" She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it ! sometimes she sews
it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to geeminy she'd stick
to one or t'other — / can't keep the run of *em. But I bet you I'll lam Sid for that,
ni learn him ! " .
He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very well
though — and loathed him.
Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles. Not because
his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a man,
but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of
his mind for the time — ^just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of
new enterprises. This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he
had just acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practice it undisturbed. It
consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble, produced by touching
the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music —
the reader probably remembers how to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence
and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his
mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an astron-
omer feels who has discovered a new planet — no doubt, as far as strong, deep,
unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the astronomer.
The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom checked
his whistle. A stranger was before him — a boy a shade larger than himself A
new comer of any age or either sex was an impressive curiosity in the poor little
shabby village of St. Petersburgh. This boy was well-dressed, too — ^well-dressed on
a week-day. This was simply astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-
buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
He had shoes on — and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit
LJ
22
TOM SAWYER.
of ribbon. He had a citified $iir about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The more
Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his finery
and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy
spoke. If one moved, the other moved — but only sidewise, in a circle ; they kept
face to face and eye to eye all the time. Finally Tom said :
" I can lick you ! "
" I'd like to see you try it. "
" Well, I can do it. "
" No you can't, either. "
" Yes I can. "
" No you can't. " ^
" lean. "
" You can't. "
" Can ! "
" Can't! "
An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said :
" What's your name ? "
"'Tisn't any of your business, maybe. "
" Well I'low I'll make it my business. "
" Well why don't you } "
" If you say much I will. "
" Much — much — much. There now. "
" Oh, you think you're mighty smart, dofCt you ? I could lick you with one
hand tied behind me, if I wanted to. "
" Well why don't you do it ? You say you can do it. "
" Well I will, if you fool with me. "
" Oh yes — I've seen whole families in the same fix. "
" Smarty ! You think you're some, now, dorCt you ? Oh what a hat ! "
" You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it ofiF— and
anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs. "
" You're a liar ! "
" You're another.'
%%
THE CHALLENGE.
*s
" You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up. "
" Aw — take a walk ! "
" Say — if you give me much more of your sass 111 take and bounce a rock oS*n
your head. "
" Oh, oi course you will. "
" Weill iw7/. "
" Well why don't you do it then ? What do you keep saying you will for ? Why
don't you iA» it ? It's because you're afraid. "
_J|^-*~iii. " I ain't afraid. "
" You arc. "
" I ain't. "
" You are. "
Another pause, and more eyeing and nd-
ling around each other. Presently they
were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said :
" Get away from here ! "
" Go away yourself! "
" I won't. " ,
" / won't either. "
So they stood, each with a loot placed
at an angle as a brace, and both shoving
with might and main, and glowering at each
other with hate. But neither could get an
advantage. After struggling till both were
hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with
WHOS AFKAtD? watchful cautioQ, and Tom said:
You re a coward and a pup I II tell my big brother on you, and he can thrash
you with his little finger, and 1 11 make him do it, too. "
" What do I care for your big brother ? I've got a brother that's bigger than he
is — and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too. " [Both brothers were
imaginary.]
" That's a lie. "

■w^ *.
34 TOM SAIVYER.
f»
»»
" Your saying so don't make it so. "
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said :
** I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand up. Anybody
thatll take a dare will steal sheep. "
The new boy stepped over promptly, and said :
** Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it.'
" Don't you crowd me now; you better look out.'
" Well, you said you'd do it — why don't you do it ?
" By jingo ! for two cents I will do it. "
l^he new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with
derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys were rolling
and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and for the space of a minute
they tugged and tore at each other's hair and clothes, punched and scratched
each other's noses, and covered themselves with dust and glory. Presently the
confusion took form and through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the
new boy, and pounding him with his fists.
** Holler'nuff ! " said he.
The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying, — mainly from rage.
" Holler'nuff! " — and the pounding went on.
At last the stranger got out a smothered "'Nuff! " and Tom let him up and said t
" Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next time. "
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing, snuffling^
and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he
would do to Tom the " next time he caught him out. " To which Tom responded
with jeers, and started off in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the
new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him between the shoulders and
then turned tail and ran like an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus,
found out where he lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time,
daring the enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through
the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom
a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away ; but he
said he "'lowed " to *'lay " for that boy.
A PRIVA TE ENTRANCE.
He got home pretty late, that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the
window, he uncovered an ambuscade, m the person of his aunt; and when sh?
•Hw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn'his Saturday holiday into
captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its firmness.


come and :
br ght and
1 fe The e as a ong n e \ heart ;
and if the heart was joung the music
ssued at the 1 ps There'Has cheer
n every face and a spr ng n every
ees ere bloom
and the f a^ran e of the Llossoms
hlkd the a Ca d ff H 11 beyond
the lage md above t vas green
h vegeta on and t lay just far
eh away to seem a Delectable
Land dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.
Tom appeared on the sidewalk with
a bucket of whitewash and a long-
handled brush. He surveyed the
ft-nce and all gladness left him and
a deep melancholy settled down upon his spint Thirty yards of board fence
nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing
STRONG TEMPTATIONS. 27
he dipped his brush and passed it along , the topmost plank ; repeated the
operation ; did it again ; compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the
far-reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box dis-
couraged. Jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin pail, and singing *'Buffalo
Gals. " Bringing water from the town pump had always been hateful work in
Tom's eyes, before, but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there
was company at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were always
there waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarreling, fighting, skylark-
ing. And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty
yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour — and even
then somebody generally had to go after him. Tom said :
" Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some. "
Jim shook his head and said :
" Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an'git dis water an'not
stop foolin'roun'wid anybody. She say she spec'Mars Tom gwine to ax me to
whitewash, an'so she tole me go'long an''tend to my own business — she lowed
s?u*d'tend to de whitewashin*. "
" Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always talks.
Gimme the bucket — I won't be gone only a minute. She won't ever know. "
" Oh, I dasn't Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an'tar de head offn me.
'Deed she would. "
" She ! She never licks anybody — whacks'em over the head with her thimble
— and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but talk don't hurt
— anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a marvel. I'll give you a
white alley ! "
Jim began to waver.
" White alley, Jim ! And it's a bully taw. "
" My ! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, / tell you ! But Mars Tom I's powerful
'fraid ole missis — "
" And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe. "
Jim was only human — this attraction was too much for him. He put down his
pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the
B.J
TOM SAWYER.
bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was flying down the street
with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly

was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.
But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had planned
for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys would come tripping
along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would make a world of fun of
him for having to work — the very thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out
his worldly wealth and examined it — bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to
buy an exchange of work, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an
hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straightened means to his pocket, and
gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment an
inspiration burst upon him ! Nothing less than a great, magniflcent inspiration.
He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in sight
presently — the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading. Ben's
STRA TEGIC MO YEMEN TS. 29
gait was the hop-skip-and-jump — proof enough that his heart was light and his
anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious whoop,
hX, intervals, followed by a deep-toned ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he
was personating a steamboat. As he drew near, he slackened speed, took the
middle of the street, leaned far over to starboard and rounded to ponderously and
with laborious pomp and circumstance — for he was personating the " Big Missouri, "
and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat, and captain,
and engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own
hurricane-deck giving the orders and executing them :
" Stop her, sir ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! " The headway ran almost out and he drew
up slowly toward the side-walk.
''Ship up to back ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! " His arms straightened and stiffened
down his sides.
" Set her back on the stabboard ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! Chow ! ch-chow-
wow ! Chow ! " His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles, — for it was
representing a forty-foot wheel.
" Let her go back on the labboard ! Ting-a-ling-ling ! Chow-ch-chow-chow ! *
The left hand began to describe circles.
" Stop the stabboard ! Ting-a-Hng-ling ! Stop the labbord ! Come ahead on
the stabboard ! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow! Ting-a-ling-ling!
Chow-ow-ow ! Get out that head-line ! Lively now ! Come — out with youi
spring-line — whatVe you about there ! Take a turn round that stump with the
bight of it! Stand by that stage, now — let her go! Done with the engines, sir!
Ting-a-ling-ling ! Sh't ! s'h't! sh't! ** (trying the gauge-cocks.)
Tom went on whitewashing — paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben stared t
moment and then said :
** Hi-yi/ You're up a stump, ain't you ! "
No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist ; then he
gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as before. Ben
ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the apple, but he stuck
to his work. Ben said :
" Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey }
Tom wheeled suddenly and said |^
t»
/- "
30
TOM SA WYBR.
" Why it's you Ben ! I wam't noticing. "
" Say — /'m going in a swimming, / am. Don't you wish you could? But of
course you'd druther work — wouldn't you ? Course you would ! "
Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said :
" What do you call work ? "
" Why ain't that work ? "
Tom resumed his whitewashing, and
answered carelessly:
" Well, maybe it is, and maybe it aint.
All I know, is, it suits Tom Sawyer. "
" Oh come, now, you don't mean to
let on that you like it ? "
The brush continued to move.
" Like it? Well I don't see why I
oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a
chance to whitewash a fence every
day ? "
That put the thing in a new light.
Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom
swept his brush daintily back and
forth — stepi^d back to note the effect
— added a touch here and there — criti-
cised the effect again — Ben watching
interested, more and more absorbed.

X?
: and i
every move and getting
Presently he said :
" Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little. "
Tom considered) was about to consent ; but he altered his mind :
" No — no — I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's awful
particular about this fence — right here on the street, you know — but if it was the
back fence I wouldn't mind and f^ wouldn't. Yes, she's awful particular about
this fence ; it's got to be done very careful ; I reckon there ain't one boy in a
thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done.
THE INNOCENTS BEGUILED. 31
**No— is that so? Oh come, now — lemme just tiy. Only just a little — I'd let
you, if you was me, Tom. "
" Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; butAunt Polly — welt Jim wanted to do it, but
she wouldn't let him ; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now don't
you see how I'm fixed t If you was to tackle this fence and anything was to happeD
to it— "
" Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say — I'll give you the
core of my apple. "
" Well, here — . No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard — "
" I'll give you all of it ! "
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face but alacrity in his heart.
And while the late steamer " Big Missouri " worked and sweated in the sun, the
retired artist sat on a barrel in the. shade close by, dangled his legs, munched bis
apple, and planned the slaughter of moie innocents. There was no lack of mate-
rial ; boys happened along every little while ; they caroe to jeer, but remained to
whitewash. By the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to
Billy Fishei for a kite, in good repair ; and when kt played out, Johnny Miller
bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with — and so on, and so on, hour
after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor poverty,
stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth. He had beside
the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part of a jews-harp, a piece of blue
bottle-glass to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything,
a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles,
six fire-crackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass door-knob, a dog-collar — ^bn;
no dog — the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange-peel, and a dilapidated old
window-sash.

3'
TOM BAfVYEJt.
He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while — plenty of company — and the
fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't ran out of whitewash, be
would have bankrupted every boy in the village.
Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He had dis-
covered a great law of human action, without knowing it— namely, that in order to
make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing
'I difficult to attain. If he had been a great
and wise philosopher, like the writer of this
book, he would now have comprehended that
Work consists of whatever a body is obliged
to do, and that Play consists of whatever a
body is not obliged to do. And this would
help him to understand why constructing
artificial flowers or performing on a tread-
mill is work, while rolling ten-pins or climb-
ing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There
are wealthy gentlemen in England who
drive four-horse passenger-coaches twenty
or thirty miles on a daily Jine, in the sum-
mer, because the privilege costs them con-
tiderable money; but if they were offered
wages for the service, that would turn it into
work and then they would resign.
The boy mused a while over the substantial change which had taken place !•
his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward head-quarters to report.

-«^

presented h mself beforeAunt
Polly who ^ as s tt ng bv an open
ttindow in a pleasant rearward apart-
n ent, which was bed-room, breakfast-
room, dining-room, and library, com-
L ned The balmy summer air, the
re tful quiet, the odor of the flowers,
1 d the drowsing murmur of the
bees had had their effect, and she was
nodding over her knitting — for she
had no company but the cat, and it
was islcep in her lap. Her specta-
cles were propped up on her gray
head for safely. She had thought
that of course Tom had'deserted
long ago, and she wondered at see-
ing him place himself in her power
" Mayn't I go and play now, auntf*
What, a'ready? How much have you done? "
3 33
At Hit-
again m this intrepid way. He said:
34
TOM SAW VEX.
" It's all dune, auDt. "
" Tom, don't lie to me — I can't bear it. "
" I ain't, aunt ; it is all done. "
Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see for
herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent of Tom*s
statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed, and not only
whitewashed but elaborately coated and rccoated, and even a streak added to
the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She said:
" Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you ean work when your'e a
mind to, Tom. " And then she diluted the compliment by adding, " But it's
powerful seldom you're a mind to, Vm bound to say. Well, go'long and play;
but mind you get back sometime in a week, or I'll tan you. "
She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him
into the closet and selected a choice
apple and delivered it to him, along
with an improving lecture upon
the added value and flavor a treat
took to itself when it came with-
out sin through virtuous effort.
And while she closed with a happy-
scriptural flourish, he " hooked " a
doughnut.
Then he skipped out, and saw
Sid just starting up the outside
stairway that led to the back rooms
on the second floor. Clods were
handy and the air was full of them
in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a hail-storm; and before Aunr
Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, si.\ or
seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was over the fence and gone.
There was a gate, but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make
use of it. His soul was at peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling
auention to his black thread and getting him into trouble.

TOM AS A CEKERAL.
35
Tom skined the block, and came round into a muddjr alley that led by the
back of bis aunt's cow-sublc. He presently got safely beyond the reach of
capture and punishment, and hasted toward the public square of the village,
where two " military " companies of boys had met for conflict, according to
previous appointment. Tom was General of one of these armies, Joe Harper
(a bosom friend,) General of the other. These two great commanders did not
condescend to fight in person — that being better suited to the still smaller fry
> ~but sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by orders
delivered through aides-de > catnp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a
long and bard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged,
the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon and the day for the necessaiy

battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and marched away, and
Tom turned homeward alone.
As he was passing by the house wbeie Jeff Thatcher lived, be saw a new girl
36
TOM SAWYER.
io the garden — a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited iato
two long tails, white summer frock and embt-oidered pantalettes. The fresh*
crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A certain Amy Lawrence Taoished
out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind. He had thought
he loved her to distraclioo, he had regarded his passion as adoration; and
behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality. He had been months
winning her; she had confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the hap-
piest and the proudest boy m the world only seven short days, and here in one
instant of time she had gone out of bis heart
like a casual stranger whose visit is done.
He worshiped this new angel with fur-
tive eye, till he saw that she had discovered
him ; then he pretended he did not know she
was present, and began to " show off " in all
sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to win
her admiration. He kept up this grotesque
foolishness for some time ; but by and by,
while he was in the midst of some dangerous
gymnastic performances, he glanced aside
and saw that the little girl was wending
her way toward the house. Tom came up
to the fence and leaned on it, grieving, and
hoping she would tarry yet a while longer.
She halted a moment on the steps and then
moved toward the door. Tom heaved a
great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face lit up, right away,
for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared.
The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and then
shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if he had dis-
covered something of interest going on in that direction. Presently he picked
up a straw and began trying to balance it on tys nose, with his head tilted far
back; and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he edged nearer and

\
TRIUMPH A iVZ? RE WA RD, 3 7
\
nearer toward the pansy ; fi(nally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes
closed upon it, and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round
the corner. But only for a minute— only while he could button the flower
inside his jacket, next his heait^-or next his stomach, possibly, for he was not
much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.
He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, *^ showing off, " as
before ; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted him-
self a little with the hope that she had been near some window, meantime, and
been aware of his attentions. Finally he rode home reluctantly, with his poor
head full of visions.
All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered ** what
had got into the child. " He took a good scolding about clodding Sid, and did
not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar under his aunt's very
nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said :
** Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it. "
*'Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into that
sugar if I warn't watching you. "
Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity,
reached for the sugar-bowl — a sort of glorying over Tom which was well-nigh
unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and broke. Tom
was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was
silent He said to himself that he would not speak a word, even when his aunt
BBmt in, but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and
then he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see
that pet model'^ catch it. " He was so brim-full of exultation that he could
hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck
discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to himself,
^Now it*s coming! " And the next instant he was sprawling on the fioor!
The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out :
" Hold on, now, what'er you belting me for ? — Sid broke it ! "
Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when
she got her tongue again, she only said :
38
TOM SAWYER.
" Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some
other audacious misciiief wlien I wasn't around, like enough. "
Then her conscience reproached
her, and she yearned to say some-
thing kind and loving; but she
judged that this would be con-
strued into a confession that she
had been in the wrong, and disci-
pline forbade that. So she kept
silence, and went about her affairs
with a troubled heart. Tom stilked
in a corner and exalte^ his woes.
He knew that in her heart his aunt
was on her knees to him, and he
was morosely gratified by the con-
sciousness of it. He would hang
out no signals, he would take
notice of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then,
through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured himself
lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little
forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die with that word
unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured himself brought
home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest.
How she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like
rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy and she would never,
never abuse him any more ! But he would lie there cold and white and make
no sign — a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an end. He so worked
upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams, that be had to keep swallow-
ing, he was so like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which
overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his
nose. And such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could
not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon

DISMAL FELICITY.
39

MlKC
It U was too sacred for such con-
tact, and so, presently, when his
cousin Mary danced in, all alive with
the joy of seeing home again after
an age-long visit of one week to the
country, be got up and moved in
clouds and darkness out at one door
as she brought song and sunshine in
at the other.
He wandered far from the accus-
tomed tiaunts of boys, and sought
desolate places that were in harmony
wtth his spirit. A log raft in the
nver invited him, and he seated him-
self on its outer edge and contem-
plated the dreary vastness of the
stream wishing the while that be could
only be drowned all at once and uncon
sciously without undergoing the uncom
fortable routine de\ ised by nature Then
he thought of his flower. He got it out,
rumpled and wilted, and it mightily in-
creased his dismal felicity. He wondered
if j^ would pity him if she knew? Would
she cry, and wish that she had a right to
put her arms around his neck and com-
fort him ? Or would she turn coldly away
like all the hollow world? This picture
brought such an agony of pleasureable
suffering that he worked it over and over
again in his mind and set it up in new and
varied lights, till he wore it threadbare,
departed in the darkness.

At labt he rose up sighing and
TOM SAWYER.

About half past nine or ten o'clock he
came along the deserted street to where
the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a
moment ; no sound fell upon his listening'
ear ; a candle was casting a dull glow upon
the curtain of a second-,story window. Was
the sacred presence there ? He climbed the
fence, threaded his stealthy way through
the plants, till he stood under that window ;
he looked up at it long, and with emotion ;
then he laid him down on the ground
under it, disposing himself upon his back»
with his hands clasped upon his breast and
holding his poor wilted flower. And thus
he would die — out in the cold world, with
DO shelter over his homeless head, no
friendly hand to wipe the death-damps
from his brow, no loving face to bend
pityingly over him when the great agony
came. And thus she would see him when
she looked out upon the glad morning, and
oh ! would she drop one little tear upon his
poor, lifeless form, would she heave one
little sigh to see a bright young life so
rudely blighted, so untimely cut down i
The window went up, a maid-servant's
discordant voice profaned the holy calm,
and a deluge of water drenched the prone
martyr's remains I
The strangling hero sprang up with a
relieving snort. There was a whiz as
of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound as of
COMMISSION AND OMISSION.
4 >
Bhirering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the fence and'shot
kway in the gloom.
Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his drenched
garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up ; but if he had any dim idea
of making any " references to allusions, " be thought better of it and held his
peace, for there was dangier in Tom's eye.
Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental
note of the omission.


1 rose upon a tranquil world,
beamed down upon the peaceful
village like a benediction. Breakfast
over, Aunt Polly had family worship;
it began with a prayer built from the
d up of solid courses of Scrip-
tural quotations, welded together with
a thin mortar of originality; and from
the summit of this she delivered &
grim chapter of the
from Sinai.
Then Tom girded up his ioi
speak, and went to work to " get his
verses. " Sid had learned his lesson
days before. Tom bent all his ener-
i^les to the memorizing of five i
and be chose part of the Sermon on
(he Mount, because he could find nq verses that were shorter. At the end of
half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of bis lessoo, but no more, for his
MENTAL ACROBATICS. 43
f >
f >
inind was traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy
with distracting recreations. Mary took his book to hear him recite, and he tried
to find his way through the fog :
" Blessed are the — a — a — "
" Poor " —
" Yes — poor ; blessed are the poor — a — a — "
" In spirit— "
" In spirit ; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they — they — "
" Theirs— "
" For theirs. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they — they —
" Sh— "
" For they— a— "
" S, H, A— "
" For they S, H— Oh I don't know what it is !
''ShalW
" Oh, shall ! for they shall — for they shall — a— a — shall mourn — a — a — blessed
are they that shall — they that — a — they that shall mourn, for they shall — a — shall
what} Why don't you tell me Mary? — what do you want to be so mean for? "
" Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't do
that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll
manage it — and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice. There, now,
that's a good boy. "
" All right ! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is. "
" Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice. "
" You bet you that's " iO, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again. "
And he did " tackle it again " — and under the double pressure of curiosity and
prospective gain, he did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success.
Mary gave him a bran-new " Barlow " knife worth twelve and a half cents ; and
the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations.
True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a " sure-enough " Barlow, and
there was inconceivable grandeur in that— though where the western boys ever
TOM SA fVYEK.
got the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its injury, is an
imposing mj stery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom contrived to scarify
the cupboard with it, and was arranging to
begin on the bureau, when he was called off
to dress for Sunday-School.
Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a
piece of soap, and he went outside the door
and set the basin on a little bench there; then
he dipped the soap in the water and laid it
down ; turned up his sleeves ; poured out the
water on the ground, gently, and then entered
the kitchen and began to wipe his face dili-
gently on the towel behind the door. But
Mary removed the towel and said :
" Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. Yoa
mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt you. "
Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin
was refilled, and this time he stood over it
a little while gathering resolution took in a big breath and began. When he
entered the kitchen presently with both eyes shut and groping for the towel
with his hands an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping from his
face. But when he emerged from the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the
clean territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and
beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread down-
ward in front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when
she was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of color,
and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls wrought into a
dainty and symmetrical general effect. [He privately smoothed out the curls, with
labor and difRcully, and plastered his hair close down to his head; for he held
curls to be effeminate, and his own filled his life with bitterness.] Then Mary
got out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two yean
— they were simply called his " other clothes " — and lo by that we know the sue

DSIHO ml BIRLOW "
A TTENDING SUNDA Y-SCHOOL.
of his wardrobe. The girl " put him to rights " after he had dressed himself; she
buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his vast shirt collar down
over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled straw hat.
He now looked exceedingly improved and uncomfortable. He was fully as uncom-
fortable as he looked-; for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanli-
ness that galled him. He hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was
blighted ; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought
them out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do every-
thing he didn't want to do. But^Mary said, persuasively :
" Please, Tom — that's a good boy, "
So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three children
— ^^ _v set out for Sunday-school — a place that
Tom hated with his whole heart; but
Sid and Mary were fond of it.
Sabbath-school hours were from nine
to half past ten; and then church ser-
vice. Two of of the children always
remained for the sermon voluntarily,
and the other always remained too —
for stronger reasons. The church's
high-backed, uncushioned pews would
seal about three hundred persons; the
edifice was but a small, plain affair, with
a sort of pine board tree-box on top of
it for a steeple. At the door Tom
dropped back a step and accosted a
Sunday -dressed comrade:
" Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket? "
" Yes. "
" What'll you take for her? "
" What'll you give ? "
" Piece of lickrish and a fish-hook. "
" Less see'em. "

46 TOM SAWYER.
Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and some small
trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other boys as they came»
and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer. He
entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded
to his seat and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher^
a grave, elderly man, interfered ; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled
a boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy turned
around ; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear him say " Ouch ! "
and got a new reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole class were of a pattern
— restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they came to, recite their lessons, not
one of them knew his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along. However,
they worried through, and each got his reward — in small blue tickets, each with a
passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the recitation.
Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be exchanged for it; ten red tickets
equalled a yellow one : for ten yellow tickets the Superintendant gave a. very plainly
bound Bible, (worth forty cents in those easy times,) to the pupil. How many of
my readers would have the industry and application to memorize two thousand
verses, even for a Dor^ Bible ? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this
way — it was the patient work of two years — and a boy of German parentage had
won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without stopping; but
the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was little better than an
idiot from that day forth — a grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occa*
sions, before company, the Superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made
this boy come out and " spread himself. " Only the older pupils managed to keep
their tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and so
the delivery of one of these prizes wa^ a rare and noteworthy circumstance ; the
successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that day that on the spot every
scholar's heart was fired with a fresh ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks.
It is possible that Tom's mental stomach had never really hungered for one of
those prizes, but unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for
the glory and the eclat that came with it.
THE SUPERINTENDENT.
47
In due coune the Superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with a closed
hymn book in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and com-
manded attention. When a Sunday-school Superintendent makes his customary
little speech, a hymn > book in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of

music in the hand of a singer who stands forward on the platform and sings a
BOlo at a concert — though why, is a mystery : for neither the hymn-book nor the
sheet of music is ever referred to by the sufferer. This Superintendent was a slim
creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he wore a stifT
standing-collar whose upper edge almost reached his cars and whose sharp points
curved forward abreast the comers of his mouth — a fence that compelled a straight
lookout ahead, and a turning of the whole body when a side view was required ;
his chin was propped on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long
as a bank note, and had fringed ends ; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in
the fashion of the day, like sleigh-runners — an effect patiently and laboriously
48 TOM SAWYER,
produced by the young men by sitting with their toes pressed against a wall for
hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest of mein, and very sincere and honest
at heart; and he held sacred things and places in such reverence, and so separated
them from worldly matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice
had acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on week-days. He
began after this fashion :
** Now children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as you can
and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There — that is it. That is
the way good little boys and girls should do. I see one little girl who is looking
out of the window — I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere — perhaps up
in one of the trees making a speech to the little birds. [Applausive titter.] I
want to tell you how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little
faces assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good. " And so
forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down the rest of the oration. It was
of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar to us all.
The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights and other
recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings and whisperings that
extended far and wide, washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible
rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every sound ceased suddenly, with the sub-
sidence of Mr. Walters'voice, and the conclusion of the speech was received with
a burst of silent gratitude.
A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which was more
or less rare — the entrance of visitors ; lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very
feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gentleman. with iron-gray hair;
and a dignified lady who was doubtless the latter's wife. The lady was leading a
child. Tom had been restless and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-
smitten, too — he could not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her
loving gaze. But when he saw this small new-comer his soul was all ablaze with
bliss in a moment. The next moment he was " showing off " with all his might —
cnffing boys, pulling hair, making faces— in a word, using every art that seemed
likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His exaltation had but one alloy
—the memory of his humiliation in this angel's garden — and that record in sand
•• SHO WING OFF, " 49
was fast washing out, under the waves of happiness that were sweeping'over it now.
The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr. Walters*
speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The middle-aged
man turned out to be a prodigious personage — no less a one than the county
judge — altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon —
and they wondered what kind of material he was made of— and they half
wanted to hear him roar, and were half afraid he might, too. He was from Con-
stantinople, twelve miles away — so he had traveled, and seen the world — these very
eyes had looked upon the county court house — which was said to have a tin roof.
The awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence
. and the ranks of staring eyes.'This was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of
their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to be familiar with
the great man and be envied by the school. It would have been music to his
soul to hear the whisperings :
" Look at him, Jim ! He's a going up there. Say — look ! he's a going to shake
hands with him — he is shaking hands with him ! By jings, don't you wish you
was Jeff? "
Mr. Walters fell to " showing off, " with all sorts of official bustlings and activities ^
giving orders, delivering judgments, discharging directions here, there, everywhere
that he could find a target. The librarian " showed off " — running hither and
thither with his arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that
inseqi authority delights in. The young lady teachers " showed off " — bending
sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning fingers at
bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly. The young gentlemen teachers
** showed off " with small scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine
attention to discipline — and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business
up at the library, by the pulpit ; and it was business that frequently had to be done
over again two or three times, (with much seeming vexation.) The little girls
" showed off " in various ways, and the little boys " showed off " with such dili-
gence that the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scuffiings.
And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all
the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur — for he was " show-
ing off, " too. 4
5© TOM SAWYER.
There was only one thing wanting, to make Mr. Walters'ecstacy complete,
and that was a chance to deliver a Bible-prize and exhibit a prodigy. Several
pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough — he had been around
among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given worlds, now, to have that
German lad back again with a sound mind.
And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward
with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a
Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters was not expecting an
application from this source for the next ten years. But there was no getting
around it — here were the certified checks, and they were good for their face.
Tom was therefore elevated to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and
the great news was announced from head-quarters. It was the most stunning
surprise of the decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new
hero up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to gaze
upon in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy — but those that
suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves
had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth
he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves, as
being the dupes of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.
The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the Superintendent
could pump up under the circumstances ; but it lacked somewhat of the true gush,
for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there was a mystery here that could
not well bear the light, perhaps ; it was simply preposterous that this boy had
warehoused two thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises — a dozen
would strain his capacity, without a doubt.
Amy Lawrence was proud and .glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her
face — but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain troubled ;
next a dim suspicion came and went — came again ; she watched ; a furtive glance
told her worlds — and then her heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and
the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom most of all, (she thought.)
Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath would
hardly come, his heart quaked — ^partly because of the awful greatness of the
TOM LIONIZED.
man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would have liked to fall down
and worship him, if it were in the dark. The Judge put his hand on Tom's head
and called him a fine little man, and
asked him what his name was. The
boy stammered, gasped, and got it out :
" Tom. "
" Oh, no, not Tom — it is — "
" Thomas. "
" Ah, that's it, I thought there was
more to it, maybe. That's very well.
But you've another one I daresay, and
you'll tell it to me, won't you ? "
" Tell the gentleman your other name,
Thomas, " said Walters, " and say dr.
— You mustn't forget your manners. "
" Thomas Sawyer — sir. "
" That's it! That's a good boy. Fine
boy. Fine, manly little fellow. Two
thousand verses is a great many — very,
TON AS A BUNDAT-^cHML BKso. vcry great many. And you never can be
sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowledge is worth more than
anything there is in the world; it's what makes great men and good men; you'll
be a great man and a good man yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look
back and say, It's all owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boy-
hood — it's all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to leam — it's all owing to
the good Superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and gave me
a beautiful Bible — a splendid elegant Bible, to keep and have it all for my own,
always— it's all owing to right bringing up ! That is what you will say, Thomas—
and you wouldn't take any money for those two thousand verses — no indeed you
wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind telling me and this lady some of the things
you've learned— no, I know you wouldn't — for we are proud of little boys that
leam. Now no doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't
you tell us the names of the first two that were appointed ? "

5a rOAf SAWYER.
Tom was tugging at a button hole and looking sheepish. He blushed, now,
and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters'heart sank within htm. He said to himself, it
is not possible that the hoy can answer the simplest question — why did the
Judge ask him ? Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say ;
" Answer the gentleman, Thomas — don't be afraid. "
Tom still hung fire.
" Now I know you'll tell me " said the lady. " The names of the first two
disciples were — "
*'David and Goliah ! "
Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.


half past ten the cracked
bell of the small church began to
ring and presently the people
began to gitlier for the morning
sermon The Sundaj school chil-
dren distributed thctnsel\ es about
the house and occupied pews with
their pnrents so as to be under
supervision Aunt PoUj came,
and Tom and Sid ind Mary sat
with lier — Tom being placed next
the aisle in order that he might
be as far amy from the open
window and the seductive out-
side summer scenes as possible.
„ g— n f^ M -77-.-i-Tt * mil III! r Tht, tro^vd filed up the aisles:
" ^ " " the aged and needy pobtmaster,
who bad seen better days; the mayor and his wife— for they had a mayor
there, among other unnecessaries ; the justice of the peace; the widow
53
54
TOM SAWYER.
Douglass, fair, smart and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and welUto^o,
her bill mansion tfae only palace in the town, aad the most hospitable and much
the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg could boast; the
bent and venerable Major and Mrs, Ward ; lawyer Riverson, the new notable
from a distance ; next the belle of the village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad
and ribbon-decked young heart-breakers ; then all the young clerks in town in
a body — for they had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling
wall of oiled and simpering admirers, till the
last girl had run their gauntlet ; and last of
all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson,
taking as heedful care of his mother as if
she were cut glass. He always brought his
mother to church, and was the pride of all
the matrons. The boys all hated him, he
was so good. And besides, he had been
" thrown up to them " so much. His white
handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket
behind, as usual on Sundays — accidentally.
Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked
upon tioys who had, as snobs.
The congr^ation being fully assembled,
now, the bell rang once more, to warn lag-
gards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush
fell upon the church which was only broken
by the tittering and whispermg of the choir in the gallery. The choir always
tittered and whispered all through service. There was once a church choir
that was not ill-bred, but I have forgotten where it was, now. -It was a great
many years ago, and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think
it was in some foreign country.
The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in a
peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country. His voice
began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point,

A USEFUL MINISTER.
vhere it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost word and then pluoged
dowD as if from a spring-board:
ShUl I be Mr.ii-«d toe the skies, on Bow-ry & *
al eue.
Whilst other, fighl to win the prue. «.d s«l thro'iW-
-y«M?
He was regarded as a wooderful reader. At church " sociables " he was

always called upon to read poetry ; and when he was through, the ladies would
lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly id their laps, and " wait " their
eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, " Words cannot express it; it is
too beautiful, too beautiful for (his mortal earth. "
After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into a
bulletin board, and read off " notices " of meetings and societies and things till
it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of doom — a queer custom
which is still kept up in America, even in cities, away here in this age of
abundant newspapers. Often, the less there is to justify a traditional custom,
the harder it is to get nd of it
:h as have the light and the good tidings, and yet 1:
-s to hear withal ; for the heathen in the far islands
th a supplication that the words he was about to spe:
'or, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in
good. Amen.
There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing c
le boy whose history this book relates did not enji
dured it — if he even did that much. He was restive
ly of the details of the prayer, unconsciously — for h
knew the ground of old, and the clergyman's regu
len a little trifle of new matter was interlarded, his <
lole nature resented it; he considered additions unfai
) midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of tl
1 tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands
id with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that i
npany with the body, and the slender thread of a necl
aping its wings with its hind legs and smoothing the
1 been coat tails ; going through its whole toilet as
iras perfectly safe. As indeed it was ; for as sorely as
b for it they did not dare — he believed his soul woulc
le did such a thing while the prayer was eroincr on.
IN CHURCH.
57
argumeot that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod — and yet
it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned tbe
predestined elect down to a company so small as to be hardly worth the saving.
Tom counted the pages of the sermon ; after church he always knew how many
pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse.
However, this time he was really interested for a little while. The minister
made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world's
hosts at the millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together
and a little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of
the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the conspicu-
ousness of the principal character before the on-looking nations; his face
lit with the thought, and he said to him-
self that he wished he could be that child,
if it was a tame lion.
Now he lapsed into suffering again,
as the dry argument was resumed. Pres
ently he bethought him of a treasure
he had and got it out. It was a large
black beetle with formidable jaws — a
" pinch-bug, " he called it. It was in a
percussion-cap box. The first thing tbe
beetle did was to take him by the finger
A natural fillip followed, the beetle went
floundering into the aisle and lit on its
back, and the hurt finger went into the
boy's mouth. The beetle lay there work
ing its helpless legs, unable to turn over
Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was
safe out of his reach. Other people un ^=^'
interested in the sermon, found relief in * ^'" ^ ^^^
the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling
aloi^ sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and the quiet, weary of

I
'=^-_=iii & _i
^Z'
58
TOM SAWYER.
captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle; the drooping tail lifted
and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked around it; smelt at it from
a safe distance; walked around it agaia; grew bolder, and took a closer
smell; then lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it, just missing
it; made another, and another; b^^a to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his
stomach with the beetle between his paws, and continued his experiments;
grew weary at last, and then indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded,
and tittle by little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it.
There was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a couple
of yards away, and lit on its back once more. The neighboring spectators
shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind fans and handker-
chiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked foolish, and probably felt
so; but there was resentment in his heart, too, and a craving for revenge. So
fae went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again ; jumping at it from
every point of a circle, lighting with his fore paws within an inch of the crea-
ture, making even closer snatches at it with bis teeth, and jerking his head till
his ears flapped again. But
^^ he grew tired once more,
afterawhile; tried to amuse
himself with a fly but found
no relief; followed an ant
around, with his nose close
to the floor, and quickly
wearied of that; yawned,
sighed, forgot the beetle
entirely, and sat down on
it! Then there was a wild
^'" i^ — ;- ,—^-^^-^'==7^.—:-'yelp of agony and the poo-
BKCLT o» PLiTiMo i» coBBCB. ^[g ^gpt Sailing Up thc
aisle; the yelps continued, and so did thedt^; he crossed the house in front
of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the doors; he
clamored up the home-strcKh ; his anguish grew with his progress, till


THE CLIMAX.
59
presently he was but a woelly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and
the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its courset and
sprang into its master's lap ; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of
distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance.
By this time the whole church was red-faced and suBbcating with suppressed
laughter, and the sermon bad come to a dead stand-stiU. The discourse was
resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all possibility of impressive-
ness being at an end ; for even the gravest sentiments were constantly being
received with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover of some remote
pew-back, as if the poor parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a
genuine relief to the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the
benediction pronounced.
Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there was
some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of variety in it. He
had but one marring thought; he was willing that the dog should play with
his pinch-bug, but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off.


i morning found Tom
Sa \ er miserable, Monday morning
alw-i E found him so— because it began
an ather week's slow suffering in school.
He generally began that day with wish-
ing he had had no intervening holiday,
t made the going into captivity and
fetters again so much more odious.
Tom lay thinking. Presently it oc-
curred to him that he wished he was
sick then he could stay home from
school Here was a vague possibility.
He canvassed his system. No ailment
was found, and he investigated again.
1 his time he thought he could detect
colicky symptoms and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But
they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected further.
60
SELF'EXAMINA TION, 6 1
Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth was loose.
This was lucky ; he was about to begin to groan, as a " starter,** as he called it,
when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that argument, his aunt
would pull it out, and that would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in
reserve for the present, and seek further. Nothing oflfered for some little time, and
then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up a
patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger. So the
boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for inspection.
But now he did not know the necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well
worth while to chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.
But Sid slept on unconscious.
Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.
No result from Sid.
Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and then
swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.
Sid snored on.
Tom was aggravated. He said, " Sid, Sid ! " and shook him. This course
worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then brought
himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom. Tom went on
groaning. Sid said :
" Tom! Say, Tom! " [No response.] " Here Tom! Tom! What is the
matter, Tom ? ** And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.
Tom moaned out:
" O don't, Sid. Don't joggle me.*'
" Why what's the matter Tom ? I must call auntie. "
" No — never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody. "
" But I must ! Don't groan so, Tom, it's awful. How long you been this
way ? "
" Hours. Ouch ! O don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me. "
" Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? O, Tom, don't! It makes my flesh
crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter ? "
" I forgive you everything, Sid. [Groan.] Everything you've ever done to
me. When I'm gone — *
*»
6^2 TOM SA WYER.
" O, Tom, you ain't dying are you ? Don't, Tom — O, don't. Maybe — "
" I forgive everybody, Sid. [Groan.] Tell'em so, Sid. And Sid, you give my
window-sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and
tell her- "
But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in reality, now,
so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his groans had gathered
quite a genuine tone.
Sid flew down stairs and said :
" O, Aunt Polly, come ! Tom's dying ! "
" Dying ! "
" Yes'm. Don't wait — come quick ! "
" Rubbage ! I don't believe it ! "
But she fled up stairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels. And her
face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached the bedside she
gasped out :
" You Tom ! Tom, what's the matter with you ? "
" O, auntie, I'm— "
" What's the matter with you — ^what is the matter with you, child ? "
" O auntie, my sore toe'^ mortified ! "
The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a little,
then did both together. This restored her and she said :
''Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that nonsense and
climb out of this. "
The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a little
foolish, and he said :
''Aunt Polly it x^^/«^// mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all. "
" Your tooth, indeed ! What's the matter with your tooth? "
" One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful. "
" There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth« Well
— your tooth is loose, but you're not going to die about that. Mary get me a silk
thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen. "
Tom said :
DENTISTRY.
63
||pilr;?.A
" 0, please auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish I may
never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie, /don't want to stay home from school. "
" Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was because you thought you'd get
to stay home from school and go a fishing ? Tom, Tom, I love you so, and you
seem to try every way you can to break
my old heart with your outrageousnesa. "
By this time the dental instruments were
ready. The old lady made one end of the
silk thread fast to Tom's tooth with a
loop and tied the other to the bed-post.
Then she seized the chunk of fire and
suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's
lace. The tooth hung dangling by the
bedpost, now.
But all trials bring their compensations.
As Tom wended to school after breakfast,
he was the envy of every boy he met
because the gap in his upper row of teeth
enabled him to expectorate in a new and
admirable way. He gathered quite a fol-
lowing of lads interested in the exhibition ;
uid one that had cut his finger and had
been a centre of fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself
suddenly without an adherent, and shorn of his glory His heart was heavy and
he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn t anything to spit like
Tom Sawyer; but another boy said " Sour grapes! " and he wandered away a dis-
mantled hero.
Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn,
son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all
the mothers of the town, because he was idle, and lawless, and vulgar and bad —
and because all their children admired him so, and delighted in his forbidden
society, and wished they dared to be like him. Tom was like the rest of the

64
TOAf SA WYER.
respectable boys, in that be envied Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and
was under strict orders not to play with him. So he played with him every time
he got a chance. Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-
grown men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat
was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim ; his coat, when he
wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons far down the
back ; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged
low and contained nothing ; the fringed legs dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.
Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on door-steps in fine
weather and in empty hogsheads in wet ; he did not have to go to school or to church,
or call any being master or obey anybody ; he could go fishing or swimming when
and where he chose, and stay as long as it suited him ; nobody forbade htm to
fight ; he could sit up as late as he pleased ;
he was always the first boy that went barefoot
in the spring and the last to resume leather
in the fall ; he never had to wash, nor put on
clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully.
Id a word, everything that goes to make life
precious, that boy had. So thought every
harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St.
Fetersburgh,
Tom hailed the romantic outcast:
" Hello, Huckleberry! "
*'Hello yourself, and see how you like it. "
" What's that you got ? "
" Dead cat, "
" Lemme see him Huck. My, he's prett;
stiff. Wherc*d you get him ? "
ncL LtuHiitii- riNw. 11 Bought him ofTn a boy. "
*'What did you give ? "
" 1 give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughter house. "
" Where'd you get the blue tickel? "

THE MIDNIGHT CHARM. 65
" Bought it off n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick. "
" Say — what is dead cats good for, Huck? "
" Good for ? Cure warts with. "
" No ! Is that so ? I know something that's better. "
*• I bet you don't. What is it ? "
" Why, spunk- water. "
" Spunk-water ! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water. "
^* You wouldn't wouldn't you ? D'you ever try it? "
" No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did. "
" Who told you so ! "
" Why he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny told Jim
Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me.
There now ! "
" Well, what of it ? They'll all lie. Leastways all but the nigger. I don't know
him. But I never see a nigger that wouldtCt lie. Shucks ! Now you tell me how
Bob Tanner done it, Huck. "
*^ Why he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain water was.**
" In the day time i
" Certainly.'
" With his face to the stump ?
" Yes. Least I reckon so. "
" Did he say anything } "
" I don't reckon he did. I don't know. "
" Aha ! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame fool
way as that ! Why that ain't a going to do any good. You got to go all by your-
self, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a spunk-water stump, and
just as it's midnight you back up against the stump and jam your hand in and say:
" Barley-corn, Barley-corn, injun-meal shorts,
Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts. "
and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then turn around
three times and walk home without speaking to anybody. Because if you speak
the charm's busted. "
5
time .''"
ff»
M
\
66 TOM SA WYER.
" Well that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner done.**
" No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this town; and
he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work spunk-water. I've
took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way Huck. I play with frogs so
much that I've always got considerable many waris. Sometimes I take'em off
with a bean. "
" Yes, bean's good. I've done that. "
" Have you ? What's your way ? "
" You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some blood, and
then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and bury
it'bout midnight at the cross-roads in the dark of the moon, and then you bum
up the rest of the bean. You see that piece that's got the blood on it will keep
drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the
blood to draw the wart, and pretty soon off she comes. "
" Yes that's it Huck— that's it; though when you're burying it if you say *Down
bean; off wart; come no more to bother mel'it's better. That's the way Jo
Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and most everywheres. But say
— how do you cure *em with dead cats ? "
" Why you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard'long about midnight
when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's midnight a devil
will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see'em, you can only hear some-
thing like the wind, or maybe hear'em talk; and when they're taking that feller
away, you heave your cat after *em and say'Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil,
warts follow cat, /'m done with ye !'That'll fetch ar^ wart.
" Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?
" No, but old mother Hopkins told me.
" Well I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch. "
" Say ! Why Tom I know she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own self.
He come along one day, and he see she was a witching him, so he took up a rock,
and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well that very night he rolled off*n a
shed wher'he was a layin drunk, and broke his arm. "
" Why that's awful. How did he know she was a witching him. "
leicii any wari« "
ft
WITCHES AND DEVILS.
" Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you right stiddy,
they're a witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz when they mumble
they're saying the Lord's Prayer back-ards. " 1
" Say, Hucky, when you going to try the
cat ? "
" To-night, I reckon they'll come after old
Hoss Williams to-aight. "
" But they buried him Saturday. Didn t
they get him Saturday night ? "
" M'hy how you talk ! How could their
cbanns work till midnight? — and iAea its
Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a
Sunday, I don't reckon. "
**I never thought of that. That's so
Lemme go with you ? "
" Of course — if you ain't afeard. "
" Afeard!'T ain't likely. Will you meow?
" Yes — and you meow back, if you get a
chance. Last time, you kep'me a meowing
around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at
me and says'Dem that cat !'and so I hove a
brick through his window— but don't you tell'"'*™''^ " ^'" ^
" I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me, but 111
meow this time. Say — what's that? "
" Nothing but a tick. "
" Where'd you get him? "
" Out in the woods. "
" What'U you take for him? "
" I don't know, I don't want to sell him. "
" All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway. "
" 0, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm satisfied with
it. It's a good enough tick for me. "



6S TOM SA WYER,
" Sho, there's ticks a plenty. I could have a thousand of'em if I wanted to. "
" Well why don^t you ? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a
pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year.'*
" Say Huck — I'll give you my tooth for him. "
" Less see it. "
Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry viewed it
wistfully. The temptation was very strong. At last he said :
" Is it genuwyne ? "
Tom lifted his lip aud showed the vacancy.
" Well, all right, " said Huckleberry, " it's a trade. "
Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the pinch-
bug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier than before.
When Tom reached the little isolated frame School-house, he strode in briskly,
with the manner of one who Tiad come with all honest speed. He hung his hat
on a peg and flung himself into his seat with business-like alacrity. The master,
throned on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the
drowsy hum of study. The interruption roused him.
" Thomas Sawyer! "
Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.
" Sir ! "
" Come up here. Now sir, why are you late again, as usual } "
Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of yellow hair
hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love ; and by
that form was the only vacant place on the girl's side of the school-house. He
instantly said :
" I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRV FiNN ! "
The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of study
ceased. The pupils wondered if this fool-hardy boy had lost his mind. The
«naster said :
CA UTIOUS APPROACHES.
69
" Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding coDfession I have ever listened to.
No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your jacket. "
The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of switches notably
diminished. Then the order followed :
" Now sir, go and sit with the girls I
And let this be a warning to you
The titter that nppled around the room
appeared to abash the boy but m reality
that result was caused rather more by his
worshipful awe of his unknown idol and
the dread pleasure that lay in his high
good fortune He sat down upon the end
of the pme bench and the girl hitched
herself away from him with a toss of her
head Nudges and winks and whispers
traversed the room but Tom sat still
with his arms upon the long low desk
before him and seemed to study his book
By and by attention ceased from him
and the accustomed school murmur rose
upon the dull air once more Presently
the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl She observed it made a
mouth " at him and gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute.
When she cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it
away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away, again, but with less ani-
mosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it remain. Tom
scrawled on his slate, " Please lake it — I got more. " The girl glanced at the
words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw something on the slate,
biding his work with his left hand. For a time the girl refused to notice; but
her human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs.
The boy worked on, apparently unconcious. The girl made a sort of non-com-
mittal attempt to see, hut the boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last
she gave in and hesitatingly whispered :

TRUTHrOLIIIga
70
TOM SA WYER,
" Let me see it.
» >
Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable ends to it
and a cork-screw of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the girl's interest
began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else. When it was
finished, she gazed a moment, then whispered :
" It's nice — make a man. "
The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick. He could
have stepped over the house ; but the girl was not hypercritical ; she was satisfied
with the monster, and whispered :
" It's a beautiful man — now make me coming along. "
Tom drew an hour-glass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed the
spreading fingers with a por-
tentous fan. The girl said:
" It's ever so nice — I wish I
could draw. "
" It's easy, " whispered Tom,
" I'll learn you. "
" O, will you ? When ? "
" At noon. Do you go home
to dinner ? "
" I'll stay if you will. "
" Good, — that's a whack.
What's your name ? "
" Becky Thatcher. What's yours ? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer. "
" That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me
Tom, will you ? "
" Yes. "
Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from the
girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom said :
" Oh it ain't anything. "
" Yes it is. "
" No it ain't. You don't want to see. "

TOM AS AN ARTIST^
HAPPY HOURS.
" Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let tne. "
" You'll tell. "
" No I won't — deed and deed and double deed I won't. "
" You won't tell anybody at all ? Ever, as long as you live ? "
" No I won't ever tell anybody. Now let me. "
" Oh, you don't want to see ! "
" Now that you treat me so, I will see. " And she put her small hand upon his
and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretend- ^ -i^ :jy»
ing to resist in earnest but letting his ^ " ^^^ ^
hand slip by degrees till these words
were revealed: " I love you. "
" O, you bad thing! " And she hit
his hand a smart rap but reddened and
looked pleased, nevertheless.
Just at this juncture the boy felt a
slow, fateful grip closing on his ear, and
a. steady lifting impulse. In that vise he
was borne across the house and deposited
in his own seat, under a peppering fire of
giggles from the whole school. Then the
master stood over him during a few awful
moments, and finally moved away to his
throne without saying a word. But al-
though Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.
As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the
turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the reading class
and made a botch of it ; then in the geography class and turned lakes into moun-
tains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again ;
then in the spelling class, and got " turned down, " by a succession of mere baby
words till he brought up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he
had worn with ostentation for months.

II Jll

» harder Tom tried to fasten
vhis mind on his book, the more his
1 ideas wandered. So at last, with a
sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It
seemed to him that the noon recess
would never come. The air was
, utterly dead. There was not a breath
'stirring. It was the sleepiest of
sleepy days. The drowsing murmur
of the five and twenty studying
scholars, soothed the soul like the
spell that is in the murmur of bees.
Away off in the flaming sunshine,
Cardiff Hill iiftcd its soft green sides
through a shimmering veil of heat,
tinted with the purple of distance;
a few birds floaitd on lazy wing high
1 the air; no other living thing was visible but some cows, and they were
asleep.
Tom'a heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest
72
A TREATY ENTERED INTO, 73
to do to pass the dreary time. His hand wandered.into his pocket and his face
lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it.
Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the tick and put
him on the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed with a gratitude that
amounted to prayer, too^ at this moment, but it was premature : for when he
started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and made him
take a new direction.
Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now
he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an instant*
This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn friends all the
week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a pin out of his lappel
and began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The sport grew in interest
momently. Soon Tom said that they were interfering with each other^ and
neither getting the fullest benefit of the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the
desk and drew a line down the middle of it from top to bottom.
''Now, " said he, " as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and 111
let him alone ; but if you let him get away and get on my side, you're to leave
him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over.*'
" All right, go ahead ; start him up. "
The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe harassed
him a while, and then he got away and crossed back again. This change of
base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing
interest, the other would look on with interest as strong, the two heads bowed
together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things else. At last luck
seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The tick tried this, that, and the other
course, and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and
again just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's
fingers would be twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and
keep possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was
too strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry
in a moment. Said he :
** Tom, you let him alone.'*
74 TOM SAWYER,
n
f >
" I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe/'
''No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone/*
** Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much/
" Let him alone, I tell you ! "
*'I won't !''
" You shall — he's on my side of the line/'
" Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick ?
" / don't care whose tick he is — he's on my side of the line, and you shan't
touch him/*
" Well I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I blame
please with him, or die ! "
A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on
Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from the two
jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too absorbed to
notice the hush that had stolen upon the school a while before when the master
came tip-toeing down the room and stood over them. He had contemplated a
good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to it.
When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered
in her ear:
''Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home ; and when you get to
the corner, give the rest of'em the slip, and turn down through the lane and
come back. I'll go the other way and come it over'em the same way. "
So the one went off " with one group of scholars^ and the other with another.
In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and when they reached
the school they had it all to themselves* Then they sat together, with a slate
before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil and held her hand in his, guiding
it, and so created another surprising house. When the interest in art began to
wane, the two fell to talking. Tom was swimming in bliss. He said:
" Do you love rats.^ "
" No ! I hate them ! "
^ Well, I do too — live ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your head
with a string. "
EARL Y LESSONS, 7$
" No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What / like is chewing-gum. "
*'O, I should ^ay so ! I wish I had some now. "
" Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must gfive it
back to me. "
That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their legs
against the bench in excess of contentment.
** Was you ever at a circus ? " said Tom.
*'Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good.**
** I been to the circus three or four times — lots of times. Church ain't shucks
to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the time. I'm going to be
a clown in a circus when I grow up. "
** O, are you ! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up. "
•• Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money — most a dollar a day, Ben
Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged ? "
" What's that? "
" Why, engaged to be married.**
« No.''
" Wouldyouliketo?**
" I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like ? **
•'Like? " Why it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't
ever have any body but him, ever ever ever^ and then you kiss and that's alL
Anybody can do it. "
" Kiss ? What do you kiss for ? "
** Why that, you know, is to— well, they always do that. "
" Everybody ? "
•'Why yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember
what I wrote on the slate ? "
*• Ye— yes. "
« What was it ? "
'* I shant tell you. "
^'Shallltell^^? "
^ Ye — ^yes~-but some other time.'
»
7 < > TOM SA WYER,
« No, now. "
" No, not now — ^to-morrow. "
** O, no, naw^ Please Becky — I'll whisper it, TU whisper it ever so easy. "
Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about
her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her ear.
And then he added :
** Now you whisper it to me — just the same. "
She resisted, for a while, and then said :
" You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you mustn't
ever tell anybody — will you, Tom ? Now you won't, will you ? "
** No, indeed indeed I won't. Now Becky.*'
He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath stirred his
curls and whispered, " I — love — ^you ! "
Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches,
with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little white
apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded :
" Now Becky, it's all done — all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid of that
—it aint anything at all. Please, Becky. " — And be tugged at her apron and
the hands.
By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop ; her face, all glowing with
the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and said :
" Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't ever
to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but me, never
never and forever. Will you ? "
" No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry anybody
but you — and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either. "
** Certainly. Of course. That's /ar/ of it. And always coming to school
or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't anybody
looking — and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because that's the
way you do when you're engaged. "
" It's so nice. I never heard of it before. "
" Oh its ever so gay ! Why me and Amy Lawrence **—
A MISTAKE MADE.
77
The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.
" O, Tom ! Then 1 ain't the first you've ever been eng^ed to ! "
The child began to cry. Tom said :
" O don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more. "
" Yes you do, Tom, — you know you do. "
Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and
turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with sooth-
ing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was up, and
he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a
while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping'she would repent and
come to find him But she did not Then he began to feel badly and fear that
he was in the wrong, tt was a hard strug*
gle with him to make new advances, now,
but he nerved himself to it and entered.
She was still standing back there in the
corner, sobbing, with her face to the wall.
Tom's heart smote him. He went to her
and stood a moment, not knowing exactly
- how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:
" Becky, I— I don't care for anybody but
you "
No reply — but sobs.
" Becky, " — pleadingly. " Becky, won't
you say something ? "
More sobs.
Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass
_ knob from the top of an andiron, and
" *-~'=::^ passed it around her so that she could see
T41H FLIiniMQ ^^ ^^j SBld :
" Please, Becky, won t you take it *'
She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over
the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently Becky

7* 710^ SA WYER,
began to suspect. She ran to the door ; he was oot in sight ; she flew around
to the play-yard ; he was not there. Then she called :
" Tom ! Come back Tom ! "
She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions but
silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself; and
by this time the scholars b^an to gather again, and she had to hide her griefs
and still her broken heart and take up the cross of a long, dreary, aching
afternoon, with ooae among the strangers about her to exchange sorrows with.


of llie track of returning scholars,
and then fell into a n oody jog. He
crossed a small brincli " two or
three times because of a prevailing
;uperst t on that to cross
water baffled pursu t Half an hour
later he as d appear ng behind the
, Doug as mans on on the summit of
, Cardiff Hill, and the school-house
was hardly distinguishable away off
; in the valley behind him. He entered
a dense wood, picked his pathless
way to the centre of it, and sat down
on a mossy spot under a spreading
oak. There was not even a. zephyr
stirring; the dead noonday heat had even stilled the songs of the birds; nature
lay in a trance that, was broken by no sound but the occasional far-off
79

8o TOM SA WYER.
hammering of a woodpecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence and
sense of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in melan-
choly ; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He sat long
with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, meditating. It seemed to
him that life was but a trouble, at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy
Hodges, so lately released ; it must be very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber
and dream forever and ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and
caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and
grieve about, ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he
could be willing to go, and be done with it all. Now as to this girl. What had he
done } Nothing. He had meant the best in the world, and been treated like a
dog — like a very dog. She would be sorry some day — maybe when it was too
late. Ah, if he could only die temporarily!
But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one constrained shape
long at a time. Tom presently began to drift insensibly back into the concerns
of this life again. What if he turned his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously ?
What if he went away — ever so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas
— and never come back any more ! How would she feel then ! The idea of
being a clown recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust. For frivolity
and jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves
upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic. No,
he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all war-worn and illustrious.
No — better still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on the war-
path in the mountain ranges and the trackless great plains of the Far West, and
away in the future come back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with
paiftt, and prance into Sunday-school, some drowsy summer morning, with a
blood-curdling war-whoop, and sear the eye-balls of all his companions with
unappeasable envy. But no, there was something gaudier even than this. He
would be a pirate ! That was it ! Now his future lay plain before him, and
glowing with unimaginable splendor. How his name would fill the world, and
make people shudder ! How gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas, in
his long, low, black-huUed racer, the " Spirit of the Storm, " with his grisly flag
TOM DECIDES ON HIS COURSE.
ilying at the fore ! And at the zenith of his
fame, how he would suddenly appear at the
old village and stalk into church, brown and
weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet
and trunks, his great jack-boots, his crimson
sash, his belt bristling with horse -pistols, his
crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his slouch
hat with waving plumes, his black flag un-
furled, with the skull and cross-bones on it,
and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisper-
ings, " It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate'— the
Black Avenger of the Spanish Main'"
Yes, it was settled ; his career was deter-
mined. He would run away from home and
enter upon it. He would start the very next
morning. Therefore he must now begin to
get ready. He would collect his resources
together. He went to a rotten log near at
hand and began to dig under one end of it
with his Barlow knife. He soon struck
wood that sounded hollow. He put his
hand there and uttered this incantation
impressively ;
" What hasn't come here, cwnf/ What's
here, rfay here I "
Then he scraped away the dirt, and ex-
posed a pine shingle. He took it up and
disclosed a shapely little treasure-house
whose bottom and sides were of shingles.
In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment
was boundless! He scratched his head
with a perplexed air, and said:


82 TOM SAWYER.
" Well, that beats anything? "
Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood cogitating. The truth,
was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and all his comrades had
always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a marble with certain necessary
incantations, and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place with the
incantation he had just used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever
lost had gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely
they had been separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably
failed. Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He had
many a time heard of this thing succeeding, but never of its failing before. It did
not occur to him that he had tried it several times before, himself, but could
never find the hiding places afterwards. He puzzled over the matter some time >
. and finally decided that some witch had interfered and broken the charm. He
thought he would satisfy himself on that point ; so he searched around till he
found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He laid
himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and called :
" Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know ! Doodle-bug, doodU*
bug tell me what I want to know ! "
The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a second
and then darted under again in a fright.
" He dasn't tell ! So it was a witch that done it. I just knowed it. "
He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he gave up
discouraged. But it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had
just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a patient search for it. But
he could not find it. Now he went back to his treasure-house and carefully
placed himself just as he had been standing when he tossed the marble away ;
then he took another marble from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying :
" Brother go find your brother! "
He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must have
fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last repetition was suc-
cessful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each other.
Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green aisles of the
OLD SCENES KE-ENACTED.
H
forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt,
raked away some brush behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, s
lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in a moment had seized these things and
bounded away, bare legged, with fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a
great elm, blew an answering blast, and then began to tip-toe and look warily out,
this way and that. He said cautiously — to an imaginary company :
" Hold, my merry men J Keep hid till I blow. "
Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom, Tom
called :
" Hold ! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass ? "
" Guy of Guisbome wants no man's pass.
Who art thou that^that — "
" Dares to hold such language, " said Tom,
prompting — for they talked " by the book, "
from memory.
" Who art thou that dares to hold such

" I, indeed ! I am Robin Hood, as thy
caitifT carcase soon shall know, "
" Then art thou indeed that famous out-
law? Right gladly will I dispute with thee
the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee ! "
They took their lath swords, dumped their
other traps on the ground, struck a fencing
attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave,
careful combat, " two up and two down, "
Presently Tom said :
" Now if you've got the hang, go it lively ! "
So they " went it lively, " panting and
perspiring with the work. By and by Tom shouted :
" Fall ! fall ! Why don't you fall ? "
" I shan't ! Why don't you fall yourself? You're getting the worst of it. "
uniH Boop k
TOM SAWYER
" Why that ain't anything. / can't fall ; that ain't the way it is in the book.
The book says'Then with one back-handed stroke he slew poor Guy of Guis-
bome.'You're to turn around and let me hit you in the back. "
There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received the whack
and fell.
" Now, " said Joe, getting up, " You got to let me ki]l}vu. That's fair. "
" Why I can't do that, it ain't in the book. "
" Well it's blamed mean, — that's all. "
" Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son and lam roe
with a quarter-staff; or I'll be the Sheriff of
Nottingham and you be Robin Hood a little
while and kill me. "
This was satisfactory, and so these ad-
ventures were carried out. Then Tom
became Robin Hood again, and was al-
lowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his
strength away through his neglected wound.
And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe
of weeping outlaws, dragged hiro sadly
forth, gave his bow into his feeble hands,
and Tom said, " Where this arrow falls,
there bury poor Robin Hood under the
greenwood tree. " Then he shot the arrow
and fell back and would have died but be
lit on a nettle and sprang up too gaily for a
corpse.
niTH OF BOBCN HOOD. Thc boys dressed themselves, hid their
accoutrements, and went off grieving that there were no outlaws any roore, and
wondering what modem civilization could claim to have done to compensate for
their loss. They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest
than President of the United States forever.

^i^yf,

■ Jml\; half past nine, that night, Tom
and Sid were sent to bed, as usual.
They said their prayers, and Sid was
soon asleep. Tom lay awake and
waited, in restless impatience. When
it seemed to him that it must be nearly
daylight, he beard the clock strike ten !
This was despair. He would have
tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves de-
manded, but he was afraid he might
wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared
up into the dark. Everything was dis-
mally still. By and by, out of the still-
ness, little, scarcely preceptible noises
began to emphasize themselves. The
ticking of the clock began to bring
itself into notice. Old beams began to
crack mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were abroad.
A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And now the
85
^
TOM SA WYER.
tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate, began. Next
the ghastly ticking of a death-watch in the wall at the bed's head made Tom
shudder — it meant that somebody's days were numbered. Then the howl of a far-'
off dog rose on the night air, and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter
distance. Tom was in an agony. At last he was satisfied that time had ceased
and eternity begun ; he began to doze, in spile of himself; the clock chimed eleven
but he did not hear it. And then there came mingling with his half-formed dreams,
a most melancholy caterwauling. The
raising of a neighboring window dis-
turbed him. A cry of " Scat ! you devil ! "
and the crash of an empty bottle against
the back of his aunt's woodshed brought
him wide awake, and a single minute
later he was dressed and out of the
window and creeping along the roof of
the " ell " on all fours. He " meow'd "
with caution once or twice, as he went;
then jumped to the roof of the wood-
shed and thence to the ground. Huckle-
berry Finn was there, with his dead cat.
The boys moved off and disappeared in
the gloom. At the end of half an hour
they were wading through the tall grass
of the graveyard.
It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned
western kind. It was on a hill, about a
mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board fence around it, which
leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of the time, but stood upright
nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery. All the old graves
were sunken in, there was not a tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-
eaten boards staggered over the graves, leaning for support and finding none,
" Sacred to the memory of " So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it

A SOLEMN SITU A TION. 87
could no longer have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had
been light.
A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the spirits
of the dead, complaining at being disturbed. The boys talked little, and only
under their breath, for the time and the place and the pervading solemnity and
silence oppressed their spirits. They found the sharp new heap they were
seeking, and ensconsced themselves within the protection of three great elms
that grew in a bunch within a few feet of the grave.
Then they waited in silence for what deemed a long time. The hooting of a
distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness. Tom's reflections
grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said in a whisper:
" Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here? "
Huckleberry whispered :
" I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, aint it ? "
" I bet it is. "
There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter inwardly.
Then Tom whispered : •
" Say, Hucky — do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking? "
" O* course he does. Least his sperrit does. "
Tom, after a pause :
" I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm. Everybody
calls him Hoss. "
" A body can't be too particular how they talk'bout these-yer dead people,
Tom. "
This was a damper, and conversation died again. Presently Tom seized
his comrade's arm and said :
« Sh !''
** What is it, Tom ? " And the two clung together with beating hearts.
" Sh ! There'tis again ! Didn't you hear it ? "
** There ! Now you hear it. "
^ Lord, Tom they're coming ! They're coming, sure. What'11 we do? " *
TOM SAWYER.
" I dono. Think they'll see us ? "
" O, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats, I wisht I hadn't come. "
" O, don't be afeard. / don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't doing any
harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us at all. "
" I'll try to, Tom, but Lord I'm all of a shiver. "
" Listen ! "
The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled sound
of voices floated up from the & r end of the graveyard.
" Look ! See there ! " whispered Tom.
" What is it? "
" It's devil-fire. O, Tom, this is awful. "
Some vague figures approached through
the gloom, swinging an old-fashioned tin
lantern that freckled the ground with innu-
merable little spangles of light. Presently
I Huckleberry whispered with a shudder:
" It's the devils sure enough. Three of
em! Lordy, Tom, we're goners! Can
j you pray? "
" I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They
ain't going to hurt us. Now I lay me
down to sleep, I — "
" Sh! "
" What is it, Huck? "
Tom's ittokt iT pratir, " They're humans/ One of em is, any-
way. One of'em's old Muff Potter's voice. "
" No — tain't so, is it ? "
" I bet 1 know it. Don't you stir nor budge. I£t ain't sharp enough to notice
us. Drunk, same as usual, likely — blamed old rip ! "
" All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here they
come again. Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot! They're
p'inted right, this time. Say Huck, I know another o'them voices ; it's Injua
Joe. "

GRA VE SUBJECTS INTRODUCED, 89
— — I ^ -■ - - - w— -
" That's so — that murderin'half-breed! Td druther they was devils a dem
sight. What kin they be up to ? *'
The whispers died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the
grave and stood within a few feet of the boys'hiding-place/*
" Here it is, " said the third voice ; and the owner of it held the lantern up
and revealed the face of young Dr. Robinson.
Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a couple
of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open the grave. The
doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came and sat down with his
back against one of the elm trees. He was so close the boys could have touched
him.
** Hurry, men! " he said in a low voice; " the moon might come out at any
moment. "
They growled a response and went on digging/ For some time there was
no noise but the grating sound of the spades discharging their freight of
mould and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade struck upon the
coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or two the men had
hoisted it out on the ground. They pried off the lid with their shovels, got
out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground. The moon drifted from
behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face. The barrow was got ready and
the corpse placed on it, covered with a blanket, and bound to its place with
the rope. Potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end
of the rope and then said :
" Now the cussed thing's ready. Sawbones, and you'll just out with another
five, or here she stays. "
« That's the talk ! " said Injun Joe.
" Look here, what does this mean Y* said the doctor. " You required your
pay in advance, and I've paid you. "
" Yes, and you done more than that, " said Injun Joe, approaching the doctor,
who was now standing. " Five years ago you drove me away from your
father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to eat, and you
said I warn't there for any good ; and when^I swore I'd get even with you if it
90 TOM SAIVYER.
took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for a vagrant. Did you think
I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for nothing. And now I've got you,
and you got to settle^ you know ! "
He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this time. The
doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground. Potter
dropped his knife, and exclaimed :
" Here, now, don't you hit my pard! " and the next moment he had grappled
with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and main, trampling
the grass and tearing the ground with their heels. Injun Joe sprang to his
feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched up Potter's knife, and went creep-
ing, catlike and stooping, round and round about the combatants, seeking an
opportunity. All at once the doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy head
board of Williams'grave and felled Potter to the earth with it — and in the
same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in
the young man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him
with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful
spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.
Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over the
two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave a
long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed muttered :
^*That score is settled — damn you. "
Then he robb;ed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in Potter's
open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin. Three — four — five
minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His hand closed
upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a shudder. Then
he sat up, pushing the body from him, and gazed at it, and then around him,
confusedly. His eyes met Joe's.
" Lord, how is this, Joe ? " he said.
♦* It's a dirty business, " said Joe, without moving. " What did you do it for?**
** I ! I never done it ! "
" Look here! That kind of talk won't wash. "
Potter trembled and grew white.
INJUN^ yOE EXPLAINS. pl
" I thought I'd got sober, I'd no business to drink to-night. But it's in my
head yet — worse'n when we started here. I'm all in a muddle; can't recollect
aoything of it hardly. Tell me, Joe — honest, now, old feller— did I do it? Joe,
I never meant to —'pon my soul and honor I never meant to, Joe. Tell mc how
it was Joe. O, it's awful — and him so young and promising. "
" Why you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the head-board
and you fell fiat ; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering, like, and
snatched the knife and jammed it into him,ju5t as he fetched you anotherawful
clip— and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge till now. "
** O, I didn't know what I was a doing. I wish I may die this minute if I

did. It was alt on account of the whisky ; and the excitement, I reckon. I
never used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but never with weep-
OQs. They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell ! Say you won't tell, Joe — that's a
good feller. I always liked you Joe, and stood up for you, too. Dontyou
9*
TOM SAWYER.
remember 7 You won't tell, wilt you Joe ? " And the poor creature dropped oa
his knees before the stolid murderer, and clasped bis appealing hands.
" No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I won't
go back on you. — There, now, that's as fair as a man can say. "
" O, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this the longest day I live. "
And Potter began to cry.
" Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blubbering.
You be off yonder way and I'll go this. Move, now, and don't leave any tracks
behind you. "
Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The half-breed stood
looking after him. He muttered:
" If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he had
the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so far he'll be
afraid to come l > ack after it to such a place by himself— chicken-heart ! "
Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the lid-
less coffin and the open grave were under no inspection but the moon's. The
stillness was complete again, too.


two boys flew on and on,
\ff toward the village, speech-
es with horror. They
glanced backward over their shoul-
ders from time to time, apprehen-
sively, as if they feared they might be
followed. Every stump that started
up in their path seemed a man and an
enemy, and made them catch their
breath; and as they sped by some out-
lying cottages that lay near the village,
the barking of the aroused watch-dogs
seemed to give wings to their feet.
" If we can only get to the old
tannery, before we break down ! "
whispered Tom, in short catches be-
tween breaths, " I can't stand it much
longer. "
Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed their
eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it. They gained
steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast they burst through the open door
93
94 TOM SAWYER.
and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering shadows beyond. By and by
their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered :
" Huckleberry, what do you reckon *11 come of this ? ^
" If Dr. Robinson dies, I reckon hanging *11 come of it. "
" Do you though? "
" Why I > Jww/it, Tom. "
Tom thought a while, then he said :
" Who'll tell .? We? "
" What are you talking about? S'pose something happened and Injun Joe
didn't hang? Why he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as we're a
laying here. "
" That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck. "
" If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough. He's generally
drunk enough. "
Tom said nothing — went on thinking. Presently he whispered :
" Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he tell ? "
" What's the reason he don't know it ? **
" Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. D'you reckon he
could see anything ? D'you reckon he knowed anything ? "
" By hokey, that's so Tom ! "
" And besides, look-a-here — maybe that whack done for htm ! "
" No,'taint likely Tom.'He had liquor in him ; I could see that ; and besides^
he always has. Well when pap's full, you might take and belt him over the head
with a church and you couldn't phase him. He says so, his own self. So it's the
same with Muff Potter, of course. But if a man was dead sober, I reckon maybe
that whack might fetch him ; I dono. "
After another reflective silence, Tom said :
" Hucky, you sure you can keep mum ? "
" Tom, we got to keep mum. You know that. That Injun devil would'nt make
any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak Tjout this
and they didn't hang him. Now look-a-here, Tom, less take and swear to one
another — that's what we got to do — swear to keep mum "
THE SOLEMN OA TH, 95
I'm agreed. It s the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear that
ff
we—
O, no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little rubbishy com-
mon things — specially with gals, cuz they go back on you anyway, and blab»if they
get in a huff — but there orter be writing'bout a big thing like this. And blood.'*
Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and awful ; the
hour, the circumstances, the surroundings, were in keeping with'it. He picked
up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moonlight, took a little fragment of'* red
keel " out of his pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully scrawled these
lines, emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his
teeth, and letting up the pressure on the up-strokes :

i < M^ ^
i/ifvyu
*«M,

^^^^^^^^

TtCl 0^pkC d^a?'-

9^ TOM SAWYER,
Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing, and the
sublimity of his language. He at once took a pin from his lappel and was going
to prick his flesh, but Tom said :
" Hold on ! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have verdigrease on it. "
" What's verdigrease } "
" It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller some of it once — you'll see.**
So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked the
ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In time, after many squeezes,
Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his little finger for a pen.
Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath was
complete. They buried the shingle close to the wall, with some dismal ceremo-
nies and incantations, and the fetters that bound their tongues were considered
to be locked and the key thrown away.
A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined build-
ing, now, but they did not notice it.
" Tom, " whispered Huckleberry, " does this keep us ixome7)er telling — always} "
" Of course it does. It don't make any difference what happens, we got to keep
mum. We'd drop down dead — ^on\ you know that? "
" Yes, I reckon that's so. "
They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up a long,
lugubrious howl just outside — within ten feet of them. The boys clasped each
other suddenly, in an agony of fright.
" Which of us does he mean ? " gasped Huckleberry.
" I dono — peep through the crack. Quick! "
" No, ^'^w, Tom ! "
" I can't— I can't do it, Huck ! "
" Please, Tom. There'tis again ! "
" O, lordy, I'm thankful ! " whispered Tom. " I know his voice. It's Bull
Harbison. " *
♦ If Mr. Harbison had owned a slave named Bull, Tom wonld have spoken of him as " Harbison's
Bull, " but a son or a dog of that name was " Bull Harbison *
TERROR BRINGS REPENTANCE, 97
" O, that's good — I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death ; I'd a bet any-
thiog it was a stray dog. "
The dog howled again. The boys* hearts sank once more.
" O, my ! that ain't no Bull Harbison ! " whispered Huckleberry. " Do, Tom 1 *•
Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack. His whisper
was hardly audible when he said :
** O, Huck, it's a stray dog ! "
^* Quick, Tom, quick ! Who does he mean ? "
*** Huck, he must mean us both — we're right together. "
^* O, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake Tjout where
/7/ go to. I been so wicked. "
** Dad fetch it ! This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a feller's
told not to do. I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried — but no, I wouldn't,
of course. But if ever I get off this time, I lay I'll just waller in Sunday-schools ! **
And Tom began to snuffle a little.
" You bad ! " and Huckleberry began to snuffle too. " Consound it, Tom Sawyer,
you're just old pie,'longside o'what/am. O, /^r^, lordy, lordy, I wisht I only
had half your chance. "
Tom choked off and whispered :
" Look, Hucky, look ! He's got his hack to us ! *'
Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.
Well he has, by jingoes ! Did he before ? "
Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. O, this is bully, you know,
Now who can he mean ? "
The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.
" Sh ! What's that ? " he whispered.
" Sounds like — like hogs grunting. No — it's somebody snoring, Tom. "
That is it ? Where'bouts is it, Huck } "
I bleeve it's down at'tother end. Sounds so, anyway. Pap used to sleep
there, sometimes,'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just .lifts things when
he snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back to this town any more/*
The spirit of adventure rose in the boys'souls once more.
7


9*
TOif SAWYER.
" Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead? "
" I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe ! "
Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the boys
agreed to try, with the understanding that they would take to their heels if the
snoring stopped. So they went tip-toeing stealthily down, the one behind the
other. When they had got to within five steps of the snorer, Tom stepped on a
stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The man moaned, writhed a little, and his

face came into the moonlight. It was Muff Potter. The boys'hearts had stood
still, and their hopes too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now.
They lip-toed out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little
distance to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on the
night air again! They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a. few feet
of where Potter was lying, and facing Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.
MENTAL PUNISHMENT. 99
" O, geeminy it's him ! " exclaimed both boys, in a breath.
" Say, Tom — they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's
house,'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago ; and a whippoorwill come in and
lit on the bannisters and sung, the very same evening ; and there ain't anybody
dead there yet. "
" Well I know that. And suppose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall in the
kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday ? "
" Yes, but she ain't dead. And what's more, she's getting better, too. "
" All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff Potter's
a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about these kind of
things, Huck. "
Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept in at his bedroom window,
the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution, and fell asleep
congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade. He was not aware that
the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and had been so for an hour.
When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the
light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not been
called — persecuted till he was up, as usual 1 The thought filled him with bodings.
Within five minutes he was dressed and down stairs, feeling sore and drowsy.
The family were still at table, but they had finished breakfast. There was no
voice of rebuke ; but there were averted eyes ; there was a silence and an air of
solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem
gay, but it was up-hill work ; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into
silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.
After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in the hope
that he was going to be fiogged ; but it was not so. His aunt wept over him and
asked him how he could go and break her old heart so ; and finally told him to go
on, and ruin himself and bring her grey hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was
no use for her to try any more. This was worse than a thousand whippings, and
Tom's heart was sorer now than his body. He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness,
promised reform over and over again and then received his dismissal, feeling that
he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a feeble confidence.
2.0*^2X1^^
lOO TOM SA WYER.
He left the piesence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward Sid ; and so
the lattet's prompt retreat through the back gate was unnecessary. He moped to
school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing
hooky the day before, with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes
and wholly dead to trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested'his elbows
on his desk and his jaws in his hands and stared at the wall with the stony stare
of sufl'eiing that .has reached the limit and can no further go. His elbow was
pressing against some hard substance. After a long time he slowly and sadly
changed his position, and took up this object with a sigh. It was in a paper.
He unrolled it. A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart broke.
It was his brass andiron knob !
This final feather broke the camel's back.

■^ " ^■A " " ^



Bf'IL'y^^E upon the hour of noon the
whole village was suddenly electri-
fied with the ghastly news. No need
of the as yet undreamed-of telegraph ;
the tale flew from man to man, from
group to group, from house to house,
with little less than telegraphic speed.
Of course the schoolmaster gave holi-
day for that afternoon; the town
would have thought strangely of hitn
if he had not.
A gory knife had been found close
to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belong-
ing to Muff Poller — so the story ran.
And it was said that a belated citizen
had come upon Potter washing himself in the " branch " about one or two
o'clock in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked off— suspicious
?l roads in every i
" was confident
j^ tured before nig
All the towi
the graveyard,
ished and he jo:
because he wou
rather go any wh
awful, unaccoui
him on. Arrive
'I he wormed his s
MjA^i crowd and saw
It seemed to hi
Somebody pinched his arm. He tun
Then both looked elsewhere at once, an
had noticed anything in their mutual glance. But ever
intent upon the grisly spectacle before them.
" Poor fellow ! " " Poor young fellow ! " " This oi
grave-robbers ! " " Muff Potter'll hang for this if they <
the drift of remark ; and the minister said, " It was a ji
here. "

there before.
Huckleberry s
MUFF POTTER COMES HIMSELF.
103
" Hallo, he's stopped ! — Look out, he's turning ! Don't let htm get away ! "
People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head, said he wasn't trying
to get away — fae only looked doubtful and perplexed.
" Infernal impudence! " said a bystander; " wanted to come and ukeaqulet
look at his work, I reckon — didn't expect any company. "
The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through, ostentatiously lead-
ing Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his eye*

jort TWO Tionits.
showed the fear that was upon him. When h« stood before the murdered man,
he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his bands and burst into tears.
" I didn't do it, friends, " he sobbed ; "'pon my word and honor I never done it. "
" Who's accused you? " shouted a voice.
This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and looked around
him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joct and exclaimed:
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and starini
hearted liar reel off his serene statement^ they expectin
clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his hea(
how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had i
alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their
betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for pi
sold himself to Satan and it would be fatal to meddle w
a power as that
" Why didn't you leave ? What did you want to com
said.
•* I couldn't help it — I couldn't help it, " Potter moa
away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here. "
again.
Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a fev
the inquest, under oath ; and the boys, seeing that th
withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe had so
He was now become, to them, the most baleful ly intei
ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinat
They inwardly resolved to watch him, nights, when o|
in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.
Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murderf
TOM'S CONSCIENCE A T WORK. 105
^■^» ■
^ It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it. "
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much
as a week after this ; and at breakfast one morning Sid said :
^ Tom^ you, pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me
awake about half the time. "
Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.
** It's a bad sign, " said Aunt Polly, gravely. " What you got on your mind,
Tom? "
'* Nothing. Nothing't I know of. " But the boy's hand shook so that he
spilled his coffee.
^ And you do talk such stuff, " Sid said. *'Last night you said'it's blood, it's
blood, that's what it is !'You said that over and over. And you said,'Don't
torment me so— I'll tell !'Tell whati What is it you'll tell ? "
Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling what might
have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face
and she came ta Tom's relief without knowing it. She said :
*• Sho ! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night myself.
Sometimes I dream it's me that done it. "
Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed satisfied.
Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he
complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his jaws every night. He
never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently slipped the bandage
free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while at a time, and after-
ward slipped the bandage back to its place again. Tom's distress of mind
wore off gradually and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid
really managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept
it to himself.
It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests
on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed
that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries, though it had been his
habit to take the lead in all new enterprises ; he noticed, too, that Tom never
acted as a witness, — and that was strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact
lo6 TOM SA WYER.
that Tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided
them when he could. Sid marveled, but said nothing. However, even inquests
went out of vo^ue at last, and ceased to torture Tom's conscience.
Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his opportunity
and went to the little grated jail-window and smuggled such small comforts
through to the " murderer " as he could get hold of. The jail was a triSing
little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards
were afforded for it ; indeed it Was seldom occupied. These offerings greatly
helped to ease Tom's conscience.
-The villagers bad a strong desire to tar-and-feather Injun Joe and ride him
on a rail, for body-snatching, but so formidable was his character that nobody
could be found who was willing to take the lead in the matter, so it was
dropped. He had been careful to begin both of his inquest-statements with
the fight, without confessing the grave-robbery that preceded it ; therefore it
was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at present


^^ < ^M$^ ol the reasons why
Tnm s m nd had drifted away from
Is SLcrtt troubles was, that it had
found a new and weighty matter to
interest ilself about Becky Thatcher
had stopped com ng to school. Tom
had struggled « th his pride a few
di)S ind tried to whistle her down
the nd but fa led. He began to
find h mself hanging around her
falh rs house n ghts, and feeling
ver\ m serable She was ill. What
if she should d e There was dis-
tract on in the thought. He no
longer took an mlerest in war, nor
even in pirai.y. The charm of life
was gone; there was nothing but
dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat ; there was no joy in them
any more. His aunt was concerned. She began to try all manner of remedies

leS
TOM BAWYEJt.
on him. She was one of those people who are infatuated with patent medicines
and all new-fangled methods-of producing health or mending it. She was an
inveterate experimenter in these things. When something fresh in this line came
out she was in a. fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never
ailing, but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for all the
" Health " periodicals and phreneological frauds; and the solemn ignorance they
were inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the " rot " they contained about
ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how
to get up, and what to eat, and what to
dnnk, and how much exercise to take, and
f " ^ j?^^ i^^W ^ what frame of mind to keep one's self in,
. ^^la^^^Tf Sjik and what sort of clothing to wear, was all
gospel to her, and she never observed that
her health-journals of the current month
customarily upset everything they had rec-
ommended the month before. She was as
simple-hearted and honest as the day was
long, and so she was an easy victim. She
gathered together her quack periodicals
and her quack medicines, and thus armed
with death, went about on her pale horse,
metaphorically speaking, with " hell follow-
ing after. " But she never suspected that
she was not an angel of healing and the
balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering neighbors. ,
The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to
her. She had hiu out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the woodshed
and drowned him witr. a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed him down with
a towel like a file, ana so brought him to ; then she rolled him up in a wet sheet
and put him away under Dlankets till she sweated his soul clean and " the yellow
stains of it came through his pores " — as Tom said.
Yet notwithsunding aU this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale

TOM SHOWS HIS GENEROSITY. I09
and dejected. She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths and plunges. The
boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began to assist the water with a slim
oatmeal diet and blister plasters. She calculated his capacity as she would a jug's >
and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls.
Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase filled the
old lady's heart with consternation. This indifference must be broken up at any
cost. Now she heard of Pain-killer for the first time. She ordered a lot at once.
She tasted it and was filled with gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form.
She dropped the water treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to
Pain-killer. She gave Tom a tea-spoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety
for the result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again ; for
the " indifference " was broken up. The boy could not have shown a wilder,
heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.
Tom felt that it was time to wake up ; this sort of life might be romantic enough,
in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too little sentiment and too
much distracting variety about it. So he thought over various plans for relief, and
finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of Pain-killer. He asked for it so
often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help him-
self and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings
to alloy her delight ; but since it was Tom, she watched the bottle clandestinely.
She found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her tl^at
the boy was mending the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it.
One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came
along, purring) eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste. Tom said ;
" Don't ask for it unless you want it, Pefer. "
But Peter signified that he did want it.
*'You better make sure. "
Peter was sure.
" Now you've asked for it, and 111 give it to you, because there ain't anything
mean about me\ but if you find you don't like it, you musn't blame anybody but
your own self. "
Petet was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the
rOAf SAWYER.
Pain-killer. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then delivered a
wai-whoop and set off round and round the room, banging against furniture^
upsetting fiower pots and making general havoc. Next he rose on his hind feet
and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and
his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around
the house again spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered
in time to see him throw a few double summersets, deliver a final mighty hurrah.

and sail through the open window, carrying the rest of the flower > pots with him.
The old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering over ,her glasses ; Tom lay
on the floor expiring with laughter.
" Tom, what on earth ails tliat cat t "
" / don't know, aunt, " gasped the boy.
" Why I never see anything like it. What did make him act so} "
" Deed I don't know Aunt Polly ; cats always act so when they're having a
good time. "
AUNT POLLY WEAKENS. lit
" They do, do they? " There was something in the tone that made Tom
apprehensive.
" Yes'm. That is, I believe they do. "
" You do ? "
•* Yes'm. "
The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized by
anxiety. Too late he divined her " drift. " The handle of the tell-tale tea-spoon
was visible under the bed-valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it up. Tom winced^
and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the usual handle— his ear — and
cracked his head soundly with her thimble.
" Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for ? "
" I done it out of pity for him — ^because he hadn't any aunt. "
" Hadn't any aunt ! — you numscuU. AVhat has that got to do with it? "
" Heaps. Because if he*d a had one she*d a burnt him out herself! She'd a
roasted his bowels out of him'thout any more feeling than if he was a human! "
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing in a new
light ; what was cruelty to a cat might be cruelty to a boy, too. She began to
soften ; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's
head and said gently :
" I was meaning for the best, Tom. And Tom, it did do you good. "
Tom looked up in her face with just a preceptible twinkle peeping through his
gravity :
" I know you was meaning for the best, aunty, and so was I with Peter. It done
him good, too. I never see him get around so since — "
" O, go'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again. And you try and
see if " you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take any more medicine.'*
Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange thing had
been occurring every day latterly. And now, as usual of late, he hung about the
gate of the school-yard instead of playing with his comrades. He was sick, he
said, and he looked it. He tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither he
really was looking — down the road. Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and
Tom's face lighted ; he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away. When
_.-.. e-'v 1 sicdi twuna. 1 ne next instant ne was out,
Indian ; yelling, laughing, chasing boys, jumping over it
limb, throwing hand-springs, standing on his head — doic
could conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out, all 1
Thatcher was noticing, fiut she seemed to be uncons >
looked. Could it be posssble that she was not aware
carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity ; came war-w!
a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the school-house, b
boys, tumbling them in every direction, and fell sprawlin
nose, almost upsetting her — and she turned, with her nost
her say. " Mf ! some people think they're mighty smart-
Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and s
crestfallen.



id was made up dow.
He was gloomy and desperate. He
was a forsaken, friendless boy, he
said; nobody loved him; when thejr
found out what they had driven him
to, perhaps they would bo sorry; he
had tried to do right and get alongf,
but they would not let him; since
notliing would do them but to be rid
of him, let it be so; and let them
blame him for the consequences —
why shouldn't they ? What right had
the friendless to complain? Yes,
they had forced liim to it at last:
he would lead a life of crime. There
was no choice.
By this time he was far down
Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to " take up " tinkled faintly upon his
ear. He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old ^miliar
114 TOM SAWYER,
sound any more — it was'very hard^ but it was forced on him ; since he was
driven out into the cold world, he must submit— but he forgave them. Then
the sobs came thick and fast.
Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper — hard-eyed,
and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart. Plainly here were
" two souls with but a single thought. " Tom, wiping his eyes with his sleeve^
began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage
and lack of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never
to return ; and ended by hoping that Joe would not forget him.
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going to
make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His mother had
whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew
nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go;
if she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but succumb ; he hoped
she would be happy, and never regret having driven her poor boy out into the
unfeeling world to suffer and die.
As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to stand
by each other and be brothers and never separate till death relieved them of
their troubles. T^hen they began to lay their plans. Joe was for being a hermit,
and living on crusts in a remote cave, and dying, some time, of cold, and want,
and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded that there were some con-
spicuous advantages about a life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.
Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi river was
a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shal-
. low bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a rendezvous. It was not
inhabited ; it lay far over toward the further shore, abreast a dense and almost
wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's Island was chosen. Who were to be
the subjects of their piracies, was a matter that did not occur to them. Then
they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers
were one to him ; he was indifferent. They presently separated to meet at a
lonely spot on the river bank two miles above the village at the favorite hour
— ^which was midnight. There was a small log raft there which they meant ta
THE YO UNO PIRA TES 1 1 5
capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could
steal in the most dark and mysterious way — as became outlaws. And before the
afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of spread-
ing the fact that pretty soon the town would " hear something. " All who. got
this vague hint were cautioned to " be mum and wait. "
About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and stopped
in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the meeting-place. It was
starlight, and very still. The mighty river lay like an ocean at rest. Tom
listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet. Then he gave a low,
distinct whistle. It was answered from under the bluff. Tom whistled twice
more; these signals were answered in the same way. Then a guarded voice
said:
** Who goes there ? "
" Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. Name your names.'*
" Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas.**
Tom had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.
** Tis well. Give the countersign.*'
Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to the
brooding night :
** Blood ! "
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,'
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was an easy,
comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked the advantages
of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate.
The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a skillet
and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought a few corn-
cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or " chewed " but
himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it would never do to
start without some fire. That was a wise thought ; matches were hardly known
there in that day. They saw a fire smouldering upon a great raft a hundred
yards above, and they went stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk.
Il6 TOM SAIVYEK,
They made an imposing adventure of it, saying ** Hist ! " every now and then,
and suddenly h^^l ting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary
dagger-hilts; and giving orders in dismal whispers that if " the foe " stirred, to
*Mef him have it to the hilt, " because " dead men tell no tales. " They knew
well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the village laying in stores or
having a spree, but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in
an unpiratical way.
They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and Joe
at the forward. Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded arms,
and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper :
" Lufif, and bring her to the wind ! "
" Aye-aye, sir ! **
" Steady, stead-y-y-y ! "
" Steady it is, sir ! "
" Let her go off a point ! "
" Point it is, sir ! "
As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream it
was no dDubt understoDd that these orders were given only for " style, " and
were not intended to mean anything in particular.
" What sail's she carrying? "
*^ Courses, tops'ls and flying-jib, sir. "
** Send the r'yals up ! Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of ye, — foretopmast-
stuns'l ! Lively, now !'*
" Aye-aye, sir! "
" Shake out that maintogalans'l ! Sheets and braces ! iVi^?a/, my hearties ! "
" Aye-aye, sir ! "
" Hellum-a-lee — hard a port ! Stand by to meet her when she comes ! Port,
port ! Now, men ! With a will ! Stead-y-y-y ! "
" Steady it is, sir! "
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river ; the boys pointed her head
right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was not
more than a two or three-mile current. Hardly a word was said during the
next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before the distant
GOING TO THE RENDEZVOUS. 117
towa. Two or three glimmering lights showed where it lay, peacefully sleep-
ing, beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed water, unconscious of the
tremendous event that was happening. The Black Avenger stood still with
folded arms, " looking bis last " upon the scene of his former joys and his later

sufferings, and wishing " she " could see him now, abroad on the wild sea,
facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim
smile on his lips. It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jack-
son's Island beyond eye-shot of the village, and so he " looked his last " with
a broken and satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last, too ;
and they all looked so long that they came near letting .the current drift them
out of the range of the island. But they discovered the danger in time, and
made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morning the raft grounded on
the bar two hundred yards above the head of the island, and they waded
back and forth until they had landed their freight. Part of the little raft's
TOM SAWYER.
belongings consisted of an old sail, and this they spread over a nook in the
bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions; but they themselves would sleep
in the open air in good weather, as became outlaws.
They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps within
the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan
for supper, and used up half of the
corn " pone " stock they hid brought.
It seemed glorious sport to be feasting
in that wild free way in the virgin for-
est of an unexplored and uninhabited
island, far from the haunts of men, and
they said they never would return to
civilization. The climbing fire lit up
their faces and threw its ruddy glare
upon the pillared tree trunks of their
forest temple, and upon the varnished
foliage and festooning vines.
When the last crisp slice of bacon
was gone, and the last allowance of corn
pone devoured, the boys stretched them-
selves out on the grass, filled with con-
tentment. They could have found a
cooler place, but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as
the roasting camp-fire,
" Ain't it gay ,'" said Joe.
" It's nuts ! " said Tom. " What would the boys say if they could see us ? "
" Say .'Well they'd just die to be here— hey Hucky ! "
**! reckon so, " said Huckleberry; " anyways /'m suited. I dont want noth-
ing better'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally — and here they can't
come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so. "
" It's just the life for me, " said Tom. " You don't have to get up, mornings,
and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that blame foolishness.
You see a pirate don't have to do anything, Joe, when he's ashore, but a hermit

THE CAMP-FIRE TALK. II9
he has to be praying considerable, and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all
by himself that way. "
" O yes, that's so, " said Joe, " but I hadn't thought much about it, you know.
I'd a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it. "
" You see, " said Tom, *♦ people don't go much on hermits, now-a-days, like
they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected And a hermit's got
to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put sack-cloth and ashes on his
head, and stand out in the rain, and — "
•* What does he put sack-cloth and ashes on his head for ? " inquired Huck.
" /dono. But they've ^^/ to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have to do
that if you was a hermit. "
«* Dern'd if I would, " said Hucfc
" Well what would you do? "
** I dono. But I wouldn't do that. "
** Why Huck, you'd have to. How'd you get around it ? "
** Why I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away. "
" Run away ! Well you would be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be a
disgrace. "
The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed. He had finished
{gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded it with tobacco,
and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke
— he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The other pirates envied
him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently
Huck said :
" What does pirates have to do? "
^^ •
Tom said :
*'Oh they have just a bully time — take ships, and burn them, and get the
money and bury it in awful places in their island wjiere there's ghosts and
things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships — make'em walk a plank. "
" And they carry the women to the island, " said Joe ; ** they don't kill the
Tvomen. "
** No, " assented Tom, " they don't kill the women — ^they're too noble. And
the women's always beautiful, too. "
120 TOM SA WYEJi.
** And don't they wear the bulliest clothes ! Oh, no ! All gold and silver
and di'monds/'said Joe, with enthusiasm.
*• Who? " said Huck.
** Why the pirates. "
Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.
** I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate, " said he, with a regretful pathos
in his voice ; " but I ain't got none but these/'
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough, after
they should have begun their adventures. They made him understand that his
poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for wealthy pirates
to start with a proper wardrobe.
Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the eyelids
of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the Red-Handed,
and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary. The Terror of the
Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main had more difficulty in getting
to sleep. They said their prayers inwardly, and lying down, since there was
nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud ; in truth
they had a mind not to say them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such
lengths as that, lest they might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt
from Heaven. Then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent
verge of sleep — but an intruder came, now, that would not " down. "'It was
conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing
wrong to run away ; and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the
real torture came. They tried to argue it away by reminding conscience that
they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of times ; but conscience was
not to be appeased by such thin plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the end,
that there was no getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was
only " hooking, " while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain
simple stealing — and there was a command against that in the Bible. So they
inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business, their piracies
should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing. Then conscience
granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates fell peacefully to sleep*

he wondered where he was. He
up and rubbed his eyes and looked
Then he c
gray dawn, and there was
of repose and peace
in the deep pervading calm and silence
of the woodi Not a leaf stirred ; not
id obtruded upon great Nature's
meditation Beaded dew-drops stood
upon the leaves and grasses. A white
layer of ashes covered the fire, and a
thin blue breath of smoke rose straight
into the air Joe and Huck still slept.
Now, far away in the woods a bird
•~ NV^^^^^'^^^ST^^'"'^^''^ ^^ " ^*^ another answered; presently
'^Vy^Nir^^.3A > ^=^*%t^ & iw the hammLnng of a woodpecker was
heard Gradually the cool dim gray of the morning whitened, and as gradually
soaads multiplied and life manifested itself The marvel of Nature shaking off
laa TOM SAWYER,
sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little green worm
came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from
time to time and " sniffing around, " then proceeding again — for he was measuring,
Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own accord, he sat as still
as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling, by turns, as the creature still came
toward him or seemed inclined to go elsewhere ; and when at last it considered a
painful moment with its curved body in the air and then came decisively down
upon Tom's leg and began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad — for that
meant that he was going to have a new suit of clothes — without the shadow of a doubt
a gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared, from nowhere in
particular, and went about their labors; one struggled manfully by with a dead
spider five times as big as itself in its arms, and lugged it straight up a tree-trunk.
A brown spotted lady-bug climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom
bent down close to it and said, " Lady-bug, lady-bug, fly away home, your house
is on fire, your children's alone, " and she took wing and went off to see about it —
which did not surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was credulous
about conflagrations and he had practiced upon its simplicity more than once. A .
tumble-bug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and Tom touched the creature,
to see it shut its legs against its body and pretend to be dead. The birds were
fairly rioting by this time. A cat-bird, the northern mocker, lit in a tree over
Tom's head, and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoy-
ment; then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig
almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one side and eyed the strangers
with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel and a big fellow of the " fox " kind
came skurrying along, sitting up at intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys,
for the wild things had probably never seen a human being before and scarcely
knew whether to be afraid or not. All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now;
long lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near, and
a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene.
Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a shout, and
in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and tumbling over each other
in the shallow limpid water of the white sand-bar. They felt no longing for the
CAMP-LIFE.
1*3
little village sleeping in the distance beyond the majestic waste of water, A
vagrant current or a slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only
gratified them, since its going was some
thing like burning the bridge between them
and civilization.
They came back to camp wonderfully
refreshed„glad-hearted, and ravenous ; and
they soon had the camp-fire blazing up
again. Huck found a spring of clear cold
water close by, and the boys made cups of
broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt that
water, sweetened with such a wild-wood
charm as that, would be a good enough
substitute for coffee. While Joe was slicmg
bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked
him to hold on a minute; they stepped to
a promising nook in the river bank and
threw in their lines; almost immediately
they had reward. Joe had not had time to
get impatient before they were back aga n with somehandsoie bass a couple
of sun-perch and a small catfish — provisions enough for qu te a fam ly They
fried the fish with the bacon and were aston shed for no fish had e^er seemed so
delicious before. They did not know that the quicker a fresh water fish is on the
Sre after he is caught the better he is ; and they reflected little upon what a sauce
open air sleeping, open air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger
makes, too.
They lay around in the shade, after breakfast, while Huck had a smoke, and then
went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They tramped gaily
along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush, among solemn monarch!
of the forest, hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping regalia of
grape-vines. Now and then they came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and
jeweled with flowers.

TOAf SA WYEK.
They found plenty of things to be delighted with but nothing to be astonished
at. They discovered that the island was about three miles long and a quarter of
a mile wide, and that the shore it lay
closest to was only separated from it
by a narrow channel hardly two hundred
yards wide. They took ■ a swim about
every hour, so it was close upon the'
middle of the afternoon when they got
back to camp. They were too hungry
to stop to fish, but they fared sumptu-
ously upon cold ham, and then threw
themselves down in the shade to talk.
But the talk soon began to drag, and
then died. The stillness, the solemnity
that brooded in the woods, and the sense
of loneliness, began to tell upon the
spirits of the boys. They fell to think-
ing. A sort of undefined longing crept
upon them. This took dim shape, pre-
sently— it was budding home -sickness. Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming
of his door-steps and empty hogsheads. But they were all ashamed of their weak-
ness, and none was brave enough to speak his thought.
For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar sound in
the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a clock which he takes no
distinct note of. But now this mysterious sound became more pronounced, and
forced a recognition. The boys started, glanced at each other, and then each
assumed a listening attitude. There was a long silence, profound and unbroken ;
then a deep, sullen boom came floating down out of the distance.
" What is it ! " eicclaimed Joe, under his breath.
" I wonder, " said Tom in a whisper.
" Tain't thunder, " said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, " becuz thunder — "
" Hark! " said Tom. " Listen — don't talk. "

A SEl^SATION. ■■ 125
They waited a time that seemed na age, and then the same muffled boom troubled
the solemit hush.
" Lei's go and sec. "
They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town. They

parted he bushes on e bank and pee ed out ovc the water The I le steam
ferry boa was abou a m e be o h v age d f ng w h the cu en Her
broad de k en ed c o ded w h peop e The e we e a g ea many sk ffs row ng
about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood of the ferry boat, but the
boys could not determine what the men in them were doing. Presently a great
jet of white smoke burst from the ferry boat's side, and as it expanded and rose in
a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.
" I know now ! " exclaimed Tom ; " somebody's drownded ! "
" That's it! " said Huck; " they done that last summer, when Bill Turner got
drownded ; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him come up to
ia6 TOM SAWYER.
the top. Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put quicksilver in'em and set'cm
afloat, and wherever there's anybody that's drownded, they'll float right there and
stop. "
" Yes, I've heard about that, " said Joe. " I wonder what makes the bread do that. "
" Oh it ain't the bread, so much, " said Tom ; ** I reckon it's mostly what they
say over it before they start it out. "
" But they don't say anything over it, " said Huck. " I've seen'em and they
don't. "
" Well that's funny, " said Tom. " But maybe they say it to themselves. Of
course they do. Anybody might know that. "
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because an
ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be expected to
act very intelligently when sent upon an errand of such gravity.
" By jings I wish I was over there, now, " said Joe.
" I do too, " said Huck. " I'd give heaps to know who it is. "
The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought flashed
through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed :
" Boys, I know who's drownded — it's us ! "
They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph ; they were
missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account; tears were
being shed; accusing memories of unkindnesses to these poor lost lads were
rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being indulged ; and best of
all, the departed were the talk of the whole town, and the envy of all the boys, jis
far as this dazzling notoriety was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while
to be a pirate, after all.
As twilight drew on, the ferry boat went back to her accustomed business and
the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They were jubilant with
vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble they were making.
They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then fell to guessing at what the
village was thinking and saying about them ; and the pictures they drew of the
public distress on their account were gratifying to look upon — from their point of
view. But when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to
TOM STEALS AfVAY FROM CAMP.
" 7
talk, and sat gazing into the fire, with theii minds evidently wandering elsewhere.
The excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts
of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as much as they
were. Misgivings came; they grew troubled and unhappy ; a sigh or two escaped,
unawares. By and by Joe timidly ventured upon a round-about " feeler " as to
how the others might look upon a return to civilization — not right now, but —
Tom withered htm with derision ■ Huck, being UDCOmmitted, as jret, joined in.
with Tom, and the waverer quickly " ex- i
plained, " and was glad to get out of the
scrape with as little taint of chicken-
hearted home-sickness clinging to his gar*
ments as he could. Mutiny was eifectu-
ally laid to rest for the moment.
As the night deepened, Huck began
to nod, and presently to snore. Joe
followed next, Totn lay upon his elbow
motionless, for some time, watching the
two intently. At last he got up cauti-
ously, on his knees, and went searching
among the grass and the flickering reflec-
tions flung by the camp-fire. He picked
up and inspected several large semi-cylin-
ders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, :
and finally chose two which seemed to suit
him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something upon each of these
with his " red keel ; " one he rolled up and put in his jacket pocket, and the other
he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a little distance from the owner. And he
also put into the hat certain school-boy treasures of almost inestimable value —
among them a lump of chalk, an India rubber ball, three fish-hooks, and one
of that kind of marbles known as a " sure'nough crystal. " Then he tip-toed
his way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and
straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sand-bar.


I FEW minutes later Tom was
in the shoal water of the bar,
wading toward the Illinois shore.
Before the depth reached his middle
he was half way over; the current
would permit no more wading, now,
so he struck out confidently to swim
the remaining hundred yards. He
swam quartering up stream, but
SI ill was swept downward rather
faster than he had expected. How-
ever, he reached the shore finally, and
drifted along till he found a low
place and drew himself out. He
put his hand on his jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck
through the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments. Shortly
138-
i^^-^.
TOM RECOlfNOITERS. 129
before ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw
the ferry boat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything
was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank, watching with
all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes and climbed
into the skiff that did ** yawl " duty at the boat's stern. He laid himself down
under the thwarts and waited, panting.
Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to ** cast off.**
A minute or two later the skifiTs head was standing high up, against the boat's
•swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in his success, for he knew
it wa§ the boat's last trip for the night. At the end of a long twelve or fifteen
minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom slipped overboard and swam ashore in
the dusk, landing fifty yards down stream, out of danger of possible stragglers.
He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his aunt's
back fence. He climbed over, approached the ** ell " and looked in at the
sitting-room window, for a light was burning there. There sat Aunt Polly, Sid,
Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together, talking. They were by the
bed, and the bed was between them and the door. Tom went to the door and
began to softly lift the latch ; then he pressed gently and the door yielded a
crack ; he continued pushing cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked,
till he judged he might squeeze through on his knees ; and so he put his head
through and began, warily.
** What makes the candle blow so ? " said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up,
" Why that door's open, I believe. Why of course it is. No end of strange
things now. Go'long and shut it, Sid. "
Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and " breathed " him-
self for a time» and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.
" But as I was saying, " said Aunt Polly, " he warn't bad^t so to say — only mis-
chievous. Only just giddy, and harum-scarum, you know. He warn't any
more responsible than a colt. He never meant any harm, and he was the best-
hearted boy that ever was " — and she began to cry.
" It was just so with my Joe — always full of his devilment, and up to every
kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be—
9
13©
TOM SAWYER.
and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream,
never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself because it was sour, and I
never to see him again in this world, never, never, never, poor abused boy! "
And Mrs Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.
" I hope Tom's better off where he is, " said Sid, " but if he'd been better in .
some ways —'.'
" Sid I " Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not see it.
" Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone ! God'll take care of iim —
never you trouble yourself, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't know how to give

him up ! I don't know how to give him up ! He was such a comfort to me,
although he tormented my old heart out of me,'most. "
■ The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away. — Blessed be the name ol
the Lord J But it's so hard— Oh, it's so hard I Only last Saturday my Joe
TOM LEARNS THE SITUATION. 13 1
btisted a fire-cracker right under my nose and I knocked him sprawling. Lit-
tle did I know then, how soon — O, if it was to do over again Td hug him and
bless him for it. "
•* Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just expictly
how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took and fiUed
the cat full of Pain-Killer, and I did think the cretur would tear the house
down. And God forgave me, I cracked Tom's head with my thimble, poor.boy,
poor dead boy. But he*s out of all his troubles now. And the last words I
ever heard him say was to reproach — "
But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down.
Tom was snuffling, now, himself — and more in pity of himself than acuy-
body else. He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word for him
from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than ever
before. Still he was sufficiently touched by his aunt'§ grief to long to rush
out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy— and the theatrical gor-
geousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and
lay still.
He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends that it was conjectured
at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim ; then the small
raft had been missed ; next, certain boys said the missing lads had promised
that the village should " hear something " soon ; the wise-heads had " put this
and that together " and decided that the lads had gone off on that raft and
would turn up at the next town below, presently ; but toward noon the raft
had been found, lodged against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below
the village, — and then hope perished; they must be drowned, else hunger
would have driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that
the search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the drown-
ing must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being good swimmers,
would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday night. If the
bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be given over, and the
funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom shuddered.
Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good-night and turned to go. Th|sn with a
132 TOM SA WYER,
mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each other's arms
and had a good, consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly was tender far
beyond her wont, in her good-night to Sid and Mary. Sid snuf9ed a bit and
Mary went off crying with all her heart.
Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly,
and with such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that
he was weltering in tears again, long before she was through.
He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making broken-
hearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and turning over.
But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her sleep. Now the boy stole
out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the candle-light with his hand, and
stood regarding her. His heart was full of pity for her. He took out his syc-
amore scroll and placed it by the candle. But something occurred to him, and
he lingered considering. His face lighted with a happy solution of his thought ;
he put the bark hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded
lips, and straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.
He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large there,
and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless except
that there was a watchman, who always turned in and slept like a graven image.
He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped into it, and was soon rowing cau-
tiously up stream. When he had pulled a mile above the village, he started
quartering across and bent himself stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on
the other side neatly, for this was a familiar bit of work to him. He was
moved to capture the skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and
therefore legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be
made for it and that might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and
entered the wood.
He sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meantime to keep
awake, and then started wearily down the home-stretch. The night was far
spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island
bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river
with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A little later he
TOM REPORTS AT CAMP.
U3
paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and heard Joe say :
" No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back. He won't de^rt. He
knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that sort
of thing. He's up to something or other. Now I wonder what ? "
" Well, the things is ours, anyway, ain't they ? "
" Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't back
here to breakfast. "
" Which he is ! " exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping grandly
into camp.
A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as the
boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his adventures. They
were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the tale was done. Then
Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates
got ready to fish and explore.

■ > ..«:^?^?Jb?^*^':


r all the gang turned
> iit to hunt for turtle eggs on the
bar Theynertabo tpokn^s cks
into the sand and when th y found
a soft place they nent down on their
knees and dug w ! ti e r hands
Somel mes they i ould take fifty or
s xt > e^gs out of one 1 ol They
were perfectl) round white things a
trifle smaller than an English walnut.
They had a famous fried-egg feast
that night, and another on Friday
morning.
After breakfast they went whoop-
ing and prancing out on the bar, and
chased each other round and round,
shedding clothes as they went, until
they were naked, and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal water of the
bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their legs from under them from
.134
A DA Y^S AMUSEMENTS.
135
time to time and greatly increased the fun. And now and then they stooped in a
group and splashed water in each other's faces with their palms, gradually
approaching each other, with averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays and
finally gripping and struggling till the
best man ducked his neighbor, and then
they all went under in a tangle of white
legs and arms and came up blowing
sputtering, laughing and gasping for breath
at one and the same time.
When they were well exhausted, they
would run out and sprawl on the dry, hot
sand, and lie there and cover themselves
up with it, and by and by break for the j-'
water again and go through the original % j

^^
performance once more. Finally it oc
curred to them that their naked skm
represented flesh-colored " tights " very
fairly ; so they drew a ring in the sand and
had a circus — with three clowns in it, for
none would yield this proudest post to
his neighbor. thi pibatke laa hahket
Next they got their marbles and played knucks and rmg taw and keeps "
till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had another swim but Tom
would not venture, because he found that m kicking ofl his trousers he hid kicked
his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped
cramp so long without the protection of this mysterious charm. He did not
venture again until he had found it, and Wy that time the other boys were tired
and ready to rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the " dumps, "
and fell to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay drowsing
in the sun. Tom found himself writing " Becky " in the sand with his big toe ;
he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his weakness. But he wrote it
again, nevertheless ; he could not help it. He erased it once more and then took
13^ TOM SA WYER.
himself out of temptation by driving the other boys together and joining them»
But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so home-
sick that he could hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay very near the
surface. Huck was melancholy, too. Tom was down-hearted, but tried hard not
to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready to tell, yet, but if this muti-
nous depression was not broken up soon, he would have to bring it out. He said^
with a great show of cheerfulness :
" I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys. We'll explore it again.
They've hid treasures here somewhere. How'd you feel to light on a rotten chest
full of gold and silver — hey } "
But it roused only a faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply. Tom
tried one or two other seductions; but they failed, too. It was discouraging
work. Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking very gloomy. Finally
he said :
" O, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lonesome. "
" Oh, no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by, " said Tom. " Just think of the fish*
ing that's here. "
" I don't care for fishing. I want to go home. "
" But Joe, there ain't such another swimming place anywhere. "
" Swimming's no good. I don't seem to care for it, somehow, when'there ain't
anybody to say I shan't go in. I mean to go home. "
" O, shucks ! Baby ! You want to see your mother, I reckon. "
" Yes, Tdo want to see my mother — and you would too, if you had one. I ain't
any more baby than you are. " And Joe snuffled a little.
" Well, we'll let the cry-baby go home to his mother, won't we Huck ? Poor
thing — does it want to see its mother . > And so it shall. You like it here, don*t
you Huck ? We'll stay, won't we ? "
Huck said " Y-e-s " — without any heart in it.
" I'll never speak to you again as long as I live, " said Joe, rising. " There
now ! " And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.
" Who cares ! " said Tom. " Nobody wants you to. Go'long home and get
laughed at. O, you're a nice pirate. Huck and me ain't cry-babies. We'll stay >
TOM REVEALS A SECRET. 137
»
i»
won't we Huck? Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can get along without
him, per'aps. "
But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly on
with his dressing. And then it was discomforting to see Huck eyeing Joe's prepa-
rations so wistfully, and keeping up such an ominous silence. Presently, without
a parting word, Joe began to wade off toward the Illinois shore. Tom's heart began
to sink. He glanced at Huck. Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his
eyes. Then he said :
" I want to go, too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now it^ be
worse. Let's us go too, Tom. "
'* I won't ! You can all go, if you want to. I mea^n to stay.'
" Tom, I better go. "
" Well go'long — who's hendering you.'
Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said :
" Tom, I wisht you'd come too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for you
when we get to shore. "
" Well you'll wait a blame long time, that's all. "
Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a strong
desire ti^gging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too. He hoped the
boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It suddenly dawned on Tom
that it was become very lonely and still. He made one final struggle with his
pride, and then darted after his comrades, yelling :
** Wait ! Wait ! I want to tell you something ! "
They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they were,
he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at last they saw the
" point " he was driving at, and then they set up a war-whoop of applause and
said it was " splendid ! " and said if he had told them at first, they wouldn't have
started away. He made a plausible excuse ; but his real reason had been the
fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very great length of
time, and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.
The lads came gaily back and went at their sports again with a will, chattering
all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the genius of it. After a
gagged a little, but Tom said :
" Why it's just as easy ! If I'd a knowed this was al
•* So would I, " said Joe. " It's just nothing. "
" Why many a time I've looked at people smoking
could do that ; but I never thought I could, " said Toi
" That's just the way with me, hain't it Huck ? Yo
way — haven't you Huck ? I'll leave it to Huck if I ha
" Yes — heaps of times, " said Huck.
" Weill have too, " said Tom; " O, hundreds of
slaughter-house. Don't you remember, Huck? Bo
Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. ]
T)out me saying that ? "
" Yes, that's so, " said Huck. " That was the day
No,'twas the day before. "
" There— I told you so, " said Tom. " Huck recoll <
" I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day, " said Joe
" Neither do I, " said Tom. " / could smoke it s
Thatcher couldn't. "
" Jeff Thatcher ! Why he'd keel over just with two
once. He'd see ! "
" I bet he would. And Johnny Miller — I wish \
THE PIRATES TAKE A LESSOff.
139
" Sb.j — boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're around,
111 come up to you and say'Joe, got a pipe ? I want a smoke,'And youll say,
kind of careless like, as if it wam't anything, you'll say,'Yes, I got my old pipe,
and another one, but my tobacker ain't very good.'And I'll say,'Oh, that's all
right, if it's strong enough.'And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up
jnst as ca'm, and then just see'em look ! "
" By jings that'll be gay, Tom ! I wish it was naiv ! "
" So do I ! And when we tell'em we
learned when we was off pirating, won't
they wish they'd been along ? "
" O, I reckon not ! I'll just liet they
will ! "
So t'le talk ran on. But presently it
began to flag a triHe, and grow disjointed
The silences widened ; the expectoration
marvelously increased. Every pore inside
the boys'cheeks became a spouting fount-
fun; they could scarcely bail out the I
cellars under their tongues fast enough to
prevent an inundation ; little overflowings
down their throats occurred in spite of all
they could do, and sudden retchings ^^
followed every time. Both boys were'
looking very pale and miserable, now, " "
Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless toh looiro pok jois knir.
fingers. Tom's followed. Both fountains were going furiously and both putnpa
bailing with might and main. Joe said feebly :
" I've lost my knife. I reckon I better go and find it. "
Tom said, with quivering lips and halting utterance:
" I'll help you. You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the spring. No,
JTOU needn't come, Huck — we can find it. "
So Huck sat down again, and waited an hoar. Then he found it lonesome,

I40 TOM SA WYER.
and went to find his comrades. They were wide apart in the woods, both very-
pale, both fast asleep. But something informed him that if they had had any
trouble they had got rid of it.
They were not talkative at supper that night. They had a humble look^
and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare theirs^
they said no, they were not feeling very well — something they ate at dinner had
disagreed with them.
About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brooding
oppressiveness m the air that seemed to bode something. The boys huddled
themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of the fire, though
the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was stifling. They sat still, intent
and waiting. The solemn hush continued. Beyond the light of the fire every-
thing was swallowed up in the blackness of darkness. Presently there came a
quivering glow that vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished*
By and by another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint moan,
came sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting breath
upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit of the Night had
gone by. There was a pause. Now a wierd flash turned night into day and
showed every little grass-blade, separate and distinct, that grew about their feet*
And it showed three white, startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went roll-
ing and tumbling down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the
distance. A sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the
flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the forest and an
instant crash followed that seemed to rend the tree-tops right over the boys'heads*
They clung together in terror, in the thick gloom that followed. A few big rain*
drops fell pattering upon the leaves.
" Quick ! boys, go for the tent ! " exclaimed Tom.
They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no two
plunging in the same direction. A furious blast roared through the trees, making
everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after another came, and peal on
peal of deafening thunder. And now a drenching rain poured down and the
rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the ground. The boys cried out to each
A NIGHT SURPRISE.
Other, but the roaring wind and the
booming thunder-blasts drowned their
voices utterly. However one by one
they straggled in at last and took shelter
under the tent, cold, scared, and stream-
ing with water ; but to have company in
misery seemed something to be grateful
for. They could not talk, the old sail
flapped so furiously, even if the other
noises would have allowed them. The
tempest rose higher and higher, and
presently the sail tore loose from its
fastenings and went winging away on
the blast. The boys seized each others'
hands and fled, with many tumblings and
bruises, to the shelter of a great oak that
stood upon the river bank. Now the
battle was at its highest. Under the
ceaseless conflagration of lightning that
flamed in the skies, everything below
stood out in clean-cut and shadowless
distinctness : the bending trees, the bil-
lowy river, white with foam, the drivmg
spray of spume-flakes, the dim outlmes
of the high bluffs on the other side,
glimpsed through the drifting cloud-rack
and theslanting veil of rain. Every httle
while some giant tree yielded the fight
and fell crashing through the younger
growth ; and the unflagging thunder-peals
came now in ear-splitting explosive
bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakably

142 TOM SAWYER.
appalling. The storm culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to
tear the island to pieces, burn it up, drown it to the tree tops, blow it away, and
deafen every creature in it, all at one and the same moment. It was a wild
night for homeless young heads to be out in.
But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and weaker
threaten ings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The boys went back
to camp, a good deal awed ; but they found there was still something to be thank-
ful for, because the great sycamore, the shelter of their beds, was a ruin, now,
blasted by the lightnings, and they were not under it when the catastrophe happened.
Everything in camp was drenched, the camp-fire as well ; for they were but heed-
less lads, like their generation, and had made no provision against rain. Here was
matter for dismay, for they were soaked through and chilled. They were eloquent
in their distress ; but they presently discovered that the fire had eaten so far up
under the great log it had been built against, (where it curved upward and separa-
ted itself from the ground,) that a hand-breadth or so of it had'escaped wetting;
so they patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from the under
sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to bum again. Then they piled on
great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace and were glad-hearted once
more. They dried their boiled ham and had a feast, and after that they sat by
the fire and expanded and glorified their midnight adventure until morning, for
there was not a dry spot to sleep on, anywhere around.
As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them and they
went out on the sand-bar and lay down to sleep. They got scorched out by and
by, and drearily set about getting breakfast. After the meal they felt rusty, and
stiff-jointed, and a little homesick once more. Tom saw the signs, and fell to
cheering up the pirates as well as he could. But they cared nothing for marbles,
or circus, or swimming, or anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret,
and raised a ray of cheer. While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device.
This was to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a change.
They were attracted by this idea; so it was not long before they were stripped, and
striped from head to heel with black- mud, like so many zebras, — all of them
chiefs, of course— and then they went tearing through the woods to attack an
English settlement.
AN INDIAN WAR.
'4i
By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon each other
from ambush with dreadful war-whoops, and killed and scalped each other by
thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one.
They assembled in camp toward supper
time, hungry and happy ; but now a diffi-
culty arose — hostile Indians could not
break the bread of hospitality together
without first making peace, and this was
a simple impossibility without smoking
a pipe of peace. There was no other
process that ever they had heard of. Two
of the savages almost wished they had
remained pirates. However, there was no =
other way ; so with such show of cheerful-
ness as they could muster they called for
the pipe and took their whiff as it passed,
in due form.
And behold they were glad they had
gone into savagery, for they had gained
1 om :ching ; they found that Chey could now
smoke a little without having to go and
hunt for a lost knife ; they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable.
T:iey were not likely to fool away this high promise for lack of effort. No, they
practiced cautiously, after supper, with right fair success, and so they spent a
jubilant evening. They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than
ihey would have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations. We will
leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use for them
at present.

3£chaptir5xvii.

:iSi
there was no hilarity in the lit*
tie town that same tranquil Saturday
afternoon. The Harpers, and Aunt
Polly's family, were being put into
mourning, with great grief and many
tears. An unusual quiet possessed the
village, although it was ordinarily quiet
enough, in all conscience. The vil-
lagers conducted their concerns with
an absent air, and talked little; but
they sighed often. The Saturday hol-
iday seemed a burden to the children,'
They had no heart in their sports, and
gradually gave them up.
In the afternoon Becky Thatcher
found herself moping about the deser-
ted school-house yard, and feeling very
melaacholy. But sbe found nothing there to comfort her. She soliloquised :
** Oh, if I only had his brass andiron-knob again ! But I haven't got any-
thing now to remember him by. " And sbe choked back a little sob.
144
MEMORIES OF THE LOST HEROES. I4S
Presently she stopped, and said to herself:
" It was right here. O, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say that — I
wouldn*t say it for the whole .world. But he's gone now ; I'll never never
never see him any more. "
This thought broke her down and she wandered away, with the tears rolling
down her cheeks. Then quite a group of boys and girls, — playmates of Tom's
and Joe's— came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and talking in
reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so, the last time they saw him, and how
Joe said this and that small trifle (pregnant with awful prophecy, as they could
easily see now !) — and each speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost
lads stood at the time, and then added something like " and I was a standing just
so — just as I am now, and as if you was him — I was as close as that — and he
smiled, just this way — and then something seemed to go all over me, like, — aw-
ful you know — and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I can see now !'*
Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and many
claimed that dismal distinction, and ofifered evidences, more or less tampered
with by the witness; and when it was ultimately decided who did see the
departed last, and exchanged the last words with them, the lucky parties took
upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and were gaped at and envied by
all the rest. One poor chap, who had no other grandeur to ofifer, said with
tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance :
" Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once. "
But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys could say that, and
so that cheapened the distinction too much. The group loitered away, still
recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.
When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell began
to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still Sabbath, and
the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon
nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment in the vestibule to
converse in whispers about the sad event. But there was no whispering in the
house ; only the funereal rustling of dresses as the women gathered to their
seats, disturbed the silence there. None could remember when the little church
10
y
I4 < 5 TOM SAWYER.
had been so full before. There was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumb-
ness, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the
Harper family, all in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister
as well, rose reverently and stood, until the mourners were seated in the front
pew. There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by muffled
sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed. A moving
hymn was sung, and the text followed:''I am the Resurrection and the Life. "
As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces^
the winning ways and the rare promise of the lost lads,, that every soul there»
thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had
persistently blinded himself to them, always before, and had as persistently
seen only faults and flaws in the poor boys. The minister related many a
touching incident in the lives of the departed, too, which illustrated their sweet,
generous natures, and the people could easily see, now, how noble and beauti-
ful those episodes were, and remembered with grief that at the time they
occurred they had seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The
congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till
at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a
chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feelings, and
crying in the pulpit.
There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed ; a moment later the
church door creaked ; the minister raised his streaming eyes above his hand-
kerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then another pair of eyes fol-
lowed the minister's, and then almost with one impulse the congregation rose
and stared while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle, Tom in the lead,
Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of drooping rags, sneaking sheepishly in the rear!
They had been hid in the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon !
Aunt Polly, Mary and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored
ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while poor
Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to do or
where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and started to
slink away, but Tom seized him and said :
" Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck. "
X
\
THE POINT IN TOM'S SECRET.
'47
" And so the)r shall. Fia glad to see him, poor motherless thing ! " And
the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing capable
of making him more uncomfortable than be was before.
Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice : " Praise God from
whom all blessings flow — Sing ! — and put your hearts in it ! "
And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while

psoimnt MOMnri'.
it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the envying
juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest
moment of his life.
As the " sold " congregation trooped out they said they would almost be wil-
ling to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that once more.
Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day — according to Aunt Polly's varying
moods — than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew which
expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.

was Tom's great secret — the
scheme to return home with his brgther
pirates and attend llieir own funerals.
They had paddled over to the Mis-
souri shore on a log, at dusk on Satur-
day, landing five or six miles below the
village; they had slept in the woods at
the edge of the town till nearly daylight,
and had then crept through back laacs
and alleys and finished their sleep in
the gallery of the church among a
chaos of invalided benches.
At breakfast, Monday morning. Aunt
Polly and Mary were very loi-ing to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants.
There was an unusual amount of talk.
In the course of ii Aunt Polly said:
" Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody suffering'most
a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity you could be so haid-beartcd
148

TOM'S FEELINGS INVESTIGA TED. 149
as to let me suffer so. If you could come over on a log to go to your funeral, you
could have come over and give me a hint some way that you wam*t dead^ but only
run off. "
" Yes, you could have done that, Tom, " said Mary ; " and I believe you would
if you had thought of it. "
" Would you Tom ? " said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully. " Say, now,
would you, if you'd thought of it ? "
" I — well I don't know.'T would a spoiled everything. "
" Tom, I hoped you loved me that much, " said Aunt Polly, with a grieved tone
that discomforted the boy. " It would been something if you'd cared enough to
think of it, even if you didn't do it. "
" Now auntie, that ain't any harm, " pleaded Mary ; " it's only Tom's giddy way
— he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything. "
" More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and
done it, too. Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late, and wish you'd
cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so little. "
" Now auntie, you know I do care for you, " said Tom.
" I'd know it better if you acted more like it. "
" I wish now I'd thought, " said Tom, with a repentant tone ; " but I dreamed
about you, anyway. That's something, ain't it .^ "
" It ain't much — a cat does that much — but it's better than nothing. What did
you dream ? "
" Why Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed,
and Sid was sitting by the wood-box, and Mary next to him. "
" Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams could take even
that much trouble about us. "
" And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here. "
" Why, she was here ! Did you dream any more ? "
" O, lots. But it's so dim,'now. "
" Well, try to recollect— can't you ? "
" Some how it seems to me that the wind — the wind Mowed the — the — *'
" Try harder, Tom ! The wind did blow something. Come! "
ISO
TOM SA WYER.
Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then said :
" I've got it now ! I've got it now ! It blowed the candle I "
" Mercy on us ! Go on, Tom — go on ! "

" And it seems to me that you said,'Why I believe that that door —'"
" Go o«, Tom! "
" Justlet me study a moment — just a moment. Oh, yes — you said you believed
the door was open. "
" As I'm a sitting here, I did ! Didn't I, Mary ! Go on ! "
" And then — and then — well I won't be certain, but it seems like as if you made
Sid go and — and — "
" Well ? Well ? What did I make him do, Tom ? What did I make him do ? "
" You made him — you — O, you made him shut it, "
" Well for the land's sake! I never heard the beat of that in all my dasrs!
Don't tell me there ain't anything in dreams, any more. Sereny Harper shall
know of this before I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her get around tkU with
her rubbage " bout superstition. Go on, Tom ! "
" Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I wam't had^
only mischeevous and harum-scarum, and not any more responsible than— than —
I think it was a colt, or something. "
TOM*S WONDERFUL DREAM. 151
" And so it was ! Well, goodness gracious ! Go on, Tom ! " •
" And then you began to cry. "
" So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then — "
''Then Mrs. Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same and she
wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd throwed it out her
own self — "
" Tom ! The sperrit was upon you ! You was a prophecying — that's what you
was doing ! Land alive, go on, Tom ! "
^ " Then Sid he said— he said— "
" I don't think I said anything, " said Sid.
" Yes you did, Sid, " said Mary. . *
" Shut your heads and let Tom go on ! What did he say, Tom ? "
" He said — I think he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if
I'd been better sometimes — "
** There y d'you hear that ! It was his very words ! "
** And you shut him up sharp. "
" I lay I did ! There must a been an angel there. There was an angel there,
somewheres ! "
** And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a fire-cracker, and you told
about Peter and the Pain-killer — "
" Just as true as I live ! "
" And then there was a whole lot of talk'bout dragging the river for us, and
•bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss Harper hugged and
cried, and she went. "
•* It happened just so ] It happened just so, as sure as I'm a sitting in these
very tracks. Tom you couldn't told it more like, if you'd a seen it ! And then
what ? Go on, Tom } "
" Then I thought you prayed for me — and I could see you and hear every word
you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry, that I took and wrote on a
piece of sycamore bark, * We ain'/ dead — we are only off being pirates^* and put it
on the table by the candle ; and then you looked so good, laying there asleep, that
I thought I went and leaned over and kissed you on the lips. "
»5«
TOM SA WYES.
" Did you, Tom, diV you ! I just forgive you everything for that! " And she
siezed the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest of
villains.
" It was very kind, even though it was only a — dream, " Sid soliloquised just
audibly.
" Shut up Sid ! A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he was
awake. Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you Tom, if you was ever
found again — now go'long to school. I'm thankful to the good God and Father
of us all I've got you back, that's long-suffering and merciful to them that believe
on Him and keep His word, though goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if
only the worthy ones got His blessings and had His hand to help them over the
rough places, there's few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest
when the long night comes. Go long Sid, Mary, Tom — take yourselves off — .
I you've hendered me long enough, "
The children left for school, and the old
lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish
het realism with Tom's marvelous dream.
Sid had better judgment than to utter the
I thought that was in his mind as he left the
house. It was this : " Pretty thin — as long
a dream as that, without any mistakes in it ! "
What a hero Tom was become, now !
He did not go skipping and prancing, but
moved with a dignified swagger as became a
pirate who felt that the public eye was on
him. And indeed it was ; he tried not to
seem to sec the looks or hear the remarks
as he passed along, but they were food and
drink to him. Smaller boys than himself
flocked at his heels, as proud to be seen
with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the drummer at the head of
a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into town. Boys of his own

BECKY THATCHER OVERSHADOWED. 15S
size pretended not to know he had been away at all ; < but they were consuming
with envy, nevertheless. They would have given anything to have that swarthy
sun-tanned skin of his, and his glittering notoriety ; and Tom would not have
parted with either for a cirpus.
At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and delivered such
eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not long in becoming
insufferably " stuck-up. " They began to tell their adventures to hungry listeners
—but they only began ; it was not a thing likely to have an end, with imaginations
like theirs to furnish material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and
went serenely puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.
Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory
was sufficient. He would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished, maybe
she would be wanting to " make up, " Well, let her — she should see that he could
be as indifferent as some other people. Presently she arrived. Tom pretended
not to see her. He moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and began
to talk. Soon he observed that she was tripping gayly back and forth with flushed
face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing school-mates, and screaming
with laughter when she made a capture ; but he noticed that she always made her
captures in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction
at such times, too. It gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him ; and so,
instead of winning him it only " set him up " the more and made him the more
diligent to avoid betraying that he knew she was about. Presently she gave over
skylarking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing
furtively and wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that now Tom was talk-
ing more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp
pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once. She tried to go away, but her
feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She said to a girl
almost at Tom's elbow — with sham vivacity :
" Why Mary Austin ! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday-school ? "
" I did come — didn't you see me ? "
" Why no ! Did you ? Where did you sit I
**I was in Miss Peter's class, where I always go. I ssi^you**
> S4
TOM SA WYER.
" Did you ? Why it's funny I didn't see you, I wanted to tell you about the
pic-nic. "
" O, that's jolly. Who's going to give it? "
" My ma's going to let me have one. "
" O, goody; I hope she'll let mt come. "
" Well she will. The pic-nic's for me. Shell let anybody come that I want,
and I want you. "
" That's ever so nice. When is it going to be? "
" By and by. Maybe about vacation. "
" O, won't it be fun ! You going to have
all the girls and boys ? "
" Yes, every one that's friends to me —
or wants to be; " and she glanced ever so
furtively at Tom, but he talked right along
to Amy Lawrence about the terrible stonn
on the island, and how the lightning tore
tlie great sycamore tree " all to flinders "
while he was " standing within three feet of

" 0, may I come ? " said Grade Miller.
" Yes. "
" And me ? " said Sally Rogers.
" Yes. "
" And me, too? " said Susy Harper. " And
Joe? "
" Yes. "
And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged for
invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still talking, and
took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes; she
hid these signs with a forced gayety and went on chattering, but the life had gone
out of the pic-nic, now, and out of everything else ; she got away as soon as she
could and hid herself and had what her sex call " a good cry. " Then she sat
TOM BECOMES JEALOUS.
ISS
moody, with wounded pride till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vin-
dictive cast in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew
what slWd do.
At recess Tom continued bis flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction.
And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with the performance.
At last he spied her, but there was a
sudden falling of his mercury. She was
sitting cosily on a little bench behind the
school-house looking at a picture book
with Alfred Temple — and so absorbed
were they, and their heads so close to
gether over the book that they did not
seem to be conscious of anything in the
world besides. Jealousy ran red hot
through Tom's veins. He began to hate
himself for throwing away the chance
Becky had ofl'ered for a reconciliation.
Me called himself a fool, and all the hard ^ ^M'^
names he could think of. He wanted to
cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily
along, as they walked, for her heart was
singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its
function. He did not hear what Amy bicct bstalutxb.
was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he could only stammer as
awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as otherwise. He kept drifting to
the rear of the school-house, again and again, to scar his eye-balls with the hate-
ful spectacle there. He could not help it. And it maddened him to see, as he
thought he saw, that Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in
the land of the living. But she did see, nevertheless ; and she knew she was
winning her fight, too, and was glad to see him sufl'er as she bad suffered.
Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he bad to attend
to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. But in vain— the girl

156
TOM SA WYES.
chirped on. Tom thought, " hang her, ain't I ever going to get rid of bet? "
At last he must be attending to those things — and she said artlessly that she would
be " axound " when school let out. And he hastened away, hating her for it.
" Any other boy! " Tom thought, grating his teeth. " Any boy in the whole
town but that Saint Louis sm arty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy t
0, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw this town, mister, and III lick
you again! You Just wait till I catch you out! I'll just take and — "
And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy — pummeling
the air, and kicking and gouging. " Oh, you do, do you ? You holler'nough, do
you ? Now, then, let that learn you ! " And so the imaginary flogging was
finished to his satisfaction.
Tom fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's
grateful happiness, and his jealousy could
bear no more of the other distress. Becky
resumedher picture-inspections with Alfred,
but as the minutes dragged along and no
Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to
cloud and she lost interest; gravity and
absent-mindedness followed, and then mel-
ancholy; two or three times she pricked
up her ear at a footstep, but it was a
false hope; no Tom came. At last she
grew entirely miserable and wished she
hadn't carried it so far. When poor Alfred,
seeing that he was losing her, he did not
know how, and kept exclaiming : " here's
a jolly one ! look at this ! " she lost pa-
tience at last, and said, " Oh, don't bother
me ! I don't care for them ! " and burst
A suDDSH nosT. into tears, and got up and walked away.
Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she said-
" Go away and leave me alone, can't you I I hate you 1 "

BLACK REVENGE.
^57
So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done — for she had said she
would look at pictures all through the nooning— and she walked on, crying.
Then Alfred went musing into the deserted schooUhouse. He was humiliated
and angry. He easily guessed his way to the truth — the girl hatl simply made a-
convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer. He was far from hating
Tom the less when this thought occurred
to him. He wished there was some way to
get that boy into trouble without much nsk
to himself. Tom's spelling bookfellunder
his eye. Here was his opportunity He
gratefully opened to the lesson for the
afternoon and poured ink upon the page
Becky, glancing in at a window behind
him at the moment, saw the act and
moved on, without discovering herself
She started homeward, now, intendmg to
find Tom and tell him ; Tom would be
thankful and their troubles would be
healed. Before she was half way home ffS
however, she had changed her mind The
thought of Tom's treatment of her when
she was talking about her pic-nic came
scorching back and filled her with shame She resolved to let him get whipped
on the damaged spelling-book's account, and to hate him forever, into the
bargain.


TOM TELLS THE TRUTH, 159
This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely looked mean
and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of anything to say
for a moment. Then he said :
** Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it — but I didn't think. "
** O, child you never think. You never think of anything but your own
selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from Jackson's
island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could think to fool me
with a lie about a dream ; but you couldn't ever think to pity us and save us
from sorrow. "
''Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean. I didn't,
honest. And besides I didn't come over here to laugh at you that night. "
*'What did you come for, then 1 "
''It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got
drowned. "
" Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world if I could
believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never did —
and / know it, Tom. "
" Indeed and'deed I did, auntie — I wish I may never stir if I didn't. "
" O, Tom, don\ lie — don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times
worse. "
*'It ain't a lie, auntie, it's the truth. I wanted to keep you from grieving—
that was all that made me come. "
** I'd give the whole world to believe that — it would cover up a power of sins
Tom. I'd'most be glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it aint reason-
able ; because, why didn't you tell me, child ? "
" Why, you see, auntie, when you got to talking about the funeral, I just got
all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the churchy and I couldn't
somehow bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my pocket and kept
mum. "
" What bark ? "
'" The bark I had wrote on to tell you we*d gone pirating. Iwish,now»
you'd waked up when 1 kissed you — I do, honest. "
i6o
TOM SA WYER.
The hard lines ia his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned
in her eyes.
" Did yon kiss me, Tom? "
" Why yes I did. "
" Are you sure you did, Tom ? "
" Why yes I did, auntie — certain sure. "
" What did you kiss me for, Tom ? "
" Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so sorry. "
The Words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in her
voice when she said :
" Kiss me again, Tom! — and be off with you to school, now, and don't bother
me any more. "
The moment he was gone, she ran to a
closet and got out the ruin of a jacket
which Tom had gone pirating in. Then
she stopped, with it in her band, and said
to herself:
No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon
he s lied about it — but it's a blessed,
blessed lie, there's such comfort come
from It I hope the Lord — I know the
Lord will forgive him, because it was such
goodheartedness in him to tell it. But I
don t want to find out it's a lie. I won't
look "
She put the jacket away, and stood by
musing a minute. Twice she put out her
liand to take the gannent again, and twice
she refrained. Once more she ventured,
and this time she fortified herself with the thought : " It's a good lie — lit's a
good lie— I won't let it grieve me. " So she sought the jacket pocket. A
moment later she was reading Tom's piece of bark through flowing tears and
saying : " I could forgive the boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins ! "


■ was something about Aunt Polly'i
manner, when she kissed Tom,
that swept away his low spirits and made
him light-hearted and happy again. He
started to school and had the luck of
; coming upon Becky Thatcher at the
1 head of Meadow Lane. His mood al-
i determined his manner. Without
L a moment's hesitation he ran to her and
fj said :
" I acted mighty mean to-day, Becky,
! and I'm so sorry. I won't ever, ever do
that way again, as long as ever I live-
please make up, won't you.'"
1 stopp < .-d and looked him sconi-
'" ^ fully la the face:
" ni thank you to keep yourself ia yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer. Ill never
speak to you again. "
II i6i
X62 TOM SAWYER.
She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not
even presence of mind enough to say " Who cares, Miss Smarty.? " until the right
time to say it had gone by. So he said nothing. But he was in a fine rage',
nevertheless. He moped into the school-yard wishing she were a boy, and
imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He presently encountered her
and delivered a stinging remark as he passed. She hurled one in return, and the
angry breach was complete. It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she
could hardly wait for school to *'take in, " she was so impatient to see Tom flogged
for the injured spelling-book. If she had had any lingering notion of exposing
Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.
Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself. The
master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied ambition. The
darling of his desires was, to be a doctor, but poverty had decreed that he should
be nothing higher than a village schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious
book out of his desk and absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were
reciting. He kept that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in
school but was perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came.
Every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of that book ; but no two theo-
ries were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case Now, as
Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she noticed that the
key was in the lock ! It was a precious moment. She glanced around ; found
herself alone, and the next instant she had the book in her hands. The title-page
— Professor somebody's " Anatomy " — carried no information to her mind ; so she
began to turn the leaves. She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and
colored frontispiece — a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow
fell on the page and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door, and caught a glimpse of
the picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck to tear
the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust the volume into the desk,
turned the key, and burst out crying with shame and vexation.
" Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a person and
look at what they're looking at. "
*^ How could / know you was looking at anything ?
»f
BECKY IN A DILEMMA.
i«3
'fr -■
'1 **, < ?;
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself Tom Sawyer ; you know you're going to
tell on me, and O, what shall I do, what shall I do I I'll be whipped, and I never
was whipped in school "
Then she stamped her little foot and
said:
" Se so mean if you want to I / know
something that's going to happen. You
just wait and you'll see ! Hateful, hateful,
hateful I " — and she flung out of the house
with a new explosion of crying,
Tom stood still, rather flustered by this
onslaught. Presently he said to himself
" What a curious kind of a fool a girl is
Never been licked in school! Shucks
What's a licking! That's just like a girl
— they're so thin-skinned and chicken
hearted. Well, of course / ain't going to
tell old Dobbins on this little fool, because
there's other ways of getting even on her, oidoht ih tm act
that ain't so mean; but what of it? Old Dobbins will ask who it was tore his
book. Nobody'U answer. Then he'll do just the way he always does — ask first
one and then t'other, and when he comes to the right girl he'll know it, without
any telling. Girl's faces always tell on them. They ain't got any back-bone.
Shell get licked. Well, it's a kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because
there ain't any way out of it. " Tom conned the thing a moment longer and then
added : " All right, though ; she'd like to see me in just such a fix— let her sweat
it out ! "
Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few moments the
master arrived and school " took in. " Tom did not feel a strong interest in his
studies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls'side of the room Becky's face
troubled him. Considering all things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was
all he could do to help it. He could get up no exultation that was really worthy

164 TOM SA WYER.
the name. Presently the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom*s mind
was entirely full of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused up
from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings. She
did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he spilt the
ink on the book himself; and she was right. The denial only seemed to make
the thing worse for Tom. Becky supposed she would be glad of that, and she
tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she was not certain. When the
worst came to the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple,
but she made an effort and forced herself to keep still — because, said she to her-
self, " he'll tell about me tearing the picture sure, I wouldn't say a word, not
to save his life ! "
Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all broken-hearted,
for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the spell-
ing-book himself, in some skylarking bout — he had denied it for form's sake and
because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from principle.
A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his throne, the air was
drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up,
yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book, but seemed undecided
whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but
there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes. Mr.
Dobbins fingered his book absently for a while, then took it out and settled him-
self in his chair to read ! Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted
and helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun leveled at its head. Instantly he
forgot his quarrel with her. Quick — something must be done ! done in a flash,
too ! But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention. Good !
— he had an inspiration ! He would run and snatch the book, spring through the
door and fly. But his resolution shook for one little instant, and the chance was
lost — the master opened the volume. If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back
again ! Too late. There was no help for Becky now, he said. The next moment
the master faced the school. Every eye sunk under his gaze. There was that in
it which smote even the innocent with fear. There was silence while one might
count ten, the master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke :
TOM'S NOBILITY ASSERTS ITSELF.
■65
" Who tore this book ? "
There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The stiDness con-
tiDued ; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.
" Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this hook ? "
A denial Another pause.
" Joseph Harper, did you? "
Another dental Tom s uneasiness grew more and more intense under the slow
torture of these proceedings. The master
scanned the ranks of boys— considered
a while, then turned to the girls :
" Amy Lawrence ? "
A shake of the bead.
" Gracie Miller? "
The same sign.
" Susan Harper, did you do this ? "
Another negative. The next girl was
Becky Thatcher, Tom was trembling
from head to foot with excitement and a
sense of the hopelessness of the situation,
" Rebecca Thatcher, " [Tom glanced at
her face — it was white with terror,] — " did
you tear — no, look mc in the face " — [her
hands rose in appeal] — " did you tear
this book ? "
A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his feet'
and shouted — " / done it ! "
The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a moment,
to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward to go to his
punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone upon him out of
poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a bundred floggings. Inspired by the
splendor of his own act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that
even Mr. Dobbins had ever administered ; and also received with indifTerence the

t66
rojif SAtyysx.
sdded cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed
— ^or he knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and not
count the tedious time as loss, either.
Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple ; for with
shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery;
but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to pleasanter musings,
aod he fell asleep at last, with Becky's latest words lingering dreamily in his ear—
" Tom, how emtid you be so noble • "


TOM. DECLAtWi..
was approaching. The
schoolmaster, always severe, grew
severer and more exacting llian
e\er, for he wanted the school to
make a good showing on " Ex-
amination " day. His rod and his
ferule were seldom idle now — at
leist among the smaller pupils.
Only the biggest boys, and young
ladies of eighteen and twenty
escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins's
Hshings were very vigorous ones,
too ; for although he carried, under
hi'i wig, a perfectly bald and shiny
head, he had only reached middle
age and there was no sign of
feebleness in his muscle. As the
great day approached, all the
tyranny that was in hira came to the surface, he seemed to take a vindictive
pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings. The consequence was, that the
167
x68
TOM SAWYER.
smaller bo^s spent their days in terror and suffering and their nights in plot-
ting revenge. They threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief.
But he kept ahead all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful
success was so sweeping and majestic that the boys always retired from the
field badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit upon a plan that
promised a dazzling victory. They swore-in the sign-painter's boy, told bim
the scheme, and asked bis help. He had his own reasons for being delighted,
for the master boarded in his father's family and had given the boy ample

cause to hate him. The master's wife would go on a visit to the country iib a
few days, and there would be nothing to interfere with the plan ; the master
always prepared himself for great occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and
the si^-painter's boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper con-
dition on Examination Evening he would " manage the thing " while he napped
YOUTHFUL ELOQUENCE. 169
in his chair ; then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried
away to school.
In the fullness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in the
evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted^ and adorned with wreaths and
festoons of foliage and flowers. The master sat throned in his great chair
upon a raised platform^ with his blackboard behind him. He was looking
tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and six rows in front
of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town and by the parents pf the
pupils. To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary plat-
form upon which were seated the scholars who were to take part in the exer-
cises of the evening; rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable
state of discomfort ; rows of gawky big boys ; snow-banks of girls and young
ladies clad in lawn and muslin and conspiciously conscious of their bare arms,
their grandmothers'ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and the
flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with non-partici-
pating scholars.
The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited,
" YouM scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage, etc " —
accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which
a machine might have used — supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order.
But he got through safely, though cruelly scared, and got. a fine_round of
applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.
A little shame-faced girl lisped *'Mary had a little lamb, etc., " performed a
compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and sat down, flushed
and happy.
Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into the
unquenchable and indestructible " Give me liberty or give me death " speech,
with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the middle of it.
A ghastly stage-fright siezed him, his legs quaked under him and he was like
to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house — but he had the
house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy. The master
frowned, and this completed the disaster;. Tom struggled a while and then
170
TOM SAWYER.
retired, utterly defeated. There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died
early.
" The Boy stood oa the Burning Deck " followed; also " The Assyrian Came
Down, " and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises, and
a spelling fight. The meager Latin class recited with honor. The prime

feature of the evening was in order, now^^riginal " compositions " by the
young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform,
cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with dainty ribbon), and pro-
ceeded to read, with labored attention to " expression " and punctuation. The
themes were the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by
their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all their ances-
tors in the female line clear back to the Crusades. " Friendship " was one ;
" Memories of Other Days; " " Religion in History; " " Dream Land; " " The
Advantages of Culture; " " Forms of Political Government Compared and
COMPOSITIONS BY THE YOUNG LADIES. 17 1
Contrasted ; " " Melancholy ; " " Filial Love ; " " Heart Longings, " etc., etc.
A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melan-
choly ; another was a wasteful and opulent g^sh of ^'fine language ; " another
was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly prized words and phrases
until they were worn entirely out; and a peculiarity that conspicuously
marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon that
wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of them. No matter
what the subject might be, a brain-racking efifort was made to squirm it into
some aspect or other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate
with edification. The glaring insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to
compass the banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient
to-day ; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps. There is
no school in all our land where the yoiing ladies do not feel obliged to close
their compositions with a sermom ; and you will find that the sermon of the
most frivolous and least religious girl in the school is always the longest and the
most relentlessly pious. But enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.
Let us return to the ^^ Examination. " The first composition that was read
was one entitled^'Is this, then, Life? " Perhaps the reader can endure an
extract from it :
" In the common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look
forward to some anticipated scene of festivity ! Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures
of joy. In fancy, the voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng,'the
observed of all observers.'Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through the
mazes of the joyous dance ; her eye is brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.
" In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance
into the elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams. How fairy-like does every thing
appear to her enchanted vision ! each new scene is more charming than the last. But after a while
she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity : the flattery which once charmed her soul,
now grates harshly upon her ear ; the ball-room has lost its charms ; and with wasted health and
imbittered heart, she turns ajvay with the conviction that earthly pleasures cannot satisfy the
longings of the soul ! "
And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratification from time to time
during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of " How sweet ! "
** How eloquent ! " " So true ! " etc., and after the thing had closed with a
peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic.
172 TOM SAWYER,
Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the *'interesting " pale-
ness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a'* poem. " Two stanzas of
it will do :
A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA.
Alabama, good-bye ! I loye thee well !
But yet for awhile do I leave thee now !
Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell,
And burning recollections throng my brow !
For I have wandered through thy flowery woods ;
Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream ;
Have listened to Tallassee's warring floods,
And wooed on Coosa's side Aurora's beam.
Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-fuU heart.
Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes ;
'Tis from no stranger land I now must part,
'Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs.
Welcome and home were mine within this State,
Whose vales I leave — whose spires fade fast from me :
And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and tete.
When, dear Alabama ! they turn cold on thee 1
There were very few there who knew what " tSte " meant, but the poem was
very satisfactory, nevertheless.
Next appeared a dark complexioned, black eyed, black haired young lady,
who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression and began to
read in a measured, solemn tone.
A VISION.
Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne on high not a single star quivered ; but
the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear ; whilst the terrific
lightning revelled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to scorn the
power exerted over its terror by the illustrious Franklin ! Even the boisterous winds unanimously
came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness
of the scene.
At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for human sympathy my very spirit sighed ; but instead
thereof,
** My dearett friend, my coanMllor, my comforter and guide—
Ify Joy In grief, my leeond bllM in Joy,** came to my side.
She moTed like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by the
A LENGTHY VISION.
173
Dtic and young, a quMD of be & uty unadorned save hy Her own transcendent loveliness. So
soft was heT step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted bj'her
genial touch, as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided awaf DuperceJved — unsought.
A sinuige sadncM rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December, as she
pointed to the contending elements without, and bade me contemplate the two beings presented.
This nightmare occupied some tea pages of manuscript and wound up with
a sermon so destructive of all hope to pon-Presbyterians that it took the first

prize. This composition was considered to be the very finest effort o^ the
evening. The mayor of the village, in delivering the prize to the author of it,
made a warm speech in which he said that it was by far the most " eloquent "
thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster himself might well be
proud of it.
It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in which
the word " beauteous " was over-fondled, and human experience referred to as
" life's page, " was up to the usual average.
174
TOM SAWYER.
Now the master, mellow almost to the
verge of geniality, put his chair aside,
turned his back to the audience, and
began to draw a map of Amenca on the
blackboard, to exercise the geography
class upon. But he made a sad business
of it with bis unsteady hand, and a
smothered titter rippled over the house.
He knew what the matter was and set
himself to right it. He sponged out
lines and re-made them; but he only
distorted them more than ever, and the
tittering was more pronounced He
threw his entire attention upon his work,
now, as if determined not to be put down
by the mirth. He felt that all eyes were
fastened upon him ; he imagined he was
succeeding, and yet the tittering con-
tinued; it even manifestly increased.
And well it might. There was a. garret
atK > ve, pierced with a scuttle over his
head; and down through this scuttle
came a cat, suspended around the
haunches by a string; she had a rag
tied about her head and jaws to keep
her from mewing ; as she slowly de-
scended she curved upward and clawed
at the string, she swung downward and
clawed at the intangible air. The titter,
ing rose higher and higher — the cat was
within six Inches of the absorbed teacher's
head — down, down, a little lower, and

THE SOYS'VENGEANCE SATISFIED.
> 7S
she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it and was snatched
up into the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession ! And
how the light did blaze abroad from the master's bald pate — for the sign-
painter's boy had gilded it!
That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.
Non. — The prelended " compasitioos " quoted in this chapter are taken without alteration from
• votome entitled " Prose and Poetry, hj a. Western Lady " — but they are exactly and preciKly
kfter the school-girl pattern and hence are much happier than any mere imitations could be.



Thi Cknix.
i!iat up — gave
fixed his hopes
joined the new order of Cadets
of Temperance, being attracted by
the showy character of their " regalia. "
He ptomiaed to abstain from smoking,
chewing and profanity as longas he re-
mained a member. Now he found out
thing — namely, that to promise
not to do a thing is the surest way in
the world to make a body want to go
and do that very thing. Tom soon
found himself tormented with a desire
to drink and swear; the desire grew
to be so intense that nothing but the
hope of a chance to display himself
in his red sash kept him from with-
drawing from the order. Fourth of
July was < :oniingi but he sooa gave
it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours — and
upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was apparently
176
TOM'S CONFIDENCE BE TEA YED.
177
on his death < bed and would have a big public funeral, since he was so high an
official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned about the Judge's con-
dition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his hopes ran high — 50 high that he
would venture to get out his regalia and practice before the loolcing-glass. But
the Judge had a most discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced
upon the mend— and then convalescent. Tom was disgusted ; and felt a sense of
injury, too. He handed in bis resignation at once — and that night the Judge

suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would never trust a man like
that again.
The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated to kill
the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however — there was
something in that. He could drink and swear, now — but found to his surprise
178
TOM SA IVYES.
that he did not want to. The simple fact that he could, took the desire away,
and the charm of it.
Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to
hang a little heavily on his hands.
He attempted a diary — but nothing happened during three days, and so he
abandoned it.
The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a sensation.
Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days.
Even'the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there
was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in the world (as Tom
supposed) Mr. Benton, an actual United Stales Senator, proved an overwhelming
disappointment — for he was not twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the
neighborhood of it.
A circus came. The boys played circus
for three days afterward in tents made of
rag carpeting — admission, three pins for
boys, two for girls— and then circusing was
abandoned. .
A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came
— and went again and left the village duller
and drearier than ever.
There were some boys-and-girls'parties,
ff'l'" "'/ but they were so few and so delightful that
[|Jl__ 1 they only made the aching voids between "
,„ ache the harder.
illl, , -^f. : , Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constan-
'-, tinople home to stay with her parents during
£^'vacation — so there was no bright side to life
KsjoTiNu THE viOiTioN. anywhcre.
The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very cancer
for permanency and pain.

TOM EXPECTS SIGNAL PUNISHMENT 179
Then came the measles.
During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its happen-
ings. He was very ill, he was interested in nothing. When he got upon his feet
at last and moved feebly down town, a melancholy change had come over every-
thing and every creature. There had been a " revival, " and everybody had " got
religion, " not only the adults, but even the boys and girls.- Tom went about,
hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointn\ent
crossed him everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and
turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and
found him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis,
who called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning.
Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression ; and when, in
desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was
received with a scriptural quotation, his heart broke and he crept home and to
bed realizing that he alone of all the town was lost, forever and forever.
And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful claps of
thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his head with the bed-
clothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for he had not the
shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him. He believed he had
taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance and
that this was the result. It might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and am-
munition to kill a bug with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incon-
gruous about the getting up such an expensive thunder storm as this to knock
the turf from under an insect like himself.
By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object.
The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform. His second was to wait
— for there might not be any more storms.
The next day the doctors were back ; Tom had relapsed.'The three weeks he
spent on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad at last he
was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his
estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted listlessly down the
iSo
TOM SA WYER.
Street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile court that was trying a
cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and
Huck Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon. Poor lads ! they — like Tom — had
suffered a relapse.


list the sleepy Ttmosphere »aS
stirred — and vigorously the murder
trial came on in the court It be-
came the absorbing topic of Milage
talk immediately Tom could not
get away from it Every reference
to the murder sent a shudder to his
heart, for his troubled conscience
and fears almost persuaded him that
these remarks were put forth in his
hearing as " feelers ; " he did not see
how he could be suspected of know-
ing anything about the murder, but
still he could not be comfortable in
the midst of this gossip. It kept
^ ^___ ^™'" ^ ^°''-'shiver all the time.
THEJuDGe'^'v- S^^^S^WB^^w^y He took Iluck to a lonely place tO'
have a talk with him. It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little
while; to divide his burden of distress with another suiTerer. Moreover, he
wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.
l82 TOM SAWYER,
»f
" Huck, have you ever told anybody about — that? "
< " Boutwhat? "
" You know what. "
" Oh—'course I haven't. "
" Never a word } "
" Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?
" Well, I wasafeard. "
" Why Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that get found out
You know that. "
Tom felt more comfortable. After a pause :
" Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they ? "
" Get me to tell? Why if I wanted that half-breed devil to drownd me they
could get me to tdl. They ain't no different way. "
" Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep mum.
But let's swear again, anyway. It's more surer. "
" I'm agreed. "
So they swore again with dread solemnities.
" What is the talk around, Huck ? I've heard a power of it. "
" Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muflf Potter, Muflf Potter all the time.
It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers. "
" That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him, sometimes? "
" Most always — most always. He ain't no account; but then he hain't ever
done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little, to get money to get drunk
on — and loafs around considerable ; but lord we all do that — leastways most of
us, — preachers and such like. But he's kind of good — he give me half a fish,
once, when there warn't enough for two; and lots of times he's kind of stood
by me when I was out of luck. "
" Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my line. I
wish we could get him out of there. "
" My ! we couldn't get him out Tom. And besides,'twouldn't do amy good ;
they'd ketch him again. "
OLD MUFF*S FRIENDS, 1 83
'* Yes — SO they would. But I hate to hear'em abuse him so like the dickens
when he never done — that. "
^'I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear'em say he's the bloodiest looking villain in
this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before. "
^'Yes, they talk like that, all the time. I've heard'em say that if he was to
get free they'd lynch him. "
" And they'd do it, too. "
The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the twi-
light drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood of the
little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that something would hap-
pen that might clear away their difficulties. But nothing happened ; there
seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in this luckless captive.
The boys did as they had often done before — went to the cell grating and
gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor and
there were no guards.
His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences before — it
cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt cowardly and treacherous to the last
degree when Potter said :
** You've been mighty good to me, boys — better'n anybody else in this town.
And I don't forget it, I don't. Often I says to myself, says I,'I used to mend
all the boys'kites and things, and show'em where the good fishin'places was,
and befriend'em what I could, and now they've all forgot old Mufif when he's
in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck don't — M^ don't forget him,'says I,
^and I don't forget them.'Well, boys, I done an awful thing — drunk and crazy
at the time — that's the only way I account for it — and now I got to swing for
it, and it's right. Right, and best^ too I reckon — hope so, anyway. Well, we
won't talk about that. I don't want to make ^^^^^ feel bad; you've befriended
me. But what I want to say, is, don't ^'^w ever get drunk — then yoil won't ever
get here. Stand a little furder west — so — that's it ; it's a prime comfort to see
faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of trouble, and there don't
none come here but yourn. Good friendly faces — good friendly faces. Git
up on one another's backs and let me touch'em. That's it. Shake hands—
TOJf SAIVVEX.

yourn'U come through the bars, but mine's
too big. Little bands, and weak — but
they've helped Muff Potter a power, and
they'd help him more if they could. "
Tom went borne miserable, and bis
dreams that night were full of horrors.
The next day and the day after, he hung
about the court room, drawn by an almost
irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing
himself to stay out. Huck was having
the same experience. They studiously
avoided each other. Each wandered away,
from time to time, but the same dismal
fascination always brought them back
presently. Tom kept his ears open when
idlers sauntered out of the court room,
but invariably heard distressing news —
the toils were closing more and more re*
lentlessly around poor Potter. At the
end of the second day the village talk was
to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence
stood firm and unshaken, and that there
was not the slightest question as to what
the jury's verdict would be.
Tom was out late, that night, and came
to bed through the window. He was in
a tremendous state of excitement. It was
hours before he got to sleep. All the
village floclced to the Court house the
next morning, for this was to bc the great
day. Both sexes were about equally rep-
resented in the packed audience. Afler
MUFF POTTER IN COURT, 185
a long wait the jury filed in and took their places; shortly afterward. Potter^
pale and haggard, timid and hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him^
and seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him ; no less conspicuous
was Injun Joe, stolid as ever. There was another pause, and then the judge
arrived and the sherifif proclaimed the opening of the court. The usual whis-
perings among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed. These
details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation
that was as impressive as it was fascinating.
Now a witness was called who testified that he found Mufif Potter washing
in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder was discovered^ ,
and that he immediately sneaked away. After some further questioning, coun-
sel for the prosecution said —
" Take the witness. "
The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when his
own counsel said —
" I have no questions to ask him.*'
The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse. Counsel
for the prosecution said :
** Take the witness. "
** I have no questions to ask him, " Potter's lawyer replied.
A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.
" Take the witness. "
Counsel for Potter declined to question him. The faces of the audience
began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney mean to throw away his client's
life without an effort ?
Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when brought
to the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the stand without
being cross-questioned.
Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the graveyard
upon that morning which all present remembered so well, was brought out by
credible witnesses, but none of them yrere cross-examined by Potter's lawyer.
The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs
TOM SA fVYER.
r/'
and provoked a reproof from the bench. Counsel for the prosecution now
said:
" By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we have
fastened this awful crime beyond all possibility of question, upon the unhappy
prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here. "
A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his ^e in his hands and
rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the courts
room. Many men were moved, and many women's compassion testified itself
in tears. Counsel for the defence rose and said:
" Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we foreshadowed
our purpose to prove that our client did
this fearful deed while under the influence
of a blind and irresponsible delirium
produced by drink. We have changed
our mmd We shall not offer that plea. "
[Then to the clerk]: " Call Thomas
Sawyer'"
A puzzled amazement awoke in every
face m the house, not even excepting
Potter's. Every eye fastened itself with
wondering interest upon Tom as he rose
and took his place upon the stand. The
boy looked wild enough, for he was badly
scared. The oath was administered.
" Thomas Sawyer, where were you on
the seventeenth of June, about the hour
TOM miss. of midnight ? "
Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him. The audi-
ence listened breathless, but the words refused to come. After a few moments,
however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and managed to put enoi^h
of \% into his voice to make part of the house hear :
•* In the graveyard ! "

\^^
m:M
MUFF POTTER SA VED, 3c87
4C
" A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were — "
" In the graveyard. "
A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.
•• Were you anywhere near Horse Williams's grave ? "
Yes, sir. "
Speak up — just a trifle louder. How near were you ? **
Near as I am to you. "
** Were you hidden, or not?'*
**Iwashid. "
*« Where .^ "
** Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave. "
Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.
** Any one with you ?'*
" Yes, sir. I went there with — "
" Wait — wait a moment. Nevermind mentioning your companion's name.
We will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there with
you. "
Tom hesitated and looked confused.
" Speak out my boy — don't be diffident. The truth is always respectable.
What did you take there ? "
" Only a — a — dead cat. "
There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.
" We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now my boy, tell us everything
that occurred — tell it in your own way — don't skip anything, and don't be
afraid. "
Tom began — hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his words
flowed more and more easily ; in a little while every sound ceased but his own
voice ; every eye fixed itself upon him ; with parted lips and bated breath the
audience hung upon his words, taking no note of time, rapt in the ghastly fas-
cinations of the tale. The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when
the boy said —
" — and as the doctor fetched the board around and Mufif Potter fell^ Injun
Joe jumped with the knife and — "
TOM SA WYER.
Crash ! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window, tore bis
way through all opposers, and was gone!
1
Kff:'3

; a glittering hero once more—
the fel of the old, the envy of the
young. His name even went into
immortal print, for the village paper
magnified him. There were some that
bel tved he would be President, yet,
if he escaped hanging.
As usual, the fickle, unreasoning
vorld look Muff Potter to its bosom
and fondled him as lavishly as it had
abused him before. But that sort
of conduct is to the world's credit;
therefore it is not well to find fault
vith It.
Tom's days were days of splendor
and exultation to him, but his nights
IVE. were seasons of horror. Injun Joe
infested all his dreams, and always with doom in his eye. Hardly any tempution
could persuade the boy to stir abroad after oightfalL Poor Huck was in the
189

190
TOM SA WYER.
same state of wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the
lawyer the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid that
his share in the business might leak out)
yet, notwithstanding Injun Joe's flight had
saved him the suffering of testifying in
court. The poor fellow had got the attor-
ney to promise secrecy, but what of that ?
I Since Tom's harrassed conscience had
managed to drive him to the lawyer's
house by night and wring a dread tale
from lips that had been sealed with the
dismalest and most formidable of oaths,
Huck's confidence in the human race was
well nigh obliterated.
Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom
glad he had spoken ; but nightly he wished
he had sealed up his tongue.
Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe
would never be captured ; the other half
he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again
until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.
Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun Joe was
found. One of those omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a detective, came up
from St Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that sort of
astounding success which members of that craft usually achieve. That is to say
he " found a clew " But you can't hang a " clew " for murder and so after that
detective t^ got through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecnre as he was
before.

The slow days drifted c
apprehension.
I, and each left behind it a slightly lightened weight of
'0^'-P';:!r

s a time in every right-
h constructed boy's life when he ha»
a raging desire to go somewhere and
dig for hidden treasure. This desire
suddenly came upon Tom one day.
He sallied out to find Joe Harper,
but failed of success. Next he sought
Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing.
Presently he stumbled upon Huck
Finn the Red-Handed. Huck would
answer. Tom took him to a private
place and opened the matter to him
confidentially. Huck was willing.
Huck was always willing to take a
hand in any enterprise tiiat ofTered
entertainment and required no capi-
tal, for he had a troublesome supera-
bundance of that sort of time which is not money. " Where'U we dig ? " said Huck.
" O, most anywhere. "
" Why, is it hid all around ? "

192
TOM SAW YES.
" No indeed tt ain't. It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck— sometimes on
islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a limb of an old dead tree, just
vhere the shadow falls at midnight; but
mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses. "
" Who hides it? " .
" Why robbers, of course — who'd you
reckon ? Sunday-school sup'rintendents ? "
I don't know. If'twas mine I wouldn't
hide It; I'd spend it and have a good
time
So would I. But robbers don't do that
way They always hide it and leave it
there
Don't they come after it any more ? "
No they think they will, but they gen-
erally forget the marks, or else they die.
Anyway it lays there a long time and gets
rusty and by and by somebody finds an
old yellow paper that tells how to find the
marks — a paper that's got to be ciphered
O er about a week because it s mostly signs and hy'roglyphics, "
Hyro — which ?
" Hy'rogliphics— pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean
anything. "
" Have you got one of them papers, Tom .'"
" No. "
" Well then, how you going to find the marks } "
" I don't want any marks. They always bury it under a ha'nted house or on an
island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb sticking out. Well, we've tried
Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again some time ; and there's the old
ha'nted house up the Still-House branch, and there's lots of dead-limb trees —
dead loads of'em. "

ABOUT KINGS AND DIAMONDS. X9J
" Is it under all of them ? "
" How you talk ! No ! "
" Then how you going to know which one to go for ? "
" Go for all of'em ! "
" Why Tom, it'll take all summer. "
" Well, what of that ? Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred dollars
in it, all rusty and gay, or a rotten chest full of diamonds. How's that ? "
Huck's eyes glowed.
" That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hundred
< lollars and I don't want no di'monds. "
" All right. But I bet you / ain't going to throw off on di'monds. Some of
*em's worth twenty dollars apiece — there ain't any, hardly, but's worth six bits or
a dollar/'
**No! Is that so? ••
" Cert'nly — anybody'11 tell you so. .Hain't you ever seen one, Huck? **
" Not as I remember. "
" O, kings have slashers of them. "
.**Well, I don't know no kings, Tom. "
" I reckon you don't. But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft of em
flopping around. "
•* Do they hop .? "
" Hop ? — your granny ! No ! "
" Well what did you say they did, for? "
" Shucks, I only meant you'd see'em — not hopping, of course — ^what do they
•want to hop for } — but I mean you'd just see'em — scattered around, you know, in
a kind of a general way. Like that old hump-backed Richard. "
" Richard } What's his other name t "
" He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given ndme. "
" No ? "
" But they don't. "
Well, if they like it, Tom, all right ; but I don't want to be a king and have
4A
n
" 94
TOM SAWYER.
only just a given name I ke a nigger But say — where you going to dig first? "
Well I dont kno v S pose we taokle that old dead-limb tree on the hill
t other side of StilUHouse branch ? "
I ra agreed. "
So they got a crippled pick and a shovel^
and set out on their three-mile tramp. They
arr ved hot and panting, and threw them-
selves down in the shade of a neighboring
elm to rest and have a smoke.
I like this, " said Tom.
So do I. "
Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here,
what you going to do with your share ? "
Well I'll have pie and a glass of soda
every day, and I'll go to every circus
that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay
time
Well ain't you going to save any of it? "
Save it? What for? "
" Why so as to have something to live on, by and by. "
" O, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to thish-yer town some day and
get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd clean it out pretty
quick. What you going to do with youTn. 1 om ? "
" I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure-'nough sword, and a red neck-tie
and a bull pup, and get married. "
" Married ! "
" That's it. "
" Tom, you — why you ain't in your right mind. "
" Wait — you'll see. "
" Well that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my mother.
Fight! Why they used to fight all the time. I remember, mighty well. "
" That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight. "

SEARCH FOX TREASURES.
I9S
" Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now you better
think'bout this a while. I tell you you better. What's the name of the gat ? "
" It ain't a gal at all — it's a girl. "
" It's all the same, I reckon ; some says gal, some says girl — both's right, like
enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom ? "
" I'll tell you some time — not now. "
" All right — that'll do. Only if you get married I'll be more lonesomer than ever. "
" No you won't. You'll come and live
with roe. Now stir out of this and we 11
go to digging. "
They worked and sweated for half an
hour. No result. They toiled another
half hour. Still no result. Huck said
" Do they always bury it as dtep is
this? "
" Sometimes — not always. Not gener
ally. I reckon we haven't got the right
place. "
So they chose a new spot and began
again. The labor dragged a little but
still they made progress. They pegged
away in silence for some time. Finally
Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the
beaded drops from his brow with his
sleeve, and said :
" Where you going to dig next, after we get this one . > "
" I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on Cardiff Hill
back of the widow's. "
" I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away from us
Tom? It's on her land. "
" She take it away ! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one of
these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any difference whose land
it's on.'*

19^ TOM SAWYER,
That was satisfactory. The work went on. By and by Huck said : —
" Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think ? "
" It is mighty curious Huck. I don't understand it. Sometimes witches inter-
fere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now. "
" Shucks, witches ain't got no power in the daytime. "
" Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh,/ know what the matter is!
What a blamed lot of fools we are I You got to find out where the shadow of the
limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig ! "
" Then consound it, we've fooled away all this work for nothing. Now hang it
all, we got to come back in the night. It's an awful long way. Can you get out } "
" I bet I will. We've got to do it to night, too, because if some body sees these
holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go for it. "
" Well, I'll come around and maow to night. "
" All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes. "
The boys were there that night, about the appointed time. They sat in the
shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by old tra-
ditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked in the murky
nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the distance, an owl answered
with his sepulchral note. The boys were subdued by these solemnities, and
talked little. By and by they judged that twelve had come ; they marked where
the shadow fell, and began to dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their
interest grew stronger, and their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened
and still deepened, but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike
upon something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone
or a chunk. At last Tom said : —
" It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again. "
" Well but we can*t be wrong. We spotted the shadder to a dot. "
" I know it, but then there's another thing. "
" What's that .^ "
" Why we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too early. "
Huck dropped his shovel.
" That's it, " said he. " That's the very trouble. We got to give this one up.
We can't ever tell the right time, and besides this kind of thing's too awful, here this
'''U /;/ "
Chapter Xii

had
impat ent to go
house H k\ wa

noon the next A-\y the
ed at the dead tree tl ey
for the r tool-: Tcm was
hiunted
meTi rably so,
al-io — b t *; ddenh " ^t d^
Iook\here Tcm do ^ou know
what A'w t s'
Tnm mental! ran over the days
of the week and t! en q i ckh lifted
his eyes with a startled look in
hem —
My I never once thought ol
t Huck
Well I d dn t neither b it all at
nee t popped onto me that it was
Fr dav
" Blame it, a body caa't be too careful, Iluck. We migbt a got into an awfiil
scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday. "
199
« Well that's good, Huck. When they dont
trouble around, you know. All we got to (
keep out of
day, and pla;
Huck? "
" No. Wh
" Why he
that was ever
was a robber.'
" Cracky, 1 1
" Only sheri
and kings, an
bothered the ]
ways divided'
" Well, heir
" I bet you i
noblest man t1
such men no'
lick any man in England, with one hand tied t
his yew bow and plug a ten cent piece every tim
" What's A yew bow? "
T Ann'* Irnnnf It'-'*

THE HAUNTED HOUSE, 20l
So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a
yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the
morrow's prospects and possibilities there^ As the sun began to sink into the
west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of the trees and
soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff Hill.
On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again. They
had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in their last hole^
not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there were so many cases
where people had given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it >
and then somebody else had come along and turned it up with a single thrust
of a shoveL The thing failed this time, however, so the boys shouldered their
tools and went away feeling that they had not trifled with fortune but had ful-
filled all the requirements that belong to the business of treasure-hunting.
When they reached the haunted house there was something so wierd and grisly
about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun, and something
so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the place, that they were
afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they crept to the door and took a
trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown, fioorless room, unplastered^ an
ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a ruinous staircase ; and here, there, and
everywhere, hung ragged and abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered,
softly, with quickened pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slight-
est sound, and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.
In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the place a
critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own boldness^ and
wondering at it, too. Next they wanted to look up stairs. This was some-
thing like cutting off retreat, but they get to daring each other, and of course
there could be but one result — they threw their tools into a corner and made
the ascent. Up there were the same signs of decay. In one corner they found
a closet that promised mystery, but the promise was a fraud — there was noth-
ing in it. Their courage was up now and well in hand. They were about to go
down and begin work when —
" Sh ! " said Tom.
** What is it ?'* whispered Huck, blanching with fright.
Two men entered. Each boy said to himsel
dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or t
man before. "
" T'other'* was a ragged, unkempt creature, i;
bis face. The Spaniard was wrapped in a scrapie
€rs; long white hair flowed from under his somb
gles. When they came in, " t'other " was talking
en the ground, facing the door, with their backs t
continued his remarks. His manner became less
distinct as he proceeded :
" No, " said he, " I've thought it all over, and I d
** Dangerous ! " grunted the ** deaf and dumb "
prise of the boys. ** Milksop ! "
This voice made the boys gasp and iquake. It v
silence for some time. Then Joe said :
" What's any more dangerous than that job up )
of it. "
" That's dififerent. Away up the river so, anc
'Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long
" Well, what's more dangerous than coming hen
would suspicion us that saw us. "
** / know that. But there warn't any other plac <
-. t-^U T A 4.^ —..:*. 4.I.! 1- -
SLEEP Y GHOSTS, 203
" Those infernal boys,*'quaked again under the inspiration of this remark,
and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was Friday and
concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they had waited a year.
The two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a long and
thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said :
** Look here, lad — you go back up the river where you belong. Wait there
till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this town just
once more, for a look. We'll do that * dangerous'job after I've spied around a
little and think things look well for it. Then for Texas! We'll leg it
together ! " ^
1
This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun Joe
said :
" I'm dead for sleep ! It's your turn to watch. "
He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His comrade stirred
him once or twice and he became quiet. Presently the watcher began to nod;
his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.
The boys drew a long, grateful breath. Tom whispered —
" Now's our chance — come ! "
Huck said :
" I can't — I'd die if they was to wake. "
Tom urged — Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and
started alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak from
the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He never made a
second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging moments till it
seemed to them that time must be done and eternity growing gray; and then
they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting.
Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around — smiled grimly
upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees — stirred him up
with his foot and said —
" Here! You^re a watchman, ain't you! All right, though — nothing's
happened. "
** My ! have I been asleep ? "
x^u— uut 1 a say come in the night as we u
^ Yes; but look here ; it may be a good whil
at that job ; accidents might happen ;'tain't in
just regularly bury it — and bury it deep. "
" Good idea, " said the comrade, who walked
raised one of the rearward hearthstones and tO(
antly. He subtracted from it twenty or thirty <
for Injun Joe and passed the bag to the latter,
comer, now, digging with his bowie knife.
The boys forgot all their fears, all their misei
ing eyes they watched every movement Lu
beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars
half a dozen boys rich ! Here was treasure-hi
pices — there would not be any bothersome ut
They nudged each other every moment — eloqu
stood, for they simply meant — " O, but ain't you
Joe's knife struck upon something.
" Hello ! " said he.
" What is it ? " said his comrade.
** Half-rotten plank — no it's a box, I believe.
sec what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a
He reached his hand in and drew it out —
** Man, it's money ! "
A BOX OF COLD.
aos
" We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst
the weeds in the comer the other side of the fire-place — I saw it a minute ago. "
He ran and brought the boys'pick and shoveL Injun Joe took the pick,
looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to himself, and
then began to use it. The box was soon unearthed. It was not very large;

It was iron bound and had been very strong before the slow years had injured
it The men contemplated the treasure a while in blissful silence.
" Pard, there's thousands of dollars here, " said Injun Joe.
"'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used around here one summer, " the
stranger observed.
" I know it, " said Injun Joe; " and this looks like it, I should say. "
" Now you won't need to do that job. "
The half-breed frowned. Said he —
" You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. Tain't
2o6 TOM SA WYEJt.
robbery altogether — it's revenge/^* and a wicked light flamed in his eyes. " V\\
need your help in it. When it's finished — then Texas. Go home to your
Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me.'*
** Well — if you say so, what'll we do with this— bury it again ? "
" Yes. [Ravishing delight overhead.] No/ by the great Sachem, no?
[Profound distress overhead.] Yd nearly forgot. That pick had fresh earth
on it ! [The boys were sick with terror in a moment] What business has
a pick and a shovel here ? What business with fresh earth on them ? Who
brought them here — and where are they gone? Have you heard anybody.^ —
seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them to come and see the
ground disturbed } Not exactly — not exactly. We'll take it to my den.**
" Why of course ! Might have thought of that before. You mean Number
One.? "
" No — Number Two — under the cross. The other place is bad — too
common. "
" All right. It*s nearly dark enough to start. "
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peep-
ing out. Presently he said :
" Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be up
stairs ? "
The boys'breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife, halted
a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The boys thought
of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came creaking up the
stairs — the intolerable distress of the situation woke the stricken resolution of
the lads — they were about to spring for the closet, when there was a crash of
rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed on the ground amid the d/bris of the
ruined stairway. He gathered himself up cursing, and his comrade said:
*• Now what's the use of all that? If it's anybody, and they're up there, let
thtm stay there — who cares? If they want to jump down, now, and get into
trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes — and then let them
follow us if they want to. I'm willing. In my opinion, whoever hove those
things in here caught a sight of us and took us for ghosts or devils or some-
thing. I'll bet they're running yet. "
BITTER LUCK.
Joe grumbled a while; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight
was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving. Shortly
afterward they slipped out of the house
in the deepening twilight, and moved
toward the river with their precious
box.
Tom and Huck rose up, weak but
vastly relieved, and stared after them
through the chinks between the logs of
the house. Follow ? Not they. They
were content to reach ground again
without broken necks, and take the
townward track over the bill. They
did not talk much. They were too
much absorbed in hating themselves —
hating the til luck that made them take
the spade and the pick there. But for
that, Injun Joe never would have sus-
pected. He would have hidden the
silver with the gold to wail there till his " revenge " was satisfied, and then he
would have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing. Bitter,
bitter luck that the tools were ever brought there !
They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come to town
spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to " Number
Two, " wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought occurred to Tom :
" Revenge ? " What if he means wj, Huck • "
" O, don't ! " said Huck, nearly fainting.
They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to believe that
be might possibly mean somebody else — at least that he might at least mean
Dobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.
Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Company
would be a palpable improvement, he thought.


DOUBTS TO BE SETTLED.
909
'-C-J-.
his age and station in life, in that t^e imagined that all references to " hundreds "
and " thousands " were mere fanciful forms of speech, and that no such sums
really existed in the world. He never had supposed for a moment that so large a.
sum as a hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in any one's •posses-
sion. If bis notions of hidden treasure had been analyzed, they would have been
found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid,
ungraspable dollars.
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the
attrition of thinking them over, and so he
presently found himself leaning to the
impression that the thing might not have
. been a dream, after all. This uncertainty
must be swept away. He would snatch a
hurried breakfast and go and find Huck.
Huck was sitting on the gunwale of a
flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the
water and looking very melancholy, Tom
concluded to let Huck lead up to the sub-
ject. If he did not do it, then the adven-
ture would be proved to have been only
a dream.
" Hello. Huck ! "
" Hello, yourself. "
Silence, for a minute.
" Tom, if we'd a left the blame tools at
the dead tree, we'd'a'got the money. O, ain't it awful ! "
"'Tain't a dream, then,'tain't a dream ! Somehow I most wish it was. Dog'd
if I don't, Huck. "
" What ain't a dream ? "
" Oh, that thing yesterday. I been half thinking it was. "
" Dream ! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd'a'seen how much dream it
-was! I've had dreams enough all night — with that patch-eyed Spanish devil
going for me all through'em — rot bim I " 14

«IO TOM SA WYER,
** No, not rot him. J^snd him ! Track the money ! "
" Tom, well never find him. A feller don't have only once chance for such a
pile — ^and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see him, anyway. "
" Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway — and track him out — to his
Number Two. "
" Number Two — yes, that's it. I ben thinking'bout that. But I can't make
nothing out of it. What do you reckon it is.^ "
" I dono. It's too deep. Say, Huck — maybe it's the number of a house ! "
" Goody! No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this one-horse
town. They ain't no numbers here. "
" Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here — it's the number of a room—
in a tavern, you know ! "
" O, that's the trick! They ain't only two taverns. We can find out quick. "
" You stay here, Huck, till I come. "
Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public
«
places. He was gone half an hour. He found that in the best tavern. No. 2 had
long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied. In the less
ostentatious house No. 2 was a mystery. The tavern-keeper's young son said it
was kept locked all the time, and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of
it except at night; he did not know any particular reason for this state of things ;
had had some little curiosity, but it was rather feeble ; had made the most of the
mystery by entertaining himself with the idea th^ that room was " ha'nted ; " had
noticed that there was a light in there the night before.
" That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very No. 2 we're after.**
" I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you going to do ? "
" Lemme think. "
Tom thought a long time. Then he said :
*'I'll tell you. The back door of that No. 2 is the door that comes out into
that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattle-trap of a brick store.
Now you get hold of all the door-keys you can find, and I'll nip all of Auntie's and
the first dark night we'll go there and try'em. And mind you keep a lookout
for Injun Joe, because be said he was going to drop into town and spy around
THE YOUNG DETECTIVES. , ail
once more for a chance to get his revenge. If you see hiro, you just follow him;
and if he don't go to that No. 3, that ain't the place. "
" Lordy I don't want to follcr him by myself! "
" Why it'll be night, sure. He mightn't ever see you— and if he did, maybe
he'd never think anything. "
" Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. Idono — I dono. I'll try. "
" You bet /'11 follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why he might V found out he
couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money. "
" It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll foller him ; I will, by jingoes !''
" Now you're talking! Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't. "


AN A TTEMPT ON NO. TWO.'atj
lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with. He hid the lantern in Buck's sugar
hogshead and the watch began. An hour before midnight the tavern closed up
and its lights (the only ones there-
abouts) were put out. No Spaniard
had been seen. Nobody had entered
or left the alley. Everything was aus-
picious. The blackness of darkness
reigned, the perfect stillness was inter-
rupted only by occasional mutterings
of distant thunder.
Tom got his lantern, lit it in ihe hogs-
head, wrapped it closely in the towel,
and the two adventurers crept in the
gloom toward the tavern, Huck stood
sentry and Tom felt his way into the
alley. Then there was a season of
waiting anxiety that weighed upon
Huck's spirits like a mountain. He
began to wish he could see a flash
from the lantern — it would frighten
him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive yet. It seemed hours since
Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have fainted; maybe he was dead;
maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement. In his uneasiness Huck
found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley ; fearing all sorts of dreadful
things, and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take
away his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to
inhale it by thimbtefuts, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the way it was
beating. Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came tearing by him:
" Run ! " said he ; " run, for your life ! "
He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty or
forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered. The boys never stopped
till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the

314 TOM SAWYER.
village. Just as they got within its shelter the stonn buist and the rain poured
down. As soon as Tom got his breath he said :
" Huck, it was awful ! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could ; but they
■eemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly get my breath I
was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either. Well, without noticing

what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and open comes the door ! It wan
locked! 1 hopped in, and shook off the towel, zJsA, great Casar's ghost! "
" What! — what'd you see, Tom ! "
" Huck, I most stepped onto Injun Joe's hand ! "
" No! "
" Yes! He was laying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch c
his eye and bis arms spread out. "
" Lordy, what did you do ? Did he wake up ? "
BUCK MOUNTS GUARD. 115
••
*'No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and started !
*'I'd never'a* thought of the towel, I bet ! "
" Well, / would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it. "
" Say, Tom, did you see that box ? "
" Huck I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see the
cross. I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by Injun Joe ;
yes, and I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the room. Don't you see,noWy
what's the matter with that ha'nted room ? "
" How ? "
** Why it's ha'nted with whisky ! Maybe all the Temperance Taverns have got
a ha'nted room, hey Huck ? "
" Well I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd'a'thought such a thing ? But say,
Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's drunk. "
" It is, that ! You try it ! "
Huck shuddered.
" Well, no— I reckon not. "
" And /reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't
enough. If there *d been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it. "
There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said :
" Lookyhere, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe's
not in there. It's too scary. Now if we watch every night, we'll be dead sure to
see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll snatch that box quicker'n
lightning. "
" Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every night,
too, if you'll do the other part of the job. " ,
" All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper street a block and
maow — and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window and that'll fetch
me.
" Agreed, and good as wheat ! "
" Now Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home. It'll begin to be daylight in
a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will you } "
" I said I would, Tom, and I will. Til ha'nt that tavern every night for a yearl
111 sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night. "
3l6
TOAf SAWYEJl.
" That's all right. Now where you going to sleep? "
" In Ben Rogers's hayloft. He let's me, and so does his pap's nigger man.
Uncle Jake, I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time
I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it. That's a
mighty good nigger, Tom, He likes me, bccuz I don't ever act as if I was above
him. Sometimes I've set right down and eat with him. But you needn't tell that.
A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a
steady thing, "
" Well, if I don't want you in the day lime, I'll let you sleep. I won't come
bothering around. Any time you see something's up, in the night, just skip right
around and'maow. "

f first thing Tom heard on Fri-
day morning was a glad piece of
news — Judge Thatcher's family had
come back to town the night before.
Both Injun Joe and the treasure
sunk into secondary importance for
a moment, and Becky took the chief
place in the boy's interest. He saw
her and they had an exhausting
good time playing " hi-spy " and
" gully-keeper " with a crowd of
their schoolmates. The day was
completed and crowned in a pecul-
iarly satisfactory way : Becky teased
her mother to appoint the next day
for the long-promised and long-
delayed picnic, and she consented.
The child's delight was bouadless; and Tom's not more moderate. The invi-
tations were sent out before sunset, and straightway the young folks of the
^*1^
aiS CAVt-i^^
company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and ct
It was not the custom for elderly people to mar pic-
children were considered safe enough under the'
eighteen and a few young gentlemen of twenty-thi
steam ferry-boat was chartered for the occasion;
up the main street laden with provision baskets. Si
fun ; Mary remained at home to entertain him.'
said to Becky, was —
" You'll not get back till late. Perhaps you'd be
of the girls that live near the ferry landing, child. "
" Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma. "
" Very well. And mind and behave yourself and
Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Bed
" Say — I'll tell you what we'll do.'Stead of goin
right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas's,
has it most every day — dead loads of it. And she'll
" O, that will be fun ! "
Then Becky reflected a moment and said :
" But what will mamma say.? "
" How'll she ever know ? "
The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and sai
" I reckon it's wrong — but — "
" But shucks ! Your mother won't know. anH 5
THE PIC'NIC. 219
persuasions presently carried the day. So it was decided to say nothing to any-
body about the night's programme. Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe
Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The thought took a deal
of the spirit out of his anticipations. Still he could not bear to give up the fun at
Widow Douglas's. And why should he give it up, he reasoned — the signal did
not come the night before, so why should it be any more likely to come to-night?
The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure ; and boy like, he
determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of
the box of money another time that day.
Three miles below town the ferry-boat stopped at the mouth of a woody hollow
and tied up^ The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest distances and
craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and laughter. All the different
ways of getting hot and tired were gone through with, and by and by the rovers
straggled back to camp fortified with responsible appetites, and then the destruc-
tion of the good things began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of
rest and chat in the shade of spreading oaks. By and by somebody shouted —
" Who's ready for the cave ? "
Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there was
a general scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the hillside — an
opening shaped like a letter A. It's massive oaken door stood unbarred. Within
was a small chamber, chilly as an ice-house, and walled by Nature with solid
limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat. It was romantic and mysterious to
stand here in the deep gloom and look out upon the green valley shining in the
sun. But the impressiveness of the situation quickly wore off, and the romping
began again. The moment a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon
the owner of it ; a struggle and a gallant defense followed, but the candle was
soon knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter
and a new chase. But all things have an end. By and by the procession went
filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering rank of lights
dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their point of junction sixty feet
overhead. This main avenue was not more than eight or ten feet wide. Every
few steps other lofty and still narrower crevices branched from it on either hand
TOM SAWYER.

— for McDougal's cave was but a vast
labyrinth of crooked isles that ran into
each other and out again and led nowhere.
It was said that one might wander days
and nights together through its intricate
tangle of rifts and chasms, and never find
the end of the cave; and Chat he might go
down, and down, and still down, into the
earth, and it was just the same — labyrinth
underneath labyrinth, and no end to any of
them. No raan " knew " the cave. That
was an impossible thing. Most of the
young men knew a portion of it, and it
was not customary to venture much beyond
this known portion. Tom Sawyer knew as
much of the cave as any one.
The procession moved along the main
avenue some three-quarters of a mile, and
then groups and couples began to slip
aside into branch avenues, fly along the
dismal corridors, and take each other by
surprise at points where the corridors
joined again. Parties were able to elude
each other for the space of half an hour
without going beyond the " known " ground.
By and by, one group after another came
straggling back to the mouth of the cave,
panting, hilarious, smeared from head to
foot with tallow drippings, daubed with cUy,
and entirely delighted with the success of
the day. Then they were astonished to
find that they had been taking no note of
HUCK ON INDIAN yOE'S THACa:
time and that night vas about at hand. The clanging bell had been calling for
■ half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's adventures was romantic
and therefore satisfactory. When the ferry-boat with her wild freight pushed into
the stream, nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the
craft.
Huck was already upon his watch when the ferry-boat's lights went glinting past
the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young people were as subdued and
still as people usually are who are nearly tired to death. He wondered what boat
it was, and why she did not stop at the wharf — and then he dropped her out of his
mind and put his attention upon his business. The night was growing cloudy and
dark. Ten o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased scattered lights began
to wink out, all straggling foot passengers distppeared the village betook itself
to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the silence and the ghosts
Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern
lights were put out; darkness every-
where, now. Huck waited what seemed
a weary long time, but nothing happened.
His faith was weakening. Was there any
use.* Was there really any use? Why
not give it up and turn in ?
A noise fell upon his ear. He was all
attention in an instant. The alley door
closed sofily. He sprang to the corner of
the brick store. The next moment two
men brushed by him, and one seemed to
have something under his arm. It must
be that box ! So they were going to re-
move the treasure. Why call Tom now ?
It would be absurd — the men would get
away with the box and never be found
again. No, he would stick to their wake and follow them ; he would trust to the
darkness for security from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped

rncy will bury it in the old quarry. But they nevt
passed on, up the summit. They plunged into th(
sumach bushes, and were at once hidden in the
shortened his distance, now, for they would never 1
along a while; then slackened his pace, fearing he
on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened; x
seemed to hear the beating of his own heart. Th <
over the hill — ominous sound ! But no footsteps.
He was about to spring with winged feet, when a n
feet from him ! Huck*s heart shot into his throat, 1
then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues hac
and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to
he was. He knew he was within five steps of the s
las's grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bur
find.
Now there was a voice — a very low voice — Injun
" Damn her, maybe she's got company — there's li
" I can't see any. "
This was that stranger's voice — the stranger of t
chill went to Huck's heart — this, then, was the " rev
to fly. Then he remembered that the Widow Doug
than once, and maybe these men were going to mur
venture to warn her ; but he knew he didn't dare-
THE'^REVENGE*'JOB, 223
** Yes. Well there is company there, I reckon. Better give it up. "
**Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever ! Give it up and maybe
never have another chance. I tell you again, as I've told you before, I don't care
for her swag — you may have it. But her husband was rough on me — many times
he was rough on me — and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me
for a vagrant. And that ain't all. It ain't a millionth part of it ! He had me
horsewhipped! — horsewhipped in front of the jail, like a nigger ! — with all the town
looking on ! Horsewhipped ! — do you understand ? He took advantage of me
and died. But I'll take it out of her^
" Oh, don't kill her ! Don't do that ! "
-''Kill ? Who said anything about killing ? I would kill him if he was here ;
but not her. When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her —
bosh ! you go for her looks. You slit her nostrils — you notch her ears like a
sow ! "
" By God, that's— "
" Keep your opinion to yourself! It will be safest for you. I'll tie her to the
bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry, if she does. My
friend, you'll help in this thing — for my sake — that's why you're here — I mightn't
be able alone. If you flinch, I'll kill you. Do you understand that ? And if I
have to kill you, I'll kill her — and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about
who done this business. " •'
" Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the better — I'm all in*
a shiver. "
" Do it now^ And company there? Look here — I'll get suspicious of you,
first thing you know. No — we'll wait till the lights are out — there's no hurry. "
Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue — a thing still more awful than any
amount of murderous talk ; so he held his breath and stepped gingerly back ;
planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a precarious
way and almost toppling over, first on one side and then on the other. He took
another step back, with the same elaboration and the same risks ; then another
and another, and — a twig snapped under his foot ! His breath stopped and he
listened. There was no sound— the stillness was perfect. His gratitude was
roAf s^H^yEx.
measureless. Now he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumach bushes
— turned himself as carefully as if he were a ship— and then stepped quickly biit
cautiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so he picked
up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he reached the Welch-

man's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads of the old man and his
two stalwart sons were thrust from windows,
" What's the row there ? Who's banging ? What do you want ? "
" Let me in — quick ! I'll tell everything. "
" Why who are you ? "
" Huckleberry Finn — quick, let me in ! "
" Huckleberry Finn, indeed ! It ain't a name to open many doors, I judge !
But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble. "
" Please don't ever tell / told you, " were Muck's first words when he got iD
AID FOR THE WWOMT. aaS
** Please don't — I'd be killed, sure — but the Widow's been good friends to me
sometimes, and I vant to tell — I will tell if you'll promise you won't ever say it
was me. "
" By George he has got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so! " exclaimed
the old man; " out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad. "
Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the hill, and
just entering the sumach path on tip-toe, their weapons in their hands. Huck
accompanied them no further. He hid behind a great bowlder and fell to listen-
ing. There was a lagging, anxious silence, and then all of a sudden there was an
explosion of firearms and a cry.
Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill as
fast as his legs could carry him.


THE WELCHMAN REPORTS. aa?
was quickly unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat and the old man
and his brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.
" Now my boy I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready
as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too — make yourself easy
about that ! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop here last night. "
" I was awful scared, " said Huck, " and I run. I took out when the pistols
went off, and I didn't stop for three mile. I've come now becuz I wanted to know
about it, you know ; and I come before daylight becuz I didn't want to run aciost
them devils, even if they was dead. "
" Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it — but there's
a bed here for you when you've had your
breakfast. No, they ain't dead, lad — we
are sorry enough for that. You see we
knew right where to put our hands on
them, by your description; so we crept
along on tip-toe till we got within fifteen
feet of them — dark as a cellar that sumach
path was — and just then I found I was
going to sneeze. It was the meanest kind
of luck! I tried to keep it back, but no
use —'twas bound to come, and it did
come ! I was in the lead with my pistol
raised, and when the sneeze started those
scoundrels a-nistling to get out of the
path, I sung out,'Fire, boys !'and blazed I
away at the place where the rustling was.
So did the boys. But they were off in a
jifiy, those villains, and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we
never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their bullets
whizzed by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the sound of their
feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the constables. They got
a posse together, and went off to guard the river bank, and as soon as it is

" 5)pienaia i Jjescnoe tnem— aescnoe tnem,
" One's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that
and t'other's a mean looking ragged — "
" That's enough, lad, we know the men ! I:
back of the widow's one day, and they slunk aw
the sheriff — get your breakfast to-morrow momi;
The Welchman's sons departed at once. As
sprang up and exclaimed :
" Oh, please don't tell anybody it was me that
" All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought tc
" Oh, no, no ! Please don't tell ! "
When the young men were gone, the old Wel <
" They won't tell — and I won't. But why dor
Huck would not explain, further than to sj
about one of those men and would not have the
against him for the whole world— he would be k
The old man promised secrecy once more, an(
" How did you come to follow these fellows, lad
Huck was silent while he framed a duly cauti <
" Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot, — lea
see nothing agin it — and sometimes I can't slee
about it and sort of trying to strike out a new i
of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I com <
HUCK UNDER FIRB.
329
one wanted a light ; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up their
faces and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard, by his white
whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty, ragged looking
devil. "
" Could you sec the rags by the light of the cigars? "
This staggered Huclc for a moment. Then he said :
" Well, I don't know — but somehow it seems as if I did. "
" 1 hen they went on, and you— " .
" FoUered'era — yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up — they sneaked
along so. I dogged'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the dark and heard the
ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks just
as I told you and your two^ "
" What ! The deaf and dumb man said
all that! "
Huck had made another terrible mistake <
He was trying his best to keep the old man
from getting the faintest hint of who the
'Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue
seemed determined to get him into trouble
in spite of all he could do. He made sev-
eral efforts to creep out of his scrape, but
the old man's eye was upon him and he
made blunder after blunder. Presently the
Welchman said :
" My boy, don't be afraid of me. I
wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all
the world. No — I'd protect you — I'd pro-
tect you. This Spaniard is not deaf and
dumb; you've let that slip without intend-
ing it; you can't cover that up now. Vou know something about that Spaniard


that you want to keep dark,
won't betray you, "
Now trust me — tell me what it is, and trust me — I
230 TOM SAIVYEH.
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and
whispered in his ear —
" Tain't a Spaniard— it's Injun Joe ! "
The Welchman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said :
** It*s all plain enough, now. When you talked about notching ears and slitting
noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because white men don't
take that sort of revenge. But an Injun ! That's a different matter altogether. "
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that
the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going to bed, was to get a
lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for marks of blood. They found
none, but captured a bulky bundle of —
" Of WHAT } "
If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more stun-
ning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring wide, now,
and his breath suspended — waiting for the answer. The Welchman started—^
stared in return — three seconds — five seconds — ten — then replied —
" Of burglar's tools. Why what's the matter with you? "
Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The Welch-
man eyed him gravely, curiously — and presently said —
" Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But what did
give you that turn ? What were you expecting we'd found ? "
Huck was in a close place — the inquiring eye was upon him — he would have
given anything for material for a plausible answer — nothing suggested itself — the
inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper — a senseless reply offered — there was
no time to weigh it, so at a venture he uttered it — feebly :
" Sunday-school books, maybe. "
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loud and joy-
ously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying
that such a laugh was money in a man*s pocket, because it cut down the doctor's
bills like everything. Then he added :
" Poor old chap, you're white and jaded — you ain't well a bit — no wonder
you're a little flighty and off your balance. But you'll come out of it. Rest and
sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope.'
f»
THE STOR y CJRCULA TED. 231
■ — -
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a sus-
picious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the
tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow's stile.
He had only thought it was not the treasure, however — he had not known that it
wasn't — and so the suggestion of a captured bundle was too much for his self-
possession. But on the whole he felt glad the little episode had happened, for
now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not the bundle, and so his
znind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact everything seemed to be
drifting just in the right direction, now ; the treasure must be still in No. 2, the
men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold
that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption.
Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck jumped
for a hiding place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late
event. The Welchman admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them the
widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of citzens were climbing up the hill — to
stare at the stile. So the news had spread.
The Welchman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors. The widow's
gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.
" Don't say a word about it madam. There*s another that you're more beholden
to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name.
We wouldn't have been there but for him. "
Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the main
matter — but the Welchman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors, and
through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his
secret. When all else had been learned, the widow said :
" I went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that noise. Why
didn't you come and wake me } "
" We judged it warn't worth while. Those fellows warn't likely to come again —
they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of waking you up
and scaring you to death ? My three negro men stood guard at your house all the
rest of the night. They've just come back. "
More visitors came, and the story had to be told and re-told for a couple of
hours more.
" Your Becky ? "
" V.s, " with a startled loolc,-

didn't she stay'
" Why, n
Mrs. Tha
a pew, just
with a friem
" Good m
morning Mn
turned up mi
at your houst
now he's afrz
got to settle >
Mrs. Thatc
turned paler'
*'He didn't
per, beginnin
anxiety came
" Joe Harp
morning? "
" No'm. "
" When did you see him last? "
Toe tried to remember. b " » ■ " - —'
A NB W SBNSA TION.
333
inquiring if any one was missing. One young man finally blurted out his fear
that they were still in the cave ! Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell
to crying and wringing her hands.
The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to street, and
within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up !
The CardifT Hill episode sank into instant insignificance, the burglars were for-
gotten, horses were saddled, skiffs were manned, the ferry-boat ordered out, and

before the horror was half an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down
high-road and river toward the cave.
All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women
visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher and tried to comfort them. They cried
with them, too, and that was still belter than words. All the tedious night the
town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at last, all the word that
came was, " Send more candles — and send food. " Mrs. Thatcher was almost
254
TOM SA WYER.'
crazed; and Aunt Polly also. Judge Thatcher sent messages of hope and en-
couragement from the cave, but they conveyed no real cheer.
The old Welchraan came home toward daylight, spattered with candle grease,
smeared with clay, and almost worn out. He found Huclt still in the bed that
had been provided for him, and delirious with fever. The physicians were all at
the cave, so the Widow Douglas came and took charge of the patient. She said
she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent,
he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected.
The Welchman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said —
" You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off. He
never does. Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands, "
Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village, but
the strongest of the citizens continued
searching. All the news that could be
gained was that remotenesses of the cav-
ern were being ransacked that had never
been visited before; that every corner
and crevice was going to be thoroughly
searched; that wherever one wandered
through the maze of passages, lights were
to be seen flitting hither and thither in
the distance, and shoutings and pistol
shots sent their hollow reverberations to
the ear down the sombre aisles. In one
place, far from the section usually trav-
ersed by tourists, the names " Beckv a
Tom " had been found traced upon the
rocky wall with candle smoke, and near
at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon.
Mrs. Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it. She said it was the last
relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial of her could
ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living body before the
awful death came. Some said that now and then, in the cave, a far-away speck

HOPE CIVmC WAY TO DESPAIR.
235
of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shoUt would burst forth and a score
of men go trooping down the echoing aisle — and then a sickening disappointment
aWays followed ; the children were not there ; it was only a searcher's light.
Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and the
village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one had heart for anything. The acci-
dental discovery, just made, that the pro-
prietor of the Temperance Tavern kept |
liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered ,
the public pulse, tremendous as the fact
was. In a lucid interval, Huck feebly led
up to the subject of taverns, and finally
asked — dimly dreading the worst — if any-
thing had been discovered at the Temper- i
ance Tavern since he had been ill?
" Yes, " said the widow.
Huck started up in bed, wild-eyed
" What! What was it? "
" Liquor ! — and the place has been shut
up. Lie down, child — what a turn you did'
give me ! "
" Only tell me just one thing— only just ; i-
one — please ! Was it Tom Sawyer that
found it? " " " " ^^ "'■'*
The widow burst into tears. " Hush, hush, child, hush !
you must not talk. You are very, very sick ! "
Then nothing but liquor had been found ; there would have been a great pow-
wow if it had been the gold. So the treasure was gone forever — gone forever !
But what could she be crying about? Curious that she should cry.
These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the
weariness they gave him he fell asleep. The widow said to herself:
" There — he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it! Pity but somebody
could find Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope enough,
or strength enough, either, to go on searching, "

I've told you before.


I to Tom and Becky s
share in the piC nic They tripped
ilong the murkj aisles with the rest
tf the compan) \isiting the famil
lar wonders of the cave — wonders
dubbed with rather over descriptive
names such as'The Drawing
Room. " " The Cathedral, " " Alad-
din's Palace, " and so on. Presently
the hide-and-seek frolicking began,
and Tom and Becky engaged in it
with zeal until the exertion began to
grow a trifle wearisome; then they
wandered down a sinuous avenue
holding their candles aloft and read-
ing the tangled web-work of names,
dates, post-office addresses and mot-
toes with which the rocky walls h < id
been frescoed (in candle smoke.) Still drifting along and talking, they scarcely
noticed that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed.
136
LOST IN THE CA VE, 241
She said she would try to hope again, she would get up and follow wherever
he might lead if only he would not talk like that any more. For he was no
more to blame than she, she said.
So they moved on, again — aimlessly — simply at random — all they could do
was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show of reviving —
not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its nature to revive when
the spring has not been taken out of it by age and familiarity with failure.
By and by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant
so much ! Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died
again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his
pockets — yet he must economise.
By and by, fatigue began to assert its claims ; the children tried to pay no
attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time was grown
to be so precious; moving, in some direction, in any direction, was at least
progress and might bear fruit; but to sit down was to invite death and shorten
its pursuit.
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down. Tom
rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there, and the com-
fortable beds and above all, the light ! Becky cried, and Tom tried to think of
some way of comforting her, but all his encouragements were grown thread-
bare with use, and sounded like sarcasms. Fatigue bore so heavily upon
Becky that she drowsed off to sleep. Tom was grateful. He sat looking into
her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural under the influence of
pleasant dreams; and by and by a smile dawned and rested there. The peace-
ful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his
thoughts wandered away to by-gone times and dreamy memories. While he
was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh — but it was
stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.
" Oh, how could I sleep ! I wish I never, never had waked ! No ! No, I
don't, Tom ! Don't look so ! I won't say it again.'*
" I'm glad you've slept, Becky ; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find the
way out. "
16
a4a
TOlll SAWYER.
" We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beautiful country ia my dream. I
reckon we are going there. "
" Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying. "
They rose up and wandered along, band in hand and hopeless. They tried
to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was that it
seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not be, for their
candles were not gone yet. Along time after this — they could not tell how
long — Tom said they must go softly and listen for dripping water — they must
find a spring. They found one presently, and Tom said it was time to rest
again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky said she thought she could go on a
little farther. She was surprised to hear Tom -dissent. She could not under-
stand it They sat down nnd Tom fastened his candle to the wall in front of
them with some clay. Thought was
soon busy ; nothing was said for some
time. Then Becky broke the silence :
Tom, I am so hungry ! "
Tom took something out of his pocket.
Do you remember this,'" said he.
Becky almost smiled.
Its our wedding cake, Tom. "
Yes— I wish it was as big as a barrel,
for It s all we've got. "
I saved it from the pic-nic for us
to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
people do with wedding cake — but it'll
be our — "
She dropped the sentence where it
was. Tom divided the cake and Becky
ale with good appetite, while Tom nib-
bled at his moiety. There was abundance of cold water to finish the feast
with. By and by Becky suggested that they move on again. Tom was silent
a moment. Then he said :

TOTAL DARKNESS. 243
" Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something? "
Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.
" Well then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink. That
little piece is our last candle ! "
Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to comfort
her but with little effect. At length Becky said :
« Tom !''
" Well, Becky ? "
" They'll miss us and hunt for us !'*
" Yes, they will ! Certainly they will ! "
" Maybe they're hunting for us now, Tom. "
** Why I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are. "
" When would they miss us, Tom? "
" When they get back to the boat, I reckon.'*
" Tom, it might be dark, then — would they notice we hadn't come? "
" I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home. "
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw that
he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that night ! The
children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of grief from
Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers also^that the
Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher discovered that
Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.
The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it melt
slowly and pitilessly away ; saw the half inch of wick stand alone at last ; saw
the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin column of smoke, linger at its top
a moment, and then — the horror of utter darkness reigned !
How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that she
was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew was, that
after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of a dead stupor
of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom said it might be Sunday,
now — maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk, but her sorrows were
244 TOM SAIVYER,
too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said that they must have been
missed long ago, and no doubt the search was going on. He would shout and
maybe some one would come. He tried it; but in the darkness the distant
echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more.
The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again. A
portion of Tom's half of the cake was left ; they divided and ate it. But they
seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only whetted desire.
By and by Tom said : •
" Sh I Did you hear that ? "
Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the faintest,
far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by the hand,
started groping down the corridor in its direction. Presently he listened again ;
again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.
" It's them I " said Tom ; " they're coming ! Come along Becky — we're all
right now ! " -
The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was slow,
however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded
against. They shortly came to one and had to stop. It might be three feet
deep, it might be a hundred — there was no passing it at any rate. Tom got
down on his breast and reached as far down as he could. No bottom. They
must stay there and wait until the searchers came. They listened ; evidently
the distant shoutings were growing more distant ! a moment or two more
and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking misery of it! Tom
whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He talked hopefully to
Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no sounds came again.
The children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged
on ; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-^tr^cken. Tom believed it
must be Tuesday by this time.
Now an idea struck him. There were some side passages near at hand. It
would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the heavy
time in idleness. He took a kite-line from his pocket, tied it to a projection,
and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped
FOUND BUT NOT SA VED. 345
aloDg, At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended in a " jumping-off place. "
Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner
as he could reach with his hands conveniently; he made an effort to stretch
yet a little further to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a
human hand, holding a candle, appeared from behind a rock ! Tom lifted up
a glorious shout, and instantly that band was followed by the body it belonged

to — Injun Joe's I Tom was paralyzed ; he could not move. He was vastly
grati6ed the next moment, to see the " Spaniard " take to his heels and get
himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his voice
and come over and killed him for testifying in court. But the echoes must
have disguised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned. Tom's
246 TOM SAlVYEIi.
fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to himself that if he had
strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and nothing
should tempt him to run the risk of meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful
to keep from Becky what it was he had seen. He told her he had only shouted
« for luck. "
But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run. Another
tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought changes. The
children awoke tortured with a raging hunger. Tom believed that it must be
Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now, and that the search
had been given over. He proposed to explore another passage. He felt
willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors. But Becky was very weak.
She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be roused. She said she
would wait, now, where she was, and die — it would not be long. She told Tom
to go with the kite-line and explore if he chose; but she implored him to come
back every little while and speak to her ; and she made him promise that when
the awful time came, he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was
over.
Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a show of
being con6dent of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave; then he
took the kite-line in his hand and went groping down one of the passages on
his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick with bodings of coming
doom.
\
.nAK^''< &'\'^^j.. "

afternuf
to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost
children had not been found. Public
prayers bad been offered up for ihem,
and many and many a private prayer
that had the pelitioner's whole heart
in it; but still no good news came from
the cave. The majority of the search-
ers had given up the quest and gone
back to their daily avocations, saying
that it was plain Ilie children could
never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was
very ill, and a great part of the time
delirious. People said it was heart-
breaking to hear her call her child,
and raise her head and listen a whole
minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had
drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost white.
The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.
247


•48
TOM SA WYER.
Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village bells, and in
'a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad people, who shouted*
" Turn out! turn out! they're found! they're found ! " Tin pans and horns were
added to the din, the population massed itself and moved toward the river, met
the childien coming in an open carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged

AND BEOKT.
around it, joined its homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street
roaring huzzah after huzzah !
The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the greatest
night the little town had ever seen. During the first half hour a procession of
villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, siczed the saved ones and kissed
them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried to speak but couldn't — and drifted
out raining tears all over the place.
Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It would
TOM TELLS THE STOR Y OF THEIR ESCAPE.
24S»
be complete, however, as soon as the messengei dispatched with the great news to
the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager
auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure, putting in
many striking additions to adom it withal ; and closed with a description of how
he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition ; how he followed two avenues
as far as his kite-line would reach ; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch
of the kite-line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-ofl " speck that
looked like daylight ; dropped the line and groped toward it, pushed his head and

shoulders through a small bole and saw the broad Mississippi rolling by* And if
it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight
and would not have explored that passage any more! He told how he went back
for Becky and broke the good news and she told him not to fret her with such stufT,
for she was tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described

250 TOM SAWYER,
how he labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy
when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight ; how
he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out; how they sat there
and cried for gladness ; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom hailed them
and told them their situation and their famished condition; how the men didn't
believe the wild tale at first, " because, " said they, " you are .five miles down the
river below the valley the cave is in " — then took them aboard, rowed to a house,
gave them supper, made them rest till two or three hours after dark and then
brought them home.
Before day-dawn. Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him were
tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung behind them, and
informed of the great news.
Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off
at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered. They were bedridden all of Wed-
nesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn, all the
time. Tom got about, a little, on Thursday, was down town Friday, and nearly as
whole as ever Saturday ; but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then
she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.
Tom learned ofHuck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could not
be admitted to the bedroom ; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday. He was
admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his adventure and
introduce no exciting topic. The widow Douglas staid by to see that he obeyed.
At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event; also that the " ragged man's "
body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry landing; he had been
drowned while trying to escape, perhaps.
About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to visit Huck,
who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting talk, and Tom had
some that would interest him, he thought. Judge Thatcher's house was on Tom's
way, and he stopped to see Becky. The Judge and some friends set Tom to
talking, and some one asked him ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave
again. Tom said he thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said :
" Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt. But
TOM'S ENEMY IN SAFE QUASTEftS.
*S»
ire have taken caie of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any more. "
" Why? "
" Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago, and triple-
locked — and I've got the keys. "
Tom turned as white as a sheet.
" What's the matter, boy ! Here, run, somebody t Fetch a glass of water ! "
The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.
" Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tcm ? "
*'Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave ! "

Mnim:
:,«4
a few minutes the news had
spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of men
were on iheir way to McDougal's cave,
and the ferry-boat, well filled with
passengers, soon followed. Tom Saw-
yer was in the skiff that bore Judge
Thatcher.
When the cave door was unlocked, a
sorrowful sight presented itself in the
•I*'" ^ W^^^ .Jk^lHL^^ dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe
lay stretched upon the ground, dead»
with his face close to the crack of the
door, as if his longing eyes had been
fixed, to the latest moment, upon the
light and the cheer of the free world
outside. Tom was touched, for he
knew by his own experience how this
wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but nevertheless he felt an abounding
sense of relief and security, now, which revealed to him in a degree which he had
353
THE FA TE OF WyUN JOE.
" 53
not fuUf appreciated before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him
since the day he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.
Injun Joe's bowie knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great found-
ation-beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through, with tedious labor ;
useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock fonned a silt outside it, and upon that
stubborn material the knife had wrought no effect ; the only damage done was to
the knife itself. But if there ha^ been no stony obstruction there the labor would

have been useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could
not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he had only
hacked that place in order to be doing something — in order to pass the weary
time— -in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily one could find half a
dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule, left there by
tourists ; but there were none now. The prisoner had searched them out and eaten
them. He had also contrived to catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten,
TOM SAWYER.
leaving only their claws. The poor unfortunate had starred to death. In one
place near at hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for
ag es, builded by the water -drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had broken
off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a
stone, wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch
the precious drop that fell once in every three minutes
with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick — a dessert
spoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop
was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy
; when the foundations of Rome were laid ; when
Christ was crucified; when the Conqueror created the
British empire ; when Columbus sailed ; when the
I massacre at Lexington was " news. " It is fallingnow;
it will still be falling when all these things shall have
sunk down the afternoon of history, and the twilight
I of tradition, and been swallowed up in the thick night
of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission }
Did this drop fall patiently during five thousand years
to be ready for this flitting human insect's need ? and
has it another important object to accomplish ten thou-
'sand years to come? No matter. It is many and many
I year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the
stone to ca;ch the priceless drops, but to this day the
tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow
dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of
McDougal's rave. Injun Joe's cup stands first in the
list of the cavern's marvels; even " Aladdin's Palace "
cannot rival it.
Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked there in
boats and wagons from the towns and from all the farms and hamlets for seven
miles around; they brought their children, and all sorts of provisions, and con-
fessed that they had liad almost as satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could
have had at the hanging.

BUCK AND TOM COMPAAB NOTES. 255
This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing — the petition to the Gover-
nor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely signed ; many tearful
and eloquent meetings had been held, and a committee of sappy women been

appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the governor, and implore him
to be a merciful ass and trample his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed 10
have killed five citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Sainn
himself there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names
to a pardon-petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and
leaky water- works.
The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have an
important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the Wekhman
and the widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one
thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted to talk about now.
Huck's face saddened. He said :
" I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found anything but whisky.
Nobody told me it was you ; but I just Vnowed it must'a'ben you, soon as I heard
Trout that whisky buiiiness ; and I knowed you hadn't got the money becuz you'd
'a'got .It me some way or other and told me even if you was mum to everybody
else. Tom, something's always told me we'd never get holt of that swag. "
" Why Huck, /never told on that tavern-keeper. Y < m know his tavern was all
256 TOM SA WYER,
right the Saturday I went to the pic-nic. Don*t you remember you was to watch
there that night? "
" Oh, yes! Why it seems'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I
follered Injun Joe to the widder's. "
" You followed him ? "
" Yes — but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him, and
I don't want'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it hadn't ben for
me he'd be down in Texas now, all right. "
Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only heard
of the Welchmen's part of it before.
" Well, " said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question, " whoever
nipped the whisky in No. 2, nipped the money too, I reckon — anyways it's a goner
for us, Tom. "
" Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2 ! "
" What ! " Huck searched his comrade's face keenly.. " Tom, have you got on
the track of that money again ? "
" Huck, it's in the cave ! "
Huck's eyes blazed.
*'Say it again, Tom ! "
" The mone/s in the cave ! "
" Tom, — honest injun, now — is it fun, or earnest ? "
" Earnest, Huck — ^just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go in there
with me and help get it out } "
" I bet I will ! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost. "
" Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the world. "
" Good as wheat ! What makes you think the money's — "
" Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it I'll agree to give
you my drum and everything I've got in the world. I will, by jings. "
" All right — it's a whiz. When do you say } "
" Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough } "
" Is it far in the cave } I ben on my pins a little, three or four days, now, but I
can't walk more'n a mile, Tom-^least I don't think I could. "
AN EXPEDITION TO THE CA VE.
m

" It's about five mile into there the way
anybody but me would go, Huck, but
there's a mighty short cut that they don't
anybody but me know about. Huck, I'll
take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float
the skiff down there, and 111 pull it back
again all by myself. You needn't ever
turn your hand over, "
" Less start right off, Tom. "
" All right. We want some bread and
meat, and our pipes, and a little bag or
two, and two or three kite-strings, and
some of these new fangled things they
call lucifer matches. I tell you tnany's
the time I wished I had some when I
was in there before. "
A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a
small skiff from a citizen who was absent,
and got under way at once. When they
were several miles below " Cave Hollow, "
Tom said :
*'Now you see this bluff here looks all
alike all the way down from the cave
hollow — no houses, no wood-yards, bushes
all alike. But do you see that white place
up yonder where there's been a land-
slide? Well that's one of my marks.
We'll get ashore, now. "
They landed.
" Now Huck, where we're a-standing you
could touch that hole I got out of with a
fishing-pole. See if you can find it. "
5vrv Ab uuvT, ctiiu wc ii K.ccp 11 4UICI) uniy wc ii ict
because of course there's got to be a Gang, or
about it. Tom Sawyer's Gang — it sounds splend
" Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob ?
" Oh, most anybody. Waylay people — that's m
" And kill them ? "
" No — not always. Hive them in the cave till t
f " What's a ransom? "
'" Money. You make them raise all they can, ofl
kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill
Only you don't kill the women. You shut up the
They're always beautiful and rich, and awfully j
and things, but you always take your hat off and t
as polite as robbers — you'll see that in any book
you, and after they've been in the cave a week or
after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you
around and come back. It's so in all the books. "
" Why it's real bully, Tom. I b'lieve it's better
" Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close U
By this time everytning was ready and the bo
lead. They toiled their way to the farther end
• spliced kite-strings fast and moved on. A few s
and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through him. I
\
PROTECTION AGAINST GHOSTS, 259
Tom*s Other corridor until they reached the " jumping-off place " The candles
revealed the fact that it was not really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty
or thirty feet high. Tom whispered —
** Now I'll show you something, Huck. "
He held his candle aloft and said —
" Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that.'There— on the
big rock over yonder — done with candle smoke. "
" Tom, its a cross T*
^^ Now Where's your Number Two? * Under the cross^* hey? Right yonder's
where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck ! "
Huck stared at the mystic sign a while, and then said with a shaky voice-—
" Tom, less git out of here ! "
" What ! and leave the treasure ? "
" Yes — leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain. "
" No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he died — away
out at the mouth of the cave — five mile from here. "
" No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways of
ghosts, and so do you. "
Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his mind. But
presently an idea occurred to him —
" Looky here, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's ghost
ain't a going to come around where there's a cross! "
The point was well taken. It had its effect.'
" Tom I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that cross is. I
reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box. "
Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended. Huck fol-
lowed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the great rock stood in.
The boys examined three of them with no result. They found a small recess in the
one nearest the base of the rock, with a pallet of blankets spread down in it ; also
an old suspender, some bacon rhind, and the well gnawed bones of two or three
fowls. But there was no money box. The lads searched and re-searched this
place, but in vain. Tom said :
a6o TOM SAIVYER,
" He said under the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the cross.
It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on the ground. "
They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged. Huck
could suggest nothing. By and by Tom said :
" Looky here, Huck, there's foot-prints and some candle grease on the clay
about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now what's that for ? I
bet you the money is under the rock. I'm going to dig in the clay. "
*'That ain't no bad notion, Tom ! " said Huck with animation.
Tom's " real Barlow " was out at once, and he had not dug four inches before
he struck wood.
" Hey, Huck !— you hear that ? "
Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and
removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock. Tom
got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he could, but said he
could not see to the end of the rift He proposed to explore. He stooped and
passed under; the narrow way descended gradually. He followed its winding
course, first to the right, then to the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short
curve, by and by, and exclaimed —
" My goodness, Huck, looky here ! "
It was the treasure box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern, along
with an empty powder keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two or three pairs
of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish well soaked with the
water-drip.
^'Crot it at last! " said Huck, plowing among the tarnished coins with his
hand. " My, but we're rich, Tom ! " ^
" Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe, but we
have got it, sure ! Say — let's not fool around here. Let's snake it out. Lemme
see if I can lift the box. "
It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward fashion,
but could not carry it conveniently.
" I thought so, " he said; /^ry carried it like it was heavy, that day at the
ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of fetching the
little bags along. "
•'AN A WFUL SNUG PLACE.''261
The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross-rock.
" Now less fetch the guns and things, " said Huck.
" No, Huck — leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when wego
to robbing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our oi^ies there,
too. It's an awful snug place for orgies. "
" What's orgies ? "
" / dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to have

them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's getting
late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we get to the skiff, "
They presently emerged into the clump of sumach bushes, looked warily out,
found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking In the skiff. As the
sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got under way. Tom
skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting cheerily with Huck,
and landed shortly after dark.
262 TOM SAIVYER.
" Now Huck, " said Tom, " we'll hide the money in the loft of the widow's
wood-shed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it and divide, and
then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it where it will be safe. Just
you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till I run and hook Benny Taylor's little
wagon; I won't be gone a minute. "
He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small
sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started off, dragging
his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the Welchman's house, they
stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move on, the Welchman stepped
out and ^said :
« Hallo, who's that ? "
" Huck and Tom Sawyer. "
" Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting.
Here — hurry up, trot ahead — I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not as
light as it might be. Got bricks in it ? — or old metal ? "
" Old metal, " said Tom.
" I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away
more time, hunting up six bit's worth of old iron to sell to the foundry than
they would to make twice the money at regular work. But that's human nature
— hurry along, hurry along! "
The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.
" Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas's. "
Huck said with some apprehension — for he was long used to being falsely
accused —
" Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing.''
The Welchman laughed.
" Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you
and the widow good friends ? "
" Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, any ways. "
" All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for? "
This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind, before he
found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas's drawing-rooou
Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.
A RECEPTION AT THE WIDOW DOUGLAS'S. 263
The place was grandly lighted, aod everybody that was of any consequence
in the village was there. The Thatchers were there, the Harpers, the Rogerses,
Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor, and a great many more, and
all dressed in their best. The widow received the boys as heartily as any one
could well receive two such looking beings. They were covered with clay
and candle grease. Aunt Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned
and shook her head at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys
did, however. Mr. Jones said :
" Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up ; but I stumbled on him and
Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry. "
" And you did just right, " said the widow : — " Come with me, boys, "
She took them to a bed chamber and said :
" Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes^
shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's — no, no thanks, Huck —
Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you. Get into
them. We'll wait— come down when you are slicked up enough. "
Then she left.

't < :^

APTERX


VGK
said " Tom, we can slope, if we
can find a rope The window ain't
high from the ground
Shucks what do you want to
slope for?
" Well I ain t used to that kind of
a crowd. I can't stand it. I aint
going down there, Tom, "
" O, bother! It ain't anything. I
don't mind it a bit. I'll take care of
you. "
Sid appeared.
" Tom, " said he, " Aumie has been
waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready >
and everybody's been fretting about you. Say — ain't this grease and clay, on
your clothes ? "
** Now Mr. Siddy, you jist *tend to your own business. What's all this blow-
out about, anyway ? "
264
SPRINGING A SECRET. 265
** It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time its for
the Welchman and his sons, on account of that scrape they helped her out of
the other night. And say— I can tell you something, if you want to know. "
" Well, what ? "
" Why old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people
here to-night, but I overheard him tell auntie to-day about it, as a secret, but
I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows — the widow, too, for
all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here —
couldn't get along with his grand secret without Huck, you know ! "
" Secret about what, Sid } "
" About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones was
going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will drop pretty
flat. "
Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.
" Sid, was it you that told ? "
" O, never mind who it was. Somebody told— that's enough. "
" Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and that's
you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd *a'sneaked down the hill and never
told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean things, and you can't
bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones. There — no thanks, as the
widow says " — and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and helped him to the door with
several kicks. " Now go and tell auntie if you dare — and to-morrow you'll
catch it ! "
Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper table, and a dozen
children were propped up at little side tables in the same room, after the fashion
of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr. Jones made his little
speech, in which he thanked the widow for the honor she was doing himself
and his sons, but said that there was another person whose modesty —
And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the ad-
venture in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the surprise it
occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and effusive as it
might have been under happier circumstances. However, the widow made a
366
TOM SA H'YEJl.
pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many compliments and so
much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable dts-
comfort of his new clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set
up as a target for everybody's gaze and everybody's laudations.
The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have
him educated ; and that when she could spare the money she would start bim in
business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come. He said :
" Huck don't need it. Huck's rich! "
Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept
■''^''rtp'h

back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But the
silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it —
" Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of it. Oh,
you needn't emile — I reckon I caq show you. You just wait a minute. "
MR. JONES'S SURPRISE A FAILURE. 267
Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a perplexed
interest — and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.
" Sid, what ails Tom? " said Aunt Polly, " He — well, there ain't ever any
making of that boy out. I never — "
Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did
not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon the table
and said —
" Ther & — what did I tell you 7 Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine ! "
The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke for a
moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom said he
could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brim full of interest.
There was scarcely an interruption from anyone to break the charm of its
flow. When he had finished^r. Jones said —
" I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it don't
amount to anything now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm witling
to allow. "
The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve thou-
sand dollars. It was more than any one present had ever seen at one time
before, though several persons were there who were worth considerably more
than that in property.


reader m;
and Huck's w
in the poor 1
burg. So vas
seemed next t
about, gloate
reason of mai
under the sti
citement. E
St. Petersburj
^ lages was diss
its foundatioi
for hidden ti
but men — pre
too, some of 1
A NEW ORDER OF THINGS. 269
as remarkable ; they had evidently lost the power of doing and saying common-
place things; moreover, their past history was raked up and discovered to bear
marks of conspicuous originality. The village paper published biographical
sketches of the boys.
The widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent., and Judge Thatcher
did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had an income, now,
that was simply prodigious — a dollar for every week-day in the year and half of
the Sundays. It was just what the minister got — no, it was what he was promised
— he generally couldn't collect it. A dollar and a quarter a week would board,
lodge and school a boy in those old simple days — and clothe him and wash him,
too, for that matter.
Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her whipping at
school, the Judge was visibly moved ; and when she pleaded grace for the mighty
lie which Tom had told in order to shift that whipping from her shoulders to his
own, the Judge said with a fine outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a mag-
nanimous lie — a lie that was worthy to hold up its head and march down through
history breast to breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the
hatchet ! Becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as
when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight
off and told Tom about it.
Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some day.
He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the National
military academy and afterwards trained in the best law school in the country, in
order that he might be ready for either career or both.
Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the widow Douglas's
protection, introduced him into society — no, dragged him into it, hurled him into
it — and his sufferings were almost more than he could bear. The widow's
servants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they bedded him
nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot or stain which he
could press to his heart and know for a friend. He had to eat with knife and
The public were profoundly concerned ; they search <
the river for his body. Early the third morning Tc
among some old empty hogsheads down behind th <
and in one of them he found the refugee. Huck
breakfasted upon some stolen odds and ends of foo
comfort with his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombe
ruin of rags that had made him picturesque in tl
happy. Tom routed him out, told him the troub
urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranqui
choly cast. He said :
" Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it do
It ain't for me ; I ain't used to it. The widder's go(
can't stand them ways. She makes me git up just at
she makes me wash, they comb me all to thunder
the wood-shed ; I got to wear them blamed clothes 1
they don't seem to any air git through'em, somehow
that I can't set down, nor lay down, nor roll around
cellar-door for — well, it'pears to be years ; I got 1
sweat — I hate them ornery sermons ! I can't ketc
I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widder eats b;
bell ; she gits up by a bell — everything's so awful re
" Well, everybody does that way, Huck. "
POOR HUCKI
zi\
no comfort — I'd got to go up in the attic and rip out a while, eVery day, to git a
taste in my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she
wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch, before
folks — " [Then with a spasm of special irritation and injury],—: " And dad fetch
it, she prayed all the time ! I never stt such a woman ! I had to shove, Tom — I
just had to. And besides, that school's going to open, and I'd a had to go to it —

well, [ vouldn't stand that, Tom. Lookyhere, Tom, being rich ain't what it's
cracked up to be. It's just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing
you was dead all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me,
and I ain't ever going to shake'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into all
this trouble if it hadn't'a'been for that money ; now you just take my sheer of it
along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes— not many times, becuz 1
like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and I'll :
it all ! just as we'd got guns, and a cave, and all just fi
foolishness has got to come up and spile it all ! "
Tom saw his opportunity —
" Lookyhere, Huck, being rich ain't going to kee;
robber. "
" No ! Oh, good-licks, are you in real dead-wood ear
" Just as dead earnest as I'm a sitting here. But E
the gang if you ain't respectable, you know. "
Huck's joy was quenched.
" Can't let me in, Tom ? Didn't you let me go for a }
" Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-tor
as a general thing. In most countries they're awful
dukes and such. "
" Now Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me? 1
would you, Tom ? You wouldn't do that, now, would yc
" Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I dorit want to — bu
Why they'd say, *Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! prett
They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and ]
Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental st
" Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and
come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Toi
" All riffht. Huck. it's a whiz ! Come aloni?. old chat
NElf ADVENTURES PLANNED.
«73
" Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation to-night,
maybe. "
" Have the which ? "
" Have the initiation. "
" What's that? "
" It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's secrets, even

if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one
of the gang, "
" That's gay — that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you. "
" Well I bet it is. And all that swearing's got to be done at midnight, in the
lonesomest, awfulest place you can find — a ha'nted house is the best, but they're
all ripped up now. "
i8
»74
TOM SA WYER.
" Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom, "
" Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a cofiSn, and sign it with blood. "
" Now that's something liAe/ Why it's a million times bullier than pirating.
I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom ; and if I git to be a reg'lar ripper of a
robber, and everybody talking'bout it, I reckon she'll be proud she snaked me in
out of the wet. "

CONCLUSION.
So ehdeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a boy^ it must stop here;
the story could not go much further without becoming the history of a man^
When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows exactly where to stopn-
that is, with a marriage ; but when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where he
best can.
Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are prosperous
and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the story of the
younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they turned out to be:
therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that part of their lives at present.
THE END.
1

niie Real
TomSawer
■i^

ij -;,


r-
^
'■■^■.n^ " A

9 > »
niieReal
TomSaw)«r

yp-

rights of others.
They could run hke wild turkeys and swi
handle a boat as if born in one. No orchard o
safe from them; no dog or slave patrol so vigila
or later elude it. They Borrowed boats when th'
Once when they found this too much trouble, t
and one Sunday gave a certain borrowed craft a
it had been green), and -secluded it for a seai
borrowed the paint also, and the brush, thou
these the same evening about nightfall, so th'
Monday morning. Tom Blankenship rigged u
and Sam Clemens named it Cecilia, after which
boats any more, though the owner of it did;
observe as he saw it pass that, if it had been ;
would have sworn it was his.


TOM SAWYER AS THE " BLACK AVENGER OF THE SPANISH MAIN, "
MUSTERS HIS PIRATE BAND
Sometimes at evening they swam across to Glasscock's Island— the
rendezvous of Tom Sawyer's " Black Avengers " and the hiding-place of
Huck and Nigger Jim; then, when they had frolicked on the sand-bar
at the head of the island for an hour or more, they would swim back in
the dusk, a distance of half a mile, breasting the strong, steady M'ssis-
sippi current without exhaustion or fear. They could swim all day, likely
enough, those graceless young scamps. Once — though this was consid-
erably later, when he was sixteen — Sam Clemens swam across to the
Illinois side, and then turned and swam back again without landing, a
distance of at least two miles, as he had to go. He was seized with a cramp
on the return trip. His legs became useless, and he was obliged to make
the remaining distance with his arms. It was a hardy life they led, and it
is not recorded that they ever did any serious damage, though they nar-
rowly missed it sometimes.
One of their Sunday pastimes was to climb HoUiday's Hill and roll
down big stones, to frighten the people who were driving to church, Hol-
liday's Hill above the road was steep; a stone once started would go plung-
ing and leaping down and bound across the road with the deadly swiftness
of a twelve-inch shell. The boys would get a stone poised, then wait until
they saw a team approaching, and, calculating the distance, would give
it a start. Dropping down behind the bushes, they would watch the
dramatic effect upon the church-goers as the great missile shot across the
Foad a few yards before them. This was WoTtveTvt s'^w,\)Vi'^ ■s^.t-^ ■^■a.-^\ > s & .
it too far. Stones that had a habit of ^ettm?,\ooiie so xi.u'K^ttwi^:^ wv'^-^-^-

Sunday after Sunday. If their parents had
that, they would have thought they were bei
Finally one Sunday, while they were diggir
saw it come crashing in his direction and made a wild effort to whip up
his horse. It was also headed toward a cooper-shop across the road. The
boys watched it with growing interest. It made longer leaps with every
bound, and whenever it struck the fragments the dust would fly. They
were certain it would demoUsh the negro and destroy the cooper-shop.
The shop was empty, it being Sunday, but the rest of the catastrophe
would invite close Investigation, with results. They wanted to fly, but
they could not move until they saw the rock land. It was making mighty
leaps now, and the terrified negro had managed to, get directly in its path.
They stood holding their breath, their mouths open. Then suddenly they
could hardly believe their eyes; the boulder struck a projection a distance
above the road, and with a mighty bound sailed clear over the negro and
his mule and landed m the soft dirt beyond — only a fragment striking the
shop, damaging but not wrecking it. Half buried in the ground, that boulder
lay there for nearly forty years; then it was blasted up for milling purposes.
It was the last rock the boys ever rolled down. They began to suspect
that the sport was not altogether safe.
Sometimes the boys needed money, which was not easy to get in those
days. On one occasion of this sort, Tom Blankenship had the skin of a coon
he had captured, which represented the only capital in the crowd. At
Selms's store on Wild Cat corner the coonskin would bring ten cents,
but that was not enough. They arranged a plan which would make it
pay a good deal more than that. Selms's window was open, it being summer-
time, and his pile of pelts was pretty handy. Huck — that is to say, Tom-
went in the front door and sold the skin for ten cents to Se'ms, who tossed
it back on the pile, Tom came back with the money and after a reasonable
period went around to the open window, crawled in, got the coonskin.

HOME OF HUCK. FINN \%afi TO \%'iO
and sold it to Selms again. He did this several times that afternoon;
then John Pierce, Selms's cleric, said:
" Look here, Selms, there is something wrong about this. That boy
has been selling us coonskins all the afternoon. "
Selms went to his pile of pelts. There were several sheepskins and some
cowhides, but only one coonskin — the one he had that moment bought.
Selms himself used to tell this story as a great joke.
Perhaps it is not adding to Mark Twain's reputation to say that the
boy Sam Clemens — a pretty small boy, a ^ood deal less than twelve at
this time — was the leader of this unhallowed band; yet any other record
would be less than historic. If the band had a leader, it was he. They
were always ready to listen to him — they would even stop fishing to do that
— and to follow his projects. They looked to him for ideas and organiza-
tion, whether the undertaking was to be real or make-believe. When
they played " Bandit " or " Pirate " or " Indian, " Sam Clemens was always
chief; when they became real raiders it is recorded that he was no less dis-
tinguished. Like Tom Sawyer, he loved the glare and trappings of
leadership. When the Christian Sons of Temperance came along with a
regalia, and a red sash that carried with it rank and the privilege of in-
venting pass-words, the gaud of these things got into his eyes, and he gave
up smoking (which he did rather gingerly) and swearing (which he did
only under heavy excitement), also liquor (though he had never tasted it
yet), and marched with the newly washed and pure in heart for a full
month — a month of splendid leadership and servitude. Then even the red
sash could not hold him in bondage. He looked up Tom Blankenship
and said:
" Say, Tom,
I'm blamed
tired of this!
Let's go some-
where and
smoke I "
Which must
have been a
good deal of
a sacriBce, for
the uniform
was a precious
thing.
Limelight
and the center
of the stage
was a passion
of Sam Clem-
ens's boyhood,
a love of the
spectacular


IT SHOT H!M
Frightened — ragged — dirty — the boy stood. It was midnight and the doctor,
waked from sleep, demanded — " But how did they shoot him? " . The boy
trembled, stuttered — " He had a dream and it shot him. "
wholly died. It seems almost a pity that in those far-off barefoot old
days he could not have looked down the years to a time when, with the
world at his feet, venerable Oxford sRould clothe him in a scarlet
gown.
He could not by any chance have dreamed of that stately honor. His
ambitions did not lie in the direction of mental achievement. It is true
that now and then, on Friday at school, he read a composition, one of
which— a personal burlesque on certain older boys — came near resulting in
bodily damage. But any literary ambition he may have had in those days
was a fleeting thing. His permanent dream was to be a pirate, or a
pilot, or a bandit, or a trapper-scout; something gorgeous and active,
where his word — his nod, even — constituted sufficient law. The river
kept the pilot ambition always fresh, and the cave supplied a background
for those other things.
The cave was an enduring and substantial joy. It was a real cave,
not merely a hole, but a subterranean marvel of deep passages and vaulted
chambers that led away into bluffs and far down into the earth's black
silences, even below the river, some said. For Sam Clemens the cave had,
a fascination that never faded. Other localities and diversions might pall,
but any mention of the cave found him always eager and ready for the three-
mile walk or pull that brought them to its mystic door. With its long'
corridors, its royal chambers hung with stalactites, its remote hiding-
places, its possibilities as the home of a gallant outlaw band, it contained
everything that a romantic boy could love or long for. In Tom Saws "
Indian Joe dies in the C3ve. He did not d\e tWtew \fe < ^\\\t,\i > i.v^'is»\««^
rhere once, and was living on bats vfhen t\\ey ^OM^ft. V«
Twain with that'immortal episode in the story di
the Nigger Jim.
This is the real story:
A slave ran off from Monroe County, Missoui
into Illinois. Ben used to fish and hunt over i
one day found him. It was considered a most w
return a runaway slave; in fact, it was a crime n <
was .for this one a reward of fifty dollars, a forti
Blankenship. That money and the honor he cou!
tempting to the waif, but it did not outweigh h
stead of giving him up and claiming the rewan
over there in the marshes all summer. The n
would carry him scraps of other food. Then, 1
Some wood-choppers went on a hunt for the fu
what is called " Bird Slough. " There trying to crc
There was a gruesome sequel to this incide
the drowning of the runaway, Sam Clemens, Jol
boys went to the spot and were pushing the di
the negro rose before them, straight and terrible
of the water. He had gone down feet foremost,
released him. The boys did not stop to inves
was after them and flew in wild terror, never st
human habitation.
What a number of things crowded themseb
RTSHI

ARRIACE
T the old St. Nicholas Hotel, which stood on the west side of
I Broadway between Spring and Broome streets, there were
stopping at this time Jervis Langdon, a wealthy coal-dealer
'and mine-owner of Elmira, his son Charles and his daughter
I Olivia, whose pictured face Samuel Clemens had first seen
in the Bay of Smyrna one September day. Young Langdon
ecially anxious to bring his distinguished Quaker City friend
people together, and two days before Christmas Samuel
invited to dine at the hotel. He went very willingly. The
" that miniature had been often a part of his waking dreams,
time now he looked upoii its reaUty. Long afterward he said:
ty years ago. From that day to this she has never been out
ngdon was twenty-two years old at this time, delicateas the
: had seen, fragile to look upon. Gentle, winning, lovable,
family idol, and Samuel Clemens joined in their worship from
of that first meeting. Olivia Langdon, on her part, was at
id fascinated, rather than attracted, by this astonishing crea-
:e any one she had ever known.
= he had skilfullv ubtainccl a renewal of the invitation to spend
e Langdon home. A gay and happy week followed— a week
1 Samuel Clemens realized more fully tliau ever that in his
;as room for only one woman in all the world : Olivia Langdim
5 they called her — and as the day of departure drew near it
the gentle girlhad made some discoveries, too.
• ■ - " ^^ ■ ■';i Clemens had the ofd-
ns, and for what, in
morning of the finul
■nisl.t. "
lint. "


with force on the cobbled street. Neithei
Clemens not at all — only dazed a little for
spiration; here was a chance to prolong h
intended that he should take that train,
gathered around with restoratives he did
allowed them to support or carry him into
arm-chair and apply remedies. The young <
showed anxiety and attention. This was
juring himself, of course, but they say Jove
He recovered in a day or two, but the wi
Langdon home was not only offered now;
there two weeks later, after which he made
in Mrs. Fairbanks how he intended to win ]
It was the next afternoon (after the W "
Buffalo, accompanied by the bride's parei
Beechers, and perhaps one or two others of
nine o'clock at night when they arrived, 2
the station with sleighs to convey the par
had selected. They drove and drove, and
and groom got behind and apparently was
which disturbed the groom a good deal, for
should arrive first, to receive their guests,
judgment in selecting a house that was so h
they turned into fashionable Delaware A'v

rg^, th <
of Joan of Arc. Her shi
across the gaping shell hoi
English — swear that they
that Joan leads them also to victory.
To us in this country, Joan is the grcates
she is the very life, the very spirit of the n;
To understand the France of today you
stoty. Never in the history of the world h:
And through all the cent
pliciiy until it was told hy
ildiers of France siill are led t^ the spirit
before them pointing the way to victory
id through the driving hail of fire. The French — the
; seen her — their own incomparable Joan of Arc. And
list know Joan of Arc and her glori
there been such another,
told her story in all its majesty and s
I. MARK TWAIN.
for him. " Don't you understand.^ It is ours, all ours— everything — a
gift from father! "
But even then he could not grasp it; not at first, not until Mr. Langdon
brought a Httle box and, opening it, handed them the deeds.
Nobody quite remembers what was the first remark ^hat Samuel
Clemens made them; but either then or a little later he said:
" Mr. Langdon, whenever you are in Buffalo, if it's twice a year, come
right here. Bring your bag and stay overnight if you want to. It sha'n't
cost you a cent! "
They went in to supper then, and by and by the guests were gone and
the young wedded pair were alone.
Patrick McAleer, the young coachman, who would grow old in their em-
ploy, and Ellen, the cook, came in for their morning orders, and were full of
Irish delight at the inexperience and novelty of it all. Then they were gone,
and only the lovers in their new house and their new ha^^itvess te.TO.iv'^e.A,
And so it was they entered the enc\\ant«i \aui.
The Retu

Invisible

JHROUGH that peaceful spring afternoon the life-wave ebbed
lower and lower. It was about half past six, and the sun lay
just on the horizon when Dr. Quintard noticed that the
breathing, which had gradually become more subdued, broke
a little. There was no suggestion of any struggle. The
noble head turned a little to one side, there was a fluttering
sigh, and the breath that had been unceasing through seventy-four tumul-
tuous years had stopped forever.
He had entered into the estate envied so long. In his own words — the
words of one of his latest memoranda:
" He had arrived at the dignity of death — the only earthly dignity that
is not artificial — the only safe one. The others are traps that can beguile
to humiliation.
" Death — tl^e only immortal who treats us all alike, whose pity and
whose peace and whose refuge are for all — the soiled and the pure — the
rich and the poor — the loved and the unloved. "
It is not often that a whole world mourns. Nations have often mourned
a hero — and races— but perhaps never before had the entire world really
united in tender sorrow for the death of any man.
No man had ever so reached the heart of the world, and one may not
even attempt to explain just why. Let us only say that it was beLause
he was so limitlessly human that every other human heart, in whatever
sphere or circumstance, responded to his touch.
From every remote corner of the globe the cables of condolence swept
in; every printed sheet in Christendom was filled with lavish tribute;
pulpits forgot his heresies and paid him honor. No king ever died that
received so rich an homage as his.
Mark Twain's religion was a faith too wide for doctrines — a benevolence
too limitless for creeds. From the beginning he strove against oppression,
sham, and evil in every form. He despised meanness; he resented with every
drop of blood in him anything that savored of persecution or a curtail'
ment of human liberties. It was a religion identified with his daily hfe
and his work.
He lived as he wrote, and he wrote as he believed. His favorite weapon
was humor — good humor — with \og\c \je\vvui\x- N. ?, < i\v < 3X ^o^ifted truth it
was^truth weanne a smile of Eent\eness,WT\cea\\'^«.TOWfc < > :i\ < iN^'3Vfc^'i.'^.
Bernard Shaw Wr Mark Iwain:
" I am persuaded that the future historian of America will find your
w^orks as indispensable to him as a French historian finds the political
tracts of Voltaire. "
KIPLING MEETS MARK TWAIN
Written by Rudyard Kipling
I have seen Mark Twain this golden morning, have shaken his hand,
and smoked a cigar — no, two cigars — with him, and talked with him for
more than two hours! Understand clearly that I do not despise you;
indeed I don't. I am only very sorry for you, from the Viceroy down-
ward. To soothe your envy and to prove that I still regard you as my
equals, I will tell you all about it.
The things happened somewhat in this order. A big, darkened drawing-
room; a huge chair; a man with eyes, a mane of grizzled hair, a brown
mustache, a strong, square hand shaking mine, and the slowest, calmest,
levelest voice in all the world, saying:
" Well, you think you owe me something, and you've come to tell me
so. That's what I call squaring a debt handsomely. "
All my preconceived notions were wrong and beneath the reality.
Blessed is the man who finds no disillusion when he is brought face to face
with a revered writer.
Once, indeed, he put his hand on my shoulder. It was an investiture
of the Star of India, blue silk, trumpets, and diamond-studded jewel, all
complete. If hereafter, in the changes and chances of this mortal life, I
fall to cureless ruin, I will tell the superintendent of the workhouse that
Mark Twain once put his hand on my shoulder; and he shall give me a
room to myself and a double allowance of paupers'tobacco.
December
Jth, 1917
LAST DAY
At the present Low Price
Why the Price Must Be Raised
To Mark Twain two things were precious above all others — ooe
was a love for his wife — the other was a love of the people. On
every side he was surrounded by tributes of honor, by joyous affec-
tion. In every corner of the world he was known and loved. And
because of this it was his desire that his books be so made and sold
at such a low price that every family could
own a set. So this set of Mark Twain has
been sold at a much lower price than would
ordinarily be the case for a set of books of
this character. But Mark Twain could not
forsee that the price of ink, paper, binding —
that everything that goes into the making of
a set of books — ^was to go to heights un-
dreamed of even two years ago. It is impos-
sible to continue the sale of this set of books
at that low price.
So after December loth the price goes up.
If you mail the card herewith on or
before December 10th, you can
still have the low price. After
that date you will be too late.
So don't wait. Mail the
card now — to-day.
If you have mislaid the
ou may send this
coupon instead.
HARPER &
BROTHERS
1817-1917

HARPER A
BROTHERS
Franklin Sq.
NEW YORK
Pleaae send me MARK
TWAIN'S WORKS. I
may keep this set for ten
days for examination and re-
turn it to you. at your expense,
if I do not want it. If I keep the
books I will remit Is.oo within five
days and I2.00 a month for twelve
months.
Name
Address
10% added to price in Canada because of duty
/iv our beauiiful r*d half -leather edition change above
//rms to $2. so on ^'elivery and $j a month for 20 monih%.
HISTORY
Read " Joan of Arc " if
you would know Mark
Twain in all his greatness
— the most amazing
story in the world — ac-
curate as history, spir-
itual in idea, beautiful
in execution.
ROMANCE
Everything he wrote was
touched with the golden
freshness of youth and
romance whether in such
books as " The Prince
and The Pauper " — " A
Connecticut Yankee, or
" Roughing It. "
SHORT STORIES
They are so many and
so good.
ESSAYS
He could not see injus-
tice without fighting it.
The flame of his anger
seared and burst forth
in essays that will live
forever.
TRAVEL
You have not seen the
world until you see it
through Mark Twain's
wise and humorous eyes.
His books of wandenngs
— will be revelations to
you no-v who read them
only in their youth.
Jan, 31, 1918] The Natio P
William T. Stead: " The Czar is ready to disarm: / am ready'
to disarm. Collect the others, it should not be much of a
task now. " To which he adds in a second letter : " Can't we
^et four great Powers to agree to reduce their strength 10
per cent, a year and thrash the others into doing likewise?
For, of course, we cannot get all of the Powers to be in
their right minds at one time. It has been tried. "
All this is the comment of a man who combined with his
invincible democratic idealism a " realizing sense " of the
complex wickedness of the human heart. Out of the love
and wrath of that union Mark Twain would, if he were in
the flesh to-day, give us his " reaction " to the War of the
German Invasions; and his utterances, we may be sure,
would as of old represent the deepest convictions of the /
American people. To his intimate friends he would reveal
that despairing inner wrench and revolt which every honest
democrat felt when he recognized the inevitability of Ameri-
can participation in the hideous conflict. His heart and
his rags of morals, he would probably admit, were with the
uncompromising pacifists. He would fill his letters with
^'disparaging remarks about the human race, " just as he
did in the case of the Boer War : " Why loas the human race
created? Or at least why wasn't something creditable cre-
ated in place of it? God had his opportunity. He could
have made a reputation. But no, He must commit this gro-
tesque folly — a lark which must have cost Him a regret when
He came to think it over and observe effects. For a giddy
and unbecoming caprice there has been nothing like it till
this war. " He would go on to exclaim that he wished all
this " civilization, " for which we are fighting, were " in hell,
where it belongs. " But, he would hasten to add, as he did
in the case of the Boer War, " provided we could get some-
thing better in the place of it. But that is not possible, per-
haps. Poor as it is, it is better than real savagery, therefore
we must stand by it, extend it, and (in public) praise it. "
A defeat for the cause of the Allies, he would conclude,
would be an " irremediable disaster for the mangy human
race. " Having thus purged his heart with bitter words,
he would go on to the platform and declare with utter sin-
cerity that Americans must support this war to the last drop
of their blood, as their noblest and holiest enterprise since
1776. Such was the humor of Mark Twain.
i
e^jOM asoqii'mm'[lAap aiq^jop? :^Bq:^ no paMo:(8
pa9 saazna jo ainipciiu « si dii:(B6'uibmj, m'9j/\
pov i^iM }o aji^xim « sv joiunq paquasap Aex
-qnd ui iC^p ifB pa:[JOM SBq aq i^aainpuauiB asoq^
« :^v a:^9Aij(I ai iCvp qv JSauHdMS iCq aauaii^tKliU!
-jaovxa 8iq ^o J9ap[joM :^6i[9dpi pijoai ai^Huoiscra
-uas 9 cri noi:(«:(aj(Lia!^n! pua^^n jo; biiivuz aiac^n
pai^aiBpinn japBaj 9 (4 siHdAdj Ai^idoja; ivouc^aqj
f/jredsap ^oa op i ^9A'pajaALsnt
^S o\ maas ^mzva i *99VJt umunii a^^ /o uot^vu
Buypodid & ^ aq^ jo i^saj aq^ ni i^nd o:^ am asnvo (
-Aia dn a3[Bia ^9q^ saii^ianja poB saisiidodiCq pxr
pa« saii^iAUJdap i^nsn aq:^ %\ m pug n^^ I V
Qaii — ^Saiojoiu iCjaAa :^i op i uadBd JSaiojooi
aaaq aAvq i,, :6iq:( 9^\\ saJ^Bss^d jo siat^i^ai aq:^ in
ssaiJOiunq aq:^ £x{ iCdojq!^a«6iia g^uivmj, ^^m }
jiaq:^ ^^^l^o; iClisva mia ^a^ija qans «/iC8iJ0odiCi|
-uauiy }o aoaid iCjBuioi^sna ai^BJoq^ia a? ajaM ai
paqsiiqnd co[jom aq:^ puB a^ix sih'uibaij, ^J^H
dii ajaH'i^sbi :^v paAOinaj pH aq:^ aAHq aM c
ai9;jaa pami^iaxa «,iBq'qv»,'pajtsaddv e^ooq ,
«/oi!^8iiHija!^Buiyy'•id^^iq ^BqMauios asdq:^ ^^qM
qons }o aoi:^BniBA [boi^^uo :^q^u aq; o:^ djaq anp
'pa:(aB aq :^Bqi
Jan. 31, 1918]
/
His life was the incense, you were the flame,
■■!■ ■ • ■ ■ 1 L 1 -i. .
(4 sa^uM eq :^uaureuuwsip iBSjaAiun joj siHsodojd s^otq
aq:^ jo sodojdB'-^n^uiji „'mou jaq :^suib3b ^[Bads n^qs oqM
aoui UBinnq aq:j jo iCuiaua ire si ajj'PPR^I^ ^^ ^sniu pirei
-aug — ^^uojM SI aqs pire — Suoim. uaAg ['sojibi^i s^jaMaiAan]
^yodv sdvioo zsxjL'HQ 22?? %8vi pfnocn yotyai fU9aryi8 pur > %%i6xu
96y 9fppi^ /o 1^X08 r > u% ^t (199^8 pjnom tioyqcn 8U0}pypvjL69p
fDotmod umiU9f) pur > um88n^ jo aoi:^Hpanai ire nvaiu pinoM,,
pa^lj^ag jo ainirej aq^ ^res aq sb'asnvoaq'uo^^ijg aq:^ q^pi
SBM pvaq siH ^/Jaog aq^ q^iM aiH aAHq i sh s[«jom jo sJStu
ipns pan :^9aq Jim i^nq'acx^ug aq:^ q^iM si pvaq Aj/q^,, ^^lA
W30UJY ir^nos aq^ }o pay ,/:^i :^aadxa Ajj^i ^jiop i asjnoo
JO i^i qsiM iCpio I'fooS joj :^no maq^ daa:[ pire :^no sja
-njSiajoj aq:^ n^ aAup qim i£aq^ adoq i pire'adojng jo saAaiq^
pajt^daos aq:^ iCq qt^iM i^iHap iCisnoireQiA naaq aAvq ^qx'asau
-iqO aq^ q^ui aj« saiqi^BdmXs Am pire'Mon ^niiqQ q« si :^i„
laoinaqaH Jaxog aq:^ jo a:^0JM aq JvaiC aures aq:^ aj ^«*aai
JOJ :^saja(^ai on SBq ajaq:^ :^no jbm aq^'os aj« s^aiq:^ asaq:^ ji
'iC^iadoid Jiaq^ a:^B0syao3 pire si^saud aq:^ duvq o^ JSuisodojd
i^ou aiH aM iCii^aajBddB pire Smaq^ o^ spireisi Jiaq^ aAid pire
aajj soaidiiiji aq:^ %ds 0% J9aisodojd %on aiv aM Ai^udi'eddY,,
:QaipiALX pudHJ ^m 0:^ a:(OJM aq 0O6I ^I'^uure qsajj «
aAjasap iCji^aaa :^sbi ^^^ J^ ®^P ^R^ -^^^^ sjre^v pai^^jqa^aa
jnoj JO aajq:^ o^ :^sa:^ oi:^BJ9omap aq:^ jo saoii^Bonddv sih
*t^q^ij SBM aq
pay'pauurep aq o^ paAjasap :^i %wi% %i pio^ puB aun:^ siq
JO «,aoi:^HzinAp„ aq:^ o:^ai pa:[ooi areMx ^J^K ^I-^I^^^ jh[iuiis
^laspajd q:^iA^'sq:^nj:^ amoq a^qBi^Bindun j^asiniq sna; pav
89BJ aq:^ ai j[asiniq i[ooi 0% sajBp oqM ireui b jo jopavo aq^
pan 92'einoo aq:^ si aiaqx «/99 JOj ssb we pue sjHaiC qz joj
joninH UH uaaa aAHU t.. :smi smai)! jaq^o ^aoore pa^^si^ aq
A P OSTHUMOUS N(
The Mysterious Stranger " a Depressin
^od, " by tViiriam Dean Hoiyells— Othei

KTRANORl
By 1
It Train. UliwtnMi In
Harper ft BroUien.
p_^HE story of the Jester who could cure every Bad
I aJli bitter heart with tb« nimble fandea of hl >
brain, but who was Umseir eaddest and bitterest
Of any, Is an old one. It has had much corroboration, and
Ita truth fa proved. For here we liave a last
" Word from him wc have always called the greatest Amer-
ican humorist, a word that comes to us after the gnvt
kas closed over tho speaker, a flnal and conclusive word.
It la difficult to Imaelne a message carrying a grimmer
credo of despair, disillusion, and contempt for human
«xlstcnc < -. It blows uRon the sftlrlt like a cold irfnd over
S dart: and desolate land, a land where there is never a
light, near or far, promising: shelter, homo, and love. In
such a land, shivering- In such a wind, what- better is there
thuii to lie down and die? And'«uch Is the coQcluaion Mr.
Clemens arri\es at. Tlie one boon Is death. The greater
tioon. a mere possibllltj'. Is that the whole thing wTbut a
dream, a ghastly, grotesque, and Impossible nightmare,
too ridiculous for realily.
Tills Ih the message. As for the book Itself, the method
of delivery, it Is an excellent piece of literature It Is
writlan wllh at] Mr. Clemens's skill In words, his power of
cliaiacter drawlnc, hia gift for putting a \'lvld picture on
the page. It voveg swiftly, It wears the dress of Action,
< , In spite of the depression It creates, it Is not likely to
-'d aside until finished. There is no question as to its
lity. nor. for that matter, as to Its truth, so far as It
■■-- -ime truth expressed by Macbeth when he de-
all man's Ideas of the supl
and can bear any nan
The stranger explains'^
tor him to love the roc
Men have nothing
point of contact: they 1
foolish little vanities aai
their foolish little II.. .
tinctlon; and they, hav
He takes the boys wit
the world, showing the

