
W^Mmm
~^f

%.-
^ " W

^ \^^
1
.11^
Vx:



I- ^ilf^
\ ,^-
•^l- " ^ > ^
^'y\C





.w(^ . -.SJlf " W ... ^'

BOSTON
PUBLIC
LIBRT^RY

Oyj

iU s'-cn}- > -^j^ u-'^x.aA^
-c-^C^
/)
J
f^yxA^oOuL^o^
i
< 2^'
i
ALICE'S
ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND.


ALICE'S
ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND.
BY
LEWIS CARROLL.
WITH FORTY-TWO ILLUS2 RATIONS
BY
JOHN TENNIEL.
NEW EDITION
NEW YORK
MACMILLAN & CO
1888.
PZ7-
New York • J. J. Little & Co., Printers.
10 to 20 Astor Place.
CONTENT Sc
CHAPTER
I. Down the Rabbit-Hole . „ .,
II. Thi: Pool of Tears . . o . . ,
m. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale
lY. The Rabbit sends in a Little Bill
Y. Advice from a Caterpillar . ,
VI. Pia AND Pepper , . . o . . o ,
VII. A Mad Tea-Party ....,.,
VTII. The Queen's Croquet-Ground , .
IX. The Mock Turtle's Story o . . .
X. The Lobster Quadrille . . . . .
XI. Who Stole the Tarts? . . . . .
XH. Alice's Evidence
Page
. 1
15
. 29
41
. 59
. 76
. 95
112
130
147
162
176
All in tlie golden afternoon
Full leisurely we glide ,
For both our oars, with little skill.
By little arms are plied,
While little hands make vain pretence
Our \\ mderino^s to c-uideo
Ah, cruel Three ! In such an hour,
Beneath such dreamy weather,
To beg a tale, of breath too weak
To stir the tiniest feather !
Yet what can one poor voice avail
Against three tongues together?
Imperious Prima flashes forth
Her edict to " begin it " —
In gentler tone Secunda hopes
" There will be nonsense _n it "
While Tertia interrupts the talc
Not more than once a minute.
Anon, to sudden silence won.
In fancy they pursue
The dream-child movms^ throus^h a land
Of wonders wild and new,
In friendly chat with bird or beast —
And half believe it true.
And ever, as the story drained
The wells of fancy dry,
And faintly strove that weary one
To put the subject by,
" The rest next time — " " It is next time I
The happy voices cry.
Thus o:rew the tale of Wonderland :
Thus slowly, one by one,
Its quaint events were hammered out^
And now the tale is done.
And home we steer, a merry crew,
Beneath the setting sun.
Alice ! a childish story take,
And with a gentle hand
Lay it where Childhood's dreams are twined
In Memory's mystic band,
Like pilgrim's withered wreath of flowers
Plucked in a far-off land.

CHAPTEE I.
DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE.
Alice was beginning to get very tired of
sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having
nothing to do : once or twice she had peeped into
the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it^ ^ " ^and what is
% DOWN THE
the use of a book, " thought Ahce, ^'without
pictures or conversations ? "
So she was considering in her own mind,
(as well as she could, for the hot day made
her feel very sleepy and stupid,) whether the
pleasure of making a daisy - chain would be
worth the trouble of getting up and picking
the daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with
pink eyes ran close by her.
There was nothing so very remarkable in
that; nor did Alice think it so very much out
of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself,
" Oh dear! Oh dear! I shall be too late! "
(when she thought it over afterwards, it oc-
curred to her that she ought to have wondered
at this, but at the time it all seemed quite
natural) ; but when the Rabbit actually took a
watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, and looked at
it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her
feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had
never before seen a rabbit with either a waist-
coat-pocket or a watch to take out of it, and,
RABBIT-HOLE. . 3
burning with curiosity, she ran across the field
after it, and was just in time to see it pop down
a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
In another moment down went Ahce after itj
never once considering how in the world she
was to get out again.
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tun-
nel for some way, and then dipped suddenly
down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment
to think about stopping herself before sue found
herself falling down what seemed to be a very
deep well.
Either the well was very deep, or she fell
very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she
went down to look about her, and to wonder
what was going to happen next. First, she tried
to look down and make out what she was com-
ing to, but it was too dark to see anything :
then she looked at the sides of the well, and
noticed that they were filled with cupboards
and bookshelves : here and there she saw maps
and pictures hung upon pegs. She took down
4 DOWN THE
a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it
was labelled " OEAIS^GE MAEMALADE, " but
to her great disappointment it was empty: she
did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing
somebody underneath, so managed to put it into
one of the cupboards as she fell past it.
" Well ! " thought Alice to herself, " after such
a fill as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling
down stairs! How brave they'll all think me
at home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about
it, even if I fell off the top of the house ! "
(Which was very likely true.)
Down, down, down. Would the fall never
come to an end? " I wonder how many milee
I've fallen by this time ? " she said aloud.'^ I
must be getting somewhere near the centre of
the earth. Let me see : that Avould be four
thousand miles down, I think — " (for, you see.
Alice had learnt several things of this sort in
her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this
was not a very good opportunity for showing off
her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to
RABBIT-HOLE.
her, still it was good practice to say it over)
^^ — y^Sj tliat's about the right distance — - but
then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I've
got to ?''(Alice had not the slightest idea
what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but she
thought they were nice grand words to say,)
Presently she began again. " I wondei* if I
shall fall right tlirougli the earth! How funny
it'll seem to come out among the people that
walk with their heads downwards! The Anti-
pathies, I think — " (she w^as rather glad there
was no one listening this time, as it didn't sound
at all the right word) " — but I shall have to
ask them what the name of the country is, you
know. Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand
or Australia ? " (and she tried to curtsy as
she spoke — fancy curtsying as you're falling
through the air! Do you think you could man-
age it ?) " And what an ignorant little girl
she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do
to ask: perhaps I shall see it written up some-
where. "
6 DOWN THE
Down, down, down. There was nothing else to
do, so Alice soon began talking again. " Dinah'll
miss me very much to-night, I should think I "
(Dinah w^as the cat.) " I hope they'll remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah, my dear!
I wish you wei*e down here with me ! There
are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you
might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse,
you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder ? "
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and
went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, " Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats? "
and sometimes, " Do bats eat cats ? " for, you
see, as she couldn't answer either question, it
didn't much matter which way she put it. She
felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun
to dream that she was walking hand in hand
mth Dinah, and was saying to her very ear-
nestly, " ]N^ow, Dinah, tell me the truth: did
you ever eat a bat ? " w hen suddenly, thump !
thump ! down she came upon a heap of sticks
and dry leaves, and the fall was over.
RABBIT-HOLE.
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up
on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but
it was all dark overhead; before her was an-
other long passage, and the White Rabbit was
still in sight, hurrying down it. There was
not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like
the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as
it turned a corner, ^^ Oh my ears and whiskers,
how late it's getting ! " She was close behind
it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit
was no longer to be seen: she found herself in
a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row^ of
lamps hanging from the roof.
There Avere doors all round the hall, but they
were all locked, and when Alice had been all
the way down one side and up the other, trying
every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged
table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing
on it but a tiny golden key, and Alice's first
idea was that this might belong to one of the
DOWN THE
doors of the hall ; but alas ! either the locks
were too large, or the key was too small, but
at auy rate it would not open any of themo
However, on the second time round, she came
upon a low
curtain she had
not noticed be-
fore, and be-
hind it was
a little door
fifteen

high
about
inches
she tried the
little golden
key in the
lock, and to her great delight it fitted !
Alice opened the door and found that it led
into a small passage, not much larger than a
rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the
passage into the loveliest garden you ever saWo
How she longed to get out of that dark hall,
and wander about among those beds of bright
KABBIT-HOLE. 9
flowers and those cool fountains, but she could
not even get her head through the doorway;
" and even if my head would go through, "
thought poor Alice, " it would be of very little
use without my shouldei's. Oh, how I wish I
could shut up like a telescope ! I think I could,
if I only knew how to begin. " For, yon see, so
many out-of-the-way things had happened lately
that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indeed were really impossible.
There seemed to be no use in Avaiting by
the little door, so she went back to the table,
half hoping she might find another key on it,
or at any rate a book of rules for shutting
people up like telescopes : this time she found
a little bottle on it, ( " which certainly was not
here before, " said Alice,) and tied round the
neck of the bottle was a paper label Avith the
words " DEINK ME " beautifully printed on
:t in large letters.
It was all very well to say " Drink me, " but
the v/ise little Alice was not going to do that
10
DOWN THE
in a hurry : ^^ no, I'll look first, " she said, " and
see Avh ether it's
marked ^ poison^
or not: " for she
had read several
nice little stories
about children who
had got burnt, and
eaten up by wild
beasts, and other
unpleasant things,
all because they
would not remem-
ber the simple rales
their friends had taught them, such as, that a
red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too
long; and that if j^ou cut your finger ^*ery deeply
with a knife, it usually bleeds ; and she had never
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle
marked " poison, " it is almost certain to dis-
agree with you, sooner or later.
However, this bottle was not marked " poison/'

RABBIT-HOLE. 11
SO Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it
very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavor of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, to & y, and hot buttered toast,) she very
soon finished it ofi.
^ * * *
« * *
* * 4f *
" " What a curious feeling ! " said Alice, ^^ I
must be shutting up like a telescope. "
And so it was indeed: she was now only
ten inches high, and her face brightened up
at the thought that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that
lovely garden. First, however, she waited for a
few minutes to see if she was going to shrink
any further : she felt a little nervous about
this, " for it might end, you know, " said Alice
to herself, " in my going out altogether, like a
candle. I wonder what I should be like then? "
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle looks like after the candle is blown out^
12 iDOWN THE
for she could not remember ever having seen
such a thing-.
After a while, finding that nothing more
happened, she decided on going into the garden
at once, but, alas for poor Alice ! when she got
to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to
the table for it, she found she could not possibly
reach it: she could see it quite plainly through
the glass, and she tried her best to climb up
one of the legs of the table, but it was too
slippery, and when she had tired herself out
with trying, the poor little thing sat down
and cried.
" Come, there's no use in crying like that! "
said Alice to herself, rather sharply, " I advise
you to leave off this minute ! " She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she
very seldom followed it,) and sometimes she
scolded herself so severely as to bring tears
into her eyes, and once she remembered trying
to box her own ears for having cheated herself
RABBIT-HOLE. 13
in a game of croquet she was playing against
herself, for this curious child was very fond of
pretending to be two people. " But it's no use
now, " thought poor Alice, " to pretend to be two
people! Why, there's hardly enough of me left
to make one respectable person! "
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that
was lying under the table: she opened it, and
found in it a very small cake, on which the
Avords " EAT ME " were Deaatifully marked in
currants. " Well, I'll eat it, " said Alice, " and
if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key;
and if it makes me grow smaller, I can creep
under the door; so either way I'll get into the
garden, and I don't care which happens ! "
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to
herself " Which way? Which way? " holding her
hand on the top of her head to feel which way
it was growing, and she was quite surprised
to find that she remained the same size: to be
sure, this is what generally happens when one
eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
14 DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE.
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-wav
things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and
stupid for life to go on in the common way.
So she set to work, and very soon finished
off the cake.
^ * * *
* * *
^ * * n-
CHAPTEE II.
THE POOL OF TEARS.
^^ Curiouser and cu-
riouser! " cried Alice
(she was so much sur-
prised, that for the
moment she quite for-
got how to speak good
Enghsh) ; ^^ now I'm
opening out hke the
largest telescope that
ever w^as ! Good-bye,
feet ! " (for when she
looked down at her
feet, they seemed to
be almost out of sight,
they were getting so
far off) ^^ Oh, my poor
little feet, I wonder

16 THE POOL
who will put on your shoes and stocldngs for
you now, dears? I'm sure I shan't be able! 1
shall be a great deal too. flir off to trouble my=
self about you : you must manage the best way
you can; — but I must be kmd to them, " thought
Alice, " or perhaps they won't walk the way I
want to go ! Let me see : I'll give them a new
pair of boots every Christmas. "
And she went on planning to herself how she
would manage it. " They must go by the car-
rier, " she thought; " and how funny it'll seem,
sending presents to one's own feet ! And how
odd the directions will look!
Alice's Right Foot^ Esq.^
Hearthrug^
near the Fender,
Qtvith Alice's love.^
Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking! "
Just at this moment her head struck against the
roof of the hall: in fact she was now rather more
than nine feet high, and she at once took up the
little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
OF TEARS. 17
Poor Alice ! It was as much as she could do,
lying down on one side, to look through into
the garden with one eye; but to get through
was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and
began to cry again.
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself/^ said
Alice, ^^ a great girl like you, " (she might well
say this,) " to go on crying in this way ! Stop
this moment, I tell you! " But she went on all
the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there
Avas a large pool all round her, about four inches
deep and reaching half down the hall.
After a time she heard a little pattering of
feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her
eyes to see what Avas coming. It Avas the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, w^ith a pair
of Avdiite kid gloA^es in one hand and a large
fan in the other : he came trotting along in a
great huriy, muttering to himself as he came^
^ " ^ Oh ! the Duchess, the Duchess ! Oh ! won't she
be saA^age if I've kept her Avaiting ! " Alice
felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help
18
THE POOL

of any one; so, when the Kabbit came near her,
she began, in a low, timid voice, " If you please,
sir " The Rabbit started violently, dropped
the white kid gloves and the fan, and skui'ried
away into the darkness as hard as he could go.
OF TEARS. 19
Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the
hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all
the time she went on talking: " Dear, dear!
How queer everything is to-day! And yester°
day things went on just as usual. I wonder if
I've been changed in the night? Let me think:
was I the same when I got up this morning?
I almost think I can remember feeling a little
different. But if I'm not the same, the next
question is, Who in the world am I? Ah, that^s
the great puzzle ! " And she began thinking
over all the children she knew, that were of
the same age as herself, to see if she could
have been changed for any of them.
" I'm sure I'm not Ada,*'she said, " for her
hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn't
go in ringlets at all; and I'm sure I can't be
Mabel, for I know all sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very little! Besides, she's
she, and Fm I, and — oh dear, how puzzling it
all is! I'll try if I know all the things I used
to know. Let me see: four times five is twelve,
20 THE POOL
and four times six is thirteen, and four times
seven is — oh dear ! I shall never get to twenty
at that rate! However, the Multiplication Table
don't signify: let's try Geography. London is
the capital of Paris, and Paris is the ca2)ital of
Rome, and Rome — no, tliafs all wrong, Pm
certain! I must have been changed for Mabel!
I'll try and say ^ How doth the little —'" and she
crossed her hands on her lap, as if she were
saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her
voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words
did not come the same as they used to do : —
^Ho2v d'jth the little crocodile
Improve his shining tail,
And pour the ^voters of the Nile
On every golden scale !
How cheerfully he seems to grin,
How neatly spreads his claws,
And welcomes little fishes in
With gently smiling jaws I "
OF TEARS. 21
" I'm sure those are not the right words, "
saiu poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears
again as she went on, " I must be Mabel after
all, and I shall have to go and live in that
poky little house, and have next to no toys to
play with, and oh! ever so many lessons to
learn! ]^o, IVe made up my mind about it:
if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here! It'll be no
use their putting their heads down and saying,
^Come np again, dear!'I shall only look up
and say, ^Who am I, then? Tell me that first,
and then, if I like being that person, I'll come
np: if not, I'll stay down here till I'm some-
body else'— but, oh dear! " cried Alice with a
sudden burst of tears, " I do wish they ivould
pnt their heads down! I am so very tired of
being all alone here! "
As sh3 said this, she looked down at her
hands, and was surprised to see that she had
put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves
while she was talking. " How ccm I have done
that ^ " she thought. " I must be growing small
22 THE FOOi^
again. " She got up and went to the table to
measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly
as she could guess, she was now about two feet
high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she
soon found out that the cause of this was the
fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily,
just in time to save herself from shrinking away
altogether.
" That was a narrow escape ! " said Alice, a
good deal frightened at the sudden change, but
very glad to find herself still in existence; " and
now for the garden ! " and she ran with all
speed back to the little door: but alas! the
little door was shut again, and the little golden
key was lying on the glass table as before, " and
things are woi-se than ever, " thought the poor
child, ^^for I never was so small as this before,
never ! And I declare it's too bad, that it is ! "
As she said these words her foot slijDped,
and in another moment, splash! she was up to
her chin in salt water. Her first idea was that
she had somehow fallen into the sea, " and in
OF TEARS.

that case I can go back by railway, " she said
',0 herself. (x\lice had been to the seaside once
in her hfe, and had come to the general con-
clnsion, that wherever you go to on the English
coast you find a number of bathing machines
in the sea, some children digging in the sand
with wooden spades, then a row of lodging
houses, and behind them a railwaj^ station.)
However she soon made out that she was in
the pool of tears which she had wept when she
was nine feet high.
" I Avish I hadn't cried so much ! " said Alice,
as she swam about, trying to find her way out.
24 THE POOL
" I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
being drowned in my own tears ! That icill be
a queer thing, to be sure ! However, everything
is queer to-da3\ "
Just then she heard something splashing
about in the pool a little way oiF, and she swam
nearer to make out what it was : at first she
thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus,
but then she remembered how small she was
now, and she soon made out that it was only
a mouse, that had slipped in like herself.
" Would it be of any use, now, " thought
Alice, " to speak to this mouse ? Everything is
so out-of-the-way down here, that I should think
very likely it can talk: at any rate there's no
harm in trying. " So she began: " O Mouse,
do you know the way out of this pool? I am
very tired of swimming about here, O Mouse ! "
(Alice thought this must be the right way of
speaking to a mouse: she had never done such
a thing before, but she remembered having seen
in her brother's Latin Grammar, " A mouse — -
OF TEARS. 25
of a mouse — to a mouse — a mouse — O mouse ! " )
The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively,
and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.
" Perhaps it doesn't understand English, "
thought Alice ; " I daresay it's a French mouse,
come over with William the Conqueror. " (For,
with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no
very clear notion how long ago anything liad
happened.) So she began again: " Ou est ma
chatte? " which was the first sentence in her
French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden
leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver
all over with fright. " Oh, I beg your pardon ! "
cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animal's feelings " I quite forgot you
didn't like cats. "
" ]N'ot like cats ! " cried the Mouse, in a shrill,
passionate voice. " Would you like cats if you
were me? "
" Well, perhaps not, " said Alice in a sooth-
ing tone: ^^ don't be angry about it. And jqX
26
THE POOL
I wish I could show you our cat Dinah : I
think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could
only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing,''
Alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily

about in the pool, " and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and wash-
ing her face — and she is such a nice soft thing
to nurse — and she's such a capital one for catch-
ing mice oh, I beg your pardon ! " cried Alice
again, for this time the Mouse was bristling
all over, and she felt certain it must be really
OF TEARS. 27
offended. " We won't talk about her any more
if yoa'd rather not. "
" " We, indeed! " cried the Mouse, who was
trembhng down to the end of his tail. " As if
/ would talk on such a subject! Our family
always hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar things!
Don't let me hear the name again ! "
" I won't indeed ! " said Alice, in a great
hurry to change the subject of conversation.
" Are you — are you fond — of — of dogs? " The
mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly :
" There is such a nice little dog near our house
I should like to show you! A little bright-
eyed terrier, you know, with oh! such long
curly brown hair! And it'll fetch things when
you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for
its dinner, and all soi'ts of things — I can't re-
member half of them — and it belongs to a
farmer, you know, and he says it's so useful,
it's worth a hundred pounds! He says it kills
all the rats and — oh dear ! " cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone. " I'm afraid I've offended it
28 THE POOL OF TEARS.
again! " For the Mouse was swimming away
from her as hard as it conld go, and making
quite a connnotion in the pool as it w^ent.
So she called softly after it: " Monse dear!
Do come back again, and we won't talk about
cats or dogs either, if you don't like them! "
When the Mouse heard this, it turned round
and swam slowly back to her: its face was
quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and
it said in a low, trembling voice, " Let us get
to the shore, and then I'll tell you my history,
and you'll understand why it is I hate cats
and dogs, "
It was high time to go, for the pool was
getting quite crowded with the birds and ani-
mals that had fallen into it: there was a Duck
and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several
other curious creatures. Alice led the way,
and the whole party swam to the shore.

CHAPTER III.
A CAUCUS-RACE AKD A LONG TALE.
They were indeed a queer-looking party that
assembled on the bank — -the birds with draggled
feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncom-
fortable.
The first question of course was, how to get
dry again: they had a consultation about this,
30 A CAUCUS-RACE
and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.
Indeed, she had quite a long argument with
the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would
only say, " I am older than you, and must know
better; " and this Alice would not allow, with-
out knowing how old it was, and as the Lory
positively refused to tell its age, there was no
more to be said.
At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a per-
son of some authority among them, called out,
^•^Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! Fll
soon make you dry enough ! " They all sat
down at once, in a large ring, with the Mouse
in the middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously
fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a
bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.
" Ahem! " said the Mouse with an important
air, " are you all ready? This is the driest thing
I know. Silence all round, if you please !
^William the Conqueror, whose cause was
AND A LONG TALE. 3i
favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to
by the English, who wanted leaders, and had
been of late much accustomed to usurpation and
conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mer«
eia and ^orthumbria —'"
" Ugh ! " said the Lory, with a shiver.
" I beg your pardon? " said the Mouse, frown-
ing, but very politely: " Did you speak? "
" KotI! " said the Lory, hastily.
" I thought you did, " said the Mouse, — ^^ I
proceed. ^ Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mer-
cia and ]N^orthumbria, declared for him; and
even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Can-
terbury, found it advisable —'"
" Found what?''said the Duck.
" Found ^Y, " the Mouse replied rather crossly:
" of course you know what 4t'means. "
" I know what ^it'means well enough when
J find a thing, " said the Duck: " it's generally
a frog or a worm. The question is, what did
the archbishop find? "
The Mouse did not notice this question, but
i32 A CAUCUS-RACE
hurriedly went on, " ^ — found it advisable to go
with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer
him tlie crown. William's conduct at first was
modei-ate. But the insolence of his ^I^ormans —'
How are you getting on now, my dear? " it con-
tinued, turning to Alice as it spoke.
" As wet as ever, " said Alice in a melancholy
tone : " it doesn't seem to dry me at all. "
" In that case, " said the Dodo solemnly, rising
to its feet, ^^ I move that the meeting adjourn,
for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies — "
" Speak English! " said the Eaglet. " I don't
know the meaning of half those long words, and
what's more, I don't believe you do either ! "
And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a
smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly.
" What I was going to say, " said the Dodo in
an offended tone, " was, that the best thing to
get us dry would be a Caucus-race. "
" What is a Caucus-race? " said Alice; not
that she much wanted to know, but the Dode
AND A LONG TALE. 33
had paused as if it thought that somebody ought
to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say
anything.
" Why, " said the Dodo, " the best way to
explain it is to do it. " (And as you might like
to try the thing yourself, some winter day, I
will tell you how the Dodo managed it.)
First it marked out a race-course, in a sort
of circle, ( " the exact shape doesn't matter, " it
said,) and then all the party were placed along
the course, here and there. There was no " One,
two, three, and away, " but they began running
when they liked, and left off when they liked, so
that it was not easy to know when the race was
over. However, when they had been running
half-an-hour or so, and were quite dry again, the
Dodo suddenly called out, " The race is over ! "
and they all crowded round it, panting, and ask-
ing, " But who has won? "
This question the Dodo could not answer
without a great deal of thought, and it sat for
a long time with one finger pressed upon its
3
34 A CAUCUS-RACE
forehead, (the position in which you usually see
Shakespeare, in the pictures of him,) while the
rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,
" Everyhody has won, and all must have prizes. "
" But w4io is to give the prizes ? " quite a
chorus of voices asked.
" Why, slie^ of course, " said the Dodo, point-
ing to Alice with one finger; and the whole
party at once ci-owded round her, calling out in
a confused w^ay, " Prizes ! Prizes ! "
Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair-
she put her hand into her pocket, and pulled out
a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not
got into it,) and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece, all round.
" But she must have a prize herself, you
know, " said the Mouse.
" Of course, " the Dodo replied very gravely.
^^What else have you got in your pocket? " he
went on, turning to Alice.
" Only a thimble, " said Alice sadly.
" Hand it over here, " said the Dodoo
AND A LONG TALE.
85

Then they all crowded round her once more,
while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble,
saying, " We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble ; " and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.
36 A CAUCUS-RACE
Alice thought th3 whole thing very absurd,
but they all looked so grave that she did not
dare to laugh, and as she could not think of
anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the
thimble, looking as solemn as she could.
The next thing was to eat the comfits: this
caused some noise and confusion, as the large
birds complained that they could not taste theirs,
and the small ones choked and had to be patted
on the back. However it was over at last, and
they sat down again in a ring, and begged the
Mouse to tell them something more.
" You promised to tell me your history, you
know, " said Alice, " and why it is you hate — C
and D, " she added in a whisper, half afraid that
it would be offended again.
" Mine is a long and a sad tale ! " said the
Mouse, turning to Ahce, and sighing.
''It is a long tail, certainly, " said Alice, look-
ing down with wonder at the Mouse's tail;
" but why do you call it sad ? " And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking,
AND A LONG TALE. 37
SO that her idea of the tale was somethhig like
this: " Fury said to
a mouse, Tliat
he met
ill the
house,
'Let us
both go
to law :
/ will
prosecute
you. —
Come, I'll
take no
denial ;
We must
have a
trial :
For
really
this
morning
I've
nothing
to do/
Said the
mouse to
the cur,
'Such a
trial,
dear sir,
" With no
,iury or
jadge,
would be
wasting
our breath.'
'Ill be
judge,
I'll be
„ jury,'
Said
cunning
old Fury;
'III try
the whole
cause,
and
condemn
you
death.'"
38 A CAUCUS-RACE
" You are not attending ! " said the Mouse
to Alice, severely. " What are you thinking of? "
^^ I beg your pardon, " said Alice very humbly i
" you had got to the fifth bend, I think ? "
" I had not!''^ cried the Mouse, sharply and
very angrily.
" A knot! " said Alice, always ready to make
herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
" ^^ Oh, do let me help to undo it ! "
" I shall do nothing of the sort, " said the
Mouse, getting up and walking away. ^^You
insult me by talking such nonsense ! "
" I didn't mean it! " pleaded poor Alice.
'But you're so easily offended, you know! "
The Mouse only growled in reply.
" Please come back, and finish your story ! "
Alice called after it; and the others all joined
in chorus, " Yes, please do ! " but the Mouse
only shook its head impatiently, and walked
a little quicker.
" What a pity it w^ouldn't stay ! " sighed
the Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight;
AND A LONG TALE. 39
and an old crab took the opportunity of saying
to her daughter, " Ah, my dear! Let this be
a lesson to you never to lose yoitr temper!'^
*^^ Hold your tongue. Ma! " said the young crab,
a little snappishly. " You're enough to try the
patience of an oyster ! "
" I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I
do ! " said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in
particular. " She'd soon fetch it back ! "
" And who is Dinah, if I might venture to
ask the question? " said the Lory.
Alice replied eagerly, for she was always
ready to talk about her pet. " Dinah's our
cat. And she's such a capital one for catching
mice, you can't think! And oh, I wish you
could see her after the birds ! Why, she'll eat
a little bird as soon as look at it! "
This speech caused a remarkable sensation
among the party. Some of the birds hurried
off at once: one old magpie began wrapping
itself up very carefully, remarking, " I really
must be getting home; the night-air doesn't
40 A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE.
suit my throat ! " and a canary called out in a
trembling voice to its children, -^ Come away, my
dears! It's high time you were all in bed! " On
various pretexts they all moved off, and Alice
was soon left alone.
" I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah ! " she
said to herself in a melancholy tone. " Nobody
seems to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's
the best cat in the world ! Oh, my dear Dinah !
I wonder if I shall ever see you any more ! "
And here poor Alice began to cry again, for she
felt very lonely and low-spirited. In a little
while, however, she again heard a little patter-
ing of footsteps in the distance, and she looked
up eagerly, half hoping that the Mouse had
changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.
CHAPTEE lY.
THE RABBIT SENDS ES^ A LITTLE BILL.
It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly
back again, and looking anxiously about as it
went, as if it had lost something; and she heard
it muttering to itself, " The Duchess! The
Duchess! Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and
whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as
ferrets are ferrets! Where can I have dropped
them, I wonder! " Alice guessed in a moment
that it was looking for the fan and the pair
of white kid gloves, and she very goodnaturedly
began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen — everything seemed to have
42 THE RABBIT SENDS
changed since her swhn in the pool, and the
great hall, with the glass table and the little
door, had vanished completely.
Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she
went hunting about, and called out to her in an
angry tone, ^^Why, Mary Ann, what are you
doing out here? Run home this moiiient, and
fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick,
now ! " And Alice was so much frightened that
she ran off at once in the direction it pointed
to, Avithout trying to explain the mistake that
it had made.
" He took me for his housemaid, " she said to
herself as she ran. ^'How surprised he'll be
when he finds out who I am! But I'd better
take himx his fan and gloves — that is, if I can
find them. " As she said this, she came upon
a neat little house, on the door of which was a
bright brass plate with the name'^ W. EABBIT, "
engraved upon it. She went in without knock-
ing, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest
she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be
IN A LITTLE BILL. 45
turned out of the house before she had found
the fan and gloves.
" How queer it seems, " Alice said to herself^
^^ to be going messages for a rabbit ! I suppose
Dinah'll be sending me on messages next I "
And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen : " ^ Miss Alice ! Come here di-
rectly, and get ready for your walk!'^ Coming
in a minute, nurse! But I've got to watch this
mousehole till Dinah comes back, and see that
the mouse doesn't get out.'Only I don't think, "
Alice went on, ^Hhat they'd let Dinah stop in
the house if it began ordering people about like
that ! "
By this time she had found her way into
a tidy little room with a table in the window,
and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or
three pairs of tiny Avhite kid gloves: she took
up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was
just going to leave the room, when her eye fell
upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-
glass. There was no label this time with the
M THE RABBIT SENDS
words " DKINK ME, " but nevertheless she nn-
corked it and put it to her Ups. " I know
something interesting is sure to happen, " she
said to herself, " whenever I eat or drink any-
thing; so I'll just see what this bottle does.
I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for
really I'm quite tired of being such a tiny
little thing! "
It did so indeed, and much sooner than she
had expected: before she had drunk half the
bottle, she found her head pressing against the
ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from
being broken. She hastily put down the bottle,
saying to herself, " That's quite enough — I hope
I shan't grow any more — As it is, I can't get
out at the door — I do wish I hadn't drunk
quite so much! "
Alas ! It was too late to wish that ! She
went on growing and growing, and very soon
had to kneel down on the floor : in another
minute there was not even room for this, and
she tried the effect of lying down, with one
rX A LITTLE BILL.
45

elbow against the door, and the other arm curled
ronnd her head. Still she went on growing,
and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of
the window, and one foot up the chimney, and
said to herself, " N " ow I can do no more, what-
ever happens. What will become of me? "
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had
now had its full effect, and she grew no larger:
still it was very nncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever
46 THE RABBIT SENDS
getting out of the room again, no wonder she
felt unhappy.
^^It was much pleasanter at home, " thought
poor AUce, " when one Avasn't always growing
larger and smaller, and being ordered about by
mice and rabbits. I almost wash I hadn't gone
down that rabbit-hole — and yet — and yet — it's
rather curious, you know, this sort of life ! I
do w^onder what can have happened to me !
When I used to read faiiy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I
am in the middle of one! There ought to be
a book written about me, that there ought !
And when I grow up, I'll write one — but I'm
grown up now, " she added in a sorrowful tone,
•^ at least there's no room to grow up any more
" But then, " thought Alice, " shall I never
get any older than I am now? That'll be a
comfort, one way — never to be an old woman
— -but then — always to have lessons to learn!
Oh, I shouldn't like that!''
IN A LITTLE BILL. 47
" Oh, you foolish AUce ! " she answered her-
self. " How can you learn lessons in here ?
Why, there's hardlj^ room foi* you, and no rooii:
at all for any lesson-books ! "
And so she went on, taking first one side and
then the other, and making quite a conversation
of it altogether, but after a few minutes she
heard a voice outside, and stopjDed to listen.
" Mary Ann ! Mary Ann ! " said the voice,
" fetch me my gloves this moment ! " Then came
a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice
knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her,
and she trembled till she shook the house, quite
forgetting that she was now about a thousand
times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason
to be afraid of it.
Presently the Rabbit came up to the door,
and triad to open it, but as the door opened
inwards, and Alice's elbow was j^ressed hard
against it, that attempt proved a failure. AHce
heard it say to itself, " Then PU go round and
get in at the window. "
48
THE RABBIT SENDS
" That yon won't 1 " thonght Alice, and, after
waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit
just under the window, she suddenly spread
out her hand, and
made a snatch in the
air. She did not get
hold of anything, but
she heard a little
shriek and a fall,
and a crash of bro-
ken glass, from which
she concluded that
> /'X it was just possible
it had fallen into a
cucumber- frame, or
something of the sort.
Ifext came an angry voice — the E-abbit's —
^^Pat! Pat! " Where are you? " And then a
Toice she had never heard before, " Sure then
Pm here! Digging for apples, yer honour! "
^^ Digging for apples, indeed ! " said the
RabMt angrily, ^'Here! Come and help me

IN A LITTLE BILL. 49
out of tills P^ (Sounds of more broken glass.)
" Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window? "
" Sure, it's an arm, yer honor! " (He pro-
nounced it " ari'um. " )
" An arm, you goose! " Who ever saw one
that size? Why, it fills the whole window! "
" Sure, it does, yer honor: but it's an arm
for all that, "
" Well, it's got no business there, at any rate:
go and tak < ,'it away! "
There avis a long silence after this, and Alice
could only hear whispers now and then, such
as, " Sure, I don't like it, yer honor, at all at
all! " " Do as I tell you, you coward! " and at
last she spread out her hand again and made
another e natch in the air. This time thei-e were
tn^o little shrieks, and more sounds of broken
glass. " What a number of cucumber frames
there must be ! " thought Alice. " I wonder
what they'll do next! As for pulling me out
of the window, I only wish they could! I'm
sure / don't want to stay in here any longer 1 "
4
60 THE RABBIT SENDS
She waited for some time without hearing
anything more: at last came a rumbling of
little cart-wheels, and the sound of a good many
voices all talking together: she made out the
words, ■'^Where's the other ladder? — Why, 1
hadn't to bring but one: Bilfs got the other —
Bill I fetch it here, lad ! — Here, put'em up at
this corner — Xo, tie'em together first — they
don't reach half high enough yet — Oh! they'll
do well enough; don't be particular — Here,
Bill! catch hold of this rope — Will the roof
bear? — Mind that loose slate — Oh, it's coming
down! Heads below! " (a loud crash) — " ^ow,
who did that? — It Avas Bill, I fancy — Who's
to go down the chimney? — ^ay, / shan't!
Ton do itl — That I won't then! — Bill's got
to go down — Here, Bill! the master says you've
got to go down the chimney ! "
^^Oh, so Bill's got to come down the chim=
ney, has he? " said Alice to herself " Why^
they seem to put everything upon Bill! I
wouldn't be in Bill's place for a good deal:
IN A LITTLE BILL.
51
this fireplace is narrow,
to be sure, but I thinh
I can kick a little! "
She drew her foot as
far down the chimney as
she could, and waited till
she heard a little animal
(she couldn't guess of
what sort it w\as) scratch-
ing and scrambling about
in the chimney close above
her: then, saying to her-
self, ^^'This is Bill, " she
gave one sharp kick, and
waited to see what would
happen next.
The first thing she
heard was a general
chorus of " There goes
Bill! " then the Rabbit's
voice alone, " Catch him,
you by the hedo-e! " then

52 THE RABBIT SENDS
silence, and then another confusion of voices—-
^^Hold up his head — Brandy now — Don't choke
bim — How was it, old feUow? What happened
to you? Tell us all about it! "
Last came a little feeble squeaking voice,
( " That's Bill, " thought Alice,) " Well, I hardly
know — lito more, thank'ye, I'm better now^
but I'm a deal too flustered to tell you — all
I know is, something comes at me like a Jack-
in-the-box, and up I goes like a sky-rocket ! "
" So you did, old fellow ! " said the others.
" We must burn the house down ! " said the
Rabbit's voice, and Alice called out as loud as
she could, " If you do, I'll set Dinah at you !'^
There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice
thought to herself, " I w^onder what they loill
do next! If they had any sense, they'd take
the roof off. " After a minute or two they
_^gan moving about again, and Alice heard the
Rabbit say, " A barrowful will do, to begin with.'''
'^A barrowful of ivJiat?^^ thought Ahce; but
she had not long to doubt, for the next moment
IN A LITTLE BILL. 03
a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at
the window, and some of them hit her in the
face. " I'll put a stop to this, " she said to herself,
and shouted out, " You'd better not do that
again ! " which produced another dead silence.
Alice noticed with some surprise that the
pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they
lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into
her head. " If I eat one of these cakes, " she
thought, " it's sure to make some change in my
size: and as it can't possibly make me larger,
it must make me smaller, I suppose. "
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was
delighted to find that she began shrinking
directly. As soon as she was small enough to
get through the door, she ran out of the house,
and found quite a crowd of little animals and
birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard,
Bill, was in the middle, being held up by two
guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out
of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the
moment she appeared, but she ran off as hard
& 4 THE RABBIT SENDS
as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.
" The first thing I've got to do, " said Alice
to herself, as she wandered about in the wood,
" is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely
garden. I think that will be the best plan. "
It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and
veiy neatly and simply arranged; the only
difiiculty was, that she had not the smallest
idea how to set about it; and while she was
peering about anxiously among the trees, a
little shai-p bark just over her head made her
look up in a great huriy.
An enormous puppy was looking down at
her with large round eyes, and feebly sti-etching
out one paw, trying to touch her. " Poor little
thing! " said Alice in a coaxing tone, and she
tried hard to whistle to it, but she was terribly
frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very
likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.
m A LITTLE BILL.
65

Hardly knowing what she did, she jDicked up
a httle bit of stick, and held it out to the
puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the
air off all its feet at ouce, with a yelp of
56 THE RABBIT SEX OS
delight, and rushed at the stick, and made be-
lieve to worry it; then Alice dodged behind
a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over, and, the moment she appeared on the
other side, the pnppy made another rush at the
stick, and tumbled head over heeb in its hurry
to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-
horse, and expecting every moment to be tram-
pled under its feet, ran round the thistle again;
then the puppy began a series of short charges
at the stick, running a very little way forwards
each time and a long way back, and bark-
ing hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue
hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes
half shut.
This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for
making her escape, so she set off at once, and
ran till she Avas quite tired and out of breath,
and till the pup23y's bark sounded quite faint
in the distance.
IN A LITTLE BILL. 57
" And yet what a dear little puppy it was ! "
said Alice, as she leant against a buttercup to
rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves; " I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if— if I'd only been the right size
to do it! Oh dear! I'd nearly forgotten that
I've got to grow up again! Let me see — how
is it to be managed? I snppose I ought to eat
or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what? "
The great question certainly was, what?
Alice looked all round her at the flowers and
the blades of grass, but she could not see any-
thing that looked like the right thing to eat
or drink under the cii'cumstances. There was a
large mushroom growing near her, about the
same height as herself, and when she had look-
ed under it, and on both sides of it, and behind
it, it occurred to her that she might as well
look and see what was on the top of it.
She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and
peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her
58 THE RABBIT SEXDS IN A LITTLE BILL.
eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with
its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah,
and taking not the smallest notice of her or of
anything else.

CHAPTER V.
ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.
The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each
other for some time m silence : at last the
Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouthy
and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
60 ADVICE FROM A
^^Who are yoiif^^ said the Caterpillar.
This was not an encouraging opening for a
conversation. Alice replied, rather shyly, " I— I
hardly know, sir, just at present — at least I
know who I was when I got up this mornings
but I think I must have been changed several
times since then. "
" What do you mean by that? " said the
Caterpillar sternly. " Explain yourself! "
" I can't explain myself^ I'm afraid, sir, "
said Alice, " because I'm not myself, you
see. "
^^I don't see, " said the Caterpillar.
" I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly, "
Alice replied very politely, " for I can't under-
stand it myself to begin with; and being so
many different sizes in a day is very confus-
ing. "
" It isn't, " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet/'
said Alice; " but when you have to turn into a
chrysalis — you will some day, you know — and
CATERPILLAR. 61
then after that into a butterfly, I should think
you'll feel it a little queer, won't you? "
" Not a bit, " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, perhaps your feelings may be differ-
ent, " said Alice; " all I know is, it would feel
very queer to me. "
" You! " said the Caterpillar contemptuously.
" Who are tjouf'
Which brought them back again to the be-
ginning of the conversation. Alice felt a little
ii'ritated at the Caterpillar's making such very
short remarks, and she drew herself up and
said, very gravely, " I think you ought to tell
me who you are, first. "
" Why? " said the Caterpillar.
Here was another puzzling question; and, as
Alice could not think of any good reason, and
as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a very un-
pleasant state of mind, she turned away.
" Come back! " the Caterpillar called after
her. " I've something important to say ! "
This sounded promising, certainly: Alice
turned and came back asrain.
62 ADVICE FROM A
" Keep your temper, " said the Caterpillar.
^^Is that all? " said Alice, swallowiifg down
her anger as well as she could.
'^^N'o, " said the Caterpillar.
Alice thought she might as well wait, as
she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after
all it might tell her something worth hearing.
For some minutes it puffed away without speak-
ing, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the
hookah out of its mouth again, and said, " So
you think you're changed, do you? "
" I'm afraid I am, sir, " said Alice; " I can't
remember things as I used — and I don't keep
the same size for ten minutes together! "
" Can't remember what things? " said the
Caterpillar.
" Well, I've tried to say'How doth the
little busy bee,'but it all came different! "
Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.
" Repeat'You are old, Father William^^ "
said the Caterpillar.
Alice folded her hands, and began: —
CATERPILLAR.
63

^^You ai^e old, father William,^'the young man
^^ And your hair has become very wliite;
And yet you incessantly stand on your head —
Do you thinh, at your age, it is right f^''
^^ Li my youthr father William replied to his son
^^ I feared it might injure the brain;
But now that Tm perfectly sure I have none.
Why, I do it agaiyi and again. "
64
ADVICE FROM A

^^You are old, " said the youth, ^^ as 1 7ne7itioned before.
And have grown most uncommonhj fat ;
Yet you turned a baclc-somersault in at the door —
Pray, what is the reason of that f "
'^ In my youth, " said the sage, as he shook his grey lochs,
'^7 kept all my limbs very supjjle
By the uxe of this ointment — one shilling the box—^
Allow me to sell you a couple "
CATERPILLAR.
6a

^You are old " said the youth, ^^ and your jaios are too
weah
For anything tougher than suet;
ITet you finished the goose, with the bones and the healc'
Pray, how did you manage to do it "
^^ In my youth,''^ said his father, ^^ I took to the law,
And argued each case with my wife;
And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw ^
Has lasted the rest of my life, "
6
66
ADVICE FROM A

^You are old^^^ said the youth; one would hardly sup-
pose
That your eye ivas as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose — =
What made you so awfully clever 9 "
^ I have answered three questions, and that is enough^
Said his father ; ^^ donH give yourself airs!
Do you thinJc I can listen all day to such stuff 9
Be off, or Til Icicle you down stairs! "
CATERPILLAR. 67
" That is not said right, " said the Caterpillar.
" ]^ot quite right, I'm afraid, " said Alice
timidly; " some of the words have got altered. "
" It is wrong from beginning to end, " said
the Caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence
for some minutes.
The Caterpillar was the first to speak.
" What size do you want to be? " it asked.
" Oh, I'm not particular as to size, " Alice
hastily replied; " only one doesn't like changing
so often, you know. "
" I donH know, " said the Caterpillar.
Alice said nothing: she had never been so
much contradicted in all her life before, and she
felt that she was losing her temper.
" Are you content now? " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, I should like to be a little larger, sir,
if you wouldn't mind, " said Alice: " three inches
is such a wretched height to be. "
" It is a very good height indeed ! " said the
Caterpillar angrily, reai'ing itself upright as it
spoke (it was exactly three inches high).
68 ADVICE FROM A
" But I'm not used to it ! " pleaded pooi!
Alice in a jDiteous tone. And she thought to
herself, " I wish the creatures wouldn't be so
easily oflPended ! "
" You'll get used to it in time, " said the
Caterpillar; and it put the hookah into its
mouth and began smoking again.
This time Alice waited patiently until it
chose to speak again. In a minute or two the
Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth,
and yaAvned once or twice, and shook itself.
Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled
away into the grass, mei'ely remarking as it
went, " One side will make you grow taller,
and the other side will make you grow shorter. "
" One side of what? The other side of
wJiatf^^ thought Alice to herself.
" Of the mushroom, " said the Caterpillar,
just as if she had asked it aloud; and in
another moment it was out of sight.
Alice remained looking thoughtfiilly at the
mushroom for a minute, trying to make out
CATERPILLAR. 69
which were the two sides of it; and, as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difficult
question. However, at last she stretched her
arms round it as far as they would go, and
broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.
^^And now which is which? " she said to her-
self, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to
try the effect: the next moment she felt a vio-
lent blow underneath her chin; it had struck
her foot!
She was a good deal frightened by this very
sudden change, but she felt that there was no
time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly;
so she set to work at once to eat some of the
other bit. Her chin was pressed so closely
against her foot, that there was hardly room to
open her mouth; but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a morsel of the left-hand
bit.
*****
70 ADVICE FROM A
" Come, my head's free at last! " said Alice in
a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in
another moment, when she found that her
shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she
could see, when she looked down, was an im-
mense length of neck, which seemed to rise
like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that
lay far below her.
" What can all that green stuff be? " said
Alice. " And where have my shoulders got to?
And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't se^^
you? " She was moving them about as she
spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a
little shaking among the distant green leaves.
As there seemed to be no chance of getting
her hands up to her head, she tried to get her
head down to them, and was dehghted to find
that her neck would bend about easily in any
direction, like a serpent. She had just succeeded
in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and
was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the
CATERPILLAR. 71
trees under which she had been wandering, when
a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a
large pigeon had flown into her face, and was
beating her violently with its wings.
" Serpent !''screamed the Pigeon.
^^I'm not a serpent! " said Alice indignantly.
" Let me alone ! "
" Serpent, I say again ! " repeated the Pigeon,
but in a more subdued tone, and added with a
kind of sob, " I've tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them ! "
" I haven't the least idea what you're talking
about, " said Alice.
" Pve tried the roots of trees, and Pve tried
banks, and Pve tried hedges, " the Pigeon went
on, without attending to her; ^^but those ser-
pents ! There's no pleasing them ! "
Alice Avas more and more puzzled, but she
thought there was no use in saying anything
more till the Pigeon had finished.
^^As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching
the eggs, " said the Pigeon, " but I must be on
72 ADVICE FROM A
the look-out for serpents night and day ! Why,
I haven't had a wnik of sleep these three
weeks ! "
" I'm very sorry you've been annoyed, " said
Alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.
" And just as I'd taken the highest tree in
the wood, " continued the Pigeon, raising its
voice to a shriek, " and just as I was thinking
I should be free of them at last, they must needs
come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh!
Serpent! "
" But I'm not a serpent, I tell you ! " said Alice,
^^Pma— I'ma "
" Well! What are you? " said the Pigeon.
" I can see you're trying to invent something! "
" I — I'm a little girl, " said Alice, rather doubt-
fully, as she remembered the number of changes
she had gone through that day.
" A likely story indeed! " said the Pigeon in
a tone of the deepest contempt. " I've seen a
good many little girls in my time, but never one
with such a neck as that! ]S " o, not You're a
CATERPILLAR. 73
serpent; and there's no use denying it. I sup-
pose you'll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg I "
" I have tasted eggs, certainly, " said Alice,
who was a very truthful child; " but little girls
eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you
know. "
" I don't believe it, " said the Pigeon; " but if
they do, why then they're a kind of serpent,
that's all I can say. "
This was such a new idea to Alice, that
she was quite silent for a minute or two, which
gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding,
" You're looking for eggs, I know that well
enough ; and what does it matter to me whether
you're a little girl or a serpent? "
" It matters a good deal to 77ze, " said Alice
hastily; " but I'm not looking for eggs, as it
happens; and if I was, I shouldn't want yours:
I don't like them raw. "
" Well, be off, then ! " said the Pigeon in a
sulky tone, as it settled down again into its
74 ADVICE FROM A
nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as
well as she could, for her neck kept getting
entangled among the branches, and every now
and then she had to stop*and untwist it. After
a while she remembered that she still held the
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set
to work very carefully, nibbling first at one
and then at the other, and gromng sometimes
taller and sometimes shorter, until she had suc-
ceeded in bringing herself down to her usual
height.
It was so long since she had been anything
near the right size, that it felt quite strange
at first, but she got used to it in a few min-
utes, and began talking to herself as usual.
" Come, there's half my plan done now ! How
puzzling all these changes are! I'm never sure
what I'm going to be, from one minute to an-
other! However, I've got back to my right
size: the next thing is, to get into that beau-
tiful garden — how is that to be done, I won-
der? " As she said this, she came suddenly upon
CATERPILLAR.
an open place, with a little house in it about
four feet high. " Whoever lives there/'thought
Alice, " it'll never do to come upon them this
size: why, I should frighten them out of their
wits ! " So she began nibbling at the right-hand
bit again, and did not venture to go near the
house till she nad orougnt nerseif down to nine
inches high.
CH^PTEE YT.
PIG AND PEPPER.
For a minute or two she stood looking at
the house, and wondermg what to do next,
when suddenly a footman in livery came run-
ning out of the wood — (she considered him to
be a footman because he was in livery: other-
wise, judging by his face only, she would tiave i
called him a fish) — and rapped loudly at the j
door with his knuckles. It was ojDened by j
another footman in livery, with a round face !
and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, i
Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled |
all over their heads. She felt very curious !
PIG AXD PEPPER.
77

to know what it was all about, and crept a little
way out of the wood to listen.
The Fish-Footman began by producing from
under his arm a great letter, nearly as large
as himself, and this he handed over to the
other, saying in a solemn tone, " For the Duch-
ess. An invitation from the Queen to play
78 PIG AND PEPPER.
croquet. " The Frog-Foottnan repeated, in the
same solemn tone, only changing the order of
the words a little, " From the Queen. An invi=
tation for the Duchess to play croquet. "
Then they both bowed low, and their curls
got entangled together.
Alice laughed so much at this that she had
to run back into the wood for fear of their
hearing her, and when she next peeped out the
Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was sitting
on the ground near the door, staring stupidly
up into the sky.
Alice went timidly up to the door, and
knocked.
" There's no sort of use in knocking, " said
the Footman, " and that for two reasons. First,
because I'm on the same side of the door as
you are ; secondly, because they're making such a
noise inside, no one could possibly hear you. "
And certainly there was a most extraordinary
noise going on within — a constant howling
and sneezing, and every now and then a great
PIG AND PEPPER. 79
crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces.
" Please, then, " said Alice, " how am I to
get in ? "
" There might be some sense in your knock-
ing, " the Footman went on without attending
to her, " if we had the door between us. For
instance, if you were iiiside, you might knock,
and I could let you out, you know. " He was
looking up into the sky all the time he was
speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly
uncivil. " But perhaps he can't help it, " she
said to herself; " his eyes are so ve?^}/ nearly
at the top of his head. But at any i^ate he
might answer questions — How am I to get
in? " she repeated, aloud.
" I shall sit here, " the Footman remarked,
" till to-morrow "
At this moment the door of the house
opened, and a large plate came skimming out,
straight at the Footman's head: it just grazed
his nose, and broke to pieces against one of
the trees behind him.
80 PIG AND PEPPER.
^^ or next day, maybe, " the Footman con-
tinned in the same tone, exactly as if nothing
had happened.
" How am I to get in? " AUce asked again in
a louder tone.
^^Are you to get in at all? " said the
Footman. " That's the first question, you
know. "
It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to
be told so. " It's really dreadful, " she muttered
to herself, " the way all the creatures argue.
It's enough to drive one crazy! "
The Footman seemed to think this a good
opportunity for repeating his remark, with
variations. " I shall sit here, " he said, " on and
off, for days and days. "
" But Avhat am I to do? " said Alice.
" Anything you like, " said the Footman, and
began whistling.
" Oh, there's no use in talking to him, " said
Alice desperately: " he's perfectly idiotic! " And
she opened the door and went in.
PIG AND PEPPER.
81
^ " vCn // \W*iBm^^ ^ifir.A- JTZIIPTZrF^

The door led right into a largo kitchen, which
was full of smoke fi'om one end to the other:
the Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool
in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was
leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron
which seemed to be full of soup.
^^ There's certainly too much pepper in that
soup! " Alice said to herself, as well as she could
for sneezing.
82 PIG AND PEPPER.
There was certainly too much of it in the
air. Even the Duchess sneezed occasionally;
and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howl-
ing alternately without a moment's pause. The
only tAvo creatures in the kitchen that did not
sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which
was sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear
to ear.
" Please, would you tell me, " said Alice, a
little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether
it was good manners for her to speak first,
" why your cat grins like that ? "
" It's a Cheshire cat, " said the Duchess, " and
that's why. Pig! "
She said the last word with such sudden vio-
lence that Alice quite jumped; but she saw in
another moment that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and
went on again : —
" I didn't know that Cheshire cats always
grinned; in fact, I didn't know that cats could
grin. "
PIG AND PEPPER. 83
" The J all can, " said the Duchess ; " and most
of'em do. "
" I don't know of any that do, " Alice said very
politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a
conversation.
" You don't know much, " said the Duchess;
" and that's a fact. "
Alice did not at all like the tone of this
remark, and thought it would be as w^ell to
introduce some other subject of conversation.
While she was trying to fix on one, the cook
took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at
once set to w^ork throwing everything within
her reach at the Duchess and the baby — the
fire-irons came first; then followed a shower
of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess
took no notice of them, even when they hit her;
and the baby w^as howling so much already, that
it was quite impossible to say whether the blows
hurt it or not.
" Oh, please mind what you're doing ! " cried
Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of
84 PIG AND PEPPER.
terror. " Oh, there goes his precious nose ! " as
an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and
very nearly carried it off.
" If everybody minded their own business, "
said the Duchess in a hoarse growl, ^- the world
would go round a deal faster than it does. "
" Which would not be an advantage, " said
Alice, Avho felt very glad to get an opportunity
of showing ofi* a little of her knowledge. " Just
think what work it w^ould make with the day
and night! You see the earth takes twenty-four
hours to turn round on its axis- "
" Talking of axes, " said the Duchess, " chop
off her head! "
Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to
see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook
was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to
be listening, so she went on again: " Twenty-
four hours, I think; or is it twelve? I "
" Oh, don't bother me, " said the Duchess; " I
never could abide figures. " And with that she
began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
PIG AND PEPPER. 85
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent
shake at the end of every line: —
" Speak 7'oughly to your little hoy,
And beat him when he sneezes;
He only does it to annoy,
Because he Tcnoxcs it teases.^'
Chorus
(in which the cook and the baby joined) : ^
" Wow ! icow ! wotv ! "
" While the Duchess sang the second verse of
the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up
and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words : —
" 7 speak severely to my hoy,
I heat him when he sneezes;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases 1^^
Chorus
" TFbi^/ wow! wow I'''
86 PIG AND PEPPER.
'^ Here ! you may nurse it a bit, if you like ! "
said tlie Ducliess to Alice, flinging the baby at
her as she spoke. " I must go and get ready to
play croquet with the Queen, " and she hurried
out of the room. The cook threw a fryingpan
after her as she w^ent, but it just missed her.
Alice caught the baby Avith some difficulty,
as it was a queer-shaped little creature, and held
out its ai'ms and legs in all directions, " just like
a star-fish, " thought Alice. The poor little thing-
was snorting like a steam-engine when she
caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether,
for the first minute or two, it was as much as
she could do to hold it.
As soon as she had made out the proj)er way
of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a
sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its
right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open
air. " If I don't take this child away with me,''
thought Alice, " they're sure to kill it in a day
PIG AND PEPPER. 87
or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave it
behind? " She said the last words out loud, and
the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off
sneezing by this time). " Don't grunt, " said
Alice: " that's not at all a proper way of
expressing yourself. "
The baby grunted again, and Alice looked
very anxiously into its face to see what was the
matter with it. There could be no doubt that
it had a very turn-up nose, much more like a
snout than a real nose; also its eyes were
getting extremely small, for a baby: altogether
Alice did not like the look of the thing at all,
" — but perhajDS it was only sobbing, " she
thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see
if there were any tears.
N^o, there were no tears. " If you're going to
turn into a pig, my dear, " said Alice, seriously,
^^ I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now! " The poor little thing sobbed again, (or
grunted, it was impossible to say which,) and
they went on for some while in silence.
«8
PIG AND PEPPER.
Alice was just beginning to think to herself,
" Now, what am I to do Avith this creature
when I get it home? " when it grunted again^
so violently, that she
looked down into its
face in some alarm.
This time there could
be no mistake about
it : it was neither
,, ,, more nor less than
WA'. ^ P^o'^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^
that it would be
fe quite absurd for her
to carry it any fur-
ther.
So she set the
little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood. " If
it had grown up, " she said to herself, " it Avould
have been a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think. " And she be-
gran thinkinof over other children she knew, who

PIG AND PEPPER. 89
might do very well as pigs, and was just say-
ing to herself, " if one only knew the right way
to change them " when she was a little
startled by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on
a bough of a tree a few yards off.
The Cat only gi'inned when it saw Alice.
It looked goodnatured, she thought: still it
had very long claws and a great many teeth,
so she felt it ought ta be treated with respect.
''^ Cheshire Puss, " she began, rather timidly,
as she did not at all know whether it would
like the name: however, it only grinned a little
wider.'^ Come, it's pleased so far, " thought
Alice, and she went on, " Would you tell me,
please, which way I ought to walk from here? "
" That depends a good deal on where you
want to get to, " said the Cat.
" I don't much care where " said Alice.
" Then it doesn't matter which way you
walk, " said the Cat.
" so long as I get somewliere^'^ Alice
added as an explanation.
90 PIG AND PEPPER.
" ^^ Oh, you're sure to do that, " said the Cat,
" if you ouly walk long enough. "
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so
she tried another question. " What sort of
peoj^le live about here? "
" In that direction, " the Cat said, waving its
right paw round, " lives a Hatter: and in that
direction, " waving the other paw, " lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like : they're both mad.'^
" But I don't w^ant to go among mad
people, " Alice remarked.
" Oh, you can't help that, " said the Cat:
" we're all mad here. I'm mad. You're mad. "
" How do you know I'm mad? " said Alice.
" You must be, " said the Cat,''or jon
wouldn't have come here. "
Alice didn't think that proved it at all;
however, she went on: " and how do you know
that you're mad? "
" To begin with, " said the Cat, " a dog's not
mad. You grant that? "
" I suppose so, " said Alice.
PIG AND PEPPER.
yi

" Well then, " the Cat
went on, " you see a dog
growls when it's angry,
and wags its tail when it's
pleased. In ow Jgrowl when
I'm pleased, and w\ag rvj
tailwhenl-m angry. There-
fore I'm mad,
" / call it purrmg, not
growling, " said Alice.
" Call it what you like-''
said the Cat. " Do you
play croquet with the Queen to-day? "
y2 PIG AND PEPPER.
" I should like it very much, " said Alice,
^^but I haven't been invited yet. "
" You'll see me there, " said the Cat, and
vanished.
Alice was not much surprised at this, she
v^as getting so well used to queer things hap-
pening, " While she was still looking at the
place w^hero it had been, it suddenly appeared
again.
^^ By - the - bye, what became of the baby? "
said the Cat. " I'd nearly forgotten to ask. "
" It turned into a pig, " Alice answered very
quietly, just as if the Cat had come back in a
natural way.
" I thought it w^ould, " said the Cat, and van-
ished again.
Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it
again, but it did not appear, and after a minute
or two she walked on in the direction in which
the March Hare w^as said to live. ^^ I've seen
hatters before, " she said to herself: " the March
Hare will be much the most interesting, and
PIG AND PEPPER.
93

perhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad —
at least not so mad as it was in March. " As
she said this, she looked np, and there was the
Cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree.
" Did yon say pig, or fig? " said the Cat.
" I said pig, " replied Alice; " and I ^yish you
wouldn't keep appearing and vanishing so sud-
denly: you make one quite giddy, "
" All right, " said the Cat; and this time it
vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end
of the tail, and ending with the grin, wdiich re-
mained some time after the rest of it had gone.
94 PIG AND PEPPER.
" Well ! I've often seen a cat without a grin, "
thought Alice; " but a grin without a cat I
It's the most curious thing I ever saw in all
my life ! "
She had not gone much farther before she
came in sight of the house of the March Ilare:
she thought it must be the right house, because
the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof
was thatched with fur. It was so large a house,
that she did nc^t like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the left-hand bit o.'nush-
room, and raised herself to about two feet high:
even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself, " Suppose it should
be raving mad after all! I almost wish I'd gone
to see the Hatter instead ! "
CHAPTER yri.
A MAD TEA-PARTYo
There was a table set out under a tree in
front of the house, and the March Hare and the
Hatter were having tea at it: a Dormouse was
sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other
two were using it as a cushion, resting their
elbows on it, and talking over its head. " Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse, " thought Alice;
" only, as it's asleep, I suppose it doesn't mind. "
The table was a large one, but the three
were all crowded together at one corner of it:
" Ko room ! No i*oom ! " they cried out when
they saw Alice coming. " There's plenty of
96 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
room ! " said Alice indignantly, and she sat down
in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.
" Have some wine, " the March Hare said in
an encouraging tone.
Alice looked all round the table, but there
was nothing on it but tea. " I don't see any
wine, " she remarked^
" There isn't any, " said the March Hare.
" Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer
it, " said Alice angrily.
" It wasn't very civil of you to sit down
without being invited, " said the March Hare.
" I didn't know it was your table, " said
Alice; " it's laid for a great many more than
three. "
" Your hair wants cutting, " said the Hatter.
He had been looking at Alice for some time
with great curiosity, and this was his first
speech.
" You should learn not to make personal
remarks, " Alice said with sorae severity: " it's
very rude. "
A iMAD TEA-PARTY.

The Hatter ojDened his eyes very wide on
hearing this; but all he said was, " Why is a
raven like a writing-desk? "
" Come, we shall have some fun now !'^
thought Alice. " I'm glad they've begun ask-
ing riddles — I believe I can guess that, " she
added aloud.
" Do you mean that you think you can find
out the answer to it? " said the March Hare,
" Exactly so, " said Alice.
^S A MAD TEA-PARTY.
" Then you should say what you mean, " the
March Hare went on.
" I do, " AUce hastily replied; " at least — at
least I mean what I say — that's the same things
you know. "
" Not the same thing a bit ! " said the Hatter.
" Why, you might just as well say that ^ I see
what I eat'is the same thing as ^ I eat what I
see'! "
" You might just as well say, " added the
March Hare, " that'^I like what I get'is the
same thing as ^ I get what I like'! "
" You might just as well say, " added the Dor-
mouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep,
" that ^I breathe when I sleep'is the same
thing as ^ I sleep when I breathe'! "
" It is the same thing with you, " said the
Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and
the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about
ravens and writing-desks, which wasn't much.
The Hatter was the first to break the silence.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 99
'^ What day of the month is it? " he said, turn-
ing to Ahce: he had taken his watch out of
his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shak-
ing it every now and then, and holding it to
his ear.
Alice considered a little, and said, " The
fourth. "
" Two days wrong ! " sighed the Hatter. " I
told you butter wouldn't suit the works ! " he
added, looking angrily at the March Hare.
" It was the hest butter, " the March Hare
meekly replied.
" Yes, but some crumbs must have got in
as well, " the Hatter grumbled: " you shouldn't
have put it in with the bread-knife. "
The March Hare took the watch and looked
at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup
of tea, and looked at it again: but he could
think of nothing better to say than his first
remark, " It was the hest butter, you know.. "
Alice had been looking over his shoulder with
some curiosity. " What a funny watch ! " she
■i
100 A MAD TEA-PARTY. I
remarked. " It tells the day of the month, and
doesn't tell what o'clock it is ! "
" Why should it? " muttered the Hatter.
" Does your watch tell you what year it is? "
" Of course not/'Alice replied very readily:
" but that's because it stays the same year for
such a long time together. "
" Which is just the case Avith mine,^^ said
the Hatter.
Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's
Tcmark seemed to her to have no sort of meaning
in it, and yet it was certainly English. " I don't
quite understand you, " she said, as politely as
she could.
" The Dormouse is asleep again, " said the
Hattei% and he poured a little hot tea on to
its nose.
The Dormouse shook its head impatiently,
and said, without opening its eyes, " Of course,
of course: just what I was going to remark
myself. "
" Have you guessed the riddle yet? " the
Hatter said, turnino: to Alice aorain.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 101
^^No, I give it up/'Alice replied: " what's
the answer? "
" I haven't the slightest idea, " said the
Hatter.
" ^:N " or I, " said the March Hare.
Alice sighed wearily. ^^I think you might
do something better with the time, " she said,
" than wasting it in asking riddles that have
no answers. "
" If you knew Time as well as I do, " said
the Hatter, " you wouldn't talk about wasting
it. It's A^m. "
" I don't know what you mean, " said Alice.
" Of course you don't ! " the Hatter said,
tossing his head contemptuously. " I dare say
you never even spoke to Time ! "
" Perhaps not, " Alice cautiously replied : " but
I knoAV I have to beat time when I learn
music. "
" Ah! that accounts for it, " said the Hatter„
" He won't stand beating. Now, if you only
kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost
102 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
anything you liked with the clock. For in-
stance, suppose it A\ore nine o'clock in the morn-
ing, just time to begin lessons: you'd only have
to Avhisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling! Half-past one, time for
dinner ! "
( " I only wish it w^as, " the March Hare said to
itself in a w^hisper.)
" That Avould be grand, certainly, " said Alice
thoughtfully : " but then — I shouldn't be hungry
for it, you know. "
" ]S " ot at first, perhaps, " said the Hatter : ^^ but
you could keep it to half-past one as long as
you liked. "
" Is that the way you manage? " Alice
asked.
The Hatter shook his head mournfully. "'Not
I " he replied. " We quarrelled last March
just before he went mad, you know " (point-
ing with his teaspoon at the March Hare,)
" it Avas at the great concert given by the
Queen of Hearts, and I had to sing. "
A MAD TEA-PARTY,
lOB

Twinkle, twinkle, little hat!
How I wonder what you're atf*
You know the song perhaps?''
^^ I've heard somethmg Hke it, " said Ahce.
''It goes on, you know/'the Hatter contmuedj
" in this way : —
* Z7p above the world you fiy^
Like a teatray in the sky.
Twinkle, twinkl e " * ^
101 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began
singmg in its sleep, " Twinkle^ twinkle^ twinMe^
twinkle - " and went on so long that thej had
to pinch it to make it stop.
" Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse,^
said the Hatter, " when the Queen bawled out
^ He's murdering the time ! Off with his head !'"
" How dreadfully savage ! " exclaimed Alice.
" And ever since that, " the Hatter went on
in a mournful tone, " he won't do a thing I
ask! It's always six o'clock now. "
A bright idea came into Alice's head. " Is
that the reason so many tea-things are put out
nere? " she asked.
" Yes, that's it, " said the Hatter with a sigh :
" it's always tea-time, and we've no time to wasn
the things between whiles. "
" Then you keep moving round, I suppose? "
said Alice.
" Exactly so, " said the Hatter: " as the things
get used up. "
" But when you come to the beginning
again? " Alice ventured to ask.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 105
" Suppose we change the subject, " the March
JHare interrupted, yawning. " I'm getting tired
of this. I vote the young lady tells us a
story. "
" I'm afraid I don't know one, " said Alice,
rather alarmed at the proposal.
" Then the Dormouse shall ! " they both cried.
'^Wake up, Dormouse! " And they pinched it
on both sides at once.
The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. " I
wasn't asleep, " he said in a hoarse, feeble voice :
" I heard every word you fellows were say-
ing. "
" Tell us a story! " said the March Hare.
" Yes, please do! " pleaded Alice.
" And be quick about it, " added the Hatter,
" or you'll be asleep again before it's done. "
" Once upon a time there were three little
sisters, " the Dormouse began in a great hurry;
" and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie;
and they lived at the bottom of a well "
" What did they live on ? " said Alice, who
106 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
always took a great interest in questions of eat-
ing and drinking.
" They lived on treacle, " said the Dormouse,
after thinking a minute or two.
" They couldn't have done that, you know, "
Alice gently remarked: " they'd have been ill. "
" So they were, " said the Dormouse; " very ill. "
Alice tried a little to fancy to herself what
such an extraordinary way of living would be
like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on : ^^ But why did they live at the bottom of
a Avell? "
" Take some more tea, " the March Hare said
to Alice, very earnestly.
" I've had nothing yet, " Alice replied in an
offended tone, " so I can't take more. "
" You mean, you can't take Zess, " said the
Hatter : " it's very easy to take more than
nothing. "
" Nobody asked your opinion, " said Alice.
" Who's making personal remarks now? " the
Hatter asked triumphantly.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 107
Alice did not quite know what to say to this:
so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and--
butter, and then turned to the Dormouse^ and
repeated her question. " Why did they live at
the bottom of a well? "
The Dormouse again took a minute or two
to think about it, and then said, " It was a
treacle- well. "
" There's no such thing! " Alice was begin-
ning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March
Hare went " Sh ! sh ! " and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, " If you can't be civil, you'd better
finish the story for yourself. "
" No, please go on ! " Alice said very humbly :
" I won't interrupt you again. I dare say there
may be oneP
" One, indeed! " said the Dormouse indignant-
ly. However, he consented to go on. " And
so these three little sisters — they were learning
to draw, you know "
" What did they draw? " said Alice, quite for-
getting her promise.
108 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
^^ Treacle, " said the Dormouse, without con-
sidering at all this time.
" I want a clean cup, " interrupted the Hatter:
" let's all move one place on. "
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse
followed him: the March Hare moved into the
Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwilUngly
took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter
w^as the only one who got any advantage from
the change: and Alice was a good deal worse
off than before, as the March Hare had just
upset the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse
again, so she began very cautiously : ^^ But I
don't understand. " Where did they draw the
treacle from? "
" You can draw water out of a water-well, "
said the Hatter; " so I should think you could
draw treacle out of a treacle- well — eh, stupid? "
" But they w^ere in the well, " Alice said to
the Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last
remark.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 109
" Of course they were, " said the Dormouse, — •
^^well in. "
This answer so confused poor Alice, that she
let the Dormouse go on for so'me time without
interrupting it.
" They Avere learning to draw, " the Dormouse
went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it
was getting very sleepy; " and they drew all
manner of things — everything that begins with
an M "
" Why with an M? " said Alice.
" Why not? " said the March Hare.
Alice was silent.
The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this
time, and was going off into a doze, but, on
being pinched by the Hattei^, it woke up again
with a little shriek, and went on: " that
begins with an M, such as mousetraps, and the
moon, and memory, and muchness — you know
you say things are ^ much of a muchness'— did
you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a
muchness? "
110
A MAD TEA-PARTY.
" Realij, now you ask me, " said Alice, very
much confused, " I don't think "
" Then you shouldn't talk, " said the Hatter.

This piece of rudeness was more than Alice
could bear: she got up in great disgust, and
walked off: the Dormouse fell asleep instantly,
and neither of the others took the least notice
of her going, though she looked back once or
twice, half hoping that they would call after
her: the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. Ill
^^ At any rate I'll never go there again ! " said
Alice as she piclved her way through the wood.
" It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in
all my life! "
Just as she said this, she noticed that one
of the trees had a door leading right into it.
^'That's very curious ! " she thought. " But
'everything's curious to-day. I think 1 may as
well go in at once. " And in she went.
Once more she found herself in the long hall,
and close to the little glass table. " ]^ow, I'll
manage better this time, " she said to herself,
and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till
she was about a foot high: then she walked
down the little passage: and then — she found
herself at last in the beautiful garden, among
the bright flowerbeds and the cool fountainSo
\
CHAPTER yill.
THE queen's croquet-ground.
A LARGE rose-tree stood near the entrance of
the garden: the I'oses growing on it were white,
but there were three gardenei-s at it, busily
painting them red. AUce thought this a very
curious thing, and she went nearer to watch
them, and just as she came up to them she
heard one of them say, " Look out now. Five !
Don't go sphishiug paint over me hke that ! "
" I couldu't help it, " said Five in a sulky
tone; " Seven jogged my elbow. "
On which Seven looked up aud said, " That's
right, Five ! Always lay the blame on others !'^
THE QUEEN'S CKOQUEl -GROUND.
113
^'Toii'd better not talk! " said Five. " I heard
the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to
be beheaded ! "
" What for? "
said the one who
had spoken first.
" That's none
of yoicr business,
Two! " said Seven.
" Yes, it is his
business ! " said
Five, " and I'll
tell him — it was
for bringhig tiie
cook tulip - roots
instead of onions. "
Seven flung
down his brush, and had just begun, " Well, of
all the unjust things — " when his eye chanced
to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them,
and he checked himself suddenly: the others
looked round also, and all of them bowed low.
8

114 THE QUEEN'S
" Would you tell me, please, " said Alice,
a little timidly, " why you are painting those
roses? "
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at
Two. Two began, in a low voice, " Why, the
fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have
been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one
in by mistake, and if the Queen was to find it
out, we should all have our heads cut off, you
know. So you see. Miss, we're doing our best,
afore she comes, to — " At this moment Five,
who had been anxiously looking across the gar-
den, called out " The Queen ! The Queen ! " and
the thi-ee gardeners instantly threw themselves
flat upon their faces. There was a sound of
many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager
to see the Queen.
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these
were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong
and flat, with their hands and feet at the cor-
ners: next the ten courtiers; these were orna-
mented ail over with diamonds, and walked two
CROQUET-GROUND. 115
and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them,
and the little dears came jumping merrily along
hand in hand, in couples: they were all orna-
mented with hearts.'Next came the guests,
mostly Kings and Queens, and among them
Alice recognized the White Rabbit: it was talk-
ing in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at
everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of
Hearts, carrying the King's crown on a crimson
velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand pro-
cession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF
HEAETS.
Alice was rathei^ doubtful whether she ought
not to lie down on her face like the three
gardeners, but she could not remember ever
having heard of such a rule at processions; ^ " ^and
besides, what would be the use of a procession, "
she thought, " if people had all to lie down on
their faces, so that they couldn't see it.^ " So she
stood Avhere she was, and waited.
1 16 THE QUEEN'S
When the procession came opposite to AUce,
they all stopped and looked at her, and the
Queen said severely, " Who is this? " She said
it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and
smiled in reply.
" Idiot! " said the Queen, tossing her head
hnpatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went
on, " What's your name, child? "
" My name is Alice, so please your Majesty, "
said Alice very politely; but she added, to
herself, " Why, they're only a pack of cards,
after ail. I needn't be afraid of them! "
" And who are these? ^^ said the Queen, point-
ing to the three gardeners who w^ere lying
round the rose-tree; for you see, as they were
lying oii their faces, and the pattern on their
backs was the same as the rest of the pack,
she coidd not tell whether ^hey w^ere gardeners,
or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own
children.
" How should /know? " said Ahce, surprised
at her own courage. " It's no business of mme. "
CROQUET-GROUXn.
117

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and,
after glaring at her for a moment like a wild
beast, began screaming, " OflP with her head !
Off—'^
118 THE QUEEN'S
" Nonsense ! " said Alice, very loudly and
decidedly, and the Queen was silent.
The King laid his hand n2)on her arm, and
timidly said, " Consider, my dear : she is only
a child! "
The Queen turned angi'ily away from him,
and said to the Knave, ^- Turn them over! "
The Knave did so, very carefully, with one
foot.
" Get up ! " said the Queen in a shrill, loud
voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped
up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.
" Leave off that! " screamed the Queen. " You
make me giddy. " And then, turning to the
rose-tree, she went on, " What have you been
doing here?''
" May it please your Majesty, " said Two, in
a very humble tone, going down on one knee
as he spoke, " we were tr^dng — "
" I see ! " said the Queen, who had mean-
while been examining the roses. " Off with
CROQUET-GROUND. 1 1 9
their heads ! " and the procession moved on,
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute
the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Ahce for
protection.
" You shan't be beheaded ! " said Alice, and
she put them into a large flower-pot that stood
near. The three soldiers wandered about for
a minute or two, looking for them, and then
quietly marched off after the others.
" Are their heads off? " shouted the Queen.
" Their heads are gone, if it please your
Majesty! " the soldiers shouted in reply.
" That's right! " shouted the Queen. " Can
you play croquet? "
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice,
as the question was evidently meant for her.
" Yes ! " shouted Alice.
" Come on then ! " roared the Queen, and
Alice joined the procession, wondering very
much what would happen next.
" It's — it's a very fine day! " said a timid
voice at her side. She was walking by the White
120 THE QUEEN'S
Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into hei
face.
" Very, " said Alice: — " where's the Duchess? "
" Hush! Hush! " said the Eabbit in a low,
hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his
shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself
upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered, " She's under sentence of execution. "
" AYhat for? " said Alice.
" Did you say'What a pity!'? " the Rabbit
asked.
" Xo, I didn't, " said Alice: " I don't think
it's at all a pity. I said'What for?'"
" She boxed the Queen's ears — " the Rabbit
began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter.
" Oh, hush ! " the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. " The Queen will hear you ! You see she
came rather late, and the Queen said — "
" Get to your places ! " shouted the Queen in
a voice of thunder, and ])eople began running
about in all directions, tumbling up against
each other: however, they got settled down in
•^ minute oi'two. and the game began.
CROQUET-GROUND.
121
Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquet-ground in her hfe : it was all
ridges and furrows; the croquet-balls were live
hedgehogs, and the mallets live flamingoes, and
the soldiei-s had to
double themselves up
and stand on their
hands and feet, to
make the arches.
The chief diffi-
culty Alice found at
first was in managing
her flamingo : she
succeeded in getting
its body tucked away,
comfortably enough,
under her arm, with
its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck nicely straightened out, and
was going to give the hedgehog a blow with
its head, it would twist itself round and look
up into her face, with such a puzzled expres-

122 THE QUEEN'S
sion that she could not help burstmg out laugh-
mg: and when she had got its head down, and
was going to begin again, it was very provoking
to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself,
and w^as in the act of crawling away: besides
all this, there was genei*ally a ridge or a furrow
in the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were
always getting up and walking off to other parts
of the grouiid, Alice soon came to the conclusion
that it was a very difficult game indeed.
The players all played at once without wait-
ing for turns, quarrelling all the while, and
fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and
went stamping about, and shouting, " Off* with
his head ! " or " Off* with her head ! " about once
in a minute,
Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure,
she had not as yet had any dispute with the
Queen, but she knew that it might happen any
minute, " and then, " thought she, " what would
CROQUET-GROUND. 123
become of me ? They're dreadfully fend of
beheading people here : the great wonder isj
that there's any one left alive ! "
She was looking about for some way of escape,
and wondering whether she could get away
without beiug seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much
at first, but after watching it a minute or two
she made it out to be a grin, and she said to her-
self, " It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have
somebody to talk to. "
" How are you getting on ? " said the Cat,
as soon as there was mouth enough for it tc
speak with.
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then
nodded. " It's no use speaking to it, " she
thought, " till its ears have come, or at least
one of them. " In another minute the whole
head appeared, and then Alice put down her
flamingo, and began an account of the game,
feeling very glad she had some one to listen to
her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
a24 the QUEEN'S
enough of it now in sight, and no more of k
appeared.
^'1 don-t think they play at all fairly, " Alice
began, in rather a complaining tone, " and they
all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear one's-self
speak — and they don't seem to have any rules
in particular; at least, if there are, nobody
attends to them — and you've no idea hoAV con-
fusing it is all the things being alive; for in-
stance, there's the arch I've got to go through
next walking about at the other end of the
ground — and I should have croqueted the
Queen's hedgehog just now, only it ran away
when it saw mine coming! "
^ " How do you like the Queen? " said the Cat
in a low voice.
^^ Not at all, " said Alice: " she's so ex-
tremely — " Just then she noticed that the
Queen was close behind her, listening: so she
went on " — likely to win, that it's hardly worth
while finishing the game. "
The Queen smiled and passed on.
CKOQUET-GROUND. 12 J
^^Who are you talldiig to? " said the King,
coming up to Alice, and looking at the Cat's
head with great curiosity.
^^It's a friend of mine — a Cheshire Cat, " said
Alice: ^^ allow me to introduce it.''
^'I don't like the look of it at all, " said the
King: " however, it may kiss my hand if it
likes. "
" I'd rather not, " the Cat remarked.
" Don't be impertinent, " said the King, " and
don't look at me like that ! " He got behind
Alice as he spoke,
" A cat may look at a king, " said AlicCc
" I've read that in some book, but I don't re-
member where. "
" Well, it must be removed, " said the King
very decidedly, and he called to the Queen, w4io
was passing at the moment, " My dear! I wish
you would have this cat removed! "
The Queen had only one way of settling all
difficulties, great or small. " Off with his head I "
she said without even lookino: round.
126 THE QUEEN'S
" I'll fetch the executioner myself, " said the
King eagerly, and he hurried off.
Alice thought she might as well go back and
see how the game was going on, as she heard
the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming
with passion. She had already heard her sen-
tence three of the players to be executed for
having missed their turns, and she did not like
the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it
was her turn or not. So she w^ent off in search
of her hedgehog.
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with
another hedgehog, which seemed to Ahce an
excellent opportunity for ci-oqueting one of them
with the other: the only difficulty was, that
her flamingo was gone across to the other side
of the garden, where Alice could see it trying
m a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
By the time she had caught the flamingo
and brought it back, the fight was over, and
both the hedgehogs were out of sight:'^but it
GSOQUET-GKOUNB. 127
doesn't matter much, " thought Alice, " as all the
arches are gone from this side of the ground. "
So she tucked it away under her arm, that it
might not escape again, and went back to have
a little more conversation with her friend.
When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she
was surprised to find quite a large crowd col-
lected round it: there was a dispute going on
between the executioner, the King, and the
Queen, who were all talking at once, wdiile all
the rest were quite silent, and looked very
uncomfortable.
The moment Alice appeared, she was ap-
pealed to by all three to settle the question,
and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it
very hard to make out exactly what they said.
The executioner's argument was, that you
couldn't cut off a head unless there was a body
to cut it off from: that he had never had to
do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to
begin at Jiis time of life.
128
THE QUEEN'S

^^-^^3ra^:ii.-^^,)

The King's argument was, that anything that
had a head could be beheaded, and that you
weren't to talk nonsense.
The Queen's argument was, that if some-
thing wasn't done about it in less than no time,
she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It
CROQUET-GROUND. 129
was this last remark that had made the whole
party look so grave and anxious.)
Alice could think of nothing else to say but
^^It belongs to the Duchess: you'd better ask
her about it, "
" She's in prison, " the Queen said to the exe-
cutioner: " fetch her here. " And the execu-
tioner went off like an arrow.
The Cat's head began fading away the mo-
ment he was gone, and, by the time he had come
back with the Duchess, it had entirely disap-
peared: so the King and the executioner ran
wildly up and down looking for it, while the
rest of the pariy went bacK to the game.
CHAPTEE IX.
THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
^^ You can't think how glad I am to see you
again, you dear old thing! " said the Duchess,
as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's,
and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a
pleasant temper, and thought to herself that
perhaps it was only the pepper that had made
her so savage when they met in the kitchen.
^^ When I^m a Duchess, " she said to herself, (not
in a very hopeful tone though,) " I Avon't have
any pepper in my kitchen at all. Soup does
THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY. 131
very well without — Maybe it's always pepper
that makes people hot-tempered, " she went on,
very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, " and vinegar that makes them
sour — and camomile that makes them bitter —
and — and barley-sugar and such things that
make children sweet-tempered. I only wish
people knew that: then they wouldn't be so
stingy about it, you know — "
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this
time, and was a little startled when she heard
her voice close to her ear. " You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk. I can't tell you just now what
the moral of that is, but I shall remember it
in a bit. "
" Perhaps it hasn't one, " Alice ventured to
remark.
" Tut, tut, child ! " said the Duchess. " Every-
thing's got a moral, if only you can find it. "
And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's
side as she spoke.
132
THE MOCK
Alice did not much like her keeping so close
to her : first, because the Duchess Avas very
ugly, and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to
rest her chin on
Alice^s shoulder,
and it was an
uncomfortably
sharp chin. How-
evei', she did not
like to be rude, so
she bore it as well
as she could.
" The game's
going on rather
better now, " she
said by way of
keeping up the conversation a little.
"'Tis so, " said the Duchess: " and the moral
of that is —'Oh,'tis love,'tis love, that makes
the woi'ld go round!'"
" Somebody said, " Alice whispered, " that it's
done by everybody minding their ow^n business! "

TURTLE'S STCRY. 133
^^ Ah, well! It means much the same thing, "
said the Duehess, digging her sharp little chin
into Alice's shoulder as she added, " and the
moral of tJiat is — ^ Take care of the sense, and
the sounds will take care of themselves.'"
^^How fond she is of finding morals in
things ! " Alice thought to herself.
" I daresay you're wondering why I don't
put my arm round your waist, " said the Duchess
after a pause: " the reason is, that I'm doubt-
ful about the temper of your flamingo. Shall
I try the experiment? "
" He might bite, " Alice cautiously replied,
not feeling at all anxious to have the experi-
ment tried.
" Very true, " said the Duchess: " flamingoes
and mustard both bite. And the moral of that
is — ^ Birds of a feather flock together.'"
" Only mustard isn't a bird, " Alice remarkedo
" Right, as usual, " said the Duchess: " what
a clear way you have of putting things ! "
" It's a mineral, I think,^^ said Alice.
134 THE MOCK
" Of course it is, " said the Duchess, who
seemed ready to agree to everything that AUce
said; " there's a large mustard-mine near here.
And the moral of that is — ^The more there is
of mine, the less there is of youi's.'"
" Oh, I know ! " exclaimed Alice, who had
not attended to this last remark, " it's a vegetable.
It doesn't look like one, but it is. "
" I quite agree with you, " said the Duchess,
" and the moral of that is — " ^Be what you would
seem to be'— or, if you'd like it put more
simply — ^^ever imagine yourself not to be
otherwise than what it might appear to others
that what you were or might have been was
not otherwise than what you had been would
have appeared to them to be otherwise.'"
" I think I should understand that better, "
Alice said very politely, " if I had it written
down: but I can't quite follow it as you say
it. "
" That's nothing to what I could say if I
chose, " the Duchess replied in a pleased tone.
TURTLE'S STORY. 135
" Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any
longer than that, " said Alice.
" Oh, don't talk about trouble! " said the
Duchess. " I make you a jjresent of every-
thing I've said as yet. "
" A cheap sort of present! " thought Alice.
" I'm glad they don't give birthday presents
like that! " But she did not venture to say it
out loud.
" Thinking again? " the Duchess asked, with
another dig of her sharp little chin.
" I've a right to think, " said Alice sharply,
for she was beginning to feel a little worried.
" Just about as much right, " said the Duchess,
" as i^igs have to fly: and the m — "
But here, to Alice's great surprise, the
Duchess'voice died away, even in the middle
of her favorite word ^ moral,'and the arm
that was linked into hers began to tremble.
Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen in
front of them, with her arms folded, frowning
like a thunderstorm.
136 THE MOCK
^^A fine day, your Majesty! " the Duchess
began in a low, weak voice.
" IS'ow, I give you fair warning, " shouted the
Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke;
" either you or your head must be off, and that
in about half no time! Take your choice! "
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone
in a moment,
" Let's go on with the game, " the Queen
said to Alice, and Alice was too much frightened
to say a word, but slowly followed her back to
the croquet-ground.
The other guests had taken advantage of
the Queen's absence, and were resting in the
shade: however, the moment they saw hei', they
huri'ied back to the game, the Queen merely
remarking that a moment's delay would cost
them their lives.
All the time they were playing the Queen
never left off quarrelling with the other players^,
and shouting " Off with his head! " or " Off
with her head ! " Those whom she sentenced
TURTLE'S STORY. 13?
were taken into custody by the soldiers, who
of course had to leave off being arches to do
this, so that by the end of half an hour or so
there were no arches left, and all the players,
except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in
custody, and under sentence of execution.
Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath,
and said to Alice, " Have you seen the Mock
Turtle yet? "
" 1^0, " said Alice. " I don't even know what
a Mock Turtle is. "
" It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made
from, " said the Queen.
" I never saw one, or heard of one, " said Alice.
" Come on, then, " said the Queen, " and he
shall tell you his history. "
As they walked off together, Alice heard the
King say in a low voice, to the company gener-
ally, " You are all pardoned. " " Come, tliafs a
good thing! " she said to herself, for she had
felt quite unhappy at the number of executions
the Queen had ordered.
138
THE MOCK

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying
fast asleep in the sun. (If you don't know what
a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) " Up, lazy
thing ! " said the Queen, " and take this young
lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his
history, I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered; " and she walked off^
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice
did not quite like the look of the creature, but
on the whole she thought it would be quite as
TURTLE'S STORY. 130
safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen: so she waited.
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes :
then it watched the Queen till she was out of
sight: then it chuckled. " What fun! " said the
Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.
" AVhat is the fun? " said Alice.
" Why, s/ze, " said the Gryphon. " It's all her
fancy, that : they never executes nobody, you
know. Come on ! "
" Everybody says ^ come on !'here, " thought
Alice, as she went slowly after it : " I never was
so ordered about before in all my life, never! "
They had not gone far before they saw the
Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and
lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they
came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as
if his heart would break. She pitied him deeply.
" What is his sorrow? " she asked the Gryphon^
and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, " It's all his fancy, that :
he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on! "
i
liO THE MOCK'
So they went up to the Mock Turtle^ who \
looked at them with large eyes full of teai'Sc i
but said nothing. ;
" This here young lady, " said the Gryphon, ]
" she wants for to know your history, she do. " \
" I'll tell it her, " said the Mock Turtle in a
deep, hollow tone: " sit down both of you, and
don't speak a word till I'v^e finished. "'
So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some'
minutes. Alice thought to herself, " I don't see \
how he can eve?^ finish, if he doesn't begin. "'
But she waited patiently. j
1
" Once, " said the Mock Turtle at last, with !
a deep sigh, " I was a real Turtle. " i
These words were followed by a very long
silence, broken only by an occasional exclama-
tion of " Hjckrrh! " from the Gryphon, and the i
constant heavy sobl)ing of the Mock Turtle. |
Alice Avas very nearly getting up and saying,
" Thank you, sir, for your interesting story, " j
but she could not help thinking there must be I
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing. i
TURTLE'S STORY.
141

" When we were little, " the Mock Turtle
went on at last, more calmly, though still sob-
bing a little now and then, " we went to school
in the sea. The master was an old Turtle — - we
used to call him Tortoise — "
142 THE MOCK
" Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't
one? " Alice asked.
" We called him Tortoise because he taught
us, " said the Mock Turtle angrily; " really you
are very dull ! "
^'You ought to be ashamed of yourself for
asking such a simple question, " added the
Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink
into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to
the Mock Turtle, " Drive on, old fellow! Don't
be all day about it! " and he went on in these
words.
" Yes, we went to school in the sea, though
you mayn't believe it —'^
" I never said I didn't !'^ interrupted Alice.
" You did, " said the Mock Turtle.
" Hold your tongue! " added the Gryphon,
before Alice could speak again. The Mock
Turtle went on.
" We had the best of educations — in fact^ we
went to school every day — "
TURTLE'S STORr. 143
^^ Tve been to a day-school too, " said Alice;
'^you needn't be so proud as all that. "
" With extras? " asked the Mock Turtle a
little anxiously.
" Yes, " said Alice, " we learned French and
music. "
" And washing ? " said the Mock Turtle.
" Certainly not ! " said Alice indignantly.
" Ah ! Then yours wasn't a really good school, "
said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief.
" I^ow at OUTS they had at the end of the bill,
^French, music, and washing — extra.* "
" You couldn't have wanted it much, " said
Alice; " living at the bottom of the sea. "
" I couldn't afford to learn it, " said the Mock
Turtle with a sigh. " I only took the regular
course. "
" What was that? " enquired Alice.
" Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin
with, " the Mock Turtle repHed : " and then the
different branches of Arithmetic — Ambition, Dis°
traction, Uglification, and Derision. "
H4 THE MOCK
^^ I never heard of ^ Uglification.'" Alice ven-
tured to say. " What is it ? "
The Gryphon hfted up both its paAvs in sur-
prise. " ^ever heard of uglifying ! " it exclaimed.
" You know what to beautify is, I suppose ? "
^^Yes, " said Alice, doubtfully: " it means —
to — make — anything — prettier. "
'■ Well then, " the Gryphon went on, " if you
don't know what to uglify is, you are a
simpleton. "
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any
more questions about it, so she turned to the
Mock Turtle, and said, " What else had you to
learn ? "
" Well, there was Mystery, " the Mock Turtle
replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, —
" Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography:
then Drawling — the Drawling-master was an old
conger-eel, that used to come once a Aveek: lie
taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in
Coils. "
" What was tliat like ? " said Alice.
TURTLE'S STORY. 145
^^ Well, I can't show it you, myself, " the Mock
Turtle said: " I'm too stiff. And the Gryphon
never learnt it. "
" Hadn't time, " said the Gryphon : " I went
to the Classical master, though. He was an
old crab, he was. "
^^I never went to him, " the Mock Turtle
said with a sigh: " he taught Laughing and
Grief, they used to say. "
" So he did, so he did, " said the Gryphon,
sighing in his turn, and both creatures hid their
faces in their paws.
" And how many hours a day did you do
lessons ? " said Alice, in a hurry to change the
subject.
" Ten hours the first day, " said the Mock
Turtle: " nine the next, and so on. "
" What a curious plan! " exclaimed Alice.
" That's the reason they're called lessons,''
the Gryphon remarked: " because they lessen
from day to day. "
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she
10
146 THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY.
thought it over a little before she made her next
remark. " Then the eleventh day must have
been a holiday? "
" Of course it was, " said the Mock Turtle.
" And how did you manage on the twelfth ? "
Alice went on eagei-ly.
" That's enough about lessons, " the Gryphon
interrupted in a very decided tone: " tell her
something about the games now. "
CHAPTEK X.
THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE.
The Mock Tuille sighed deejDly, and drew
the back of one flapper aci-oss his eyes. He
looked at Alice and tried to speak, but for a
mmute or two sobs choked his vuice. " Same
as if he had a bone in his throat, " said the
Gryphon, and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back. At last the
Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again: —
" You may not have hved much under the
sea — " ( " I haven't, " said Alice) — " and perhaps
you were never even introduced to a lobster — "
148 THE LOBSTER
(Alice began to say ^^I once tasted — " but
checked herself hastily, and said, " No, never " ) — -
" so yon can have no idea what a delightful thing
a Lobster-Quadrille is! "
" No, indeed, " said Alice. " " What sort of a
dance is it? "
" Why, " said the Gryphon, " you first form
into a line along tne seashore — "
" Two lines ! " cried the Mock Turtle, " Seals,
turtles, salmon, and so on: then, when you've
cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way — "
" That generally takes some time, " mter-
rupted the Gryphon.
" — you advance twice — "
" Each with a lobster as a partner! " cried
the Gryphon.
" Of course, " the Mock Turtle said : " advance
twice, set to partners — "
" — change lobsters, and retire in same order, "
continued the Gryphon.
" Then, you know, " the Mock Turtle went
on, " you throw the — "
QUADRILLE. 149
^^ The lobsters ! " shouted the Gryphon, with
a bound mto the ah*.
" — as far out to sea as you can — "
" Swhii after them ! " screamed the Gryphon.
" Turn a somersault in the sea ! " cried the
Mock Turtle, capering wildly about.
" Change lobsters again ! " yelled the Gryphon
at the top of its voice.
" Back to land again, and — that's all the first
figure, " said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping
his voice, and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time,
sat down again very sadly and quietly, and
looked at Alice.
" It must be a very pretty dance, " said Alice
timidly.
" Would you like to see a little of it? " said
the Mock Turtle.
" Very much indeed, " said Alice.
" Come, let's try the first figure! " said the
Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. " We can do it
without lobsters, you know. W^hich shall sing? "
VjO
THE LOBSTER

" Oh, you sing, " said the Gryphon. " I've
forgotten the words. "
So they began solemnly dancing ronnd and
round Alice, every now and then treading on
her toes when they passed too close, and waving
their fore-paws to mark the time, while the
Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly: — -
QUADRILLE. 151'.
\
*^Will you walk a little faster T " * said a whiting to a
snail,
^^There^s a porjjoise close behind us, and he's treading
on my tail. ]
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance! \
They are waiting on the shingle — will you come and
join the dance ?
Will you, woiTbt you, will you, wonH you, will you
join the dance 9 :
Will you, won't you, will you, woyiHt you, wonH you \
join the dance?
\
" You cayi really have no notion how delightful it will <
be \
When they talce us up and throw us, with the lobsters, ]
out to seal j
But the snail replied " Too far, too far!'''and gave a
looJc askance — !
8aid lie tJianked the whiting kindly, but he would not ]
join tlie dance. \
Would not, could not, ivould not, could not, would
not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not, could
not join the dance.
152 THE LOBSTER
" What matters it how far ice go ? " his scaly frienA
replied,
^^ There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further off from England the nearer is to France;
Then tu7m not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the
dance.
Will you, won't you, will you, woril you, " mil you join
the danced
Will you, 100)1 1 you, will you, won't you, wovHt you
join the dance? "
" Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to
watch, " said AHce, feeUng very glad that it was
over at last ; " and I do so like that curioD.s
song about the whiting! "
" Oh, as to the whiting, " said the Mock
Turtle, " they — you've seen them, of course?'^
" Yes, " said Alice, " I've often seen them at
dinn —'^ she checked herself hastily.
" I don't know where Dinn may be, " said
the Mock Turtle, " but if you've seen them m
oiten, of course you know what they're like. "
" I believe so, " Alice replied thoughtfully
QUADRILLE. 153
^^ They have their tails in their mouths ; — and
they're all over crumbs. "
" You're wrong about the crumbs, " said the
Mock Turtle : " crumbs would all wash off in
the sea. But they have their tails in their
mouths; and the reason is — " here the Mock
Turtle yawned and shut his eyes. — " Tell her
about the reason and all that, " he said to the
Gryphon.
" The reason is, " said the Gryphon, " that
they ivould go with the lobsters to the dance.
So they got thrown out to sea. So they had
to fall a long way. So they got their tails fast
in their mouths. So they couldn't get them
out again. That's all. "
" Thank you, " said Alice, " it's very interest-
ing. I never knew so much about a whiting
before. "
" I can tell you more than that, if you like, "
said the Gryphon. " Do you know why it's
called a whiting? "
" I never thought about it, " said Alice.
154 THE LOBSTER
^ " ^ It does the hoots mid shoes,'^^ the Gryphon
replied very solemnly.
Alice was thoroughly puzzlecL " Does the
boots and shoes ! " she repeated in a wonder-
ing tone.
" Why, what are your shoes done with ? "
said the Gryphon. " I mean, what makes them
so shiny? "
Alice looked down at them, and considered
a little before she gave her answer, " They're
done with blacking, I believe. "
" Boots and shoes under the sea, " the Gry-
phon went on in a deep voice, " are done with
whiting. !N^ow you know. "
" And what are they made of? " Alice asked
in a tone of great curiosity.
" Soles and eels, of course, " the Gryphon
replied rather imiDatiently : " any shrimp could
have told you that. "
" If I'd been the whiting, " said Alice, whose
thoughts were still running on the song, " I'd
have said to the porpoise, ^Keep back, please:
we don't want vou with usl'"
QUADRILLE. 155
" They were obliged to have him with them, "
the Mock Turtle said: " no wise fish would go
anywhere without a porpoise. "
" Wouldn't it really? " said Ahce in a tone
of great surprise.
" Of course not, " said the Mock Turtle:
" why, if a fish came to me^ and told me he
was going a journey, I should say ^ With what
Dorpoise ?'"
" Don't you mean ^ purpose ?'" said Alice.
" I mean what I say, " the Mock Turtle re-
plied in an offended tone. And the Gryphon
added " Come, let's hear some of your adven-
tures. "
" I could tell you my adventures — beginning
from this monung, " said Alice a little timidly:
" but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then. "
" Explain all that, " said the Mock Turtle.
" No, no ! the adventures first, " said the
Gryphon in an impatient tone: " explanations
take such a dreadful time. "
156 THE LOBSTER
So Alice began telling them her adventures
from the time when she first saw the White
Rabbit: she was a little nervous about it just at
first, the two creatures got so close to her, one
on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths
so very w-ide, but she gained courage as she
went on. Hei* hsteners were perfectly quiet
till she got to the part about her repeating
" You are old, Father William^''to the Cater-
pillar, and the v/ords all coming different, and
then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and
said, " That's very curious. "
" It's all about as curious as it can be, " said
the Grj^phon.
" It all came different! " the Mock Turtle
repeated thoughtfully. " I should like to hear
her tiy and repeat something now. Tell her
to begin. " He looked at the Gryphon as if he
thought it had some kind of authority over
Alice.
" Stand up and repeat " ^^Tis the voice of the
%liiggardP^ said the Gryphon.
QUADRILLE.
157
^^ How the creatures
order one about, and
make one repeat les-
sons ! " thought Alice.
" I might just as well
be at school at once. "
However, she got up, i^\^^
and began to repeat'jlj^y
it, but her head was
so full of the Lob-
ster-Quadrille, that
she hardly knew what
she was saying, and
the words came very ^g
queer indeed: —
"'T/s the voice of the lobster; I heard him declare,
'You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair}
As a duck lolth its eyelids , so he with his nose
Trims his belt and his buttons^ and turns out his toes J

" That's different from what I used to saj?
when I was a child, " said the Gryphon.
108 THE LOBSTEB
^^ Well, I never heard it before, " said the Mock
Turtle ; " but it sounds uncommon nonsense. "
Alice said nothing: she had sat down again
with her face in her hands, wondering if any-
thing would ever happen in a natural way
again.
" I should like to have it explained, " said the
Mock Turtle.
" She can't explain it, " said the Gryphon
hastily. " Go on with the next verse. "
" But about his toes? " the Mock Turtle
persisted. " How could he turn them out with
his nose, you know? "
" It's the first position in dancing, " Alice
said; but she was dreadfully puzzled by the
whole thing, and longed to change the subject.
" Go on with the next verse, " the Gryphon
repeated impatiently: " it begins " ^ I jyassed hy
his garden.'''^'^
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she
felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went
on in a tromblin«y voice : —
QUADRILLE. 159
*^ I passed by his garden^ and marked, with one eye.
How the owl and the oyster were sharing the pie — - "
^^ What is the use of repeating all that stuff, "
the Mock Turtle interrupted, " if you don't ex-
plain it as you go on? It's by far the most con-
fusing thing I ever heard ! "
" Yes, I think you'd better leave off, " said
the Gryphon, and Alice was only too glad to
do so.
" Shall we try another figure of the Lobster-
Quadrille? " the Gryphon went on.'-Or would
you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song? "
" Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would
be so kind, " Alice replied, so eagerly that the
Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, " Hm!
]S'o accounting for tastes! Sing her " ^Turtle
Soup,''Avill you, old fellow? "
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began,
in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing
this : —
100 THE LOBSTER
" ^ Beautiful Soiqj, so rich and green.
Waiting in a hot tureen!
Who for such dainties would not stoop f
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop!
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop!
Soo — 00]) of the e — e — evening.
Beautiful, beautiful Soup!
^Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish c >
Game, or any otJier dish?
Who would not give all else for tioo p
ennywortli only of beautiful Soup?
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop!
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop!
Soo — ooj) of the e — e — evening.
Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP!''
^^ Chorus again! " cried the Gryphon, and the
Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when
QUADRILLE. l6l
a cry of " The trial's beginning ! " was heard in
the distance.
" Come on ! " cried the Gryphon, and, taking
Alice by the hand, it hurried off, without wait-
ing for the end of the song.
" What trial is it? " Alice j3anted as she ran,
but the Gryphon only answered " Come on ! "
and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze tnat followed them,
the melancholy words : —
" /boo — oop of the e — e — evening^
Beautiful i beautiful Soup f^
CHAP TEE XL
WHO STOLE THE TARTS £*
The King and Queen of Hearts were seated
on their throne when thej ari-ived, with a great
crowd assembled about them — all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as we!^ as the whole pack of
cards: the Knave was standing before them,
in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of
parchment in the other. In the very middle
of the court was a table, with a large dish of
WHO STOLE THE TARTS? 163
tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it
made Alice quite hungry to look at them — " I
wish they'd get the trial done, " she thought,
" and hand round the refreshments! " But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began
looking at everything about her to pass away
the time.
Alice had never been in a court of justice
before, but she had read about them in books,
and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. " That's
the judge, " she said to herself, " because of his
great wig. "
The judge, by the way, was the King, and
as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at
the frontispiece if you want to see how he did
it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it
was certainly not becoming.
" And that's the jury-box, " thought Alice,
" and those twelve creatures, " (she was obliged
to say " creatures, " you see, because some of
them were animals, and some were birds,) " T
164 WHO STOLE
suppose they are the jurors. " She said this
last word two or three times over to herself,
being rather proud of it: for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age
knew the meaning of it at all. However, " jury-
men " would have done just as well.
The twelve jurors were all writing very
busily on slates. " What are they doing? " Alice
whispered to the Gryphon. " They can't have
anything to put down yet, before the trial's
begun. "
" They're putting down their names, " the
Gryphon whispered in reply, " for fear they
should forget them before the end of the trial. "
" Stupid things ! " Alice began in a loud
indignant voice, but she stopped herself hastily,
for the White Rabbit cried out, " Silence in the
court ! " and the King put on his spectacles and
looked anxiously round, to make out who was
talking.
Alice could see, as well as if she were look-
ing over their shoulders, that all the jurors were
THE TARTS? 165
writing down " stupid things ! " on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them
didn't know how to spell ^^ stupid, " and that he
had to ask his neighbor to tell him. " A nice
muddle their slates'11 be in before the trial's
over! " thought Alice.
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.
This, of course, Alice could not stand, and she
went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away. She did it so quickly that the poor
little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not
make out at all what had become of it; so,
after hunting all about for it, he was obliged
to write with one finger for the rest of the
day; and this was of very little use, as it left
no mark on the slate.
" Herald, read the accusation ! " said the
King.
On this the White Eabbit blew three blasts
on the trumpet, and then unrolled the parch-
ment scroll, and read as follows : —
166
WHO STOLE

^Tffit0ifrn^-
The Queen of Hearts^ she made some tartS',
All on a summer day :
The ITnave of Hearts, he stole those fartSf
And toolc them quite aivay!^^
^^ Consider your verdict, " the King said to -j
the jury.'i
THE TARTS? 167
" ^'ot yet, not yet! " the Rabbit hastily in-
terrupted. " There's a great deal to come before
that! "
" Call the first witness, " said the King; and
the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the
trumpet, and called out, " First witness ! "
The first witness was the Hatter. He came
in with a teacup in one hand, and a piece of
bread-and-butter in the other. " I beg pardon,
your Majesty, " he began, " for bringing these
in: but I hadn't quite finished my tea when
I was sent for. "
" You ought to have finished, " said the King.
" " When did you begin? "
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who
had followed him into the court, arm-in-arm
with the Dormouse. " Fourteenth of March, I
think it was, " he said.
" Fifteenth, " said the March Hare. ,
" Sixteenth, " added the Dormouse.
" Write that down, " the King said to the
jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three
168 WHO STOLE
dates on their slates, and then added them up,
and reduced the answer to shilUngs and pence.
" Take off your hat, " the King said to the
Hatter,
" It isn't mine, " said the Hatter.
^^ Stolen !^'^ the King exclaimed, turning to
the jury, who instantly made a memorandum
of the fact.
" I keep them to sell, " the Hatter added as
an explanation: " I've none of my own. I'm
a hatter. "
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and
began staring hard at the Hatter, who turned
pale and fidgeted.
" Give your evidence, " said the King; " and
don't be nervous, or I'll have you executed on
the spot. "
This did not seem to encourage the witness
at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the
other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.
THE TARTS? 169
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious
sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until
she made out what it was: she was beginning
to groN larger again, and she thought at first
she would get up and leave the court; but on
second thoughts she decided to remain where
she was as long as there was room for her.
" I wish you wouldn't squeeze so, " said the
Dormouse, who was sitting next to her. " I can
hardly breathe. "
" I can't help it, " said Alice very meekly:
^^ I'm growing. "
" You've no right to grow liere^^ said the
Dormouse.
" Don't talk nonsense, " said Alice more boldly:
^^ you know you're growing too. "
" Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace, " said
the Dormouse: " not in that ridiculous fashion. "
And he got up verj^ sulkily and crossed over
to the other side of the court.
All this time the Queen had never left off
staring at the Hatter, and, just as the Dormouiiie
170
WHO STOLE
crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, " Bring me the Hst of the singers in
the last concert! " on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he
shook both his shoes
off.
" Give your evi-
dence, " the King re-
peated angrily, " or
I'll have you execu-
ted, whether you're
nervous or not. "
" I'm a poor man,
your Majesty, " the
Hatter began in a
trembling voice, " and
I hadn't but just begun my tea — not above
a week or so — and Avhat with the bread-and«
butter getting so thin — and the twinkling of
the tea — "
^^The twinkling of what?^^ said the King.
^^ It hegan with the tea, " the Hatter replied.

THE TARTS? 171
" Of course twinkling begins with a T ! " said
the King sharply. ^^ Do you take me for a
dunce ? Go on I "
" I'm a poor man, " the Hatter went on, ^^ and
most things twinkled after that — only the March
Hare said * "
" I didn't ! " the March Hare interrupted in
a great hurry,
" You did! " said the Hatter.
" I deny it ! " said the March Hare.
" He denies it, " said the King: " leave out
that part. "
" Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said — " the
Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see
if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse
denied nothing, being fast asleep.
" After that, " continued the Hatter, " I cut
some more bread-and-butter - "
" But what did the Dormouse say? " one of
the jury asked.
" That I can't remember, " said the Hatter.
" You must remember, " remarked the King,
^or I'll have vou executed. "
172 WHO STOLE
The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and
bread-and-butter, and went down on one kneeo
" I'm a poor man, your Majesty, " he began.
" You're a very poor speaker,^^ said the
King.
Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was
immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will
just explain to you how it was done. They had
a large canvass bag, which tied \\\) at the mouth
with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-
pig, head first, and then sat upon it.)
" I'm glad I've seen that done, " thought
Alice. " I've so often read in the newspapers,
at the end of trials, ^ There was some attempt
at applause, which was immediately suppressed
by the officers of the court,'and I never under-
stood what it meant till now. "
" If that's all you know about it, you may
stand down, " continued the King.
" I can't go no lower, " said the Hatter : " I'm
on the floor, as it is. "
THE TARTS?
173
" Then you may sit down, " the King rephed.
Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was
suppressed.

" Come, that finishes the guinea-pigs ! " thought
Ahce. " ]^ow we shall get on better. "
'^I'd rather finish my tea, " said the Hatter,
with an anxious look at the Queen, who was
reading the list of singers.
^^ You may go, " said the King, and the Hatter
hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to
put his shoes on,
^^ and just take his head ofi* outside, " the
174 AVHO STOLE
Queen added to one of the officers; but the
Hatter was out of sight before the officer could
get to the door.
" Call the next witness ! " said the King.
The next witness was the Duchess'cook.
She carried the pepper-box in her hand; and
Alice guessed who it was, even before she got
into the court, by the way the people near the
door began sneezing all at once.
" Give your evidence, " said the King.
" Shan't, " said the cook.
The King looked anxiously at the " White
Rabbit, who said in a low voice, " Your Majesty
must cross-examine this witness. "
" Well, if I must, I must, " the King said with
a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and
frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly
out of sight, he said in a deep voice, " What are
tarts made of ? "
" Pepper, mostly, " said the cook.
" Treacle, " said a sleepy voice behind her.
" Collar that Dormouse ! " the Queen shrieked
THE TARTS? 175
out. " Behead that Dormouse ! Turn that Dor-
mouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him!
Off with his whiskers ! "
For some minutes the whole court was in
confusion, getting the Dormouse turned out, and,
by the time they had settled down again, the
cook had disappeared.
" INTever mind ! " said the King, with an air
of great relief. " Call the next witness. " And
he added in an under-tone 1o the Queen,
" Keally, my dear, you must cross-examine the
next witness. It quite makes my forehead ache ! "
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled
over the list, feeling very cui-ious to see what
the next witness would be like, " — for they
haven't got much evidence yet^^^ she said to
hei'self. Imagine her surprise, wiien the White
Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little
voice, the name " Alice ! "
CHAPTEE Xn.
Alice's evidence,
" Here ! " cried Alice, quite forgetting in the
fluny of the moment how large she had grown
in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in
such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box
with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jury-
men on to the heads of the crowd below, and
there they lay sprawling about, reminding her
veiy much of a globe of gold-fish she had
accidentally upset the week before.
" Oh, I heg your pardon ! " she exclaimed in
a tone of great dismay, and began picking them
up again as quickly as she could, for the acci-
ALICE'S EVIDENCE.
177

dent of the gold-fish kept running in her headj
and she had a vague sort of idea that they must
be collected at once and put back into the jury-
box, or they would die.
12
178 ALICE'S EVIDENCE.
" The trial cannot proceed, " said the King in
a very grave voice, " until all the jurymen are
back in their proper places — a?Z, " he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as
he said so.
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that,
in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head
downwards, and the poor little thing was waving
its tail about in a mehmcholy way, being quite
unable to move. She soon got it out again, and
put it right; " not that it signifies much, " she
said to herself; " I should think it would be
quite as much use in the trial one way up as
the other. "
As soon as the jury had a little recovered
from the shock of being upset, and their slates
and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the
Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth ojDcn, gazing
up into the roof of the court.
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 179
" What do you know about this business ^
the King said to Alice.
" Nothing, " said AHce.
" JN'othing ivliateverf''persisted the King.
" Nothing whatever, " said AHce.
" That's very important, " the King said, turn-
ing to the jury. They were just beginning to
write this down on their shites, when the White
Rabbit interrupted: " ^mmportant, your Majesty
means, of course, " he said in a very respectful
tone, but frowning and making faces at him as
he spoke.
" r/mmportant, of course, I meant, " the King
hastily said, and went on to himself in an under-
tone, " important — unimportant — unimportant —
important " as if he were trying which word
sounded best.
Some of the jury wrote it down " important, "
and some " unimportant. " Alice could see this,
as she was near enough to look over their
slates ; " but it doesn't matter a bit, " she thought
to herself.
180 ALICE'S EVIDENCE.
At this moment the King, who had been for
some time busily writing in his note-book, called
out " Silence ! " and read out from his book,
^^ Rule Forty-two. All 2 > ersons more than a mile
high to leave the courtP
Everybody looked at Alice.
^^ Vm not a mile high, " said Alice.
" You are, " said the King.
" Nearly two miles high, " added the Queen.
" Well, I shan't go, at any rate, " said ^Vlice ;
^^ besides, that's not a regular rule : you invented
it just now. "
" It's the oldest rule in the book, " said the
King.
" Then it ought to be I*^umber One, " said Alice.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-
book hastily. " Consider your verdict, " he said to
the jury, in a low trembling voice.
" There's more evidence to come yet, please
your Majesty, " said the White Rabbit, jumping
up in a great hurry; " this paper has just been
picked up. "
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 181
^^ " What's ill it? " said the Queen.
" I haveirt opened it yet, " said the White
Kabbit,''but it seems to be a letter, written by
the prisoner to — to somebody. "
" It must have been that, " said the King,
" unless it was written to nobody, which isn't
usual, you know. "
" Who is it directed to? " said one of the
jurymen.
" It isn't directed at all, " said the White
Eabbit; " in fact, there's nothing written on the
outside^ He unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added, " It isn't a letter after all: it's a
set of verses. "
" Are they in the prisoner's handwriting? "
asked another of the jurymen.
" JS'o, they're not, " said the White Rabbit,
" and that's the queerest thing about it. " (The
jury all looked puzzled.)
" He must have imitated somebody else's
hand, " said the King. . (The jury all brightened
up again.)
182 ALICE'S EVIDENCE.
" Please your Majesty, " said the Knave,
" I didn't write it, and they can't prove I did:
there's no name signed at the end. "
" If you didn't sign it, " said the Kmg, " that
only makes the matter worse. You must have
meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed
your name like an honest man. "
There was a general clapping of hands at
this: it was the first really clever thing the
King had said that day.
" That proves his guilt, " said the Queen.
" It proves nothing of the sort! " said Alice.
" Why, you don't even know what they're
about! "
" Read them, " said the King.
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.
" Where shall I begin, please your Majesty? "
he asked.
" Begin at the beginning, " the King said,
gravely, " and go on till you come to the end :
then stop. "
These were the verses the White Rabbit read : —
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 183
'^ They told me you had been to he?',
And mentioned me to him:
She gave me a good character.
But said I could 7iot swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
( We know it to he true) :
If she should push the matter on.
What would become of you?
I gave her one, they gave him two.
You gave us three or more;
They all returned from him to you.
Though they were mine before.
If I or she should chance to be
Involved in this affair.
He trusts to you to set them free,
Exactly as we were.
84 ALICE'S EVIDENCE.
My notion ivas that you had been
(^Before she had this Jit)
An obstacle that came between
Him, and ourselves, and it.
DorUt let him know she liked them best.
For this must ever be
A. secret, kept from all the rest.
Between yourself and me.''
" That's the most unportant piece of evidence
we've heard yet, " said the King, rubbing his
hands; so now let the jury "
''" ^f any one of them can explain it, " said
Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few
minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupt-
ing him,) " I'll give him sixpence. I don't
believe there's an atom of meaning in it. "
The jury all wrote down on their slates, " > S'/26
doesn't believe there's an atom of meaning in
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 185
it, " but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.
" If there's no meaning in it, " said the King,
^^ that saves a world of trouble, you know, as
we needn^t try to find any. And yet I don't
know, " he went on, spreading out the verses
on his knee, and looking at them with one
eye; ^^I seem to see some meaning in them,
after all. ^ — said I could not swim —'you can't
swim, can you? " he added, turning to the
Knave.
The Knave shook his head sadly. ^^ Do I
look like it? " he said. (Which he certainly
did 7iot^ being made entirely of cardboard.)
" All right, so far, " said the King, and he
went on muttering over the verses to himself:
" ^IFe hioiu it to he true—''that's the jury, of
coursp— ^ I gave lier one, they gave liim two —'
why, that must be what he did with the tarts,
you know — "
" But it goes on ^tliey all returned from Mm
to you^ " said Alice.
186
ALICE'S EVIDENCE.

" Why, there they
are ! " said the King
triumphantly, pointing
to the tarts on the
table. " Nothing can be
clearer than that. Then
again— ^ before she had
this fit—^ you never
had fits, my dear, I
think? " he said to the
Queen,
" JSTever ! " said the
Queen furiously, throw-
ing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke.
(The unfortunate Httle Bill had left off writing
on his slate with one finger, as he found it made
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 187
110 mark; but he now hastily began again, using
the ink, that was trickUng down his flice, as
long as it hxsted.)
" Then the words don't fit you, " said the
King, looking round the court with a smile.
There was a dead silence.
" It's a pun ! " the King added in an angry
tone, and everybody laughed. " Let the jury
consider their verdict, " the King said, for about
the twentieth time that day.
" No, no! " said the Queen. " Sentence first
— verdict afterwards. "
" Stuff and nonsense ! " said Alice loudly.
" The idea of having the eentence first ! "
" Hold your tongue! " said the Queen, turn-
ing purple.
" I won't ! " said Alice.
" Off with her head! " th( > Queen shouted at
the top of her voice. Nobody moved.
" Who cares for you ? " said Alice, (she had
grown to her full size by this ljm < ?0 " You're
nothing but a pack of cards!*'
188
ALICE'S EVIDENCE.

At this the whole pack rose up into the air,
and came flying down upon her; she gave a
ALICE'S EVIDENCE. 189
fittle scream, half of fright and half of anger,
and tried to beat them off, and found herself
lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of
her sister, who was gently brushing away some
dead leaves that had fluttered down from the
trees on to her face.
" Wake np, Alice dear ! " said her sister ;
*Svhy, what a long sleep you've had! "
" Oh, I've had such a curious dream! " said
Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she
could remember them, all these strange Ad-
ventures of hei's that you have just been read-
mg about; and when she had finished, her sis-
ter kissed her, and said, " It was a curious
dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your
tea; it's getting late. " So AHce got np and
ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she
might, what a wonderful dream it had been.
190
But her sister sat still just as she left her,
leaning her head on her hand, watchhig the
setting son, and thinking of little Alice and all
her wonderful Adventures, till she too began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her
dream : —
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself: —
once again the tiny hands were clasped upon
her knee, and the bright eager eyes were look-
ing up into hers — she could hear the very tones
of her voice, and see that queer little toss of
her head, to keep back the wandering hair that
ivould always get into her eyes — and still as
she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole
place around her became alive with the strange
creatures of her little sister's dream.
191
The long grass rustled at her feet as the
White Rabbit hurried by — the frightened Mouse
splashed his way through the neighboring pool
— she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their
never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the
Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to
execution — once more the pig-baby was sneezing
on the Duchess'knee, while plates and dishes
crashed around it — once more the shriek of the
Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's slate-
pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-
pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant
sob of the miserable Mock Turtle.
So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half
believed herself in Wonderland, though she
knew she had but to open them again and all
would change to dull reality — the grass would
be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rip-
pling to the waving of the reeds — the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells,
and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the
192
Bhepherd boy — and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer
noises, would change (she knew) to the con-
fused clamor of the busy farm-yard — while the
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take
the place of the Mock Turtle's heavy sobs.
Lastly, she pictui-ed to herself how this same
little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be
herself a grown Avoman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhood: and how she
would gather about her other little childi-en, and
make their eyes bright and ea^-er with many a
strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long-ago: and how she would
feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a
pleasure in all their simple jo^^s, remembering
her own chikl-life, and the happy summer days.
THE END.
MACMILLAN AND GO'S
BOOKS FOR THE YOUNG.
WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL.
One Hundredth Thousand.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. With Forty
two Illustrations by Tenniel. 12mo, cloth, gilt. Price, $1.
" Lewis Carroll's immortal ^tox^ ^ —Academy .
" That most delightful of children's stories. " — /Sa(!«r^ay Review.
" Elegant and delicious nonsense. " — (xwarrfiaA/.
Fiftieth Thousand.
Through the Looking Glass and What Alice Found
There. With Fifty Illustrations by Tenniel. 12uio, cloth, gilt.
Price, $1.
" Will fairly rank svith the tale of her previous experience. " —Z > a27y Telegraph.
''.Many of Mr. Tenniel's designs are masterpieces of wise absurdity. " — J. < A^fl(jM;r2.
" Whether as regarding author or illustrator, this book is a jewel rarely to be
found nowadays.— £'c-/;o.
" Not a whit inferior to its predecessor in grand extravagance of imagination, and
delicious allegorical nonsense.''— Quar(e7i > / Beview.
Rhyme ? and Reason ? With Sixty-five Illustrations by
Arthur B. Frost, and Mne by Henry Holiday. 12mo, $1.50.
This book is a reprint, with additions, of the comic portions of " Phantasmagoria
and other Poems, " and of the " Hunting of the Snark. "
The above three volumes are also kept elegantly hound in extra cloth
gilt, with gilt edges, in paper box. Price, $4.00.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, and Through
the Looking Glass and What Alice found There, with all theillu^^
trations. Printed in One Volume. 12mo, cloth plain, $1.25.
1
Macmillan & Co*s Catalogue,
NEW ILLUSTRATED EDITIONS,
Bound tiniform loiili " Alice^s Adventures in Wonderland.^'
The Prince and the Page ; a Story of the Last Crusade.
By Charlotte M. Yonge, author of''The Heir of Redclyffe, "
etc., etc. With illustrations. 12mo. $1.50.
The Heroes ; Greek Fairy Tales for My Children. By
Chaeles Ktngsley. New Edition, with Illustrations. 12mo,
cloth extra, gilt. $1.
" We do not think these heroic stories have ever been more attractively told. . .
There is a deep undercurrent of religious feeling throughout its pages, which is sure
to influence young readers powerfully. " — London Revitw.
" ■ One of the children's books that will surely become classic. "
The Water Babies. A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby.
By Charles Kingsley. With Illustrations. American Edition.
12mo. $1.
" In fun, in humor, and in innocent imagination, asa child's book, we do not linow
its equal.'" — London, Beview.
Tom Brown's School Days. By Thomas Hughes,
M. P. New lUustrated Edition. 12mo, cloth, gilt. $1.00.
(Pocket Edition, 50 cents.)
" The most ianious beys'book in the language. " — Z > a27?/ Neics.
Tom Brown at Oxford. By the same Author. New
Illustrated Edition. ]2mo, cloth, gilt. $1.50.
-'In no other work that we can call to mind are the finer qualities of the English
gentleman more happily portrayed. " —Z'flj/?/ Xeirs.
" A book of greai power and truth. " — Natiojml Revieiv.
A York and a Lancaster Rose. By Annie Keary.
12mo. $1.50.
" A capital bonk for g\x\'& .''''— Stanley Lane-Poole.
*:jj* The above Six Volumes, with *'Alice's Adventures in Wonder-
land " and " Through the Looking Glass " (Eight Volumes), in box,
$9.
NEW UNIFORM EDITION OF MRS. MOLESWORTH'S
JUVENILE WORKS.
Elustrated hy Walter Crane.
" There is no more acceptable writer for children than Mrs. Molesworth. " — Liter-
anf Worhl.
" No English writer of stories for children has a better reputation than Mrs. Moles-
worth, and none whose stories we are familiar with, that deserves it better. " — A'fi
York Mail and Expi^ess.
'■ Mistress of the art of writing for chW^ren.''''— Spectator.
Books for the Young.
Grandmother Dear. With Illustrations by Walter
Crake. Ninth Thousand. lOmo, cloth. $1.
" The autlioi's concern is with the development of character, and seldom does one
meet with the wis-dom, tact and good breeding which pervades this little book. " —
Nation.
Tell Me a Story. Illustrated by Walter Crane. Third
Edition. 16mo, cloth. $1.
" So delightful that wu are inclined to join in the petition, and we hope she may
soon tell us more stories. " — .-l^/if/iOJi/m.
" Carrots ; " Just a Little Boy. Illustrated by Walter
CiiANE. Tenth Thousand. 16mo, cloth. $1.
" One of the cleverest and most ph-asing stories it has been our good fortune to
meet with for some time.'Carrots'and his sister are delightful little beings, whom
to read about is at once to become veiy fond of. " — Examiner.
The Cuckoo Clock. Illustrated by Walter Crane.
Ninth Thousand. 16mo, cloth. $1.
" A beautiful little story. ... It will be read with dilight by every child into
whose hands it is placed. " —Pa// Mall Gazette.
The Tapestry Room. A Child's Romance. Illustrated
by Walter Crane. 16mo, cloth. $1.
" Mrs. Molesworth is the Queen of children's fairy land. She knows how to
make use of the vague, fresh, wondering instincts of childhood, and to Invest famil-
iar things with'fairy glamor.''''—AtheiKEimi
A Christmas Child, A Sketch of a Boy's Life. Illus-
trated by Walter Ci?ane. 16mo, cloth. $1.
" A very sweet and tenderly drawn sketch, with life and reality manifeet through-
out. " — P«// Mall Gazette.
Rosy. Illustrated by Walter Crane. 16mo, cloth.
$1.
" It is a very pleasant little child novel that she has written, and Mr. Crane has
drawn for it some of his most characteristic illustrations. " - ^Y < ?m > York Mail and
Express.
The Adventures of Herr Baby. With Illustrations
by Walter Crane. 16ni < K $1.00.
" This sweet and beauiiful book . . Herr Baby will be one of the real heroes of
nursery ^vlXxow.'^— Academy.
Two Little Waifs. With Illustrations by Walter
Crane. lOrao. $1.00.
Christmas Tree Land. With Illustrations by W^ilter
Crane. $1.00.
Four Winds Farm. Illustrated by AValter Crane. $1.25
Little Miss Peggy. Illustrated by Walter Craxe. $1.
Macmillan & Cos Catalogue.
Summer Stories for Boys and Girls. By Mrs. Moles-
worth. 12mo. $1.50.
" Fresh and charming in style, %vith fun that is never forced, pathos that is ahvayi
genuine, and with a distinctly wholesome purpose. They are certain to be favorites
with young readers. "'— iii'erar?/ WoHU..
Novels and Tales. By Charlotte M. Yoxge. iN^ew
uniform Illustrated Edition. 12mo, cloth, gilt. Per volume, $L50.
The Heir of Redclyffe.
Heartsease, or, the Brother's Wife.
The Daisy Chain.
The Trial. More Links of the Daisy Chain.
Hopes and Fears. Scenes from the Life of a Spinster.
Dynevor Terrace ; or the Clue of Life.
The Young Stepmother ; a Chronicle of Mistakes.
The Dove in the Eagle's Nest.
" There is something exquisite in the treatment of this little tale, which is full of
Ufe and color, and a tender pathos.— iifera/ " ?/ World.
The Caged Lion.
The Chaplet of Pearls.
The Pillars of the House. Two volumes.
My Young Alcides ; a Faded Photograph.
The Three Brides.
Magnum Bonum ; or, Mother Carey's Brood.
Lady Hester, or Ursula's Narrative, and The Dan vers
Papers.
Womankind.
"'Womankind'is the ripe fruit of her rich experience, and is full of promise of
the best usefulness to her sex " — Churchman.
" lu our opinion no household containing daughters should be witliout this book on
'W^omankind.'''—Church Paper.
The Clever Woman of the Family.
Love and Life ; an Old Story in Eighteenth Century
Costume.
Unknown to History. A Story of the Captivity of Mary
of Scotland.
" Not only a charmuig story, full of romantic interest, but also marked by unusual
fulness of historic research, and of much more than the average artistic excellence. "
—American Literary Churchman.
The above Twenty Volumes, uniformly bound in cloth, in papel
box, $25.00.
Books for the Young. ^
Stray Pearls : Memoirs of Margaret de Ribaumont
Viscountess of Bellaise. By the same Author. 12mo. $1.50,
" It is a book worthy the autlior of'The Heir of Redclyffe,'and should have i
wide circulation. " — jyo-yto/i Courier.
The Armourer's Prentices. Bv the same iVuthor.
12mo. $1.50.
NOVELS, TALES, ETC., BY CHARLES KINGSLEY.
Two Years Ago. English Edition. 12mo. $1.75.
Westward Ho ; Or, The Voyages and Adventures of Sir
Amyas Leigh. 12mo. $1.75.
Hypatia ; or, New Eoes with an Old Face. 12mo. $1.75.
Alton Locke, Tailor and Poet. With a prefatory Memoir
by Thomas Hughes. 12mo. $1.75.
Yeast : a Problem. 12mo. $1.75.
Hereward, the Last of the English. 12mo. $1.75.
" In spirit, motive and method, Charles Kingsley is to be regarded as the highest
type of our recent English novelists His works will, wi; trust, grow in favor
with the large-minded and the thoughtful. He wrote with a high purpose and with
the best of motives, and this will be recognized sooner or later. " — (jhurchman.
A cheap American edition of the Novels, price $1.00 each, can also
be had in Macmillan's Series of " Dollar Novels. "
The Water Babies. A Fairy Tale for a Land Baby.
With illustrations. i2mo. $1.75.
American edition. 12mo. $1.
The Heroes; or, Greek Fairy Tales for My Children,
With illustrations. 12mo, $1 .
Glaucus ; Or, the Wonders of the Shore. With Colored
Illustrations. 12mo. $2.00.
Madam How and Lady Why ; or. First Lessons in
Earth Lore for Children. With Illustrations. 12mo. $1.
At Last ; a Christmas in the West Indies. With Illustra-
tions. 12mo. $1 75.
BY CHARLOTTE M. YONGE.
The Prince and the Page ; a Story of the Last Crusade.
With Illustrations. 16 mo., cloth. $1.25.
The Little Duke ; Eichard the Fearless. With Illustra-
tions. 16mo., cloth. $1.25.
Little Lucy's Wonderful Globe. With numerous illus*
trations. 16mo, cloth. $1.25.
Macmillan & Go's Catalogue,
P's and Q's ; or, The Question of Putting Upon. With
Illustrations. 16mo, cloth. $1.25.
The Lances of Lynwood. With Illustrations. New
edition. IGmo, cloth. $1.25.
A Book of Golden Deeds of all Countries and all
Times. 16mo, cloth $1.'J5.
A Book of Worthies. 16mo, cloth. $1.25.
The Story of the Christians and Moors of Spain.
16mo, cloth. $1.25
The above eight volumes, by Charlotte M. Yonge, can also be had together, uni-
formly bound, iu paper box, price, ^7.50.
Scripture Readings for Schools and Families. By
Charlotte M. Yonge, Author of " The Heir of Redclyffe, " with
Comments. Five Tolumes, in paper box, $6.00. Each volume sold
separately.
First Series —Genesis to Deuteronomy.
Second Series. — Joshua to Solomon.
Third Series. — The Kings and the Prophets.
Fourth Series. — The Gospel Times.
Fifth Series. — Apostolic Times.
Actual need has led the Author to endeavor to prepare a reading book convenient
for study with children, containing the very words of the Bible, with only a few ex-
pedient omissions, and arranged in lessons of such length as by experience she has
found to suit with children's ordinarj'power of accurate, a'ttentive interest. The verse
form has been retained because of its convenience for children reading in class, and
as more resembling their Bibles : but the poetical portions have been given in their
lines. Professor Huxlev, at a meeting of the London School Board, particularly
mentioned the Selecticmmade by Miss Yonge as an example of how selections might
be made for School reading.'• Her comments are modt-ls of their ]ni\(\.:'— Literal^
Chnrchman.
The Adventures of a Brownie ; as Told to My Child.
By the Author of " John Halifax, Gentleman. " With Illustrar
tions. New edition. 16mo. §1.
True Tales for My Grandsons. By Sir Samuel AY.
Baker. M.A.,F.R.S., F.R.G.S. With numerous illustrations by
W. J. Hennp:ssy. 12mo, cloth, extra gilt. $1.50.
" Young people will observe that the characters which attract their sj-mpathy are
not tlie blustering heroes of a melodramatic stage, but those combinations of honor,
courage, and gentleness, which form the much respected word in English, gentleman "
From the Preface.
When Papa comes Home ; a Story of Tip Tap Toe. By
the Author of " When I was a Little Girl.''With Illustrationa.
16mo. $1.25.
The Ma2:ic Valley ; or, Patient Antoine. By E. Keary
With Illustrations. Xew edition. 16mo, cloth. |l.25.
" ■ A verj'pretty, tender, quaint little tale. " — Times-
Books for the Young.
STANDARD DOLLAR SERIES OF BOOKS FOR THE
YOUNG.
New Editions.
Agnes Hopetoun's Schools and Holidays. The Ex-
perience of a Little Girl. By Mes. Oliphant. New edition. Witb
Illustrations. 16mo.
Ruth and her Friends. A Story for Girls. New edition.
With Illmtrations. 16mo.
When I was a Little Girl. By the Author of''St.
Olaves. " Illustrated by L. Frolich. New edition. 16mo.
The Heroes of Asg-ard. Tales from Scandinayian My-
thology. By A. and E. Keary. With Illustrations. 16mo.
" Reminds us of our old favorite, Grimm.'" — Ti/ne^.
The Runaway. By the Author of''Mrs. Jerningham's
Journal. " With Illustrations. 16mo.
" It is an admirable hooik.''''— Saturday Review.
A Storehouse of Stories. Selected and edited by Char-
lotte M. YONGE. Two volumes. Each IGmo.
The Story of a Fellow-Soldier. By Frances Awdry
(A life of Bisuop Pattesox for the young). 16mo.
Our Year. By the Author of " John Halifax, Gentleman.'*
16mo.
Little Sunshine's Holiday. By the Author of " John
Halifax, Gentleman. " 16mo.
Nine Years Old. By the Author of " When I was a Little
Girl. " With Illustrations by Frolich. 16mo.
Wandering Willie. By the Author of ^'Conrad the
Squirrel. " 16mo.
The White Rat, And Other Stories. By Lady Barker.
With Illustrations. 16mo.
Pansie's Flour Bin. By the Author of *^When I was a
Little Giri. " With III istrations. 16mo.
Milly and Oily ; or, a Holiday Among the Mountains
By Mrs. T. H. Ward. With Illustrations. 16mo.
8 Macmillan & Cos Catalogue.
Paladin and Saracen. Stories from Ariosto. By M. 0.
Hollway-Calthrop. With Illustrations. 12mo. $1.50.
„ir^^f^f\'^^^'" ^^^^''^'^,^°V'^T'^^^^ char.nin- reading for young people out of the
plays of bhakespeare, so Mr. Holhvay-Calthrop has successfully done with these tales
oi chivalry. Young people should be thankful to him for having thus opened
the way to a better appreciation m their mature age of the famous poets of the Re-
na.ssance.'—Nation. f ^'^ " ^ tuc xvc
Grimm's Household Stories. Translated from the Ger^
man. By Lucy Crake. With nearly two hundred designs by
Walter Cra^'e. l:;!mo. $1.25.'
''This beautiliil work Avill b. ar the strongest commendation. It is a treasury of
Fo wHrh^A.pr'v vn,fP " f'°^''"'^^ < ^h«rming l.yle. It contains the notable fairy tales
Zlr^^L^rPJ^.^u^ " ^'"'i " " " ?'-^ " ^ " ^'"'interest, and which the civilized world
cSUkiTurd^^ cherishes as part of the heritage of its childhood. " -
Hannah Tarne. A Story for the Young. By the Author
of " Mr. Greysmith. " With Illustrations. 16mo. " ^$1.25.
Adventures in Thule; Three Stories for Boys. By Will-
iam Black, Author of the " Princess of Thule, " etc., etc. 12mo.
$1.25.
Anyhow Stories ; Moral and Otherwise. By Mrs. W. K.
Clifford. With Illustrations. ]6mo. $1.
" These is nothing unusual about this dainty little l)ook except its title. The illus
trations are ;is pretty as the stories, and the book will please the fancy of children of
aU gro\\iUsy—Acaae7ny.
Some of JEsop's Fables, with Modern Instances. Shown
in Designs by Randolph Caldecott, from New Illustrations by
Alfred Caldecott, M.A. 4to. $1.50.
The Necklace of Princess Fiorimonde, and Other
Stories. By Mary De Morgan. Illustrated by Walter Crane.
Small 4to. $1.25.
Tales of Old Travel, Re-narrated by Henky Kixgsley.
With Illustrations. 12mo. $1.50.
Fairy Tales. Their Origin and Meaning, with some ac°
count of " Dwellers in Fairy Land. " By John Thackray BuNcrc.
]6mo, cloth. 90 cents.
" Must be pronounced a useful book, fairly down to the level of childish compre-
hension, and siiriply and entertainingly composed. " — iVa^io/j.
Stories from the History of Rome. By Mes. Beesly.
New edition. 16mo cloth. 90 cents.
" Of all the stories we rememb'-r f rom hi-torj', none have struck us as so genuinely
food as those of Mrs. Beesly. Happy the little folks who get their first knowledge of
lOinan history from these pagvi^.'''^Educational Time?.
The Five Gateways of Knowledge. By Geokge Wil-
son. Sixth edition. Illustrated. 16mo. 75 cents.
" The nsimes of these Gates were these : Ear-gate, Eye-gate, Mouth-gate, Nose-
gate, and Feel-gate. "
MACMILLAN & CO., NEW YORK.
GOLDEN TREASURY SERIES.
Uniformly printed in ISmo, with Vignette Titles by J. E. Millais^
r. WOOLNER, VV . HOLMAN HuNT, SiR NOEL PaTON, ArTHUR HuGHES,
& c. Engraved on steel by Jeens. Bound in extra clotli, $1.25 each
volume. " Also kej^t in half morocco and half calf bindings.
" Messrs Macmilhin have, in their Golden Treasury Series, especially provided
editions of standard works, volumes of selected poetry, and original compositions,
which entitle this series to be called classical. Nothing can be Detter than the liter-
ary execution, nothing more elegant than the material workmanship. " — i^ri^2*Vi
(Quarterly Review.
THE GOLDEN TREASURY OF THE BEST SONGS AND
LYRICAL POEMS IN THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE.
Selected and arranged, with Xotes, by Francis Turner Pal-
grave.
THE CHILDREN'S GARLAND FROM THE BEST POETS.
Selected and arranged by Coventry Patmore.
THE BOOK OF PRAISE. From the best English Hymn Writers.
Selected and arranged by Lord Selborne. A New and Enlarged
Edition.
THE FAIRY BOOK; the Best Popular Fairy Stories. Selected
and rendered anew by the Author of " John Halifax, Gentle-
man. "
" A delightful selection, in a delightful external form; full of the physical
splendor and va^t opulence of proper fairy tales. " — Spectator.
THE BALLAD BOOK. A Selection of the Choicest British Bal-
lads. Edited by William Allingham.
THE JEST BOOK. The Choicest Anecdotes and Sayings. Se-
lected and arranged by Mark Lemon.
" The fullest and best jest book that has yet appeared. " — ^Sa^wrcZay Reviexo.
BACON'S ESSAYS AND COLOURS OF GOOD AND EVIL.
With Notes and Glo.ssarial Index. By W. Aldis Weight, M.A.
*'The beautiful little edition of Bacon's Essays, now before us, does credit ta
the taste and scholarship of Mr. Aldis Vf ng\\i. " — Spectator.
THE CHILDREN'S TREASURY OF ENGLISH SONG.
Selected and arranged, with Notes, by Francis Turner Pal-
grave, late Fellow of Exeter College, Oxford. Editor of the
*'Golden Treasury. "
lO Macmillan & Cos Catalogue.
THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS from this World to that which is
to come. By John Bunyan.
" A beautiful and scholarly reprint. " — /S/jecto^or.
THE SUNDAY BOOK OF POETRY FOR THE YOUNG.
Selected and arranged by C. F. Alexajs^der.
" A well-selected volume of sacred poetry. "'Spectator.
A BOOK OF GOLDEN DEEDS of all Times and All Countries.
Gathered and Narrated Anew. By the Author of " The Heir of
Kedclyffe. "
" ... To the young, for whom it is especially intended, as a most interest-
ing collection of thrilling talej well told ; and to their elders as a useful handbook of
reference, and a pleasant one to take up when their wish is to while away a weary
hall-hour. We have seen no prettier gift-book for a long time. " — ^^/ie/itcw.vi.
THE ADVENTURES OF ROBINSON CRUSOE. Edited,
from the Original Edition, by J. W. Clark, M.A., Fellow of Trin-
ity College, C ambridge.
THE REPUBLIC OF PLATO, Translated into English, with
Notes by J. Ll. Davies, M.A., and D. J. Vaughan, M A.
" A dainty and cheap little edition. " — ^xamin^r.
THE SONG BOOK. Words and Tunes from the best Poets and
Musicians. Selected and arranged by John Hullah, E^rofessor of
Vocal Music in King's College, London.
" A choice collection of th*- sterling songs of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
with the music of each prefixed to tlie words. How much true wholesome pleasure
isuch a book can diffuse, and will diffuse, we trust, through many thousand families. "
— Examiner.
LA LYRE FRANCAISE. Selected and arranged, with Xotes, by
Gustave Masson', French Master in Harrow School.
" We doubt whether even in France itself so interesting and complete a reper-
tory of the best French Lyrics could be fouud. " — A'bte and Queries.
TOM BROWN'S SCHOOL DAYS. By an Old Boy.
" A perfect gem of a book. The best and most healthy book about boys for
boys that ever was writien.''^— Illustrated Times.
A BOOK OF WORTHIES. Gathered from the Old Histories anc
written anew by the Author of " The Heir of B-edclyffe. "
" An admirable addition to an admirable series.'" — Westminster Eeview.
A BOOK OF GOLDEN THOUGHTS. By Henry Attwell,
Knight of the Order of the Oak Crown.
" Mr. Attwell has produced a work of rare value . . .Happily it is small enough
to be carried about in the pocket, and of such a companion it would be difficult ta
wearj'. " — Pa/^ Mall Gazette.
GUESSES AT TRUTH. Bv Two Brothers. New edition.
Golden Treasury Series. \\
THE CAVALIER AND HIS LADY. Selections from the Works
of the First Duke and Duchess of Newcastle. With an Intro-
ductory Essay by Edward Jenkins, M.P., Author of " Ginx'a
Baby,'& c
" A charming little ^oXam^y— Standard.
SCOTTISH SONG. A Selection of the Choicest Lyrics of Scotland.
Compiled and arranged, with brief Notes, by Maky Carlyle
AlTKEN.
" The booli is one that should find a place in everj'librarj', we had almost said
in every pocket. " — *S;pfc^a to?-.
DEUTSCHE LYRIK : The Golden Treasury of the best German
Lyrical Poems. Selected and arranged, with Notes and Literary
Introduction, by Dr. Buchheim.
" A book wliich all lovers of German poetrj'will welcome. " — IFe^^m/zs^er Jieview.
HERRICK : Selections from the Lyrical Poems. Arranged, with
Notes, by F. T. Palgrave.
" For the first time the sweetest of English pastoral poets is placed within the
range of the great world of readeni.'" — Academy.
MATTHEW ARNOLD'S SELECTED POEMS.
" A volume which is a thing of beanty in itself. " — P«^^ Mall Gazette.
THE STORY OF THE CHRISTIANS AND MOORS IN
SPAIN. By C. M. Yonge. Author of the " Heir of Redclyffe. "
With Vignette by Holman Hunt.
LAMB'S TALES FROM SHAKESPEARE. Edited by tne
Rev. a. Aingeh, M.A., Reader at the Temple.
POEMS OF WORDSWORTH. Chosen and Edited, with Pref-
ace by Matthew Aknold.
" A volume, every page of which is weighted with the golden fruit of poetry. "
—Pall Mall Gazette.
" Except in producing original work of their own, men of genius, who are at once
Soets and critics, can hardly do a greater service to the world than Mr. Swinburne has
one in regard to Coleridge, and Mr. Arnold has done in regard to Wordsworth. " —
AthencRum.
?.HAKESPE ARE'S SONGS AND SONNETS. Edited by F. T.
Palgrave.
POEMS FROM SHELLEY. Selected and arranged by Stopfoed
A. Brooke, M.A.
" Pull of power and true appreciation of Shelley. " — 5/jecta to/
tSSAYS OF JOSEPH ADDISON. Chosen and Edited by Jobs
Richard Green, M.A., LL.D.
" This Is a most welcome addition to a most excellent series. " — J^aramin^r.
12 Macmillan & Go's Catalogue.
POETRY OF BYRON. Chosen and arranged by Matthew Arnold
" It is written in Mr. Arnold's neatest vein, and in Mr. Arnold's most pellucH
manner. " —J-^Ae/^fewm.
SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF WALTER
SAVAGE LAN DOR. Arranged and edited by Sidney Colvin.
" In the attractive pages of the Golden Treasury Series, however, this noble mas-
ter of English appeals to us with a new force. . . . There are some of his pro-
ductions —pages, for example, of the Imaginary Conversations— which rank by com-
mon consent with tlie most precious things of tlieir kind in English literature. " —
New York Tribune.
THE SPEECHES AND TABLE TALK OF THE PROPHET
MOHAMMAD. Chosen and translated, with Introductions and
Notes, by Stanley Lane-Poole.
" This pretty little volume deserves a warm welcome. Of course, it goes over
much the same ground as Lane's Selections from the Koran, but it is far better
adapted for the g'ueral public. " — ^4;'Ae?i6e?/m.
SIR THOMAS BROWNE'S RELIGIO MEDICI, Letters to a
Friend, etc., and Christian Morals. Edited by W. A. Greenhill,
M.D. Oxon.
" Tills is the neatest and most accurate edition yet published of these fascinating
vvorks; works, which disclose new beauties and charms on every fresh perusal. " —
American Literary Churchman.
SELECTIONS FROM COWPER'S POEMS. With Introduc-
tion by Mrs. Oliphant.
" A beautiful little volume. The Selections are prefaced by a brief critical analy-
sis of the poet's works, which shows sound judgment and a deep sympathy with their
seutimeut. " - ^o^toM Evening Transcript.
SELECTIONS FROM COWPER'S LETTERS. Edited,
with Introduction, by the Rev. W. Benham, B.D., Editor of the
''Globe Edition " of Cowper's Poetical Works.
" We do not know any recent volume of the Series that should give more pleas*
are, and less cause for criticism, than this.^''— Academy.
THE POETICAL WORKS OF JOHN KEATS. Reprinted
from the Original Editions,with Notes by Francis T. Palgrave.
" The most attractive and convenient edition of these beautiful poems which
we have seen. " — Christian Union.
SELECTIONS FROM THE POEMS OF LORD TENNY-
SON. Edited with Notes by Francis Turner Palgrave.
IN ME MORI AM. By Alfred, Lord Tennyson.
THE TRIAL AND DEATH OF SOCRATES. Being the
Euthyphron, Apology, Crito, and Phaedo of Plato. Translated
into English by F. J. Church, M.A.




