

^^a^::^^-^^/^^

y^f-^.
Digitized by the Internet Arciiive
in 2008 with funding from
IVIicrosoft Corporation
http://www.archive.org/details/alicesadventuresOOcarrrich

ALICE'S
Adventures in Wonderland
BY
LEWIS CARROLL
WITH FORTY-TWO ILLUSTRATIONS BY
JOHN TENNIEL
NEW YORK
LOVELL, CORYELL & COMPANY
310-3x8 SIXTH AVENUE
All in the golden afternoon
Full leisurely we glide ;
For both our oars, with little skill,
By little arms are plied,
While little hands make vain pretence
Our wanderings to guide.
Ah, cruel Three ! In such an hour,
Beneath such dreamy weather,
To beg a tale, of breath too weak
To stir the tiniest feather !
Yet what can one poor voice avail
Against three tongues together ?
Imperious Prima flashes forth
Her edict to " begin it " —
In gentler tone Secunda hopes
** There will be nonsense in it " —
While Tertia interrupts the tale
Not more than once a minute.
Anon, to sudden silence won,
In fancy they pursue
The dream-child moving through a land
Of wonders wild and new,
In friendly chat with bird or beast —
And half believe it true.
And ever, as the story drained
The wells of fancy dry,
And faintly strove that weary one
To put the subject by,
'* The rest next time — " " It is next time !
The happy voices cry.
Thus grew the tale of Wonderland :
Thus slowly, one by one,
Its quaint events were hammered out
And now the tale is done,
And home we steer, a merry crew,
Beneath the setting sun.
Alice ! a childish story take,
And with a gentle hand
Lay it where Childhood's dreams are twined
In Memory's mystic band,
Like pilgrim's withered wreath of flowers
Plucked in a far-off land.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER. PACE
I. Down the Rabbit-Hole I
II. The Pool of Tears 15
III. A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale 29
IV. The Rabbit sends in a Little Bill 41
V. Advice from a Caterpillar 58
VI. Pig and Pepper 74
VIL A Mad Tea.Party 93
VIII. The Queen's Croquet-Ground no
IX. The Mock Turtle's Story 128
X. The Lobster Quadrille 145
XI. Who Stole the Tarts ? i6o
XII, Alice's Evidence ,,,. 174

CHAPTER I.
DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE.
ALICE was beginning to get very tired of sitting
by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing
to do : once or twice she had peeped into the
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures
^ DOWN THE
or conversations in it, " and what is the use of a
book, " thought Alice, " without pictures or con-
versations ? "
So she was considering in her own mind, (as
well as she could, for the hot day made her
feel very sleepy and stupid,) whether the pleasure
of making a daisy-chain would be worth the
trouble of getting up and picking the daisies,
when suddenly a white rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.
There was nothing so very remarkable in that ;
nor did Alice think it so very much out of the way
to hear the Rabbit say to itself, " Oh dear ! Oh
dear ! I shall be too late ! " (when she thought it
over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought
to have wondered at this, but at the time it all
seemed quite natural); but when the Rabbit
actually took a watch out of its waistcoat pocket,
and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started
to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she
had never before seen a rabbit with either a waist-
coat-pocket or a watch to take out of it, and,
burning with curiosity, she ran across the field
BABBIT-HOLB. 8
after it, and was just in time to see it pop down
a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.
In another moment down went Alice after it,
never once considering how in the world she was
to get out again.
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel
for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so
suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down what seemed to be a very deep well.
Either the well was very deep or she fell very
slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went
down to look about her, and to wonder what was
going to happen next. First, she tried to look
down and make out what she was coming to, but
it was too dark to see anything : then she looked
at the sides of the well, and noticed that they
were filled with cupboards and bookshelves : here
and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon
pegs. She took down a jar from one of the
shelves as she passed : it was labelled " ORANGE
MARMALADE, " but to her great disappoint-
ment it was empty ; she did not like to drop the
4 DOWN THE
jar for fear of killing somebody underneath, so
managed to put it into one of the cupboards as
she fell past it.
" Well ! " thought Alice to herself, " after such
a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling
down stairs ! How brave they'll all think me at
home ! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it,
even if I fell off the top of the house !''(Which
was very likely true.)
Down, down, down. Would the fall never
come to an end ? " I wonder how many miles
Tve fallen by this time .J* " she said aloud. " I
must be getting somewhere near the centre of
the earth. Let me see: that would be four
thousand miles down, I think — " (for you see,
Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was
not a very good opportunity for showing off her
knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her,
still it was good practice to say it over) " — yes,
that's about the right distance — but then I wonder
what Latitude or Longitude IVe got to .? "
(Alice bad not the slightest idea what Latitude
BABBIT-HOLE. 5
was, or Longitude either, but she thought they
were nice grand words to say.)
Presently she began again. " I wonder if I
shall fall right through the earth ! How funny
it'll seem to come out among the people that
walk with their heads downwards! The Anti-
pathies, I think — " (she was rather glad there was
no one listening this time, as it didn't sound at all
the right word) " — but I shall have to ask them
what the name of the country is, you know. Please,
Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia ? " (and
she tried to curtsy as she spoke — fancy curtsying
as you're falling through the air ! Do you think
you could manage it ?) " And what an ignorant
little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll
never do to ask : perhaps I shall see it written up
somewhere. "
Down, down, down. There was nothing eise
to do, so Alice soon began talking again.
" Dinah'U miss me very much to-night, I should
think 1 " (Dinah was the cat.) " I hope they'll
remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah
my dear I I wish you were down here with me I
6 DOWN THE
There are no mice in the air, Fm afraid, out you
might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse,
you know. But do cats eat bats, I wonder? "
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy and
went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, " Do cats eat bats ? Do cats eat bats ? "
and sometimes, " Do bats eat cats ? " for, you
see, as she couldn't answer either question, it
didn't much matter which way she put it. She
felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun
to dream that she was walking hand in hand
with Dinah, and was saying to her very earnestly,
" Now, Dinah, tell me the truth : did you ever
eat a bat ? " when suddenly, thump ! thump !
down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry
leaves, and the fall was over.
Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up
on to her feet in a moment : she looked up, but
it was all dark overhead; before her was an-
other long passage, and the White Rabbit was
still in sight, hurrying down it. There was
not a moment to be lost : away went Alice like
RABBIT-HOLK 7
the Wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as
it turned a corner, " Oh my ears and whiskers,
how late it's getting ! " She was close behind
it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit
was no longer to be seen : she found herself in
a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of
lamps hanging from the roof.
There were doors all round the hall, but they
were all locked, and when Alice had been all
the way down one side and up the other, trying
every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged
table, all made of solid glass ; there was nothing
on it but a tiny golden key, and Alice's first
idea was that this might belong to one of the
doors of the hall ; but alas ! either the locks
were too large, or the key was too small, but
at any rate it would not open any of them-
However, on the second time round, she came
DOWN THE

upon a low cur-
tain she had not
noticed before,
and behind it
was a little door
about fifteen
inches high ; she
tried the little
II golden key in
the lock, and to
her great delight it fitted !
Alice opened the door and found that it led
into a small passage not much larger than a
rat hole : she knelt down and looked along the
passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark hall,
and wander about among those beds of bright
flowers and those cool fountains, but she could
not even get her head through the doorway;
" and even if my head would go through, " thought
poor Alice, " it would be of very little use with-
EABBIT-HOLE. 9
out my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could
shut up like a telescope ! I think I could,
if I only knew how to begin. " For, you
see, so many out-of-the-way things had hap-
pened lately that Alice had begun to think
that very few things indeed were really impos-
sible.
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the
little door, so she went back to the table, half
hoping she might find another key on it, or at
any rate a book of rules for shutting people up
like telescopes : this time she found a little
bottle on it, ( " which certainly was not here be-
fore, " said Alice,) and tied round the neck of
the bottle was a paper label with the words
" DRINK ME " beautifully printed on it in
large letters.
It was all very well to say''Drink me, " but
the wise little Alice was not going to do that in
a hurry :''no, I'll look first, " she said,''and
see whether it's marked'poison'or not : " for
she had read several nice little stories about
10
DOWN THE
children who had got burnt, and eaten up by
wild beasts, and other unpleasant things, all
because they would not remember the simple
rules their friends had taught them, such
as, that a red-hot
poker will burn
you if you hold it
too long ; and that
if you cut your
finger very deeply
with a knife, it
usually bleeds ; and
she had never for-
gotten that, if you
drink much from
a bottle marked
" poison, " it is al-
most certain to dis-
agree with you sooner or later.
However, this bottle was not marked " poi-
son, " so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding
it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed

RABBIT-HOLE. 11
flavor of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, toffy, and hot buttered toast), she very
soon finished it off
" What a curious feeling ! " said Alice,'* I
must be shutting up like a telescope. "
And so it was indeed : she was now only
ten inches high, and her face brightened up
at the thought that she was now the right size
for going through the little door into that
lovely garden. First, however, she waited for
a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink
any further : she felt a little nervous about this,
** for it might end, you know, " said Alice to
herself, *'in my going out altogether, like a
candle. I wonder what I should be like then ? "
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a
12 DOWN THE
candle looks like after the candle is blown
out, for she could not remember ever having
seen such a thing.
After a while, finding that nothing more
happened, she decided on going into the gar-
den at once, but, alas for poor Alice ! when
she got to the door, she found she had for-
gotten the little golden key, and when she went
back to the table for it, she found she could not
possibly reach it : she could see it quite plainly
through the glass, and she tried her best to
climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was
too slippery, and when she had tired herself out
with trying, the poor little thing sat down and
cried.
" Come, there's no use in crying like that ! "
said Alice to herself, rather sharply, " I advise
you to leave off this minute ! " She generally
gave herself very good advice, (though she
very seldom followed it,) and sometimes she
scolded herself so severely as to bring tears
into her eyes, and once she remembered trying
to box her own ears for having cheated herself
BABBIT-HOLE. 13
in a game of croquet she was playing against
herself, for this curious child was very fond of
pretending to be two people. " But it's no use
now, " thought poor Alice, " to pretend to be two
people ! Why, there's hardly enough of me left
to make one respectable person! "
Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was
lying under the table : she opened it, and found
in it a very small cake, on which the words " EAT
ME " were beautifully marked in currants. " Well,
I'll eat it, " said Alice, " and if it makes me grow
larger, I can reach the key ; and if it makes me
grow smaller, I can creep under the door ; so
either way I'll get into the garden, and I don't
care which happens ! "
She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to her-
self " Which way .? Which way ? " holding her
hand on the top of her head to feel which way
it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size : to be sure,
this is what generally happens when one eats
cake, but Alice had got so much into the way of
expecting nothing but out-of-the-way thinys to
14 DOWK THE BABBIT-HOLE.
happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for
life to go on in the common way.
So she set to work, and very soon finished of
the cake.
15

CHAPTER II.
THE POOL OF TEARS.
* CuRiousER and cu-
riouser ! " cried Alice
(she was so much sur-
prised, that for the
moment she quite for-
got how to speak good
English) ; " now I'm
opening out like the
largest telescope that
ever was ! Good-bye,
feet! " (for when she
looked down at her
feet, they seemed to
be almost out of sight,
they were getting so
far off) " Oh, my poor
little feet, I wonder
16 THE POOL
who will put on your shoes and stockings for you
you now, dears ? Tm sure /shan't be able I I
shall be a great deal too far off to trouble my-
self about you : you must manage the best way
you can ; — but I must be kind to them, " thought
Alice, " or perhaps they won't walk the way I
want to go ! Let me see : I'll give them a new
pair of boots every Christmas. "
And she went on planning to herself how she
would manage it. " They must go by the car-
rier, " she thought ; " and how funny it'll seem,
sending presents to one's own feet ! And how
odd the directions will look !
Alices Right Foot, Esq,,
Hearthrug,
near the Fender,
{with Alices love)
Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking ! "
Just at this moment her head struck against the
roof of the hall : in fact she was now rather more
than nine feet high, and she at once took up the
little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
OF TEARS. 17
Poor Alice ! It was as much as she could do,
lying down on one side, to look through into
the garden with one eye ; but to get through was
more hopeless than ever : she sat down and be-
gan to cry again.
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself, " said
Alice, " a great girl like you, " (she might well say
this,) " to go on crying in this way! Stop this
moment, I tell you ! " But she went on all the
same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a
large pool all round her, about four inches deep
and reaching half down the hall.
After a time she heard a little pattering of feet
in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to
see what was coming. It was the White Rabbit
returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white
kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other : he came trotting along in a great hurry,
muttering to himself as he came, " Oh ! the
Duchess, the Duchess ! Oh ! won't she be sav-
age if I've kept her waiting ! " Alice felt so des-
perate that she was ready to ask help of any oen ;
18
THE POOL

SO, when the Rabbit came near her, she began,
in a low, timid voice, " If you please, sir "
The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white
kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into
the darkness as hard as he could go.
OF TEARS 19
Alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the
hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the
time she went on talking : " Dear, dear ! How
queer everything is to-day ! And yesterday things
went on just as usual. I wonder if I've been
changed in the. night ? Let me think : was I the
same when I got up this morning ? I almost
think I can remember feeling a little different-
But if I'm not the same, the next question is.
Who in the world am I ? Ah, that's the great
puzzle ! " And she began thinking over all the
children she knew, that were of the same age as
herself, to see if she could have been changed for
any of them.
" Fm sure I'm not Ada, " she said, " for her hair
goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesn't go
in ringlets at all ; and I'm sure I can't be Mabel,
for I know all sorts of things, and she, oh ! she
knows such a very little ! Besides, shes she, and
/'m I, and — oh dear, how puzzling it all is I I'll
try if I know all the things I used to know. Let
me see : four times five is twelve, and four times
six is thirteen, and four times seven is — oh
20 THE POOL
dear ! I shall never get to twenty at that
rate ! However, the Multiplication Table don't
signify : let's try Geography. London is the
capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Rome — no, that's all wrong, I'm certain ! I
must have been changed for Mabel ! I'll try and
say * How doth the littte —'" and she crossed her
hands on her lap, as if she were saying lessons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded
hoarse and strange, and the words did not come
the same as they used to do : —
" How doth the little crocodile
Improve his shining tail,
And pour the waters of the Nile
On every golden scale /
*'How cheerfully he seems to grin.
How neatly spreads his claws.
And welcomes little fishes in
With gently smiling jaws ! "
OP TEAES. 21
" Tm sure those are not the right words, " said
poor Alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as
she went on, " I must be Mabel after all, and I
shall have to go and live in that poky little house,
and have next to no toys to play with, and oh !
ever so many lessons to learn ! No, I've made up
my mind about it : if I'm Mabel, I'll stay down here!
It'll be no use their putting their heads down and
saying, * Come up again, dear !'I shall only look
up and say,'Who am I, then ? Tell me that
first, and then, if I like being that person, I'll
come up : if not, I'll stay down here till I'm some-
body else* — but, oh dear !'* cried Alice with a
sudden burst of tears, " I do wish they would put
their heads down ! I am so very tired of being
all alone here ! "
As she said this, she looked down at her hands,
and was surprised to see that she had put on one
of the Rabbit's little white kid gloves while she
was talking. " How can I have done that ? " she
thought. I must be growing small again/'She
got up and went to the table to measure herself
by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess,
22 THE POOL
she was now about two feet high, and was going
on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that
the cause of this was the fan she was holding,
and she dropped it hastily, just in time to save
herself from shrinking away altogether.
" That was a narrow escape ! " said Alice, a
good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very
glad to find herself still in existence ; " and now
for the garden ! " and she ran with all speed back
to the little door: but alas! the little door was
shut again, and the little golden key was lying
on the glass table as before, " and thmgs are
worse than ever, " thought the poor child, " for I
never was so small as this before, never ! And I
declare it*s too bad, that it is ! "
As she said these words her foot slipped, and
in another moment, splash ! she was up to her
chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she
had somehow fallen into the sea, " and in that
case I can go back by railway, " she said to her-
self. (Alice had been to the seaside once in her
life, and had come to the general conclusion, that
wherever you go to on the English coast you find
OF TEARS.

a number of bathing machines in the sea, some
children digging in the sand with wooden spades,
then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a
railway station.) However she soon made out
that she was in the pool of tears which she had
wept when she was nine feet high.
" I wish I hadn't cried so much ! " said Alice,
as she swam about, trying to find her way out.
'I shall be punished for it now, I suppose, by
24 THE POOL
being drowned in my own tears ! That will be
a queer thing, to be sure ! However, everything
is queer to-day. "
Just then she heard something splashing about
in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer
to make out what it was : at first she thought it
must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she
remembered how small she was now, and she
soon made out that it was only a mouse, that had
slipped in like herself.
" Would it be of any use, now, " thought Alice,
" to speak to this mouse ? Everything is so out-
of-the-way down here, that I should think very
likely it can talk : at any rate there's no harm in
trying. " So she began: " O Mouse, do you
know the way out of this pool 1 I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse! " (Alice
thought this must be the right way of speaking to
a mouse : she had never done such a thing be-
fore, but she remembered having seen in
her brother's Latin Grammar, " A mouse —
of a mouse — to a mouse — a mouse — O mouse! " )
The Mouse looked at her rather inquisitively,
OF TEARS. 25
and seemed to her to wink with one of its little
eyes, but it said nothing.
" Perhaps it doesn't understand English, "
thought Alice ; " I daresay it's a French mouse,
come over with William the Conqueror. " (For,
with all her knowledge of history, Alice had no
very clear notion how long ago anything had
happened.) So she began again : " Ou est ma
chatte ? " which was the first sentence in her
French lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden
leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver
all over with fright. " Oh, I beg your pardon ! "
cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
poor animal's feelings. " I quite forgot you
didn't like cats. "
" Not like cats ! " cried the Mouse, in a shrill,
passionate voice.''Would j/ou like cats if you
were me ? "
" Well, perhaps not, " said Alice in a sooth-
ing tone : " don't be angry about it. And yet
I wish I could show you our cat Dinah : I
think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could
26 THE POOL.
only see her. She is such a dear quiet thing/
AHce went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily

about in the pool, *'and she sits purring so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and wash-
ing her face — and she is such a nice soft thing
to nurse — and she's such a capital one for catch
ing mice oh, I beg your pardon ! " cried Alice
again, for this time the Mouse was bristling
all over, and she felt certain it must be really
offended. " We won't talk about her any more
if you'd rather not. "
OF TBAJB8. 27
" We, indeed! " cried the Mouse, who was
trembling down to the end of his tail. " As if
/ would talk on such a subject! Our family
always hated cats : nasty, low, vulgar things !
Don't let me hear the name again ! "
" I won t indeed ! " said Alice, in a great
hurry to change the subject of conversation.
" Are you — are you fond — of — of dogs .f* " The
Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly :
" There is such a nice little dog near our house
I should like to show you! A little bright-
eyed terrier, you know, with oh ! such long
curly brown hair ! And it'll fetch things when
you throw them, and it'll sit up and beg for
its dinner, and all sorts of things — I can't re-
member half of them — and it belongs to a
farmer, you know, and he says it's so useful,
it's worth a hundred pounds ! He says it kills
all the rats and — oh dear ! " cried Alice in a
sorrowful tone. " I'm afraid I've offended it
again ! " For the Mouse was swimming away
from her as hard as it could go, and making
quite a commotion in the pool as it went.
28 THE POOL OF TEAKS.
So she called softly after it: " Mouse dear!
Do come back again, and we won't talk about
cats or dogs either, if you don't like them ! "
When the Mouse heard this, it turned round
and swam slowly back to her: its face was
quite pale (with passion, Alice thought), and
it said in a low, trembling voice, " Let us get
to the shore, and then I'll tell you my'history,
and you'll understand why it is I hate cats and
dogs. "
It was high time to go, for the pool was
getting quite crowded with the birds and ani-
mals that had fallen into it : there was a Duck
and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several
other curious creatures. Alice led the way, and
the whole party swam to the shore.

CHAPTER III.
A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE.
They were indeed a queer-looking party that
assembled on the bank — the birds with draggled
feathers, the animals with their fur clingino: close
30 A CAUCUS-EACB
to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncom-
fortable.
The first question of course was, how to get
dry again: they had a consultation about this,
and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them all her life.
Indeed, she had quite a long argument with the
Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only
say, " I am older than you, and must know better ; "
and this Alice would not allow, without knowing
how old it was, and as the Lory positively re-
fused to tell its age, there was no more to be
said.
At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person
of some authority among them, called out, " Sit
down, all of you, and listen to me! I'll soon
make you dry enough ! " They all sat down at
once, in a large ring, with the Mouse in the
middle. Alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on
it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if
she did not get dry very soon.
** Ahem ! " said the Mouse with an important
AND A LONG TALE. 81
air, " are you all ready ? This is the dryest thing
I know. Silence all round, if you please ! * Wil-
liam the Conqueror, whose cause was favored by
the pope, was soon submitted to by the English,
who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin
and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northum-
bria—'"
" Ugh ! " said the Lory, with a shiver.
" I beg your pardon ? " said the Mouse, frown-
ing, but very politely : " Did you speak } "
" Not I ! " said the Lory, hastily.
" I thought you did, " said the Mouse. — " I pro-
ceed.'Edwin and Morcar, the earls of Mercia
and Northumbria, declared for him ; and even
Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury,
found it advisable —'"
" Found what! " said the Duck.
" Found //, " the Mouse replied rather crossly :
" of course you know what * it'means. "
" I know what'it'means well enough when
/ find a thing, " said the Duck : " it's generally a
frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find ? "
32 A CAUCUS-RACE
The Mouse did not notice this question, but
hurriedly went on, " * — found it advisable to go
with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer
him the crown. William's conduct at first was
moderate. But the insolence of his Normans —'
How are you getting on now, my dear ? " it con-
tinued, turning to Alice as it spoke.
" As wet as ever, " said Alice in a melancholy
tone : " it doesn't seem to dry me at all. "
" In that case, " said the Dodo solemnly, rising
to its feet, " I move that the meeting adjourn,
for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies — "
" Speak English ! " said the Eaglet. " I don't
know the meaning of half those long words, and
what's more, I don't believe you do either ! " And
the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile :
some of the other birds tittered audibly.
" What I was going to say, " said the Dodo in
an offended tone, " was, that the best thing to get
us dry would be a Caucus-race. "
" What is a Caucus-race ? " said Alice ; not
that she much wanted to know, but the Dodo
AND A LONG TALE. 83
had paused as if it thought that somebody ought
to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say
anything.
" Why, " said the Dodo, " the best way to ex-
plain it is to do it. " (And as you might like to
try the thing yourself, some winter day, I will tell
you how the Dodo managed it.)
First it marked out a race-course, in a sort
of circle, ( " the exact shape doesn't matter, " it
said,) and then all the party were placed along the
course, here and there. There was no " One,
two, three, and away, " but they began running
when they liked, and left off when they liked, so
that it was not easy to know when the race was
over. However, when they had been running
half-an-hour or so, and were quite dry again, the
Dodo suddenly called out, " The race is over ! "
and they all crowded round it, panting, and ask--
ing, " But who has won ? "
This question the Dodo could not answer
without a great deal of thought, and it sat for
a long time with one finger pressed upon its
forehead, (the position in which you us-ually see
84 A CAUCUS-RACE
Shakespeare, in the pictures of hnn,) while the
rest waited in silence. At last the Dodo said,
" Everybody has won, and all must have
prizes. "
" But who is to give the prizes ? " quite a chorus
of voices asked.
" Why, she, of course, " said the Dodo, pointing
to Alice with one finger ; and the whole party
at once crowded round her, calling out in a con-
fused way, " Prizes ! Prizes ! "
Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair
she put her hand into her pocket, and pulled out
a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not
got into it, and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece, all round.
" But she must have a prize herself, you know, "'
said the Mouse.
" Of course, " the Dodo replied very gravely.
" What else have you got in your pocket ? " he
went on, turning to Alice.
^'Only a thimble, " said Alice sadly.
" Hand it over here, " said the Dodo.
Then they all crowded round her once more,
AND A LONG TALL.
85

while the Dodo solemnly presented the thimble,
saying, " We beg your acceptance of this elegant
thimble ; " and, when it had finished this short
speech, they all cheered.
86 A CAUCUS-RACE
Alice thought the whole thing very absurd,
but they all looked so grave that she did not dare
to laugh, and as she could not think of anything
to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble,
looking as solemn as she could.
The next thing was to eat the comfits : this
caused some noise and confusion, as the large
birds complained that they could not taste theirs,
and the small ones choked and had to be patted
on the back. However it was over at last, and
they sat down again in a ring, and begged the
Mouse to tell them something more.
" You promised to tell me your history, you
know, " said Alice, " and why it is you hate — C
and D, " she added in a whisper, half afraid that
it would be offended again.
" Mine is a long and a sad tale ! " said the
Mouse, turning to Alice, and sighing.
" It is a long tail, certainly, " said Alice, look-
ing down with wonder at the Mouse's tail;
" but why do you call it sad ? " And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking,
AND A LONG TALE. 37
SO that her idea of the tale was something like
this : " Fury said to
a mouse, That
he met
in the
house,
* Let us
both go
to law :
/will
prosecute
you. —
Come, I'll
take no
denial ;
We must
have a
trial :
For
really
this
morning
nothing
to do.'
Said the
mouse to
the cur,
'Such a
trial
dear sir,
With no
jury or
would be
rasting
our breath.*
'I'll be
judge,
juag(
•11 be
Said
cunning
old Fury :
« I'll t
try
the whole
cause,
and
condemn
you
to
death. "'
38 A CAUCUS-RACE
" You are not attending ! " said the Mouse to
Alice, severely. " What are you thinking of? "
" I beg your pardon, " said Alice very humbly :
" you had got to the fifth bend, I think? "
" I had not ! " cried the Mouse, sharply and
very angrily.
" A knot ! " said Alice, always ready to make
herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
" Oh do let me help to undo it ! "
" I shall do nothing of the sort, " said the Mouse,
getting up and walking away. " You insult me
by talking such nonsense ! "
" I didn't mean it ! " pleaded poor Alice. " But
you're so easily offended, you know ! "
The Mouse only growled in reply.
" Please come back, and finish your story ! "
Alice called after it ; and the others all joined in
chorus, " Yes, please do ! " but the Mouse only
shook its head impatiently, and walked a little
quicker.
" What a pity it wouldn't stay ! " sighed the
Lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight ; and
an old crab took the opportunity of saying to her
AND A LONG TALE. 39
daughter, " Ah, my dear ! Let this be a lesson
to you never to lose ^our temper ! " " Hold your
tongue, Ma ! " said the young crab, a little snap-
pishly. " You're enough to try the patience of
an oyster ! "
" I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do ! "
said Alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular.
" She'd soon fetch it back !''
" And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask
the question ? " said the Lory.
Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready
to talk about her pet. " Dinah's our cat. And
she's such a capital one for catching mice, you
can't think ! And oh, I wish you could see her
after the birds ! Why she'll eat a Httle bird as
soon as look at it I "
This speech caused a remarkable sensation
among the party. Some of the birds hurried
off at once : one old magpie began wrapping it-
self up very carefully, remarking, " I really must
be getting home ; the night-air doesn't suit my
throat!** and a canary called out in a trembling
voice to its children, " Come away, my dears!
40 A CAUCUS-BACE AND A LONG TALE.
If s high time you were all in bed ! " On various
pretexts they all moved off, and Alice was soon
left alone.
" I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah ! " she said
to herself in a melancholy tone. " Nobody seems
to like her, down here, and I'm sure she's the best
cat in the world ! Oh, my dear Dinah ! I won-
der if I shall ever see you any more ! " And here
poor Alice began to cry again, for she felt very
lonely and low-spirited. In a little while, how-
ever, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps
in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half
hoping that the Mouse had changed his mind,
and was coming back to finish his story.
CHAPTER IV.
THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL.
It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back
again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as
if it had lost something ; and she heard it mut-
tering to itself, *'The Duchess ! The Duchess !
Oh my dear paws ! Oh my fur and whiskers !
She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are fer-
rets ! Where can I have dropped them, I won-
der ! " Alice guessed in a moment that it was
looking for the fan and the pair of white kid
gloves, and she very good-naturedly began hunt'
42 THE BABBIT SENDS
ing about for them, but they were nowhere to be
seen — everything seemed to have changed since
her swim in the pool and the great hall, with the
glass table and the little door, had vanished com-
pletely.
Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, as she
went hunting about, and called out to her in an
angry tone, " Why, Mary Ann, what are you do-
ing out here? Run home this moment, and
fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan ! Quick,
now ! " And Alice was so much frightened that
she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to,
without trying to explain the mistake that it had
made.
" He took me for his housemaid, " she said to
herself as she ran. " How surprised he'll be when
he finds out who I am 1 But I'd better take him
his fan and gloves — that is, if I can find them. "
As she said this, she came upon a neat little
house, on the door of which was a bright
brass plate with the name " W. RABBIT, "
engraved upon it. She went in without knock-
ing, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest
IN A LITTLB BILL. 43
she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be
turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.
" How queer it seems, " Alice said to herself,
" to be going messages for a rabbit ! I suppose
Dinah'll be sending me on messages next! "
And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would happen : " * Miss Alice ! Come here di-
rectly, and get ready for your walk !'* Coming
in a minute, -nurse ! But I've got to watch this
mousehole till Dinah comes back, and see that
the mouse doesn't get out'Only I don't think, "
Alice went on, " that they'd let Dinah stop in
the house if it began ordering people about like
that! "
By this time she had found her way into
a tidy little room with a table in the window,
and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or
three pairs of tiny white kid gloves : she took
up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was
just going to leave the room, when her eye fell
upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-
glass. There was no label this time with the
44 THE BABBIT SENDS
words " DRINK ME, " but nevertheless she un-
corked it and put it to her lips. " I know
something interesting is sure to happen, " she
said to herself, " whenever I eat or drink any-
thing ; so I'll just see what this bottle does.
I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for
really Tm quite tired of being such a tiny
little thing!''
It did so indeed, and much sooner than she
had expected; before she had drunk half the
bottle, she found her head pressing against the
ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from
being broken. She hastily put down the bottle,
saying to herself, " That's quite enough — I hope
I shan't grow any more — As it is, I can't get
out at the door — I do wish I hadn't drunk quite
so much 1 "
Alas ! It was too late to wish that I She
went on growing and growing, and very soon
had to kneel down on the floor: in another
minute there was not even room for this, and
she tried the effect of lying down, with one
elbow against the door, and the other arm curled
IN A lilTTLE BILL.
45

round her head. Still she went on growing,
and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of
the window, and one foot up the chimney, and
said to herself, " Now I can do no more, what-
ever happens. What will become of me ? "
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had
now had its full effect, and she grew no larger :
still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there
seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever
46 THE EABBIT SENDS
getting out of the room again, no wonder she
felt unhappy.
" It was much pleasanter at home, " thought
poor Alice, " when one wasn't always grov/ing
larger and smaller, and being ordered about by
mice and rabbits. I almost wish I hadn't gone
down that rabbit-hole — and yet — and yet — it's
rather curious, you know, this sort of life ! I
do wonder what can have happened to me !
When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that
kind of thing never happened, and now here I
am in the middle of one ! There ought to be
a book written about me, that there ought!
And when I grow up, I'll write one — but I'm
grown up now, " she added in a sorrowful tone,
" at least there's no room to grow up any more
herer
" But then/'thought Alice, " shall I never
get any older than I am now ? That'll be a
comfort, one way — never to be an old woman
— but then — always to have lessons to learn!
Oh, I shouldn't like that ! "
" Oh, you foolish Alice 1 " she answered her-
IN A LITTLE BLLL. 47
self. " How can you learn lessons in here ?
Why, there's hardly room for you, and no room
at all for any lesson-books !'*
And so she went on, taking first one side and
then the other, and making quite a conversation
of it altogether, but after a few minutes she
heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.
" Mary Ann ! Mary Ann ! " said the voice,
" fetch me my gloves this moment ! " Then came
a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice
knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her,
and she trembled till she shook the house, quite
forgetting that she was now about a thousand
times as large as the Rabbit, and had no reason
to be afraid of it.
Presently the Rabbit came up to the door,
and tried to open it, but as the door opened
inwards, and Alice's elbow was pressed hard
against it, that attempt proved a failure. Alice
heard it say to itself, " Then I'll go round and
get in at the window. "
" TM^ you won't ! " thought Alice, and, after
waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit
48
THB BABBIT SENDS
just under the window she suddenly spread
out her hand, and
made a snatch in the
air. She did not get
hold of anything, but
she heard a Httle
shriek and a fall,
and a crash of bro-
ken glass,f rom which
she concluded that
it was just possible
it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame, or
something of the
sort.
Next came an angry voice — the Rabbit's —
" Pat! Pat! Where are you? " And then a
voice she had never heard before, " Sure then,
Tm here ! Digging for apples, yer honor! "
" Digging for apples, indeed ! " said the
Rabbit angrily. " Here ! Come and help me
out of this " / (Sounds of more broken glass.)
" Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the win-
dow.? "

IN A LITTLE BILL. 49
" Sure, it's an arm, yer honor ! " (He pro-
nounced it " arrum. " )
" An arm, you goose ! Who ever saw one that
size? Why, it fills the whole window! "
" Sure, it does, yer honor : but it's an arm for
all that. "
" Well, it's got no business there, at any rate :
go and take it away ! "
There was a long silence after this, and Alice
could only hear whispers now and then, such as,
" Sure, I don't like it, yer honor, at all at all !''
" Do as I tell you, you coward ! " and at last she
spread out her hand again and made another
snatch in the air. This time there were two little
shrieks and more sounds of broken glass. " What
a number of cucumber frames there must be ! "
thought Alice. " I wonder what they'll do next !
As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish
they could I I'm sure / don't want to stay in here
any longer I "
She waited for some time without hearing any-
thing more: at last came a rumbling of little
cart-wheels, and the sound of a good many voices
50 THE RABBIT SENDS
all talking together: she made out the words,
" Where's the other ladder ?— Why, I hadn't to
bring but one : Bill's got the other — Bill ! fetch
it here, lad ! — Here, put'em up at this corner —
No, tie'em together first — they don't reach half
^ .gh enough yet — Oh ! they'll do well enough ;
don't be particular — Here, Bill! catch hold of
this rope — Will the roof bear? — Mind that
loose slate — Oh, it's coming down ! Heads
below I " (a loud crash) — " Now, who did that ? —
It was Bill, I fancy — Who's to go down the
chimney ? — Nay, / shan't ! You do it ! — That I
won't then ! — Bill's got to go down — Here, Bill !
the master says you've got to go down the
chirnney ! "
" Oh, so Bill's got to come down the chim-
ney has he? " said Alice to herself. " Why,
they seem to put everything upon Bill! I
wouldn't be in Bill's place for a good deal :
this fireplace is narrow, to be sure, but I think I
can kick a little "
She drew her foot as far down the chimney as
she could, and waited till she heard a little animal
IN A LITTLE BILL.
51

pened to you
(she couldn't guess of
what sort it was) scratch-
ing and scrambling
about in the chimney
close above her : then,
saying to herself, " This
is Bill, " she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to
see what would happen
next.
The first thing she
heard was a general
chorus of " There goes
Bill? " then the Rabbit's
voice alone, " Catch him,
you by the hedge ! " then
silence, and then an-
other confusion of voices
— " Hold up his head
— Brandy now — Don't
choke him — How was it,
old fellow ? What hap-
Tell us all about it ! "
52 THE BABBIT SENDS
Last came a little feeble squeaking voice,
( " That's Bill, " thought Alice,) ^'Well, I hardly
know — No more, thank'ye, I'm better now — but
I'm a deal too flustered to tell you — all I know
is, something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box,
and up I goes like a sky-rocket ! "
" So you did, old fellow ! " said the others.
" We must burn the house down ! " said the
Rabbit's voice, and Alice called out as loud as
she could, " If you do, I'll set Dinah at you ! "
There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice
thought to herself, " I wonder what they will do
next! If they had any sense, they'd take the roof
off. " After a minute or two they began moving
about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, " A
barrowful will do, to begin with. "
" A barrowful of what ? " thought Alice ; but
she had not long to doubt, for the next moment
a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window, and some of them hit her in the face.
" I'll put a stop to this, " she said to herself, and
shouted out, " You'd better not do that again ! "
which produced another dead silence.
IN A LITTLE BILL. 63
Alice noticed with some surprise that the
pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they
lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her
head. " If I eat one of these cakes, " she thought,
" it's sure to make some change in my size : and
as it can't possibly make me larger, it must make
me smaller, I suppose. "
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was
delighted to find that she began shrinking
directly. As soon as she was small enough to
get through the door, she ran out of the house,
and found quite a crowd of little animals and
birds waiting outside. The poor little Lizard,
Bill, was in the middle, being held up by two
guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out
of a bottle. They all made a rush at Alice the
moment she appeared, but she ran off as hard
as she could, and soon found herself safe in a
thick wood.
" The first thing I've got to do, " said Alice to
herself, as she wandered about in the wood, " is
to grow to my right size again ; and the second
54 THE RABBIT SENDS
thing IS to find my way into that lovely garden. I
think that will be the best plan. "
It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and
very neatly and simply arranged ; the only diffi-
culty was, that she had not the smallest idea how
to set about it ; and while she was peering about
anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark
just over her head made her look up in a great
hurry.
An enormous puppy was looking down at
her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching
out one paw. trying to touch her. " Poor little
thing ! " said Alice in a coaxing tone, and she
tried hard to whistle to it, but she was terribly
frightened all the time at the thought that it
might be hungry, in which case it would be very
likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.
Hardly knowing what she did, she picked
up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the
puppy ; whereupon the puppy jumped into the
air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of
delight, and rushed at the stick, and made be-
lieve to worry it; then Alice dodged behind
IN A LITTLE BILL.
65

a great thistle, to keep herself from being run
over, and, the moment she appeared on the
other side, the puppy made another rush at the
56 THE RABBIT SENDS
stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry
to get hold of it ; then Alice, thinking it was
very like having a game of play with a cart-
horse, and expecting every moment to be tram-
pled under its feet, ran round the thistle again ;
then the puppy began a series of short charges
at the stick, running a very little way forwards
each time and a long way back, and bark-
ing hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat
down a good way off, panting, with its tongue
hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half
shut.
This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for
making her escape, so she set off at once, and
ran till she was quite tired and out of breath,
and till the puppy's bark sounded quite faint in
the distance.
" And yet what a dear little puppy it was ! "
said Alice, as she leant against a buttercup to
rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the
leaves ; " I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if — if I'd only been the right size
to doit! Oh dear! I'd nearly forgotten that
IN A LITTLE BILL. 67
I've got to grow up again ! Let me see — how
is it to be managed ? I suppose I ought to eat
or drink something or other; but the great
question is, what ? "
The great question certainly was, what?
Alice looked all round her at the flowers and
the blades of grass, but she could not see any-
thing that looked like the right thing to eat
or drink under the circumstances. There was a
large mushroom growing near her, about the
same height as herself, and when she had looked
under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it,
it occurred to her that she might as well look and
see what was on the top of it.
She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped
over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes
immediately met those of a large blue cater-
pillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms
folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking
not the smallest notice of her or of anything
else.

CHAPTER V.
ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.
The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each
other for some time in silence : at last the
Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth,
and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
ADVICE FHOM A CATERPLLLAB. L\)
" Who 2iXQyou?''said the Caterpillar.
This was not an encouraging opening for a
conversation. Alice replied, rather shyly, " I — I
hardly know, sir, just at present — at least I know
who I was when I got up this morning, but I
think I must have been changed several times
since then. "
" What do you mean by that ? " said the Cater-
pillar sternly. " Explain yourself ! "
" I can't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir, "
said Alice, " because I'm not myself, you
see. "
" I don't see, " said the Caterpillar.
" I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly, "
Alice replied very politely, " for I can't under-
stand it myself to begin with ; and being so
many different sizes in a day is very confus-
ing. "
" It isn't, " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet, "
said Alice ; " but when you have to turn into a
chrysalis — you will some day, you know — and
60 ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAE.
then after that into a butterfly, I should think
you'll feel it a little queer, won't you ? "
" Not a bit, " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, perhaps your feelings may be differ-
ent, " said Alice; " all I know is, it would feel
very queer to me!'
" You ? " said the Caterpillar contemptuously.
" Who are you ? "
Which brought them back again to the be-
ginning of the conversation. Alice felt a little
irritated at the Caterpillar's making such very
short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, " I think you ought to tell me who
you are, first. "
" Why ? " said the Caterpillar.
Here was another puzzling question ; and, as
Alice could not think of any good reason, and
as the Caterpillar seemed to be in a very un-
pleasant state of mind, she turned away.
" Come back ! " the Caterpillar called after her.
" I've something important to say ! "
This sounded promising, certainly: Alice
turned and came back again.
ADVICE FKOM A CATEHriLLAK. 61
" Keep your temper/'said the Caterpillar.
" Is that all? " said Alice, swallowing down
her anger as well as she could.
" No, " said the Caterpillar.
Alice thought she might as well wait, as she
had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it
might tell her something worth hearing. For
some minutes it puffed away without speaking,
but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah
out of its mouth again, and said, " So you think
you're changed, do you ? "
" I'm afraid I am, sir, " said Alice ; " I can't
remember things as I used — and I don't keep
the same size for ten minutes together ! "
" Can't remember what things ? " said the
Caterpillar.
" Well, I've tried to say'How doth the little
busy bee,'but it all came different ! " Alice re-
plied in a very melancholy voice.
" Repeat'You are old. Father William', " said
the Caterpillar.
Alice folded her hands, and began ; —
62
ADVICE FROM A CATEKPILLAR.

" You are old, father William^,^ the young man said^
" And your hair has become very white ;
And yet you incessantly stand on your head—
Do you thinks at your age, it is right ?^^
" In my youth^'father William replied to his son,
" I feared it might injure the brain ;
But now that I'm perfectly sure I have none^
Why, I do it again and again'^
ADVICE FliOM A CATEKPILLAB.
63

" You are old^^ said the youths " as I mentioned be-
fore,
And have grown most uncommonly fat ;
Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door —
Pray^ what is the reason of that ? "
" In my youth','said the sage, as he shook his gray
locks,
" / kept all my limbs very supple
By the use of this ointment — one shilling the box —
Allow me to sell you a coupled
64 ADVICE FEOM A CATERPILLAR.

" You are old,''said the youth,''and your jaws are
too weak
For anything tougher than suet ;
Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and tlie
beak.
Pray, how did you manage to do it? "
" In my youth,''said his father, " / took to the law,
And argued each case with my wife;
And the muscular strength, which it gave to myjaw^
Has lasted the rest of my lifer
ADVICE FllOM A CATERPILLAR.
65

" Vou are old''said the youth ; " one would hardly
suppose
That your eye was as steady as ever;
Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose —
What made you so awfully clever ? "
" / have answered three questions^ and that is
enough^^^
Said his father ; " don t give yourself airs !
Do you thi7ik I can listen all day to such stuff?
Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs I "
G6 ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.
" That is not said right, " said the Caterpillar,
" Not ^2u^e right, I'm afraid, " said Alice
timidly ; " some of the words have got altered. "
" It is wrong from beginning to end/'said the
Caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence for
some minutes.
The Caterpillar was the first to speak.
" What size do you want to be ? " it asked.
" Oh, I'm not particular as to size, " Alice
hastily replied; " only one doesn't Hke changing
so often, yoii know. "
" I don^ know, " said the Caterpillar.
Alice said nothing: she had never been so
much contradicted in all her life before, and she
felt that she was losing her temper.
" Are you content now ? " said the Caterpillar.
" Well, I should like to be a /////^ larger, sir,
if you wouldn't mind, " said Alice : " three inches
is such a wretched height to be. "
" It is a very good height indeed !'* said the
Caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it
spoke (it was exactly three inches high).
" But I'm not used to it ! " pleaded poor
ADVICE FROM A CATEUPILLAR. 67
Alice in a piteous tone. And she thought to
herself, " I wish the creature wouldn't be so
easily offended ! "
" You'll get used to it in time, " said the
Caterpillar ; and it put the hookah into its
mouth and began smoking again.
This time Alice waited patiently until it
chose to speak again. In a minute or two the
Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth,
and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.
Then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled
away into the grass, merely remarking as it went,
" One side will make you grow taller, and the
other side will make you grow shorter. "
" One side of what? The other side of
what? " thought Alice to herself.
" Of the mushroom, " said the Caterpillar, just
as if she had asked it aloud; and in another
moment it was out of sight.
Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the
mushroom for a minute, trying to make out
which were the two sides of it ; and, as it was
perfectly round, she found this a very difficult
68 ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.
question. However, at last she stretched her
arms round it as far as they would go, and broke
off a bit of the edge with each hand.
" And now which is which ? " she said to her-
self, and nibbled a little of the right-hand bit to
try the effect : the next moment she felt a vio-
lent blow underneath her chin ; it had struck
her foot !
She was a good deal frightened by this very
sudden change, but she felt that there was no
time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly ;
so she set to work at once to eat some of the
other bit. Her chin was pressed so closely
against her foot, that there was hardly room to
open her mouth ; but she did it at last, and
managed to swallow a morsel of the left-hand
bit.
* * « * m
« « « « «
" Come, my head's free at last ! " said Alice in
a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in
another moment, when she found that her
ADVICE FKO^r A CATERPILLAR.
69
shoulders were nowhere to be found : all she
could see, when she looked down, was an im-
mense length of neck, which seemed to rise like
a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far
below her.
" What can all that green stuff be } " said
Alice. " And where have my shoulders got to .?
And oh, my poor hands, how is it I can't see
you ? " She was moving them about as she
spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a
little shaking among the distant green leaves.
As there seemed to be no chance of getting
her hands up to her head, she tried to get her
head down to them, and was delighted to find
that her neck would bend about easily in any
direction, like a serpent. She had just succeeded
in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and
was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the
trees under which she had been wanderinof, when
a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry ; a
large pigeon had flown into her face, and was
beating her violently with its wings.
70 ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR.
" Serpent !'* screamed the Pigeon.
" I'm not a serpent ! " said Alice indignantly.
** Let me alone ! "
" Serpent, I say again ! " repeated the Pigeon,
but in a more subdued tone, and added with a
kind of sob, " I've tried every way, and nothing
seems to suit them ! "
" I haven't the least idea what you're talking
about, " said Alice.
" I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried
banks, and I've tried hedges, " the Pigeon went
on, without attending to her ; " but those ser-
pents ! There's no pleasing them ! "
Alice was more and more puzzled, but she
thought there was no use in saying anything
more till the Pigeon had finished.
" As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching
the eggs, " said the Pigeon, " but I must be on
the look-out for serpents night and day ! Why,
I haven't had a wink of sleep these three
weeks ! "
" I'm very sorry you've been annoyed, " said
Alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.
ADVICE niOM A CATERPILLAR. 71
" And just as I'd taken the highest tree in
the wood, " continued the Pigeon, raising its
voice to a shriek " and just as I was thinking
I should be free of them at last, they must needs
come wriggling down from the sky ! Ugh !
Serpent! "
" But I'm not a serpent, I tell you ! " said Alice,
" I'm a I'm a "
" Well ! What are you ? " said the Pigeon.
" I can see you're trying to invent something ! "
" I— I'm a little girl, " said Alice, rather doubt-
fully, as she remembered the number of changes
she had gone through that day.
" A likely story indeed ! " said the Pigeon in
a tone of the deepest contempt. " Tve seen a
good many little girls in my time, but never one
with such a neck as that ! No, no ! You're a
serpent ; and there's no use denying it. I sup-
pose you'll be telling me next that you never
tasted an egg I "
" I have tasted eggs, certainly, " said Alice, v/ho
was a very truthful child ; " but little girls eat
eggs quite as much as serpents do, you know. "
72 ADVICE FROM A CATEEPILLAR.
" I don't believe it, " said the Pigeon ;''but if
they do, why then they're a kind of serpent,
that's all I can say. "
This was such a new idea to Alice, that
she was quite silent for a minute or two, which
gave the Pigeon the opportunity of adding,
" You're lookinor for eQ:2:s, I know that well
enough ; and what does it matter to me whether
you're a little girl or a serpent ? "
" It matters a good deal to me','said Alice
hastily; " but I'm not looking for eggs, as it
happens ; and if I was, I shouldn't want yours :
I don't like them raw.'*
" Well, be off, then ! " said the Pigeon in a
sulky tone, as it settled down again into its
nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as
well as she could, for her neck kept getting
entangled among the branches, and every now
and then she had to stop and untwist it. After
a while she remembered that she still held the
pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set
to work very carefully, nibbling first at one
and then at the other, and growing sometimes
ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR. 73
taller and sometimes shorter, until she had suc-
ceeded in bringing herself down to her usual
height.
It was so long since she had been anything
near the right size, that it felt quite strange
at first, but she got used to it in a few min-
utes, and began talking to herself as usual.
" Come, there's half my plan done now ! How
puzzling all these changes are ! I'm never sure
what I'm going to be, from one minute to an-
other ! However, I've got back to my right
size : the next thing is, to get into that beau-
tiful garden — how is that to be done, I won-
der ? " As she said this, she came suddenly upon
an open place, with a little house in it about
four feet high. " Whoever lives there, " thought
Alice, " it'll never do to come upon them this
size : why, I should frighten them out of their
wits 1 " So she began nibbling at the right-hand
bit again, and did not venture to go near the
house till she had brought herself down to nine
inches high.
CHAPTER VI.
PIG AND PEPPER.
For a minute or two she stood looking at the
house, and wondering what to do next, when sud-
denly a footman in livery came running out of
the wood — (she considered him to be a footman
because he was in livery : otherwise, judging by
his face only, she would have called him a fish) —
and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles.
It was opened by another footman in livery, with
a round face and large eyes like a frog ; and both
footmen, Alice noticed, had powdered hair that
curled all over their heads. She felt very curious
PIG AND PEPPER.
75

to know what it was all about, and crept a little
way out of the wood to listen.
The Fish- Footman began by producing from
under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as
himself, and this he handed over to the other,
saying in a solemn tone, ^'For the Duchess. An
76 PIG AND PEPPER.
invitation from the Queen to play croquet. " The
Frog- Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone,
only changing the order of the words a little,
" From the Queen. An invitation for the Duch-
ess to play croquet. "
Then they both bowed low, and their curls got
entangled together.
Alice laughed so much at this that she had to
run back into the wood for fear of their hearing
her, and when she next peeped out the Fish-
Footman was gone, and the other was sitting on
the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into
the sky.
Alice went timidly up to the door, and
knocked.
" There's no sort of use in knocking, " said
the Footman, " and that for two reasons. First,
because I'm on the same side of the door as
you are ; secondly, because they're making such
a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you. "
And certainly there was a most extraordinary
noise oroino: on within — a constant howlinoj
and sneezing, and every now and then a great
PIG AND PEPPEK. 77
crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to
pieces.
" Please, then, " said Alice, " how am I to get
in?
" There might be some sense in your knock-
ing, " the Footman went on without attending to
her, " if we had the door between us. For in-
stance, if you were inside, you might knock, and
I could let you out, you know. " He was looking
up into the sky all the time he was speaking,
and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. " But
perhaps he can't help it, " she said to herself ;
" his eyes are so very nearly at the top of his
head. But at any rate he might answer ques-
tions — How am I to get in } " she repeated,
aloud.
" I shall sit here, " the Footman remarked, " till
to-morrow "
At this moment the door of the house opened,
and a large plate came skimming out, straight at
the Footman's head: it just grazed his nose, and
broke to pieces against one of the trees behind
him.
78 PIG AND PEPPER.
-or next day, maybe, " the footman con-
tinued in the same tone, exactly as if nothing had
happened.
" How am I to get in ? " Alice asked again in
a louder tone.
" Are you to get in at all'^. " said the Footman.
" Thafs the first question, you know. "
It was, no doubt : only Alice did not like to be
told so. " It's really dreadful, " she muttered to
herself, " the way all the creatures argue. It s
enough to drive one crazy ! "
The Footman seemed to think this a good op-
portunity for repeating his remark, with varia-
tions. " I shall sit here, " he said, " on and off-,
for days and days. "
" But what am / to do ? " said Alice.
*'Anything you like, " said the Footman, and
began whistling.
" Oh, there's no use in talking to him, " said
Alice desperately : " he's perfectly idiotic ! " And
she opened the door and went in.
The door led right into a large kitchen, which
was full of smoke from one end to the other : the
PIG AND PEPPER.
79

Duchess was sitting on a three-legged stool in the
middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning
over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which
seemed to be full of soup.
" There's certainly too much pepper in that
soup! " Alice said to herself, as well as she could
for sneezing.
80 PIG AND PEPPEJB.
There was certainly too much of it in the air.
Even the Duchess sneezed occasionally ; and as
for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alter-
nately without a moment's pause. The only two
creatures in the kitchen that did not sneeze,
were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting
on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.
" Please, would you tell me, " said Alice, a little
timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was
good manners for her to speak first, " why your
cat grins like that ? "
" It's a Cheshire cat, " said the Duchess, " and
that's why. Pig ! "
She said the last word with such sudden vio-
lence that Alice quite jumped ; but she saw in
another moment that it was addressed to the
baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and
went on again : —
'I didn't know that Cheshire cats always
grinned ; in fact, I didn't know that cats could
grin. "
" They all can, " said the Duchess ; " and most
of'em do. "
PIG AND PEPPER. 81
" I don't know of any that do, " Alice said very
politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a
conversation.
" You don't know much, " said the Duchess;
" and that's a fact. "
Alice did not at all like the tone of this
remark, and thought it would be as well to
introduce some other subject of conversation.
While she was trying to fix on one, the cook
took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at
once set to work throwing everything within
her reach at the Duchess and the baby — the
fire-irons came first ; then followed a shower
of saucepans, plates, and dishes. The Duchess
took no notice of them, even when they hit her ;
and the baby was howling so much already, that
it was quite impossible to say whether the blows
hurt it or not.
" Oh, // < ? < 3;i " ^ mind what you're doing! " cried
Alice, jumping up and down in an agony of
terror. " Oh, there goes his preciotcs nose ! " as
an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and
very nearly carried it off.
82 PIG AND PEPPEB.
" If everybody minded their own business/'
said the Duchess in a hoarse growl, " the world
would go round a deal faster than it does. "
" Which would not be an advantage, " said
Alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity
of showing off a little of her knowledge. " Just
think what work it would make with the day
and night ! You see the earth takes twenty-four
hours to turn round on its axis "
" Talking of axes, " said the Duchess, " chop
off her head ! "
Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to
see if she meant to take the hint; but the
cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed
not to be listening, so she went on again :
" Twenty-four hours, I think; or is it twelve?
I "
" Oh, don't bother me''said the Duchess ; " I
never could abide figures. " And with that she
began nursing her child again, singing a sort of
lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent
shake at the end of every line : —
PIG AND PEPPER. 88
** Speak roughly to your little doy,
And beat him when he sneezes ;
He only does it to annoy ^
Because he knows it teases^
Chorus.
(in which the cook and the baby joined) :—
** Wow I wow ! wow I "
While the Duchess sang the second verse of
the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up
and down, and the poor little thing howled so,
that Alice could hardly hear the words :
" / speak severely to my boy^
I beat him when he sneezes ;
For he can thoroughly enjoy
The pepper when he pleases i "
Chorus.
** Wow ! wow / wow I "
84 PIG AND PEPPEB.
" Here ! you may nurse it a bit, if you like P
said the Duchess to Alice, flinging the baby at
her as she spoke. " I must go and get ready to
play croquet with the Queen, " and she hurried
out of the room. The cook threw a frying-pan
after her as she went, but it just missed her.
Alice caught the baby with some difficulty,
as it was a queer-shaped little creature, and held
out its arms and legs in all directions, " just like
a star-fish, " thought Alice. The poor little thing
was snorting like a steam-engine when she
caught it, and kept doubling itself up and
straightening itself out again, so that altogether,
for the first minute or two, it was as much as
she ,could do to hold it.
As soon as she had made out the proper way
of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a
sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its
right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its
undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open
air. " If I don't take this child away with me,''
thought Alice, " they're sure to kill it in a day
PIG AND PEPPER. 86
or two : wouldn't it be murder to leave it
behind ? " She said the last words out loud, and
the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off
sneezing by this time). " Don't grunt, " said Alice :
" that's not at all a proper way of expressing your-
self.''
The baby grunted again, and Alice looked
very anxiously into its face to see what was the
matter with it. There could be no doubt that
it had a very turn-up nose, much more like a
snout than a real nose ; also its eyes were get-
ting extremely small, for a baby: altogether
Alice did not like the look of the thing at all,
" — but perhaps it was only sobbing, " she thought,
and looked into its eyes again, to see if there
were any tears.
No, there were no tears. " If you're going to
turn into a pig, my dear, " said Alice, seriously,
*'I'll have nothing more to do with you. Mind
now! " The poor little thing sobbed again, (or
grunted, it was impossible to say which,) and
they went on for some while in silence.
86
PIG AND PEPPER.
Alice was just beginning to think to herself,
'Now, what am I to do with this creature
when I get it home ? " when it grunted again,
so violently, that she
looked down into its
face in some alarm.
This time there could
be no mistake about
it: it was neither
more nor less than
a pig, and she felt
that it would be
quite absurd tor her
to carry it any fur-
ther.
So she set the
little creature down, and felt quite relieved to
see it trot away quietly into the wood. " If
it had grown up, " she said to herself, " it would
have been a dreadfully ugly child ; but it makes
rather a handsome pig, I think. " And she be-
gan thinking over other children she knew, who

PIG AND PEPPER. 87
might do very well as pigs, and was just saying
to herself, " if one only knew the right way to
change them " when she was a little startled
by seeing the Cheshire Cat sitting on a bough of
a tree a few yards off.
The Cat only grinned when it saw Alice. It
looked good-natured, she thought : still it had
very long claws and a great many teeth, so she
felt it ought to be treated with respect.
" Cheshire Puss,'* she began, rather timidly, as
she did not at all know whether it would like the
name : however, it only grinned a little wider.
" Come, it's pleased so far, " thought Alice, and
she went on, " Would you tell me, please, which
way I ought to walk from here 1 "
" That depends a good deal on where you want
to get to, " said the Cat.
" I don't much care where " said Alice.
" Then it doesn't matter which way you walk, "
said the Cat.
" — so long as I get somewhere'^'Alice added
as an explanation.
88 PIG AND PEPPER.
" Oh, you're sure to do that, " said the Cat, " if
you only walk long enough. "
Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she
tried another question. " What sort of people
live about here ? "
" In //^^/ direction, " the Cat said, waving its
right paw round, " lives a Hatter : and in ^Aal
direction, " waving the other paw, " lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like: they're both
mad "
" But I don't want to go among mad people,'*
Alice remarked.
" Oh, you can't help that, " said the Cat : " we're
all mad here. I'm mad. You're mad. "
" How do you know I'm mad ? " said Alice.
" You must be, " said the Cat, " or you
wouldn't have come here. "
Alice didn't think that proved it at all ; how-
ever, she went on : " and how^ do you know that
you're mad ? "
" To begin with, " said the Cat, " a dog's not
mad. You grant that } " _
" I suppose so, " said Alice.
PIG AND PEPPER.
c
.t.

" Well then, " the Cat
went on, " you see a dog
growls when it's angry,
and wags its tail when it's
pleased. Now / growl
when I'm pleased, and wag
my tail when I'm angry.
Therefore I'm mad. "
*'/ call it purring, not
growling, " said Alice.
" Call it what you like. "
said the Cat. " Do you
play croquet with the Queen to-day ? "
90 PIG AND PEPPER.
" I should like it very much, " said Alice, " but
I haven't been invited yet/'
" You'll see me there, " said the Cat, and van-
ished.
Alice was not much surprised at this, she
was getting so well used to queer things hap-
pening. While she was still looking at the
place where it had been, it suddenly appeared
again.
" By-the-bye, what became of the baby ? " said
the Cat. " I'd nearly forgotten to ask. "
" It turned into a pig, " Alice answered very
quietly, just as if the Cat had come back in a
natural way.
" I thought it would, " said the Cat, and van-
ished again.
Alice waited a little, half expecting to see it
again, but it did not appear, and after a minute
or two she walked on in the direction in which
the March Hare was said to live. " I've seen
hatters before, " she said to herself : " the March
Hare will be much the moct interesting, and
perhaps as this is May it won't be raving mad —
PIG AJ^D PEPPER.
91

at least not so mad as it was in March. " As
she said this, she looked up, and there was the
Cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree.
" Did you say pig, or fig ? " said the Cat.
*'I said pig, " replied Alice ; " and I wish you
wouldn't keep appearing and vanishing so sud-
denly : you make one quite giddy. "
" All right, " said the Cat ; and this time it
vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end
of the tail, and ending with the grin, which re-
mained some time after the rest of it had gone.
*'Well ! I've often seen a cat without a grin,
92 PIG AND PEPPER.
thought AHce; " but a grin without a cat!
It's the most curious thing I ever saw in all my
life ! "
She had not gone much farther before she
came in sight of the house of the March Hare ;
she thought it must be the right house, because
the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof
was thatched with fur. It was so large a house,
that she did not like to go nearer till she had
nibbled some more of the left-hand bit of mush-
room, and raised herself to about two feet high :
even then she walked up towards it rather
timidly, saying to herself, " Suppose it should be
raving mad after all ! I almost wish I'd gone to
see the Hatter instead ! "
CHAPTER VII.
A MAD TEA-PARTY.
There was a table set out under a tree in
front of the house, and the March Hare and the
Hatter were having tea at it : a Dormouse was
sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other
two were using it as a cushion, resting their
elbows on it, and talking over its head. " Very
uncomfortable for the Dormouse, " thought Alice ;
" only, as it's asleep, I suppose it doesn't mind. "
The table was a large one, but the three were
all crowded together at one corner of it : " No
room ! No room ! " they cried out when they
94 A MAD TEA-PAETY.
saw Alice coming. " There's plenty of room ! "
said Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a
large arm-chair at one end of the table.
" Have some wine, " the March Hare said in
an encouraging tone.
Alice looked all round the table, but there v/as
nothing on it but tea. " I don't see any wine, "
she remarked.
" There isn't any,''said the March Hare.
" Then it wasn't very civil of you to offer it, "
said Alice angrily.
" It wasn't very civil of you to sit down with-
out being invited, " said the March Hare.
" I didn't know it was your table, " said
Alice ; " it's laid for a great many more than
three. "
" Your hair wants cutting, " said the Hatter.
He had been looking at Alice for some time
with great curiosity, and this was his first
speech.
" You should learn not to make personal
remarks, " Alice said with some severity : " it's
very rude. "
A MAD TEA-PARTY.
96

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hear-
ing this ; but all he said was, " Why is a raven
like a writing-desk ? "
" Come, we shall have some fun now ! "
thought Alice. " I'm glad they've begun asking
riddles — I believe I can guess that, " she added
aloud.
" Do you mean that you think you can find
out the answer to it ? " said the March Hare.
96 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
" Exactly so, " said Alice.
" Then you should say what you mean, " the
March Hare went on.
" I do, " Alice hastily replied ; " at least — at
least I mean what I say — that's the same thing,
you know. "
" Not the same thing a bit ! " said the Hatter.
" Why, you might just as well say that'I see
what I eat'is the same thing as * I eat what I
see'! "
" You might just as well say, " added the March
Hare, " that * I like what I get'is the same thing
as * I get what I like'! "
" You might just as well say, " added the Dor-
mouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep,
" that * I breathe when I sleep'is the same thing
as * I sleep when I breathe'! "
" It is the same thing with you, " said the
Hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and
the party sat silent for a minute, while Alice
thought over all she could remember about ravens
and writing-desks, which wasn't much.
The Hatter was the first to break the silence.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 97
" What dav of the month is it? " he said, turn-
inof to Alice: he had taken his watch out of
his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shak-
ing it every now and then, and holding it to his
ear.
Alice considered a little, and said, " The
fourth. "
" Two days wrong ! " sighed the Hatter. *'I
told you butter wouldn't suit the works! " he
added, looking angrily at the March Hare.
" It was the best butter, " the March Hare
meekly replied.
" Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as
well, " the Hatter grumbled: " you shouldn't have
put it in with the bread-knife. "
The March Hare took the watch and looked
at it gloomily : then he dipped it into his cup of
tea, and looked at it again : but he could think
of nothing better to say than his first remark, " It
was the best butter, you know. "
Alice had been looking over his shoulder with
some curiosity. " What a funny watch ! " she
98 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
remarked. " It tells the day of the month, and
doesn't tell what o clock it is ! "
" Why should it ? " muttered the Hatter.
" Does your watch tell you what year it is } "
" Of course not, " Alice replied very readily:
" but that's because it stays the same year for
such a long time together. "
" Which is just the case with mine','said the
Hatter.
Alice felt dreadfully puzzled. The Hatter's re-
mark seemed to her to have no sort of meaning
in it, and yet it was certainly English. " I don't
quite understand you, " she said, as politely as she
could.
" The Dormouse is asleep again, " said the
Hatter, and he poured a little hot tea on to its
nose.
The Dormouse shook its head impatiently,
and said, without opening its eyes, " Of course,
of course : just what I was going to remark
myself. "
" Have you guessed the riddle yet .f* " the Hatter
said, turning to Alice again.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 99
" No, I gi-ve it up, " Alice replied : " what's the
answer ? "
" I haven't the slightest idea, " said the
Hatter.
" Nor I, " said the March Hare.
Alice sighed wearily. " I think you might
do something better with the time, " she said,
" than wasting it in asking riddles that have no
answers. "
'^ If you knew Time as well as I do, " said the
Hatter, " you wouldn't talk about wasting //. It's
" I don't know what you mean, " said Alice.
" Of course you don't ! " the Hatter said, tossing
his head contemptuously. " I dare say you never
even spoke to Time ! "
" Perhaps not, " Alice cautiously replied : " but
I know I have to beat time when I learn
music. "
" Ah ! that accounts for it, " said the Hatter.
" He won't stand beating. Now, if you only
kept on good terms with him, he'd do almost
anything you liked with the clock. For in-
100 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
Stance, suppose it were nine o'clock in the morn-
ing, just time to begin lessons : you'd only have
to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling ! Half-past one, time for
dinner ! "
( " I only wish it was, " the March Hare said to
itself in a whisper.)
" That would be grand, certainly, " said Alice
thoughtfully : " but then — I shouldn't be hungry
for it, you know. "
" Not at first, perhaps, " said the Hatter : " but
you could keep it to half-past one as long as you
liked. "
" Is that the way you manage ? " Alice
asked.
The Hatter shook his head mournfully. " Not
I " he replied. " We quarrelled last March
just before he went mad, you know " (point-
ing with his teaspoon at the March Hare,) "
it was at the great concert given by the Queen of
Hearts, and I had to sing. "
A MAD TEA-PAETY. lOl

* Twinkle^ twinkle^ little bat f
How I wonder what you re at I'
You know the song perhaps ? "
" I've heard something Hke it, " said Alice.
" It goes on, you know, " the Hatter continued,
" in this way : —
^Up above the world yoii fly.
Like a tea-tray in the sky.
Twinkle, twinkle
102 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
Here the Dormouse shook itself, and began
singing in its sleep, " Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle,
twinkle " and went on so long that they had
to pinch it to make it stop.
" Well, I'd hardly finished the first verse,'*
said the Hatter, " when the Queen bawled out
* He's murdering the time ! Off with his head !'"
" How dreadfully savage ! " exclaimed Alice.
" And ever since that, " the Hatter went on in
a mournful tone, " he won't do a thing I ask !
It's always six o'clock now. "
A bright idea came into Alice's head. " Is
that the reason so many tea-things are put out
here .? " she asked.
** Yes, that's it, " said the Hatter with a sigh :
" it's always tea-time, and we've no time to wash
the things between whiles. "
" Then you keep moving around, I suppose } "
said Alice.
" Exactly so, " said the Hatter : " as the things
get used up. "
" But when you come to the beginning again } "
Alice ventured to ask.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 103
" Suppose we change the subject, " the March
Hare interrupted, yawning. " I'm getting tired
of this. I vote the young lady tells us a
story. "
" I'm afraid I don't know one, " said Alice,
rather alarmed at the proposal.
" Then the Dormouse shall ! " they both cried.
" Wake up. Dormouse ! " And they pinched it
on both sides at once.
" The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. " I
wasn't asleep, " he said in a hoarse, feeble voice :
" I heard every word you fellows were saying. "
" Tell us a story ! " said the March Hare.
" Yes, please do ! " pleaded Alice.
" And be quick about it, " added the Hatter,
" or you'll be asleep again before it's done. "
" Once upon a time there were three little
sisters, " the Dormouse began in a great hurry ;
*'and their names were Elsie, Lacie, and Tillie ;
and they lived at the bottom of a well **
" What did they live on ? " said Alice, who
always took a great interest in questions of eat-
ing and drinking.
104 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
" They lived on treacle, " said the Dormouse,
after thinking a minute or two.
" They couldn't have done that, you know, "
Alice gently remarked : " they'd have been ill. "
*'So they were, " said the Dormouse ; " very ill. "
Alice tried a little to fancy to herself what
such an extraordinary way of living would be
like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went
on : " But why did they live at the bottom of a
well ? "
" Take some more tea, " the March Hare said
to Alice, very earnestly.
" I've had nothing yet, " Alice replied in an
offended tone, " so I can't take more. "
" You mean, you can't take less''said the
Hatter; " it's very easy to take more than
nothing. "
" Nobody asked ^ < ?/^r opinion, " said Alice.
" Who's making personal remarks now.? " the
Hatter asked triumphantly
Alice did not quite know what to say to this:
so she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-
butter, and then turned to the Dormouse, and
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 105
repeated her question. " Why did they live at
the bottom of a well ? "
The Dormouse again took a minute or two
to think about it, and then said, " .It was a treacle-
well. "
" There's no such thing! " Alice was begin-
ning very angrily, but the Hatter and the March
Hare went " Sh ! sh ! " and the Dormouse sulkily
remarked, " If you can't be civil, you'd better
finish the story for yourself. "
" No, please go on ! " Alice said, very humbly:
" I won't interrupt you again. I dare say there
may be one "
*'One, indeed ! " said the Dormouse indignant-
ly. However, he consented to go on. " And
so these three little sisters — they were learning
to draw, you know "
" What did they draw } " said Alice, quite for-
getting her promise.
" Treacle, " said the Dormouse, without con-
sidering at all this time.
" I want a clean cup, " interrupted the Hatter :
•* let's all move one place on. "
106 A MAD TEA-PARTY.
He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse
followed him : the March Hare moved into the
Dormouse's place, and Alice rather unwillingly
took the place of the March Hare. The Hatter
was the only one who got any advantage from
the change : and Alice was a good deal worse
off than before, as the March Hare had just up-
set the milk-jug into his plate.
Alice did not wish to offend the Dormouse
again, so she began very cautiously: " But I
don't understand. Where did they draw the
treacle from ? "
" You can draw water out of a water-well, "
said the Hatter ; " so I should think you could
draw treacle out of a treacle-well — eh, stupid ? "
" But they were zn the well, " Alice said to
the Dormouse, not choosing to notice this last
remark.
" Of course they were, " said the Dormouse, —
" well in. "
This answer so confused poor Alice, that she
let the Dormouse go on for some time without
interrupting it.
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 107
" They were learning to draw, " the Dormouse
went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it
was getting very sleepy ; " and they drew all
manner of things — everything that begins with
an M "
" Why with an M ? " said Alice.
" Why not? " said the March Hare.
Alice was silent.
The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this
time, and was going off into a doze, but, on
being pinched by the Hatter, it woke up again
with a little shriek, and went on: " that
begins with an M, such as mousetraps, and the
moon, and memory, and muchness— you know
you say things are'much of a muchness'— did
you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a
muchness ? "
" Really, now you ask me, " said Alice, very
much confused, " I don't think "
" Then you shouldn't talk, " said the Hatter.
This piece of rudeness was more than Alice
could bear: she got up in great disgust, and
walked off : the Dormouse fell asleep instantly,
108
A MAD TEA-PARTY.

and neither of the others took the least notice
of her going, though she looked back once or
twice, half hoping that they would call after
her: the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.
" At any rate I'll never go there again ! " said
Alice as she picked her way through the wood.
" It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in
all my life ! "
Just as she said this, she noticed that one
of the trees had a door leading right into it
A MAD TEA-PARTY. 109
" That's very curious ! " she thought. " But
everything's curious to-day. I think I may as
well go in at once. " And in she went.
Once more she found herself in the long hall,
and close to the little glass table. " Now, I'll
manage better this time, " she said to herself, and
began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom
(she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she
was about a foot high : then she walked down
the little passage : and then — she found herself
at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright
flower-beds and the cool fountains.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE queen's croquet GROUND.
A LARGE rose-tree stood near the entrance of
the garden : the roses growing on it were white,
but there were three gardeners at it, busily paint-
ing them red. AHce thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and
just as she came up to them she heard one of
them say, " Look out now. Five ! Don't go
splashing paint over me like that ! "
" I couldn't help it, " said Five in a sulky tone;
" Seven jogged my elbow. "
THE queen's croquet GROUND.
Ill
On which Seven looked up and said, " That's
right, Five ! Always lay the blame on others I "
" Youd better not talk ! " said Five. " I heard
the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be
beheaded! "
" What for? "
said the one who
had spoken first.
" That's none
of your business,
Two! " said Seven.
" Yes, it is his
business ! " said
Five, " and I'll
tell him— it was
for bringing the
cook tulip-roots
instead of onions. "
Seven flung
down his brush, and had just begun, " Well, of
all the unjust things — " when his eye chanced to
fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them,
and he checked himself suddenly : the others

^f^^^
112 THE QUEEN'S
looked round also, and all of them bowed
low.
" Would you tell me, please, " said Alice,
a little timidly, " why you are painting those
roses ? "
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at
Two. Two began, in a low voice, " Why, the
fact is, you see. Miss, this here ought to have
been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one
in by mistake, and if the Queen was to find it
out, we should all have our heads cut off, you
know. So you see. Miss, we're doing our best,
afore she comes, to — " At this moment Five,
who had been anxiously looking across the gar-
den, called out " The Queen ! The Queen ! " and
the three gardeners instantly threw themselves
flat upon their faces. There was a sound of
many footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to
see the Queen.
First came ten soldiers carrying clubs ; these
were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong
and flat, with their hands and feet at the cor-
ners : next the ten courtiers ; these were orna-
CROQUET-GROUND. 113
mented all over with diamonds, and walked two
and two, as the soldiers did. After these came
the royal children; there were ten of them,
and the little dears came jumping merrily along
hand in hand, in couples : they were all orna-
mented with hearts, Next came the guests,
mostly Kings and Queens, and among them
Alice recognized the White Rabbit : it was talk-
ing in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at
everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then followed the Knave of
Hearts, carrying the King's crown on a crimson
velvet cushion ; and, last of all this grand pro-
cession, came THE KING AND QUEEN OF
HEARTS.
Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought
not to lie down on her face like the three
gardeners, but she could not remember ever
having heard of such a rule at processions ; " and
besides, what would be the use of a procession, "
she thought, " if people had all to lie down on
their faces, so that they couldn't see it ? " So she
stood where she was, and waited.
114 THE queen's
When the procession came opposite to Alice,
they all stopped and looked at her, and the
Queen said severely, " Who is this? *'She said
it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and
smiled in reply.
" Idiot ! " said the Queen, tossing her head
impatiently ; and, turning to Alice, she went on,
" What's your name, child ? "
" My name is Alice, so please your Majesty, "
said Alice very politely ; but she added, to
herself, " Why, they're only a pack of cards,
after all. I needn't be afraid of them ! "
" And who are these? " said the Queen, point-
ing to the three gardeners who were lying
round the rose-tree ; for you see, as they were
lying on their faces, and the pattern on their
backs was the same as the rest of the pack,
she could not tell whether they were gardeners,
or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own
children.
" How should 1 know ? " said Alice, surprised
at her own courage. " It's no business of miner
The Queen turned crimson with fury, and,
CROQUET-GKOUND.
115

after glaring at her for a moment like a wild
beast, began screaming, " Off with her head i
Off— " .
116 THE QtJEEN S.
" Nonsense ! " said Alice, very loudly and de-
cidedly, and the Queen was silent.
The king laid his hand upon her arm, and
timidly said, " Consider, my dear : she is only a
child! "
The Queen turned angrily away from him, and
said to the Knave, " Turn them over I "
The Knave did so, very carefully, with one
foot.
" Get up ! " said the Queen in a shrill, loud
voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped
up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.
" Leave off that ! " screamed the Queen. " You
make me giddy. " And then, turning to the
rose-tree, she went on, " What have you been
doing here t "
" May it please your Majesty, " said Two, in a
very humble tone, going down on one knee as he
spoke, " we were trying — "
" /see!''said the Queen, who had mean-
while been examining the roses. " Off with
their heads ! " and the procession moved on
CROQUET-OROUia). 117
three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute
the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to Alice for
protection.
" You shan*t be beheaded ! " said Alice, and
she put them into a large flower-pot that stood
near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly
marched off after the others.
" Are their heads off ? " shouted the Queen.
" Their heads are gone, if it please your
Majesty ! " the soldiers shouted in reply.
" That's right ! " shouted the Queen. " Can
you play croquet } "
The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice,
as the question was evidently meant for her.
" Yes ! " shouted Alice.
" Come on then ! " roared the Queen, and
Alice joined the procession, wondering very much
what would happen next.
" It's — it's a very fine day ! " said a timid
voice at her side. She was walking by the White
Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her
face.
118 THE queen's
" Very, " said Alice : — " where's the Duchess ? "
" Hush ! Hush ! " said the Rabbit in a low,
hurried tone. He looked anxiously over his
shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself
upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered, " She's under sentence of execution.*'
" What for ? " said Alice.
" Did you say'What a pity !'?'* the Rabbit
asked.
" No, I didn't, " said Alice : " I don't think it's
at all a pity. I said'What for ?'"
" She boxed the Queen's ears — " the Rabbit
began. Alice gave a little scream of laughter.
" Oh, hush ! " the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. " The Queen will hear you ! You. see she
came rather late, and the Queen said — "
" Get to your places ! " shouted the Queen in
a voice of thunder, and the people began running
about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other : however, they got settled down in a min-
ute or two, and the game be^an.
Alice thought she had never seen such a
curious croquet-ground in her life : it was all
CROQUET-GROUND.
119
ridges and furrows ; the croquet-balls were like
hedgehogs, and the mallets live flamingoes, and
the soldiers had to
double themselves up
and stand on their
hands and feet, to
make the arches.
The chief diffi-
culty Alice found at
first was in managing
her flamingo : she
succeeded in getting
its body tucked away,
comfortably enough,
under her arm, with
its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck nicely straightened out, and
was going to give the hedgehog a blow with
its head, it would twist itself round and look
up into her face, with such a puzzled expression
that she could not help bursting out laughing :
and when she had got its head down, and was
going to begin again, it was very provoking to

120 THE queen's
find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and
was in the act of crawling away : besides all this,
there was generally a ridge or a furrow in the
way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog
to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always
getting up and walking off to other parts of the
ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion that
it was a very difficult game indeed.
The players all played at once without wait-
ing for turns, quarrelling all the while, and
fighting for the hedgehogs ; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and
went stamping about, and shouting, " Off with
his head ! " or " Off with her head !'* about once
in a minute.
Alice began to feel very uneasy : to be sure,
she had not as yet had any dispute with the
Queen, but she knew that it might happen any
minute, " and then, " thought she, " what would
become of me ? They're dreadfully fond of be-
heading people here : the great wonder is, that
there's any one left alive ! "
She was looking about for some way of escape,
CROQUET-GROUND. 121
and wondering whether she could get away with-
out being seen, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air : it puzzled her very much
at first, but after watching it a minute or two
she made it out to be a grin, and she said to her-
self, " It's the Cheshire Cat : now I shall have
somebody to talk to. "
" How are you getting on ? " said the Cat, as
soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak
with.
Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then
nodded. " It's no use speaking to it, " she
thought, " till its ears have come, or at least
one of them. " In another minute the whole
head appeared, and then Alice put down her
flamingo, and began an account of the game,
feeling very glad she had some one to listen to
her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it
appeared.
" I don't think they play at all fairly, " Alice
began, in rather a complaining tone, " and they
all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear one's-self
122 THE QUEEN'g
speak — and they don't seem to have any rules
in particular ; at least, if there are, nobody at-
tends to them — and youVe no idea how confus-
ing it is all the things being alive ; for instance,
there's the arch I've got to go through next walk-
ing about at the other end of the ground — and I
should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog
just now, only it ran away when it saw mine
coming ! "
" How do you like the Queen ? " said the Cat
in a low voice.
" Not at all, " said Alice : " she's so ex-
tremely — " Just then she noticed that the
Queen was close behind her, listening : so she
went on " — likely to win, that it's hardly worth
while finishing the game. "
The Queen smiled and passed on.
" Who are you talking to } " said the King,
coming up to Alice, and looking at the Cat's
head with great curiosity.
" It's a friend of mine — a Cheshire Cat, " said
Alice : " allow me to introduce it. "
" I don't like the look of it at all, " said the
CROQUET GROUND. 123
King : " however, it may kiss my hand if it
likes. "
" I'd rather not, " the Cat remarked.
" Don't be impertinent, " said the King, " and
don't look at me like that ! " He got behind
Alice as he spoke.
" A cat may look at a king, " said Alice. " IVe
read that in some book, but I don't remember
where. "
" Well, it must be removed, " said the King
very decidedly, and he called to the Queen, who
was passing at the moment, " My dear ! I wish
you would have this cat removed ! "
The Queen had only one way of settling all
difficulties, great or small. " Off with his head ! "
she said without even looking round.
" I'll fetch the executioner myself, " said the
King eagerly, and he hurried off.
Alice thought she might as well go back and
see how the game was going on, as she heard
the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming
with passion. She had already heard her sen-
tence three of the players to be executed for
124 THE queen's
having missed their turns, and she did not like
the look of things at all, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it
was her turn or not. So she went off in search
of her hedgehog.
The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with
another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an
excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them
with the other : the only difficulty was, that
her flamingo was gone across to the other side
of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in
a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
By the time she had caught the flamingo and
brought it back, the fight was over, and both
the hedgehogs were out of sight : *'but it doesn't
matter much, " thought Alice, " as all the arches
are gone from this side of the ground. " So she
tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back to have a little
more conversation with her friend.
When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she
was surprised to find quite a large crowd col-
lected round it : there was a dispute going on
CROQUET GROUND.
V2^

between the executioner, the King, and the
Queen, who were all talking at once, while all
the rest were quite silent, and looked very
uncomfortable.
The moment Alice appeared, she was ap-
pealed to by all three to settle the question,
126 THE queen's
and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they all spoke at once, she found it
very hard to make out exactly what they said.
The executioner's argument was, that you
couldn't cut off a head unless there was a body
to cut it off from : that he had never had to do
such a thing before, and he wasn't going to
begin at his time of life.
The King's argument was, that anything that
had a head could be beheaded, and that you
weren't to talk nonsense.
The Queen's argument was, that if something
wasn't done about it in less than no time, she'd
have everybody executed, all round. (It was this
last remark that had made the whole party look
so grave and anxious.)
Alice could think of nothing else to say but
" It belongs to the Duchess : you'd better ask
her about it. "
" She's in prison, " the Queen said to the exe-
cutioner : " fetch her here. " And the execu-
tioner went off like an arrow.
The Cat's head began fading away the mo-
CROQUET GROUND. 127
ment he was gone, and, by the time he had come
back with the Duchess, it had entirely disap-
peared: so the King and the executioner ran
wildly up and down looking for it, while the
rest of the party went back to the game.
CHAPTER IX.
THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
" You can't think how glad I am to see you
again, you dear old thing ! " said the Duchess,
as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's
and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a
pleasant temper, and thought to herself that
perhaps it was only the pepper that had made
her so savage when they met in the kitchen.
" When Fm a Duchess, " she said to herself, (not
in a very hopeful tone though,) " I won't have
THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY. 129
any pepper in my kitchen at alL Soup does
very well without — Maybe it's always pepper
that makes people hot-tempered, " she went on,
very much pleased at having found out a new
kind of rule, " and vinegar that makes them sour
— and camomile that makes them bitter — and —
and barley-sugar and such things that make chil-
dren sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew
that: then they wouldn't be so stingy about it,
you know — "
She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this
time, and was a little startled when she heard
her voice close to her ear. " You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk. I can't tell you just now what
the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in a
bit.'*
" Perhaps it hasn't one, " Alice ventured to re-
mark.
" Tut, tut, child ! " said the Duchess. " Every-
thing's got a moral, if only you can find it. "
And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's
side as she spoke.
130
THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY.
Alice did not much like her keeping so close
to her : first, because the Duchess was very
ugly, and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to
rest her chin on
Alice's shoulder,
and it was an
uncomfortably
sharp chin. How-
ever, she did not
like to be rude, so
she bore it as well
as she could.
" The game's
going on rather
better now, " she
said by way of
keeping up the
conversation a little.
"'Tis so, " said the Duchess : " and the moral
of that is —'Oh,'tis love,'tis love, that makes
the world 2:0 round !'"
" Somebody said, " Alice whispered, " that it's

THE MOCK turtle's STORY. 131
done by everybody minding their own bus-
iness !''
" Ah, well ! It means much the same thing, "
said the Duchess, digging her sharp little chin
into Alice's shoulder as she added, " and the
moral of that is —'Take care of the sense, and
the sounds will take care of themselves.'"
*'How fond she is of finding morals in things !'*
Alice thought to herself.
" I daresay you're wondering why I don't put
my arm round your waist, " said the Duchess
after a pause : " the reason is, that I'm doubtful
about the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try
the experiment ? "
" He might bite, " Alice cautiously replied, not
feeling at all anxious to have the experiment
tried.
" Very true, " said the Duchess : flamingoes
and mustard both bite. And the moral of that
is —'Birds of a feather flock together.'"
" Only mustard isn't a bird. " Alice remarked.
" Right, as usual, " said the Duchess: " what
a clear way you have of putting things! "
132 THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
" It's a mineral, I think,''said .Alice.
" Of course it is, " said the Duchess, who
seemed ready to agree to everything that Alice
said ; " there's a large mustard-mine near here.
And the moral of that is — * The more there is of
mine, the less there is of yours.'"
" Oh, I know ! " exclaimed Alice, who had not
attended to this last remark, " it's a vegetable. It
doesn't look like one, but it is. "
" I quite agree with you, " said the Duchess,
" and the moral of that is —'Be what you would
seem to be'— *or if you like it put more
simply —'Never imagine yourself not to be
otherwise than what it might appear to others
that what you were or might have been was
not otherwise than what you had been would
have appeared to them to be otherwise. "
" I think I should understand that better, "
Alice said very politely, " if I had it written
down: but I can't quite follow it as you say
it. "
" That's nothing to wliat I could say if I
chose, " the Duchess replied in a pleased tone.
THI5 Mociv Turtle's storit. 13S
" Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any
longer than that, " said Alice.
" Oh, don't talk about trouble! " said the
Duchess. " I make you a present of everything
I've said as yet. "
" A cheap sort of present ! " thought Alice.
" I'm glad they don't give birthday presents
like that ! " But she did not venture to say it
out loud.
" Thinking again ? " the Duchess asked, with
another dig of her sharp little chin.
" I've a right to think, " said Alice sharply, for
she was beginning to feel a little worried.
" Just about as much right, " said the Duchess,
" as pigs have to fly : and the m — "
But here, to Alice's great surprise, the
Duchess'voice died away, even in the middle
of her favorite word'moral,'and the arm
that was linked into hers began to tremble.
Alice looked up, and there stood tne Queen in
front of them, with her arms folded, frowning
like a thunderstorm.
134 THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
" A fine day, your Majesty ! " the Duchess
began in a low, weak voice.
" Now, I give you fair warning, " shouted the
Queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke ;
" either you or your head must be off, and that
in about half no time I Take your choice ! "
The Duchess took her choice, and was gone
in a moment.
" Let's go on with the game, " the Queen said
to Alice, and Alice was too much frightened to
say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.
The other guests had taken advantage of the
Queen's absence, and were resting in the shade :
however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remark-
ing that a moment's delay would cost them their
lives.
All the time they were playing the Queen
never left off quarrelling with the other players,
and shouting " Off with his head ! " or " Off
with her head ! " Those whom she sentenced
THE MOCK TUKTLE'S STORY. 135
were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of
course had to leave off being arches to do this,
so that by the end of half an hour or so there
were no arches left, and all the players, except
the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody,
and under sentence of execution.
Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath,
and said to Alice, " Have you seen the Mock
Turtle yet.? "
" No, " said Alice. " I don't even know what
a Mock Turtle is. "
" It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made
from, " said the Queen.
" I never saw one, or heard of one, " said Alice.
" Come on, then, " said the Queen, " and he
shall tell you his history. "
As they walked off together, Alice heard the
King say in a low voice, to the company- gener-
ally, " You are all pardoned. " " Come, that's a
good thing ! " she said to herself, for she had
felt quite unhappy at the number of executions
the Queen had ordered.
136
THE MOCK turtle's STORY.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying
fast asleep in the sun. (If you don't know what
a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) " Up, lazy
thing ! " said the Queen, " and take this young
lady to see the Mock Turtle, and to hear his
history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered ; " and she walked off,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice
did not quite like the look of the creature, but
on the whole she thought it would be quite as
THE MOCK turtle's STORY. 137
safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Queen : so she waited.
The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes:
then it watched the Queen till she was out of
sight : then it chuckled. " What fun ! " said the
Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.
" What is the fun .? " said Alice.
" Why, she','said the Gryphon. " It's all her
fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you
know. Come on ! "
" Everybody says ^ come on !'here, " thoug.ht
Alice, as she went slowly after it : " I never was
so ordered about before in all my life, never ! "
They had not gone far before they saw the
Mock Turtle in the distance, sitting sad and
lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they
came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as
if his heart would break. She pitied him deeply.
" What is his sorrow ? " she asked the Gryphon,
and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, " It's all his fancy, that:
he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on ! "
So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who
138 THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
looked at them with large eyes full of tears, but
said nothing.
" This here young lady, " said the Gryphon,
" she wants for to know your history, she do. "
" I'll tell it her, " said the Mock Turtle in a
deep, hollow tone : " sit down both of you, and
don't speak a word till I've finished. "
So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some
minutes. Alice thought to herself, ^* I don't see
how he can ever finish, if he doesn't begin. "
But she waited patiently.
" Once, " said the Mock Turtle at last, with a
deep sigh, " I was a real Turtle. "
These words were followed by a very long
silence, broken only by an occasional exclama-
tion of " Hjckrrh ! " from the Gryphon, and the
constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle.
Alice was very nearly getting up and saying,
" Thank you, sir, for your interesting story, "
but she could not help thinking there must be
more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.
" When we were little, " the Mock Turtle went
on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a
THE MOCK turtle's STOBY.
139

little now and then, " we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle — we used
to call him Tortoise — "
1-JtO THE MOCK TTJBTLE'S STORY.
" Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't
one ? " Alice asked.
" We called him Tortoise because he taught
us, " said the Mock Turtle angrily ; " really you
are very dull ! "
" You ought to be ashamed of yourself for
asking such a simple question, " added the
Gryphon ; and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink
into the earth. At last the Gryphon said to the
Mock Turtle, " Drive on, old fellow! Don't be
all day about it ! " and he went on in these words.
" Yes, we went to school in the sea, though
you mayn't believe it — "
" I never said I didn't ! " interrupted Alice.
" You did, " said the Mock Turtle.
" Hold your tongue ! " added the Gryphon,
before Alice could speak again. The Mock
Turtle went on.
" We had the best of educations — in fact, we
went to school every day — "
" Fve been to a day-school too,'* said Alice ;
" you needn't be so proud as all that. "
THE MOCK turtle's STOKY. 14l
" With extras ? " asked the Mock Turtle a
little anxiously
" Yes, " said Alice, " we learned French and
music. "
" And washing ? " said the Mock Turtle.
" Certainly not ! " said Alice indignantly.
" Ah ! Then yours wasn't a really good school, "
said the Mock Turtle in a tone of great relief.
" Now at ours they had at the end of the bill,
* French, music, and washing — extra.'"
" You couldn't have wanted it much, " said
Alice ; " living at the bottom of the sea. "
*'I couldn't afford to learn it, " said the Mock
Turtle with a sigh. " I only took the regular
course. "
" What was that ? " inquired Alice.
" Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin
with, " the Mock Turtle replied : " and then the
different branches of Arithmetic — Ambition, Dis-
traction, Uglification, and Derision. "
" I never heard of'Uglification.'" Alice ven-
tured to say. " What is it ? "
The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in sur-
142 THE MOCK turtle's STOKY.
prise. " Never heard of Uglifying ! " it exclaimed.
" You know what to beautify is» I suppose ? "
" Yes/'said Alice, doubtfully : " it means —
to — make — anything — prettier. "
" Well then, " the Gryphon went on, " if you
don't know what to uglify is, you are a
simpleton. "
Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any
more questions about it, so she turned to the
Mock Turtle, and said, " What else had you to
learn ? *'
" Well, there was Mystery, " the Mock Turtle
replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, —
" Mystery, ancient and modern, with Seaography :
then Drawling — the Drawling-master was an old
conger-eel, that used to come once a week : he
taught us Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in
Coils. "
" What was that like ? " said Alice.
" Well, I can't show it you, myself, " the Mock
Turtle said : " I'm too stiff. And the Gryphon
never learnt it. "
" Hadn't time, " said the Gryphon : " I went
THE MOCK turtle's STORY. 148
to the Classical master, though. He was an old
crab, he was. "
" I never went to him, " the Mock Turtle said
with a sigh : " he taught Laughing and Grief,
they used to say. "
'^ So he did, so he did, " said the Gryphon,
sighing in his turn, and both creatures hid their
faces in their paws.
" And now many hours a day did you do
lessons t " said Alice, in a hurry to change the
subject.
" Ten hours the first day, " said the Mock
Turtle: " nine the next, and so on. "
" What a curious plan ! " exclaimed Alice.
" That's the reason they're called lessons, "
the Gryphon remarked : " because they lessen
from day to day. "
This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she
thought it over a little before she made her next
remark. " Then the eleventh day must have
been a holiday } "
" Of course it was, " said the Mock Turtle.
144 THE MOCK turtle's STORY.
" And how did you manage on the twelfth ? "
Alice went on eagerly.
" That's enough about lessons, " the Gryphon
interrupted in a very decided tone : " tell her
something about the games now. "
CHAPTER X.
THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE.
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew
the back of one flapper across his eyes. He
looked at Alice and tried to speak, but for a
minute or two sobs choked his voice. " Same
as if he had a bone in his throat, " said the
Gryphon, and it set to work shaking him and
punching him in the back. At last the Mock
Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears run-
ning down his cheeks, he went on again : —
" You may not have lived much under the
sea — " ( " I haven't, " said Alice) — " and perhaps
146 THE LOBSTBE
you were never even introduced to a lobster — "
(Alice began to say " I once tasted — " but
checked herself hastily, and said, " No, never " ) —
" so you can have no idea what a delightful thing
a Lobster-Quadrille is ! "
" No, indeed, " said Alice. " What sort of a
dance is it ? "
" Why, " said the Gryphon, " you first form
into a line along the seashore — "
" Two lines ! " cried the Mock Turtle. " Seals,
turtles, salmon, and so on : then, when you Ve
cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way — "
" That generally takes some time, " interrupted
the Gryphon.
" — you advance twice — "
" Each with a lobster as a partner ! " cried the
Gryphon.
" Of course, " the Mock Turtle said: " advance
twice, set to partners — "
" — change lobsters, and retire in same order, "
continued the Gryphon.
" Then, you know, " the Mock Turtle went on,
" you throw the — "
QUADRILLE. 147
" The lobsters ! " shouted the Gryphon, with a
bound into the air.
" — as far out to sea as you can — *'
" Swim after them ! " screamed the Gryphon.
" Turn a somersault in the sea ! " cried the
Mock Turtle, capering wildly about.
" Change lobsters again ! " yelled the Gryphon
at the top of its voice.
" Back to land again, and — that's all the first
figure, " said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping
his voice, and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat
down again very sadly and quietly, and looked
at Alice.
*'It must be a very pretty dance, " said Alice
timidly.
" Would you like to see a little of it ? " said
the Mock Turtle.
" Very much indeed, " said Alice.
" Come, let's try the first figure ! " said the
Mock Turtle to the Gryphon. " We can do
it without lobsters, you know. Which shall
sing? "
148
THE LOBSTEB.

" Oh, you sing, " said the Gryphon. " I've
forgotten the words. "
So they began solemnly dancing round and
round Alice, every now and then treading on
her toes when they passed too close, and waving
their fore-paws to mark the time, while the
Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly : —
QUADRILLE. 149
" Will you walk a little faster ! " said a whiting
to a snail,
" There s a porpoise close behind us, and hes tread-
ing on my tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all
advance I
They are waiting on the shingle — will you come
and join the dance ?
Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will
you join the dance?
Will you, wont you, will you, won! t you, wont
you join the dance ?
" You can really have no notion how delightful it
will be
When they take us up and throw us, with the
lobsters, out to sea I "
But the snail replied " Too far, too far ! " and
gave a look askance —
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would
not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would not, could not,
would not join the dance.
Would not, could not, would noty could not^
could not join the dance.
150 THE LOBSTER
" What matters it how far we go ? " his scaly
friend replied,
" There is another shore, you know, upon the other
side.
The further off from England the 7iearer is to
France;
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and
join the dance.
Will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will
you join the dance ?
Will you, \won t you, will you, wont you, wont
you join the dance ? "
" Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to
watch, " said Alice, feeling very glad that it was
over at last ; " and I do so like that curious song
about the whiting ! "
" Oh, as to the whiting, " said the Mock
Turtle, " they — you Ve seen them, of course ? "
" Yes, " said Alice, " I've often seen them at
dinn — " she checked herself hastily.
*'I don't know where Dinn may be, " said the
Mock Turtle, " but if you've seen them so often,
of course you know what they're like/'
" I believe so, " Alice replied thoughtfully.
QUADKILLE. 151
" They have their tails in their mouths; — and
they're all over crumbs. "
" You're wrong about the crumbs, " said the
Mock Turtle : " crumbs would all wash off in
the sea. But they have their tails in their
mouths ; and the reason is — " here the Mock
Turtle yawned and shut his eyes. — " Tell her
about the reason and all that, " he said to the
Gryphon.
" The reason is, " said the Gryphon, " that
they would go with the lobsters to the dance.
So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to
fall a long way. So they got their tails fast in
their mouths. So they couldn't get them out
again. That's all. "
" Thank you, " said Alice, " it's very interest-
ing. I never knew so much about a whiting
before. "
" I can tell you more than that, if you like, "
said the Gryphon. " Do you know why it's
called a whiting } "
" I never thought about it, " said Alice.
" Why? "
152 THE LOBSTER
" // does the boots and shoes','the Gryphon
replied very solemnly.
Alice was thoroughly puzzled. " Does the
boots and shoes! " she repeated in a wonder-
ing tone.
" Why, what are your shoes done with 1 "
said the Gryphon. " I mean, what makes them
so shiny 1 "
Alice looked down at them, and considered a
little before she gave her answer, " They're
done with blacking I believe. "
" Boots and shoes under the sea, " the Gryphon
went on in a deep voice, " are done with whiting.
Now you know. "
" And what are they made of.? " Alice asked
in a tone of great curiosity.
" Soles and eels, of course, " the Gryphon re-
plied rather impatiently : " any shrimp could
have told you that. "
" If I'd been the whiting, " said Alice, whose
thoughts were still running on the song, " I'd
have said to the porpoise, * Keep back, please ;
we don't want jj/^^ with us!''*
QUADRILLE. 168
" They were obliged to have him with them, "
the Mock Turtle said : " no wise fish would go
anywhere without a porpoise. "
" Wouldn't it really ? " said Alice in a tone of
great surprise.
" Of course not, " said the Mock Turtle:
" why, if a fish came to me, and told me he
was going a journey, I should say'With what
porpoise ?'"
" Don't you mean * purpose * ? " said Alice.
" I mean what I say, " the Mock Turtle re-
plied in an offended tone. And the Gryphon
added " Come, let's hear some of j/our adven-
tures. "
" I could tell you my adventures — beginning
from this morning, " said Alice a little timidly:
" but it's no use going back to yesterday, because
I was a different person then. "
" Explain all that, " said the Mock Turtle.
" No, no ! the adventures first, " said the
Gryphon in an impatient tone : " explanations
take such a dreadful time. "'
154 THE LOBSTER
So Alice began telling them her adventures
from the time when she first saw the White
Rabbit : she was a little nervous about it just at
first, the two creatures got so close to her, one
on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths
so very wide, but she gained courage as she
went on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till
she got to the part about her repeating " You are
old. Father William','to the Caterpillar, and the
words all coming different, and then the Mock
Turtle drew a long breath, and said, " That's
very curious. "
" It's all about as curious as it can be, " said
the Gryphon.
" It all came diflFerent ! " the Mock Turtle
repeated thoughtfully. " I should like to hear
her try and repeat something now. Tell her
to begin. " He looked at the Gryphon as if he
thought it had some kind of authority over
Alice.
" Stand up and repeat''Tis the voice of the
sluggard', " said the Gryphon.
QUADRILLE.
156
" How the creatures
order one about, and
make one repeat les-
sons ! " thought Alice.
" I might just as well
be at school at once. "
However, she got up
and began to repeat 1
it, but her head was
so full of the Lob-
ster-Quadrille, that
she hardly knew
what she was saying,
and the words came
very queer indeed : —

"'TiV the voice of the lobster ; I heard him declare,
^You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
hair!
As a duck with his eyelids, so he with his nose
Trims his belt a7td his buttons, and turns out his
toesr
156 THE LOBSTER
" That's different from what / used to say
when I was a child/'said the Gryphon.
" Well, I never heard it before, " said the
Mock Turtle ; " but it sounds uncommon non-
sense. "
Alice said nothing : she had sat down again
with her face in her hands, wondering if any-
thing would ever happen in a natural way
again.
" I should like to have it explained/'said the
Mock Turtle.
" She can't explain it, " said the Gryphon
hastily. " Go on with the next verse. "
" But about his toes .f* " the Mock Turtle per-
sisted. " How could he turn them out with his
nose, you know ? "
" It's the first position in dancing/'Alice said ;
but she was dreadfully puzzled by the whole
thing, and longed to change the subject.
" Go on with the next verse, " the Gryphon re-
peated impatiently : " it begins'I passed by his
garde7t! "
Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt
QUADRILLE. 167
sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in
a trembling voice : —
" I passed by his garden^ and marked^ with oneeye^
How the owl and the oyster were sharing the
pie—''
" What is the use of repeating all that stuff, "
the Mock Turtle interrupted, " if you don't ex-
plain it as you go on ? It's by far the most con-
fusing thing / ever heard ! "
" Yes, I think you'd better leave off, " said the
Gryphon, and Alice was only too glad to do
so.
''Shall we try another figure of the Lobster-
Quadrille ? " the Gryphon went on. " Or would
you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song } "
" Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would
be so kind, " Alice replied so eagerly that the
Gr3''phon said, in a rather offended tone, " Hm !
No accounting for tastes ! Sing her'Turtle
Soup'will you, old fellow ? "
The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in
a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing this :
158 THE LOBSTER
" Beautiful Soup, so rich and green.
Waiting in a hot tureen !
Who for such dainties would not stoop?
Soup of the evejting, beautiful Soup /
Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup !
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop !
Beau — ootiful Soo — oop I
Soo — oop of the e — e — evening.
Beautiful, beautiful Soup !
" Beautiful Soup / Who cares for fish.
Game, or any other dish ?
Who would not give all else for twop
ennyworth only of beautiful Soup ?
Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup ?
Boo — ootiful Soo — oop /
Boo — ootiful Sov — oop !
Soo — oop of the e — e — evening.
Beautiful, beauti—FUL SOUP/''
" Chorus again ! " cried the Gryphon, and the
Mock Turtle had just begun to repeat it, when
QUADRILLE. 159
a cry of " The trial's beginning ! " was heard in
the distance.
" Come on ! " cried the Gryphon, and, taking
Alice by the hand, it hurried on, without wait-
ing for the end of the song.
" What trial is it ? " Alice panted as she ran, but
the Gryphon only answered " Come on ! " and
ran the faster, while more and more faintly came,
carried on the breeze that followed them, the
melancholy words : —
" Soo — oop of the e — e— evenings
Beautiful^ beautiful Soup t "
CHAPTER XL
WHO STOLE THE TARTS?
The King and Queen of Hearts were seated
on their throne when they arrived, with a great
crowd assembled about them — all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of
cards: the Knave was standing before them,
in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him ; and near the King was the White Rabbit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of
parchment in the other. In the very middle
of the court was a table, wth a large dish of
WHO STOLE THE TARTS. 161
tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it
made Alice quite hungry to look at them — " I
wish they'd get the trial done, " she thought,
" and hand round the refreshments ! " But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began
looking at everything about her to pass away
the time.
Alice had never been in a court of justice
before, but she had read about them in books,
and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. " That's
the judge ! " she said to herself, " because of his
great wig. "
The judge, by the way, was the King, and as
he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the
frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he
did not look at all comfortable, and it was cer-
tainly not becoming.
" And that's the jury-box, " thought Alice,
" and those twelve creatures, " (she was obliged
to say " creatures, " you see, because some of
them were animals, and some were birds,) " I
suppose they are the jurors. " She said this
162 WHO STOLE
last word two or three times over to herself,
being rather proud of it : for she thought, and
rightly too, that very few little girls of her age
knew the meaning of it at all. However, " jury-
men " would have done just as well.
The twelve jurors were all writing very
busily on slates. " What are they doing ? "
Alice v/hispered to the Gryphon. " They can't
have anything to put down yet, before the trial's
begun. "
" They're putting down their names, " the
Gryphon whispered in reply, " for fear they
should forget them before the end of the trial. "
** Stupid things ! " Alice began in a loud
indignant voice, but she stopped herself hastily,
for the White Rabbit cried out, " Silence in the
court ! " and the King put on his spectacles and
looked anxiously round, to make out who was
talking.
Alice could see, as well as if she were look-
ing over their shoulders, that all the jurors were
writing down " stupid things! " on their slates,
THE TARTS. 163
and she could even make out that one of them
didn't know how to spell " stupid, " and that he
had to ask his neighbor to tell him. " A nice
muddle their slates'11 be in before the triaFs
over ! " thought Alice.
One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.
This, of course, Alice could 7iot stand, and she
went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it
away. She did it so quickly that the poor
little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not
make out at all what had become of it ; so,
after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to
write with one finger for the rest of the day;
and this was of very little use, as it left no mark
on the slate.
" Herald, read the accusation ! " said the
King.
On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts
on the trumpet, and then unrolled the parch-
ment scroll, and read as follows ; —
164
WHO STOLE

WW^ "
" TAe Queen of hearts^ she made some tarts^
All on a summer day :
The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts^
And took them quite away I "
" Consider your verdict, " the King said to
the jury.
THE TARTS* 165
^*Not yet, not yet! " the Rabbit hastily in-
terrupted. " There's a great deal to come before
that! "
" Call the first witness, " said the King ; and
the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the
trumpet, and called out, " First witness ! "
The first witness was the Hatter. He came
in with a teacup in one hand, and a piece of
bread-and-butter in the other. " I beg pardon,
your Majesty, " he began, " for bringing these in :
but I hadn't quite finished my tea when I was
sent for. "
" You ought to have finished, " said the King.
" When did you begin ? "
The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who
had followed him into the court, arm-in-arm
with the Dormouse. " Fourteenth of March, I
think it was,''he said.
" Fifteenth, " said the March Hare.
" Sixteenth, " added the Dormouse.
" Write that down, " the King said to the
jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three
dates on their slates, and then added them
166 WHO STOLE
up and reduced the answer to shillings and
pence.
" Take off your hat, " the King said to the
Hatter.
" It isn't mine, " said the Hatter.
" Stolen ! " the King exclaimed, turning to
the jury, who instantly made a memorandum of
the fact.
" I keep them to sell, " the Hatter added as
an explanation : " I've none of my own. Tm a
hatter. "
Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and
began staring hard at the Hatter, who turned
pale and fidgeted.
" Give your evidence, " said the King ; " and
don't be nervous, or I'll have you executed on
the spot. "
This did not seem to encourage the witness
at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the
other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the bread-and-butter.
Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious
THE TARTS. 167
sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until
she made out what it was : she was beginning
to grow larger again, and she thought at first
she would get up and leave the court ; but on
second thoughts she decided to remain where
she was as long as there was room for her.
" I wish you wouldn't squeeze so, " said the
Dormouse, who was sitting next to her. " I can
hardly breathe. "
" I can't help it, " said Alice very meekly :
" I'm growing. "
" You've no right to grow here''said the Dor-
mouse.
" Don't talk nonsense, " said Alice more boldly :
" you know you're growing too. "
" Yes, but / grow at a reasonable pace, " said
the Dormouse : " not in that ridiculous fashion. "
And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to
the other side of the court.
All this time the Queen had never left off
staring at the Hatter, and, just as the Dormouse
crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, " Bring me the list of the singers in
168
WHO STOLE
the last concert! " on which the wretched Hatter
trembled so, that he
shook both his shoes
off.
" Give your evi-
dence, " the King re-
peated angrily, " or
I'll have you executed,
whether you're nervous
or not. "
" Vxn a poor man,
your Majesty, " the
Hatter began in a
trembling voice, " and
I hadn't but just begun my tea — not above
a week or so — and what with the bread-and-
butter getting so thin — and the twinkling of the
tea "
" The twinkling of wAa^ ? " said the King.
" It began with the tea, " the Hatter replied.
" Of course twinkling begins with a T ! " said
the King sharply. " Do you take me for a
dunce t Go on ! "

THE TARTS. 169
" Vm a poor man, " the Hatter went on, " and
most things twinkled after that— only the March
Hare said *'
•* I didn't ! " the March Hare interrupted in a
great hurry.
" You did ! " said the Hatter.
" I deny it ! " said the March Hare.
" He denies it, " said the King : " leave out that
part. "
" Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said — " the
Hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see
if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse
denied nothing, being fast asleep.
" After that, " continued the Hatter, " I cut
some more bread-and-butter "
" But what did the Dormouse say ? " one of
the jury asked.
* That I can't remember, " said the Hatter.
" You mus^ remember, " remarked the King,
" or I'll have you executed. "
" The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and
bread-and-butter, and went down on one knee.
** Tm a poor man, your Majesty, " he began.
170 WHO STOLE
" You're a very poor speaker y'said the King.
Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was
immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will
just explain to you how it was done. They had
a large canvass bag, which tied up at the mouth
with strings : into this they slipped the guinea-
pig, head first, and then sat upon it.)
" I'm glad I've seen that done, " thought
Alice.''I've so often read in the newspapers,
at the end of trials, * There was some attempt
at applause, which was immediately suppressed
by the officers of the court,'and I never under-
stood what it meant till now. "
" If that's all you know about it, you may
stand down, " continued the King.
" I can't go no lower, " said the Hatter : " I'm
on the floor, as it is. "
** Then you may sit down, " the King replied.
Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was
suppressed.
" Come, that finishes the guinea-pigs I " thought
Alice. " Now we shall get on better. "
THE TARTS.
171
" Fd rather finish my tea,'* said the Hatter,
with an anxious look at the Queen, who was
reading the list of singers.

" You may go, " said the King, and the Hatter
hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to
put his shoes on.
" and just take his head off outside, " the
Queen added to one of the officers : but the
Hatter was out of sight before the officer could
get to the door.
*'Call the next witness ! " said the King.
The next witness was the Duchess'cook. She
carried the pepper-box in her hand : and Alice
172 WHO STOLE
guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began
sneezing all at once.
" Give your evidence, " said the King.
" Shan't, " said the cook.
The King looked anxiously at the White
Rabbit, who said in a low voice, *'Your Majesty
must cross-examine this witness. "
''Well, if I must, I must, " the King said with
a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and
frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly
out of sight, he said in a deep voice, " What are
tarts made of t "
" Pepper, mostly, " said the cook.
" Treacle, " said a sleepy voice behind her.
" Collar that Dormouse ! " the Queen shrieked
out. " Behead that Dormouse ! Turn that Dor-
mouse out of court ! Suppress him ! Pinch him !
Off with his whiskers ! "
For some minutes the whole court was in
confusion, getting the Dormouse turned out, and,
by the time they had settled down again, the
cook had disappeared.
THE TARTS. 173
" Never mind ! " said the King, with an air
of great relief. " Call the next witness. " And he
added in an undertone to the Queen, " Really,
my dear,^^^ must cross-examine the next wit-
ness. It quite makes my forehead ache ! "
Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled
over the list, feeling very curious to see what the
next witness would be like, " — for they haven't
got much evidence yef,'she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Rabbit
read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name " Alice ! "
CHAPTER XII.
Alice's evidence.
" Here ! " cried Alice, quite forgetting in the
flurry of the moment how large she had grown
in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in
such a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box
with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jury-
men on to the heads of the crowd below, and
there they lay sprawling about, reminding her
very much of a globe of gold-fish she had acci-
dentally upset the week before.
" Oh, I beg your pardon ! " she exclaimed in a
ALICE S EVIDENCE.
175

tone of great dismay, and began picking them
up again as quickly as she could, for the acci-
dent of the gold-fish kept running in her head,
176 AlilCE's EVIDENCE.
and she had a vague sort of idea that they must
be collected at once and put back into the jury-
box, or they would die.
" The trial cannot proceed, " said the King in
a very grave voice, " until all the jurymen are
back in their proper places — all','he repeated
with great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he
said so.
Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that,
in her haste, she had put the Lizard in head
downwards, and the poor little thing was waving
its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite
unable to move. She soon got it out again, and
put it right ; " not that it signifies much, " she
said to herself; " I should think it would be
quite as much use in the trial one way up as the
other. "
As sdon as the jury had a little recovered
from the shock of being upset, and their slates
and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the accident, all except the
Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
Alice's evidence. 177
anything but sit with Its mouth open, gazing up
into the roof of the court.
" What do you know about this busines ? "
the King said to AHce.
" Nothing, " said Alice.
" Nothing whatever ? " persisted the King.
" Nothing whatever, " said Alice.
" That's very important, " the King said, turn-
ing to the jury. They were just beginning to
write this down on their slates, when the White
Rabbit interrupted : " 6^j > ^important, your Majesty
means, of course, " he said in a very respectful
tone, but frowning and making faces at him as
he spoke.
" ^/elmportant, of course, I meant, " the King
hastily said, and went on to himself in an under-
tone, " important — unimportant — unimportant —
important " as if he were trying which word
sounded best.
Some of the jury wrote it down " important, "
and some " unimportant. " Alice could see this,
as she was near enough to look over their
178 Alice's evidence.
slates ; " but it doesn't matter a bit, " she thought
to herself.
At this moment the King, who had been for
some time busily writing in his note-book, called
out " Silence ! " and read out from his book,
" Rule Forty-two. All persons more than a mile
high to leave the courts
Every body looked at Alice.
" J'm not a mile high, " said Alice.
" You are, " said the King.
** Nearly two miles high, " added the Queen.
" Well, I shan't go, at any rate, " said Alice ;
** besides, that's not a regular rule : you invented
it just now. "
" It's the oldest rule in the book, " said the
King.
" Then it ought to be Number One, " said Alice.
The King turned pale, and shut his note-book
hastily. *'Consider your verdict, " he said to the
jury, in a low trembling voice.
" There's more evidence to come yet, please
your Majesty, " said the White Rabbit, jumping
Alice's evidence. 179
up in a great hurry; " this paper has just been
picked up. "
" What's in it ? " said the Queen.
" I haven't opened it yet, " said the White
Rabbit, " but it seems to be a letter, written by
the prisoner to — to somebody. "
" It must have been that, " said the King,
" unless it was written to nobody, which isn't
usual, you know. "
" Who is it directed to ? " said one of the jury-
men.
" It isn't directed at all, " said the White
Rabbit ; " in fact, there *'s nothing written on the
outsidey He unfolded the paper as he spoke,
and added, " It isn't a letter after all : it's a set of
verses. "
" Are they in the prisoner's handwriting ? "
asked another of the jurymen.
" No, they're not, " said the White Rabbit,
" and that's the queerest thing about it. " (The
jury all looked puzzled.)
" He must have imitated somebody else's
180 Alice's evidence.
hand, " said the King. (The jury all brightened
up again.)
*'Please your Majesty, " said the Knave,
" I didn't write it, and they can't prove I did :
there's no name signed at the end. "
" If you didn't sign it, " said the King, " that
only makes the matter worse. You must have
meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed
your name like an honest man. "
There was a general clapping of hands at
this : it was the first really clever thing the King
had said that day.
" T\i2X proves his guilt, " said the Queen.
" It proves nothing of the sort ! " said Alice.
" Why, you don't even know what they're
about! "
" Read them, " said the King.
The White Rabbit put on his spectacles.
" Where shall I begin, please your Majesty } " he
asked.
" Begin at the beginning, " the King said,
gravely, " and go on till you come to the end :
then stop. "
181
These were the verses the White Rabbit read : —
" They told me you had been to her^
And mentioned 7ne to him :
She gave me a good character ^
But said I could not swim.
He sent them word I had not gone
( We know it to be true) :
If she should push the matter ofiy
What would become of you ?
I gave her one, they gave him two^
You gave us three or more ;
They all returned from him. to you,
Though the "'were mine before.
If I or she shouL, chance to be
Involved in this affair.
He trusts to you to set themfree^
Exactly as we were.
182 Alice's evidencb.
My notion was that you had been
(Before she had this fit)
An obstacle that came between
Himy and ourselves, and it.
Dont let him know she liked them best^
For this must ever be
A secret, keptfrorn all the rest,
Between yourself and me''
" That's the most important piece of evidence
we've heard yet, " said the King, rubbing his
hands ; " so now let the jury "
" If any one of them can explain it, " said
Alice, (she had grown so large in the last few
minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupt-
ing him,) " I'll give him sixpence. / don't
believe there's an atom of meaning in it. "
The jury all wrote down on their slates, " She
doesn't believe there's an atom of meaning in
Alice's evidence. 183
it, " but none of them attempted to explain the
paper.
" If there's no meaning in it, " said the King,
" That saves a world of trouble, you know, as
we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't
know, " he went on, spreading out the verses
on his knee, and looking at them with one
eye ; " I seem to see some meaning in them,
after all.'— said I could not swim —'you can't
swim, can you ? " he added, turning to the
Knave.
The Knave shook his head sadly. " Do I
look like it .? " he said. (Which he certainly did
not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
" All right, so far, " said the King, and he
went on muttering over the verses to himself :
" * We know it to be true —'that's the jury, of
course — * / gave her one, they gave him two —'
why, that must be what he did with the tarts,
you know — "
" But it goes on'they all returned from him
to you', " said Alice.
184
ALICE S EVIDENCE.

" Why, there they
are ! " said the King
triumphantly, point-
ing to the tarts on the
table. " Nothing can
be clearer than that.
Then again — * before
she had this fit —'you
never had fits, my
dear, I think.? " he
said to the Queen.
" Never ! " said the
Queen furiously.
throwing an inkstand at the Lizard as she spoke.
(The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing
on his slate with one finger, as he found it made
Alice's evidence. 185
no mark ; but he now hastily began again, using
the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long
as it lasted.)
" Then the words don'tyf/ you, " said the
King, looking round the court with a smile.
There was a dead silence.
" It's a pun ! " the King added in an angry
tone, and everybody laughed. " Let the jury
consider their verdict, " the King said, for about
the twentieth time that day.
" No, no 1 " said the Queen. " Sentence first
— verdict afterwards. "
" Stuff and nonsense ! " said Alice loudly.
" The idea of having the sentence first I "
** Hold your tongue ! " said the Queen, turn-
ing purple.
" I won't ! " said Alice.
" Off with her head ! " the Queen shouted at
the top of her voice. Nobody moved.
" Who cares for you ? " said Alice, (she had
grown 10 her full size by this time.) " You're
nothing but a pack of cards ! "
186
Alice's evidence.
^^^\%

At this the whole pack rose up into the air,
and came flying down upon her; she gave a
Alice's evidence. 187
little scream, half of fright and half of anger,
and tried to beat them off, and found herself
lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of
her sister, who was gently brushing away some
dead leaves that had fluttered down from the
trees on to her face.
" Wake up, Alice dear ! " said her sister ;
" why, what a long sleep you've had I "
" Oh, Tve had such a curious dream I " said
Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she
could remember them, all these strange Ad-
ventures of hers that you have just been reading
about ; and when she had finished, her sister
kissed her, and said, " It was a curious dream,
dear, certainly : but now run in to your tea ; it's
getting late. " So Alice got up and ran off,
thinking while she ran, as well she might, what
a wonderful dream it had been.
But her sister sat still just as she left her,
leaning her head on her hand, watching the
setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all
her wonderful Adventures, till she too began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her
dream : —
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself: —
once again the tiny hands were clasped upon
her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers — she could hear the very tones of
her voice, and see that queer little toss of her
head, to keep back the wandering hair that
would always get into her eyes — and still as she
listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place
around her became alive with the strange crea-
tures of her little sister's dream.
The long grass rustled at her feet as the
White Rabbit hurried by — the frightened Mouse
splashed his way through the neighboring pool
189
—she could hear the rattle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their
never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the
Queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to
execution — once more the pig-baby was sneezing
on the Duchess* knee, while plates and dishes
crashed arolmd it — once more the shriek of the
Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's slate-
pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-
pigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sob
of the miserable Mock Turtle.
So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half
believed herself in Wonderland, though she
knew she had but to open them again and all
would change to dull reality — the grass would
be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rip-
pling to the waving of the reeds — the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells,
and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the
shepherd boy — and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer
noises, would change (she knew) to the con-
fused clamor of the busy farm-yard — while the
190
lowing of the cattle in the distance would take
the place of the Mock Turtle's heavy sobs.
Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same
little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be
herself a grown woman ; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhood : and how she
would gather about her other little children, and
make their eyes bright and eager with many a
strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of lonar-asco : and how she would
feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a
pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering
her own child-life, and the happy summer days.
THE END.
THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS,
AND WHAT ALICE FOUND THERE.
DRAMATIS PERSON^E.
{As arranged before commencement of game. \
White.
pieces pawns.
Tweedledee Daisy.
Unicorn Haigha.
Sheep Oyster.
W. Queen " Lily. "
W. King Fawn.
Aged man Oyster.
W. Knight Hatta.
Tweedledum Daisy.
Red.
pawns. pieces.
Daisy Humpty Dump^«
Messenger Carpenter.
Oyster Walrus.
Tiger-lily R. Queen.
Rose R. King.
Oyster Crow.
Frog R. Knight,
Daisy Lion»
RED.

WHITE.
White Pawn (Alice) to play^ and win in eleven moves.
PAGE.
1. Alice meets R. Q 35
2. Alice through Q.'s 3rd (by
railway) 48
to Q's 4th (Tweedledum
and Tweedledee) 54
3. Alice meets W, Q. (with
shawl) 91
4. Alice to Q's 5th (shop,
river, shop) loi
5. Alice to Q.'s 6th (Humpty
Dumpty) 112
6. Alice to Q.'s 7th (forest) 155
7. W.Kt. takes R. Kt 161
8. Alice to Q.'s 8th (coro-
nation) 183
9. Alice becomes Queen 196
10. Alice castles (feast) 204
11, Alice takes R. Q. & wins. . 215
PAGE.
1. R. Q. toK. R.'s 4th 45
2. W. Q. to Q. B.'s4th(a/?^
shawl) 91
3. W. Q. to Q. B.'s 5th (be-
comes sheep) 100
4. W. Q. to K. B.'s 8th
(leaves egg on shelf) Ill
5. W. Q. to Q. B.'s 8th fly-
ing from R. Kt.) 149
6. R. Kt. to K.'s 2nd (ch.). . 158
7. W. Kt. toK. B.'s 5th.... 182
8. R. Q. to K.'s sq .[exami-
nation) 186
9. Queen's castle 199
10. W. Q. to Q. R. 6th [soup). i\\

Child of the pure unclouded brow
And dreaming eyes of wonder 1
Though time be fleet, and I and thou
Are half a life asunder.
Thy loving smile will surely hail
The love-gift of a fairy-tale.
I have not seen thy sunny face,
Nor heard thy silver laughter ;
No thought of me shall find a place
In thy young life's hereafter
Enough that now thou wilt not fail
To listen to my fairy-tale.
A tale begun in other days,
When summer suns were glowing — -
A simple chime, that served to time
The rhythm of our rowing
Whose echoes live in memory yet,
Though envious years would say " forget'
Come, hearken then, ere voice of dread.
With bitter tidings laden,
Shall summon to unwelcome bed
A melancholy maiden !
We are but older children, dear.
Who fret to find our bedtime near.
Without, the frost, the blinding snow.
The storm- wind's moody madness
Within, the firelight's ruddy glow
And childhood's nest of gladness.
The magic words shall hold thee fast :
Thou shalt not heed the raving blast
And though the shadow of a sigh
May tremble through the story,
For * happy summer days'gone by
And vanish'd summer glory
It shall not touch with breath of bale
The pleasance of our fairy-tale.
CONTENTS,
CHAPTBR. PAGB«
I. Looking-Glass House i
II. The Garden of Live Flowers 26
III. Looking-Glass Insects 46
IV. Tweedledum AND TwEEDLEDEE 66
V. Wool AND Water 91
VI. HumptyDumpty 113
VII. The Lion AND THE Unicorn 137
VIII. ♦* It's my own Invention " 157
IX. Queen Alice 185
X. Shaking 215
XI. Waking 216
Xn. Which Dreamed It ? 218

CHAPTER I.
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
One thing was certain, that the white kitten
had had nothing to do with it : it was the
black kitten's fault entirely. For the white
kitten had been having its face washed by the
old cat for the last quarter of an hour (and
bearing it pretty well, considering); so you
2 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
see that it couldnt have had any hand in the
mischief.
The way Dinah washed her children's faces
was this : first she held the poor thing down by
its ear with one paw, and then with the other
paw she rubbed its face all over, the wrong way,
beginning at the nose: and just now, as I said,
she was hard at work on the white kitten,
which was lying quite still and trying to purr
no doubt feeling that it was all meant for its
good.
But the black kitten had been finished with
earlier in the afternoon, and so, while Alice was
sitting curled up in a corner of the great arm-
chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the
kitten had been having a grand game of romps
with the ball of worsted AHce had been trying
to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down
till it had all come undone again ; and there it
was, spread over the hearth-rug, all knots and
tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail
in the middle.
" Oh, you wicked wicked little thing ! " cried
tOO^NG-GLASS HOUSE. S
Alice, catching up the kitten and giving it a
little kiss to make it understand that it was in
disgrace. " Really, Dinah ought to have taught
you better manners ! You ought, Dinah, you
know you ought ! " she added, looking reproach-
fully at the old cat, and speaking in as cross
a voice as she could manage and then she
scrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the
kitten and the worsted with her, and began
winding up the ball again. But she didn't get
on very fast, as she was talking all the time,
sometimes to the kitten, and sometimes to herself.
Kitty sat very demurely on her knee, pretending
to watch the progress of the winding, and now
and then putting out one paw and gently touch-
ing the ball, as if it would be glad to help if it
might.
" Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty ? "
Alice began. " You'd have guessed if you'd
been up in the window with me only Dinah
was making you tidy, so you couldn't. I was
watching the boys getting in sticks for the bon-
fire and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty !
4 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
Only it got so cold, and it snowed so, they had
to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we'll go and
see the bonfire to-morrow. " Here Alice wound
two or three turns of the worsted round the
kitten's neck, just to see how it would look:
this led to a scramble, in which the ball rolled
down upon the floor, and yards and yards of it
got unwound again.
" Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty, " Alice
went on, as soon as they were comfortably
settled again,''when I saw all the mischief you
had been doing, I was very nearly opening the
window, and putting you out into the snow!
And you'd have deserved it, you little mis-
chievous darling! What have you got to say
for yourself ? Now don't interrupt me ! " she
went on, holding up one finger. " I'm going
to tell you all your faults. Number one : you
squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your
face this morning. Now you can't deny it,
Kitty : I heard you ! What's that you say ? "
(pretending that the kitten was speaking.) *'Her
paw went into your ejQ? Well, that's your
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.

fault, for keeping your eyes open — if you'd shut
them tight up, it wouldn't have happened. Now
O LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
don't make any more excuses, but listen ! Num-
ber two: you pulled Snowdrop away by the
tail just as I had put down the saucer of milk
before her ! What, you were thirsty, were you ?
How do you know she wasn't thirsty too?
Now for number three : you unwound every
bit of the worsted while I wasn't looking :
" That's three faults, Kitty, and you've not
been punished for any of them yet. You know
I'm saving up all your punishments for Wednes-
day week suppose they had saved up all
fny punishments ! " she went on, talking more
to herself than the kitten. " What would they
do at the end of the year ? I should be sent
to prison, I suppose, when the day came.
Or let me see suppose each punishment
was to be going without a dinner: then, when
the miserable day came, I should have to go
without fifty dinners at once ! Well, I shouldn't
mind that much! I'd far rather go without
them than eat them !
" Do you hear the snow against the window-
panes, Kitty? How nice and soft it sounds I
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. 7
Just as if some one was kissing the window all
over outside. I wonder if the snow loves the
trees and fields, that it kisses them so gently .?
And then it covers them up snug, you know,
with a white quilt ; and perhaps it says, * Go to
sleep, darlings, till the summer comes again.'
And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty,
they dress themselves all in green, and dance
about whenever the wind blows oh,
that's very pretty ! " cried Alice, dropping the
ball of worsted to clap her hands. " And I
do so wish it was true ! I'm sure the woods
looks sleeply in the autumn, when the leaves
are getting brown.
" Kitty, can you play chess ? Now, don't smile,
my dear, I'm asking it seriously. Because, when
we were playing just now, you watched just as
if you understood it : and when I said'Check !'
you purred ! Well, it was a nice check, Kitty,
and really I might have won, if it hadn't been
for that nasty Knight, that came wriggling down
among my pieces. Kitty, dear, let's pretend "
8 LOOKING-QLASS HOUSE.
And here I wish I could tell you half the
things Alice used to say, beginning with her
favorite phrase " Let's pretend. " She had had
quite a long argument with her sister only the
day before — all because Alice had begun with
" Let's pretend we're kings and queens ; " and her
sister, who liked being very exact, had argued
that they couldn't, because there were only two
of them, and Alice had been reduced at last to
say, " Well, you can be one of them then, and
ril be all the rest. " And once she had really
frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly
in her ear, " Nurse ! Do let's pretend that I'm
a hungry hyaena, and you're a bone ! "
But this is taking us away from Alice's
speech to the kitten. " Let's pretend that you're
the Red Queen, Kitty ! Do you know, I think if
you sat up and folded your arms, you'd look
exactly like her. Now do try, there's a dear ! "
And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and
set it up before the kitten as a model for it to
imitate : however, the thing didn't succeed, prin-
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. 9
cipally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn't
fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held
it up to the Looking-glass, that it might see how
sulky it was " and if you're not good directly, "
she added, " I'll put you through into Looking-
glass House. How would you like that ?
" Now, if you'll only attend, Kitty, and not
talk so much, I'll tell you all my ideas about
Looking-glass House. First, there's the room you
can see through the glass that's just the same
as our drawing-room, only the things go the
other way. I can see all of it when I get upon
a chair all but the bit just behind the fire-
place. Oh ! I do so wish I could see that bit !
I want so much to know whether they've a
fire in the winter : you never can tell, you
know, unless our fire smokes, and then smoke
comes up in that room too but that may be
only pretence, just to make it look as if they
had a fire. Well then, the books are something
like our books, only the words go the wrong
way ; I know that, because IVe held up one of
10 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
our books to the glass, and then they hold up
one in the other room.
" How would you like to live in Looking-
glass House, Kitty ? I wonder if they'd give
you milk in there ? Perhaps Looking-glass milk
isn't good to drink But oh, Kitty ! now we
come to the passage. You can just see a little
peep of the passage in Looking-glass House, if
you leave the door of our drawing-room wide
open ; and it's very like our passage as far as
you can see, only you know it may be quite
different on beyond. Oh, Kitty ! how nice it
would be if we could only get through into
Looking-glass House ! I'm sure it's got, oh !
such beautiful things in it ! Let's pretend there's
a way of getting through into it, somehow,
Kitty. Let's pretend the glass has got all soft
like gauze, so that we can get through. Why,
if s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare !
It'll be easy enough to get through " She
was up on the chimney-piece while she said
this, though she hardly knew how she had got
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
11

there. And certainly the glass was beginning
to melt away, just like a bright silvery mist.
12
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.

In another moment Alice was through the
glass, and had jumped lightly down into the
Looking-glass room. The very first thing she
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. 13
did was to look whether there was a fire in the
fireplace, and she was quite pleased to find that
there was a real one, blazing away as brightly
as the one she had left behind. " So I shall be
as warm here as I was in the old room, " thought
Alice : " warmer, in fact, because there'll be no
one here to scold me away from the fire. Oh,
what fun it'll be, when they see me through the
glass in here, and can't get at me I "
Then she began looking about, and noticed
that what could be seen from the old room was
quite common and uninteresting, but that all the
rest was as different as possible. For instance,
the pictures on the wall next the fire seemed to
be all alive, and the very clock on the chimney-
piece (you know you can only see the back of it
in the Looking-glass) had got the face of a little
old man, and grinned at her.
" They- don't keep this room so tidy as the
other, " Alice thought to herself, as she noticed
several of the chessmen down in the hearth
among the cinders : but in another moment, with
14
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
a little " Oh ! " of surprise, she was down on her
hands and knees watching them. The chessmen
were walking about, two and two !
" Here are the Red King and the Red
Queen, " Alice said (in a whisper, for fear of
frightening them), " and there are the White
King and the White Queen sitting on the edge
of the shovel and here are two Castles walk-
ing arm in arm 1 don't think they can

LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. 15
hear me, " she went on as she put her head
closer down, " and Tm nearly sure they can't
see me. I feel somehow as if I were in-
visible "
Here something began squeaking on the table
behind Alice, and made her turn her head
just in time to see one of the White Pawns
roll over and begin kicking : she watched it
with great curiosity to see what would happen
next
" It was the voice of my child I " the White
Queen cried out, as she rushed past the King,
so violently that she knocked him over among
the cinders. " My precious Lily ! My imperial
kitten ! " and she began scrambling wildly up the
side of the fender.
" Imperial fiddlestick I " said the King, rub-
bing his nose, which had been hurt by the fall.
He had a right to be a little annoyed with the
Queen, for he was covered with ashes from
head to foot.
Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as
the poor little Lily was nearly screaming herself
16 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen and
set her on the table by the side of her noisy little
daughter.
The Queen gasped, and sat down : the rapid
journey through the air had quite taken away
her breath, and for a minute or two she could
do nothing but hug the little Lily in silence.
As soon as she had recovered her breath a little,
she called out to the White King, who was
sitting sulkily among the ashes, " Mind the
volcano ! "
" What volcano ? " said the King, looking up
anxiously into the fire, as if he thought that was
the most likely place to find one.
" Blew me up, " panted the Queen, who
was still a little out of breath. " Mind you
come up the regular way don't get blown
up! "
Alice watched the White King as he slowly
struggled up from bar to bar, till at last she
said, " Why, you'll be hours and hours getting
to the table, at that rate. I'd far better help
you, hadn't I ? " But the King took no notice
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
17

of the question : it was quite clear that he could
neither hear her nor see her.
So Alice picked him up very gently, and
lifted him across more slowly than she had lifted
the Queen, that she mightn't take his breath
away : but, before she put him on the table, she
thought she might as well dust him a little, he
was so covered with ashes.
18 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
She said afterwards that she had never seen
in all her life such a face as the King made,
when he found himself held in the air by an
invisible hand, and being dusted : he was far too
much astonished to cry out, but his eyes and
his mouth went on getting larger and larger,
and rounder and rounder, till her hand shook so
with laughing that she nearly let him drop upon
the floor.
" Oh ! /fkase don t make such faces, my dear ! "
she cried out, quite forgetting that the King
couldn't hear her. " You make me laugh so
that I can hardly hold you ! And don't keep
your mouth so wide open ! All the ashes will
get into it there, now I think youVe tidy
enough ! " she added, as she smoothed his hair,
and set him upon the table near the Queen.
The King immediately fell flat on his back,
and lay perfectly still : and Alice was a little
alarmed at what she had done, and went round
the room to see if she could find any water to
throw over him. However, she could find
nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. 19
back with it she found he had recovered, and
he and the Queen were talking together in a
frightened whisper so low, that Alice could
hardly hear what they said.
The King was saying, " I assure you, my
dear, I turned cold to the very ends of my
whiskers I "
To which the Queen replied, " You haven't
got any whiskers. "
" The horror of that moment, " the King went
on, " I shall never, never forget I "
" You will, though, " the Queen said, " if you
don't make a memorandum of it. "
Alice looked on with great interest as the
King took an enormous memorandum-book out
of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden
thought struck her, and she took hold of the
end of the pencil, which came some way over
his shoulder, and began writing for him.
The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy,
and struggled with the pencil for some time
without saying anything ; but Alice was too
strong for him, and at last he panted out, " My
20
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
dear ! I really must get a thinner pencil. I can't
manage this one a bit ; it writes all manner of
things that I don't intend "
" What manner of things? " said the Queen,
looking over the book (in which Alice had put
'The White Knight
is sliding down the
poker. He balances
very badly'). " That's
not a memorandum
of your feelings ! "
There was a book
lying near Alice on
the table, and while
she sat watching
the White King (for
she was still a little
anxious about him,
and had the ink all ready to throw over
him, in case he fainted again), she turned over
the leaves, to find some part that she could
read, " — for it's all in some language I don't
know, " she said to herself.

LOOKING-QI^ASS HOUSE. 21
It was like this.
i^\s^\ ^^J,V5\^ ^V\i$^si t'^iVW^i ^x^vw\^*
She puzzled over this for some time, but
at last a bright thought struck her. " Why,
it's a Looking-glass book, of course ! And if
I hold it up to a glass, the words will all go
the right way again. "
This was the poem that Alice read.
JABBERWOCKY,
^Twas brillig, mid the stithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
'All minsy were the borogoves.
And the mome raths outgrabe.'
22 LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE.
" Beware the Jabberwock^ my son f
The jaws that bite, the claws that catch /
Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
The frumious Bander snatch ! "
He took his vorpal sword in hand :
Long time the manxom^e foe he sought —
So rested he by the Ttim^tum, tree^
And stood awhile in thought.
And as in uffish thought he stood.
The Jabberwock, with eyes ofjlame.
Came whiffling through the tulgey wood^
And burbled as it came !
One, two / One, two / And through and through
The vorpal blade went snicker-snack !
He left it dead, and with its head
He went galumphing back.
LOOKLNGHS^LASS HOUSE.
S3

^o^^:iM*uJ.
24 LOOKENG-GLASS HOUSE.
" And hast thou slain the Jabberwock ?
Come to my arms, my beamish boy !
O frabjous day ! Callooh ! Callay i''
He chortled in his joy,
'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre andgimble in the wabe ;
All mimsy were the borogoves.
And the mome raths outgrabe.
" It seems very pretty, " she said when she
had finished it, " but it's rather hard to under-
stand ! " (You see she didn'w Hke to confess,
even to herself, that she couldn*t make it out at
all.) " Somehow it seems to fill my head with
ideas only I don't exactly know what they
are! \lovjQ,YQr, somebody'killed. something: that's
clear, at any rate "
" But oh ! " thought Alice, suddenly jumping
up, " if I don't make haste I shall have to
go back through the Looking-glass, before Tve
LOOKING-GLASS HOUSE. • 25
seen what the rest of the house is like ! Lefs
have a look at the garden first ! " She was out
of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs
or, at least, it wasn't exactly running, but
a new invention for getting down stairs quickly
and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just
kept the tips of her fingers on the hand-rail,
and floated gently down without even touching
the stairs with her feet ; then she floated on
through the hall, and would have gone straight
out at the door in the same way, if she hadn't
caught hold of the door-post. She was getting
a little giddy with so much floating in the air,
and was rather glad to find herself walking again
in the natural way.
CHAPTER II.
THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS.
" I SHOULD see the garden far better, " said
Alice to herself, " if I could get to the top of
that hill : and here's a path that leads straight
to it at least, no, it doesn't do that "
(after going a few yards along the path, and
turning several sharp corners), " but I suppose it
will at last. But how curiously it twists ! It's
more like a corkscrew than a path ! Well, this
turn goes to the hill, I suppose no, it doesn't !
This goes straight back to the house! Well
then, I'll try it the other way. "
THE GARDEN OF LIVE FLOWERS. 2t
And St) she did : wandering up and down,
and trying turn after turn, but always coming
back to the house, do what she would. Indeed,
once, when she turned a corner rather more
quickly than usual, she ran against it before she
could stop herself.
" It's no use talking about it, " Alice said, look-
ing up at the house and pretending it was argu-
ing with her. " I'm not going in again yet. I
know I should have to get through the Looking-
glass again — back into the old room — and there'd
be an end of all my adventures ! "
So, resolutely turning her back upon the
house, she set out once more down the path,
determined to keep straight on till she got to
the hill. For a few minutes all went on well,
and she was just saying, " I really shall do it this
time " when the path gave a sudden twist
and shook itself (as she described it afterwards),
and the next moment she found herself actually
walking in at the door.
" Oh, it's too bad ! " she cried. " I never saw
such a house for getting in the way ! Never ! "
28 THE GAKDEN OP
However, there was the hill full in sight, so
there was nothing to be done but start again.
This time she came upon a large flower-bed,
with a border of daisies, and a willow-tree grow-
in the middle.
" O Tiger-lily, " said Alice, addressing herself
to one that was waving gracefully about in the
wind, " I wish you could talk ! "
" We can talk, " said the Tiger-lily: " when
there's anybody worth talking to. "
Alice was so astonished that she couldn't
speak for a minute : it quite seemed to take her
breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only
went on waving about, she spoke again, in a
timid voice — almost in a whisper. " And can
all the flowers talk ? "
" As well as you can, " said the Tiger-lily.
" And a great deal louder. "
" It isn't manners for us to begin, you
know, " said the Rose, " and I really was won-
dering when you'd speak ! Said I to myself,
* Her face has got some sense in it, though
LIVE FLOWERS.
29
it's not a clever one !'
Still, you're the right
color, and that goes a
long way. "

" I don't care about the color, " the Tiger-
Hly remarked. " If only her petals curled up a
little more, she'd be all right. "
30 THE GARDEN OF
Alice didn't like being criticised, so she began
asking questions. " Aren't you sometimes fright-
ened at being planted out here, with nobody to
take care of you ? "
" There's the tree in the middle, " said the
Rose : " what else is it good for ? "
" But what could it do, if any danger came ? "
Alice asked.
" It could bark, " said the Rose.
" It says'Bough-wough !'" cried a Daisy :
" that's why its branches are called boughs ! "
" Didn't you know that?'" cried another
Daisy, and here they all began shouting together,
till the air seemed quite full of little shrill
voices. " Silence, every one of you ! " cried
the Tiger-lily, waving itself passionately from
side to side, and trembling with excitement.
*'They know I can't get at them ! " it panted,
bending its quivering head towards Alice, " or
they wouldn't dare to do it ! *'
" Never mind ! " Alice said in a soothing
tone, and stooping down to the daisies, who
LIVE FLOWERS. 31
were just beginning again, she whispered, " If
you don*t hold your tongues, I'll pick you ! "
There was silence in a moment, and several
of the pink daisies turned white.
" That's right! " said the Tiger-lily. " The
daisies are worst of all. When one speaks, they
all begin together, and it's enough to make one
wither to hear the way they go on !''
" How is it you can all talk so nicely ? "
Alice said, hoping to get it into a better temper
by a compliment. " Fve been in many gardens
before, but none of the flowers could talk. "
" Put your hand down, and feel the ground, "
said the Tiger-lily. " Then you'll know why. "
Alice did so. " It's ver^^ hard, " she said,
" but I don't see what that has to do with it. "
" In most gardens, " the Tiger-lily said, " they
make the beds too soft — so that the flowers are
always asleep.'*
This sounded a veiy good reason, and Alice
was quite pleased to know it. " I never thought
of that before ! " she said.
32 THE GARDEN OF
" It s my opinion that you never think at
all''the Rose said in a rather severe tone.
" I never saw anybody that looked stupider, "
a Violet said, so suddenly, that Alice quite
jumped ; for it hadn't spoken before.
" Hold your tongue ! " cried the Tiger-lily.
" As \i you ever saw anybody I You keep your
head under the leaves, and snore away there,
till you know no more what's going on in the
world, than if you were a bud ! "
" Are there any more people in the garden
besides me .? " Alice said, not choosing to notice
the Rose's last remark.
" There's one other flower in the garden
that can move about like you, " said the Rose.
" I wonder how you do it " ( " You're
always wondering, " said the Tiger-lily), " but
she's more bushy than you are. "
" Is she like me .? " Alice asked eagerly, for
the thought crossed her mind, " There's another
little girl in the garden, somewhere ! "
" Well, she has the same awkward shape as
LIVB FLOWERS. 33
you, " the Rose said, " but she's redder and
her petals are shorter, I think. "
" Her petals are done up close, almost like
a dahlia, " the Tiger-lily interrupted : " not tum-
bled about anyhow, like yours. "
" But that's not your fault, " the Rose added
kindly : " you're beginning to fade, you know
and then one can't help one's petals getting
a little untidy. "
Alice didn't like this idea at all : so, to change
the subject, she asked " Does she ever come out
here? "
" I daresay you'll see her soon, " said the Rose.
" She's one of the thorny kind. "
" Where does she wear the thorns ? " Alice
asked with some curiosity.
" Why, all round her head, of course, " the
Rose replied. " I was wondering you hadn't got
some too. I thought it was the regular rule. "
" She's coming ! " cried the Larkspur. " I
hear her footstep, thump, thump, along the gravel-
walk! "
Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it
84 THE GARDEN OF
was the Red Queen. " She's grown a good
deal ! " was her first remark. She had indeed :
when AHce first found her in the ashes, she had
been only three inches high and here she
was, half a head taller than Alice herself !
" It's the fresh air that does it, " said the Rose :
" wonderfully fine air it is, out here. "
" I think I'll go and meet her,'said Alice, for,
though the flowers were interesting enough, she
felt that it would be far grander to have a talk
with a real Queen.
" You can't possibly do that,'* said the Rose :
" / should advise you to walk the other way. "
This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said
nothing, but set off at once towards the Red
Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her
in a moment, and found herself walking in at the
front-door again.
A little provoked, she drew back, and after
looking everywhere for the Queen (whom she
spied out at last, a long way off), she thought
she would try the plan, this time, of walking in
the opposite direction.
LIVE FLOWEKS.
36
It succeeded beautifully. She had not been
walking a minute before she found herself face

to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of
the hill she had been so long aiming at.
" Where do you come from ? " said the Red
36 THE GARDEN OF
Queen, " And where are you going ? Look up,
speak nicely, and don't twiddle your fingers all
the time. "
Alice attended to all these directions, and ex-
plained, as well as she could, that she had lost
her way.
" I don't know what you mean by your way, "
said the Queen : " all the ways about here belong
to me but why did you come out here at
all ? " she added in a kinder tone. " Curtsey
while you're thinking what to say. It saves
time. "
Alice wondered a little at this, but she was
too much in awe of the Queen to disbelieve it.
*'ril try it when I go home, " she thought to
herself, " the next time I'm a little late for
dinner. "
" It's time for you to answer now, " the Queen
said, looking at her watch: " open your mouth a
little wider when you speak, and always say
'your Majesty.'"
" I only wanted to see what the garden was
like, your Majesty " "
LIVE FLOWERS. 37
" That's right, " said the Queen, patting her
on the head, which Alice didn't like at all,
" though, when you say'garden,'— Tve seen
gardens, compared with which this would be a
wilderness. "
Alice didn't dare to argue the point, but went
on : " and I thought I'd try and find my way
to the top of that hill "
" When you say'hill,'" the Queen interrupted,
" / could show you hills, in comparison with
which you'd call that a valley. "
" No, I shouldn't, " said Alice, surprised into
contradicting her at last : " a hill cant be a
valley, you know. That would be nonsense'*
The Red Queen shook her head. " You may
call it * nonsense'if you like, " she said, " but Fve
heard nonsense, compared with which that would
be as sensible as a dictionary ! "
Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from
the Queen's tone that she was a little offended:
and they walked on in silence till they got to the
top of the little hill
For some minutes Alice stood without speak-
38
THE GARDEN OF
ing, looking out in all directions over the country
— and a most curious country it was. There
were a number of tiny little brooks running
straight across it from side to side, and the

ground between was divided up into squares by
a number of little green hedges, that reached
from brook to brook.
" I declare it's marked out just like a large
chess-board ! " Alice said at last. " There ought
to be some men moving about somewhere
LIVE FLOWERS. 89
and so there are ! " she added in a tone of delight,
and her heart began to beat quick with excite-
ment as she went on. " It's a great huge game
of chess that's being played all over the
world if this is the world at all, you know.
Oh, what fun it is ! How I wish I was one of
them ! I wouldn't mind being a Pawn, if only
I might join though of course I should /^ " /^^
to be a Queen, best. "
She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen
as she said this, but her companion only smiled
pleasantly, and said, " That's easily managed.
You can be the White Queen's Pawn, if you
like, as Lily's too young to play ; and you're in
the Second Square to begin with : when you get
to the Eighth Square you'll be a Queen''
Just at this moment, somehow or other, they
began to run.
Alice never could quite make out, in thinking
it over afterwards, how it was that they began :
all she remembers is, that they were running
hand in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it
was all she could do to keep up with her : and
40 THE GARDEN OF
still the Queen kept crying " Faster ! Faster ! "
but Alice felt she could not go faster, though she
had no breath left to say so.
The most curious part of the thing was, that
the trees and the other things round them never
changed their places at all : however fast they
went, they never seemed to pass anything. " I
wonder if all the things move along with us ? "
thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen
seemed to guess her thoughts, for she cried,
" Faster ! Don't try to talk ! "
Not that Alice had any idea of doing that
She felt as if she would never be able to talk
again, she was getting so much out of breath :
and still the Queen cried " Faster ! Faster ! "
and dragged her along. " Are we nearly there ? "
Alice managed to pant out at last.
" Nearly there ! " the Queen repeated. " Why,
we passed it ten minutes ago ! Faster !'* And
they ran on for a time in silence, with the
wind whistling in Alice's ears, and almost blow-
ing her hair off her head, she fancied.
" Now ! Now I " cried the Queen. " Faster I
LIVE FLOWERS.
41
Faster! " And they went so fast that at last
they seemed to skim through the air, hardly
touching the ground with their feet, till sud-

denly, just as Alice was getting quite exhausted,
they stopped, and she found herself sitting on
the ground, breathless and giddy.
The Queen propped her up against a tree,
and said kindly, " You may rest a little now. "
Alice looked round her in great surprise.
" Why, I do believe we've been under this tree
the whole time ! Everything's just as it was I "
42 THE GARDEN OF
" Of course it is, " said the Queen : " what
would you have it ? "
" Well, in our country, " said Alice, still pant-
ing a little, " you'd generally get to somewhere
else if you ran very fast for a long time, as
we've been doing. "
" A slow sort of country ! " said the Queen.
" Now, here, you see, it takes all the runningjj/^^
can do, to keep in the same place. If you want
to get somewhere else, you must run at least
twice as fast as that !'*
" I'd rather not try, please ! " said Alice. " Fm
quite content to stay here only I am so hot
and thirsty ! "
" I know what youd like ! " the Queen said
good-naturedly, taking a little box out of her
pocket. " Have a biscuit } "
Alice thought it would not be civil to say
" No, " thought it wasn't at all what she wanted.
So she took it, and ate it as well as she could :
and it was very dry ; and she thought she had
never been so nearly choked in all her life.
" While you're refreshing yourself, " said the
LIVE FLOWERS.
Queen, " I'll just take the measurements. " And
she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in
inches, and began measuring the ground, and
sticking little pegs in here and there.
" At the end of two yards, " she said, putting
in a peg to mark the distance, " I shall give you
your directions have another biscuit ? "
" No, thank you, " said Alice : " one's guz^e
enough ! "
" Thirst quenched, I hope ? " said the Queen.
Alice did not know what to say to this, but
luckily the Queen did not wait for an answer,
but went on. " At the end of ifAree yards I shall
repeat them for fear of your forgetting them.
At the end of /our, I shall say good-bye. And
at the end oifive, I shall go! "
She had got all the pegs put in by this time,
and Alice looked on with great interest as she
returned to the tree, and then began slowly
walking down the row.
At the two-yard peg she faced round, and
said, " A pawn goes two squares in its first
move, you know. So you'll go very quickly
44 THE GARDEN OF
through the Third Square by railway, I should
think and you'll find yourself in the Fourth
Square in no time. Well, that square belongs
to Tweedledum and Tweedledee the Fifth is
mostly water the Sixth belongs to Humpty
Dumpty But you make no remark? "
" I 1 didn't know I had to make one
just then, " Alice faltered out.
" You should have said, " the Queen went on
in a tone of grave reproof, " * It's extremely kind
of you to tell me all this'however, we'll
suppose it said the Seventh Square is all
forest however, one of the Knights will show
you the way and in the Eighth Square we
shall be Queens together, and it's all feasting
and fun ! " Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat
down again.
At the next peg the Queen turned again,
and this time she said, " Speak in French when
you can't think of the English for a thing
turn out your toes as you walk and re-
member who you are ! " She did not wait
for Alice to curtsey this time, but walked on
LIVB FLOWERS. 45
quickly to the next peg, where she turned for
a moment to say''good-bye, " and then hurried
on to the last.
How it happened, Alice never knew, but
exactly as she came to the last peg, she was
gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or
whether she ran quickly into the wood ( " and
she can run very fast ! " thought Alice), there
was no way of guessing, but she was gone,
and Alice began to remember that she was a
Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her to
move.
CHAPTER III.
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
Of course the first thing to do was to make
a grand survey of the country she was going
to travel through. " It's something very like
learning geography, " thought Alice, as she stood
on tiptoe in hopes of being able to see a little
further. " Principal rivers there are none.
Principal mountains I'm on the only one, but
I don't think it's got any name. Principal
towns why, what are those creatures, making
honey down there } They can't be bees
nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know "
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 47
and for some time she stood silent, watching one
of them that was bustling about among the
flowers, poking its proboscis into them, " just as
if it was a regular bee,'* thought Alice.
However, this was anything but a regular
bee : in fact, it was an elephant as Alice soon
found out, though the idea quite took her breath
away at first. " And what enormous flowers
they must be ! " was her next idea. " Something
like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks
put to them and what quantities of honey
they must make ! I think I'll go down and
no, I won't go just yet, " she went on, checking
herself just as she was beginning to run down
the hill, and trying to find some excuse for turn-
ing shy so suddenly. " It'll never do to go down
among them without a good long branch to
brush them away and what fun it'll be when
they ask me how I liked my walk. I shall say
* Oh, I liked it well enough'(here
came the favorite little toss of the head), * only
it was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did
tease so !'"
48 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
" I think rU go down the other way, " she said
after a pause : " and perhaps I may visit the
elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to get
into the Third Square ! "
So with this excuse she ran down the hill
and jumped over the first of the six little
brooks.
" Tickets, please ! " said the Guard, putting
his head in at the window. In a moment every-
body was holding out a ticket : they were about
the same size as the people, and quite seemed to
fill the carriage.
" Now then ! Show your ticket, child ! " the
Guard went on, looking angrily at Alice. And
a great many voices all said together ( " like the
chorus of a song, " thought Alice), " Don't keep
him waiting, child I Why, his time is worth a
thousand pounds a minute I "
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 49
" I'm afraid I haven't got one, " Alice said in a
frightened tone : " there wasn't a ticket-office
where I came from. " And again the chorus of
voices went on. " There wasn't room for one
where she came from. The land there is worth
a thousand pounds an inch ! "
" Don't make excuses, " said the Guard ; " you
should have bought one from the engine-driver. "
And once more the chorus of voices went on
with " The man that drives the engine. Why,
the smoke alone is worth a thousand pounds a
puff! "
Alice thought to herself, " Then there's no
use in speaking. " The voices didn't join in this
time, as she hadn't spoken, but, to her great
surprise, they all thought in chorus (I hope you
understand what thinking in chorus means
for I must confess that / don't), " Better say
nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand
pounds a word ! "
" I shall dream about a thousand pounds to-
night, I know I shall ! " thought Alice,
60
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.

All this time the Guard was looking at her,
first through a telescope, then through a micro-
scope, and then through an opera-glass. At last
he said, " You're travelling the wrong way, " and
shut up the window and went away.
" So young a child, " said the gentleman sitting
opposite to her, (he was dressed in white paper,)
" ought to know which way she's going, even if
she doesn't know her own name I''
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 61
A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman
in white, shut his eyes and said in a loud voice,
" She ought to know her way to the ticket-office,
even if she doesn't know her alphabet ! "
There was a Beetle sitting next the Goat (it
was a very queer carriage-full of passengers
altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be that
they should all speak in turn, he went on with
" She'll have to go back from here as luggage! "
Alice couldn't see who was sitting beyond the
Beetle, but a hoarse voice spoke next. " Change
engines " it said, and there it choked and was
obliged to leave off.
" It sounds like a horse, " Alice thought to
herself. And an extremely small voice, close to
ner ear, said, " you might make a joke on that— something about'horse'and
* hoarse,'you know. "
Then a very gentle voice in the distance said,
" She must be labelled'Lass, with care,'you
know "
And after that other voices went on ( " What
a number of people there are in the carriage ! "
thought Alice), saying, " She must go by post,
52 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
as she's got a head on her " " She must
be sent as a message by the telegraph " " She
must draw the train herself the rest of the way
, " and so on.
But the gentleman dressed in white paper
leaned forwards and whispered in her ear, " Never
mind what they all say, my dear, but take a re-
turn-ticket every time the train stops. "
*'Indeed I shan't ! " Alice said rather impa-
tiently. " I don't belong to this railway journey
at all 1 was in a wood just now and I
wish I could get back there ! "
« You might make joke on thatr Sald tllC HttlC VOicC CloSC tO
lier ear I " something about ^yoxxwould if you could,'you know. "
" Don't tease so, " said Alice, looking about in
vain to see where the voice came from ; " if you're
so anxious to have a joke made, why don't you
make one yourself } "
The little voice sighed deeply : it was very
unhappy, evidently, and Alice would have said
something pitying to comfort it, " if it would
only sigh like other people ! " she thought. But
this was such a wonderfully small sigh, that she
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 63
wouldn't have heard it at all, if it hadn't come
quite close to her ear. The consequence of this
was that it tickled her ear very much, and quite
took off her thoughts from the unhappiness of the
poor little creature.
" I know you are a friend, " thC Httlc VOicC WCUt On ;'* a dear
friend and an old friend. And you won't hurt me, thought I am an insect. "
" What kind of insect ? " Alice inquired a
little anxiously. What she really wanted to
know was, whether it could sting or not, but she
thought this wouldn't be quite a civil question
to ask.
'« What, then you don't- " thc Httlc voicc bcgau, whcu it
was drowned by a shrill scream from the engine,
and everybody jumped up in alarm, Alice among
the rest.
The Horse, who had put his head out of
the window, quietly drew it in and said, " It's
only a brook we have to jump over. " Every-
body seemed satisfied with this, though Alice
felt a little nervous at the idea of trains jumping
at all. " However, it'll take us into the Fourth
Square, that's some comfort ! " she said to her-
54 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
self. In another moment she felt the carriage
rise straight up into the air, and in her fright
she caught at the thing nearest to her hand,
which happened to be the Goat's beard.
But the beard seemed to melt away as she
touched it, and she found herself sitting quietly
under a tree while the Gnat (for that was
the insect she had been talking to was balanc-
ing itself on a twig just over her head, and fan-
ning her with its wings.
It certainly was a very large Gnat : " about
the size of a chicken, " Alice thought. Still, she
couldn't feel nervous with it, after they had been
talking together so long.
" then you don't like all insects ? " the
Gnat went on, as quietly as if nothing had hap-
pened.
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 66
" I like them when they can talk, " Alice said.
" None of them ever talk, where / come from. "
" What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where
you come from ? " the Gnat inquired.
" I don't rejoice in insects at all, " Alice ex-
plained, " because I'm rather afraid of them
at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the
names of some of them. "
" Of course they answer to their names t " the
Gnat remarked carelessly.
" I never knew them do it.''
" What's the use of their having names, " the
Gnat said, " if they won't answer to them ? "
" No use to them^'said Alice ; " but it's useful
to the people that name them, I suppose. If not,
why do things have names at all } "
" I can't say, " the Gnat replied. " Further on,
in the wood down there they've got no names
-however, go on with your list of insects:
you're wasting time. "
" Well, there's the Horse-fly, " Alice began,
counting off the names on her fingers.
56
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
" All right, " said the Gnat : " half way up that
bush, you'll see a Rocking-horse-fly, if you look.
It's made entirely of wood, and gets about by
swinging itself from branch to branch.

" What does it live on ? " Alice asked, with
great curiosity.
" Sap and sawdust, " said the Gnat. " Go on
with the list. "
Alice looked at the Rocking-horse-fly with great
interest, and made up her mind that it must have
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
67

been just repainted, it looked so bright and
sticky ; and then she went on.
" And there's the Dragon-fly. "
" Look on the branch above your head, " said
the Gnat, " and there you'll find a Snap-dragon-
fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings
of holly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning
in brandy. "
" And what does it live on ? " Alice asked, as
before.
*'Frumenty and mince-pie, " the Gnat replied ;
" and it makes its nest in a Christmas-box. "
58
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
" And then there's the Butterfly, " Alice went
on, after she had taken a good look at the in-
sect with its head on fire, and had thought to
herself, " I wonder if that's the reason insects are
SO fond of flying into candles because they
want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies ! "
" Crawling at your feet, " said the Gnat (Alice
drew her feet back in some alarm), " you may
observe a Bread-and-butter-fly. Its wings are
thin slices of bread-and-butter, its body is a crust,
and its head is a lump of sugar. "
" And what does it live on .? "

LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 69
" Weak tea with cream in it. "
A new difficulty came into Alice's head. " Sup-
posing it couldn't find any ? " she suggested.
" Then it would die, of course. "
" But that must happen very often, " Alice re-
marked thoughtfully.
*'It always happens, " said the Gnat.
After this, Alice was silent for a minute or
two, pondering. The Gnat amused itself mean-
while by humming round and round her head :
at last it settled again and remarked, " I suppose
you don't want to lose your name ? "
*'No, indeed,''Alice said, a little anxiously.
" And yet I don't know, " the Gnat went on in
a careless tone : " only think how convenient it
would be if you could manage to go home with-
out it ! For instance, if the governess wanted to
call you to your lessons, she would call out
* Come here ,'and there she would have to
leave off, because there wouldn't be any name for
her to call, and of course you wouldn't have to
go, you know. "
" That would never do, I'm sure, " said Alice:
60 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
" the governess would never think of excusing
me lessons for that. If she couldn't remember
my name, she'd call me'Miss !'as the servants
do. "
" Well, if she said'Miss,'and didn't say any-
thing more, " the Gnat remarked, " of course you'd
miss your lessons. That's a joke. I wish j^ou
had made it. "
" Why do you wish / had made it ? " Alice
asked. " It's a very bad one. "
But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two
large tears came rolling down its cheeks. .
" You shouldn't make jokes, " Alice said, " if it
makes you so unhappy. "
Then came another of those melancholy little
sighs, and this time the poor Gnat really seemed
to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice looked
up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the
twig, and, as she was getting quite chilly with
sitting still so long, she got up and walked on.
She very soon came to an open field, with a
wood on the other side of it: it looked much
darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a /z//k
LOOKING-GLASS INSECO^S. 61
timid about going into it. However, on second
thoughts, she made up her mind to go on : " for
I certainly won't go back','she thought to her-
self, and this was the only way to the Eighth
Square.
" This must be the wood, " she said thoughtfully
to herself, " where things have no names. I won-
der what'U become of my name when I go in .? I
shouldn't like to lose it at all because they'd
have to give me another, and it would be almost
certain to be an ugly one. But then the fun
would be, trying to find the creature that had got
my old name ! That's just like the advertise-
ments, you know, when people los? dogs
* answers to the name of " Dash : " had on a brass
collar'just fancy calling everything you met
* Alice,'till one of them answered ! Only they
wouldn't answer at all, if they were wise. "
She was rambling on in this way when she
reached the wood : it looked very cool and shady.
" Well, at any rate it's a great comfort, " she said
as she stepped under the trees, ** after being so
hot, to get into the into the into what? "
62 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
she went on, rather surprised at not being able to
think of the word. " I mean to get under the
under the under this, you know ! *'put-
ting her hand on the trunk of the tree. " What
does it call itself, I wonder } I do believe if s got
no name why, to be sure it hasn't ! "
She stood silent for a minute, thinking : then
she suddenly began again. " Then it really has
happened, after all ! And now, who am I .? I
will remember, it I can ! Tm determined to do
it ! " But being determined didn't help her
much, and all she could say, after a great deal of
puzzling, was, " L, I know it begins with L ! "
Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it
looked at Alice with its large gentle eyes, but
didn't seem at all frightened. " Here then ! Here
then ! " Alice said, as she held out her hand and
tried to stroke it ; but it only started back a little,
and then stood looking at her again.
" What do you call yourself .? " the Fawn said
at last. Such a soft sweet voice it had !
" I wish I knew ! " thought poor Alice. She
answered, rather sadly, " Nothing, just now. "
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
68
•* Think again, " it said : " that won't do.*'
Alice thought, but nothing came of it. " Please,
would you tell me what you call yourself t " she
said timidly. " 1 think that might help a little. "

" ril tell you, if you'll come a little further
on, " the Fawn said. " I can't remember here. "
So they walked on together through the wood,
Alice with her arms clasped lovingly round the
64 LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS.
soft neck of the fawn, till they came out into
another open field, and here the Fawn gave a
sudden bound into the air, and shook itself free
from Alice's arms. " I'm a Fawn ! " it cried out
in a voice of delight, " and, dear me ! you're a
human child ! " A sudden look of alarm came
into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another
moment it had darted away at full speed.
Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to
cry with vexation at having lost her dear little
fellow-traveller so suddenly. " However, I know
my name now, " she said, " that's some comfort.
Alice Alice 1 won't forget it again. And
now, which of these finger-posts ought I to
follow, I wonder ?'*
It was not a very difficult question to answer,
as there was only one road through the wood,
and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.
" I'll settle it, " Alice said to herself, " when the
road divides and they point different ways. "
But this did not seem likely to happen. She
went on and on, a long way, but wherever the
road divided there were sure to be two finger-
LOOKING-GLASS INSECTS. 65
posts pointing the same way, one marked * TO
TWEEDLEDUM'S house; and the other
*TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE/
" I do believe, " said Alice at last, " that they
live in the same house ! I wonder I never thought
of that before But I can't stay there long.
I'll just call and say * How d'ye do.?'and ask
them the way out of the wood. If I could only
get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark ! "
So she wandered on, talking to herself as she
went, till, on turning a sharp corner, she came
upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she
could not help starting back, but in another
moment she recovered herself, feeling sure that
they must be.
CHAPTER IV.
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
They were standing under a tree, each with
an arm round the other's neck, and Alice knew
which was which in a moment, because one of
them had'DUM'embroidered on his collar,
and the other * DEE.'" I suppose they've each
got'TWEEDLE'round at the back of the
collar, " she said to herself.
They stood so still that she quite forgot they
were alive, and she was just looking round to see
if the word * TWEEDLE'was written at the
TWEEDLEDUM AJSD TWEEDLEDEB.
67

back of each collar, when she was startled by a
voice coming from the one marked'DUM.*
" If you think we're wax-works, " he said, " you
ought to pay, you know. Wax-works weren't
made to be looked at for nothing. Nohow ! "
" Contrariwise, " added the one marked * Dee/
" if you think we're alive, you ought to speak. "
" I'm sure I'm very sorry, " was all Alice could
say ; for the words of the old song kept ringing
68 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDBB.
through her head like the ticking of a clock, and
she could hardly help saying them out loud : —
" Tweedledum and Tweedledee
Agreed to have a battle;
For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
Had spoiled his nice new rattle.
yust thenjlew down a monstrous crom
As black as a tar-barrel ;
Which frightened both the heroes so^
They quite forgot their quarreC
" I know what youVe thinking about, " said
Tweedledum : " but it isn't so, nohow. "
" Contrariwise, " continued Tweedledee, " if it
was so, it might be ; and if it were so, it would
be ; but as it isn't, it ain't. That's logic. "
" I was thinking, " Alice said very politely,
" which is the best way out of this wood : it's
getting so dark. Would you tell me, please } "
But the fat little men only looked at each
other and grinned.
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE. 69
They looked so exactly like a couple of great
schoolboys, that Alice couldn't help pointing her
finger at Tweedledum, and saying " First Boy ! "
" Nohow ! " Tweedledum cried out briskly, and
shut his mouth up again with a snap.
" Next boy ! " said Alice, passing on to
Tweedledee, though she felt quite certain he
would only shout out " Contrariwise ! " and so he
did.
" You've begun wrong ! " cried Tweedledum.
" The first thing in a visit is to say * How d'ye
do ?'and shake hands ! " And here the two
brothers gave each other a hug, and then they
held out the two hands that were free, to shake
hands with her.
Alice did not like shaking hands with either of
them first, for fear of hurting the other one's
feelings ; so, as the best way out of the difficulty,
she took hold of both hands at once : the next
moment they were dancing round in a ring.
This seemed quite natural (she remembered after-
wards), and she was not even surprised to hear
music playing ; it seemed to come from the tree
70 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
under which they were dancing, and it was done
(as well as she could make it out) by the branches
rubbing one across the other, like fiddles and
fiddle-sticks.
" But it certainly was funny, " (Alice said after-
wards, when she was telling her sister the history
of all this), " to find myself singing'Here we go
round the mulberry bus hi I don't know when I
began it, but somehow I felt as if Td been sing-
ing it a long, long time ! "
The other two dancers were fat, and very soon
out of breath. " Four times round is enough for
one dance, " Tweedledum panted out, and they
left off dancing as suddenly as they had begun :
the music stopped at the same moment.
Then they let go of Alice's hands, and stood
looking at her for a minute : there was a rather
awkward pause, as Alice didn't know how to
begin a conversation with people she had just
been dancing with. " It would never do to say
* How d'ye do ?'nowl'she said to herself :'* we
seem to have got beyond that, somehow ! "
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE. 71
" I hope you're not much tired ? " she said
at last.
" Nohow. And thank you very much for ask-
ing, " said Tweedledum.
" So much obliged ! " added Tweedledee. " You
like poetry } "
" Ye-es, pretty well some poetry, " Alice
said doubtfully. " Would you tell me which road
leads out of the wood ? "
" What shall I repeat to her .? " said Tweedle-
dee, looking round at Tweedledum with great
solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice's question.
"'The Walrus and the Carpenter'is the
longest, " Tweedledum replied, giving his brother
an affectionate hug.
Tweedledee began instantly :
" The sun was shining *'
Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. " If
it's very long, " she said, as politely as she could,
" would you please tell me first which road "
Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again :
T2 TWEEDLEDUM Am) TWEEDLEDEE.
" T^ sun was shining on the sea^
Shining with all his might:
He did his very best to make
The billows smooth and bright
And this was odd, because it was
The middle of the night.
The moon was shining sulkily y
Because she thought the sun
Had got no business to be there
After the day was done —
• Ks very rude of him^ she said,
* To come and spoil the fun /'
The sea was wet as wet could be^
The sands were dry as dry.
You could not see a cloud, because
No cloud was in the sky :
No birds were flying overhead —
There were no birds to fly.
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
73

The Walrus and the Carpenter
Were walking close at hand;
They wept like anything to see
Such quantities of sand,
• IJ this were only cleared away^
Ihey said, * it would be grand t'
* If seven maids with seven mops
Swept it for half a year,
Do you suppose^ the Walrus said^
* That they could get it clear ? *
74 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
* / doubt it^ said the Carpenter^
And shed a bitter tear,
* O Oysters, come and walk with us!
The Walrus did beseech.
^A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk^
Along the briny beach :
We cannot do with more thaiifour^
To give a hand to each.
The eldest Oyster looked at him^
But never a word he said:
The eldest Oyster winked his eye^
And shook his heavy head —
Meaning to say he did not choose
To leave the oyster-bed.
But four young Oysters hurried up.
All eager for the treat:
Their coats were brushed, their faces washed^
Their shoes were clean and neat —
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB. 75
And this was odd, because, you know.
They hadnt any feet
Four other Oysters followed them.
And yet another four ;
And thick and fast they came at last.
And more^ and more, and more —
All hopping through the frothy waves^
And scramblhig to the shore.
The Walrus and the Carpenter
Walked on a mile or so.
And then they rested on a rock
Conveniently low :
And all the little Oysters stood
And waited in a row,
* The time has come'the Walrus said
* To talk of many things :
Of shoes — and ships — and sealing-wax
Of cabbages — and kings —
76 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB.
And why the sea is boiling hot —
And whether pigs have wings'

* But wait a bit,'the Oysters cried^
* Before we have our chat ;
For some of us are out of breathy
And all of us are fat I'
No hurry !'said the Carpenter.
They thanked him much for that.
A loaf of bread'the Walrus said^
* Is what zve chiefly need :
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB. 77
Pepper and vinegar besides
Are very good indeed —
Now if you re ready, Oysters dear.
We can begin to feed'
^ But not onus !'the Oysters cried.
Turning a little blue,
* After such khtdness, that would be
A dismal thing to do /'
* The night is fncy the Walrus said,
* Do you admire the view ?
* // was so kind of you to come /
And you are very nice ! *
The Carpenter said nothing but
* Cut us another slice :
I wish you were not quite so deaf —
Fve had to ask you twice !'
*// seems a shamel the Walrus said,
* To play them such a tricky
78 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB.
After we've brought them out sofar^
And made them trot so quick !'
The Carpenter said nothing but
* The butters spread too thick /'

* 7 weep for you^ the: Walrus said'.
* / deeply sympathized
With sobs and tears he sorted out
Those of the largest size^
Holding his pocket- handkerchief
Before his streaming eyes.
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE. 79
*0 Oysters^ said the Carpenter^
* YotCve had a pleasant run /
Shall we be trotting home again ?
But answer came there none —
And this was scarcely odd, because
Theyd eaten every oneV
" I like the Walrus best, " said Alice : " because
you see he was a little sorry for the poor oysters. "
" He ate more than the Carpenter, though, "
said Tweedledee. " You see he held his hand-
kerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn't
count how many he took : contrariwise. "
" That was mean ! *'Alice said indignantly.
" Then I like the Carpenter best if he didn't
eat so many as the Walrus. "
" But he " ate as many as he could get, " said
Tweedledum.
This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice
began, " Well ! They were both very unpleas-
ant characters " Here she checked herself
in some alarm, at hearing something that sounded
80
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLBDEB.
to her like the puffing of a large steam-engine
in the wood near them, though she feared
it was more likely to be a wild beast. " Are
there any lions or tigers about here ? " she asked
timidly.
" It*s only the Red King snoring, " said
Tweedledee.
" Come and look at him ! " the brothers cried,
and they each took one of Alice's hands, and led
her up to where the King was sleeping.


" Isn't he a lovely sight ? " said Tweedledum.
Alice couldn't say honestly that he was. He
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDBB. 81
had a tall red night-cap on, with a tassel, and
he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy
heap, and snoring loud " fit to snore his head
off ! " as Tweedledum remarked.
" I'm afraid he'll catch cold with lying on
the damp grass, " said Alice, who was a very
thoughtful little girl.
" He's dreaming now,*'said Tweedledee :
" and what do you think he's dreaming
about ? "
Alice said " Nobody can guess that. "
" Why, about you / " Tweedledee exclaimed,
clapping his hands triumphantly. " And if he
left off dreaming about you, where do you sup-
pose you'd be .? "
" Where I am now, of course, " said Alice.
" Not you ! " Tweedledee retorted contemptu-
ously. " You'd be nowhere. Why, you're only
a sort of thing in his dream ! "
" If that there King was to wake, " added
Tweedledum, " you'd go out bang! ^just
like a candle ! "
" I shouldn't ! " Alice exclaimed indignantly.
82 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB.
" Besides, if Fm only a sort of thing in his
dream, what d^x^you, I should like to know? "
" Ditto, " said Tweedledum.
" Ditto, ditto ! " cried Tweedledee.
He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn't
help saying,''Hush ! You'll be waking him,
I'm afraid if you make so much noise. "
" Well, it's no use yoiir talking about waking
him, " said Tweedledum, " when you*re only one
of the things in his dream. You know very well
you're not real. "
" I am real ! " said Alice, and began to cry.
" You won't make yourself a bit realler by
crying, " Tweedledee remarked : " there's nothing
to cry about. "
" If I wasn't real, " Alice said — half-laughing
through her tears, it all seemed so ridiculous —
" I shouldn't be able to cry. "
" I hope you don't suppose those are real
tears .? " Tweedledum interrupted in a tone of
great contempt.
" I know they're talking nonsense, " Alice
thought to herself: " and it's foolish to cry
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE. 83
about it. " So she brushed away her tears, and
went on as cheerfully as she could, " At any rate
I'd better be getting out of the wood, for really
it's coming on very dark. Do you think it's
going to rain ? "
Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over
himself and his brother, and looked up into it.
" No, I don't think it is, " he said : " at least
not under here. Nohow.'*
" But it may rain outside ? "
" It may if it chooses, " said Tweedledee :
" we've no objection. Contrariwise. "
" Selfish things I " thought Alice, and she was
just going to say " Good-night " and leave
them, when Tweedledum sprang out from
under the umbrella, and seized her by the
wrist.
" Do you see that?''he said, in a voice
choking with passion, and his eyes grew large
and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with
a trembling finger at a small white thing lying
under the tree.
" If s only a rattle, " Alice said, after a careful
84
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB.
examination of the little white thing. " Not a
rattlesnake, you know, " she added hastily, think-
ing that he was frightened : " only an old rattle
quite old and broken. "

K».N?^
" I knew it was ! " cried Tweedledum, begin-
ning to stamp about wildly and tear his hair.
* It's spoilt, of course ! " Here he looked at
Tweedledee, who immediately sat down on the
ground and tried to hide himself under the
umbrella.
TWEEDLEDUM AKD TWEEDLEDEE. 85
Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in
a soothing tone, " You needn't be so angry about
an old rattle. "
" But it isn't old ! " Tweedledum cried in
a greater fury than ever. " It's a new, I tell
you 1 bought it yesterday my nice new
RATTLE ! " and his voice rose to a perfect
scream.
All this time Tweedledee was trying his best
to fold up the umbrella, with himself in it : which
was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it
quite took off Alice's attention from the angry
brother. But he couldn't quite succeed, and it
ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the
umbrella, with only his head out: and there he
lay, opening and shutting his mouth and his
large eyes " looking more like a fish than
anything else, " Alice thought.
" Of course you agree to have a battle.? "
Tweedledum said in a calmer tone.
" I suppose so, " the other sulkily replied, as he
crawled out of the umbrella: " only she must
help us to dress up, you know. "
bu TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand
into the wood, and returned in a minute with
their arms full of things such as bolsters,
blankets, hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers,
and coal-scuttles. " I hope you're a good hand
at pinning and tying strings ? " Tweedledum
remarked. " Every one of these things has got
to go on, somehow or other. "
Alice said afterwards she had never seen such
a fuss made about anything in all her life
the way those two bustled about and the
quantity of things they put on and the
trouble they gave her in tying strings and fasten-
ing buttons " Really they'll be more like
bundles of old clothes than anything else, by the
time they're ready ! " she said to herself, as she
arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee,
" to keep his head from being cut off, " as he
said.
" You know, " he added very gravely,''it's
one of the most seriuos things that can possibly
happen to one in a battle to get one's head
cut off. "
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
87
Alice laughed loud : but she managed to turn
it into a cough, for fear of hurting his feelingSv

" Do I look very pale? " said Tweedledum,
coming up to have his helmet tied on. (He
called it a helmet, though it certainly looked much
more like a saucepan.)
" Well yes a little','Alice replied gently.
" I'm very brave generally, " he went on in a
low voice: " only to-day I happen to have a
headache. "
88 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE.
^* And Pve got a toothache ! " said Tweedle-
dee, who had overheard the remark. " I'm far
worse than you ! "
" Then you'd better not fight to-day, " said
Alice, thinking it a good opportunity to make
peace.
" We must have a bit of a fight, but I don't
care about going on long, " said Tweedledum.
" What's the time now ? "
Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said
" Half-past four. "
" Let's fight till six, and then have dinner, " said
Tweedledum.
" Very well, " the other said, rather sadly :
" and she can watch us only you'd better
not come very close, " he added : " I generally
hit everything I can see when I get really
excited.'*
''And / hit everything within reach,''cried
Tweedledum, " whether I can see it or not ! "
Alice laughed. " You must hit the trees
pretty often, I should think, " she said.
Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied
TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB. 89
smile. " I don't suppose, " he said, " there'll be a
tree left standing, for ever so far round, by the
time we've finished ! "
" And all about a rattle ! " said Alice, still
hoping to make them a little ashamed of fighting
for such a trifle.
" I shouldn't have minded it so much, " said
Tweedledum, " if it hadn't been a new one. "
" I wish the monstrous crow would come ! "
thought Alice.
" There's only one sword, you know, "
Tweedledum said to his brother : " but you can
have the umbrella if s quite as sharp. Only
we must begin quick. It's getting as dark as
it can. "
" And darker, " said Tweedledee.
It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice
thought there must be a thunderstorm coming
on. " What a thick black cloud that is ! " she
said. " And how fast it comes ! Why, I do
believe it's got wings ! "
" It's the crow ! " Tweedledum cried out in
a shrill voice of alarm: and the two brothers
90 TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEB.
took to their heels and were out of sight in a
moment.
Alice ran a little way into the wood, and
stopped under a large tree. " It can never get
at me here','she thought : " it's far too large to
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish
it wouldn't flap its wings so it makes quite
a hurricane in the wood here's somebody's
shawl being blown away ! "
CHAPTER V.
WOOL AND WATER.
She caught the shawl as she spoke, and
looked about for the owner : in another moment
the White Queen came running wildly through
the wood, with both arms stretched out wide, as
if she were flying, and Alice very civilly went to
meet her with a shawl.
" I'm very glad I happened to be in the way, "
Alice said, as she helped her to put on her shawl
agam.
The White Queen only looked at her in a
92 WOOL AND WATER.
helpless frightened sort of way, and kept repeat-
ing something in a whisper to herself that
sounded like *'Bread-and-butter,bread-and-butter, "
and Alice felt that if there was to be any conver-
sation at all, she must manage it herself. So
she began rather timidly : " Am I addressing
the White Queen .? "
" Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing, " the
Queen said. " It isn't my notion of the thing,
at all. "
Alice thought it would never do to have an
argument at the very beginning of their conver-
sation, so she smiled and said, " If your Majesty
will only tell me the right way to begin, I'll do it
as well as I can. "
" But I don't want it done at all ! " groaned
the poor Queen. " I've been a-dressing myself
for the last two hours. "
It would have been all the better, as it
seemed to Alice, if she had got some one else
to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy.
" Every single thing's crooked, " Alice thought
to herself, " and she's all over pins ! May I
WOOL AND WATER.
put your shawl straight for you ? " she added
aloud.
" I don't know what's the matter with it ! "
the Queen said, in a melancholy voice. " It's
out of temper,
I think. I've
pinned it here,
and I've pin-
ned it there,
but there's no
pleasing it! "
" It cant go
straight, you
know, if you
pin it all on
one side, " Alice
said, as she
gently put it
right for her ; " and, dear me, what a state your
hair is in ! "
" The brush has got entangled in it! " the
Queen said with a sigh. " And I lost the comb
yesterday. "



94 WOOL AND WATER.
Alice carefully released the brush, and did her
best to get the hair into order. " Come, you
look rather better now ! " she said, after altering
most of the pins. " But really you should have
a lady's-maid ! "
" I'm sure I'll take you with pleasure ! " the
Queen said. " Twopence a week, and jam every
other day. "
Alice couldn't help laughing, as she said, *^ I
don't want you to hire me and I don't care
for jam. "
" It's very good jam, " said the Queen.
" Well, I don't want any to-day, at any rate. "
" You couldn't have it if you did want it, " the
Queen said. " The rule is, jam to-morrow and
jam yesterday but never jam to-day. "
" It must come sometimes to * jam to-day,'"
Alice objected.
" No, it can't, " said the Queen. " It's jam
every other day : to-day isn't any other day, you
know. "
" I don't understand you, " said Alice. " It's
dreadfully confusing I "
WOOL AND WATEK. 96
" That's the effect of living backwards, " the
Queen said kindly : " it always makes one a little
giddy at first "
" Living backwards ! " Alice repeated in great
astonishment. " I never heard of such a thing ! "
" but there*s one great advantage in it,
that one's memory works both ways. "
" I'm sure mine only works one way, " Alice
remarked. " I can't remember things before they
happen. "
" It's a poor sort of memory that only works
backwards, " the Queen remarked.
" What sort of things do you remember best } "
Alice ventured to ask.
" Oh, things that happened the week after
next, " the Queen replied in a careless tone.
" For instance, now,'* she went on, sticking a
large piece of plaster on her finger as she spoke,
" there's the King's Messenger. He's in prison
now, being punished : and the trial doesn't even
begin till next Wednesday : and of course the
crime comes last of all.'*
96
WOOL AND WATER,

" Suppose he never
commits the crime ? "
said Alice.
" That would be all
the better, wouldn't
it ? " the Queen said,
as she bound the
plaster round her
finger with a bit of
ribbon.
Alice felt there
was no denying that.
" Of course it would be all the better, " she said :
" but it wouldn't be all the better his being
punished. "
" YouVe wrong there, at any rate, " said the
Queen : " Were you ever punished ? "
" Only for faults, " said Alice.
" And you were all the better for it, I know ! "
the Queen said triumphantly.
" Yes, but then I had done the things I was
WOOL AND WATER. 97
punished for, " said Alice : " that makes all the
difference. "
" But if you hadnt done them, " the Queen
said, " that would have been better still ; better,
and better, and better ! " Her voice went higher
with each " better, " till it got quite to a squeak
at last.
Alice was just beginning to say " There's a
mistake somewhere , " when the Queen began
screaming, so loud that she had to leave the
sentence unfinished. " Oh, oh, oh ! " shouted the
Queen, shaking her hand about as if she wanted
to shake it off. " My finger's bleeding ! Oh,
oh, oh, oh ! "
Her screams were so exactly like the whistle
of a steam-engine, that Alice had to hold both
her hands over her ears.
" What is the matter ? " she said, as soon as
there was a chance of making herself heard.
" Have you pricked your finger } "
" I haven't pricked it ^^/, " the Queen said,
" but I soon shall oh, oh, oh ! "
98 WOOL AND WATER.
" When do you expect to do it ? " Alice asked,
feeling very much inclined to laugh.
" When I fasten my shawl again, " the poor
Queen groaned out : " the brooch will come un-
done directly. Oh, oh ! " As she said the words
the brooch flew open, and the Queen clutched
wildly at it, and tried to clasp it again.
" Take care ! " cried Alice. " You're holding
it all crooked ! " And she caught at the brooch ;
but it was too late : the pin had slipped, and the
Queen had pricked her finger.
" That accounts for the bleeding, you see, "
she said to Alice with a smile. " Now you under-
stand the way things happen here. "
" But why don't you scream now ? " Alice
asked, holding her hands ready to put over her
ears again.
" Why, I've done all the screaming already, "
said the Queen. " What would be the good of
having it all over again ? "
By this time it was getting light. " The crow
must have flown away, I think, " said Alice:
" WOOL AND WATER. 99
" Vm so glad it's gone. I thought it was the
night coming on. "
" I wish / could manage to be glad ! " the
Queen said. " Only I never can remember the
rule. You must be very happy, living in
this wood, and being glad whenever you like ! "
** Only it is so very lonely here ! " Alice said
in a melancholy voice ; and at the thought of
her loneliness two large tears came rolling down
her cheeks.
" Oh, don't go on like that ! " cried the
poor Queen, wringing her hands in despair.
** Consider what a great girl you are. Consider
what a long way you've come to-day. Consider
what o'clock it is. Consider anything, only
don't cry ! "
Alice could not help laughing at this, even
in the midst of her tears. " Can you keep from
crying by considering things ? " she asked.
" That's the way it's done, " the Queen said
with great decision : " nobody can do two things
at once, you know. Let's consider your age to
begin with how old are you ? "
100 WOOL AND WATER.
" I'm seven and a half exactly. "
" You needn't say'exactually/ " the Queen
remarked : " I can believe it without that. Now
ril gwQ you something to believe. I'm just one
hundred and one, five months and a day. "
" I can't believe that!''said Alice.
" Can't you 1 " the Queen said in a pitying
tone. " Try again ; draw a long breath, and
shut your eyes. "
Alice laughed. " There's no use trying, " she
said : " one can't believe impossible things. "
" I daresay you haven't had much practice, "
said the Queen. " When I was your age, I
always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why,
sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible
things before breakfast. There goes the shawl
again ! "
The brooch had come undone as she spoke,
and a sudden gust of wind blew the Queen's
shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread
out her arms again, and went flying after it, and
this time she succeeded in catching it for herself.
" I've got it ! " she cried in a triumphant tone.
WOOL AND WATER. 101
** Now you shall see me pin it on- again, all by
myself! "
" Then I hope your finger is better now ? "
Alice said very politely, as she crossed the little
brook after the Queen.
t
* * # :|e * 9|c
*****
♦ * * * * *
" Oh, much better !''cried the Queen, her
voice rising into a squeak as she went on. " Much
be-etter ! Be-etter ! Be-e-e-etter ! Be-e-ehh ! " The
last word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep
that Alice quite started.
She looked at the Queen, who seemed to
have suddenly wrapped herself up in wool. Alice
rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn t
make out what had happened at all. Was she
in a shop ? And was that really was it really
a sheep that was sitting on the other side of the
counter ? Rub as she would, she could make
nothing more of it : she was in a little dark
102
WOOL AND WATER.

shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter,
and opposite to her was an old Sheep, sitting in
an arm-chair knitting, and every now and then
leaving off to look at her through a great pair
of spectacles.
WOOL AND WATER. 103
" What is it you want to buy ?''the Sheep
said at last, looking up for a moment from her
knitting.
" I don't quite know yet, " Alice said very
gently. " I should like to look all round me first,
if I might. "
" You may look in front of you, and on both
sides, if you like, " said the Sheep; " but you
can't look all round you unless you've got
eyes at the back of your head. "
But these, as it happened, Alice had not got :
so she contented herself with turning round,
looking at the shelves as she came to them.
The shop seemed to be full of all manner
of curious things but the oddest part of it
all was, that whenever she looked hard at any
shelf, to make out exactly what it had on it,
that particular shelf was always quite empty :
though the others round it were crowded as full
as they could hold.
" Things flow about so here ! " she said at
last in a plaintive tone, after she had spent a
minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright
104 WOOL AND WATER.
thing that looked sometimes like a doll and
sometimes like a work-box, and was always in
the shelf next above the one she was looking at.
" And this one is the most provoking of all
but I'll tell you what " she added, as a
sudden thought struck her, " I'll follow it up
to the very top shelf of all. It'll puzzle it to
go through the ceiling, I expect ! "
But even this plan failed : the'thing went
through the ceiling as quietly as possible, as if
it were quite used to it.
" Are you a child or a teetotum ? " the Sheep
said, as she took up another pair of needles.
" You'll make me giddy soon, if you go on turn-
ing round like that. " She was now working with
fourteen pairs at once, and Alice couldn't help
looking at her in great astonishment.
" How can she knit with so many ? " the
puzzled child thought to herself. " She gets
more and more like a porcupine every minute ! "
" Can you row ? " the Sheep asked, handing
her a pair of knitting-needles as she spoke.
" Yes, a little but not on land and not
" WOOL AND WATER. 105
with needles " Alice was beginning to say
when suddenly the needles turned into oars in
her hands, and she found they were in a little
boat, gliding along between banks: so there was
nothing for it but to do her best.
" Feather ! " cried the Sheep, as she took up
another pair of needles.
This didn't sound like a remark that needed
any answer, so Alice said nothing, but pulled
away. There was something very queer about
the water, she thought, as every now and then
the oars got fast in it, and would hardly come
out again.
'* Feather ! Feather ! " the Sheep cried again,
taking more needles. " You'll be catching a
crab directly. "
" A dear little crab ! " thought Alice. " I
should like that. "
*'Didn't you hear me say * Feather'? " the
Sheep cried angrily, taking up quite a bunch of
needles.
" Indeed I did, " said Alice : * * youVe said
106 WOOL AND WATER.
it very often and very loud. Please, where
are the crabs } "
" In the water, of course ! " said the Sheep,
sticking some of the needles into her hair, as
her hands were full. " Feather, I say! "
" Why do you say'Feather'so often .? " Alice
asked at last, rather vexed. " I'm not a bird ! "
" You are, " said the Sheep : " you're a little
goose. "
This offended Alice a little, so there was no
more conversation for a minute or two, while the
boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of
weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the
water, worse than ever), and sometimes under
trees, but always with the same tall river-banks
frowning over their heads.
" Oh, please ! There are some scented
rushes ! " Alice cried in a sudden transport of
delight. " There really are and such
beauties ! "
" You needn't say'please'to me about *em, "
the Sheep said, without looking up from her
WOOL AND WATER. 107
knitting : " I didn't put em there, and I'm not
going to take'em away. "
" No, but I meant please, may we wait and
pick some ? " Alice pleaded. " If you don't
mind stopping the boat for a minute. "
*'How am / to stop it ? " said the Sheep. " If
you leave off rowing, it'll stop of itself. "
So the boat was left to drift down the stream
as it would, till it glided gently in among the
waving rushes. And then the Httle sleeves were
carefully rolled up, and the little arms were
plunged in elbow-deep, to get hold of the rushes
a good long way down before breaking them
off and for a while Alice forgot all about
the Sheep and the knitting, as she bent over the
side of the boat, with just the ends of her tangled
hair dipping into the water while with bright
eager eyes she caught at one bunch after another
of the darling scented rushes.
" I only hope the boat won't tipple over ! " she
said to herself. " Oh, wM^ a lovely one ! Only
I couldn't quite reach it. " And it certainly did
seem a little provoking ( " almost as if it happened
108 WOOL AND WATER.
on purpose, " she thought) that, though she man-
aged to pick plenty of beautiful rushes as the
boat glided by, there was always a more lovely
one that she couldn't reach.
" The prettiest are always further ! " she said
at last, with a sigh at the obstinacy of the rushes
in growing so far off, as, with flushed cheeks and
dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back in-
to her place, and began to arrange her new-found
treasures.
What mattered it to her just then that the
rushes had begun to fade, and to lose all their
scent and beauty, from the very moment that
she picked them? Even real scented rushes,
you- know, last only a very little while and
these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost
like snow, as they lay in heaps at her feet but
Alice hardly noticed this, there were so many
other curious things to think about.
They hadn't gone much farther before the
blade of one of the oars got fast in the water
and wouldn ^ come out again (so Alice explained
it afterwards), and the consequence was that the
" WOOL Amy WATER. 109
handle of it caught her under the chin, and, in
spite of a series of little shrieks of * Oh, oh, oh I'
from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat,
and down among the heap of rushes.
However, she wasn't a bit hurt, and was soon
up again: the Sheep went on with her knitting
all the while, just as if nothing had happened.
" That was a nice crab you caught ! " she re-
marked, as Alice got back into her place, very
much relieved to find herself still in the boat.
" Was it ? I didn't see it, " said Alice, peeping
cautiously over the side of the boat into the dark
water. " I wish it hadn't let go 1 should so
like a little crab to take home with me ! " But
the Sheep only laughed scornfully, and went on
with her knitting.
** Are there many crabs here ? " said Alice.
" Crabs, and all sorts of things, " said the
Sheep: " plenty of choice, only make up your
mind. Now, what do you want to buy ? "
" To buy ! " Alice echoed in a tone that was
half astonished and half frightened for the
no
WOOL AND WATER.

oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished
all in a moment, and she was back again in the
little dark shop.
WOOL AND WATER. HI
" I should like to buy an egg, please, " she said
timidly. " How do you sell them ? "
" Fivepence farthing for one twopence for
two, " the sheep replied.
" Then two are cheaper than one ? " Alice
said in a surprised tone, taking out her purse.
" Only you mt^s^ eat them both, if you buy
two, " said the Sheep.
" Then I'll have one, please, " said Alice, as she
put the money down on the counter. For she
thought to herself, " They mightn't be at all nice,
you know. "
The Sheep took the money, and put it away
in a box : then she said, " I never put things
into people's hands that would never do
you must get it for yourself. " And so saying,
she went off to the other end of the shop, and set
the egg upright on a shelf.
" I wonder w^y it wouldn't do ? " thought
Alice, as she groped her way among the tables
and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards
the end. " The egg seems to get further away
the more I walk towards it. Let me see, is this
112 " WOOL AND WATER.
a chair ? Why, it's got branches, I declare !
How very odd to find trees growing here ! And
actually here's a little brook ! Well, this is the
very queerest shop I ever saw ! "
So she went on, wondering more and more
at every step, as everything turned into a tree
the moment she came up to it, and she quite
expected the egg to do the same.
CHAPTER VI.
HUMPTY DUMPTY.
However, the egg only got larger and larger,
and more and more human : when she had
come within a few yards of it, she saw that it
had eyes and a nose and mouth ; and when she
had come close to it; she saw clearly that it
was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. " It can't
be anybody else ! " she said to herself. " I'm
as certain of it, as if his name were written all
over his face ! "
It might have been written a hundred times,
easily, on that enormous face. Humpty Dumpty
114 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk,
on the top of a high wall such a narrow one
that Alice quite wondered how he could keep
his balance and, as his eyes were steadily
fixed in the opposite direction, and he didn't
take the least notice of her, she thought he must
be a stuffed figure after all.
" And how exactly like an egg he is ! " she
said aloud, standing with her hands ready to
catch him, for she was every moment expecting
him to fall.
" It s very provoking, " Humpty Dumpty said
after a long silence, looking away from Alice as
he spoke, " to be called an ^^^ very I "
" I said you looked like an egg, Sir, " Alice
gently explained. " And some eggs are very
pretty, you know, " she added, hoping to turn her
remark into a sort of compliment.
" Some people, " said Humpty Dumpty, look-
ing away from her as usual, " have no more
sense than a baby ! "
Alice didn't know what to say to this : it
wasn't at all like conversation, she thought, as
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 115
he never said anything to her; in fact, his last
remark was evidently addressed to a tree so
she stood and softly repeated to herself ; —
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
Humpty Dumpty had a great fall
All the Kings horses and all the Kings men
Couldntput Humpty Dumpty in his place again. "
" That last line is much too long for the
poetry, " she added, almost out loud, forgetting
that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.
" Don't stand chattering to yourself like that, "
Humpty Dumpty said, looking at her for the
first time, " but tell me your name and your
business. "
" My name is Alice, but **
" It's a stupid name enough ! " Humpty
Dumpty interrupted impatiently. " What does
it mean ? "
" Must a name mean something ? " Alice
asked doubtfully.
116 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
" Of course it must, " Humpty Dumpty said
with a short laugh : " my name means the shape
I am and a good handsome shape it is, too.
With a name Hke yours, you might be any shape,
ahuost. "
" Why do you sit out here all alone ? " said Alice,
not wishing to begin an argument.
" Why, because there's nobody with me ! " cried
Humpty Dumpty. " Did you think I didn't
know the answer to that? Ask another. "
" Don't you think you'd be safer down on the
ground t " Alice went on, not with a-ny idea of
making another riddle, but simply in her good-
natured anxiety for the queer creature. " That
wall is so very narrow ! "
" What tremendously easy riddles you ask ! "
Humpty Dumpty growled out. " Of course I
don't think so ! Why, if ever I did fall off
which there's no chance of but if I did "
Here he pursed up his lips, and looked so solemn
and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing.
''If\ did fall, " he went on,''the King has prom-
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 117
ised me ah, you may turn pale, if you like !
You didn't think I was going to say that, did you ?
The King has promised me with his very own
mouth to to "
" To send all his horses and all his men, " Alice
interrupted rather unwisely.
" Now I declare that's too bad ! " Humpty
Dumpty cried, breaking into a sudden passion.
" You've been listening at doors and behind
trees and down chimneys or you couldn't
have known it ! "
" I haven't indeed ! " Alice said very gently.
*'It's in a book, "
" Ah, well ! They may write such things in a
book''Humpty Dumpty said in a calmer tone.
That's what you call a History of England,
that is. Now, take a good look at me ! I'm one
that has spoken to a King, / am ; mayhap you'll
never see such another: and to show you
I'm not proud, you may shake hands with
me ! " And he grinned almost from ear to ear,
as he leant forwards (and as nearly as possible
HUMPTY DUMPTY.


fell off the wall in doing
so) and offered Alice his
hand. She watched him
a little anxiously as she
took it. " If he smiled
much more, the ends of
his mouth might meet
behind, " she thought :
" and then I don't know what would happen to
his head ! Tm afraid it would come off ! "
" Yes, all his horses and all his men, " Humpty
HUMPTY DTJMPTY. 119
Dumpty went on. " They'd pick me up again
in a minute, they would ! However, this conver-
sation is going on a little too fast : let's go back
to the last remark but one. "
" I'm afraid I can't quite remember it, " Alice
said very politely.
" In that case we start fresh, " said Humpty
Dumpty, " and it's my turn to choose a sub-
ject'* ( " He talks about it just as if it was
a game ! " thought Alice.) " So here's a question
for you. How old did you say you were 1 "
Alice made a short calculation, and said
" Seven years and six months.'*
" Wrong ! " Humpty Dumpty exclaimed tri-
umphantly. " You never said a word like it !'*
" I thought you meant * How old are you 1 "
Alice explained.
" If I'd meant that, I'd have said it, " said
Humpty Dumpty.
Alice didn't want to begin another argument,
so she said nothing.
" Seven years and six months ! " Humpty
120 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. " An uncom-
fortable sort of age. Now if you'd asked my
advice, I'd have said * Leave off at seven'
but it's too late now. "
" I never ask advice about growing, " Alice said
indignantly.
''Too proud ? " the other inquired
Alice felt even more indignant at this sug-
gestion. " I mean, " she said, " that one can't
help growing older. "
" One can't, perhaps, " said Humpty Dumpty,
" but two can. With proper assistance, you might
have left off at seven. "
" What a beautiful belt you've got on ! "
Alice suddenly remarked. (They had had quite
enough of the subject of age, she thought : and
if they really were to take turns in choosing
subjects, it was her turn now.) " At least, "
she corrected herself on second thoughts, *'a
beautiful cravat, I should have said no, a
belt, I mean 1 beg your pardon ! " she added
in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thor-
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 121
oughly offended, and she began to wish she
hadn't chosen that subject. " If only I knew, "
she thought to herself, " which was neck and
which was waist ! "
Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry,
though he said nothing for a minute or two.
When he did speak again, it was in a deep
growl.
" It is a most -provoking thing, " he
said at last, " when a person doesn't know a
cravat from a belt ! "
" I know it's very ignorant of me, " Alice
said, in so humble a tone that Humpty Dumpty
relented.
** It's a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as
you say. It's a present from the White King
and Queen. There now I "
" Is it really ? " said Alice, quite pleased to
find that she had chosen a good subject, after
all
" They gave it me, " Humpty Dumpty con-
tinued thoughtfully, as he crossed one knee over
the other and clasped his hands round it
122 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
" they gave it me for an un-birthday present. "
" I beg you pardon ? " Alice said with a
puzzled air.
" I'm not offended, " said Humpty Dumpty.
" I mean, what is an un-birthda}'- present ? "
" A present given when it isn't your birthday,
of course. "
Alice considered a little. " I like birthday
presents best, " she said at last.
" You don't know what you're talking about ! "
cried Humpty Dumpty. " How many days are
there in a year .? "
" Three hundred and sixty-five, " said Alice.
" And how many birthdays have you } "
" One. "
" And if you take one from three hundred and
sixty-five, what remains ? "
" Three hundred and sixty-four, of course. "
Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. " I'd rather
see that done on paper, " he said.
Alice couldn't help'smiling as she took out
her memorandum-book, and worked the sum for
him:
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 123
I
Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at
it carefully. " That seems to be done right "
he began.
" You're holding it upside down ! " Alice in-
terrupted.
" Ta be sure I was ! " Humpty Dumpty
said gaily, as she turned it round for him. " I
thought it looked a little queer. As I was say-
ing, that seems to be done right though I
haven't time to look it over thoroughly just now
— —and that shows that there are three hun-
dred and sixty-four days when you might get un-
birthday presents "
" Certainly, " said Alice.
" And only one for birthday presents, you
know. There's glory for you ! "
" I don't know what you mean by * glory,'"
Alice said.
124 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. " Of
course you don't till I tell you. I meant
* there's a nice knock-down argument for you !'"
" But * glory'doesn't mean * a nice knock-
down argument,'" Alice objected.
" When / use a word, " Humpty Dumpty
said in rather a scornful tone, " it means just
what I choose it to mean neither more nor
less. "
" The question is, " said Alice, " whether you
can make words mean so many different things. "
" The question is, " said Humpty Dumpty,
" which is to be master that's all. "
Alice was too much puzzled to say anything,
so after a minute Humpty Dumpty began again.
" They've a temper, some of them particu-
larly verbs, they're the proudest adjectives
you can do anything with, but not verbs
however, / can manage the whole lot of them !
Impenetrability! That's what / say ! "
" Would you tell me, please,'* said Alice,
" what that means ? "
" Now you talk like a reasonable child, " said
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 125
Humpty Dumpty, looking very much pleased.
^'I meant by'impenetrability'that we've had
enough of that subject, and it would be just as
well if you'd mention what you mean to do next,
as I suppose you don't mean to stop here all the
rest of your life. "
" That's a great deal to make one word mean/*
Alice said in a thoughtful tone.
" When I make a word do a lot of work
like that, " said Humpty Dumpty, " I always pay
it extra. "
" Oh! " said Alice. She was too much puz-
zled to make any other remark.
" Ah, you should see'em come round me of
a Saturday night, " Humpty Dumpty went on,
wagging his head gravely from side to side :
" for to get their wages, you know. "
(Alice didn't venture to ask what he paid
them with; and so you see I can't teWyou,)
" You seem very clever at explaining words,
Sir, " said Alice. " Would you kindly tell me the
meaning of the poem called'Jabberwocky'? "
" Let's hear it, " said Humpty Dumpty. " I
126 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
can explain all the poems that ever were in-
vented and a good many that haven't been
invented just yet. "
This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated
the first verse :
"'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
Did gyre and gimble in the wade :
All mimsy were the borogoves^
And the mome raths outgrabe,
" That's enough to begin with, " Humpty
Dumpty interrupted : " there are plenty of hard
words there. * Brillig'va^din^ four o'clock in the
afternoon the time when you begin broiling
things for dinner. "
" That'll do very well, " said Alice: " and
'slithy'?''
" Well, * slithy'means * lithe and slimy.'
* Lithe'is the same as * active.'You see it's
like a portmanteau there are two meanings
packed up into one word. "
HUMPTY DUMPTY.
12T

" I see it now, " Alice remarked thoughtfully:
** and what are * toves'/ "
" Well,'toves'are something like badgers •
128 HUMPTY DITMPTY.
they're something like lizards and they're
something like corkscrews. "
" They must be very curious-looking crea-
tures. "
*'They are that, " said Humpty Dumpty : " also
they make their nests under sun-dials also
they live on cheese. "
" And whafs to'gyre'and to'gimble'? "
" To*^r^'is to go round and round like
a gyroscope. To'gimble'is to make holes like a
gimblet. "
" And ^ the wabe^ is the grass-plot round a
sun-dial, I suppose ? " said Alice, surprised at her
own ingenuity.
" Of course it is. If s called * wabe'you know,
because it goes a long way before it, and a long
way behind it "
" And a long way beyond it on each side, "
Alice added.
" Exactly so. Well then, * mimsy'is'flimsy
and miserable'(there's another portmanteau for
you). And a * borogove'is a thin shabby-looking
HXJMPTY DUMPTY. 129
bird with its feathers sticking out all round
something like a live mop. "
" And then * mome raths'/ " said Alice.
" I'm afraid I'm giving you a great deal of
trouble. "
" Well, a * rath'is a sort of green pig : but
* mome'I'm not certain about. I think it's short
for *from home'meaning that they'd lost
their way, you know. "
" And what does'outgrabe'mean ? "
" Well, ^ outgribing'is something between
bellowing and whistling, with a kind of sneeze
in the middle : however, you'll hear it done,
maybe down in the wood yonder and
when you've once heard it you'll be quite con-
tent. Who's been repeating all that hard stuff
to you? "
" I read it in a book, " said Alice. " But I had
some poetry repeated to me, much easier than
that, by Tweedledee, I think it was. "
" As to poetry, you know, " said Humpty
Dumpty, stretching out one of his great hands,
130 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
" / can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it
comes to that "
" Oh, it needn't come to that ! " Alice hastily
said, hoping to keep him from beginning.
" The piece I'm going to repeat, " he went on
without noticing her remark, " was written
entirely for your amusement**
Alice felt that in that case she really ought to
listen to it, so she sat down, and said " Thank
you " rather sadly.
" In winter^ when the fields are white^
I sing this song for your delight
only I don't sing it, " he added, as an expla*
nation.
" I see you don't, " said Alice.
" If you can see whether I'm singing or not,
you've sharper eyes than most, " Humpty
Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.
" //^ springs when woods are getting green^
ril try and tell you what I mean''
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 131
" Thank you very much, " said Alice.
" In summer when the days are long.
Perhaps you II understand the song:
In autumn, when the leaves are brown^
Take pen and ink, and write it down''
" I will, if I can remember it so long, " said
Alice.
" You needn*t go on making remarks like
that, " Humpty Dumpty said : " they're not
sensible, and they put me out. "
" / sent a message to the fish :
I told them'This is what I wish.
The little fishes of the sea.
They sent an answer back to me.
The little fishes'answer was
* We cannot do it. Sir, because'
132 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
" I'm afraid I don't quite understand, " said
Alice.
" It gets easier further on, " Humpty Dumpty
replied.
" / sent to them again to say
* // will be better to obey^
The fishes answered with a grin^
* Whyy what a temper you are in /'*
/ told them once, I told them twice:
They mould not listen to advice.
I took a kettle large and new^
Fit for the deed I had to do.
My heart went hop, my heart went thump ;
I filled the kettle at the pump.
Then some one came to me and said,
* The little fishes are in bed'
HUMPTY DUMPTT.
133
I said to him, I said it plain ^
* Then you must wake them up again.

I said it very loud and clear ;
I went and shouted in his earT
Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to
e scream as he repeated this verse, and Alice
134 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
thought with a shudder, " I wouldn't have been
the messenger for anything ! "
" But he was very stiff and proud ;
He said''You neednt shout so loud!
And he was very proud and stiff ;
He said ^ Td go and wake them^ if-
/ took a corkscrew from the shelf :
I went to wake them up myself
And when I found the door was locked,
I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.
And when I found the door was shut,
I tried to turn the handle, but "
There was a long pause.
** Is that all ? " Alice timidly asked.
" That's all, " said Humpty Dumpty. " Good-
bye. "
This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but,
HUMPTY DUMPTY. 135
after such a very strong hint that she ought to
be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil
to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand.
" Good-bye, till we meet again ! " she said as
cheerfully as she could.
" I shouldn't know you again if we did
meet, " Humpty Dumpty replied in a discontented
tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake;
" you're so exactly like other people. "
" The face is what one goes by, generally, "
Alice remarked in a thoughtful tone.
" That's just what I complain of, " said Humpty
Dumpty. " Your face is the same as everybody
has the two eyes, so " (marking their
places in the air with his thumb) " nose in the
middle, mouth under. It's always the same.
Now if you had the two eyes on the same side
of the nose, for instance or the mouth at the
top that would be some help. "
" It wouldn't look nice, " Alice objected. But
Humpty Dumpty only shut his eyes and said
" Wait till you've tried. "
Alice waited a minute to see if he would
136 HUMPTY DUMPTY.
speak again, but as he never opened his eyes
or took any further notice of her, she said
" Good-bye ! " once more, and getting no answer
to this, she quietly walked away : but she
couldn't help saying to herself as she went,
" Of all the unsatisfactory " (she repeated
this aloud, as it was a great comfort to have
such a long word to say) " of all the unsatisfac-
tory people I ever met " She never finished
the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash
shook the forest from end to end.
CHAPTER VII.
THE LION AND THE UNICORN.
The next moment soldiers came running
through the wood, at first in twos and threes,
then ten or twenty together, and at last in such
crowds that they seemed to fill the whole forest.
Alice got behind a tree, for fear of being run
over, and watched them go by.
She thought that in all her life she had
never seen soldiers so uncertain on their feet ;
they were always tripping over something or
other, and whenever one went down, several
more always fell over him, so that the ground
was soon covered with little heaps of men.
138
THE LION AND

Then came the horses. Having four feet,
these managed rather better than the foot-soJ-
THE UNICORN. 139
diers : but even they stumbled now and then ;
and it seemed to be a regular rule that, when-
ever a horse stumbled, the rider fell off instantly.
The confusion got worse every moment, and
Alice was very glad to get out of the wood into
an open place, where she found the White King
seated on the ground, busily writing in his
memorandum-book.
*'I've sent them all ! " the King cried in a
tone of delight, on seeing Alice. " Did you
happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you
came through the wood t "
" Yes, I did, " said Alice : " several thousand,
I should think. "
" Four thousand two hundred and seven,
that's the exact number, " the King said referring
to his book. " I couldn't send all the horses,
you know, because two of them are wanted in
the game. And I haven't sent the two Mes-
sengers, either. They're both gone to the town.
Just look along the road, and tell me if you can
see either of them. "
" I see nobody on the road, " said Alice.
140 THE LION AND
" I only wish / had such eyes,'* the King
remarked in a fretful tone. " To be able to
see Nobody ! And at that distance too ! Why
it's as much as / can do to see real people, by
this light ! "
All this was lost on Alice, who was still
looking intently along the road, shading her
eyes with one hand. " I see somebody now ! "
she exclaimed at last. " But he's coming* very
slowly and what -curious attitudes he goes
into ! " (For the Messenger kept skipping up
and dow'n, and wriggling like an eel, as he came
along, with his great hands spread out like fans
on each side.)
" Not at all, " said the King. " He's an Anglo-
Saxon Messenger and those are Anglo-Saxon
attitudes. He only does them when he's happy.
His name is Haigha. " (he pronounced it so as
to rhyme with'mayor.')
" I love my love with an H,'Alice couldn't
help beginning'because he is Happy. I hate
him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed the
him with with with Ham -sandwiches and
THE UNICORN. 141
Hay. His name is Haigha, and he lives "
" He lives on the Hill, " the King remarked
simply, without the least idea that he was join-
ing in the game, while Alice was still hesitating
for the name of a town beginning with H. " The
other Messenger's called Hatta. I must have
two, you know to come and go. One to
come, and one to go. "
" I beg your pardon ? " said Alice.
" It isn't respectable to beg, " said the King.
** I only meant that I didn't understand, " said
Alice. " Why one to come and one to go ? "
" Don't I tell you .? " the King repeated im-
patiently. " I must have two to fetch and
carry. One to fetch, and one to carry. "
At this moment the Messenger arrived: he
was far too much out of breath to say a word,
and could only wave his hands about, and make
the most fearful faces at the poor King.
" This young lady loves you with an H, "
the King said, introducing Alice in the hope of
turning off the Messenger's attention from him-
self but it was no use the Anglo-Saxon
142
THE LION AND
attitudes only got more extraordinary every
moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from
side to side.

" You alarm me ! " said the King. " I feel
faint Give me a ham sandwich ! "
On which the Messenger, to Alice's great
amusement, opened a bag that hung round his
THE UNICORN. 143
neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who
devoured it greedily.
" Another sandwich ! " said the King.
" There's nothing but hay left now, " the
Messenger said, peeping into the bag.
" Hay, then, " the King murmured in a faint
whisper.
Alice was glad to see that it revived him a
good deal. " There*s nothing like eating hay
when you're faint, " he remarked to her, as he
munched away.
" I should think throwing cold water over
you would be better, " Alice suggested : " or
some sal-volatile. "
" I didn't say there was nothing better^'the
King replied. " I said there was nothing like
it. " Which Alice did not venture to deny.
" Who did you pass on the road ? " the King
went on, holding out his hand to the Messenger
for some more hay.
" Nobody, " said the Messenger.
" Quite right, " said the King: " this young
144 THE LION AND
lady saw him too. So of course Nobody walks
slower than you. "
" 1 do my best, " the Messenger said in a sullen
tone. " I'm sure nobody walks much faster than
I do! "
" He can't do that, " said the King, " or else
he'd have been here first. However, now you've
got your breath, you may tell us what's happened
in the town. "
" I'll whisper it, " said the Messenger, putting
his hands to his mouth in the shape of a trumpet
and stooping so as to get close to the King's
ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to
hear the news too. However, instead of whis-
pering; he simply shouted at the top of his voice
" They're at it again ! "
" Do you call that a whisper ? " cried the poor
King, jumping up and shaking himself. " If you
do such a thing again, I'll have you buttered!
It went through and through my head like an
earthquake ! "
" It would have to be a very tiny earth-
THE UNICORN. 146
quake ! " thought AHce. " Who are at it again ? "
she ventured to ask.
•* Why, the Lion and the Unicorn, of course, "
said the King.
*'Fighting for the crown ? "
" Yes, to be sure, " said the King : " and the
best of the joke is, that it's my crown all the
while! Lets run and see them. " And they
trotted off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran,
the words of the old song : —
** The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the
crown :
The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
Some gave them white breads some gave them brown ;
Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out
of townr
" Does the one that wins get the
crown .? " she asked, as well as she could, for the
run was putting her quite out of breath.
" Dear me, no ! " said the King. " What an
idea! "
146 THE LION AND
*'Would you be good enough, " Alice
panted out, after running a little further, " to
stop a minute just to get one's breath
again ? "
" I'm good enough, " the King said, " only I'm
not strong enough. You see, a minute goes by
so fearfully quick. You might as well try to
stop a Bandersnatch ! "
Alice had no more breath for talking, so
they trotted on in silence, till they came in
sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which
the Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They
were in such a cloud of dust, that at first Alice
could not make out which was which : but she
soon managed to distinguish the Unicorn by his
horn.
They placed themselves close to where Hatta,
the other Messenger, was standing watching the
fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece
of bread-and-butter in the other.
''He's only just out of prison, and he hadn't
finished his tea when he was sent in, " Haigha
whispered to Alice : ** and they only give them
THE UNICORN. 147
oyster-shells in there so you see he's very
hungry and thirsty. How are you, dear child?'
he went on, putting his arm affectionately round
Hatta's oeck.
Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on
with his bread-and-butter.
" Were you happy in prison, dear child ? "
said Haigha.
Hatta looked round once more, and this time
a tear or two trickled down his cheek : but not a
word would he say,
" Speak, can't you ! " Haigha cried impa-
tiently. But Hatta only munched away, and
drank some more tea,
" Speak, won^t you ! " cried the King. " How
are they getting on with the fight ? "
Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed
a large piece of bread-and-butter. " They're
getting on very well, " he said in a choking voice :
" each of them has been down about eighty-seven
times. "
" Then I suppose they'll soon bring the
148
THE LION AND

white bread and the brown ? " Alice ventured to
remark.
" It's waiting for'em now, " said Hatta : " this
is a bit of it as I'm eating "
There was a pause in the fight just then, and
the Lion and the Unicorn sat down, panting,
while the King called out " Ten minutes allowed
for refreshments ! " Haigha and Hatta set to
THE UNICORN. 149
work at once, carrying round trays of white and
brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it
was very dry.
" I don't think they'll fight any more to-day, "
the King said to Hatta: " go and order the
drums to begin. " And Hatta went bounding
away like a grasshopper.
For a minute or two Alice stood silent,
watching him. Suddenly she brightened up.
" Look, look I " she cried, pointing eagerly.
" There's the White Queen running across the
country! She came flying out of the wood
over yonder How fast those Queens can
run ! "
" There's some enemy after her, no doubt, "
the King said, without even looking round.
" That wood's full of them. "
" But aren't you going to run and help her ? "
Alice asked, very much surprised at his taking
it so quietly.
" No use, no use ! " said the King. " She
runs so fearfully quick. You might as well try
to catch a Bandersnatch ! But I'll make a
150 THE LION AND
memorandum about her, if you like She s a
dear good creature, " he repeated softly to himself,
as he opened his memorandum-book. " Do you
spell * creature'with a double * e'? "
At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by
them, with his hands in his pockets. *'I had
the best of it this time ? " he said to the King,
just glancing at him as he passed.
" A little a little, " the King replied, rather
nervously. " You shouldn't have run him
through with your horn, you know. "
" It didn't hurt him, " the Unicorn said care-
lessly, and he was going on, when his eye
happened to fall upon Alice : he turned round
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her
with an air of the deepest disgust.
" What is this ? " he said at last.
" This is a child ! " Haigha replied eagerly,
coming in front of Alice to introduce her, and
spreading out both his hands towards her in an
Anglo-Saxon attitude. " We only found it to-
day. It*s as large as life, and twice as natural I "
THE UNICORN. 151
" I always thought they were fabulous mon-
sters ! " said the Unicorn. *'Is it alive ? "
" It can talk, " said Haigha, solemnly.
The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and
said " Talk, child. "
Alice could not help her lips curling up into
a smile as she began.: " Do you know, I always
thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too !
I never saw one alive before ! "
" Well, now that we have seen each other, "
said the Unicorn, " if you'll believe in me, I'll
believe in you. Is that a bargain .? "
" Yes, if you like, " said Alice.
" Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man ! "
the Unicorn went on, turning from her to the
King. " None of your brown bread for me ! "
" Certainly certainly ! " the King muttered,
and beckoned to Haigha. " Open the bag ! " he
whispered. " Quick ! Not that one that's
full of hay! "
Haigha took a large cake out of the bag,
and gave it to Alice to hold, while he got out
a dish and carving-knife. How they all came
152
THE LION AND
out of it Alice couldn't guess. It was just like
a conjuring-trick, she thought.

The Lion had joined them while this was
going on : he looked very tired and sleepy, and
his eyes were half shut. " What's this ! " he
said, blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a
deep hollow tone that sounded like the tolling of
great bell.
THE UNICORN. 163
" Ah, what is it, now ? " the Unicorn cried
eagerly. " You'll never guess ! /couldn't. "
The Lion looked at Alice wearily. " Are you
animal or vegetable or mineral ? " he said,
yawning at every other word.
" It's a fabulous monster ! " the Unicorn cried
out, before Alice could reply.
" Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster, "
the Lion said, lying down and putting his chin
on his paws. " And sit down, both of you, " (to
the King and the Unicorn) : " fair play with the
cake, you know ! "
The King was evidently very uncomfortable
at having to sit down between the two great
creatures ; but there was no other place for him.
" What a fight we might have for the crown,
now I " the Unicorn said, looking slyly up at
the crown, which the poor King was nearly
shaking off his head, he trembled so much.
" I should win easy, " said the Lion.
" I'm not so sure of that, " said the Unicorn.
" Why, I beat you all round the town, you
154 THE LION AND
chicken ! " the Lion replied angrily, half getting
up as he spoke.
Here the King interrupted, to prevent the
quarrel going on: he was very nervous, and
his voice quite quivered. " All round the town ? "
he said. " That's a good long way. Did you
go by the old bridge, or the market-place.'^ You
get the best view by the old bridge. "
" Fm sure I don't know, " the Lion growled
out as he lay down again. " There was too
much dust to see anything. What a time the
Monster is, cutting up that cake ! "
Alice had seated herself on the bank of a
little brook, with the great dish on her knees,
and was sawing away diligently with the knife.
" It's very provoking ! " she said, in reply to
the Lion (she was getting quite used to being
called'the Monster'). " I've cut several slices
already, but they always join on again ! "
" You don't know how to manage Looking-
glass cakes, " the Unicorn remarked. " Hand it
round first, and cut it afterwards. "
This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obedi-
THE UNICORN. 155
ently got up, and carried the dish round, and
the cake divided itself into three pieces as she
did so. " Now cut it up, " said the Lion, as she
returned to her place with the empty dish.
" I say, this isn't fair ! " cried the Unicorn,
as Alice sat with the knife in her hand, very
much puzzled how to begin. " The Monster has
given the Lion twice as much as me ! "
" She's kept none for herself, anyhow, " said
the Lion. " Do you like plum-cake, Monster?* "
But before Alice could answer him, the drums
began.
Where the noise came from, she couldn't
make out: the air seemed full of it, and it
rang through and through her head till she felt
quite deafened. She started to her feet and
sprang across the little brook in her terror,
156
THE LION AND THE UNICOKN.

and had just
time to see the
Lion and the
Unicorn rise to
their feet, with
angry looks at
being interrupt-
ed in their
feast, before she
dropped to her
knees, and put
her hands over
her ears, vainly
trying to shut
out the dreadful
uproar.
" If that doesn't * drum them out of town/
thought to herself, *'nothing ever willT*
she
CHAPTER VIII.
" it's my own invention. "
After a while the noise seemed gradually to
die away, till all was dead silence, and Alice
lifted up her head in some alarm. There was
no one to be seen, and her first thought was
that she must have been dreaming about the
Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-
Saxon Messengers. However, there was the
great dish still lying at her feet, on which she
had tried to cut the plum-cake, " So I wasn't
dreaming, after all, " she said to herself, " unless
unless weVe all part of the same dream.
158 " it's my own invention. "
Only I do hope it's my dream, and not the Red
King's ! I don't like belonging to another per-
son's dream, " she went on in a rather complain-
ing tone : " I've a great mind to go and wake
him, and see what happens ! "
At this moment her thoughts were interrupted
by a loud shouting of " Ahoy ! Ahoy ! Check ! "
and a Knight, dressed in crimson armor, came
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great
club. Just as he reached her, the horse stopped
suddenly : " You're my prisoner ! " the Knight
cried, as he tumbled off his horse.
Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened
for him than for herself at the moment, and
watched him with some anxiety as he mounted
again. As soon as he was comfortably in the
saddle, he began once more " You're my "
but here another voice broke in " Ahoy ! Ahoy !
Check ! " and Alice looked round in some sur-
prise for the new enemy.
This time it was a White Knight. He drew
up at Alice's side, and tumbled off his horse just
as the Red Knight had done : then he got on
" it's my own invention. " 159
again, and the two Knights sat and looked at
each other for some time without speaking
Alice looked from one to the other in some
bewilderment.
" She's my prisoner, you know ! " the Red
Knight said at last.
" Yes, but then / came and rescued her ! " the
White Knight replied.
" Well, we must fight for her, then, " said the
Red Knight, as he took up his helmet (which
hung from the saddle, and was something the
shape of a horse's head), and put it on.
" You will observe the Rules of Battle, of
course.? " the White Knight remarked, putting
on his helmet too.
" I always do, " said the Red Knight, and they
began banging away at each other with such
fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the
way of the blows.
" I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are, "
she said to herself, as she watched the fight, timidly
peeping out from her hiding-place : " one Rule
seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other.
IGO

he knocks him off his horse, and if he misses, he
tumbles off himself and another Rule seems
to be that they hold their clubs with their arms,
as if they were Punch and Judy What a noise
" it's my own invention. " 161
they make when they tumble ! Just like a whole
set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how
quiet the horses are ! They let them get on and
off them just as if they were tables ! "
Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not
noticed, seemed to be that they always fell on
their heads, and the battle ended with their both
falling off in this way, side by side : when they
got up again, they shook hands, and then the
Red Knight mounted and galloped off.
" It was a glorious victory, wasn't it ? " said the
White Knight, as he came up panting.
" I don't know, " Alice said doubtfully. " I
don't want to be anybody's prisoner. I want to
be a Queen. "
" So you will, when you've crossed the next
brook, " said the White Knight. " I'll see you
safe to the end of the wood and then I must
go back, you know. That's the end of my move. "
" Thank you very much, " said Alice. " May I
help you off with your helmet ? " It was evidently
more than he could manage by himself ; however,
she managed to shake him out of it at last.
162
'• Now one can breathe more easily, " said the
Knight, putting back his shaggy hair with both
hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen
such a strange-looking soldier in all her life.
He was dressed in tin armor, which seemed to
fit him very badly, and he had a queer-shaped
little deal box fastened across his shoulders,
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open.
Alice looked at it with great curiosity.
" I see you're admiring my little box, " the
Knight said in a friendly tone. " It's my own
invention to keep clothes and sandwiches in.
You see I carry it upside-down, so that the rain
can't get in. "
" But the things can get ouC Alice gently re-
marked. " Do you know the lid's open 1 "
" I didn't know it, " the Knight said, a shade
of vexation passing over his face. " Then all the
things must have fallen out ! And the box is no
use without them. " He unfastened it as he spoke,
and was just going to throw it into the bushes,
" IT'S MY OWN INVENTION. " 163
when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,
and he hung it carefully on a tree. " Can you
guess why I did that ? " he said to Alice.
Alice shook her head.
" In hopes some bees may make a nest in it
then I should get the honey. "
" But you've got a bee-hive or something
like one fastened to the saddle, " said Alice.
" Yes, it's a very good bee-hive, " the Knight
said in a discontented tone, " one of the best
kind. But not a single bee has come near it
yet. And the other thing is a mouse- trap. I
suppose the mice keep the bees out or the
bees keep the mice out, I don't know which. "
" I was wondering what the mouse-trap was
for, " said Alice. " It isn't very likely there
would be any mice on the horse's back. "
" Not very likely, perhaps, " said the Knight ;
" but if they do come, I don't choose to have
them running all about. "
" You see, " he went on after a pause, " it's as
well to be provided for everything. That's the
164 " it's my own invention, "
reason the horse has all those anklets round his
feet. "
" But what are they for ? *'Alice asked in a
tone of great curiosity.
" To guard against the bites of sharks, " the
Knight replied. " It's an invention of my own.
And now help me on. I'll go with you to the
end of the wood What's that dish for ? "
" It's meant for plum-cake, " said Alice.
" We'd better take it with us, " the Knight
said. " It'll come in handy if we find any plum-
cake. Help me to get it into this bag. "
This took a long time to manage, though Alice
held the bag open very carefully, because the
Knight was so very awkward in putting in the
dish : the first two or three times that he tried
he fell in himself instead. " It's rather a tight
fit, you see, " he said, as they got it in at last;
" there are so many candlesticks in the bag. "
And he hung it to the saddle, which was already
loaded with bunches of carrots, and fire-irons,
and many other things.
**IT''S MY OWN INVENTION. " 165
" I hope you've got your hair well fastened
on ? " he continued, as they set off.
" Only in the usual way, " Alice said, smiling.
" That's hardly enough, " he said, anxiously.
" You see the wind is so very strong here. It's
as strong as soup. "
" Have you invented a plan for keeping the
hair from being blown off .f* " Alice inquired.
" Not yet, " said the Knight. " But I've got a
plan for keeping it irom falling off. "
" I should like to hear it, very much. "
" First you take an upright stick, " said the
Knight. " Then you make your hair creep up
it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls
off is because it hangs down things never
fall upwards, you know. It's a plan of my own
invention. You may try it if you like. "
It didn't sound a comfortable plan, Alice
thought, and for a few minutes she walked on in
silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now
and then stopping to help the poor Knight, who
certainly was not a good rider.
Whenever the horse stopped Cwhich it did
166
" it's my own invention. "

very often), he fell off in front; and when-
ever it went on again (which it generally did
rather suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise
he kept on pretty well, except that he had a
habit of now and then falling off sideways ; and
as he generally did this on the side on which
" it's my own invention. " 167
Alice was walking, she soon found that it was the
best plan not to walk quite close to the horse.
" Tm afraid you've not had much practice in
riding, " she ventured to say, as she was helping
him up from his fifth tumble.
The Knight looked very much surprised, and a
little offended at the remark. " What makes you
say that t " he asked, as he scrambled back into
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice's hair with one
hand, to save himself from falling over on the
other side.
" Because people don't fall off quite so often,
when they've had much practice. "
" I've had plenty of practice, " the Knight said
very gravely : " plenty of practice ! "
Alice could think of nothing better to say
than " Indeed 1 " but she said it as heartily as
she could. They went on a little way in silence
after this, the Knight with his eyes shut, mutter-
ing to himself, and Alice watching anxiously for
the next tumble.
" The great art of riding, " the Knight suddenly
began in a loud voice, waving his right arm as he
168 " it's my own invention. "
spoke, " is to keep " Here the sentence ended
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell
heavily on the top of his head exactly in the path
where Alice was walking. She was quite fright-
ened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as
she picked him up, " I hope no bones are broken ? "
" None to speak of, " the Knight said, as if
he didn't mind breaking two or three of them.
" The great art of riding, as I was saying, is
to keep your balance properly. Like this, you
know "
He let go the bridle, and stretched out both
his arms to show Alice what he meant, and this
time he fell flat on his back, right under the
horse's feet.
" Plenty of practice ! " he went on repeating,
all the time that Alice was getting him on his
feet again. " Plenty of practice ! "
" It's too ridiculous ! " cried Alice, losing all
her patience this time. " You ought to have a
wooden horse on wheels, that you ought ! "
" Does that kind go smoothly? " the Knight
" it's my own invention. " 169
asked in a tone of great interest, clasping his
arms round the horse's neck as he spoke, just in
time to save himself from tumblino: off a2:ain.
''Much more smoothly than a live horse/'
Alice said, with a little scream of laughter, in
spite of all she could do to prevent it.
" Til get one, " the Knight said thoughtfully
to himself. " One or two several. "
There was a short silence after this, and then
the Knight went on again. " I'm a great hand
at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed,
the last time you picked me up, that I was look-
ing rather thoughtful ? "
" You were a little grave, " said Alice.
" Well, just then I was inventing a new
way of getting over a gate would you like to
hear it.? "
" Very much indeed, " Alice said, politely.
" ril tell you how I came to think of it, " said
the Knight. " You see, I said to myself, * The
only difficulty is with the feet : the kead is high
enough already.'Now, first I put my head on
the top of the gate then the head's high
170 " it's my own invention. "
enough then I stand on my head then
the feet are high enough, you see then I'm
over, you see. "
" Yes, I suppose you'd be over when that was
done, " Alice said, thoughtfully : " but don't you
think it would be rather hard ? "
" I haven't tried it yet, " the Knight said,
gravely : " so I can't tell for certain but I'm
afraid it would be a little hard. "
He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice
changed the subject hastily. " What a curious
helmet you've got ! " she said, cheerfully. " Is
that your invention too t "
The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet,
which hung from the saddle. " Yes, " he said,
" but I've invented a better one than that like
a sugar-loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off
the horse, it always touched the ground directly.
So I had a very little way to fall, you see But
there was the danger of falling into it, to be sure.
That happened to me once and the worst of
it was, before I could get out again, the other
" it's my own invention. " 171
White Knight came and put it on. He thought
it was his own helmet. "
The Knight looked so solemn about it that
Alice did not dare to laugh. " Vm afraid you
must have hurt him, " she said in a trembling
voice, " being on the top of his head. "
" I had to kick him, of course, " the Knight
said, very seriously. " And then he took the
helmet off again but it took hours and hours
to get me out. I was as fast as as lightning,
you know. "
" But that's a different kind of fastness, " Alice
objected.
The Knight shook his head. " It was all
kinds of fastness with me, I can assure you ! " he
said. He raised his hands in some excitement as
he said this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle
and fell headlong into a deep ditch.
Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for
him. She was rather startled by the fall, as for
some time he had kept on very well, and she was
afraid that he really ee;^^ hurt this time. However,
though she could see nothing but the soles of his
172
" it's my own invention. "
feet, she was much relieved to hear that he was
talking on in his usual tone. " All kinds of fast-
ness, " he repeated : " but it was careless of him
to put another man's helmet on with the man
in it, too. "

" How can you go on talking so quietly, head
downwards ? " Alice asked, as she dragged him
out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the
bank.
The Knight looked surprised at the question.
" rt's Ml? OWN inVen'Tiok/'Its
'* What does it matter where my body happens
to be ? " he said. " My mind goes on working all
the same. In fact, the more head downwards
I am, the more I keep inventing new things. "
** Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I
ever did/'he went after a pause, " was inventing
a new pudding during the meat-course. "
" In time to have it cooked for the next
course ? " said Alice. " Well, that was quick
work, certainly ! "
" Well not the next course,*'the Knight said
in a slow thoughtful tone : " no, certainly not the
next coursed
" Then it would have to be the next day. I
suppose you wouldn't have two pudding-courses
in one dinner ? "
" Well, not the next day,** the Knight repeated
as before : " not the next day. In fact, " he went
on, holding his head down, and his voice getting
lower and lower, " I don't believe that pudding
ever was cooked ! In fact, I don't believe that
pudding ever will be cooked ! And yet it was
a very clever pudding to invent. "
174
" What did you mean it to be made of ? "
Alice asked, hoping to cheer him up, for the poor
Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.
" It began with blotting-paper, " the Knight
answered with a groan.
" That wouldn't be very nice, I'm afraid "
" Not very nice alone,''he interrupted, quite
eagerly : " but you've no idea what a difference
it makes, mixing it with other things such
as gunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I
must leave you. " They had just come to the
end of the wood.
Alice could only look puzzled : she was think-
ing of the pudding.
" You are sad, " the Knight said in an anxious
tone : " let me sing you a song to comfort you. "
" Is it very long.? " Alice asked, for she had
heard a good deal of poetry that day.
" It's long, "'said the Knight, " but it's very,
very beautiful. Everybody that hears me sing
it either it brings the tears into their eyes or
else "
" it's my own invention. " 176
" Or else what? " said Alice, for the Knight
had made a sudden pause.
" Or else it doesn't, you know. The name of
the song is called'HaddocHs Eyes 1 "
" Oh, that's the name of the song, is it? " Alice
said, trying to feel interested.
" No, you don't understand, " the Knight said,
looking a little vexed. " That's what the name
is called. The name really is * The Aged Aged
Man: "
" Then I ought to have said * That's what the
song is called'? " Alice corrected herself.
" No, you oughtn't : that's quite another thing !
The song is called'Ways and Means': but
that's only what it's called, you know ! "
*'Well what is the song, then ? " said Alice,
who was by this time completely bewildered.
" I was coming to that, " the Knight said.
^* The song really 2 >'A -Sitting On A Gate* i
and the tune's my own invention. "
So saying, he stopped his horse and let the
reins fall on its neck : then, slowly beating time
with one hand, and with a faint smile lighting up
176 " it's my own invention. "
his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the
music of his song, he began.
Of all the strange things that Alice saw in
her journey Through The Looking-Glass, this
was the one that she always remembered most
clearly. Years afterwards she could bring the
whole scene back again, as if it had been only
yesterday the mild blue eyes and kindly
smile of the Knight the setting sun gleaming
through his hair, and shining on his armor in a
blaze of light that quite dazzled her the horse
quietly moving about, with the reins hanging
loose on his neck, cropping the grass at her feet
and the black shadows of the forest behind
all this she took in like a picture, as, with
one hand shading her eyes, she leant against a
tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in
a half dream, to the melancholy music of the
song.
" But the tune isnt his own invention, " she
said to herself : " it's * / give thee all, I can no
more'" She stood and listened very attentively,
but no tears came into her eyes.
" it's my own invention. " 177
** /'// tell thee everything I can ;
There s little to relate,
I saw an aged aged man,
A -sit ting on a gate,
* Who are you, aged man ?'I said.
* And how is it you live ?'
And his answer trickled through my head
Like water through a sieve.
He said * 1 look for butterflies
That sleep among the wheat :
I m^ake them into mutton-pies^
And sell them in the street.
I sell them unto men', he said,
* Who sail on stormy seas ;
And that's the way I get my bread-
A trifle, if you please'.
But I was thinking of a plan
To dye one's whiskers green.
And always use so large a fan
That they could not be seen.
178
Soy having no reply to give
To what the old man said,
I cried'Come, tell me how you live / *
And thumped him, on the head*
His accents mild took up the tale :
He said * I go my ways^
And when I find a m.ountain-rill^
I set it in a blaze ;
And thence they make a stuff they call
Rowlands'Macassar Oil —
Yet twopence-halfpenny is all
They give me for my toil!
But I was thinking of a way
To feed oneself on batter ,
And so go on from day to day
Getting a little fatter.
I shook him > well from, side to side.
Until his face was blue :
" IT^S MY OWN INVENTION. "
* Come, tell me how you live'I cried^
* And what it is you do ! *
He said * / hunt for haddocks'eyes
Among the heather bright^
179

And work them into waistcoat-buttons
In the silent night.
And these I do 7tot sell for gold
Or coin of silvery shine^
180 " it's my own invention. "
But for a copper halfpenny^
And that witl purchase nine*
* / sometimes dig for buttered rolls.
Or set limed twigs for crabs ;
I sometimes search the grassy knolls
For wheels of Hansom-cabs.
And that's the way'(he gave a wink)
* By which I get my wealth —
And very gladly will I drink
Your Honor s noble health!
I heard him then, for I had just
Completed my design
To keep the Menai bridge from rust
By boiling it in wine,
I thanked him much for telling me
The way he got his wealth.
But chiefly for his wish that he
Might drink my noble health*
" it's my own invention. " 181
And now, if e'er by chance I put
My fingers into glue.
Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
Into a left-hand shoe.
Or if I drop upon my toe
A very heavy weight,
I weep, for it reminds m,e so
Of that old m,an I used to know —
Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow^
Whose hair was whiter tha^i the snow.
Whose face was very like a crow.
With eyes, like cinders, all aglow.
Who seemed distracted with his woe^
Who rocked his body to and fro.
And muttered mumblingly and low^
As if his mouth were full of doughy
Who snorted like a buffalo
That summer evening, long agOy
A -sit ting on a gate^
As the Knight sang the last words of the
ballad, he gathered up the reins, and turned
182 " it's my own invention. "
his horse's head along the road by which they
had come. " You've only a few yards to go, "
he said, " down the hill and over that little brook,
and then you'll be a Queen But you'll stay
and see me off first ? " he added as Alice turned
with an eager look in the direction to which
he pointed. " I shan't be long. You'll wait
and wave your handkerchief when I get to that
turn in the road ? I think it'll encourage me,
you see. "
" Of course I'll wait, " said Alice : " and thank
you very much for coming so far and for the
song 1 Hked it very much. "
" I hope so, " the Knight said, doubtfully :
" but you didn't cry so much as I thought you
would. "
So they shook hands, and then the Knight
rode slowly away into the forest. " It won't
take long to see him ojfy I expect, " Alice said
to herself, as she stood watching him. " There
he goes ! Right on his head as usual ! How-
ever, he gets on again pretty easily that
comes of having so many things hung round the
" it's my own invention. " 188
horse " So she went on talking to herself
as she watched the horse walking leisurely along
the road, and the Knight tumbling off, first on
one side and then on the other. After the
fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and
then she waved her handkerchief to him, and
waited till he was out of sight.
" I hope it encouraged him, " she said, as
she turned to run down the hill : " and now
for the last brook, and to be a Queen ! How
grand it sounds! " A very few steps brought
her to the edge of the brook. " The Eighth
Square at last ! " she cried as she bounded across,
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
♦ « * ♦ * ♦
and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as
soft as moss, with little flower-beds dotted about
it here and there. " Oh, how glad I am to get
here! And what is this on my head.? " she
184
" IT^S MY OWN " INVENTION.*'
exclaimed in a
tone of dismay,
as she put her
hands up to
something very
heavy, that fitted
tight all round
her head.
" But how can
it have got there
without my know-
ing it ? " she said
to herself, as she
lifted it off, and
set it on her lap to make out what it could
possibly be.
It was a golden crown.

CHAPTER IX.
QUEEN ALICE.
" Well, this is grand ! " said Alice. " I never
expected I should be a Queen so soon and
I'll tell you what it is, your Majesty, " she went
on in a severe tone (she was always rather fond
of scolding herself), " it'll never do for you to be
lolling about on the grass like that! Queens
have to be dignified, you know ! "
So she got up and walked about rather
stiffly just at first, as she was afraid that the
crown might come off : but she comforted her-
self with the thought that there was nobody to
186 QUEEN ALICE.
see her, " and if I really am a Queen, " she said
as she sat down again, " I shall be able to man-
age it quite well in time. "
Everything was happening so oddly that she
didn't feel a bit surprised at finding the Red
Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her,
one on each side : she would have liked very
much to ask them how they came there, but
she feared it would not be quite civil. How-
ever, there would be no harm, she thought, in
asking if the game was over. " Please, would
you tell me " she began, looking timidly at
the Red Queen. "
" Speak when you're spoken to ! " the Queen
sharply interrupted her.
" But if everybody obeyed that rule, " said
Alice, who was always ready for a little argu-
ment, " and if you only spoke when you were
spoken to, and the other person always waited
lor you to begin, you see nobody would ever say
anything, so that "
" Ridiculous ! " cried the Queen. " Why, don't
you see, child " here she broke off with a
QUEEN ALICE. 187
frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly
changed the subject of the conversation. " What
do you mean by'If you really are a Queen ? *
What right have you to call yourself so ? You
can't be a Queen, you know, till you've passed
the proper examination. And the sooner we
begin it, the better. "
" I only said * if M " poor Alice pleaded in a
piteous tone.
The two Queens looked at each other, and the
Red Queen remarked, with a little shudder, " She
says she only said * if'"
" But she said a great deal more than that ! "
the White Queen moaned, wringing her hands.
" Oh, ever so much more than that ! "
" So you did, you know, " the Red Queen
said to Alice. " Always speak the truth
think before you speak and write it down
afterwards. "
" I'm sure I didn't mean " Alice was
beginning, but the Red Queen interrupted her
impatiently.
18^ Q.IIEEN ALiCU.
" That*s just what I complain of ! You
should have meant ! What do you suppose is
the use of a child without any meaning ? Even
a joke should have some meaning and a
child's more important than a joke, I hope.
You couldn't deny that, even if you tried with
both hands. "
" I don't deny things with my handsy'Alice
objected.
" Nobody said you did, " said the Red Queen.
" I said you couldn't if you tried. "
" She is in that state of mind, " said the White
Queen, " that sh^ wants to deny something
only she doesn't know what to deny ! "
" A nasty, vicious temper, " the Red Queen
remarked ; and then there was an uncomfortable
silence for a minute or two.
The Red Queen broke the silence by saying
to the White Queen, " I invite you to Alice's
dinner-party this afternoon. "
The White Queen smiled feebly, and said
" And I invite your
" I didn't know I was to have a party at all/
OtTEEN ALIClJ. l8d
said Alice ; ** but if there is to be one, I think /
ought to invite the guests. "
" We gave you the opportunity of doing it, "
the Red Queen remarked : " but I daresay you've
not had many lessons in manners yet? "
" Manners are not taught in lessons, " said
Alice. " Lessons teach you to do sums, and
things of that sort. "
" Can you do Addition .? " the White Queen
asked. " What's one and one and one and one
and one and one and one and one and one and
one? "
" I don't know, " said Alice. " I lost count. "
" She can't do Addition, " the Red Queen in-
terrupted. " Can you do Subtraction ? Take
nine from eight.'*
" Nine from eight I can't, you know, " Alice
replied very readily : " but "
" She can't do Subtraction, " said the White
Queen. " Can you do Division ? Divide a loaf,
by a knife what's the answer to that ? "
" I suppose " Alice was beginning, but the
Red Queen answered for her. " Bread-and-butter,
190
QUEEN ALICE.
of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Takie
a bone from a dog : what remains ? "
AHce considered. " The bone wouldn't re-
main, of course, if I took it and the dog

wouldn't remain ; it would come to bite me — —
and I'm sure / shouldn't remain ! "
" Then you think nothing would remain ? "
said the Red Queen.
" I think that's the answer. "
QUEEN ALICE. 191
" Wrong, as usual, " said the Red Queen:
** the dog's temper would remain. "
" But I don't see how "
" Why, look here ! " the Red Queen cried.
" The dog would lose its temper, wouldn't it ? "
" Perhaps it would, " Alice replied cautiously.
" Then if the dog went away, its temper
would remain ! " the Queen exclaimed trium-
phantly.
Alice said, as gravely as she could, " They
might go different ways. " But she couldn't
help thinking to herself, " What dreadful non-
sense we are talking ! "
" She can't do sums a bit ! " the Queens said
together, with great emphasis.
" Can you do sums ? " Alice said, turning
suddenly on the White Queen, for she didn't
like being found fault with so much.
The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. " I
can do Addition, " she said, " if you give me
time but I can't do Subtraction under any
circumstances I'*
192 QUEEN ALICE.
" Of course you know your ABC? " said
the Red Queen.
" To be sure I do, " said Alice.
" So do I, " the White Queen whispered
" we'll often say it over together, dear. And
ril tell you a secret 1 can read words of
one letter ! Isn't that grand ? However, don't
be discouraged. You'll come to it in time. "
Here the Red Queen began again. " Can
you answer useful questions .? " she said. " How
is bread made ? "
" I know that I *'Alice cried eagerly. " You
take some flour "
" Where do you pick the flower ? " the
White Queen asked. " In a garden, or in the
hedges } "
" Well, it i^vit picked dX all, " Alice explained:
it's ground "
" How many acres of ground ? " said the
White Queen. " You mustn't leave out so
many things. "
" Fan her head! " the Red Queen anxiously
QtTEBN ALICE. 193
interrupted. " She'll be feverish after so much
thinking. " So they set to work and fanned her
with bunches of leaves, till she had to beg them
to leave off, it blew her hair about so.
" She's all right again now, " said the Red
Queen. " Do you know Languages? What's
the French for fiddle-de-dee ? "
" Fiddle-de-dee's not English, " Alice replied
gravely.
" Who ever said it was.? " said the Red
Queen.
Alice thought she saw a way out of the
difficulty this time. " If you'll tell me what
language * fiddle-de-dee'is, I'll tell you the
French for it ! " she exclaimed triumphantly.
But the Red Queen drew herself up rather
stiffly, and said " Queens never make bargains. "
" I wish Queens never asked questions, " Alice
thought to herself.
" Don't let us quarrel, " the White Queen
said in an anxious tone. " What is the cause ot
lightning ? "
194 QUEEN ALICE.
" The cause of lightning, " Alice said very
decidedly, for she felt quite certain about this,
" is the thunder no, no ! " she hastily cor-
rected herself. " I meant the other way. "
" It's too late to correct it, " said the Red
Queen : " when youVe once said a thing, that
fixes it, and you must take the consequences. "
** Which reminds me " the White Queen
said, looking down and nervously clasping and
unclasping her hands, " we had such a thunder-
storm last Tuesday 1 mean one of the last
set of Tuesdays, you know. "
Alice was puzzled. " In our country, " she
remarked, " there's only one day at a time. "
The Red Queen said " That's a poor thin way
of doing things. Now here^ we mostly have
Jays and nights two or three at a time, and
sometimes in the winter we take as many as five
nights together for warmth, you know. "
" Are five nights warmer than one night,
then ? " Alice ventured to ask. -
" Five times as warm, of course. "
QUEEN ALICE. 195
" But they should be five times as cold, by the
same rule "
" Just so ! " cried the Red Queen. " Five times
as warm, and five times as cold just as I'm
five times as rich as you are, and five times as
clever ! "
Alice sighed and gave it up. " It's exactly
like a riddle with no answer 1'* she thought.
" Humpty Dumpty saw it too, " the White
Queen went on in a low voice, more as if she
were talking to herself. " He came to the door
with a corkscrew in his hand "
" What did he want ? " said the Red Queen.
" He said he would come in, " the White
Queen went on, " because he was looking for a
hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there
Virasn't such a thing in the house, that morning. "
*'* Is there generally ? " Alice asked in an
astonished tone.
" Well, only on Thursdays, " said the Queen.
" I know what he came for, " said Alice : " he
Wanted to punish the fish, because "
Here the White Queen began again. " It
196 QUEEN ALICE.
was such a thunderstorm, you can*t think I "
( " She never could, you know, " said the Red
Queen.) " And part of the roof came off, and
ever so much thunder got in and it went
rolling round the room in great lumps and
knocking over the tables and things till I
was so frightened, I couldn^t remember my own
name ! "
Alice thought to herself, " I never should
try to remember my name in the middle of an
accident ! Where would be the use of it ? " but
she did not say this aloud, for fear of hurting
the poor Queen's feelings.
" Your Majesty must excuse her, " the Red
Queen said to Alice, taking one of the White
Queen's hands in her own, and gently stroking
it : " she means well, but she can't help saying
foolish things, as a general rule. "
The White Queen looked timidly at Alice,
who felt she ought to say something kind, but
really couldn't think of anything at the moment
" She never was really well brought up, " the
Red Queen went on: " but it's amazing how
QUEEN ALICE. 197
good-tempered she is I Pat her on the head,
and see how pleased she'll be ! " But this was
more than Alice had courage to do.
" A little kindness and putting her hair
in papers would do wonders with her "
The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid
her head on Alice's shoulder. " I am so sleepy ! "
she moaned.
" She's tired, poor thing! " said the Red
Queen. " Smooth her hair lend her your
nightcap and sing her a soothing lullaby. "
" I haven't got a nightcap with me, " said Alice,
as she tried to obey the first direction : " and I
don't know any soothing lullabies. "
" I must do it myself, then, " said the Red
Queen, and she began :
" Hush-a-by lady, in Alices lap
Till the feast ^s ready, weve time for a nap :
When the f east's over, well go to the ball —
Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!
" And now you know the words, " she added,
198
QUEEN ALTCE.
as she put her head down on Alice's other
shoulder, " just sing it through to me. I'm get-
ting sleepy too. " In another moment both
Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud.

" ^^
" What am I to do ? " exclaimed Alice
looking about in great perplexity, as first one
round head, and then the other, rolled down
from her shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump
in her lap. ** I don't think it ever happened
before, that any one had to take care of two
QUEEN ALICE. 199
Queens asleep at once! No, not in all the
History of England it couldn't, you know,
because there never was more than one Queen
at a time. Do wake up, you heavy things ! "
she went on in an impatient tone ; but there
was no answer but a gentle snoring.
The snoring got more distinct every minute,
and sounded more like a tune : at last she could
even make out words, and she listened so eagerly
that, when the two great heads suddenly
vanished from her lap, she hardly missed them.
She was standing before an arched doorway
over which were the words QUEEN ALICE
in large letters, and on each side of the arch
there was a bell-handle; one was marked
" Visitors'Bell, " and the other " Servants'
Bell. "
" Til wait till the song's over, " thought
Alice, " and then I'll ring the the which
bell must I ring ? " she went on, very much
puzzled by the names. " I'm not a visitor, and
I'm not a servant. There ought to be one marked
* Queen,'you know "
200 QTJBEN ALICE.
Just then the door opened a little way, and
a creature with a long beak put its head out
for a moment and said " No admittance till the
week after next ! " and shut the door again with
a bang.
Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long
time, but at last a very old Frog, who was sitting
under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards
her : he was dressed in bright yellow, and had
enormous boots on.
" What is it, now ? " the Frog said in a deep
hoarse whisper.
Alice turned round, ready to find fault with
anybody. *'Where's the servant whose business
it is to answer the door ? " she began angrily.
" Which door ?''said the Frog.
Alice almost stamped with irritation at the
slow drawl in which he spoke. " This door, of
course I "
The Frog looked at the door with his large
dull eyes for a minute: then he went nearer
and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were
QUEEN ALICE.
201
trying whether the paint would come off ; then
he looked at Alice.

" To answer the door? " he said. " What's
it been asking of ? " He was so hoarse that
Alice could scarcely hear him.
" I don't know what you mean, " she said.
202 QUEEN ALICE.
" I speaks English, doesn't I ?'* the Frog
went on. " Or are you deaf ? What did it ask
you ? "
" Nothing ! " Alice said, impatiently. " I've
been knocking at it ! "
" Shouldn't do that shouldn't do that "
the Frog muttered. " Wexes it, you know. "
Then he went up and gave the door a kick
with one of his great feet. " You let it alone, "
he panted out, as he hobbled back to his tree,
" and it'll \^tyou alone, you know. "
At this moment the door was flung open, and
a shrill voice was heard singing :
" To the Looking'Glass world it was Alice that
said^
* Tve a sceptre in hand, Tve a crown on my head;
Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be.
Come and dine with the Red Queen^ the White
Queen, and me /^^*
And hundreds of voices joined in the
chorus:
QUEEN ALICE. 208
** Then fill Up the glasses as quick as you can
And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran :
Put cats in the coffee^ and mice in the tea —
And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-timeS "
three!''
Then followed a confused noise of cheering,
and Alice thought to herself, " Thirty times
three makes ninety. I wonder if any one's
counting ?'* In a minute there was silence again,
and the same shrill voice sang another verse;
"'O Looking'Glass creatures^ quoth A lice ^ * draw
near I
^Tis an honor to see me, a favor to hear :
^Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
Along with the Red Queen^ the White Queen^
and me !'"
Then came the chorus again : —
" Then fill up the glasses with treacle andink^
Or anything else that is pleasant to drink ;
Mix sand with the cider^ and wool with the
wine-^
204 QtJEElT ALICE.
And welcome Queen Alice witk ninety'timeS'
nine I "
" Ninety times nine !'* Alice repeated in de-
spair. " Oh, that'll never be done I I'd better
go in at once " and in she went, and there
was a dead silence the moment she appeared.
Alice glanced nervously along the table, as
she walked up the large hall, and noticed that
there were about fifty guests, of all kinds : some
were animals, some birds, and there were even
a few flowers among them. " I'm glad they've
come without waiting to be asked, " she thought :
" I should never have known who were the
right people to invite ! "
There were three chairs at the head of the
table ; the Red and White Queens had already
taken two of them, but the middle one was
empty. Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfort-
able at the silence, and longing for some one to
speak.
At last the Red Queen began. " YouVe
missed the soup and fish, " she said. " Put on
QUEEN ALICE.
205
the joint ! " And the waiters set a leg of mutton
before Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously^
as she had never had to carve a joint before.
" You look a little shy ; let me introduce
you to that leg of mutton, " said the Red Queen.
" Alice Mutton ;

Mutton-
Alice. "
The leg of mutton
got up in the dish
and made a little
bow to Alice ; and
Alice returned the
bow, not knowing
whether to be fright-
ened or amused.
" May I give you
a slice ? " she said,
taking up the knife
and fork, and look-
ing from one Queen to the other.
" Certainly not, " the Red Queen said, very
decidedly : " it isn*t etiquette to cut any one
you've been introduced to. Remove the joint ! "
206 QUEEN ALICE.
And the waiters carried it off, and brought a
large plum-pudding in its place.
" I won't be introduced to the pudding,
please,'* Alice said rather hastily, " or we shall
get no dinner at all. May I give you some ? "
But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled
" Pudding Alice ; Alice Pudding. Remove
the pudding ! " and the waiters took it away so
quickly that Alice couldn't return its bow.
However she didn't see why the Red Queen
should be the only one to give orders, so, as an
experiment, she called out " Waiter ! Bring
back the pudding ! " and there it was again in a
moment, like a conjuring-trick. It was so large
that she couldn't help feeling a /zU/e shy with it
as she had been with the mutton ; however, she
conquered her shyness by a great effort, and cut
a slice and handed it to the Red Oueen.
" What impertinence ! " said the Pudding. " I
wonder how you'd like it, if I were to cut a slice
out of you, you creature ! "
" It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and
QUEEN ALICE. 207
Alice hadn't a word to say in reply : she could
only sit and look at it and gasp.
" Make a remark/* said the Red Queen : " it's
ridiculous to leave all the conversation to the
pudding ! "
" Do you know, I've had such a quantity
of poetry repeated to me to-day, " Alice began,
a little frightened at finding that, the moment
she opened her lips, there was dead silence,
and all eyes were fixed upon her ; " and it's a
very curious thing, I think every poem was
about fishes in some way. Do you know why
they're so fond of fishes, all about here ? "
She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer
was a little wide of the mark. " As to fishes, "
she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her
mouth close to Alice's ear, " her White Majesty
knows a lovely riddle all in poetry all
about fishes. Shall she repeat it ? "
" Her Red Majesty's very kind to mention
it, " the White Queen murmured into Alice's
other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon.
" It would be SUC & a treat ! May I ? "
208 QUEEN ALICE.
" Please do, " Alice said very politely.
The White Queen laughed with delight, and
stroked Alice's cheek. Then she began :
" * First, the fish must be caught^
That is easy : a baby, I think, could have caught it,
* Next, the /ish must be bought'
That is easy ; a penny, 1 think, would have bought
it.
* Now cook me the fish /'
That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
* Let it lie in a dish !'
That is easy, because it already is in it,
* Bring it here f Let me sup !'
// is easy to set such a dish on the table,
* Take the dish-cover up !'
Ah, that is so hard that I fear I'm unable !
For it holds it like glue
Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle ;
Which is easiest to do,
Un-dish-^over the fish, or dishcover the riddle? "
QUEEN ALICE. 209
" Take a minute to think about it and then
guess, " said the Red Queen. " Meanwhile, we'll
drink your health Queen Alice's health I *'she
screamed at the top of her voice, and all the
guests began drinking it directly, and very
queerly they managed it: some of them put
their glasses upon their heads like extinguishers,
and drank all that trickled down their faces
others upset the decanters, and drank the wine
as it ran off the edges of the table and three
of them (who looked like kangaroos) scrambled
into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly
lapping up the gravy, " just like pigs in a
trough !'* thought Alice.
" You ought to return thanks in a neat
speech, " the Red Queen said, frowning at Alice
as she spoke.
" We must support you, you know, " the
White Queen whispered, as Alice got up to do
it, very obediently, but a little frightened.
" Thank you very much, " she whispered in
reply, " but I can do quite well without. "
:210 QUEEN ALICE.
" That wouldn't be at all the thing, " the Red
Queen said very decidedly : so Alice tried to
submit to it with a good grace.
" (And they did push so ! " she said afterwards,
when she was telling her sister the history of the
feast. " You would have thought they wanted
to squeeze me flat ! " )
In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep
in her place while she made her speech : the two
Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that
they nearly lifted her up into the air : " I rise
to return thanks ** Alice began : and she
really did rise as she spoke, several inches ; but
she got hold of the edge of the table, and man-
aged to pull herself down again.
" Take care of yourself ! " screamed the White
Queen, seizing Alice's hair with both her hands.
" Something's going to happen ! "
And then (as Alice afterwards described it)
all sorts of things happened in a moment. The
candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking some-
thing like a bed of rushes with fireworks at
QUEEN ALICE. 211
the top. As to the bottles, they each took a
pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as
wings, and so, with forks for legs, went flutter-
ing about in all directions : " and very like birds
they look, " Alice thought to herself, as well as
she could in the dreadful confusion that was be-
ginning.
At this m6ment she heard a hoarse laugh
at her side, and turned to see what was the
matter with the White Queen ; but, instead of
the Queen, there was the leg of mutton sitting
in the chair. " Here 1 am ! " cried a voice
from the soup-tureen, and Alice turned again,
just in time to see the Queen's broad good-
natured face grinning at her for a moment over
the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared
into the soup.
There was not a moment to be lost. Already
several of the guests were lying down in the
dishes, and the soup-ladle was walking up the
table towards Alice's chair, and beckoning to her
impatiently to get out of its way.
212
QUEEN ALICE.
" I can't stand this
any longer! " she
cried as she jumped
up and seized the
table-cloth with both
hands : one good pull
and plates, guests, and
candles came crashing
down together in a
on the floor.

QUEEN ALICE. 213
" And as for you''she went on, turning
fiercely upon the Red Queen, whom she con-
sidered as the cause of all the mischief but
the Queen was no longer at her side she had
suddenly dwindled down to the size of a little
doll and was now on the table, merrily running
round and round after her own shawl, which
was trailing behind her.
At any other time, Alice would have felt sur-
prised at this, but she was far too much
excited to be surprised at anything now, ** As
ioY you,^^ she repeated, catching hold of the little
creature in the very act of jumping over a bottle
which had just lighted upon the table, " Til
shake you into a kitten, that I will I "

CHAPTER X.
SHAKING.
She took her off the table as she spoke, and
shook her backwards and forwards with all her
might.
The Red Queen made no resistance whatever ;
only her face grew very small, and her eyes
got large and green : and still, as Alice went
on shaking her, she kept on growing shorter
and fatter and softer and rounder
and
CHAPTER XI.
WAKING.
-and it really was a kitten, after all

CHAPTER XII.
WHICH DREAMED IT?
" Your Red Majesty shouldn't purr so loud, "
Alice said, rubbing her eyes, and addressing the
kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity.
" You woke me out of oh I such a nice dream !
And youVe been along with me, Kitty all
through the Looking-Glass world. Did you
know it, dear ? "
It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice
had once made the remark) that, whatever
you say to them, they always purr. " If they
would only purr for * yes,* and mew or * no,
WHICH DREAMED IT? 219
or any rule of that sort, " she had said, " so that
one could keep up a conversation ! But how
can you talk with a person if they always say the
same thing ? "
On this occasion the kitten only purred : and
it was impossible to guess whether it meant * yes *
or'no.'
So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the
table till she had found the Red Queen : then
she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug,
and put the kitten and the Queen to look at
each other. " Now, Kitty ! " she cried, clapping
her hands triumphantly. " Confess that was
what you turned into I "
( " But it wouldn't look at it, " she said, when
she was explaining the thing afterwards to her
sister : " it turned away its head, and pretended
not to see it : but it looked a little ashamed of
itself, so I think it must have been the Red
Queen. " )
" Sit up a little more stiffly, dear! " Alice
cried with a merry laugh. " And curtsey while
you're thinking what to what to purr. It
220
WHICH DREAMED IT?
saves time, remember ! " And she caught it up
and gave it one little kiss, " just in honor of its
having been a Red Queen. "

" Snowdrop, my pet ! " she went on, looking
over her shoulder at the White Kitten, which
was still patiently undergoing its toilet, " when
will Dinah have finished with your White Ma-
iesty, I wonder? That must be the reason you
WHICH DREAMED IT? 221
were so untidy in my dream. Dinah! Do
you know that youVe scrubbing a White Queen ?
Really, it's most disrespectful of you I
" And what did Dinah turn to, I wonder ? "
she prattled on, as she settled comfortably down,
with one elbow on the rug, and her chin in her
hand, to watch the kittens. " Tell me, Dinah,
did you turn to Humpty Dumpty ? I think you
did however, you'd better not mention it to
your friends just yet, for I'm not sure.
" By the way, Kitty, if only you'd been
really with me in my dream, there was one
thing you would have enjoyed 1 had such
a quantity of poetry said to me, all about
fishes I To-morrow morning you shall have a
real treat. All the time you're eating your
breakfast. 111 repeat * The Walrus and the Car-
penter'to you ; and then you can make believe
it's oysters, dear !
" Now, Kitty, let*s consider who it was that
dreamed it all. This is a serious question, my
dear, and you should not go on licking your
paw like that ^as if Dinah hadn't washed
222 WHICH DREAMED IT?
you this morning ! You see, Kitty, it must
have been either me or the Red King. He
was part of my dream, of course but then
I was part of his dream, too ! Was it the Red
King, Kitty ? You were his wife, my dear,
so you ought to know Oh, Kitty, do help
to settle it ! I'm sure your paw can wait ! "
But the provoking kitten only began on the
other paw, and pretended it hadn't heard the
question.
Which 6.0 you think it was?
A BOAT, beneath a smmy skj
Lingerinf: onward dreamily
in an evening: of July
Children three that nestie near,
Eager eye and willing ear,
Pleased a simple tale to bear
Long has paled that sunny sky :
Echoes £ide and memories die :
Autumn frosts have slain July.
StOl she haunts me, phantomwise
Alice moving under skies
Never seen by waking eyeib
Chfldren yet, the tale to hear.
Eager eye and willing ear.
Lovingly shall nestle neai;
In a Wonderland they lie,
Dreaming as the days go by.
Dreaming as the summers dia
Ever drifting down the stream-
Lingering in the golden gleam-
Life^ what is it but a dream?
hi,
/9 <

