


I
BODLEIAN LIBRARY
nt lift of
Miss Emma F. I, Dtautm

b, Google
b, Google
b, Google
yANE AUSTEN'S WORKS
^*StBP
(FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1816)
,,,.f:lbyG00gk'
troTTisweoM «md co, Hcw-rmiBT mioam
b, Google
b, Google
.-■ ^ " t < fi ^L/UivUftf/- itm/^'..^rt^A^
b, Google
b, Google
b, Google
EMMA
JANE AUSTEN
STBi'BNroN EDITION
LONDON
RICHARD BENTLEY ft SON, NEW BURLINGTON STREET
Sablii^Mi in •ibimng In " in ^^i > % Iftt ffiuin
18S2
Mi.Mb, Google
b, Google

EMMA.
CHAPTER I.
^MMA WOODHOUSE, handsome ctever, and
rich, with a comfortable home and happy dis-
position, seemed to unite some of the best
blessings of existence; and had lived nearly
twenty-one years in the worid with very little
to distress or vex her.
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affec-
tionate, indulgent father; and had, in consequence of her
sister's marriage, been mistress of his house tcaa a very early
period. Hermotherhaddiedtoolongagoforhertoha\'emore
than an indistinct remembrance of hei caresses, and her
place had been supplied by an excellent woman as gover-
ness, who bad fallen Uttle short of a mother in affection.
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse's
femily, less as a governess than a friend, very fond of both
daughters, bat particularly of Emma. Between /Aem it was
more die intimacy of sisters. Even before Miss Taylor had
ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, the mildness
ofher temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint;
and the shadow of audiori^ b^ng now long passed away,
they had been hving tt^ether as friend and friend very mu-
tually attached, and Emma doingjustwhat she liked; highly
esteeming Miss Taylor's judgment^ but directed chiefly by
her own.
The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the power
cf having rather too much her own way, and g disposition to
byGoOgk'
2'Emma.
think a tittle too well d herself: these were the disadvan-
tages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments. The
danger, however, was at present so unperceived, that they
did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her.
Sorrow came — a gentle soirow — but not at all in the
sh^ > e of any disagreeable consdousness. Miss Taylor
married. It was Miss Taylor's loss which first brought grief.
It was on the wedding-day of this beloved friend, that Emma
first sat in mournful thought of any continuance. The wed-
ding over, and the bnde-people gcwe, her Either and herself
were left to dine together, with no prospect of a third to
cheei a long evening. Her fiither composed himself to
sleep aiter dinner, as usual, and she had then only to sit and
think of what she had lost
The event had every promise of happiness for her firiend.
Mr. Weston was a man of unexceptionable character, easy
fortune, suitable age, and pleasant manners; and there was
some satlsfactioa in considering with what self-denying, gene-
rous friendship, she had always wished and promoted the
match; but it was a black morning's work for her. The want
of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. She
recalled her past kindness — the kindness, the affection of
sxteen years — how she had taught and how she had played
with hei from five years old — how she had devoted all her
powers to attach and amuse her in health — and how nursed
her through the various illnesses of childhood. A Urge debt
of gratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last
seven years, the equal footing and perfect unreserve which
had soon followed Isabella's marriage on their being left to
each other, was yet a dearer, tenderer recollection. She had
been a fiiend and companion such as few possessed; intelli-
gent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all the ways of
the family, interested in all its concerns, and peculiarly in-
terested in herself in every pleasure every scheme of hers;~-
one to whom she could speak eveiy thought as it arose, and
who had such an affection for her as could never find fault
How was she to bear the change! It was true, that her
& iend was going only half a mile from Aem ; but Emma waa
aware that great most be the difference between a Mrs.
Weston, only half a mile firom them, and a Miss Taylor in
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
tiwhouse; mdwidt all her advantages, natuial and domesde^
she was now in great danger of soffering from intellectual
solitude. She dearly loved her fether, but he was no com-
panion for her. He could not meet her in conversation,
iBtional or playAil,
The evil of the actual dispart^ in their ages (and Mr.
Woodhouse had not manied eariy) was much increased by
his coDstitation and habits; for having been a valetudinarian
all his life^ without activil? of mind or body, he was a much
older man in wajra than is jrean ; and tiioo^ every where
beloved for the fiiendlinesa (tf his heart and his amiable
temper, his talents could not have recommended him al
anytime.
Her sister, though compaiatirely but little removed by
matrimony, being setded in London, only sixteen miles off,
was much beyond her daily reach; and many a long October
and November evening must be strug^ed through at Hart-
field, before Chiistmas broi^t the next visit firom Isabella
and her husband, and thtti little children, to fill the house,
and give her pleasant Bodety again.
H^buty, the large and populous village almost amount-
ing to a town, to which Hartiidd, in spite of its separate lawn,
and shnibberies, and name, did really belong, afforded her
no equals. The Woodhouses were first in consequence there.
All looked up to them. She had many acquaintances in the
place; for her fatherwas univeisally dvil, but not one among
then who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even
half a day. It wasamdancholy change; and Emma could
not but sigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her
& hei awoke, and made it necessary to be cheerful. His
spirits required support He was a nervous man, easily de-
pressed; fixid otrray body that he was used to, and hating
to part with than ; hating change of every kind. Matrimony,
as Uie origin of change, was always disagreeable; andhcwas
by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter s marrying,
nor could ever speak of her but with compassion, thou^ it
had been entirely a match of afiection, when he was now
obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits
of gende sdfishness, and of being never able to suppose that
other people could feel diffmently from himself; he was veiy
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing
for herself as for them, and would have been a great deal
happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield.
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could, to
keep him Seom such thoughts; but when tea came, it was im-
possible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner.
'Poor Miss Taylor I — I wish she were here again. What
a pi^ it is that Mi. Weston ever thought of her !'
'I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot
Mr. Weston is such a good humoured, pleasant, excellent
man, that be thoroughly deserves a good wife; and you would
not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever, and bear
all D^ odd humours, when she might have a house of her
ownl'
'A hotise of her own I— but where is the advantage of a
bouse of her own t This is three times as large, — and you
have never any odd humours, my dear/
'How often we shall be going to see them, and they
coming to seeusl^We shall be always meetingi H^must
b^in; we must go and pay our wedding-visit very sooD.'
'My dear, how am I to get so fiir 1 Randalls is sach a
distance. I could not walk half so fiir.'
'Ho, papa ; nobody thought of your walking. We must
go in tiie carriage, to be guie.'
'The canif^l But James will not like to put the horsea
to for such a little way;— and where are the poor horses to
be while we are paying our visit I'
'They are to be put into Mr. Weston's stable, papa. You
know we have settled all that already. We talked it all ova
with Mr. Weston last night And as for James, you may be
veiy sure he will always like going to Randalls, because of his
daughter's being housemaid there. I only doubt whether he
will ever take us any where else. That was your doing, papa.
You got Hannah that good place. Nobody thought of
Hannah till you mentioned hei — ^Jamesis so obliged to you!'
'X am very glad I did think of her. It was very lucky,
Cor I would not have had poor James think himself slighted
upon any account; and Z am sure she will make a very good
lervant j she is a dvil, pretty spoken girl ; I have a great
(q > imon of her. Whenever I see hei, she always courtesies
by Google
Emma. S
and asks me how I do, in a TCiy pretty manner; and whcD
you have bad her here to doceedle-woil^ I obs^ve she always
turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it
I am sure she will be an excellent sorvant; and it wiO be a
great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about
her that she is u»cd to see. Whenever James goes over to
see his daughter, you know, she will be heaiiug of us. He
will be able to tell her how we all are.'
Emma spared no erertions to roiuntain this happier flow
of ideas, and hoped, by the help of backgammon, to get
her & ther tolerably through the evening, and be attacked by
no regrets but her own. The backgammon-table was placed;
but a visitor itmnediately afterwards walked in and made it
unnecessary.
Mr, Knightley, a sensible man about seven or ei^t and
durty, was not only a very old and intimate & iend of the
family, but particiilaiiy connected with it as the elder
brother of Isabella's husband. He lived about a mile from
Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome, and
at this time more welcome than usual, as coming directly
from their mutual connections in London. He had returned
to a late diimer after some days* absence, and now walked
up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square.
It was a happy circumstance, and animated Mr. Woodhouse
for some time. Mr. Knightley had a cheerful manner which
always did him good; and his many enquiries after'poor
Isabella'and her children where answered most satis & ctorily.
When this was over, Mr. Woodhouse gratefully observed, —
'It is very kind of you, Mr. Knightley, to come out at this
late hour to call upon us. I am afraid you must have had
a shocking walk.'
'Not at all, dr. It is a beautiful moonli^t night; and so
mUd that I must dmw back from yonr great fire.'
'But you must have found it very damp and dirty. I wish
jou may not catch cold'
* Dirty, at I Look at my shoes. Not a speck on diem.'
'Well I that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast
deal of rain here. It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour,
while we were at break & sL I wanted them to put oS ths
wedding'
by Google
6 Emma.
* B7 the b]r, I have not wished you joy. Being pretty
well aware of irtiat sort of joy you must both be feelings I
have been in no huny with my congratulations; but I hope it
all went off tolerably well. How did you all behave t Who
died most}'
'Ah I poof Miss Taylor I'ds a sad business.'
'Foot tAj, and Miss Woodhonse, if you please ; but I
cannot possibly say " poor Miss Taylor. " I have a great
r^aid for you and Emma; but when it comes to the ques-
tion of dependence or independence ! At any rate, it must
be better to have only one to please than twa'
'Especially when tme of those two is such a fimdfiU,
troublesome creature 1'said Emma playfully.'That is what
you have in your head, I know — and what you would cer-
tainly say if my father were not by.'
'I believe it is voy true, my dear, indeed,'said Mr.
Woodhousewith a sigh.'I am afiaid I am sometimes very
fandfiil and troublesome.'
'My dearest papa 1 You do not think I could mean , > vi^
or suppose Mr. Kni^tley to mean ynt. What a hoitible
idea I Oh, no ! I meant only mysel£ Mr. Enightley loves
to find fault with me, you know — in a joke — it is all a jok &
We always say what we like to one another.'
Mr, Knightley, in & c^ was one of the few people who
could see bults in Emma Woodbouse, and the only one who
ever told ber of them ; and though tUs was not particularly
agreeable to Emma herself she ^ew it would be so much
less so to her father, that she would not have him really sus-
pect such a circumstance as het not being thought perfect
by every body.
'Emma knows I never flatter her,'said Mr. Knigfatley;
'but I meant no reflection on any body. Miss Taylor baa
been used to have two persons to please; she will now hare
but one. The chances are that she must be a gainer.'
'Well,'said Emma, willing to let it pass,'you want to
hear about the wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you,
for we all behaved charmingly. Every body was punctual,
every body in their best looks: not a tear, and hardly a long
& ce to be seen. Oh, no; we all felt that we were going to
be only half a mile apar^ and were sure of meeting evdy
day.'
byGoogIc
Eimna. f
'Dear Enuna bean every thing m mil,'caid ha fiuha-.
* But, Mr. Knigbdey, she is really Tcry aony to loae poor
Miss Taylor, and I am sure she iviff miss hex more dian she
thinks few.'
Emma tamed away her head, divided between tears and
smiles.
* It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a caia-
pemon,'said Mr. Knightley.'We should not like her so
well as we do, sir, if we could suppose it: but she knows bow
much the marriage-is to Miss Taylor's advantage; she knows
how veiy accepbiUe it must be at Miss Taylor's time of life to
be settled in a home of her own, and how important to her to
be secme of a comfortable provisiim, and therefore cannot
allow herself to feel so much pidn as pleasure. Every friend
< rf Miss Taylor must be f^lad to have ber so happily married.'
'And you have forgotten one matter < rf joy to me,'said
Emma,'and a very connderabte one — that I mz^ds die match
myself. I made ^ match, you know, four years ago; and
to have it take place, and be proved in the rights when so
many people said Mr. Weston would never marry again,
may comfort me for any thing.*
Mt. Knighdey shook his head at her. Her father ftxidly
repUed,'Ahi my dear, I wish you would not make matdies
and foretell things, for whatever you say always comes to pass.
Pray do not make any more matches.'
'I promise you to make none ka it^rself, papa ; but I
must, indeed, for other people. It is the greatest amuse-
ment in the world I And after such success, you know 1
Every body said that Mr. Weston would never marry again.
Oh dear no I Mr. Weston, who had been a widower so
long, and who seemed so perfectly comfortable wi & out a
wife, so constantly occupied either in his business in town or
among his Mends here, always acceptable wherever he went,
always cheerliil — Mr. Weston need not spend a single
evening in the year alone if he did not like it Oh, no 1
Mr. Weston certunly would never many again. Some
people even talked of a promise to his wife on her death-bed,
and others of the son and the uncle not letting him. All
manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject, but
I believed none of it Ever since the day (about four years
ago) that Miss Taylor and I met with him in Broadway
by Google
8 Entma.
Lane, when, becBose it began to mizzle, he darted away
with so mudi gailantiy, and borrowed two umbrellas for ut
from Farmer Mitchell's, I made up my mind on the subject
I planned the match from that hour ; and when such success
fa^ blessed me in this instance, dear papa, you camiot think
that I shall leave off match-making.'
'I do not understand what you mean by " success, "'said
Mr. Knij^tl^.'Success supposes endeavour. Your tune
has been properly and delicately spent, if you have been en-
deavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage.
A worthy onployment tot a young lady's mind I but ii^
which I lather imagine, your maiking the match, as you call
it, means only yoor pluming it, your saying to yourself one
idle day,'I tlunk it would be a very good thing for Miss
Taylor if Mr. Weston were to marry her, " and saying it again
to yourself every now and then afterwards, — why do you talk
of success 1 where is your merit! What are you proud oft
You made a lucky guess; end that is all that can be said.'
'And have you never known tiie pleasure and trium|di (^
a hidty guess 1 I pity you. I thou^t you dcverer; for
depend upon it, a lucky guess is never merely luck. There
is always some tedent in it Andasto mypoorword " success, "
which you quairel with, I do not know that I am so entirely
without any claim to it You have drawn two pretty pic-
tures ; but I think there may be a third, — a something be-
tween the do-nothing and the do-alL If I had not pnKuoted
Mr. Weston's visits here, and given many little encourage-
ments, and smoothed many little matters, it might not have
come to any thing after aU. I think you must know Hait-
field enough to comprehend tiiat'
'A straight-forward, open-hearted man, like Weston, and
a rational unaSccted w < Hnan, like Miss Taylor, may be safely
left to manage their own omcems. You are more hkely to
have done harm to yourself than good to them, by inter-
ference.'
'Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to
others,'rejoined Mt. Woodhouse, understanding but in part.
'But^ my dear, pray do not make any more matches, they
are silly things, and break up erne's family drcle grievously.'
'Only one more, papa; onfy for Mr. Elton. Poor Mr.
byGoogle
Bmma. 9
lElton t Yon like Mr. Elton, papit; I must look about for a
wife for him. There is nobody in Highbury who deservet
him,— and he has been here a whole year, and has fitted up
his house so comfortably, tiiat it would be a shame to have
him sii^le any longer; and I thought when he was joining
thdr hands to-day, he looked so very much as if he would
h1ce to have the same kind office done for him I I think
very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way I have of
doing him a service.'
'Mr. Elton is a very pret^ young man, to be sure, and a
vety good young man, and I have a great regard for hint.
But if you want to show him any attention, my dear, ask
him to come and dine with us some day. That will be a
much better thing. I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so
kind as to meet him.'
'With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,'said Mr,
Knighdey, laughing ;'and I agree with yon entirely, that it
will be a much better thing; Invite him to dinner, Emma, and
help him to the best of the fish and the chicken, but leave
him to choose his own wife. Depend upon it, a man of six
or seven and twen^ can take care of himsell'
CHAPTER H
Mr. WxsTOif was a nadve of Highbury, and bom of a
icq > ectable famDy, which for the last two or three gene-
rations had been rismg into gentility and property. He
had received a good education, but on succeeding eariy in
life to a small independence, had become indisposed for
any of the more homely pursuits in which his brokers were
engaged ; and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and
social temper by entering into the militia of his county,
then embodied.
Captain Weston was a general favourite ; and ^en the
chances of his military life had introduced htm to Miss
Churchill, of a great Yorkshire family, and Miss Churchill
fell in love with him, nobody was surprised except her
brother and his wife^ who bad never seen him, and who
by Google
-10 Emma.
woe fiill of pride and importance which the coimection
would offend.
Miss Churchni, however, being of age, & nd with the foil
comma & d of her fortnne— though her foitime bore no
proportion to the family-estate — ^was not to be dissuaded
from the maniage, & nd it took place to the infinite mortifi-
cation of Mr. and Mis. Churchill, who threw her off with due
decorum. It was an imsuitable connection, and did not
produce much happiness. Mrs. Weston ought to have found
more in it, for she had a husband whose wann heartand sweet
temper made him think every thing due to hei in retum for
the great goodness of being in love with him J butthoughshe
had one sort of spirit, she had not the besL She had resolu-
tion enough to pursue her own wUl in spite of her brotiier,
but not enough to refrain fix)m unreasonable r^rets at that
brother's unreasonable anger, nor from missing the hixmies
of hei fonaer home. They lived beyond their inasoe, but
still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe : she did not
cease to love her husband ; but she wanted at once to be tiie
wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe.
Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by
the CbuTChills, as wabing such an gmming match, was
proved b) have much the worst of the baigain j for whab his
wife died, after a three years'maniage, he was rather a
poorer man than at first, and with a child to " laintain.
From the expense of the child, however, he was soon
relieved. The boy had, with the additional softening claim
of a lingering illness of his mother's^ be?n the means of a
sort of reconciliation } and Mr, and Mrs. Churchill, having
no children of their own, nor any other young creature of
equal kindred to care for, c^ered to take the whole charge
of the Uttie Frank soon after her decease. Some scruples
and some reluctance the widowei'& ,thei may be supposed
to have felt ; but as they were overcome by other con-
siderations, the child was given up to the caie and the
wealth of the Chuichills, and he had only his own comfort to
seek, and his own situation to improve as he could.
A complete change of life became desirable. He quitted
the militia and engaged in trade, having brothers already
established in a good way in London, wMch afforded him a
byGoogIc
Emma. ii
fiiTOOiable opening. It wss a. concern which brought just
emplofment enouf^ He hsd still a small bonse in High-
bn^, where most of his leisure days were spent ; and
between useful occupation and the pleasuies of society, the
next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheeiJuUy
away. He had, by that time, realised an easy competence
— enough to secnie die purchase of a little estate adjoining
Highbury, which he had always longed for — enough to
many a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and to
live according to tiie wishes of his own friendly and social
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to
influence his schemes ; but as it was not the tyrannic
influence of youth on youth, it had not shaken his deter-
mination of never settlmg till he could purchase Randalls,
and die sale of Randalls was long looked forward to ; but
he had gone steadily on, with these objects in view, till they
were accomplished. He had made his fortune, boi^ht his
house^ and obtained his wife; and was begmning a new
period of existence with every probability of greater happi-
ness than in any yet passed through. He had never been
an unhappy man ; his own temper had secured him from
thal^ even in his first maniage ; but his second must show
him how delightful a well-judgii% and truly amiable woman
could be, and must gjve him the pleasantest [noof of its
being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen, to
excite gratitude than to feel it.
He had only himself to please in his choice : his fortune
was his own; for as to Frank, it was more than beii^
tacidy brought up as his uncle's heir; it had become so
avovred an adoption as to have him assume the name of
Churchill on coming of age. It was most unlikely, there-
fore, that he should ever want his father's assistance. His
& ther had no apprehension of it Tht aunt was a capri-
cious woman, and governed her husband entirely j but it
was not in Mr. Weston's nature to imagine that any caprice
could be strong enough to affect one so dear, and, as he
believed, so deservedly dear. He saw his son every year in
London, and was proud of him ; and his fond report of him
as a vei; fine young man had made Highbury feel a sort of
by Google
12 Emma.
pnde in him too. He was looked on as sufficiently belong-
ing to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of
common concern.
Mr. Frank ChurchUl was one of the boasts of Highbury,
and a lively curiosity to see Wm prevailed, though the
compliment was so little returned that he had never been
there in his life. His coming to visit his & ther had been
often talked of but never achieved.
Now, upon his Other's mamage, it was very generally
proposed, as a most proper attention, tiiat the visit should
take place. There was not a dissentient voice on the
subject, either when Mis. Pory diank tea widi Mis. and
Miss Kites, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates retomed the visit
Now was the time for Mr, Frank Churchill to come among
them ; and the hope strengthened when it was understood
that he had written to bis new mother on the occasion.
For a few days every morning visit in Highbury included
some mention of ^e handsome letter Mis. Weston had
received.'I suppose you have heard of the handsome
letter Mr. Frank Churchill had written to Mis. Weston 1 I
understand it was a very handsome letter, indeed. Mr.
Woodhouse told me of it Mr. Woodhouse saw the letter,
and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life.'
It was, indeed, a highly-priaed letter. Mrs. Weston had,
of course, formed a vety ^vourable idea of the young man ;
and such a pleadng attention was an irresistible pnxrf'of his
great good sense, and a most welcome addition to every
source and every expression of congratulation which her
marriage had already secured. She felt herself a most for-
tunate woman ; and she had lived long enough to know how
fortunate she might well be Aought^ where the only regret
was for a paitial separation from fiiends, whose friendship
for her had never cooled, and who could ill bear to part
with her.
She knew that at times she must be missed ; and could
not think, without pain, c^ Emma's lodng a single pleasure,
or suffering an hour's ennui, from the want of her com-
panionaUeness ; but dear Emma was of no feeble characta;
she was more equal to her situation than most girls would
have been, and had sense, and energy, and spirits that
by Google
Emma.
13
might be hoped would bear her weU and happily tbrongh its
little difficulties and privations. And then iheie was such
comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield,
so convenient for even solitary female walking, and in Mr.
Weston's disposition and circumstances, which would make
the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half
the evenings in the week together.
Her situation was altogether the subject of boars of grati-
tude to Mis. Weston, and of moments only of regret ; and
her sads & ctioQ — her more than satisfaction — her cheerful
enjoyment was so just and so apparent, that Emma, well as
she knew her father, was sometimes taken by surprise at
his being still able to pity'poor Miss Taylor,'when they lefl
her at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or
saw her go away in the evening attended by her pleasant
husband to a carriage of her own. But never did she
go without Mr. Woodhouse's giving a gentle sigh, and
sayinfe—
* Ah, poor Miss Taylor I She would be very glad to stay.'
There was no recovering Miss Taylor — nor much likeli-
hood of ceasing to pity her ; but a few weeks brought some
alleviation to Mr. Woodhousc, The compliments of his
ndghboms were ova : he was no longer teased by being
wished jc^ of so sorrowful an event ; and the wedding-cake,
which had been a great distress to him, was all ate up. His
own stomach could bear nothing rich, and he could never be-
lieve other people to be different from himself What was
unwholesome to him, he regarded as unfit for any body ; and
he had, therefore, earnestly tried to dissuade them from
having any wedding-cake at all ; and when that proved vain,
as earnestly tried to prevent any body's eating it He had
been at the pains of consulting Mr. Perry, the apothecary,
on the subject Mr. Peiiy was an intelligent, gentlemanlike
man, whose frequent vidts were one of the comforts of Mr.
Woodhouse's life j and, upon being applied to, he could not
but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the bias
of indination), that wedding-cake might certainty disagree
with many — perhaps with most people, unless taken moder-
ately. With such an opinion, in confirmation of his own
Ht. Woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of the new-
byGooglc
mairied pair j but still the cake was eaten ; and there wat
no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone.
There was a strange lumour in Highbury of all the little
FeriTB bemg seen with a slice of Mis. Weston's wedding-
cake in their hands; but Mr. Woodhouse would never
believe it
CHAPTER ni.
Mk. Wooshotise was fond of society in his own way. He
liked veiy much to have bis fiiends come and see him ;
and from various united causes, from his long residence at
Hartfield, and his good nature, & om his fottune, his house,
and his daughter, he could command the visits of his own
little drcle, in a great measure, as he liked He had not
much intercourse with any families beyond that circle : his
horror of late hours, and large dinner-parties, made him un-
fit for any acquaintance, but such as would visit him on his
own terms. Fortunately for him, Highbury, including Ran-
dalls in the same parish, and Donw^ Abbey in the parish
adjoining, the seat of Mr. Knighdey, comprehended many
such. Not unfrequently, through Emma's persuasion, he
had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him ; but
evening parties were what be preferred ; and, unless he
& ncied himself at any time unequal to company, there was
scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could not
make up a card-table for him.
Real, long standing regard brought the Westons and Mr.
Knightley ; and by Mr. Elton, a young man living alone
without liking it, the privilege of exchanj^ng any vacant
evening of his own blank solitude for the el^ancies and
sode^ of Mr. Woodhouse's drawing-room, and the smiles
of his lovely daughter, was in no danger of being thrown
away.
After these came a second set: among the most come-
at-Able of whom were Mrs. and Miss Bates, and Mrs.
Goddard, tluee ladies almost always at the service of an
invitation from Hartfield, and who were fetched and carried
home so often, that Mr. Woodhouse thought it no hardship
by Google
Emma, i]
to either James or the horses. Had it taken place onlj
once a year, it would have been a grievance.
Mrs, Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, waa
a veiy old lady, almost past every thing but tea and
qnadiiUe. She lived with her mgle daughter in a very
small way, and was considered with all the regard and
respect which a harmless old lady, under such untoward
circumstances, can excite. Her daughter enjoyed a most
uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young,
handsome, ridi nor married. Miss Bates stood in the
very worst predicament in the wodd for having much of the
public favour ; and she had no intellectual superiority to
make atonement to herself or frighten those who might
hate her, into outward respect She had never boasted
eidier beauty or cleverness. Her youth had passed without
distinction, and her middle of life was devoted to the care
of a & Oing mother, and the endeavour to make a small in-
come go as far as possible. And yet she was a happy
woman, and a woman whom no one named without good-
will. It was her own universal good-will and contented
temper which worked such wonders. She loved every body,
was interested in every body's happiness, quicksighted to
every body's merits ; thought herself a most fortunate
creature and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent
mother, and so many good neighbours and friends, and a
home that wanted for nothing. The simplicity and cheer-
fiUness of her nature, her contented and grateful spirit, were
a recommendation to every body, and a mine of felicity to
herself She was a great talker upon little matters, which
exactly suited Mr. Woodhouse, full of trivial communi cations
and harmless gossip.
Mrs. Goddard was the mistress of a school, — not of a
seminary, or an establishment, or any thing which professed,
in long sentences of refined nonsense, to combine liberal
acquirements with elegant morality, upon new principles
and new systems, — and where young ladies for enormous
pay might be screwed out of health and into vanity, — but a
real, honest, old fasWoned boarding-school, where a reason-
able quanti^ of accomplishments were sold at a reason-
able price, and where gurls might be sent to be out of the
,M..d by Google
i6
limma.
way, and scramble themselves into a little education, with-
out any danger of coming back prodigies. Mrs. Goddard's
school was in high repute, and very deservedly ; for High-
bury was reckoned a particularly healthy spot : she had an
ample house and garden, gave the children plenty of whole-
some food, let them run about a great deal in the summer,
and in winter dressed their chilblains with her own hands.
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now
walked after her to Church. She was a plain, mother^
kind of woman, who had worked hard in her youth, and
now thought herself entitled to the occasional holiday of a
tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to Mr. Wood-
house's kindness, felt his particular claim on her to leave
her neat parlour, hung round with fancy work, whenever she
could, and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside.
These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very
frequently able to collect; and happy was she, for her father's
sake, in die power; though, as far as she was herself con-
cerned, it was DO remedy for the absence of Mrs. Weston.
She was delighted to see her father look comforUble, and
very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well;
but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel
that evoy evening so spent was indeed one of the long even-
ings she had fearfully anticipated.
As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a
(Jose of the present day, a note was brought from Mrs God
dard, requesting, in most respectfiil terms, to be allowed to
bring Miss Smith with her : a most welcome request ; for Miss
Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew very well by
dgfat, and had long felt ao interest in. on account of h^
beauty. A very gracious invitation was returned, and the
evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion.
Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody.
Somebody had placed her, several years back, at Mis. God-
dard's school, and somebody had lately raised her from the
condition of scholar to that of parlour boarder. This was all
that was generally known of herhistoty. She had no visible
friends but what had been acquired at Highbury, and was
now just returned from a long visit in die country to some
young ladies who had been at school there with her.
byGoogIc
Etama.
»7
She was a very pretty giil, and her beauty happened to be
of a sort which Emma particularly admired, ^e vrus short,
plump, and fair, with a fine bloom, blue eyes, light hur,
regular features, and a look of great sweetness ; and, before
the end of the evening, Emma was as much pleased with her
manners as her person, and quite determined to continue the
acquaintance.
She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss
Smith's conversation, but she found her altogether very en-
gaging — not inconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk,— and
yet so fiir from pushing, showing so proper and becoming a
deference, seeming so pleasantly grateful for being admitted
to Hartfield, and so artlessly impressed by the appearance ot
every thing in so superior a style to what she had been used
to, that she must have good sense, and deserve encourage-
ment Encouraganent should be given. Those soft blue
eyes, and all those natural graces, should not be wasted on
the inferior society of Highbury, and its connections. The
acquaintance she had already formed were unworthy of her.
The friends from whom she had just parted, though veiy
good sort of people, must be doing her hann. They were a
family of the name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by
character, as renting a large farm of Mr. Kni^tley, and
residing in the parish of Donwell,— very creditably, she be-
lieved : she knew Mr. Knightley thought highly of them ; but
they must be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the
intimates of a girl who wanted only a little more knowledge
and elegance to be quite perfect Sie would notice her ;
she would improve her; she would detach her from her
bad acquaintance, and introduce her into good society ; she
would fonn her opinions and her manners. It would be an
interesting and certainly a very kind undertaking ; highly
becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, and powers.
She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talk-
ing and listening, and foiming all these schemes in the in-
betweens, that the evening flew away at a very unusual rate;
and the supper table, which always closed such parties, and
for which ^e had been used to sit and watch the due time^
was all set out and ready, and moved forwards to the fire,
before she was aware. With an alacrity beyond the O
by Google
1 8 Emma.
impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the
credit of doing every thing well and attentively, with the real
good-will of a mind delisted with its own ideas, did she
then do all the honours of the meal, and help and recom-
mend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters, with an
urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early
hours and dvil scruples of their guests.
Upon such occasions poor Mr. Woodhousc's feelings were
in sad warfare. He loved to have the cloth laid, beaiuse it
bad been the fashion of his youth: but his conviction of
■uppers being veiy unwholesome, made him rather sony to
see any thing put on it ; and irtiile his hospitality would have
welcomed his visitors to every thin^ his care for their health
made him grieve that they wonld eat
Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was
all that he could, with thorough self-approbation, recom-
mend ] though he might constrain himself, while the ladies
were comfortably clearing the nicer things, to say, —
'Mrs. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of
these eggs. An egg boiled veiy soft is not unwholesome.
Scile understands boiling an egg better than any body. I
would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else, —
but you need not be afiaid, they are very small, you see, —
one of our small q(gs will not hurt you. Miss Bates, letEnnna
help you to a iiUle bit of tart— a very little bit Ours are
all apple tarts. You need not be afraid of unwholesome
preserves here. I do not advise the custard. Mrs. Goddard,
what say jrou to ha^ a glass of wine t A smail half glass,
put into a tumbler of water 1 I do not think it could disagree
with you.'
Emma allowed her fadier to talk — but supplied her
visitors in a much more satisfactory s^le ; and on the pre-
sent evening had particular pleasure in sending them away
happy. The happiness of Miss Smith was quite equal to
her intentions. Miss Woodhouse was so great a peraonage
in Highbury, that the prospect of the introduction had given
as much panic as pleasure ; but the humble, grateful tittle
gM went off with hi^y gratified feelings, delighted with the
affiibility with which Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the
^ and actually shaken hands with her at last !
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
CHAPTER IV.
Haxriet Surra's indmacy at Haitfield was soon a settled
thing. Quick and dedded in her ways, Emma lost no time
in invitmg, encouraging, and telling her to come very often ;
and as their acquaintance increased, so did their satisfaction
in each other. As a walking companioni Emma had very
eojiy foreseen how usdul she might find her. In that respect
Mrs. Weston's loss had been important Her father never
went beyond die shrubbery, where two divisions of the
ground sufficed him for his long walk, or his shot, as the year
varied; and since Mrs. Weston's marriage her exerdse had
been too much confined. She had ventured once alone to
Raadalls, bat it was not pleasant; and a Harriet Smidi,
therefor^ one whom she could summon at any time to a walk,
would be a valnable addition to her privileges. But in every
respect as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was
confirmed in all her kind designs.
Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet,
dodle, grateliil disposition; was totally free from concdt,
and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to.
Her early attachment to herself was very amiable ; and her
inclination for good company, and power of appreciating
what was elegant and clever, showed that there was no want
of taste, though strength of understanding must not be ex-
pected. Altogether she was quite coni-inced of Harriet
Smith's being exacdy the young friend she wanted,— «xacdy
die sometbii^ whidi her home required. Sach a fiiend as
Mrs. Weston was out of the question. Two such conld
never be granted. Two such she did not want It was quite
a difierent sort of thing,-~a sentiment distinct and indepen-
dent Mrs. Weston was the object of a regard which had its
basis in gratitude and esteem. Hairiet would be loved as
one to whom she could be usefiiL For Mrs. Weston tbeie
was nothing to be done ; for Hairiet every thing.
Her first attempts at utefiilness were in an endeavour to
find out who were the parents ; but Hiuriet could not telL
,M..d by Google
20 Emma.
She was readjr to tell every thing in her power, but on thii
subject questions were vain. Emma was obliged to fancjr
what she liked ; but she could never believe that in the
same situation sAe should not have discovered the truth.
Harriet had no penetration. She had been satisfied to hear
•nd believe just what Mrs. Goddard chose to tell her : and
looked no farther.
Mrs. Goddaid, and the teachers, and the girls, and the
aJ£urs of the school in general, formed naturally a great part
of her conveisatioD, — and but for her acquaintance with the
Martins of Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have been the whole.
But the Martins occupied her thoughts a good deal : she
had spent two very happy months with them, and now loved
to talk of the pleasures of her visit, and describe the many
comforts and wonders of the place. Emma encouraged her
talkativeness, — amused by such a picture of another set of
beings, and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could
speak with so much exultation of Mrs. Martin's having'taw
parlour^ two very good parlours, indeed : one of them quite
as large as Mrs. Goddard'a drawing-room ; and of her having
an upper maid who had lived five-and-twenty years with her ;
and of their having eight cows, two of them Aldemeys, and
one a little Welsh cow, a very pretty little Welsh cow, indeed;
and of Mrs. Martin's saying, as she was so fond of it^ it
should be called Aer cow ; and of their having a very hand-
some summer-house in their gaiden, where some day next
year they were all to drink tea, — a very handsome summer-
house, large enough to hold a doten people.'
For some dme she was amused, without thinking beyond
die immediate cause ; but as she came to understand the
ftmily better, other feelings arose. She had taken up a wrong
idea, fancying it was a mother and daughter, a son and son's
wife, who all lived together ; but when it appeared that the
Mr Martin, who bore apart in the narrative, and was always
moitioned with approbation for his great good-nature in
doing something or other, was a single man ; that there was
no young Mrs. Martin, no wife in the case ; she did suspect
danger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality and
kindness, — and diat if she were not taken care o^ ^e might
be required to sink herself for ever.
by Google
Emma, 2X
With this inspiiitiDg notion, her questions increased in
number and meaning ; and she paitictdarir led Harriet to
talk more of Mr. Maitin — and there was evidendy no dislike
to it Harriet was very ready to speak of the share he had
had in their moonlight walks and merry evening games ; and
dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good-humouted
and obliging.'He had gone three miles round one day, in
order to bring her some walnuts, because she had said how
fond she was of them, — and in every thing else he was sove^
obliging. He had his shepherd's son into the parlour one
ni{^t on purpose to sing to her. She was very fond of sing-
ing. He could sing a Utde hunsel£ She believed he was
Toy cleva, and understood every thinf^ He had a very
fine flock ; and, while she was with them, be bad been lud
more for his wool than any body in the country. She believed
every body spoke well of him. His mother and sisters were
very fond of him. Mrs. Martin had told her one day (and
there was a blush as she said it), that it was impossible for
any body to be a better son ; and therefore she was sure
iriienever he mairied he would make a good husband. Not
that she wantai him to many. She was in no huriy at alL'
'Well don^ Mrs. Martin 1'thought Emma.'You know
what you aie about'
'And when she had come away, Mrs. Martin was so very
kind as to send Mrs. Goddard a beautiiiil goose : die finest
goose Mis. Goddard had ever seen. Mrs. Goddard had
dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the three teachers,
Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson to sup
with her,'
'Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information
beyond the line of his own business. He does not readf
'Oh, yes 1 — that is, no — I do not know — but I believe
he has read a good deal — but not what you would think
anything oC He reads the Agricultural Reports, and some
other books that lie in one of the wiitdow seats — ^but he reads
all them to himself. But sometimes of an evening, before
we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of the
Elegant Extracts, very entertaining. And I know he has
read the Vicar of Wakefield. He never read the Romance
< rf the Forest, nor the Children of the Abbey. He had nevet
byGoogIc
heaid of such books before I mentioned them, but he is de-
tennined to get them now as soon as ever he can.'
" nie next question was, —
'What soit of looking man is Mr. MEUtinr
'Oh! not handsome — not at all handsome. I thought
him very plain at first, but I do not think him so plain notr.
One does not, you know, after a time. But did jrou never
Bee himi He is in Highbury ev^ now and then, and he is
sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston.
He has passed you very often.'
'That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but
without having any idea of his name. A young laimer,
whether on horseback or on foot, is the very last sort of
person to raise my curiosity. The yeomanry are precisely
the order of people with whom I feel I can have nothing to da
A degree or two lower, and a creditable appearance might
interest me ; I might hope to be useful to their families in
some way or other. But a farmer can need none of my help,
and is therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice, as
in every other he is below iL*
'To be sure. Oh, yes, it is not likely you should ever have
observed him ; but he knows you very well, indeed— I mean
by sight'
'I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young
man. I know, indeed, that he is so ; and, as such, wish
him welL What do you imagine his age to be V
'He was four-and twenty the 8th of last June, and my
birthday is the 33rd : just a. fortnight and a day's difference ;
which is very odd.'
'Only four-and-tweuty. That is too young to settie. His
mother is perfectly right not to be in a huny. They seem
very comfortable as they are, and if she were to take any
pains to marry him, she would probably repent iL Six years
hence, if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in
the same rank as his own, with a little money, it might be
very desirable.'
'Six years hence I dear Miss Woodbonse, he would be
thirty years old.'
-Well, and that is as early as most men can tSCoTd to
marry, who are not bom to an independence. Mr. Mattiiv
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
I imagine, hu his fortune entirely to make — cannot be at all
beforehand with the world. Wfaatevermonerhe might come
into when his fsther died, whatever his share of the & mily
property, it is, I dare say, all afloat, all employed in his stock
and so forth ; and Aou^, with diligence and good luck, he
may be rich in time, it is next to impossible that he should
have realised any thing yet'
'To be sure, so it Is. But they live very comfwtably. They
have no in-doors man — else they do not want for any thing;
and Mrs. Martin talks of taking a boy another year.'
* I wish you may not get into a scrape, Hamet, whenever
he does marry, — I mean, as to being acquainted with his
wife ; for thoogh his sisters, from a superior educadoi^ are
not to be altogether objected to, it does not follow that he
inig^t many any body at all fit for you to notice. The mis-
fortune of your birth ought to make jrou particularly careful
as to your associates. There can be no doubt of your being
a gentleman's daughter, and you must support your claim to
that station by every thing within your own power, or there
will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrad-
ing you.'
'Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are. But while I visit at
Haitfield, and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodbouse, I am
not afraid of what any body can do.'
'You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet,
but I would have you so firmly established in good society,
as to be independent even of Hartfield and Miss Woodhouse.
I want to see you permanently well connected, — and to that
end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as
may be ; and, therefore, I say, that if you should still be in
this country when Mr. Martm marries, I wish you may not
be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be ac-
quainted with the wife, who will probably be some mere
farmer's daughter, without education.'
'To be sure. Yes. Not that I think Mr. Martin would
ever many any body but what had had some education, and
been very well brought up. However, I do not mean to set
up my c^inion against yours, — arnl I am sure I shall not
insh for the acquaintance of his wife. I shall always have a
great regard for the Miss Martins, espedaliy Elizabeth, and
by Google
Z4. Emma.
should be very sony to give diem up, for diey are qaite as
well educated as mc But if he raairics a very ignorant,
vulgar woman, certainly I had better not visit her, if I can
help it'
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of thisspeech,
and saw no alaiming symptoms of love. The young man
had been the first admirer, but she trusted there was no
other hold, sod that there would be no serious difficulty
on Harriet's side to oppose any Mendly arrangement of har
own.
They met Mr. Martin the very next day, as they were
waUdng on the Donwell road. He was on foot, and after
looking very respectfully at her, looked with most unfeigned
latisfaction at her companion. Emma was not sony to have
such an opportunity of survey; and walking a few yards for^
ward, while they talked together, soon made her quick eye
sufhdently acquainted with Mr. Robert Martin. His
appearance was very neat, and he looked like a aen^ble
young man, but his person had no other advantage ; and
when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen, she thought
he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet's incli-
i > ation. Harriet was not insensible of manner; she had
voluntarily noticed her father's gentleness with admiration as
well as wonder. Mr. Martin looked as if he did not know
what manner was.
They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Wood-
house must not be kept waiting; and Harriet then came
runnii^ to her with a smiling face, and in a flutter of spirits,
which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose.
'Only think of our happening to meet him ! How very
odd 1 It was quite a chance, he said, that he had not gone
round by Randalls. He did not think we ever walked this
road. He thought we walked towards Randalls most days.
He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet.
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he
quite forgot it, but he goes again to-morrow. So very odd
we should happen to meet I Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he
like what you expected t What do you think of him t Do
you think him so very pbin 1'
'He is very plain, undoubtedly, remarkably plain; but
I .;, Google
Emtfta. 2$
that is nodiing, compared widi his entire want of gentility.
I had no right to expect much, and I did not expect much;
but I bad no idea that he oould be to fay downish, so
totally without air. I had imagined him, I confess, a degree
or two nearer gentili^.'
'To be sure,'said Maniet, in a mortified voice,'he is not
so gcnted as real gentlemen.'
'I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you
have been repeatedly in the company of some, such vciy real
gentlemen, that you must yourself be struck with the differ-
CDce in Mi. Martin. At Haitfield, you have had very good
specimens of well educated, well bred men. I should be
surprised i^ after seeing them, you could be in company
with Mr. Martin again without perceiving him to be a
very inferior creature, — and rather wondering at yourself for
having ever thought him at all agreeable before. Do not yon
b^in to feci that now 1 Were not you struck t I am sure
you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt
manner; and the uncouthness of a voice, which I heard to
be wholly unmodulated as I stood here.'
'Certainly, he is not like Mr. Knightley. He has not
■uch a fine air and way (rf'walking as Mr. Knighdey. I see
the difference plain enough. But Mr. Knightley is so very
fine a man 1'
'Mr. Knightley's air is so remarkably good that it is not
fail to oxnpare Mr. Martin with Mm. You might not see
one in a hundred, with gaUkman so plainly written as in
Mr. Knightley. But he is not the only gentleman you have
been lately used to. What say you to Mr. Weston and Mr.
Elton I Compare Mr. Martin with either of them. Compare
their manner of canyii^ themselves; of walking; of speak-
ing ; of being silent You must see the difference.'
'Oh, yes, there is a great difference. But Mr. Weston is
almost an old man. Mr. Weston must be between forty and
fifty.'
'Which makes his good maimers the more valuable. The
older a person grows, Harriet, the more important it is that
their manners should not be bad, — the more glaring and dis-
gusting any loudness, or coarseness, or awkwardness becomes.
What is passable in youth is detestable in later age. Mr.
byGoOgk'
26 Emma.
Martiii is now awkward and abrupt; what will he be at tit.
Weston's time oflifer
'There is no sayings indeed,'replied Hairiet, rather
solemnly.
'But thete may be pretty good guesnng. He will be a
completely gross, vulgar fanner, — totally inattentive to
appearances, and thinking of nothing bat profit and loss.'
■Wilt he, indeed) that will be very bad.'
'How much his business engrosses him already, is very
plaiit fiom the circumstance of his forgetting to enquire for
the book you recommended. He was a great deal too fiill
of the market to think of any thing else, — ^which is just as it
should be, for a thriving man. What has he to do with
books t And I have no doubt that he wUl thrive and be a
very rich man in time, — and his being illiterate and coarse
need not disturb us.'
'I wonder he did not remember the book,'was all
Haniets answer, and spoken with a degree of grave dis-
pleasure which Emma thought might be safely left to itself.
She, therefore, said no more for some time. Her next
beginning was, —
'In one respect, perhaps, Mi. Elton's manners are
superior to Mr. Knightley's or Mr. Western's.'Diey have
more geutleness. They might be more safely held up as a
pattern. There is an openness, a quickness, ahnost a blunt-
ness in Mr. We^on, whidi every body likes in him, because
there is so much good humour with it — ^but that would not
do to be copied. Neither would Mr. Knightley's down-
right^ decided, commanding sort of manner — though it suits
him very well : his figure, and look, and situation in life
seem to allow it ; but if any young man were to set about
copying him, he would not be sufierable. On the contrary,
I tiunk a young man might be very safdy reconmiendcd to
take Mr. Elton as a model Mr. Elton is good bimioured,
cheerful, obliging, and gentle. He seems to me to be grown
particularly gende of late. I do not know whedier he has
any design of ingratiating himself with either of xis, Haniet,
by additional softness, but it strikes me that his manners are
softer than they used to be. If he means any thing, it must
byGoo^^lc
Emma. 27
be to please you. Did not I tell yoa what he said of you
the other day}'
She then repeated some warm personal praise which she
had drawn from Mr. Elton, and now did full justice to ;
and Haniet blushed and smiled, and said she had always
thought Mr. Elton very agreeable;
Mr. Elton was the very person fixed on hy Emma for
driving the young farmer out of Harriet's head. She
thou^t it would be an excellent match; and only too
palpably desirable, natural and probable, for her to have
much merit in planning it. She feared it was what eveiy
body else must thint of and predict. It was not likely,
however, that any body should have equalled her in die
date of the plan, as it had entered her brsm during the very
first evening of Harriet's coming to Hartfield. The longer
she considered it, the greater was her sense of its expedienC7.
Mr. Elton's sttuadon was most suitable, quite the gendemaa
himself, and without low connections ; at the same time not
< tf any & mily that conld feirly object to the doubtful birth of
Haniet He had a comfortable home for her, and Emma
imagined a very sufficient income ; for though the vicarage
of Hif^buiy was not large, he was known to have some
independCDt property ; and she thought very highly of him
as a good-humoured, well-meaning respectable young man,
vrithout any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge
of the world.
She had already satisfied herself diat he thought Harriet
a beautifiil girl, which she trusted, with such frequent meet-
ings at HartfieJd, was foundation enough on his side ; and
on Harriet's there could be little doubt that the idea of
being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and
efficacy. And he was really a. very pleasing young man, a
young man whom any woman not festidious might like. He
was reckoned very handsome ; his person much admired in
general, though not by her, there being a want of elegance
of feature which she could not dispense with ; but the girl
who could be gratified by a Robert Martin's riding about the
country to get walnuts for her might very well be conquered
by Mr. Elton's adiiuiati < m.
by Google
CHAPTER V.
'I DO not know what your opinion taaj be, Mn. Weston,'
said Mr. Knightley,'of this great iatiaacy between Emma
and Haiiiet Smith, but I think it is a bad tiling.*
'A bad thing I Do you really think it a bad tiling t —
why so f'
■ I think they will neither of tiiem do the other any good.'
'You surprise me 1 BmmamustdoHaniet good; andby
supplying her with a new object of interest, Harriet may be
said to do Emma good. I have been seeing their intimacy
with the greatest pleasure. How very differcntiy we feel 1
Not think they will do each other any good 1 This will
certainty be the beginning of one of our quarrels about
Emma, Mr. Knightiey.'
'Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with
you, knowing Weston to be out, and that you must still fight
your own battie.'
'Mr. Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were
here, for he thinks exactly as I do < ai the subject We were
spealdng of it only yestoday, and agreeing how fortunate it
was for Emma, l^t there should be such a gid in Hi^buty
for her to associate with. Mr. Knightiey, I shall not allow
you to be a iair judge in this case. You are so much used
to live alone, that you do not know the value of a com-
panion; and, perhaps, no man can be a good judge of the
comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex,
after being used to it all her life. I can imagine your objec-
tion to Haniet Smith. She is not the sup^or young woman
iriiich Emma's biead ought to be. But, on the other hand,
as Emma wants to see her better informed, it will be an in-
ducement to her to read more hcnelf. Tbcy will read
together. She means it, I know.'
• Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she
was twelve years old. I have seen a great many lists of her
drawing up at various times of books that she meant to read
regularly through — and very good lists they were — very well
byGoogle
Emma. 29
diosen, and T«y neatly airanged — sometimes alphabetically,
and sometimes by some other mle. The list she drew up
when only fourteen — I remember thinking it did her judg-
ment 80 much credit, that I preserved it some time; and I
dare say she may have made out a very good list now. But
I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from
FTr* " } " . She will never submit to any thing requiring industry
and patience, and a subjection of the fancy to the under-
standing. Where Miss Taj^or failed to stimulate, I may
safely afirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing. You never
could persuade her to read half so much as yon wished.
You know yon could not'
'I dare say,'replied Mrs. Weston, nailing, * that I thought
so thM ; but since we have parted, I can never remember
Emma's omitting to do any diing I wished.'
'There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as
Ain/,'said Mr. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment or
two he had done.'But I,'he soon added,'who have had
no such charm thrown over my senses, must still see, bear,
and remember, Bjnma ts spoiled by being the cleverest of
her family. At ten years old she had the misfortune of
being able to answer questions which puizled her sister at
seventeen. She was always quick and assured; Isabella
slow and diffident And ever since she was twelve, Emma
has been mistress of the house and of you all. In her
mother she lost the only person able to cope with her. She
inherits her mother's talents, and must have been under sub-
jection to her.'
* I should have been sony, Mr. Knightley, to be dependent
on your recommendation, had I quitted Mr. Woodhouse's
family and wanted another situation ; I do not think you
would have spoken a good word for me to any body. I am
sure you always thought me unfit for die office I held.'
'Yes,'said he smiling.'You are better placed fure ;
wry fit for a wife, but not at all for a governess. But you
were preparing yourself to be an excellent wife all the time
you were at Hartfield. You might not give Emma such a
complete education as your powers would seem to promise;
but you were recdving a very good education from Jier, on
the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own
M.Pd by Google
30 Emma.
will, and doing as you were tnd ; and if Weston had asked
me to recommend bim a wife, I should certainiy have named
Miss Taylor.'
'Thank you. There will be veiy Uttle merit in making a
good wife to such a man as Mr. Weston.'
'Why, to own the truth, I am afciid you are rather thrown
away, and that with every disposition to bear, there will be
nothing to be borne. We will not despair, however, Wes-
ton may grow cross from the wantonness of comfort, or hut
son may plague him.'
'I hope not fAat. It is not likely. No, Mr. Knightley,
do not foretell vexation from that quarter.'
'Not I, indeed. I only name possibilities. I do not pre-
tend to Emma's genius for foretelling and guessing. I hope,
with all my heart, tbe young man may be a Weston in merit,
and a Chim:hill in fortune. But Harriet Smith, — I have not
lialf done about Harriet Smith. I think her the very worst
sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. She
knows nothing herself and looks upon Emma as knowii^
every thing. She is a flatterer in all her ways ; and so much
the worse, because undesigned. Her ignorance is houiiy
flattery. How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn
herself while Harriet is presenting such a delightfiil in-
feriority I And as for Harriet, I will venture to say that tie
cannot gain by the acquaintance. Hartiield will only put
her out of conceit with all the other places she belongs to.
She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with
those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her
home. I am much mistaken if Emma's doctrines give any
strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girt adapt herself
rationally to the varieties of her situation in life.'They only
give a little polish.'
'I either depend more upon Emma's good sense than
you do, or am more anxious for her present comfort; for
I cannot lament the acquaintance. How well she looked
last night'
* Oh, you would rather talk of her person than her mind,
would you 1 Very well ; I shall not attempt to deny Emma's
being pretty.'
'^tty ! say beautiful rather. Can you imagine any
byGoogle
Emma.
3*
dting Dearer perfect beauty dura Emma altogether — & ce
udfigmet'
'I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that
I have seldom seen a. faxx or figure more pleasing to me than
hers. But I am a partial old friend.'
'Such an eye ! — the true hasel eye — and so brilliant I
legulai features, open countenance, with a complexion.— < rii,
what a bloom of full health, and such a pretty height and
size; such a fiim and upright figure. There is health, not
merely in her Uoom, but in her air, her head, her glance.
One hears sometimes of a child being " the picture of health; "
DOW Knma always gives me the idea of being the com plete
picture o( growD-np health. £aie is loveliness itself, Mr.
Knightley, is not she I'
'I have not a & ult to find widi her person,'he replied.
< I think her all you describe. I lo^-e to look at her; and I
will add this praise, that I do not think her personally vain.
Con^dering how very handsome she is, she appears to be
little occupied with it; her vanity lies another way. Mrs.
Weston, I am not to be talked out of my dislike of her
intimacy with Harriet Smith, or my dread of its doing them
both harm.'
'And I, Mr. Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence
of its not doing them any harm. With all dear Emma's little
& nlta, she is an excellent creature. Where shall we see a
better daughter, or a kinder sister, or a truer friend 1 No,
no ; she has qualities which may be trusted ; she will never
lead any one really wrong ; she will make no lasting blunder ;
where Emma ens once, she is in the right a hundred times.'
'Very well; I will not pl^ue you any more. Emma
shall be an angel, and I will keep my spleen to myself till
Christmas brings John and Isabella. John loves Emma
with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection, and
Isabella always thinks as he does, except when he is not
quite frightened enough about the diildren. I am sure of
having their opinions with me.'
'I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust
or unkind; but excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if I take the
Kberty (I consider myself, you know, as tuviDg somewhat
of the privilege of speed) that Emma's mother might have
by Google
32
Emma.
had), ihe liberty of hinting, that I do not think any possible
good can arise from Harriet Smith's intimacy being made a
matter of much discussion among you. I^y excuse me ;
but supposing any httle inconvenience may be apprehended
from the intimacy, it cannot be expected that Emma, ac-
countable to nobody but her father, who perfectly approves
the acquaintance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a
source of pleasure to herself. It has been so many years
my province to give advice, that you cannot be surprised,
Mr. Knightley, at this little remains of office.'
'Not at all,'cried he;'I am much obliged to you for it
It is very good advice, and it shall have a better fate than
your advice has often found; for it shall be attended to.'
'Mrs. John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be
made unhappy about her sister.'
'Be satisfied,'said he;'I will not raise any outcry. I
will keep my ill-humoui to myself. I have a very sincere
interest in Emma. Isabella does not seem more my sister:
has never excited a greater interest; perhaps hardly so great
There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one feels for Emma.
I wonder what will become of her.'
'So do I,'said Mrs. Weston, gently,'very much.'
'She always declares she will never many, i^ch, of
course, means just nothing at all. But I have do idea that
she has yet ever seen a man she cared for. It would not be
a bad thing for her to be very much in love with a proper
object I should like to see Emma in love, and in some
doubt of a return: it would do her good. But there is no >
body hereabouts to attach hec ; and she goes so seldom from
home.'
'There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break
her resolution at present,'said Mrs. Weston,'as can well
be; and while she is so hf^py at Hartfield, I cannot wish
her to be forming any attachment which would be creating
such difficulties, on poor Mr. Woodhouse's account. I do
not recommend matrimony at present to Emma, though I
mean no slight to the state, I assure you.'
Fart of her meaning was to conceal some iavourite thoughts
of her own and Mr. Weston's on the subject as much as pos-
sible. There were wishes at Randalls respecting Emma's
,,,.f:ibyGoOglc
destiny, bat it was not desirable to have them suspc-cted ;
and the quiet tiansitioii which Mr. Knightley sooa after-
wards made to'What does Weston think of the weather 1 —
shall we hare rain I * — convinced her that he had nodiuig
more to say or suimise about Hattfidd.
CHAPTER VI.
Ehha could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet's fancy
a proper direction, and raised the gratitude of her young
vanity to a very good purpose ; for she found her decidedly
more sensible tiian before of Mr. Elton's being a remarkably
handsome man, with most agreeable manners j and as she
had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admi-
ration by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident of
creating as mnch liking on Harriet's side as there could be
any occasion for. She was quite convinced of Mf. Elton's
being in the fairest way of felling in love, if not in love
already. She bad no scruple with r^ard to him. He talked
of Huriet; and praised her so wannly, that she conld not
suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add.
His perception of the striking improvement of Harriet's
manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of
the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment
'You have given Miss Smith all that she required,'said
he: ■ you have made her graceful and easy. She was a
beautiful creaturewhen she came to you; but in my opinion,
the attractions you have added are infinitely superior to
what she received from nature:'
'I am glad vou think I have been useful to her ; but
Harriet only wanted drawing out, and receiving a few, very
few, hints. She had all the natural grace of sweetness o(
temper and artlessness in hoselC I have done very little.'
'If it were admissible to contradict a lady'said
gallant Mr. Elton.
* I have, peih^ > s, given her a little more decision of
character, — have tau^t her to think on points which bad
not fallen in her way before.'
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
'Exactljr so; that is what principally strikes me; So
much superadded dedsLoQ of charact» I Skilful has been
the hand.'
'Great haa been the pleasure, I am sure. I never met
with a disposition more truly amiable.'
'I have no doubt of it'And it was spoken with a sort
of sighing animation which had a vast deal of the lover. She
was not less pleased, another day, with the manner in which
he seconded a sudden wish of hers — to have Harriet's picture.
* Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet t'said
she;'did you ever sit for your [uctnre 1'
Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and Only
stopped to say with a very interesting naSveti —
'Oh, dear, no, — never. "
No sooner was she out of sight than Emma exclatmed- > -
'WbiU an exquisite possession a good picture of her
would be! I would give any money for it I almost long
to attempt her likeness myself. You do not know it, I dare
say; but, two or three years ago, I had a great passion for
taking likenesses, and attempted several of my friends, and
was thought to have a tolerable eye in general; but from
one cause or another, I gave it up in di^st. But, really, I
could almost venture, if Harriet would sit to me. It would
be such a delight to have her picture!'
'Let me entreat you,'cried Mr. EIt < n, —'it would indeed
be a delight: let me entreat you, MissWoodhouse, to exercise
so charming a talent in favour of your friend. I know what
your drawings are. How could you suppose me ignorant t
Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and
flowers I and has not Mrs. Weston some inimitable figure-
pieces in her drawing room at Randalls I'
Yes, good man ! — thought Emma — but ^at has all that to
do with taking likenesses ? You know nothing of drawing.
Don't pretend to be in raptures about mine. Keep your
raptures for Harriet's face,'Well, if you give me such kind
encouragement, Mr. Ehon, I believe I shall try what I can
do. Harriet's features are very delicate, which makes a like-
ness difficult ; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of
the eye and the lines about the mouth wluch one ou^t to
catch.'
i,M.P:ibyG00gle
Emma. 35
'Exactly so, — the shape of the eye and the lines about the
mouth, — I have not a doubt of your success. Pray, pray
attempt it. As you will do it, it will indeed, to use your
own words, be an exquisite possession.'
'But I am afiaid, Mr. Elton, Haniet will not like to sit, —
she thinks so little of her own beauty. Did not you observe
ber manner of answering me 1 How completely it meant,
** Why should my picture be drawn 1 "'
'Oh, yes, I observed it, I assure yoa It was not lost OD
me. But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded'
Hamet was soon back again, and the proposal almost
immediately made; and she had no scruples which could
stand many minutes against the earnest pressing of both the
Others. Emma wished to go to work directly, and there-
fore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts
at portraits, for not one of them had ever been finished, that
they might decide together on the best size for HairieL Her
many b^nnings were displayed. Miniatures, half-lengths,
whole-lengths, pendl, crayon, and water-colours had been
all tried in turn. She had always wanted to do everything,
and had made more progress both in drawing and music
than many might have done with so little labour as she would
ever submit to. She played and sang, and drew in almost
every style ; but steadiness had always been wantingj and in
notiung had she approached the d^rce of excellence which
she would have been glad to command, and ought not to have
failed of She was not much deceived as to her own skill,
either as an artist or a musiciaD; but she was not unwilling
to have others deceived, or sorry to know her reputation for
accomplishment often h^er than it deserved.
There was merit in every drawing, — in the least finished,
perhaps the most Her style was spirited j but had there
been much less, or had there been ten times more, the de-
light and admiration of her two companions would have
been the same. They were both in ecstasies. A hkeness
pleases everybody; and Miss Woodbouse's perfornumcet
must be capital
'No great variety of feces for you,'said Emma.'1 had
only my own family to study firom. There is my father, —'
another of my father; — but the idea of sitting for his picture
by Google
made him so nervous, that I could only take him by stealth;
aeither of them veiy like, theiefore. Mts. Weston again,
and again, and again, you see. Dear Mrs. Weston — always
my kindest friend on eveiy occasion. She would sit when-
ever I asked her. There is my sister; and really quite her
own little elegant figuie — and the face not unlike. I should
have made a good likeness of her, if she would have sat
longer; but she was in such a hutty to have me draw her
fourchildren that she would not be quiet Then, here come
all my attempts at three of those four children: — there they
are, Henry, and John, and Bella, from one end of the sheet
to the other, and any one of them mig^t do for any one of
the rest She was so eager to have them drawn that I
could not refiise; but there 13 no making diildien of three
or four years old stand still, you know; nor can it be
very easy to take any likeness of than, beyond the an-
and complexion, unless they are coarser featured than
any of mamma's children ever were. Here is my sketch
of the fourth, who was a baby. I took him as he was
sleeping on the sofa, and it b as strong a likeness of his
cockade as you would wish to see. He had nesded down
his head most conveniently: — thaf s very like. I am rather
proud of litde George. The comer of the sola is very good.
Then here is my last,'— unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentle-
man in small size, whole-length, —'my last and my best, —
my brother, Mr. John Knightley. This did not want much
of being finished, when I put it away in a pet, and vowed I
would never take another likeness. I could not help being
provoked; for after all my pains, and when I had realty
made a very good Ukeness of it— (Mrs. Weston and I were
quite agreed in thinking it very like) — only too handsome —
too flattering — but that was a fault on the right sid e j— after
all this, came poor dear Isabella's cold approbation of—
" Yea, it was a litde Uke; but to be sure it did not do him
justice. " We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading
him to sit at alL It was made a great & vour of; and alto-
gether it was more than I could bear ; and so I never would
finish it, to have it apologised over as an unfavourable like-
ness, to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square; and, ai
I said, I did then forswear ever drawing any body again.'
,,_-:! byGoogle
Emma.'37
But for Hairief s sake, or rather for my own, and as there
are no husbands and vires in the case at present, I will
break my resolution now,'
Mr. ^ton seemed very properly struck and delighted by
the idea, and was repeating,'No husbands and wives in the
case at f resent, indeed, as you observe. Exactly so. No
husbands and wives,'with so interesting a. consdotisness, that
£nima b^an to consider whether she had not better leave
them together at once. But as she wanted to be drawing,
the declaration must wait a little longer.
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrut It
was to be a whole-length in water-colours, like Mr. John
Kcightley's, and was destined, if she could please heisel^ to
hold a very honourable station over the mantel-piece.
The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and
aiiaid of not keeping her attitude and countenance, presented
a very sweet mixture of youthftil egression to the steady
eyes of the artist But there was no doing any thing, with
Mr. Elton fidgeting behind her, and watching every touch.
She gave him credit for stationing himself vdierc he mi^t
gaxe and gaze again without oSence; but was really obliged
to put an end to it, and request him to place himself else-
where. It then occurred to her to employ him in reading.
'Ifhe would be so good as to read to tjiem, it would be a
kindness indeed I It would amuse away the difficulties of
her part, and lessen the iri^someness of Miss Smith's.'
Mr. Etton was only too happy. Harriet listened, and
Emma drew in peace. She must allow him to be still ft^c-
quendy coming to look ; anything less would certainly
have been too littie in a lover; and he was ready at the
Bnallest intermission of the pencil to jump up and see the
progress, and be charmed. There was no being displeased
with sudi an encourager, for his admiration made him dis-
cern a likeness almost before it was possible. She could not
respect his eye, but his love and his complaisance were un-
exceptionable.
The sittmg was alt < ^tber very satis & ctory: she was quite
enou^ pleased with the firet day's sketch to wish to go on.
There was no want of likeness: she had been fortunate in the
attitude; and as she meant to throw in a little improvement
byGoogle
}8 Emma.
to the Ggure, to give a little more height^ and considerably
more elegance, she had great confidence of its being in every
way a pretty drawing at last, and of its filling its destined
place with credit to them both, — a standing menKnial of the
beauty of one, the skill of the other, and the friendship of
both; with as many other agreeable associations as Mr.
Elton's veiy promising attachment was likely to add.
Haniet was to sit again the next day; and Mr. Elton, just
as he ought, entreated for the permission of attending and
reading to them again.
'By all means. We shall be most happy to consider you
as one of the party.'
The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and
satisfaction, took place on the moirow, and sccompanied the
whole pogress of the picture, which was rapid and happy.
Evoybody who saw it was pleased, but Mr. Elton was in
continual raptures, and defended it through every criticism.
'Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty
she wanted,'observed Mrs. Weston to him, not in the least
suspecting that she was addressing a lover.'The expression
of die eye is most correct, but Miss Smith bas not those
eyebrows and eyelashes. It is the fault of her face that she
has them not.'
'Do you think so f'replied he.'I cannot a^nt with you.
It appeals to me a most perfect resemblance in evray feature
I never saw such a likeness in my life We must allow for
the effect of shade, you know.'
'You have made her too tall, Emma,'said Mr, Knigbtley.
Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and
Mr Elton warmly added, —
'Oh, no — certainly not too tall — not in the least too tali
Consider she is sitting down, which naturally presents a
different — which in short gives exactly the idea;^ — and the
proportions must be preserved, you know. R-oporlions,-
foreshortening: — oh, no; it gives one exactly the idea of
such a height as Miss Smith's; — exactly so, indeed.'
'It is very pretty,'said Mr. Woodhouse.'So prettily
done! Just as your drawings always are, my dear. I do not
know anybody who draws so well as you do. The only
thing I do not thoroughly Jike is, that she seems to be sitting
byGoogle
Emma. 39
out of doors, with only a little shawl over her shoulders ; and
it makes one think she must catch cold.'
'But, my deaz papa, it is supposed to be summer; a wann
day in sunmieT. Look at the tree.'
'But it ifi never safe to sit out of doois, my dear.'
'You, sir, may say any thing,'cried Mr. Elton;'but I
must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought, the
placing Miss Smith out of doors; and the tree is touched
with such inimitable spirit I Any o & aa situation would have
been much less in character. The muveti of Miss Smith's
mamiers, — tuid ahogetiier — oh, it is most admirable I I
catanax. keep my eyes fiom it I never saw such a hkeness.*
The next tiling wanted was to get the picture framed;
and here were a few difficulties. It must be done directly; it
must be done in London; the order must go through the hands
of some mtelhgent person whose taste could be depended
on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all commissions, must
not be applied to, because it was December, and Mr. Wood-
house could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house
in the fogs of December, But no sooner was the distress
known to Mr. Elton than it was removed. His gallantry was
always on the alert.'Might he be trusted with the com-
mission, viax, infinite [Measure should he have in executing it I
be could ride to London at any time. It was impossible to
say how much be should be gratified by being employed on
such an etiand'
:'He was too good ! — she could not endure the thought ! —
she would not give him such a troublesome office for the
world,'— bron^t on the desired repetition of entreaties and
assurances, — and a very few minutes settled the business.
Mr. Elton was to take the drawing to London, choose
the frame, and give the directions ; and Emma thought she
could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incom-
moding him, while he seemed mostly feaiM of not being
incommoded enoi^h.
* What a precious deposit I'said he, widi a tender sigh, as
he received it
'This man is almost too gallant to be in love,'thought
Emma.'I should say so, but that I suppose there maybeft
hundred different ways of being in love. He is an excellent
by Google
young man, and will suit Hairiet exactly: it will be an
" exactly s(^ " as he says himself; but he does sigh and lan-
guish, and study for compliments ratlin mwe than I could
endure as a piincipaL I come in for a pret^ good share as a
second. But it is his giadtude on Hairicfs account'
CHAPTER Vn.
Thk veiy day of Mr. Elton's goii^ to Loidon produced a
fresh occasion for Emma's services towards her friend.
Harriet had been at Hartfietd, as usnal, soon after brealc^t;
and after a time, had gone home to return again to dinner:
she returned, and sooner than had been talked oi, and with
an agitated, hurried look, announcing something extraordinaiy
to have h^pened which she was longing to telL Half a
minute brought it all out She had heard, as soon as she
got back to Mis. Goddard's, that Mr. Martin had been diere
an hour before, and finding she was not at home, not pai-
ticularly expected, had left a little parcel for her from one of
his sisters, and gone away; and on opening this parcel, she
had actually found, besides the two songs which she had
lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this letter was
from him, from Mr. Martin, and contained a direct proposal
of maniage.'Who could have thought itl She was so sur-
prised she did not know what to do. Yes, quite a proposal
of maniage; and a very good letter, at least, she thought so.
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much — ^but she
did not know — and so, she was come as & st as she could to
ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do.'Emma was half
ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful
'Upon my word,'she cried,'die young tnan is determined
not to lose any thmg for want of asking. He will connect
himself well if he can.'
'Will you read the letter t'cried Harriet • Pniy da I'd
rather you would.'
Emma was not soiry to be pressed. She read, and was
■urprised. The sQ'le of the letter was much above her ex-
pectation. There were not merely no grammatical errors,
u,., ■,:.:! by Google
Emma. 4X
but as a compositioD it would not have disgraced a gentle-
man: the language, though plain, was strong and unaffected,
and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of
the writer. It was short, but expressed good sense, warm
attachment, libendi^, propriety, even delicacy of feeling'
She paused over it, while Harriet stood amdousty watching
for her opinion, with a'Well, well,'and was at last forced
ta add,'Is it a good letter; oris ittooshoR}'
'Yes, indeed, a very good letter,'replied Emma, rather
slowly; —'so good a letter, Harriet, that, every thing dod-
sldered, I think one of his sisters must have helped him. I
can hardly im^:ine the young man whom I saw talking with
you the o & er day could express himself so well, if left quite
to bis own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman;
no, certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough
for a woman. No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose
may have a natural talent for — thinks strongly and clearly —
and when he takes a pen in hand, his thoughts naturally find
proper words. It is so with some men. Yes, I understand
tlie son of mind. Vigorous, decided, widi sentiments to a
CKtain point, not coarse. A better written letter, Harriet
(returning it), than I had expected.'
'Well,'said the still waiting Harriet; —'well— and — and
what shall I do!'
'What shall you dot Inirtiat respect) Do you mean
with regard to this letter 1'
'Yes.'
'But iriiat are you in doubt of t You must answer it of
course — and speedily. "
'Yes. But iriiat shall I say 1 Dear Miss Woodhouse, do
advise ue.'
'Oh, no, no : tlie letter had much better be all your own.
You wUI express yourself very properly, I am sure. There
is no danger of your not being intelligible, which is the first
thing. Your meaning must be unequivocal; no doubts or
demurs; and such expressions of gratitude and concern for
the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires, will present
thetoselves unbidden to your mind, I am persuaded. Ytm
need not be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow
for his disappointment.'
,,i,db, Google
'You think I ought to iditse him, thva 1'said Harriet,
looking down.
* Ought to refuse him 1 My dear Harriet, whst do yod
meant Are you in any doubt as to thatt I thought —
but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have been under a mis-
take. I certainly have been misunderstandii^ you, tf you
feel in doubt as to the parport of your answer. I had
imagined you were consulting me only as te the wording
of it'
Harriet was silent With a little reserve of manner, Emma
continued, —
'You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect'
'No, I do not ; that is I do not mean — ^What shall T do *
What would you advise me to do ! Pray, dear Miss Wood-
house, tell me what I ought to do.'
'I shall not pve you any advice, Harriet I will have
nothing to do with it This is a point which you must settle
with your own feelings.'
'I had no notion that he likod me so very much,'said
Harriet, contemplating the letter. For a little while Emma
persevered in her silence; but beginning to apprehend the
bewitching flatty of that letter might be too powerfiil, she
thought it best to say, —
'I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman
dou^ as to whether she should accept a man or not, she
certainly ought to refuse him. If ^e can hesitate as to
" Yes, " she ought to say " No " directly. It is not a state to
be safely entered into with doubtful feelings, with half a
heart I thought it my duty as a friend, and older than your-
self to say thus mudi to you. But do not imagine that I
want to iniSuence you.'
'Oh, ao, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to
but if you would just advise me what I had best do > — no, na,
I do not mean that : — as you say one's miud ought to be
quite made up — one should not be hesitating: — ^it is a very
serious thing. It will be safer to say " No, " periiaps. Do
you think I had better say " No 1 "'
'Not for the world,'said Emma, smiling graciously,
'would I advise you either way. You must be the best
judge of your own happiness. If you i»eler Mr. Martin to
byGoogle
Emma. 43
ereiy other person; if you think him the moat agreeable
man you Iiave ever been in company with, why should yoa
heattate t You blush, Harriet Does anybody else occur
to you at this moment under such a definition) Hairiet,
Honiet, do not deceive yourself; do not be nio away with
by gratitude and compassion. At this moment whom are
you thinking of 1'
The synq > t(nts were fiiTOuiable. Instead of answering,
Haitiet turned away confused, and stood thoughtfully by the
file; and though the letter was still in her hand, it was now
mechanically twisted about without regard. Emma waited
the result with impatience, but not without strong hopes.
At last, with some hesitation, Haniet said,—
'Miss Woodhouse, a£ yon will not give me your opinion,
I must do as well as I can by myself; and I hare now quite
determined, and really almost made up my mind, to refuse
Mi. Mania. Do you think I am right t'
'Feifecdy, perfecdy right, my dearest Harriet; you are
doing just what you oi^ht Wiile you were at all in sus-
pense^ I kept my feelings to myself, but now that you are so
completely decided I have do hesitation in approving.
Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this. It would have
grieved me to lose your acquaintance, \i4uch must have been
the consequence of your marrying Mr. Mardn. While you
were in the smallest degree wavering, I said nothing about
it, because I would not influence ; but it would have been
the loss of a Mend to me. I could not have visited Mrs.
Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. Now I am secure of
you for ever.'
Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of
it struck her forcibly.
'You could not have visited mel'she cried, looking
aghast'tio, to be sure you could not; but I never thought
of that before. Thatwould have been too dreadfiill What
an escape I Dear Miss Woodhouse, I would not give up the
pleasure and honour cS being indmate with you for any-
thing in the worid.'
'Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to
lose you ; but it must have been. You would have thrown
yoursdf out of all good sode^. I must have given you up.'
b, Google
- ^ Dear mel Hov should I ever have borne it t It would
have killed me never to come to Hartfield any mme.'
'Dear, affectionate creature! yint banished to Abbey-
Mill FannI ybu confined to ihe sodety of the illiterate
and vulgar all yoai life! I wonder how the young man could
have the assurance to ask it He must have a pretty good
(pinion of himseE'
'I do not think be is conceited either, in general,'said
Haiiie^ her consdence opposing such censure;'at least he
is very good natuied, and I shall always feel much obhged
to him, and have a great r^ard for — but that is quite a dif-
ferent thing firom — and you know, though he may like me, it
does not follow that I should — and, certainly, I must con-
fess that since my visidng here I have seen people — and if
one cODoes to compare them, person and manners, there is
DO compaiison at all, cne is so very handsome and agreeable.
However, I do really think Mr. Martin a very amiable young
man, and have a great opinion of him ; and his being so much
attached tome — and his writing such a letter — ^but as to leav-
ing you, it is what I would not do upon any consideration.'
'Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. We
will not be parted. A woman is not to marry a man merely
because she is asked, or because he is attached to her, and
can write a tolerable letter.'
'Oh, no ; — and it is but a short letter, too.'
Emma fdt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with
a'very true ; and it would be a small consolation to her,
for the downish manner which might be offending her every
hour of the day, to know that her husband could write a
good letter.'
'Oh, yes, very. Nobody cares for a letter: the thing is, to be
always happy with pleasant companions. I am quite deter-
mined to refiise him. But how shall I do t What shall I sayl'
Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the
answer, and advised its being written directly, which was
agreed to, in the hope of her assistance ; and though Emma
continued to protest against any assistance being wanted, it
was in fact given in the fonnation of every sentence. The
looking over his letter again, in replying to it, had such a
softening tendency, that it was particuiarly necessary to bnce
:,a,l,;p:lbyGOO < ^le
her up with a few decisive ejq)ressions; and she was so veiy
much coacemed at the idea of making him unhappy, and
thought so much of what his mother and sisters would think
and say, and was so anxious that they should not fancy her
ungrateful, that Emma believed if the young man had come in
her way at that moment, he would have been accepted after
alL
This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent
The business was finished, and Harriet safe She was rather
low all the evening; but Emma could allow for her amiable
regrets, and sometimes relieved them by spealcing of her own
affection, sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr.
Elton.
'I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again,'was said
in rather a sorrowful tone.
'Not, if you were, could I tva bear to part with you, my
Harriet You are a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to
be spared to Abbey-MilL'
'And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am
never happy but at Hartfield.'
Some time afterwards it was,'I think Mrs. Goddard would
be very much surprised if she knew what had happened.
I am siu« Miss Nash would — for Miss Nash thinks her own
sister vtiy well married, and it is only a linen-draper.'
'One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement
in the teacher of a school, Harriet I dare say Miss Nash
would envy you such an opportunity as this of being married.
Even this conquest would appear valuable in her eyes. As
to anything superior for you, I suppose she is quite in the
dark. The attentions of a certain person can hardly be
among the titde-Uttle of Highbury yet Hitherto I fancy
you and I are the only people to whom his looks and man-
ners have explained themselves.'
Harriet blushed and smiled, and Bald something about
wondering that people should like her so much. The idea
of Mr. Elton was certainly cheering ; but still, after a time,
she was tender-hearted again towards the rejected Mi.
Martin.
'Now he has got my letta,'said she softly.'I wonder
what they are all doing — whether his sisters know — if he is un-
iM,z.dbyGoOgle
46
Emma.
happy, they will be unhappy too. I hope he will not mind
it ao v«y much.'
'Let us think of those among our absent Iriends who are
more cheerfully employed,'cried Emma.'At this moment,
perhaps, Mr. Elton is showing your picture to his mother
and sisters, telling how much more beautihil is the original,
and after being asked for it five or six times, allowing them
lo hear your name, your own dear name.'
'My picture! But he has left my picture in Bond Street'
'Has he so ! Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton. No,
my dear little modest Harriet, depend upon it, the picture
wUl not be in Bond Street till just before he mounts his horse
to-morrow. It is his companion all this evening, his solace,
his delight It opens his designs to his family, it introduces
you among them, it diffuses through the party those pleasantest
feelings of our nature, eager curiosity and warm preposses-
sion. How cheerful, how animated, how suspicious, how
busy their imaginations all are !'
Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger.
CHAPTER VIII.
Harriet slept at Hartfield that night For some weeks
past she had been spending more than half her time there,
and gradually getting to have a bed-room appropriated to
herself; and Emma judged it best in every respect, safest
and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible just
at present She was obliged to go the next moming, for an
hour or two to Mrs. Goddard's, but it was then to be settled
that she should return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit
of some days.
While she was gone, Mr. Knightley called, and sat some
time with Mr. Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse,
who had previously made up his mind to walk out, was per-
suaded by his daughter not to defer it, and was induced by
the entreaties of both, though against the scruples of his own
civility, to leave Mr. Knightley for that purpose. Mr.
Knightley, who had nothing of ceremony about him, was
i,Gootile
Emma. 47
offering, l^ his short, decided answets, an amusing contrast
to die protracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other.
'Weil, IbeUeve,ifyouwilieicuaeme,Mr.Knightley,ifyou
will not consider me as doing a. Tcry rude thing, I slull take
Emma's advice and go out for a quarter of an hour. As the
son is out, I believe I bad better take my three turns while
I can. I treat you without ceremony, Mr. KnighUey. We
invalids think we are privileged people.'
'My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.'
'I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter. Emma
will be bxppf to entertain you. And therefore I think I will
beg your excuse, and take my three turns — my winter walk. "
'You cannot do better, sir.'
'I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr.
Knighdey, but I am a very slow walker, and my pace would
be tedious to you ; and, besides, yon have another long walk
before you, to Donwell Abbey.'
'Thank you, sir, thank you ; I am going this moment my-
self; and I think the sooner > m« go the better. I wilt fetch
jcms greatcoat and open the garden door for you.'
Mi. Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr. Knightley, in-
stead of being immediately off Ucewise, sat down again,
seemin^y inclined for more chat He began speaking of
Haniet, and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than
Emma had ever heard before.
'I cannot rate her beau^ as you do,'said he ;'but she
is a joetty little creature, and I am indined to think very
well of her disposition. Her character depends upon those
she is with ; but in good hands she will turn out a valuable
'I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may
not be wanting.'
'Come,'said h^'you are anxious for a compliment, so 1
will tell you that you have improved her. You have cured
her of her school-girl's g^le ; she really does you credit'
'Thank you. I should be mortified, indeed, if I did not
believe I had been of some use; but it is not everybody
who will bestow praise wheare they may. You do not often
overpower me with it'
'You axe expecting her again, you say,this momingt'
by Google
43 Bfoma.
'Almost every moment She has been gone loDgfx
already than she intended.'
'Something has happened to delay her; some vi^bv^
perhaps.'
'Highbury gos^ps I Tiresome wretches I'
'Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you
would.'
Emma knew this was tootiue for contradiction, and, there-
fore, said nothing. He presently added, with a smiley—
'I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell
yon that I have good reason to believe yout little friend will
soon hear of something to her advantage.'
'Indeed ! how so 1 of what sort I'
'A very serious sort, I assure you,'still smiling.
'Very serious 1 I can think of but one thing: — who is in
love with her 1 Who makes you their confidant t'
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Elton's having
dropped a hint Mr. KnighUey was a sort of general friend
and adviser, and she knew Mr. Elton looked up to him.
'I have reason to think,'he replied,'that Hairiet Smith
will soon have an offer of marriage, and from a most unez*
ceptionable quarter: — Robert Martin is the man. Her visit
to Abbey Mill, this summer, seems to have done his business.
He is desperately in love, and means to many her.'
'He is very obliging,'said Emma;'but is he sure th^
Hairiet means to many him 1'
'Well, well, means to make her an offer, then. WiU that
do f He came to the Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to
consult me about it He knows I have a thorough r^ard
for him and all his family, and, I believe, considers me as
one of his best friends. He came to ask me whether I
thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so eariy;
whether I thought her too young : in short, whether I ap-
proved bis choice altogether; having some apprehension,
perhaps, of her being considered (especially since jvur mak-
ing so much of her) as in a line of aocie^ above him. I
was very much pleased with all that he said I never hear
better sense from any one than Robert Martin. He always
speaks to the purpose ; < q > en, straightforward, and very well
judging. He told me every thing; his circumstances and
byGoogIc
Emma. 49
plans, and what Aq'all proposed doing in the event (tf his
marriage. He is an excellent young man, both as son and
brother. T bad no hesitation in advising him to many. He
proved to me that he could afford it; and that being the
case, I was convinced he could not do better. I praised the
fair lady too, and altogether sent him away very happy. If
he had never esteemed my opinion before, he would have
thought highly of me then ; and, I dare say, left the house
thinking me the best & iend and counsellor man ever hati
This happened the night before last Now, as we may fairly
suppose, he would not allow much time to pass before he
spoke to the lady, and as he does not appear to have spoken
yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs. God-
(lard's t < > day ; and she naay be detained by a visitor, without
thinking him at all a tiresome wretch.'
'Pray, Mr. Knightley,'said Emma, who had been smiling
to herself through a great part of this speech,'how do you
know that Mr. Martin did not speak yesterday %'
'Certainly,'replied he, surprised,'I do not absolutely
know it ; but it may be inferred. Was not she the whole
day with you %'
'Come,'s^d she,'I will tell you something, in return for
what you have told me. He did speak yestCTday — that is,
he wrote, and was refiised.'
This was obliged to be repeated before it could be
believed; and Mr. Knightley actually looked red with sur-
prise and displeasure, as he stood up, in tall indignation,
and said, — >
'Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her.
What is the foolish girl about )'
'Oh, to be sure,'cried Emma,'it is always incomprehen-
sible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer ol
marriage. A man always imagines a woman to be ready for
anybody who asks her.'
'Nonsense I a man does not imagine any such thing
But what is the meaning of this t Harriet Smith refiise
Robert Martin ! Madness, if it is so ; but I hope you are
'I saw her answer ; noUiing could be clearer.*
,,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
'You saw her answer ! You wrote heranswertoo. Emma,
this is your doing. You peisuaded her to refuse him.'
'And if I did (which, however, I am & r Irom allowing),
I diould not feel that I had done wrong. Mr. Martin is a
very respectable yotmg man, but I cannot admit him to be
Hamef s equal ; and am radier surprised, indeed, that he
should have ventured to address her. By your account, he
does seem to have had some scruples. It is a pity that tfaey
were ever got over.'
'Not Hairicfs equal I'exclaimed Mr. Knightley, loudly
and warmly; and with calmer asperity added, a few mo-
ments afietwards,'No, he is not her equal, indeed, for be is
as much her superior in sense as in situation. Emma,
your infatuation about that girl blinds you. What are
Harriet Smith's claims, either of birth, nature, or education,
to any connection higher than Robert Martin ) She is the
natural daughter of nobody knows whom, with probably no
settled provision at all, and certainly no respectable rela-
tions. She is known ody as parlour-boarder at a common
school She is not a sensible girl, nor a girl of any in-
formation. She has been taught nothing useful, and is too
young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself.
At her age she can have no experience ; and, with her Gttle
wit, is not very likely ever to have any that can avail her.
She is pretty and she is good-tempered, and that is all.
My only scruple in advising the match was on his account,
as being beneath his deserts, and a bad connection for htm.
I felt that, as to fortune, in all probability he might do much
better ; and that, as to a rational companion or useful
helpmate, he could not do wotse. But I could not reason
so to a man in love, and was willii^ to trust to there being
no harm in her ; to her having that sort of disposition
which, in good hands like his, might be easily led aright,
and turn out very well The advantage of the match I felt
to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt {nor
have I now) that there would be a general cry-out upon her
extreme good luck. Even yaur satisfaction I made sure of.
It crossed my mind immediately that you would not regret
your friend's leaving Highbury, for the sake of her being
settled so wul). I remember saying to myself, " Even & nma.
by Google
Emma. 5r
whh all hei partiality Tot Harriet, will think this a good
match. "'
'I cannot hdp wondering at your knowing so little of
Emma ai to say any such thing. What 1 think a iamier
{and with all his sense and all hiii merit Mr. Martin is no-
thing more) a good match for my intimate friend 1 Not
tegtet her leaving Hi^buty for the sake of marrying a man
whom I could nerer admit as an acquaintance of ray own 1
I wonder you should think it possible for me to have such
feelii^s. I assure you mine are very different I must
think your statement by no means fair. You are not just
lo Harriet's claims. They would be estimated very differ-
ently by others as well as myself; Mr, Martin may be the
richest of the two, bul he is undoubtedly her inferior as to
rank in society. The sphere in which she moves is much
above his. It would be a degradation.'
* A d^radation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be
tnarried to a respectable, intelligent gentleman-taimer )'
•As » the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal
sense she may be called Nobody, it will not hold in com-
mon sense. She is not to pay for the offence of others, by
being held below the level of those with whom she is brought
up. There can scarcely be a doubt that her father is a
gentleman — and a gendeman of fortune. Her allowance is
very liberal; nothing has ever been grudged for her im-
provement or comfort That she is a gentleman's daughter
is indubitable to me ; that she associates with gentlemen's
daughters, no one, I apprehend, will deny. She is superior
to Mr. Robert Mardn.'
'Whoever might be her parents,'said Mr. Knighdey,
'whoever may have had the chai^ge of her, it does not
appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her
into what you would call good society. After receiving a
very indifferent education, she is left in Mrs. Goddard's
hands to shift as she can ;— to move, in short, in Mrs.
Goddard's line, to have Mrs. Goddard's acquaintance. Her
friends evidendy thought this good enough for her; and it
was good enough. She desired nothing better herself. Till
you chose to tum her into a fHend, her mind had no
distaste for her o*-n set, nor any ambition beyond it She
by Google
S2 Emma.
was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer.
She had no sense of superiori^ then. If she has it now,
you have given it You have been no friend to Harriet
Smit^ Enmia. Robert Martin would never have proceeded
60 fai, if he had not felt persuaded of her not being dis-
inclined to him. I know him welL He has too much real
feeling to address any woman on the hap-hazard of selfish
passion. And as to conceit, he is the farthest from it of
any man I know. Depend upon it, he had encouragemenL'
It was most convenient to Emma not to make a. direct
reply to this assertion ; she chose rather to take up her own
line of the subject again.
'You are a very wann friend to Mr. Martin ; but, as I
said before, are unjust to Harriet Harriet's claims to marry
well arc not so contemptible as you represent them. She is
not a clever girl, but she has better sense than you are
aware ot, and does not deserve to have her understanding
spoken of so slightingly. Waving that point, however, and
supposing her to be, as you describe her, only pretty and
good-natured, let me tell you, that in the degree she
possesses them, they are not trivial reconunendations to the
woiid in general, for she is, in hct, a beautiful girl, and must
be thought so by ninety-nine people out of a hundred; and
till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the
subject of beauty than they are generally supposed; till
they do fell in love with well-infoimed minds instead of
handsome faces, a girl, with such loveliness as Harriet, has
a certainty of being admired and sought after, of having the
power of choosing from among many, consequently a claim
to be nice. Her good nature, too, is not so very slight a
claim, comprehending, as it does, real, thorough sweetness
of temper and manner, a very humble opinion of herself,
and a great readiness to be pleased with other people. I
am veiy much mistaken if your sex in general would not
think such beauty, and such temper, the highest claims a
woman could possess.'
'Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason
you have is almost enough to make me think so, toa Better
be without senses than misapply it as you do.'
'To be sure,'cried she playfully,'I know Ma/ is the
L.,.n.P:lbyG00glc
feeling of you alL I know that such a. girt as Harriet is
exactly what every man delights in — what at once bewitches
his senses and satisfies his judgment. Oh, Harriet may pick
and choose. Were you, yourself, ever to mairy, she is the
very woman for yoiL And is she, at seventeen, just enter-
ing into life, just beginning to be known, to be wondered at
because she does not accept the first oficr she receives I
No — pray let her have time to look about her.'
'I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy,'said
Mr. Knightley presently,'though I have kept my thoughts
to myself; but I now perceive that it will be a very un-
fortunate one for Harriet. You will puff her up with such
ideas of her own beauty, and of what she has a claim to,
that, in a little while, nobody within her reach will be good
enough for her. Vanity working on a weak head produces
every sort of mischief. Nothing so easy as for a young lady
to raise her expectations too high. Miss Harriet Smith
may not find offers of marriage flow in so fast, though she is
a very pretty girL Men of sense, whatever you may choose
to say, do not want stUy wives. Men of family would not
be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such
obscuri^, — and most prudent men would be afraid of the
inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved ia,when
the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed. Let her
marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable, and happy
for ever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry
greatly, and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than
a man of consequence and large fortune, she may be a
parlour-boarder at Mrs. Goddard's all the rest of her life, —
or, at least (for Harriet Smith is a girt who will marry some-
body or other), till she grow desperate, and is glad to catch
at the old writing-master's son.'
'We think so very differently on this point, Mr. Knightley,
that there can be no use in canvassbg it We shall only be
making each other more angry. But as to my ietting her
marry Robert Martin, it is impossible ; she has refused him,
and so decidedly, I think, as must prevent any second
application. She must abide by the evil of having refused
him, wliatever it may be ; and as to the refusal itself, I will
not pretend to say that ! might not influence her a little ;
by Google
54 Emma.
but I assure you there was veiy little for me or for any body to
da His appearance is so much against him, and his
manner so bad, that if she ever were disposed to favour him,
she is not now. I can imagine, that before she had seen
any body superior, she might tolerate him. He waa the
brother of her friends, and he took pains to please her ; and
altogether, having seen nobody better (that must have been
his great assistant), she might not, while she was at Abbey-
Mill, find him disagreeable. But the case is altered now.
She knows now what gentlemen are; and nothing but a
gentleman in education and manner has any chance wi &
Hairiet'
■ Nonsense, anant nonsense, as ever was talked I'cried
Mr. Knightley,'Robert Martin's manners have sense, sin-
cerity, and good-humour to recommend them ; and his mind
has more true gcntilit)'than Hairiet Smith could understand.'
Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully uncon-
cerned, but was really feeling uncomfortable, and want-
ing him very much to be gone; she did not lepent what she
had done; she still thought herself a better judge of such
a point of female right and refinement than he could be:
but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment
in general, which made her dislike having it so loudly
against her; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in
angry state, was very disagreeable. Some minutes passed in
this unpleasant silence, with only one attempt on Emma's
side to talk of the weather, but he made no answer.
He was thinking. The result of his thoughts appeared at
last in these words, —
< Robert Martin has no great loss — if he can but think so;
and I hope it will not be long before he does. Your views
for Harriet are best known to yourself; but as you make no
secret of your love of match-making, it is & ir to suppose tiiat
views, and plans, and projects you have: — and, as a friend, I
shall just hint to you, that if Elton is the man, I think it
will be all labour in vain.'
Emma laughed and disclaimed. He continued, —
'Depend upon it, Elton will not do. Elton is a very good
sort of man, and a very respectable vicar of Highbuty, but
not at all likely to make an imprudent match. He knows
byGoogIc
Emma. 55
the value of a. good income as well as any body. Elton may
talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally. He is as well
acquainted with hia own claims as you can be with Hanief s.
He knows that he is a very handsome young man, and a great
favourite wherever he goes; and from his general way of
talking in unreserved moments, wh«i there are only men
present, I am convinced that he does not moan to Arow
himself away. I have heard him speak with great animation
of a large family of young ladies that bis sisters are intimate
with, who have all twenty thousand pounds a piece.'
'I am very much obliged to you,'nid & ama, laughing
again.'If I had set my heart on Mr. Elton's maiiTing
Haniec, it would have been very kind to open my eyes; but
at present I only want to keep Harriet to myself. I have
done with match-making, indeed. I could never hope to
equal my own dobgs at Randal la. I shall leave off while
I am wdL'
'Good morning to you,'said he, rising, and walking off
abruptly. He was very much vexed. He felt the disap-
pointment of the young man, and was mortified to have been
the means of promoting it, by the sanction he had given;
and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in
the affair was provoking him exceedingly.
Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was
more indistinctness in the causes of hers than in his. She
did not always feel so absolutely satisfied with herself so
entirely convinced that her opinions were right and her ad-
versary's wrong, as Mr. Knighdey. He walked off in more
complete self-approbation than he left for her. She was not
so materially cast down, however, but that a little time and
the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives.
Harriet's staying away so long was banning to make her
uneasy. The possibility of the young man's coming to Mrs.
Goddard's that morning, and meeting with Harriet, and
pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas. The dread
of such a failure, after all, became the prominent uneasiness
and when Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and
without having any such reason to give for her long absence,
she felt a satisfaction which settled her witii h» own mind;
and convinced her that, let Mr. Knightley think or say what
,, II.;, Google
56 Emma.
he would, she had done nothing which woman's friendship
and woman's feelings would not justify.
He had frightened her a little about Mr. Elton; but when
she considered that Mr. Knightley could not have obsened
hint as she had done, neither with the interest nor (she
must be allowed to tell herself, in spite of Mr. Knightley's
pretensions) with the skill of such an observer on such a
question as herself that he had spoken it hastily and
in anger, she was able to believ^ that he had rather said
what he wished resentfully to be true, than what he knew
any thing about He certainly might have heard Mr. Elton
gpealc with more unreserve than she had ever done, and Mr.
Elton might not be of an imprudent, inconsiderate disposi-
tion, as to money matters; he might naturally be rather at-
tentive than otherwise to them^ but tlien Mr. Knightley did
not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion
at war with all interested motives. Mr. Knightley saw no
such passion, and, of course, thought nothing of its effects;
but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming
any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originaUy
suggest; and more than a reasonable, becoming degree of
prudence, she was very sure did not belong to Mr. Elton.
Harriet's cheerful look and manner established heis: she
came back, not to think of Mr. Martin, but to talk of Mr.
Elton. Miss Nash had been telhng her something, which
she repeated immediately with great delight Mr. Perry had
been to Mrs. Goddard's to attend a sick child, and Miss Nash
had seen him; and he had told Miss Nash, that as he was
commg back yesterday from Clayton Park he had met Mr.
Elton, and found, to his great surprise, that Mr. Elton was
actually on his road to London, and not meaning to return
till the morrow, though it was the whist-ciub night, which he
had been never known to miss before; and Mi. Peny had
remonstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby it
was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried
very much to persuade him to put off his Journey only one
day; but it would not do: Mr. Elton had been determined
to go on, and had said, in a very f articular way indeed, that
he was going on business which he would not put off for any
inducancnc in the world; and something about a very envi-
im,.p:i by Google
Emma. 57
able commission, and bong the bearer of something exceed-
ingly precious. Mr. Peny could not quite understand hint,
but he was veiy sure there must be a /ady in the case, and
he told him so; and Mr. Elton only looked very conscious
and smiling, and rode off in great spirits. Miss Nash had
told her all this, and had talked a great deal more about Mr.
Elton; and said, looking so very significantly at hci,'that
she did not pretend to understand what his business might
be, but she only knew, that any woman whom Mr. Elton
could prefer she should think the luckiest woman in tlk«
world; for, beyond a doubt, Mr. Elton had not his equal
for beauty or agreeableness,'
CHAPTER IX.
Ms. Knigbtley might quarrel with her, but Emma could
not quarrel with herself. He was so much displeased, that
it was longer than usual before he came to Hartfield again;
and when they did meet, his grave looks showed that she
was not forgiven. She was sorry, but could not repent On
the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and more
jitstified, and endeared to her by the general appearances
of the next few days.
The picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon
after Mr. Elton's return, and being hung over the mantel-
piece of the common sitting-room, he got up to look at it,
and sighed out his half sentences of admiration just as he
ought; and as for Harriet's feelings, they were visibly form-
ing themselves into as strong and steady an attachment as
her youth and sort of mind admitted. Emma was soon per-
fectly satisfied of Mr. Martin's being no otherwise remem-
bered, than as he furnished a contrast with Mr. Elton, of the
utmost advantage to the latter.
Her views of improving her little fiiend's mind, by agreat
deal of useful readmg and conversation, had never yet led
to more than a few first chapters, and the intention of going
on to-moTTow. It was much easier to chat than to study ;
much pleasanter to let her imagination range and work at
by Google
l^ Emma.
Harriet's fortune, than to be labouring to enlarge her com-
Ijretiension, or exercise it on sober facts; and the only lite-
rary pursuit which engaged Harriet at present, the only men
tal provision she was making for the evening of life, was the
collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort that
she could meet with, into a thin quarto of hot-pressed paper,
made up by her friend, and ornamented with ciphers and
trophies.
In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand
scale are not uncommon. Miss Nash, head teacher at Mrs.
Goddard's, bad written out at least three hundred; and
Harriet, who had taken the first hint of it from her, hoped,
with Miss Woodhouse's help, to get a great many more.
Emma assisted with her invention, memorj-, and taste;
and as Harriet wrote a very pretty hand, it was likely to
be an anangement of the first order, in form as well as
quantity.
Mr. Woodhouse was almost as nnich interested in the
business as the girls, and tried very often to recollect some-
thing worth their putting in,'So many clever riddles as
there used to be when he was young — he wondered he could
not remember them ; but he hoped he should in time.'And
it always ended in'Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.'
His good fiiend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on
the subject, did not at present recollect any thing of the
riddle kind ; but he had desired Perry to be upon the watch,
and as he vrent about so much, something, bethought, might
come from that quarter.
It was by no means his daughtei's wish that the intellects
of H^buiy in general should be put under requisition. Mr.
Elton was the only one whose assistance she asked. He
was invited to contribute any really good enigmas, charades,
or conundrums, that he might recollect; and she had the
pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recol-
lections; and at the same time, as she could perceive, most
earnestly carefiil that nothing ungallant, nothing that did not
breathe a compliment to the sex, should pass his lips. They
owed to him their two or three politest puzzles; and the joy
and exultation with which at last he recalled, and rather
sentimentally recited, that well-known charade, —
byGoogIc
Mr fint dotb tffiction doiota,
Wliidi my secood » destin'd to feel ;
And my wbok ii the btat anlidote
ThMl ifflktioii to soften and hoU,—
made her quite sony to at^nowlot^ that they had trai-
scribed it some pages ^^ already.
'Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr. Elton t'
said she;'that is the only security for its freshness ; and
nothing couM be easier to you.'
'Oh, no ; he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of
the kind in his life. The stupidest fellow ! He was afraid
not even Miss Woodhouse,'— he stopped a moment —'or
Miss Smidi could inspire him.'
The very next day, however, produced some proof of
mspiration. He called for a few momepts, just to leave a
piece of paper on the table containing, as he said, a charade
which a friend of his had addressed to a young lady, the
object of his admiration ; but which, from his manner, Emnia
was immediately convinced must be his own.
'I do not offer it for Miss Smith's collection,'said he.
'Being my Siend's, I have no right to expose it in any
degree to the public eye, but pertiaps you may not dishke
looking at it.'
This speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which
Emma could understand. There was deep consdoosnesa
about him, and he found it eader to meet her eye than her
friend's. He was gone the next moment: — after another
moment's pause, —
'Take it,'~s^d Emma, smiling, and pushing the pai)er
towards Harriet, —'it is for you. Take your own.'
But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it ;
and Emma, never loth to be first, was obliged to e:
bersel£
To Miss
My fint displays the wealth and pomp of Idngi,
Lords of the outht thdr luxury and cue.
Another view of man, my second brings,
Behold him there, the monarch of the mmI
b, Google
Bat, ah] anited, iriut reverse we have'
Man's boasteil power and freedom, ill are flown;
Lotd of tbe earth and lea, be bends a slave,
And woman, lorely woman, reigns alone.
She cast her eye over it, pondaed, caught die n _
read it through again to be quite certain, and quite mistress
of the lines, and then passing it to Harriet, sat happily
smiling, and saying to hetsel^ while Hairiet was puzJding
over the papa in all the confusion of hope and dulness,
•Very well, Mr. Elton, very well, indeed. I have read
worse charades. Coutiskip — a very good hint. I give you
credit for it. This is feeling your way. This is saying very
plainly — " Pray, Miss Smith, give me leave to pay my
addresses to you. Approve my charade and my intentions
in the same glance. "
May its approval beam in that soft eye I
Harriet exactly. . Soft is the very word fis her eye — of all
epithets, & e justest that could be given.
Thy ready wjt the word will soon npply.
Humpb—Hairief s ready wit ! All the better. A man must
be very much in love, indeed, to describe \\tsi sa Aht Hr.
Kn^hdey, I wish you had the benefit of thisj I think this
would convince you. For once in your life you would be
obliged to own yourself mistaken. An excellent charade
indeed — and very much to the purpose. Things must come
to a crisis soon now.'
She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant
observations, which were otherwise of a sort to nm into
great length, by the eagerness of Harriet's wondering
'What can it be, Miss Woodhousel— what can it bef I
have not an idea — I cannot guess it in the least What can
it possibly be 1 Do try to find it out. Miss Woodhouse.
Do help me. I never saw anything so hard. Is it Idng-
domt I wonder who the friend wa & — and who could be
byGoogIc
the young lady. Do jcm diink it is a good one t Can it be
vomanT
And wonun, lo*df woman, reigni rIoha.
Can it be Neptune t
Behold him there, the monftrdi of the aeia I
Or a tiidentt or a mennaidi or a sha^t Oh, no: shark is
only one syllable. It must be very clever, or he would not
have brought it Oh, Miss Woodhouse, do you think we
shall ever find it out T'
'Mennaids and sharks I Nonsense I My dear Harriet,
what are you thinking of) Where would be the use of his
bringing us a charade made by a (Hend upon a mermaid or
a sl»rk I Give me the paper, and listen.
" For Miss , " read Miss Smith,
That is sAifi, — ^plain as he can be. — Now for the cream.
But ah] nnited (fmiraii^ ^(niknoir), what reverse wehBTel
Man'i boasted power and freedoin, all are flowD ;
Lord of the eailh and sea, he bends a slave.
And woinui, lovely woman, reigns alone.
A veiy proper compliment ! — and then follows the appU-
cation, which I think, my dear Harriet, you cannot find
much difficulty in comprehending. Read it in comfort to
yourself. There can be no doubt of its being written for you
and to you.'
Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion.
She read the concluding lines, and was all flutter and hap-
piness. She could not speak. But she was not wanted to
speak. It was enough for her to feel. Emma spoke for
her.
'There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in this
compliment,'said she.'that I cannot have a moment's
byGoogle
62 Emma.
doubt as to Mr. Elton's intentions. Yon are his object,- -
and you will soon receive the completest proof of it I'
thought it must be so. I thought I could not be so de-
ceived; but now it is clear: the state of his mind is as
clear and decided as my wishes on the subject have been
ever since I Icnew you. Yes, Harriet, just so long have I
been wanting the very circumstance to happen which has
happened I could never tell whether an attachment
between you and Mr. Elton were most desirable or most
natural. Its probability and its eligibility have really so
equalled each other! I am very happy. I congratulate
you, m^ dear Harriet, with all my heart This is an at-
tachment which a woman may well feel pride in creating.
This is a connection which offers nothing but good. It will
give you every thing that you want, — consideration, inde-
pendence, a proper home,— it will fix yon in the centre of
all your real friends, close to Hartfield and to me, and
confirm our intimacy for ever. This, Harriet, is an alliance
which can never raise a blush in either of us.'
'Dear Miss Woodhouse,'and'Dear Miss Woodhouse,'wat
all that Hairiet, with many tender embraces, could arti-
culate at first ; but when they did arrive at something more
like conversation, it was sufficiently clear to her friend that
she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered just as she ought
Mr. Elton's superiority had very ample acknowledgment
'Whatever you say is always right'cried Harriet,'and
therefore, I suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so ;
but otherwise 1 could not have imagined it It is so mucli
beyond any thing I deserve. Mr. Elton, who might marry
any body ! There cannot be two opinions about him. He
is so very superior. Only think of those sweet verses — " To
Miss . " Dear me, how clever ! Could it really be
meant for me 1'
'I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about
that It is a ceruinty. Receive it on my judgment It is
a sort of prologue to the play, a motto to the chapter ; and
will be soon followed by matter-of-fact prose,'
'It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected.
I am sure, a month ago, I had no more idea myself I The
strangest things do take place 1'
by Google
'When Miss Smiths and Mr. Elionsget acquainted — the
do indeed— and Teally it is strange ; it is out of the common
course that what is so evidently, so palpably desirable — what
courts the pre-airangement of other people — should so im-
mediately shape itself into the proper fonn. You and Mr.
Elton are by situation caUed together ; you belong to one
another by every circumstance of your respective homes.
Your matiying will be equal to the matdi at Randalls.
Theie does seem to be a something in the lur of Hartfield
which gives love exactly the right direction, and sends it
into the vei; duumel where it ought to flow.
llMConne of tine love never did ran tmootb —
A Hartfield edition of Sbakspeare would have a long note
on that passage.'
'That Mr. Elton should reaUy be in love with me, — ^me,
of all people, who did not know him, to speak to him, at
Michaelmas ! And he, the veiy handsomest man that ever
was, and a man that every body looks up to, quite like Mr.
Kn^tley 1 His company so sought after, that every body
says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not
choose it ; that he has more invitations than there are days
in the week. And so excellent in the church I Miss Nash
has put down all the texts he has ever preached from since
he came to Highbury. Dear me I When I look back to
the first dme I saw him I How little did 1 think I I'he
two Abbotts and I ran into the fiont room and peeped
through the blind when we heard he was going by, and
Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look
through herself ; however, she called me back presently, and
let me look too, which was very good-natured. And how
beaudful we thought he looked I He was arm in arm with
Mr. Cole.'
'This is an alliance which, whoever — ^whatever your friends
may be, must be agreeable to them, provided at least they
have common sense ; and we are not to be addressing our
conduct to fools. If they are anxious to see you happily
married, here is a man whose amiable character gives every
assurance of it ; if they wish to have you setded in the same
country and circle which they liave chosen to place you in,
by Google
64 Emma.
here it will be accomplished ; and if their only object is
that you should, in the common phrase, be well married,
here is the coinfortable fortune, the respectable establish-
ment, the rise in the world which must satisfy them.'
'Yes, very true. How nicely you talk ! I love to hear
you. You understand e^'Crything. You and Mr. Elton
are one as clever as the other. This charade ! If I had
studied a twelvemonth, I could never have made any thing
like it'
'I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of
declining it yesterday.'\
'I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I
ever read.'
'I never read one more to the purpose, certainly.'
'It is as long again as almost all we have had before.'
'I do not consider its length as particularly in its iavour.
Such things in general cannot be too short'
Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear. The most
Eatisfactoiy comparisons were rising in her mind.
< It is one thing,'said she, presently, her cheeks in a glow,
'to have very good sense in a common way, like every
body else, and if there is anything to say, to sit down and
write a letter, and say just what you must, in a short way;
and another, to write verses and charades Uke this.'
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of
Mr. Martin's prose.
'Such sweet lines !'continued Harriet —'these two last !
But how shall I ever be able to return the paper, or say I
have found it out! Oh, Miss Woodhouse, what can we do
about that 1'
'Leave it to me. You do nothing. He will be here
this evening, I dare say, and then I will give it him back,
and some nonsense or other will pass between us, and you
shall not be committed. Your soft eyes shall choose their
own time for beaming. Trust to me.'
'Oh, Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write
this beautiful charade into my book 1 I am sure I have
not got one half so good.'
'Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason why
you should not write it into your booL'
byGoogle
Emma. 65
'Oh, but tfiase two lines are'—'The best of aH.
Granted;— for pnTOte enjoyment; and for private enjoy-
ment keep them. They are not at all the less written, you
know, because you AmAe them. The couplet does not
cease to be, nor does its meaning change. But take it
away, and all afpnpruaien ceases, and a veiy pretty,
gallant charade remains, fit for any collection. Depend
iq > on it, be would not hke to have his chaiade slighted
much better than his passion, A poet in love must be
encooraged in both capacities, or neither. Give me the
book, I will write it down, and then there can be no pos-
»ble reflection on you.'
Harriet submitted, though h^-mmd could hardly separate
the parts, so as to 1^1 quite sure that her friend were not
writing down a declaration of love. It seemed too precious
an ofiering for any degree of publicity.
'I shall never let that book go out of my own hands,'
ctud she.
'Very well,'replied Emma,'a most natural feeling, and
die longer it lasts, the better I shall be pleased. But here
is my father coming ; you will not object to my reading the
charade to him. It will be giving him so much pleasure.
He loves any thing of the sort, and especially any thing
that pays woman a compUmenL He has the tendeiest spirit
of gallanti7 towards us all. You must let me read it to himu'
Hairiet looked grave.
'My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon
this charade. You will betray your feelings improperly,
if you are too conscious and too quick, and appear to ailix
more meaning, or even quite all the meaning which may be
aifixed to it Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute
pf admiration. If he had been anxious for secrecy, he would
not have left the paper while I was by ; but he rather
pushed it towards me than towards you. Do not let us be too
solemn on the business. He has encouragement enough to
prcx«ed, without our sighing out our souls over this charade.'
'Oh, no; I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it Do
as you please.'
Mr. Woodhouse came in, and veiy soon led to the subject
again, by the recurrence of his veij- frequent inquiry of
by Google
'Wen, my dears, how does jonr book goon 1 Hav« you got
any thing & esh !'
'Yes, papa; we have something to read to yon, some-
thing quite fresh. A piece of paper was found on the
table this morning — (dropped, we suppose, by a laiiy) —''
containing a very prrt^ diaiade, and we have J\ist copied
it in.'
She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read,'
Sfoiriy and distinctly, and two or three times over, with ex-
planations of every part as she proeeeded; and he was veiy
much pleased, and, as she had fijreseen, espedally strucl:
with the complimentary conduaon.
'Ay, Ihafs very just, indeedj thafs very propefty said.
Very true. " Woman, lovely woman. " It is sudi a pretty
charade, my dear, that I can eaaly guess what faiiy brought
it Nobody could have written so prettily but you, Emma.'
Emma only nodded, and smiled. After a little thinking,
and a vety tender sigh, he added, —
'Ah, it is no difficulty to see wiio you take after. Your
dear mother was so clever at aD those things. If I ba^
but her memory. But I can remember nothing; not even
that partJcular riddle which yoo have heard me mention: f
can only recollect the first stanza; and Oiere are several; —
Kitt]', a lair bnt fhizen maid,
Kindled a Some I jet deplore;
Tbe hoodwink'd hoy I called to aid,
Thoof^ of bi( near appicajji a & aid,
So fttal to my suit before.
And that is all that I can recollect of it; but it is veiy clever
all the way through. But I think, my dear, you said you
had got it'
'Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page. Wa
copied it Aom the Elegant Extracts. It was Gairick's, yoa
know.'
'Ay, very true: — I wish I could recollect more of it
Kitty, a & ii but frozen maid.
Tlie name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she waa
very near bong christened Catherine after her grandmamma.
I hope we shaQhaveherh«e next week. Have you though^
byGoogIc
^ f?
tny deai, vhen yon sbail put her, and what toom there wffl
be for the children !';
'Oh, yes — she will h & ve her own room, of course ; the
room she alvayt has, — utd th«« it the nursery for the
children, — ^jost as usual, you know. Why should there b0
any change 1'
'I do not know, my dear— but it is so long since she was
here — not since last Easter, and then only for a few days.
Mr. John Knightle/s being a lawyer is vay inconvenient
Poor Isabella! — she is sadly taken away from us all ; — and
how Sony she willbe when ^e oomes, not to see Miss Ta^r
here.'
'She will not be surprised, papa, at least'
,'I do not know, my dear. I am sore I was very
much surprised when I first heard she was going to be
mairied.'
'We must ask Mr. and Mrs. Weston to dine with us, whila
Isabella is here.'
'Yes, my dea^ if there is time. But — (in a very depressed
tone) — she is coming for only one week. There will not be
time for any thing.'
'It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer, — ^but it
seems a case of necesuty. " iAi. John Knightley must be in
town again on the aSth; and we ou^t to be thankfiil, p^n,
that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to
the country, that two or three days are not to be taken out for
the Abbey. Mr. Knightley promises to give up his daim this
Christmas, though you know it is longer since they were with
bim than with us.'
'It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella
weie to be anywhere but at Haitfleld.'
Mr. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. Knightley's
claims on his brother, or any body's claims en Isabella,
except his own. He sat musing a little while, and then
said, —
'But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to
go back so soon, though he does. I thin k , Emma, I shall
try and peisuade her to stay longer with us. She and the
children mi^t stay very wdL'
'Ah, papa, that is what you never have been aUe to
by Google
68 Emma.
VxijmpMi, and I do not dtiok yon ever wQL Isabella
cannot bear to stay behind her husband.'
This waa too trae for contiadictioa Unwelcome as it
was, Mr. Woodhouse could only give a submissive sigh; and
as Emma saw his spirits affected by the idea of his dau^ter's
attadimeit to her husband, she immediately led to such a
branch of the subject aa must raise them.
'Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can
while my brD±a and sister are here. 1 am sure she mil be
pleased with the children. We aie very proud of the children,
are not we, papa I I wonder which she will think the hand-
somest, Henry or Johnl'
'Ay, 1 wonder which she will. Poor little dears, how
(jlad they will be to come. They are very fond of being at
Haitfield, Harriet'
'I dare say they are, ^. I am sure I do not IcnowiriK) is
noL'
'Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his manuna.
Henry is the eldest, he was named after me, not after his
father. John, the second, is named after his father. Some
people are suipiised, I bdieve, that the eldest was not, but
Isabella would have him called Henry, which I thought very
pretty of her. And he is a very clever boy, indeed. They
are all remarkably clever; and they have so many pretty
ways. They will come and stand by my chair and say,
" Grandpapa, can you give me a bit of string 1 " and once
Henry ^ed me for a luiife, but I told him knives were only
made for grandpapas. I think their father is too rough with
them very often.'
'He appears rough to you,'said Emma, ■ because you are
so veiy gentle yourself; but if you could compare him with
other papas, you would not think him rou^. He wishes his
boys to be active and hardy; and if they misbehave, can
give them a sharp word now and then: but he is an affec-
tionate father — certainly Mr. John Knighdey is an affec-
tionate father. The children are all fond of him.'
* And dien their unde comes in, and tosses them up to
the ceiling in a very fiightfiil way.'
'But they Uke it, papa; there is nothing they like so
taatiL It is such enjoyment to them, that if their uncle did
by Google
Emtna. 69
not lay down the rnle of thdr taking turns, «4ilch ever bc^aa
would never give way to Ac other.'
'Well, t cannot undetstand it'
'That is the case wiA us all, papa. One half of the worid
cannot understand the pleasures cS the other.'
Later in the morning, and just as the giria were going to
separate in preparadon for the r^ular four o'clock dinner,
the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again. Harriet
turned away; but Emma could receive him with the usual
smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in hia the con-
sciousness of having ma^e a push — (^ having thrown a die;
and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up.
His ostensible reason, however, was to ask whether Mr.
Woodhouse's party could be made up in the evening without
him, or whether he should be in the smallest d^rce ne-
cessary at Hartfield. If he were, every thing else must g^ve
way; but otherwise his friend Cole had been saying so much
about his dinmg with him — had made such a point of it —
that he had promised him conditionally to coma
Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disap-
pointing his friend on their account; her £ither was sure of
his rubber. He re-uiged — she re-dedined ; and he seemed
then about to make his bow, when, taking the p^ > » torn the
table, she returned it
'Oh, here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave
with us; thank you for the sight of it. We admired it so
much, diat I have ventured to write it into Miss Smith's col-
lection. Vour friend will not take it amiss, I hope; Of
course, I have not transcribed beyond the eight first lines.'
Mr. Elton certainly did not veiy well know what to say.
He looked rather doubtingly—rather confused; said some-
thing about'honour;'— glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and
then seeing the book open on the uble, took it up, and ex-
amined it very attentively. With the view of passing off an
awkward moment, Emma smilingly said, —
'You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good
a charade must not be confined to one or two. He may be
sure of every woman's approbation while he writes with such
gallantry.'
'I have DO heatation in saying,'replied Mr. Elton, thougb
byGoo^lc
JO Emma.
he^tatiog a. good deal while he spoke, —'I have no hesitatioa
in saying — at least if my fHend feels at all as /do— I have
not die smallest doubt that, could he see his little eSusion
lionouied as / see it (looking at the book again, and re-
placing it on the table), he would consider it as the proudest
nisnientofhis life.'
After this speech he was gone aa soon as possible. Emma
could not think it too soon; for with all his good and
lagreeable qualities there was a sort of parade in bis speeches
which was very apt to incline her to laugh. She lan away to
■indulge the inclination, leaving the tender and the sublime
'of pl^isure to Harriet's share.
CHAPTER X
Trodoh now the middle of December, there had yet been
no weather to prevent the yotmg ladies from tolerably re-
gular exercise ; and on the morrow, Emma had a charitable
visit to pay to a poor sick family who lived a little way out
of Highbury.
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage
Lane, a lane leadii^ at right-angles from the broad, though
insular, main street of the place j and, as may be inferred,
containing the blessed abode of Mr. Elton. A few inferior
dwellings were first to be passed, and then, about a quarter
of a mile down the lane, rose the vicarage; an old and not
very good house, almost as close to the road as it could be-
lt had no advantage of situation ; but hod been very much
smartened up by the present proprietor ; and, such as it was,
jthere could be no possibility of the two friends passing it
without a slackened pace and observing eyes. Emma's re-
mark was, —
'There it is. There go you and your riddle-book one of
■these days,'Harriet's was, —
'Oh, what a sweet bouse I How very beantiful ! TTiere
•are the yellow curtains that Miss Nash admires so innch.'
* I do not often walk this way ni > w'said Emma, as they
:proceeded,'but ^Act there will bean inducement, and I shall
byGoogle
Emma. 71
gradually get intimtdy acquainted with allthehedget^ B^tci,
pools, and pollards of this part of Highbury.'
Harriet, she found, had rtever in her life bees within-
side the vicarage ; and her cariosity to see it was lo extreme
that, considcriDg exteriors and probatulitiesi Emma could
only class it, as 4 [HOof of love, with Mr. Eltoo^s seeing
ready wit in her.
'I wish we could contrive i^'said she ;'tiut I cannot
think of any toIeraUe pretence for going in ; — ^no servant
that I want to inquire about of his housekeeper— no mes-
sage from my & ther.'
She pondered, but could think of noUiing. After «
mutual silence of some rmnutes^ Harriet thus b^an again —
'I do BO woDder, Miss Woodhouse, Uiat yon sho^ not
be married, or going to be married — so diarming as you are.'
Emma laughed, and replied, —
'Uy being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to in-
duce me to marry j I must find other people diaiming —
one other person at least And I am not oi^y not going to
be married at present, but have very htde intention of ever
marrying at alL'
'Ah, so you say ; but I caimot believe it'
* I rmist see somebody veiy superior to any one I have
.seen yet, to be tempted: Mr. Elton, you know (recollecting
hers^f), is out of the question; and I do net wish to see any
such peisoo. I would latber not be tempted. I cannot
really change for the better. If I were to marry, I must ex-
pect to repent it'
'Deal me I— ^it is so odd to hear a woman talk so 1'
'I have none of the usual inducements of women to many.
Were I to & U in love, indeed, it would be a different thing ;
but I never have been in love : it is not my way, or my
pature; and I do not think I ever shall And, without lov^
I am sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as
mine. FcHtune I do not want ; employment I do not want;
ccnsequence I do not want; I believe few married women
are hiUf as much mistress of their husband's house as I am of
Haitfield; and never, never could I expect to be so truly
bebved axA impottaatj so always first and always rig^t m
any maa's eyes as I am in my father's.'
by Google
^2 Emma.
'But then, to be an old maid aX last, like Miss Bates !'
'That is as fonnidable an image as you could present,
Haniet; and if I thought I should ever be like Miss Bates
— so silly, 80 satisfied, so smiling, so prosing, so undistin-
guishing and un & stidious; and so apt to tell eveiy thing
relative to every body about me, I would many to-moirow.
But between kf, I am convinced there never can be any
likeness, except in being unmarned.'
'But still, you will be an old maid — and that's so dreadful !'
* Never mind, Haniet, I shall not be a poor old maid j
and it is poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to
4 genennis public I A single woman with a very narrow
income must be a ridiculous, disagreeable old maid ! the
proper sport of boys and giiis ; but a dngle woman of good
fortune is always respectable, and may be as sensible and
pleasant as anybody else I And the distinction is not quite
so much against the candour and common sense of the
world as appear? at first; for a very naiiow income has a
tendency to contract the mind, and sour tiie temper. Those
who can barely live, and who live perforce in a very small,
and generally veiy inferior, society, may well be illiberal and
cross. This does not apply, however, to Miss Bates : she is
only too good natured and too silly to suit me ; but in
general, she is very much to the taste of every body, though
single and though poor. Poverty cert:unly has not contracted
Jier mind. I really believe, if she had only a shilling in the
world, she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it;
and nobody is afraid of her : that is a great charm.'
'Dear me I but what shall you dot How shall you
employ yourself when you grow oldt'
'If I know myself, Harriet mine is an active, busy mind,
with a great many independent resources ; and I do not per-
ceive why I should be more in want of employment at forty
or fifty than at one-and-twenty. Woman's usual occupations
of eye, and hand, and mind, will be as open to me then as
they arc now, or with no important variation. If I draw less^
I shall read more ; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-
work. And as for objects of interest, objects for theaffrcdons,
which is, in truth, the great point of inferiority, the want (rf
which is really the great evil to be avoided in Mi mairyinf^
byGoo^lc
I shall be very well aS, with all the children of a sister I lore
so much to care abouL There will be enough of them, in
all probability, to supply every sort of sensation that declin-
ing life can need. There will be enou^ for every hope and
every fear ; and though n^ attachment to none can equal
that of a paientfit suits my ideas of comfort better than what
is warmer and blinder. My nephews and nieces : I shall
(Aen have a niece with me.'
'Do you know Miss Bates's niece 1 That is, I know you
must have seen her a hundred times — but are you acquainted!'
'Oh, yea ; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever
she comes to Highbiuy. By the bye, tAat is almost enough
to put one out at conceit with a niece. Heaven forbid, at
least, that I should ever bore people half so much about all
the Knightleys tc^ether as she does about Jane Fair & x.
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax. Every letter
from her is read forty times over: ho* compliments to all
fiiends go round and round again j and if she does but send
her aunt the pattern irf a sttmmcher, or knit a pair of
garters for her grandmother, one hears of nothing else for
a month. I wish Jane Faii & x very well; but she dres me
to death.'
They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle
topics were superseded. Enmia was very compassionate;
and the distresses of the poor were as sure of relief from
her personal attention and kindness, her counsel and her
patience, as from her purse. She understood their ways,
could allow for their ignorance and their temptations, had no
romantic expectations of extraordinary virtue from Uiose for
whom education had done so little, entered into their troubles
with ready sympathy, and always gave her assistance with
as much intelligence as good-will. In the present in-
stance, it was sickness and poverty together vinch she came
to viut; and after remaining there as long as she could give
comfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with sudi an iro-
^«ssion of the scene as made her say to Harriet, as they
walked away, —
'These are the s^;hts, Harriet, to do one good. How
trifling they make every thing else appear ] I feel now as if
I coiUd tluok of nothing but these poor creatures all the
L:,.n.P:lbyG00gk'
74
Emma.
test of the ^y ; and jret who can say bow soon it may all
vanish from my mind I'
'Very true,'said Harriet.'Poor creatures I one can
think of nothing else.'
'And really, I do not think the impression will soon be
over,'said Emma, as she crossed the low hedge and totter-
ing footstep which ended the nairow, slippery path Arough
the cottage garden, and brought them into the laoe ^ain.
'I do not think it will,'stopping to look ooce m«e at all
the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still
greater within.
'Oh dear, no,'said hei companioo.
They walked on. The lane made a sli^t bend j and when
that bend was passed, Mr. Elton was immediately in si^t ;
and so near as to gjve Etnma time only to say feitiier, —
'Ah, Harriet, here ccHnes a very sudden trial of our stability
in good thoughts. Well (smiling), I hope it may be allowed
that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the
sufferers, it has done all that is tnily important If we feel
for the wretched, enough to do all we can for them, the rest
is emp^ sympathy, only distressing to ourselves.*
Harriet could just answer,'Ob dear, yes,'before the
gentleman joined them. The wante and sufferings of the
poor ^rnily, however, were the first subject on meeting.
He had been going to call on them. His visit he would
now defer; but they had a very interesting parley about what
could be done and should be done. Mr. Elton then turned
back to accompany theru.
'To & 11 in with each other on such an enand as this,'
thought Emma;'to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will
bring a great increase of love on each side. I should not
wonder if it were to bring on the declaration. It must, if I
were not here. I wish I were anywhere else.'
Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could,
she soon afterwards took possession of a narrow foot-
path, a little raised on one side of the lane, leaving them V > -
gether in the main road. But she had not been there two
minutes when she found that Harriett habits of dependence
and imitation were bringing her up too, and that, in short,
they would both be sotm after her. This would not do;
J,g,l,z6:lbyG00gle
Emma. 75
^e immediately stopped, under i^etence of lutving some
alteration to ma^e in the lacing of her half-boot, and stoo[ >
ii^downincompleteoccupationof the footpath, be^ed them
to have die goodness to walk on, and she would follow in
half a minute. They did as they were desired ; and by the
time she judged it reasonable to have done witb ha boot,
she had the comfort of further delay in her power, being
overtaken by a child from the cottage, settii^ out, according
to orders, with her pitcher, to fetch broth ftom Hartfietd.
To walk by die side of this child, and ttdk to and question
ha, was the most natural thing in the world, or would have
.bc«i the ntoet natural, had she been acting just then without
design; and t^ this means the others were still able to keep
ahead widiout anyobligation of wtuting for her. She gained on
them, however, involuntarily : the child's pace was quick,
and theirs rather slow; and she was the more concerned at
it, from dieir being evidently in a conversation which interested
them. Mr. Elton was speaking with animation, Harriet
listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma having
sent the child on, was b^inning to think how she might
draw back a little more, when they both looked around, and
she was obliged to join them.
Mr. Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interest
ing detail; and Emma experienced some disappointment
when she found that he was only giving his fair companion
an account of the yesterday's party at his friend Cole's, and
that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese, and the
north Wiltshire, the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and all
the dessert.
'This would soon have led to something better, of couree,'
.was her consoling reflection;'anything interests between
those who love; and anything will serve as introduction to
what is near the heart If I could but have kqtt longer away.'
They now walked on together quietly till within view of
the vicarage pales, when a sudden resolution, of at least
getting Harriet into the house, made her again find some-
thing very much amiss about her boot, and & 11 behind to
arrange it once more. She then broke the lace off short, and
.dexterously throwing it into a ditch, was presently obliged to
.entreat them to stop, and acknowledge her inability to put
by Google
^ Emma.
herself ta rights «o aa to be aUe to walk home In toletalde
cotnfort
'Fart of my laoe is gone,'said Aae,'and I do not know
how I am to contrive. I really am a most troublesome com-
panion to you both, but I hope I am not often so ill-equipped.
Mr. Elton, I must beg leave to stop at your house, and
ask your housekeeper for a Int of liband or string, or any
thing just to keep my boot on.'
Mr. Elton lo^^ed all happiness at this proportion; and
DoAing could exceed his alertness and attention in conduct-
ing them into hia house, and endeavouring to make eveiy-
tlmig appear to advantage; The room they were taken into
was the one he chiefly occupied, and tooUng forwards; be-
hind it was anolJier with which it inunediately communicated ;
the door between them was open, and Emma passed into it
mth the housekeeper, to receive her assistance in the most
cuofortable manna. She was obliged to leave the door
ajar as she found it; but she fully intended that Mr. Elton
should close it. It was not closed, however, it still remaned
ajar; but by enga^ng the housekeeper in incessant conver-
sation, she hoped to make it practicable for him to choose
his own subject in the adjoining room. For ten minutes she
could hear nothing but herself. It could be protracted no
longer. She was then obliged to be fiiushed, and make her
appearance.
The lovers were standing tc^ether at one of the windows.
It had a most favourable aspect; and, for half a minute,
Enmia felt the glory of having schemed successfully. But it
would not do; be had not come to the point He had been
most agreeable, most dehf^tfuU he had told Harriet that he
had seen them go by, and had purposely followed them;
other lilde gallantries and allusions had been dropped, but
nothing serious.
'Cautious, very cautious,'thought Emma;'he advances
inch by inch, and win hazard nothing till he believes himself
secure.'
Still, however, though everything had not been accom-
plished by her ingenious device, she could not but flatter her-
self that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment
to both, and must be leading them forward to the great event
byGooj^lc
CHAPTER XI.
Hr. Elton must now be left to himself. It was no longer
in Emma's power to superintend his happiness, or quicken
his measures. The coming of her sister's bmily was so very
near at hand, that Sist in anticipation, and then in reality, it
became henceforth the prime object c^ interest; and during
die ten days of their stay at HartAeld it was not to be ex-
pected — she did not hersdf expect — that any thing beyond
occasional, fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to
the lovera Th^ might advance rapidly if they would, how-
ever J they must advance somehow or other, whether they
voM or no. She hardly wished to have more leisure for
them. There are people who, the more you do for them,
the less they will do for themselves.
Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, from havii^ been longer
than usual absent from Surrey, were exdting, of course, rather
more than the usual interest Till this year, every long
vacation since their marriage had been divided between
Hartfidd Mid Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays of this
autumn had been given to sea-bathing for the children; and
it was therefore many months since they had been seen in a
regular way by their Surrey connections, or seen at all by
Mr. Woodhouse, who could not be induced to get so fiir aa
London, even torjxxa Isabella's sakej and who consequently
was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in fore-
stalling this too short visit.
He thought much of the evils of the joumey for her, and
not a litde of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman,
who were to bring some of the party die last half (rf the way;
but his alanns were needless ; the ^teen miles being hap-
pily accomplished, and Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, their
five children, and a competent number of nursery-maids, all
reaching Hartfield in safety. The bustie and joy of such
an arrival, the many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged,
and variously dispersed and disposed of| produced a noise
and confiision widch hia nerves could not have borne under
by Google
78 Emma.
any other cause, nor have endured much longer even for this;
but the ways of Hartlield and the feelings of her father were
so respected by Mrs. John Knightley, that in spite of mater-
nal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her httle ones
and for their having instantly all the hberty and attendance
ail the eating and drinking, and sleeping and playing, vhich
they could possibly wish for, without the smallest delay,
the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to
him, either in themselves or in any restless attendance on
them.
Mrs. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of
gentle, quiet manners, and a disposition remarkably amiid > le
and affectionate, wiapt up in her family, a devoted wife, a
doting mother, and so tenderly attached to her father and
sister that, but for these higher ties, a warmer love might
have seemed impossible. She could never see a fault in any
of them. She was not a woman of strong understanding or
any quickness; and with this resemblance of her father, she
inherited also much of bis constitudonj was delicate in her
own health, over-careful of that of her children, had many
fears and many nerves, and was as fond of her own Mr.
^ttngfield in town as her father could be of Mr, Perry. They
were alike, too, in a general benevolence of temper, and a
strong habit of r^ard for every old acquaintance.
Mr. John Knightley was a tall, gendeiuan-hke, and
very clever man ; rising in bis profession, domestic, and
respectable in his private character; but with reserved
manners which prevented his being generally pleasing, and
capable of being sometimes out of humour. He was not an
ill-tempered man, not so often unreasonably cross as to de-
serve such a reproach; but his temper was not his great per-
fection; and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife, it waa
hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be
increased. The extreme sweetness of her temper must
hurt his. He had all the clearness and quickness of mind
which she wanted; and he could sometimes act an ungra-
cious, or say a severe thing. He was not a great favourite
with his Esir sister-in-law. Nothing wrong in him escaped
her. She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella,
which Isabella never fislt herselC Fei^ps she might have
byGoogIc
Emma. 79
passed over more lud his manners b«en fianering b) Isabella's
sister, but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and
friend, without praise and without blindness ; but hardly any
degree of personal compliment could have made her regard-
less of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he some-
times fell into, the want of respectful forbearance towards
her father. There he had not always the patience that could
have been wished. Mr, Woodhouse's peculiarities and
fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational
remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill bestowed. It did
not often happen; for Mr. John Knightley had really a great
r^ard for his father-in-law, and generally a strong sense of
what was due to him ; but it was too often for Emma's charity,
especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequendy
to be endured, though the ofience came not. The begin-
ning, however, of every visit displayed none but the pro-
perest feelings, and this being of necessity so short, might be
hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality. They had not
been long seated and composed when Mr. Woodhouse, with
a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh, called his
daughter's attention to the sad change at Hartfield since she
had been there last
'Ah, my dear,'said he,'poor Miss Taylor. It is a griev-
ous business.'
'Oh, yes, sir,'cried she, with ready sympathy,'how you
must miss her ! And dear Emma, too. What a dreadful
loss to you both! I have been so grieved foryou. I could
not imagine how you could possibly do without her. It is a
sad change indeed; but I hope she is pretty well, sirt'
'Pretty well, my dear, — I hope, — pretty welL 1 do not
know but that the place agrees with her tolerably.'
Mr. John Knightley here asked Eroma, quietiy, whether
there were any doubts of the ur of Randalls.
'Oh, no: none in the least. I never saw Mrs, Weston
better in my life, — never looking so well Papa is only
speaking his own regret'
'Very much to the honour of both,'was the handsome
r^ly.
'And do you see her, sir, tolerably often 1'asked Isabctlj
in the plaintive tone which just suited her & ther.
UigillzedbyGoOgk'
8o Emma.
Mr. Woodhouse hesitated.'Not near so often, my dear,
OS I could wish.'
* Oh, papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire
day since they married. Either in the morning or evening
of every day, excepting one, have we seen either Mr. Weston
or Mrs. Weston, and generally both, either at Randalls or
here ; and, as you may suppose, Isabella, most frequently
here. They are very, very kind in their visits. Mr. Weston
is really as kind as herself. Papa, if you speak in that
melancholy way, you will be giving Isabella a false idea of
us all. Eveiy body must be aware that Miss Taylor must be
missed ; but every body ought also to be assured that Mr. and
Mrs. Weston do really prevent our missing her by any means
to the extent we ourselves anticipated, — which is the exact
truth.'
* Jnsl as it should be,'said Mr. John Knightley,'and just
BS I hoped it was from your letters. Her wish of showing
you attention could not be doubted, and his being a disen-
gaged and social man makes it all easy. I have been always
telling you, my love, that I had no idea of the change being
so very material to Hartfietd as you apprehended; and now
you have Emma's account, I hope you will be satisfied.'
'Why, to be sure,'said Mr. Woodhouse, —'yes, certainly.
I cannot deny that Mrs. Weston, — poor Mrs. Weston, — does
come and see ns pretty often ; but then, she is always obliged
to go away again.'
'It would be very hard upon Mr. Weston if she did not,
papa. You quite forget poor Mr, Weston.'
'I Aink, indeed,'said Mr. John Knightley, pleasantly,'that
Mr. Weston has some little claim. You and I, Emma, wilt
venture to take the part of the poor husband. X being a
husband, and you not being a wife, the claims of the man
may very likely strike us with equal force. As for Isabella,
she has been married long enough to see the convenience
of putting all the Mr. Westons aside as much as she can.'
'Me, my love 1'cried his wife, hearing and understanding
only in part'Are you talking about me t I am sure nobody
ought to be, or can be, a greater advocate for matrimony
than I am; and if it had not been for the mlsciy of her
leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought of Miss
L.,.n.P:ibyG00glc
Emma. & i
Taylor but as tiie most fortunate woman in the world ; and
as to slighting Mr. Weston, — that excellent Mr. Weston, —
I think there is nothing he does not deserve. I believe he
is one of the very best tempered men that ever existed.
Excepting yourself and your brother, I do not know his
equal for tempo*. I shall never forget his flying Henry's kite
for him that very windy day last Easter; and ever since his
particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing
that note, at twelve o'clock at night, on purpose to assure me
that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham, I have been con-
vinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor a better
man in existence. If any body can deserve him, it must be
Miss Taylor.'
'Where is the young man }'said John Knightley.'Has
he been here on ibis occanon, or has he not 1'
'He has not been here yet,'replied Emma.'There was
a strong expectation of his coming soon after the marriage,
but it ended in nothing ; and I hare not heard him mentioned
lately.'
'But you should tell them of the letter, my dear,'said
her & ther.'He wrote a letter to poor Mrs. Weston, to
congratulate her, and a vety proper, handsome letter it was.
She showed it to me. I thought it very well done of him,
indeed Whether it was his own idea, you know, one can-
not telL He is but young, and his uncle perhaps'
'My dear papa, he is thiee-and-tweufy. You forget how
tune passes.'
'Three-and-twenty I is he, indeed I Well, I could not have
thought it ; and he was but two years old when he lost his
poor mother. Well, time does fly indeed! and my memory
is very bod. However, it was an exceeding good, pretty
letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs. Weston a great deal < ^
pleasure. I remember it was written from Weymouth, and
dated Sept aSth, and began, " My dear Madam, " but I foi^et
how it went on j and it was signed " F. C Weston ChurchilL**
I remember that perfectly.'
'How very pleasing and- proper of him ;'cried the good-
hearted Mrs. John Knightley.'I have no doubt of his being
a most amiable young man. But how sad it is that he
should not live at home with his father I There is some-
by Google
j^2 Emma.
thing so shocking in a child's being taken away from hia
paimts and natursl home I I never can comprehend boW
Mr. Weston could part with him. To give up one's child 1
I really never could think well of any body who proposed
such a thing to any body else.'
'Nobody ever did thmk well of the ChurchiUs, I fancy,'
observed Mr. John Knightley, coolly.'But you need not
imagine Mr. Weston to have felt what you would feel in givii^
up Henry or John. Mr. Weston is rather an easy, cheerful
tonpered man, than a man of strong feelings : he taked
things as he finds them, and makes enjoyment of them
somehow or other, depending, I suspect, much more upon
what is called s^idy for his comforts, that is, upon the
power of eating and drinking, and playing whist with his
neighbours five times a-week, than upon family affection, or
any thing that home affords.'
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on
Mr. Weston, and had half a mind to take it up; but she
struggled, and let it pass. She would keep the peace if
possible; and there was something honourable and valu-
able in die strong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of
home to lums^ whence resulted her brother's disposition
to look down on the common rate of social intercourse, and
those to whom it was important It had a high claim to
forbearance.
CHAPTER XII.
Mr. IChicbtlev was to dine with them, rather against the
inclination of Mr. Woodhouse, who did not like that any
one should share with him in Isabella's first day. Emma's
sense of right, however, had decided it ; and, besides the
consderadon of what was due to each brother, she had
particular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late dis-
agieeroent between Mr. Rnightley and herseU; in procuring
him die proper invitation.
She hoped liiey mij^t now become friends again. She
diought it was time to make up. Making up, indeed, would
by Google
Emma. 83
not do. S^ certainly had not been in the wrong, and At
would never own that he had. Concession must be out of the
question 1 but it was time to appear to forget that they had
ever quairelled; and she hoped it might rather assist the
restoration of Mendship, that when he came into the room
■he had one of the children with her, — the youngest, a
nice little girl, about eight months old, who was now making
her first visit to Hartfield, and very happy to be danced
about in her auafs arms. It did asMst; for though he
began with grave looks and short questions, be was soon
led on to talk of them all in the usual way, and to take the
chiM out of her aims with all the unceremoniousness of
perfect amity. Emma felt they were Mends again ; and
the convictiDn giving ba at first great satisfacdon, and then
a little saudness, she could not help saying as he was
admiring the baby, —
'What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our
nephews and nieces. As to men and women, our opinions
are sometimes veiy different; but with r^ard to these
children, I observe we never disagree.'
'If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate
of men and women, and as little under the power of & ncy
and whim in your dealings with them, as you are where
these children are concerned, we might always think alike.'
'To be sure — our discordances must always arise fixim
my being in the wroi^.'
'Yes,'SEud he, smiling'and reason good. I was sixteen
years old when you were bom.'
'A material diSerence, then,'she replied ;'and no doubt
you were much my superior in judgment at that period of
our lives ; but does not the lapse of one-and-twenty years
bring our understandings a good deal nearer I'
'Yes, a good deal nearer'
'But still, not near enough to give me a chance of being
right, if we think differently.'
'I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years'
experience, and by not being a pretty young woman and
a spoilt child. Come, my dear Emma, let us be friends^
and say no more about it Tell your aunt, little Emma,
that she ought to set you a better example than to he
by Google
84
Emma,
renewing old grievances, and that if she were not wrong
before, she is now.'
'That's true,'she cried,'very true. Little Emma, grow
up a better woman than your aunt Be infinitely cleverer
and not half so conceited. Now, Mr. Knightley, a word
or two more, and I have done As £ir as good intentions
went, we were both right, and I must say, that no effects
on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong. I only
want to know that Mr. Martin is not very, very bitterly
disappointed.'
'A man cannot be more so,'was his short, fiill answer,
'Ah 1 Indeed I am veiy sc»iy. Come, shake hands
with me. "
This had just taken place, and with great cordiality, when
John Knightley made his appeaiance ; and'How d'ye do,
George 1'and'John, how are you I'succeeded in the true
English style, burying under a calmness that seemed all
but indifference the real attachment which would have led
either of them, if requisite, to do every thing for the good of
the other.
The evening was quiet and conversable, aa Mr. Wood-
house declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable
talk with his dear Isabella, and the little party made two
natural divisions : on one side he and his daughter ; on the
other the two Mr. Knighdeys ; their subjects totally distinct,
or very rarely mixing, and Emioa only occasionally joining
in one or the otho*.
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits,
but principally of those of the elder, whose temper was by
much the most communicative, and who was alwa3rs the
greater talker. Aa a magistrate, he had generally some
point of law to consult John about, or, at least, some
curious anecdote to give ; and as a farmer, as keeping in
hand the home-fann at Donwell, he had to tell what every
field was to bear next year, and to give all such local in-
formation as could not fail of being interesting to a brother,
whose home it had equally been the longest part of his life,
and whose attachments were strong, The plan of a drain,
the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the desti-
nation of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring com, was
by Google
entered into mth u much equality of interest by John as
his rooler manneis rendered possible; and if hia willing
brother ever left him any thing to inquire about, his
inqairies even approached a tone of eagerness.
While they were thus comfortably occuined, Mr. Wood-
house was enjoying a Aill flow oi happy regrets and feariul
affection with lus daughter.
'My poor dear Isabella,'said he, fondly taldng her hand,
and intemipting, for a few moments, her busy labours for
some one of her five chil^*^'how long it is, how terribly
long since you were here I And how tired you must be after
your jovmey I You must go to bed early, my dear, — and I
recommend a little gruel to you before you go. You and I
will have a nice basin of gruel together. My dear Birrnff,
suppose we all have a Uttle grueL'
Enuna could not suppose any such thin^ knowing, aa she
did, that both the Mr. Knighdeys vac as unpersuadable on
that article as herself and two basins only were ordered.
After a little more discourse in praise of gruel, with some
wondering at its not being taken every evening by every
body, he proceeded to say, with an air of grave reflec-
tion, —
'It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the
autumn at South End instead of coming here. I never had
much opinion of die sea air.'
'Mr. Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir, or
we should not have gone. He recommended it for all the
children, but particularly for the weakness in little Bella's
throat, — ^botb sea air and bathing.'
'Ah, my dear, but Peny had many doubts about the sea
doing her any good ; and as to myself I have been long
perfecdy convinced, though perhaps I never told you so
before, that the sea is very rarely of use to anybody. I am
sure it almost killed me once.'
'Come, come,'cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe
subject,'I must beg you not to talk of the sea. It makes
me envious and miserable ; Iwho haveneverseen iti South
End is prohibited, if you please. My dear Isabella, I have
not heard you make one inquiry after Mr. Perry yet ; and
he never forgets you.'
by Google
?6
Emma.
'Oh, good Mr. Perry, how is he, sirt'
'^Vhy, pretty well ; but not quite weU, Poor Peiry is
bilious, and he has not time to take care of himself; he tells
me he hu not time to take care of himself— which is very
sad — but he is always wanted all round the country. I sup-
pose there is not a man in such practice anywhere. But
then, there is not so clever a man anywhere.'
'And Mrs. Perry and the childrwi, how are flieyt Do
the children growl I have a great regard for Mr. Peny. I
hope he will be calling soon. He will be so pleased to see
my litde ones.'
'I hope he will be here to^noirow, for I have a question
or two to ask him about myself of some consequence. And,
my dear, whenever he comes, you had better let him look at
little Bella's throaL'
'Oh, my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have
hardly any uneasiness about it Either bathing has been of
the greatest service to her, or else it is to be attributed to an .
excellent embrocation of Mr. Wingfield's, wluch we have
been applying at times ever since August'
'It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have
beenof use toher; and if I had known you wa% wanting an
embrocation, I would have spoken to'
'You seem tome to have forgotten Mrs: and Miss Bates,'
said Emma-,'I have not heard one inquiry after them.'
'Oh, the good Bateses — I am quite ashamed of myself;
but you mention them in most of your letters. I hope they
are quite well. Good old Mrs. Bates. I will call upon her
to-moirow, ajid take my children, l^ey are always so pleased
to see my children. And that excellent Miss Bates! — such
thorou^ worttiy people 1 How arc they, sirl'
'Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. But poor
Mrs. Bates had a bad cold about a month ago.'
'How sorry I am I but colds were never so prevalent as
they have been this autumn. Mr. Wii^eld told me that he
had never known them more general or heavy, except when
it has been quite an influenza.'
'That has been a good deal the case, my dear, but not to
the de^e you mention. Peny says that colds have been
very general, but not so heavy as he has very irflen known
byGoogle
Emma. 87
than in November. Peny doea not call it altogether a
sickly season.'
'No, I do not know that Mr. Wingfield considers it very
siddy, except'
'Ah, my poor dear child, the truth is, tiiat in London It
is always a sickly season. Nobody is healthy in London,
nobody can be. It is a dreadful thing to have you forced to
live there ; — so far off I — and the air so bad !'
'No, indeed, rv are not at all in a bad air. Our part of
London is so very superior to most others. You must not
confound us with London in general, my dear ^. The
ndghbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from
alokost all the resL We are to veiy aiiy 1 I should be un-
willing, I own, to live in any other part of the town ; there
is hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my chil-
dren in; but ZEW arc so remarkably aiiyl Mr. Wngfidd
thinks the vidni^ of Brunswick Square decidedly the most
favourable as to air.'
'Ah, my dear, it is not like Hartfield. You make the best
of it — but after you have been a week at Hartfield, you are
all of you different creatures ; you do not look like the same.
Now, I cannot say that I think yon are any of you looking
well at present'
'I am soriy to hear you say so, sir ; but I assure you.
excepting those little nervous headaches and palpitations,
which I am never entirely free from anywhere, I am quite
well myself; and if the children were rather pale before they
went to bed, it was only because they were a little more tired
than usual, from their journey and the happiness of coming.
I hope you will think better of their looks to-morrow; for I
assure you Mr. Wingfield told me, that be did not believe
he had ever sent us o^ altogether, in such good case. I
trust, at leas^ & at you do not thmk Mr. Knightley looking
in,'taming her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her
husband.
'Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you. I think
Mr. John Knightley very fer from looking welL'
'What is the matter, sir) Did you speak to mel'cried
Mi. John Knightley, hearing his own nam &
'I am sorry to find, my love, that my £ither does not think
,,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
you looking well; but I hope it is only from being a little
fatigued. I could have wished, however, as you know, that
you had seen Mr, Wingfield before you left home.'
'My dear Isabella,'exclaimed he, hastily,'pray do not
concern yourself about my looks. Be satisfied with doctor-
ing and coddling yourself and the children, and let me look
as I choose.'
'I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling
your brodier,'cried Emma,'about your friend Mr. Graham's
intending to have a bailiff from Scotland, to look after his
new estate. But will it answer 1 WM not the old prejudice
be too strong 1'
And she bUked in this way so long and saccessftilly that,
when forced to give her attention again to her & dier and
sister, she bad nothing worse to hear than Isabella's kind
inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane Fair & x, though no
great favourite with her in general, she was, at that moment,
very happy to assist in praising.
'That sweet, amiable Jane Faii & c!'said Mrs. John
Knightley.'It is so long since I have seen her, except now
and then for a moment accidentally in town ; what happiness
it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt,
when she comes to visit them I I always regret excessively,
on dear Emma's account, that she cannot be more at High-
bury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose Colonel
and Mrs. Campbell will not be able to part with her at alL
She would be such a delightfiil companion for Emma.'
Mr. Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added,—
'Our little friend, Hairiet Smith, however, is just sadb
another pretty kind of young person. You will like HarrieL
Emma could not have a better companion than Harriet'
'I am most happy to hear it; but only Jane Fairfiut one
knows to be so very accomplished and superior, and exacdy
Emma's age.'
This topic was discussed very happily, and others suc-
ceeded of similar moment, and passed away with simitar
harmony; but the evening did not close widiout a little return
of agitation. The gruel came, and supplied a great deal to
be said — much praise and many comments — ^undoubting de-
rision of its wholesomeness for every constitution, and pret^
byGoogIc
Emma. 89
severe philippics upon the many houses where it was never
met with tolerable; but, unfortunately, among the Mlurei
which the dau^ter had to instance, ihe most recent, and
therefore most prominent, was in her own cook at South
End, a young woman hired foi the time, who never had
been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice
smooth gruel, thin, but not too & aa. Often as she had
wished for and ordered it, she had never been able to get
any thing tolerable. Here was a dangerous opening
< Ah,'said Mr. Woodhouse, shaking his head, and fixing
his eyes on her with tender concern. The ejaculation in
Emma's ear expressed,'Ah, there is no end of the sad con-
sequences of your going to South End. It does not beai
talking of.'And for a little while she hoped he would not
tali of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to re-
store him to the relish of his own smooth grueL After an
interval of some minutes, however, he b^an with, —
'I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this
autumn, instead of coming here.'
'Sut why should you be sorry, sir t I assure you, it did
the childrra a great deal of good.'
■And,moreover, if youmustgo to the sea, it had better not
have been to South End. South End is an unhealthy place.
Perry was surprised to hear you had fixed upon South End.'
'I know there is such an idea with many people, but in-
deed it is quite a mistake, sir. We all had our health per-
fectly well there, never found the least inconvenience from
the mud, and Mr. Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to
Siq > pose the place unhealthy ; and I am sure he may be
depended on, for he thoroughly understands the nature of|
the air, and his own brother and family have been there
repeatedly.'
'You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you went
anywhere. Pcny was a week at Cromer once^ and he holds
it to be the best of all the sea-bathing places. A fine ofea
sea, he says, and very pure air. And, by what I understand,
you might have had lodgings there quite away from the sea-~
a quarter of a mile off — very comfortable. You should have
consulted Peny. "
'But, my dear ur, the difference of the journey; only con-
i,m.p:i by Google
90
Etnma.
aider how great it would have been. A hundred miles, per-
haps, instead of forty.'
'Ah, my dear, as Peny says, where health is at stake,
nothing else should be considered; and if one is to travel,
there is not much to choose between forty miles and a hun-
dred. Better not move at all, better stay in London altogether,
than travel forty miles to get into a worse air. This is just
what Perry said. It seemed to him a very ill-judged measure.'
Emma's attempts to stop her father had been vain; and
when he had reached such a point as this, she could not
wonder at her brother-in-law's breatdng ouL
'Mr. Perry,'said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure,
'would do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for.
Why does he make it any business of his to wonder at what
I dot — at my taking my family to one part of the coast or
Bnotherl I may be allowed, I hope, theuseof myjut^ment
as well as Mr. Perry. I want his directions no more than
his drugs.'He paused, and growing cooler in a moment,
added, with only sarcastic dryness,'If Mr. Perry can tell me
how to convey a wife and five children a distance of a hun-
dredand thirty miles with no greater expense or inconvenience
than a distance of forty, I should be as willing to ptefer
Cromer to South End as he could himself
'True, true,'cried Mr. Knightley, with most ready inters
posidon, —'very true. That's a consideration, indeed. But,
John, as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving
the path to Langham, of turning it mwe to the right that it
may not cut through the home meadows, I cannot conceive
any difficulty. I should not attempt it, if it were to be the
means of inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if you
call to mind exacdy the present line of the path .... The
only way of proving it, however, will be to turn to our maps. I
shall see you at the Abbey to-morrow morning I hope, and then
we will look them over, and you shall give me your opinion.'
Mr. Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflec-
tions on his friend Peny, to whom he had, in fact, thou^
unconsciously, been atbibuting many of his own feelings and
expressions; but the soothing attentions of his daughters
gradually removed the present evil, and the immediate alert-
ness of one brother, and better recoUections of the other,
prevented any renewal of it
byGoo^lc
CHAPTER XIII.
There could hardly be a happier creature in the world tliaa
Mrs. John Knightley, in this short visit to Hartfield, going
about every rooming among her old acquaintance with her
five children, and talking over what she had done every
evening with her fother and sister. She had nothing to wish
otherwise, but that the days did not pass so swiftly. It was
a deUghtfiil visit ; — perfect, in being much too short
In general their evenings were less engaged with fiiends
than their momingsi but one complete dinner engagement,
and ont of the house too, there was no avoiding, though at
Christmas. Mr. Weston would take no denial : they must
all dine at Randalls one day; — even Mr. Woodhouse was
persuaded to think it a possble thing in preference to a
division of the party.
How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made
a difficulty if he could, but as his sonand daughter's carriage
and horses were actually at Haitfield, he was not aUe to
make more than a simple question on that head; it hardly
amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma long to con-
vince him that they might in one of the canines find room
for Hajriet aba
Harriet, Mr. Elton, and Mt. Knighdey, their own especial
set, were the only persons invited to meet them: — the hours
were to be early as well as the numbers few; Mr. Wood-
house's habits and inclination being consulted in every
Tlie evening before this great event (for it was a very great
event that Mr. Woodhouse should dine out on the Z4th of
December) had been spent by Harriet at Hartfield, and she
had gone home so much indisposed widi a cold, that, but
for her own earnest wish of bemg nursed by Mrs. Goddaid,
Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house.
Emma called on her the next day, and found her doom
already signed with regard to Randalls. She was very feverish
tikd had a bad sne-throat: Mrs. (lOddard was fiiU of caie
by Google
and affection, Mr. Perry was talked of, and Harriet herself
was too ill and low to resist the authotity which excluded hei
from this delightful engagement, though she could not speak
of her loss without many teais.
Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in
Mis. Goddard's unavoidable absences^ and raise her spirits
by representing how much Mr. Elton's would be depressed
when he knew her state; and left her at last tolerably com-
fortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a most com-
fortless visit, and of their all missing her very much. She
had not advanced many yards from Mrs. Goddard's door,
irtien she was met by Mr. Elton himself, evidently coming
towards it, and as they walked on slowly together in codvot-
satioD about the invalid, — of whom he, on the rumour of
considerable illness, had been going to inquire, that he
might carry some report of her to Haitfield, — they were over-
taken by Mr. John Knightley returning firom the daily visit
to Donwell, with his two eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing
faces showed all the benefit of a country run, and seemed to
ensure a quick dispatch of the roast mutton and rice-pudding
they were hastenit^ home for. They joined company and
proceeded together. Fmma was just describing the nature
of her friend's compl^t: —'a throat very much inflamed,
with a great deal of heat about her, a quick low pulse, & a,
and she was sorry to find from Mrs. Goddard that Harriet
was liable to very bad sore throats, and had often alarmed
her with them.'Mr. Elton looked all alarm on the occasion,
as he exclaimed, —
'A sore throat I — I hope not infectious. I hope not of a
putrid infectious sort Has Feny seen her I Indeed you
should takecareof yourself aswellasofyourfrrend. Letme
entreat you to lun no risks. Why does not Peny see her t'
Emma, who was not really at all frightened herseUj tran-
quillised this excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs.
Goddard^ experience and care ; but as there must still re-
main a d^ree of uneasiness which she could not wish to
reason away, which she would rather feel and assist than
not, she added soon afterwards — as if quite another sub-
ject,—
'It i« so cold, so very cold, and looks and feels so veiy
byGoo^lc
Emma. 93
much Elce snow, that if it were to any other place or with
any other party, I should really try not to go out to-day,
and dissuade ray father from venturing; but as he has made
up his mind, and does not seem to feel the cold himself, I
do not like to interfere, as I know it would be so great a
disappointment to Mr. and Mrs. Weston. Bat upon my
word, Mr. Elton, in your case, I should certainly excuse
mysel£ You appear to me a little hoarse already; aid
when you connder what demand of voice and what ^tigues
to-morrow will bring, I think it would be no more than
common i«iidence to stay at home and take care of yourself
Mr. Elton looked as if he did not very well know what
answer to make ; which was exactly, the case ; for though
very much gratified by the kind care of such a & ir lady, and
not liking to resist any advice of hers, he had not really the
least inclination to give up the visit ; but Emma, too eager
and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to
hear him impartially, or see him with clear vision, was
veiy well satisfied with bis muttering acknowledgment of its
being'very cold, certainly very cold,'and walked on, rejoicing
in having extricated himself from Randalls, and secured
hira the power of sending to inquire after Harriet eveiy
hour of the evening.
'You do quite right,'said she : —'we will make your
apologies to Mr. and Mrs. Weston.'
But hardly had she so spoken when she found her brother
was dvilly offering a seat in his carriage, if the weather were
Mr. Elton's only objection, and Mr. Elton actually accept-
ing the offer with much prompt satisfaction. It was a done
thing : Mr. Elton was to go ; and never had bis broad hand-
some {ace expressed more pleasure than at this moment ;
never had his smile been stronger, nor his eyes more
exulting than when he next looked at her.
'Well,'said she to herself^'this is most strange I After
I had gotten him off so well, to choose to go into company,
and leave Harriet ill behind ! Most strange indeed I But
there is, I believe, in many men, especially single men, such
an incUnation — such a passion for dining out ; a dinner
engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures,
by Google
94 Emma.
theii emploj^nents, their dignities, almost theii duties, that
any thing gives way to it— and this must be the case with
Mr. Elton : a. most valuable, amiable, pleasing young man
undoubtedly, and veiy much in love with Harriet ; but still,
he cannot refuse an invitation, he must dine out wherevei
he is asked. What a strange thing lore is I he can see
ready wit in Harriet, but will not dine alone for her.'
Soon afterwards Mr. Elton quitted them, and she could
not but do him the justice of feeling that there was a great
deal of sentiment in his manner of naming Harriet at patt-
ing ; in the tone of his voice while assuring her that be
should call at Mrs. Goddard's for news of her feir friend,
the last thing before he prepared for the happiness of
meeting her again, when he hoped to be able to give a better
report; and he sighed and smiled himself off in a way that
left the balance of approbation much in his favour.
After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John
Knighiley began with, —
'I never in my life saw a man more intent on bdng
agreeable than Mr, Elton. It is downright labour to him
where ladies are concerned. With men he can be rational
and unaffected, but when he has ladies to please every
feature works.'
'Mr. Elton's manners are not perfect,'replied Emoka;'but
where there is a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and
one does overlook a great deal. Where a man does his
best with only moderate powers, he will have the advantage
over n^tigent superiority. There is such perfect good
temper and good will in Mr. Elton as one cannot but value.'
'Yes,'said Mr. John Knightley presentiy, with some
slyness,'he seema to have a great deal of good will to-
wards jw.'
'Me r she replied, with a smite of astonishment;'are
you imagining me to be Mr. Elton's object I'
< Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma ; and
if it never occurred to you before, you may as well take it
into consideration now.'
'Mr. Elton in love with me I What an idea !'
'I do not say it is so but you will do well to consider
whe & er it is so or not, and to regulate your behaviour
byGoo^lc
Emma. 95
accoidin^. I think your mumers to him encouraging I
speak as a fnend, Emma. You had better look about you,
and ascertain what you do, and what you mean to da'
'I thank you ; but I assure you you are quite mistaken.
Mr. Elton and I are veiy good friends, and nothing more ;'
and she walked (xi, amnsing herself in die condderation of
the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of
circumstances, of the mistakes which people of h^ pre-
tentions to judgment are for ever falling into ; and not very
well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and
ignorant, and in want of counsel He said no more.
Mr. Woodbonse had so completely made up his mind to
the visit, that in spite of the increasing coldness, he seemed
to have no idea of shrinking from it, and set forward at last
most punctually with his eldest daughter in his own carriage,
with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either
of the others ; too full of the wonder of his own going, and
the pleasure it was to afford at Randalls to see that it was
cold, and too well wrapt up to feel it The cold, however,
was severe ; and by the time the second carriage was in
motion, a few flakes of snow were finding their way down,
and the slcy had the appearance of being so overcharged as
to want only a milder air to produce a very white world in
a very short time,
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the hap-
piest humour. The preparing and the going abroad in such
weather, with the saoifice of his children after dinner, were
evils, were disagreeables at least, which Mr. John Knightley
did not by any means like ; he anticipated nothing in the
visit that could be at all worth the purchase; and the whole
of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing
his discontent.
'A man,'said he,'must have a very good opinion of
himself when he asks people to leave th«r own fiie-side,
and encounter such a day as this, for the sake of coming to
see him. He must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I
could not do such a thing. It is the greatest absurdity —
actually snowing at this moment ! The folly of not allow*
ing people to be comfortable at home — and the folly of
people's not staying comfortably at home when they can I
,M.f:i by Google
y6 Emma.
If we were obliged to go out such an evening as this, by
any call of duty or business, what a hardship we should
deem it; — and here are we, probably with rathei thinner
clothmg than usual, setting forward voluntarily, without
excuse, in defiance of the voice of nature, which tells man,
in eveiy thing given to his view or his feelings, to stay at
home himself, and keep all under shelter that he can; — here
aie we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another
man's bouse, with nothing to say or to hear that was not
said and heard yesterday, and may not be said and
heard again to-morrow. Going in dismal weather, to return
probably in worse ; — four horses and four servants taken out
for notlung but to convey five idle, shivering creatures into
colder rooms and worse company than they might have
had at home.'
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased
assent^ v^ch no doubt he was in the habit of receiving, to
emulate the'Very true, my love,'which must have been
usually administered by his travelling companion^ but she
had resolution enough to refi^n from making any answer at
slL She could not be complying; she dreaded being
quarrelsome; her heroism reached only to silence. She
allowed him to talk, and arrange the glasses, and wrapped
herself up, without opening her hps I
They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down,
and Mr. Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was with them
instantly. Emma thought widi pleasure of scMne change of
subject Mr. Elton was all oblation and cheofiilness; he
was so very cheerful in his civilities Indeed, that she began
to think he must have received a different account of
Harriet from what had reached her. She had sent while
dressing, and the answer had been,'Much the same — not.
better.'
'My report firom Mrs. Goddard's, " said she^ presently,
■ was not so pleasant as I had hoped: — " Not better, " was my
answer.'
His iocs lengthened immediately ; and hia voice was Uie
voice of sentiment as he answered, —
'Oh, no — I am grieved to find — I was on the point of
telling you that when I called at Mrs. Goddard's door, which
by Google
Emma. 97
I did the very last thing before I tetunied to dress, I was
told that Miss Smith was not better, by no means better,
rather worse. Very much grieved and concerned — I had
flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial
as I knew had bem given in the morning.'
Emma smiled, and answered, —'My visit was of use to the
nervons part of her complaint, I hope; but not even I can
chaim away a sore throat; it is a most severe cold, indeed,
Mr. Peny has been with her, as you probably heard'
'Yes — I imagined — that is — I did not'
'He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope
to-morrow morning will bring us both a more comfortable
report But it is impossible not to feel uneasiness. Such a
sad loss to our party to-day !'
'DreadAtl! Exactly so, indeed. She will be missed every
moment.'
This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was
really estimable ; but it should have lasted longer. Emma
was rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he
b^;an to speak of other things, and in a voice of the greatest
alacrity and enjoyment
'What an excellent device,'said he,'the use of a sheep-
skin for carriages. How very comfortable they make it ; —
impossible to feel cold with such precautions. The con-
trivances of modem days, indeed, have rendered a gentleman's
carriage perfectly complete. One is so fenced and guarded
from the weather, diat not a breath of air can find its way
unpermitted. Weather becomes absolutely of no conse-
quence. It is a very cold afternoon — but in this carriage we
know nothmg of the matter. Ha ! snows a little, I see.'
'Yes,'said John Knightley,'and I think we shall have a
good deal of it'
'Christmas weather,'observed Mr. Elton.'Quite season-
able; and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it
did not begin yesterday, and prevent this day's party, which
it might very possibly have done, for Mr. Woodhouse would
hardly have ventured had there been much snow on the
ground; but now it is of no consequence. This is quite the
season, indeed, for friendly meetings. At Christmas every
body invites their friends about them, and people think little
by Google
of even the worst weather. I was snowed up at a firiend's
house once for a week. Nothing could be pleasanter. I
went for only one night, and could not get away till that veiy
day se'nnight'
Mr. John Knightl < y looked as if he did not comprehend
the pleasure, but sud only, coolly, —
'I cannot wish to be snowed up a week a.t Randalls.'
At anothci time Emma might have been amused, but
she was too much astonished now at Mr. Elton's spirits for
other feelings. Harriet seemed quite forgotten in the ex-
pectation of a pleasant party .
'We are sure of excellent fires,'continued h^'and every
thing in the greatest comfort Charming people, Mr. and
Mrs. Westonj— Mrs. Weston indeed is much beyond pi < use,
and he is exactly what one values, so hospitable, and so fond
of societyj^it will be a small party, but where small parties
arc select, they are, perhaps, the most agreeable of any. Mr.
Weston's dining-room does not accommodate more than ten
comfortably; and for my part, I would rather, under such
circunistances, fall short by two than exceed by two. I
think you will agree with me (turning with a soft air to
Emma), 1 think I shall certainly have your approbation,
though Mr. Knightley, perhaps, & om being used to the large
partic* of London, may not quite enter into our feelings,'
'I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir — I
never dine with anybody.'
'Indeed ! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea
that Ae law had been so great a slavery. Well, dr, the time
must come when you will be paid for all this, when you will
have little labour and great enjoyment'
*My first enjoyment,'replied John Knightley, as they
passed through the sweep-gate^'wUI be to find myself safe at
Hartfield again.'
l,,,.f:lbyG00glc

CHAPTER XIV. \^ > > -7
Soke change of countenance was necessary for ea^ gende-
man as they walked into Mrs. Weston's drawing-room; — Mr.
Bitoa must compose his joyous looks, and Mr. John Knight-
ley disperse his ill-humour. Mr. Elton must smile less, and
Mr. John Knightley more, to fit them for the place. Emma
only might be as nature prompted, and show herself just as
bai^ as she was. To her, it was real enjoyment to be with
the Westons, Mr. Weston was a. great favourite, and there
was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such
unreserve as to his wife; not any one, to whom she related
with such conviction of beii% listened to and understood, of
being always interesting and always intelligible, the little
affaiis, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her father
and herself. She could tell nothing of Hartfield, in which
Mrs. Weston had not a lively concern; and half an hour's
uninterrupted communication of all those little matters on
which the daily happiness of private life depends, was one of
the first gratifications of each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's visit
might not afford, which certainly did not belong to the
present half hour; but the very sight of Mrs. Weston, hex
smile, her touch, her voice, was grateful to Emma, and she
determined to think as little as possible of Mr. Elton's oddi-
ties, or of any thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all that was
enjoyable to the utmost
The misfortune of Harriet's cold had been pretty well gone
through before her arrival Mr. Woodhouse had been safely
seated long enough to give the history of it, besides all the
history of his own and Isabella's coming, and of Emma's being
to follow; and had, indeed, just got to the end of his satis-
factitHi that James should come and see his daughter, when
the others appeared, and Mrs. Weston, who had been almost
i^Qlly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to turn
away and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma's project of forgetting Mr. Elton for awhile made
byGoogle
100 Emma.
hertaAer sony to find, when tbejrhad all taken their p'aces,
that he was close to het. The difficulty was great of driving
his strange insensibility towards Harriet from her mind, while
he not only sat at bei elbow, but was continually obtruding
his happy countenance on her notice, and solicitously ad-
dressing her upon every occasion. Instead of forgetting
him, his behaviour was such diat she could not avoid the in-
ternal su^estion of'Can it really be as my brother imagbed t
can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transfer
his affections from Harriet to me I — Absurd and insufferable.'
—Yet he would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm,
would be so interested about her & ther, and so delighted with
Mrs. Weston; and, at last, would begin admiring her draw-
ings with so much zeal and so little knowledge, as seemed
terribly like a would-be lover, and made it some effort with
her to preserve her good manners. For her own sake she
could not be rude; and for Hanief s, in the hope that all
would yet turn out right, she was even positively civil: but
it was an effort; especially as something was going on
amongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr.
Elton's nonsense, which she particularly wished to listen to.
She heard enough to know that Mr. Weston was giving some
inframation about his son: she heard the words'my son,'and
'Rank,'and'my son,'repeated several times over; and, from
a few other half syllables, very much suspected that he was
aimouncing an early visit from his son; but before she could
quiet Mr. Elton, the subject was so completely past, that any
reviving question from her would have been awkward.
Now it so happened, that, in spite of Emma's resolution
of never marrying, there was something in the name, in the
idea, of Mr. Frank Churchill, which always interested her.
She had frequently thought, - especially since his father's
marriage witti Miss Taylor, — that if she were to mairy, he
was the very person to suit her in age, character, and con-
dirion. He seemed, by this connection between the famihes,
quite to belong to her. She could not but suppose it to be
a match that everybody who knew them must think oE
That Mr. and Mrs. Weston did think of it, she was very
strongly persuaded; and though not meaning to be induced
by hun, or by anybody else, to give up a situation which
u,a,i,z6:ibyGoOglc
Emma. tot
she believed more replete with good than any she could
change it for, she had a great curiosity to see him, ft de-
cided intendon of finding him pleasant, of bdng liked by him
to a certain degree, and a sort t^ pleasure in the idea ot thdr
being coupled in thor friend^ imaginations.
With such sensations, Mr. Elton's civilities were dread-
fully Hi-timed; but she had the comfort of appearing very
polite, while feeling very cross , — and of thinking that the
rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bringing for-
waid the same information again, or the substance of it, from
the open-heaited Mr. Weston. So it proved; — for, when
happily released Irom Mr. Elton, and seated by Mr. Westoo
at dinner, he made use of the very first interval in the cares
of hospitality, the very first leisure from the saddle of ratitton,
to say to her, —
'We want only two more to be just the tight number. I
should like to see two more here, — ^your pretty little friend,
Miss Smith, and my son, — and then I should say we were
quite complete. I believe you did not hear me telling the
others in die drawing-room that we are expecting Frank. I
had a letter from him this morning, and he will be with us
within a fortnight'
Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure, and
fiilly assented to his proposition, of Mr. Frank Churchill and
Miss Smith makii^ their party quite complete.
'He has been wanting to come to us,'continued Mr.
Weston,'ever sine* September : every letter has been fiill of
it; but he cannot command his own time. He has those to
please who must be pleased and who (between ourselves) are
sometimes to be pleased, only by a good many sacrifices.
But DOW I have no doubt of seeing him here about the
second week in January.'
'What a very great pleasure it will be to you ! and Mis.
Weston is so anxious to be acquainted with him, that she
roust be almost as happy as yourself.'
'Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be
another pot-off. She does not depend upon his cooung so
much as I do ; but she does not know the parties so well aa
I da TTie case, you see, is — (but this is quite between our-
■dves: I did not mention a syllable of it in the other loom.
by Google
toi Emilia.
*rhere are secrets in all femilies, you know) — the case is,
that a party of fnends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe
!n January, and that Frank's coming depends upon their
being put off. If they are not put off, he cannot stir. But
I know they will, because it is a family that a certain lady,
of some consequence at Enscombe, has a particular dislike
to ; and though it is thought necessary to invite them once
in two or three years, they always are put off when it comes
to the point. I have not the smallest doubt of the issue.
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of
January, as I am of being here myself: but your good fiientf
there (nodding towards the upper end of the table) has so
few vagaries herself^ and has been so little used to them at
Hartfield, that she cannot calculate on their effect^ as I have
been long in the practice of doing.'
'I am Boiry there should be any thing like doubt in the
case,'replied Emma;'but am di^ > osed to side with you,
Mr. Weston. If you think he will come, I shall think so too;
for you know Enscombe.'
'Yes — I have some right to that knowledge ; thou^ I
have never been at the place in my life. She is an odd
woman! But I never allow myself to speak ill of her, on
Frank's account ; for I do believe her to be very fond of him.
I used to diink she was not capable of being fond of any
body except herself: but she has always been kind to him
^n her way — allowii^ for little whims and caprices, and ex-
pectii^ every thing to be as she likes). And it is no small
credit, in my opinion, to him, that he should exdte such an
affection; for, tiiough I would not say it to any body else,
she has no more heart than a stone to people in general, and
the devil of a temper.'
Emma liked Qie subject so well, that she began upon it to
Mis. Weston, veiy soon after their moving into the drawing-
room; wishing her joy, — yet observing, that she knew the
first meeting must be rather alarming. Mrs. Weston agreed
to it; but added, that she should be very glad to be secure
of undergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talked
of ;'for I cannot depend upon his coming. I cannot be so
sanguine as Mr. Weston. I am very much afraid that it will
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 103
all end in nothing. Mr. Weston, X dare say, has been tell-
ing you exactly how the matter stands.'
• Yes — it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill humour
of Mis. Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain
thing in the world.'-
'My Enunal'replied Mrs. Westtm, smiling,'what is the
certainty of capricel Then turning to Isabella, who had
not been attending bcToie, —'Vou must know, njy dear Mrs,
Knightley, that we are by no means so sure of seeing Mr.
Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as his father thinks. It
depends cntiTely upon his aunfs spirits and pleasure; in
short, upon her temper. To yon — to my two daughters— -I
may TOnture an the truth. Mrs. Churchill rules at Enscombe,
and is a very odd-tempered woman; and his coming now
depends upon hei being willing to spare him.'
'Oh, Mrs. Chmchill, every body knows Mrs. Churchill,'
replied Isabella ;'and I am sure I never think of that ^ota
young man without the greatest compassion. To be con-
stantly living with an Ill-tempered poson must be dreadfuL
It is what we happily have never known any thing of; but
it must be a life of misery. What a blessing, that she never
had any childienl Foor litde creatures, how unh^py she
would have made them I'
Emma wished she bad been alone with Mrs. Weston.
She should then have heard more ; Mt & Weston would speak
to her with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard
with Isabella; and, she really believed, would scarcely try to
conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from her, except-
ing those views on the young man, of which her own imagi-
nation had already given her such instinctive knowledge.
But at present there was nothing more to be said, Mr.
Woodhouse very soon foUowed them into the drawing-room.
To be sitting long after dinner was a confinement that be
could not endure. Neither wine nor conveisatioa was any
thing to him; and gladly did he move to those with whom
he was always comfortable.
. While he talked to Isabella, however, Enmia fonnd an
opportunity of saying —
'And so you do not consider this vimt from your son aa
by Google
I04 Emma.
by any meana certain. I am sorry for it The introductioD
must be unpleasant, whenever it takes place ; and the sooner
it could be over the belter.'
'Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of
other delays. Even if this family, the Braithwaites, are put
O^ I am still afraid that some excuse may be found for
disappointing us. I cannot bear to imagine any reluctance
on his side; but I am sure there is a great wish on the
ChuTchills to keep bim to themselves. There is jealousy.
They are jealous even of his regard for his fether. In short
I can feel no dependence on his coming and I wish Mr,
Weston were less sanguine.'
'He ought to come,'said Emma.'If he oould stay only
ft couple of days, he ought to come; and one can hardly
conceive a young man's not having it in his power to do as
much as that A young woman, if she fall into bad hands,
may be teaced, and kept at a distance from those she wants
to be with ; but one cannot comprehend a young man't
bemg under such restraint, as not to be able to spend a
week with his Either, if he likes it'
'One ought to be at Enscombe, and know ihe ways of
the family, before one decides upon what he can do,* repUed
Mrs. Weston.'One ought to use the same caution, perhaps,
in judging of the conduct of any one individual of any one
family; but Enscombe, I beUeve, certainly must not be judged
by general rules :'^ is so very unreasonable ; and eveiy
thing gives way to her.'
'But she is so fond of the nephew : he is so very great a
favourite. Now, according to my idea of Mrs. Churchill, it
would be most natural, that while she makes no saoifice for
the comfort of the husband, to whom she owes every thing,
while she exerdBes incessant caprice towards A/«, she
should frequently be governed by the nephew, to whom she
owes nothing at all'
'My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet
temper, to understand a bad one, or to lay down rules for
it : you must let it go its own way. I have no doubt of his
having, at times, considerable influence; but it may he
perfectly JmpOBsiUe for him to know befoidiand wAai it
will be.'
,,,_f:ibyGoOgle
Emma listened, and then coolly said, * I shaQ not be
•atisfied, unless he comes.'
'He may have a great deal of influence on some points,'
continued Mrs. Weston,'uid on otheis, very little; and
among those, on which she is b^ond his leach, it is but too
lively may be this veiy ciicumstance oi his onning away
from them to visit ua.'
CHAPTER XV.
Mr. Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea ; and when he
had diank hia tea he was quite leady to go home ; and it
was as much as his three companions could do, to entertain
away his notice of the lateness of the hour, before the other
gentlemen appeared. Mr. Weston was chatty and convivial
and no & iend to early separations of any sort ; but at last
the drawing-ioom party did receive an augmentation. Mr.
Elton, in veiy good spirits, was one of the first to walk in.
Mrs. Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa.
He joined them immediately, and with scarcely an invitation,
seated himself between them.
Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded
her mind by the expectation < rf Mr. Fnmk Churchill, was
willing to foiget his late improprieties, and be as well
satisfied with him as before, and on his making Harriet his
very first subject, was ready to listen with most friendly smiles.
He professed himself extremely anxious about her tsar
friend — her fair, lovely, amiable friend.'Did she know t
— had she heard any thing about her, since their bebg at
Randalls I — ^he felt much anxiety — he must confess that the
nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably.'And in
this style he talked on for some time very properly, not
much attending to any answer, but altogether sufficiently
awake to the terror of a bad sore throat : and Emma was
quite in charity with him.
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed all at
once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat
by Google
io6 Emma.
on her account than on Haniet's — more anxious that she
should escape the infection, than that there should be no
infection in the complaint. He began with great earnest-
ness to entreat her to le & ain from visiting the sick chamber
agaiji, for the present — to entreat her to fromist JUm not to
venture into such hazard till be had seen Mr. Peny and
learned his opinion ; and though she tried to laugh, it off
and bring the subject back into its proper course, there was
no putting an end to his eztreme solicitude about her. She
was vexed. It did appear — there was no concealing it —
exactly tike the pretence of being in love with her, Instead
of Hmiet ; an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible
and abominable 1 and she had difficulty in behaving with
temper. He tumcd to Mrs. Weston to implore her assist
ance :'Would not she give him her support !— would not sfae
add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss Woodhouse not
to go to Mrs. Goddard's, till it were certain that Miss Smith's
disorder had no infection ) He could not be satisfied with-
out a promise — would not she give him her influence in
procuring it t'
'So scrupulous for others,'be continued,'and yet so
careless for herself) She wanted me to nnise my cold by
staying at home today, and yet will not promise to avoid
the danger of catching an ulcerated sore throat herself. Is
this iair, Mrs. Weston ! Judge between us. Have not I some
right to complain f I am sure of your kind support and aid.'
Emma saw Mrs. Weston's surprise, and felt that it must
be great, at an address which, in words and manner, was
assuming to himself the ri^t of first interest in her ; and as
for herself, she was too much provoked and offended to
have the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose.
She couid only give him a look ; but it was such a look as
she thought must restme him to his senses ; and then left
the soCa, removing to a seat by her sister, and giving her all
her attcnOoQ.
She had not time to know how Mr, Elton took the re-
proof, so rapidly did anodier subject succeed; for Mr. John
Knightley now came into the room from examining the
weather, and opened on them all with the information of
the ground being covered with snow, and of its still snowing
byGoogIc
£mma. 107
fasi, with a strong driftiTig win < ] ; coQCluding wi^i these
words to Mr. Woodhouse, —
This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter
engagements, sir. Something new for your coachman and
horses to be making their way through a. storm of snow.'
Poor Mr. Woodhouse was silent from consternation ; but
every body else had something to say ; every body was
either surprised, or not surprised, and had some question to
ask, or some comfort to offer. Mrs. Weston and Emma
tried eamesdy to cheer him and turn his attention from his
son-in-law, who was pursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.
'I admired your resolution very much, sir,'said he,'in
venturing out in such weather, for of course you saw there
would be snow very soon. Eveiy body must have seen die
snow coming on. I admired your spirit ; and I dare say
we shall get home veiy well. Another hour or two's snow
can hardly make the road impassable ; and we are two
cairi^;es; iS one \i blown over in the bleak part of the
common field there will be the other at hand. I dare say
we shall be all safe at Hartfield before midnight.'
Mr. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was con
fessing that he had known it to be snowing some time, but
had not said a word, lest it should make Mr. Woodhouse
unromfoTtable, and be an excuse for his hurrying away.
As to their being any quantity of snow fallen or likely to
fall to impede their return, that was a mere joke; he was
afraid they would 6nd no difficulty. He wished the road
might be impassable, that he might be able to keep them all
at Randalls ; and with the utmost good-will was sure tliat
accommodation might be found for every body, calling on
his wife to agree with him, that, with a little contrivance,
every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to
do, from the consciousness of there being but two spare
rooms in the house.
'What is to be done, my dear Enunat what is to be
done I'was Mr. Woodhouae's first exclamation, and all that
he could say for some time. To her he looked for comfort;
and her assurances of safety, her representation of the
excellence of the horses, and of James, and of their having
so many friends about them, revived him a little.
byGoOgk'
io8 Emma.
His eldest flatightcr's alarm was equal to his own. The
horror of being blocked up ar Randalls, while her children
were at Hartfield, was full in her imagination ; and fancying
the road to be now just passable for adventurous people, but
in a state that admitted no delay, Rhe was eager to have
it settled, that her father and Emma should remain at
Randalls, while she and her husband set forward instantly
through all the possible accumulations of drifted snow that
might impede them.
'You had better order the carriage directly, my love,'said
she;'I dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off
directly; and if we do come to any thing very bad, I can
get out and walk. I am not at aU afiaid. I should not
mind walldng half the way. I could change my shoes, you
know, the moment I got home; and it is not the sort of thing
that gives roe cold.'
'Indeed!'replied he.'Then, my dear Isabella, it is the
most extraordinary sort of thing in the worid, for in general
every thing does give you cold. Walk home!— you are
prettily shod for walking home, I dare say. It will be bad
enough for the horses.'
Isabella turned to Mrs. Weston for her approbation of the
plan. Mrs. Weston could only approve. Isabella then
went to Emma; but Emma could not so entirely give tip the
hope of theii being all able to get away ; and they were still
discussing the point, when Mr. Knightley, who had left the
room immediately after his brother's (irst report of the snow,
came back again, and told them that he had been out of
doors to examine, and could answer for there not being the
smallest difficulty in their getting home, whenever they liked
it, either now or an hour hence. He had gone beyond the
sweep — some way along the Highbury road — the snow was
nowhere above half an inch deep — in many places hardly
enough to whiten the ground; a very few flakes were falling
at present, but the clouds were parting, and there was every
appearance of it being soon over. He had seen the coach-
men, and they both agreed with him in there being nothing
to ^prehend.
To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and
th < y were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her fathei's
by Google
Emma. 109
account, iriio was immediately set as much at ease on the
subject aa his nervoua constitution allowed; but the alarm
that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of
any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls. He
was satisfied of there being no present duiger in returning
home, but no assurances could convince him that it was
safe to stay; and while the others were variously u^ng and
recommending, Mr. Knightley and Emma settled it in a few
brief sentences: thus, —
'Your father will not be easy; why do not you go 1'
'I am leady, if the others are.'
'9ialllriiig thebellt'
'Yes, do.'
And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for. A
few minutes more, and Emma hoped to see one troublesome
companion deposited in his own house, to get sober and
cool, and the other recover his temper and happiness when
this visit of hardship were over.
The carriage came; and Mr. Woodhouse, always the first
object on such occasions, was carefully attended to his own
by Mr. Knightley and Mr. Weston; but not all that either
could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight
of the snow which had actually fallen, and the discovery of
a much darker night than he had been prepared for.'He
was afraid they should have a very bad drive. He was afhtid
poor Isabella would not Uke it And there would be poor
Emma in the carriage behind. He did not know what they
had best do. They must keep as much together as they
could ;'and James was talked to, and given a charge to go
very slow, and wait for the other carriage.
Isabella stept in after her fiither; John Knightley, foist-
ing that he did not belong to their party, stept in after his
wife very naturally; so that Emma found, on being escorted
and followed into the second carriage by Mr. Elton, that the
door was to be lawfully shut on them, and that they were to
have a t€te-i-t£te drive. It would not have been the awk-
wardness of a moment, it would have been rather a pleasure,
previous to the suspicions of this very day; she could have
talked to him of Harriet, and the three quarters of a mile
would have seemed but one. But now, she would rather it
by Google
no Smmo.
had Dot happened. She believed he had been drinking too
much of Mr. Weston's good wine, and felt sure that he would
want to be talking nonsense.
To restrain him as much as might be, by hei own man-
oeis, she vras immediately preparing to speak with exquisite
calmness and giavi^ of the weather and the night ; but
scarcely had she begun, scarcely had they passed the sweep-
gate and joined the other carnage, than she foundher subject
cut up — her hand seized— her attention demanded, and Mr
Ellon actually making violent love to her: availing himself of
the precious opportunity, declaring sentiments which must be
already well known, hopmg — fearing — adoring — ready to "
die if she refused him; but flattering himself that his ardent
attachment and unequalled love and une^iampled passion
could not tail of having some effect, and in short, very much
resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible. It
really was sa Without scruple— without apology — without
much apparent diffidence, Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet,
was professing himself Aer lover. She tried to stop him; but
vainly ; he would go on, and say it all. Angry as she was,
the thought of the moment made her resolve to restrain her-
self when she did speak. She felt that half this folly must be
drunkenness, and therefore could hope that it might belong
only to the passing hour. Accordingly, with a mixture of
the serious and the playful, which she hoped would best suit
his half and half slate, she rephed, —
'I am very much astonished, Mr. Elton. This to me, you
forget yourself— you Uke me for my friend — any message to
Miss Smith I shall be happy to dehver; but no more of this
to me, if you pleas &'
'Miss Smith!— Message to Miss Sraithl — What could she
possibly mean !'— ^And he repeated her words with such as-
surance of accent, such boastful pretence of amazement, that
she could not help replying with quickness,-^
'Mr, Elton, this is the most extraordinary conductl and I
can account for it only in one way; you are not yourself, or
you could not speak either to me, or of Harriet, in such a
manner. Command yourself enough to say no more, and I
will endeavour to foi^get it*
But Mr. Elton had only diunk wine enoq^^ to elevate bia
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. iii
sidiits, not at aH to contuse his intellects. He perfectly knew
his own meaning; and having wannly protested against her
suspicion as most injurious, and slightiy touched upon his
respect for Miss Smith as her friend, — but acknowledging
his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all, —
he resumed the subject of his own passion, and was very
urgent for a favourable answer.
As she thought leas of his inebriety, she thought more o(
his inconstancy and presumption; and with fewer straggles
for politeness, replied, —
'It is impossible for me to doubt any longer. You have
made yourself too clear. Mr. Elton, my astonishment is
much beyond any thing I can express. After such behaviour,
as I have witnessed during the last month, to Miss Smith —
such attentions as Ihave been dailyin the habit of observing
— to be addressing me in this manner — this is an unsteadiness
of character, indeed, which I had not supposed possible ! Be-
lieve me, sir, I am fei — ^veiy far — from gratified in being the
object of such professions.'
'Good heaven !'cried Mr. Elton, * what can be tiie mean-
ing of this 1 Miss Smith 1 I never thought of Miss Smith
in the whole course of my existence — never paid her any at
tentions, but as your friend: never cared whether she were
dead or alive, but as your friend. If she has fancied other-
wise, her own wi^es have misled her, and I am very sony —
extremely sony. But, Miss Smith, indeed ! Oh, Miss Wood-
house, who can think of Miss Smith when Miss Woodhouse
is near 1 No, upon my honour, there is no unsteadiness of
character. I have thought only of you. I protest again. < ;t
having paid the smallest attention to any one else. Every
thing that I have said or done, formanyweeks past, has been
with the sole view of mailcing my adoration of yoursel£
You cannot really, seriously doubt it No! ^n an accent,
meant to be insinuating) I am sure you have seen and under-
stood me.'
It wonld be impossible to say what Emma felt on hearing
this; which of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able
to reply; and two moments of ulenoe being ample encourage-
by GoOgk
112 Emma.
ment for Mr. Elton's sanguine state of mind, he tried to take
hei hand again, as he joyously exclaimed, —
'Chanuing Miss Woodhouse ! allow me to interpret this
interesting silence. It confesses that you have long under-
stood me.'
'No, sir,'cried Emma,'it confesses no such thing. So
far from having long understood you, I have been in a most
complete error with respect to your views till this moment
As to myself I am very sony that you should have been
giving way to any feelii^ Nothing could be farther
from my wishes — your attachment to my Mead Harriet —
your pursuit of her (pursuit it appeared) — gave me great
pleasure, and I have been very earnestly wishing you success;
but had I supposed that she were not your attraction to
Maitfield, I should certainly have thought you judged ill in
making your visits so frequent Am I to believe that you
have never sought to recommend yourself particularly to
Miss Smithi that you have never thought seriously of her!'
'Never, madam,'cried h^ affronted in his turn:'never,
I assure you. /think seriously of Miss Smith! — Miss Smith
is a very good sort of girl; and I should be happy to see her
respectably settled. I wish her extremely well; and no
doubt, there are men who might not object to Every
body has their level; but as for myself, I am no^ I think,
quite so much at a loss. I need not so totally despair of an
equal alliance as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith! No,
madam, my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only;
and the encouragement I received'
'Encouragement 1 I give you encouragement! — ^r, you
have been entirely mistaken in supposing it I have seen
you only as the admirer of my friend. In no other light
could you have been more to me than a common acqu^nt-
ance. I am exceedingly sorry; but it is well that the mis-
take ends where it does. Had the same behaviour con-
tinued. Miss Smith might have been led into a mlsconcq > -
tion of your views ; not being aware, probably, any more
than DQ^^ of the very great inequality which you are so
sensible of But, as it is, the disappointment is single, and,
I trust, will not be lasting. I have do tluMights 5i matri-
mony at present'
kGoo^^lc
Emma. 113
He was too angty to say another word; her manner too
decided to invite supplication: and in this state of swelling
lesentment, and mutually deep mortification, they had to
continue together a few minutes longer, for the fears of Mr.
Woodhouse had ctxifined them to a foot pace. If there had
not been so much anger, there would have been desperate
awkwardness; but their strai^tfoiward emoticHis left no
room for the little ngcags of embarrassment. Without
knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane, or
when it stopped, they found themselves^ all at once, at the
door of his house ; and he was out before another syllable
passed Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a
good night The compliment was just returned, coldly and
proudly ; and, under indescribable irritation of spirits, she
was then conveyed to Hart & eld.
There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her
fiither, who had been trembling for the dangers of a sotitaiy
drive from Vicarage Lane — taming a comer which he could
never bear to think of— and in strange hands— a mere com-
mon coachman — no James; and there it seemed as if her re-
turn only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr.
John Knightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kind-
ness and attention ; and so'particularly solicitous for the com-
fort of her & ther, as to seem — if not qui te ready to join him in
a basin of gruel — perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly
wholesome; and the day was concluding in peace and com-
fort to all their litde party, except heisel£ But her mind had
never been in such perturbation; and it needed a veiy strong
effort to appear attentive and dieerAil till the usual hour of
separating allowed her the relief cf quiet reflection.
CffAPTER XVI.
Thb hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma
sat down to think and be miserable. It was a wretched
business, indeed. Such an overthrow of every thing she had
been wishing for ! Such a development of every thing most
unwdcomel Such a blow for Harriet! — that was the womt
by Google
114
Emma.
of aU. Eveiy p^ of it brought pain and humiliation of some
sort or other ; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all
was light; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet
more mistaken— more in error — more disgraced by mis-
judgment than she actually was, — could the effects of her
blunders have been confined to herself.
'If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I
could have borne any thing. He might have doubled his
presumption to roe — but poor Harriet !'
How she could have been so deceived! He protested
that he had never thought seriously of Harriet — never 1 Hie
looked back as well as she could; but it was all contusion.
She had taken up the idea, she supposed, and made every
thing bend to it His manners, however, must have been
unmarked, wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so
misled.
The picture ! How eager he had been about the picture I
—end die charade I— < iod a hundred other circumstances; —
how clearly they had seemed to point at Harriet. To be
sure, the charade, with its'ready wif — ^but then the'soft
eyes,'— in fact, it suited neither; it was a jumble without
taste or truth. Who could have seen through such thick-
headed nonsense T
Cert^ly she had often, especially of late, thought his
manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ; but it had passed
as his way, as a mere error of judgment, of knowledge, of
taste^ as one proof) among others, that he had not always
lived in the best society; that with all the gentleness of his
address, true elegance was sometimes wanting ; but, till this
very day, she had never for an instant suspected it to mean
any thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet's fiiend.
To Mr. John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea
on the subject for the first start of its possibility. There
was no denying that those brothers had penetration. She
remembered what Mr. Knightley had once said to her about
Mr. Elton, the caudon he had given, the conviction he had
professed that Mr. Elton would never many indiscreetly;
and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his
character had been there shown than any she had reached
beisel£ It was dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Elton was
by Google
Emma. 113
proving hinuel:^ in many lespects, the very nvetse of what
she had meantand believed him; proud, assuming, conceited:
very full of hU own claims, and little concerned about the
feelings of others.
Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr. Elton's want-
ing to pay his addiesses to her had sunk him in her opinion.
His professions and his proposals did him no service. She
thought nothing of his attachment, and was insulted by his
hopes. He wanted to many well, and having the am^^ce
to raise his eyes to her, pretended to be in love; but she
was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment
that need be cared for. There had been no real affection
either in his language or maimeis. Sighs and fine words had
been given in abundance; but she could hardly devise any
set of expressions, or fency any tone of voice, less allied with
real love. She need not trouble herself to pity him. He
only wanted to a^^isudise and enrich himself; and if Miss
Woodhonse of Hartfield, the heiress of thhty thousand
pounds, were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied,
he would soon tiy for Miss Somebody else with twenty, or
with tea
But, that he should talk of encouragement, should consider
her as awaie of his views, accepting his intentions, meaning,
in short, to many,him!— should suppose himself her equal
in connection or mindl — ^look down upon her friend, so well
understanding the gradations of rank below him, and be so
blind to what rose above, as to fancy himself showing no
presumption in addressing her ! — it was most provoking.
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very
much he was her inferior in talent, and all the elegancies of
mind. The very want of such equality might prevent his
perception of it ; but he must know that in fortune and con
sequence she was greatly bis superior. He must know that
the Woodhouses had been settled for several generations at
Hartfield, the younger branch of a very ancient family, —
and that the Eltons were nobody. The landed property of
Hartfield certainly was inconsiderable, being but a sort of
notch in the Donwell Abbey esUte, to which all the rest of
Highbury belonged; but theii fortune, from other sources,
was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell
byGoogle
1 16 E/nma.
Abbey itself, in every other kind of consequence ; and the
Woodhouses had long held a high place io the consideration
of the neighbourhood which Mr. Elton had fiist entered not
two yeara ago, to make his way as he could, without any
alliances but in trade, or any thbg to recommend him to
notice but his situation and his civility. But he had fancied
her in love with him; that evidendy must have been his de-
])endence; and after raving a little about the seeming incon-
gruity of gentle manners and a conceited head, Emma was
obliged, in common honesty, to stop and admit, that her
own behaviour to him had been so complaisant and oblong,
so full of courtesy and attention, as (supposing her real
motive unperceived) might warrant a man of ordinary obser-
vation and delicacy, like Mr. Elton, in fancying himself a
very decided favourite. If tie had so misinterpreted his
feeUngs, she had litde right to wonder that ie, with self-
interest to blind him, should have mistaken hers.
The first error, and the worst, lay at her door. It was
foolish, it was wrong, to take so active a part in bringing
any two people together. It was adventuring too far, as-
sumii^ too much, making light of what ought to be serious,
a trick of what ought to be simple. She was quite con-
cerned and ashamed, and resolved to do such things no more.
'Here have I,'said she,'actually talked poor Harriet
into being very much attached to this man. She might
never have thought of him but for me; and certainly never
would have thought of him with hope, if I had not assured
her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as
I used to think him. Oh that I had been satisfied with
persuading her not to accept young Martin I There I was
quite right : that was well done of me ; but there I should
have stopped, and left the rest to time ajid chance. I was
introducing her into good company, and giving her the op-
portunity of pleasing some one worth having; I ought not
to have attempted more. But now, pool girl, her peace is
cut up for some time. I have been but half a friend to her;
and if she were not to feel this disappointment so very much,
lam sure I have not anideaofanybodyelsewhowouldbea
alt desirable for her: — William Coxe — oh no, I could not
endure William Cose, — a pert young lawyer.'
byGoo^lc
Emma. ti7
She stopped to blush and laugh at her ova lelapse, and
then resumed a more serious, more dispiriting notation
upon what had been, and might be, and must be. The
distressing explanation she had to maJce to Harriet and all
that poor Hamet would be aufieiing, with the awkwardness
of future meetings, the difficulties of continuing or discon-
tinuing the acquaintance, of subduing feelings, concealii^
resentment, and avoiding & lat, were enough to occupy her
in most unmirthfiil reflections some time longer, and she
went to bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction
of her having blundered most dreadfiilly.
To youth and natural cheeifulness like Emma's, though
under temporary gloom at night, the return of day will
hardly fail to bring return of spirits. The youth and cbee^
fulness of morning are in happy analogy, and of powerful
operation; and if the distress be not poignant enough to
keep the eyes unclosed, they will be sure to open to sensa-
tions of softened pain and brighter hope.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort
than she had gone to bed ; more ready to sec alle^-iations
of the evil bdbre her, and to depend on getting tolerably
out of it
It was a great consolation that Mr. Elton should not be
really in love with her, or so particularly amiable as to make
it shocking to disappoint him ; that Harriet's nature should
not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most
acute and retentive ; and that there could be no necesuty for
any body's knowing what had passed except the three
principals, and especiaily for her father's being given a
moment's uneasiness about it
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of a
great deal of snow on the ground did her further service, for
any thing was welcome that might justify their all three
being quite asunder at present
The weather was most favourable for her; though Christ-
mas-day, she could not go to church. Mr. Woodhouse
would have been miserable had his daughter attempted it,
and she was therefore safe & t)m either excitmg or receiving
unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas. The ground covered
widi snow, and the atmosphere in that unsetded state be-
by GoOglc
tween frost and thaw, which is of all others the most unfriendly
for exercise, every moming beginning in nun or snow, and
every evening setting in to freeze, she was for many days
a most honourable prisoner. No intercourse with Harriet
possible but by note; no churdi for her on Sunday any
more than on Christmas-day ; and no need to find excuses
for Mr, Elton's absenting himself.
It was weather which might & irly confine every body at
home ; and though she hoped and believed him to be
really taking comfort in some sodety or other, it was very
pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being
all alone in his own house, too wise to sdr out ; and to hear
him say to Mr. Knigfatley, whom no weather could keep en-
tirely from them, —
'Ah, Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like
poor Mr. Elun 1'
These days of confinement would have been, but for her
private perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such se-
clusion exactly suited her brother, whose feelings must
always be of great importance to his companions ; and he
had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off his iU-humour at
Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during the
rest of his stay at Hartfield, He was always agreeable and
obliging, and speaking pleasan^y of every body. But with
all the hopes of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of
delay, there was still such an evil hanging over her in the
hour of explanation with Harriet, as made it impossible for
Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.
CHAPTER XVII.
Mil and Mrs. John K»ichtle7 were not detained long at
Hartfield. The weather soon improved enough for those to
move ^o must move; and Mi. Woodhouse having, as usual,
tried to persuade his daughter to stay behind with all her
children, was obliged to see the whole party set ofi| and
returned to his lamentations over the destiny of poor Isabella ;
— which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she
byGoogIc
BrntMO. 119
.doted on, full < ^ their merits, blind to their faulty and
always innocently busy, might have been a model of right
feminine happiness.
The evenii^ of the very day on which they went brought
a note from Mr. Elton to Mr. Woodhouse, a long, dvil,
ceremonious note, to say, with Mr. Eton's best compliments
'that he was proposing to leave Highbury the following
moinmg in his way to Bath ; wher^ in compliance with
the pressing entreaties of some friends, he had engaged
to spend a few weeks; and very much r^retted the im-
possibility he was under, from various circumstances of
weather and business, of talcing a personal leave of Mr.
Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilitiea he should ever rO'
tain a grateful sense ; and had Mr. Woodhouse any com-
mands, should be bappy to attend to them.'
Enmia was most agreeably surprised. Mr. Elton's ab-
sence just at this time was the veiy thing to be desired.
She admired him for contriving it, though not able to give
hiro much credit for the manner in which it was announced.
Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than
in a civiU^ to her father, from which she was so pointedly
excluded. She had not even a share in his opening com-
pliments. Her name was not mentioned ; and there was so
striking a change in all this, and such an ill-judged solemnity
of leave-taking in his gratefiil acknowledgments, as she
thoi^ht, at first, could not escape her father's suspicion.
It did, however. Her & ther was quite taken up with the
surprise of so sudden a joumey, and his fears that Mr. Elton
might never get safely to the end of it, and saw nothing
extraordinary in his language. It was a very useful note,
for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought and
conversation during tlie rest of their lonely evening. Mr.
Woodhouse talked over his alarms, and Emma was in spirits
to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude.
She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark.
She had reason to believe her neariy recovered from her
cold, and it was desirable that she should have as much
time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint
before the gentleman's return. She went to Mrs. Goddard's
accordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary
by Google
penance of commimicatioii ; and a severe one it vrai. She
had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so indus-
triously feeding, to appear in the vmgracious character of the
one prefened, and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and
misjudging in all her ideas on one subject, all her observa-
tioDs, all her convicdons, all her piophedes for the last six
weeks.
The confes^on completely renewed her first shame, and
the sight of Haniet's teats made her diink that she ahoutd
never be in chaii^ with herself again.
Hairiet bore the intelligence vety well, blaming nobody,
and in every thing testifying such an ingenuousness of dis-
position and lowly opinion of herself as must appear with
pardculai advantage at that moment to her friend.
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty
to the utmost; and all that was amiable, all that ought to be
attaching, seemed on Haxrief s side, not her own. Harriet
did not consider herself as having any thing to complain o£
The affection of such a man as Mr. Elton would have been
too great a distinction. She never could have deserved him;
and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Wood-
house would have thought it possible.
Her tears fell abundantly; but her grief was so truly artless,
that no digni^ could have made it more respectable in
Emma's eyes; and she listened to her, and tried to console
her with all her heart and understanding, — realfy for the
time convinced that Harriet was the superior creature of
the two, and that to resemble her would be more for her own
wel & re and happiness than all that genius or intelligence
could do.
It was ratho- too late in the day to set about being simple-
minded and ignorant; but she left her with every previous
resolution confirmed of being humble and discreet, and re-
pressing imagination all the rest of her life. Her second
duty now, inferior only to her father's claims, was to promote
Harriet's comfort, and endeavour to prove her own aflection
in some better method than by match-making. She got her
to Hartfield, and showed her the most unvarying kindness,
striving to occupy and amuse her, and by books and coovcF-
sation to drive Mr. Elton from her thou^ts.
byGoogIc
Emma. I3l
Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thorou^jr
done; and she could suppose henelf but an indifferent
juc^e of such matten in general, and veiy inadequate to syni-
paUiise in an attachment to Mr. Elton in particulat; but it
seemed to her reasonable that at Haiiief s age, and with the
entire exdncdon of all hope, such a progreas might be made
towards a state of compostne by the time of Mr. Elton's
return, as to allow Ihem all to meet again in the common
routine of acquaintance, without any danger of betraying
sentiments or increasing than.
Harriet did think him all peifecti < »i, and maintain the non-
existence of any body equal to him in person or goodness,
and did, in truth, prove herself more resolutely in love than
Emma had foreseen ; but yet it appeared to her so natural,
80 inevitable to strive against an inclination of that sort tut-
Ttqiattd, that she could not comprehend its continuing very
long in equal force.
If Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as
evident and indubitable as die could not doubt he would
anxiously do, she could not imagine Haniefs peTsisting to
place her happiness in the sight or the recollection of him.
Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place,
was bad for each, for all three. Not one of them had the
power of removal, or of effecting any material change of
society. They mnst encounter each other, and make the
best of it.
Harriet was fiuther unfortunate in the tone of her com-
panions at Mis. Goddaid's, Mr. Elton being the adoration of
all the teachers and great girls in the school; and it must
be at Hartfield only that she could have any chance of hear-
ing him spoken of with cooling moderation or repellant truth.
Where the wound had been given, there must the cure be
found, if any where; and Emma felt that, till she saw her in
the way of cure, there could be no true peace for hersel£
by Google
CHAPTER XVIII.
Mr. Frank Churchill did not come. When the time
proposed drew near, Mis. Weston's fears were justified in the
arrival of a letter of excuse. For the present, he could not
be spared, to his'very great mortificatioa and regret; but
still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls
at no distant period.'
Mrs. Weston was exceedingly disappointed, — much more
disappointed, in fact, than her husband, though her depen-
dence on seeing tlie young man had been so much more
sober ; but a sangoine temper, though for ever expecting
more good than occurs, does not always pay for its Hopes by
any proportionate depression. It soon flies over the present
failure, and begins to hope again. For half an hour Mr.
Weston was surprised and sorry: but then he b^an to
perceive that Frank's coming two or three months later would
be a much bett^ plan, better dme of year, better weather;
and that he would be able, without any doubt, to stay con-
siderably longer with them than if he had come sooner.
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs.
Weston, of a more apprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing
but a repetition of excuses and delays; and after all her con-
cern for what her husband was to suffer, sufTered a great deal
more herself.
Enuna was not at this time in a state of spirits to care
really about Mr. Frank Churchill's not coming, except as a
disappointment at Randalls. The acquaintance, at present,
bad no charm for her. She wanted, rather, to be quiet
and out of tempution; but still as it was desirable that
she should appeax, in general, like her usual self, she tt > ok
care to express as much interest in the circumstance and
enter as warmly into Mr. and Mrs. Weston's disappointment
as might naturally belong to their friendship.
She was the first to announce it to Mr. Knightley ; and ex-
claimed quite as much as was necessary (or, being acting a
part, perhaps rather more,) at the conduct of the ChiochiUs
by Google
Emma. 123
in keeping him away. She then proceeded to say a good
deal more than she felt of the advantage of such an addition
to their confined society in Suney ; the pleasure of looking
at somebody new; the gala-day to Highbniy endre, which
the sight of > iiiin would have made ; and ending with re-
flections on the ChurchiUa again, found henelf directly in <
volved in a disagreement with Mr. Kni^tley; and, to her
great amusement, perceived that she was taJdng the o^ier
side of the quesdon from her real opinion, and, making use
of Mrs. Weston's argmnenls against herselC
'The Ctmrchills are very likely in & ult,'said Mr.
Knightley, coolly;'but I dare say he might come if he
would.'
'I do not know ^y you should say so. He wishes ex-
ceedin^y to come; Init his micle and aunt will not spare
him.'
* I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if
he made a point of iL tt is too unlikely for me to believe
it without proof.'
'How odd you are I What has Mr. Frank Churchill
done, to make you suppose him such an unnatural creature 1'
'I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in
suspecting that he may have learned to be above his con-
nections, and to care very Uttle for any thing but his own
pleasure, from living with those who have always set him
the example of it. It is a great deal more natural than one
could wish, that a young man, brought up by those who
are proud, luxurious, and selfish, should be proud, luxurious,
and selfish toa If Frank Churchill bad wanted to see his
& ther, he would have contrived it between September and
January. A man at his age, — ^what is he t — three or four
and twenty — cannot be without the means of doing as much
as that It is impossible.'
'That " s easily said, and easily felt by you, who have
always been your own master. You are the worst judge in
the wwld, Mr. Knightley, of the difficulties of dependence.
You do not know what it is to have tempers to manage.'
'It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four and
twen^ should not have liberty of mind or limb to that
amount He cannot want money, he cannot want leisure.
byGoOgk'
124 Empta.
We know, on the contnuy, that he hai so inach of both^
that he is glad to get rid c^ them at the idlest hauats in the
kingdom. We hear of him for ever at some waterii^-place
or other ; a little while ago he was at Weymouth. This
proves that he can leave the Churchills.'
'Yes, sometimes he can.'
'And those times are, whenever he thinks it woith his
while ; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure.'
'It is very unfair to judge of any body's conduct, without
an intimate knowledge of their situation. Nobody, who has
not been in the interior of a family, can say what the
difficulties of any individual of that famt^ may be. We
ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mra,
Chuicbill's temper, befcne we pretend to decide with what
her nephew can da He may, at times, be able to do a
great deal more than he can at others.'
* Th^e is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do,
if he chooses, and that is, his duty ; not by manceuvring and
finessii^, but by vigour and resolution. It is Frank Chuicb-
ill's du^ to pay th^ attratioo to his fether. He knows it
to be so, by his promises and messages ; but if he wished to
do it, it might be done. A man who felt rightly would say
at once, simply and resolutely, to Mrs. Churchill, " Every
sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to
make to your convenience; but I must go and see my
father immediately. I know he would be hurt by my
failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present
occasion. I shall, therefore, set off to-raorrDw. " If he
would say so to her at once, in the tone of decision be-
coming a man, there would be no opposition made to his
going.'
'No,'said Emma, laughing ; but perhaps there might be
some made to his coming back again. Such language for a
young man entirely dependent to use I Nobody but you,
Mr. Knightley, would imagine it possible : but you have
not an idea of what is requisite in ntuations directly
opposite to your own. Mr. Frank Churchill to be making
such a speech as that to the uncle and aunt who have
brought, him up, and are to provide for him I — standing
up in die middle of tiie room, I suppose and speaking
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
Emma.
I2S
as lond u he could. How can you imagine such conduct
practicable t'
Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would Jind no
difficulty in it He would feel himself in the right; and the
declaration, — made, of course, as a man of sense would
make it, in a proper manner, — would do him more good,
raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the people
he depended on, than all that a line of shifts and expedients
can ever da Respect would be added to affection. I'hey
would feel that they could trust him ; that the nephew, who
had done rightiy by his & ther, would do rightly by them ;
for they know, as well as he does, — as well as all the world
must know, — that he ought to pay this visit to his fether ;
and while meanly exerting their power to delay it are in
their hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to
their whims. Respect for right conduct is felt by every
body. If he would act in this sort of manner on principle,
consistently, regularly, their little minds would bend to his.'
'I rather doubt that. You are very fond of bending little
minds ; but where little minds belong to rich people in
authority, I think they have a knack of swelling out, till they
are quite as unmanageable as great ones. I can imagine,
that if you, as you are, Mr. Knig^tley, were to be transported
and placed all at once in Mr. Fhmk Churchill's situation,
you wouM be able to say and do just what you have been
recommending for him; and it might have a very good
effect The Churchills might not have a word to say in
return ; but then you would have no habits of early obedience
and long observance to break through. To him who has, it
might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect
independence, and set all their claims on his gratitude and
regard at nought He may have as strong a sense of what
would be tight as you can have, without bong so equal,
under particular circumstances, to act up to it'
'Then, it would not be so strong a sense. If it Med to
produce equal exertion, it could not be an equal conviction.'
'Oh, die difference of situation and habit I I wish you
would try to understand what an amiable young man may
be likely to feel in directly opposing those whom, as child
and boy, he has been looking up to all his life.'
by Google
126 Emma.
'Your amiable young man is a veiy weak young man, if
this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution
to Jo right against the will of otheis. It ought to have been
a habit with Iiim, by this time, of following his duty, instead
of consulting expe^ency. I can allow for the fears of the
child, but not of the man. As he became rational, he ought
to have roused himself, and shaJten off all that was unwoi^y
in their authority. He ought to have opposed the first
attempt on their side to make him slight his lather. Had
he begun as he ought^ there would have been no difficulty now.'
'We shall never agree about him,'died Emma ;'but that
is nothing extraordinary. I have not the least idea of his
being a weak young man : I feel sure that he is noL Mr,
Weston would not be blind to folly, though in his own son )
but he is very likely to have a more yielding, complying,
mild disposition, than would suit your notions of man's
perfection. I dare say he has ; and though it may cut him
off from some advantages, it will secure him many others.'
'Ves ; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to
move, and of leading a life of mere idle pleasure, and
fancying himself extremely expert in finding excuses for iL
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter, full of
professions and falsehoods, and persuade himself that he has
hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving
peace at home, and preventing his father's having any right
to complain. His letters disgust me.'
'Your feelings are singular. They seem to satisfy every
body else.'
'I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. Weston. They hardly
can satiny a woman of her good saise and quick feelings :
standing in a mother's place, but without a mother's affection
to blind her. It is on her account that attention to Randalls
is doubly due, and she must doubly feel the omission. Had
she been a person of consequence herself, he would have
come, I dare say; and it would not have signified whether
he did or no. Can you think your friend behind-hand in
these sort of considerations ) Do you suppose she does not
often say all this to herself? No, Emma ; your amiable
young man can be amiable only in French, not in English.
He may be very " amiable^ " have very good manners, and be
L.,:,-i:p:lbyG00gle
Emma.
127
veiy agreeable ; but he can have no English delicacy to-
wards the feelings of otho: people, — ^nothing really amiable
about him.'
* You seem detennined to think ill of him.'
'Me ! not at all,'replied Mr. Knightley, rather displeased ;
'I do not want to think ill of him. I should be as leady to
acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of
none, except what are merely personal, — that he is well-
grown and good looking, with smooth, plausible manners,'
'Well, if be have nothing else to recommend him, he will
be a treasure at Highbury. We do not often look upon Ane
young men, well bred and agreeable. We must not be nice,
and ask for all the virtues into the bargain. Cannot you
imagine, Mr. Knightley, what a sauaium his coming will
produce 1 There will be but one subject throughout the
parishes of Donwell and Highbury; but one interest — one
object of curiosi^ ; it will be all Mr. Frank •Churchill ; we
shall think and speak of nobody else.'
'You will excuse my being so much overpowered. If I
find him conversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance;
but if he is only a chattering coxcomb, he will not occupy
much of my time or thoughts.'
'My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to
the taste of every body, and has the power as well as the
wish of being universally agreeable. To you, he will talk
of farming; to me, of drawing or music; and so on to every
body, having that general information on all subjects which
will enable him to follow the lead, or take the lead, just as
propriety may require, and to speak extremely well on each ;
that is my idea of him.'
'And mine,'said Mr. Knightley, warmly,'is, that if he
turn out any thing like it, he will be the most insufferable
fellow breathing ! What! at three-and-twenty to be the king
of his company — the great man — the practised politician,
who is to read every body's character, and make every body's
talents conduce to the display of his own superiority ; to be
dispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear
like fools compared with himself ! My dear Emma, your
own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it
came to the point'
by Google
128
'I will say no more about him,'cried Emma, —'you tnm
every thing to eviL We are both prejudiced; you against, I
for him; and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really
here.'
'Prejudiced I I am not prejudiced,'
'But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed
of it My love for Mr. and Mis. Weston gives me a decided
prejudice in his favour,'
'He is a person I never think of from one month's end to
mother,'said Mr. Knightley, with a degree of vexation which
made Emma Immediately talk of something else, though she
could not comprehend why he should be angry.
To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared
to be of a different disposition from himself, was unworthy
the real liberality of mind which she was always used to
acknowledge in him ; for with all the high opinion of him-
self which sha had often laid to his charge, she had never
befbre for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to
the merit of another.
END OF THE FIRST VULtmC
,zp:lbyG00glc
VOLUME THB SECOND.
CHAPTER L
EuMA and Harriet had been walking together one monung,
and, in Emma's opinioii, been talking enough of Mr. Elton
fw that day. She could not think that Hairiefs solace
or her own sins required more; and she was therefore in-
dustriously getting rid of the subject as they returned; — but
it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded, and
after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in
winter, and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive
—'Mr. Elton is so good to the poor I'she found something
eke must be done.
I'hey were ^t approaching the house where lived Mis.
and Miss Bates. She determined to call upon them and
seek safety in numbers. There was always sufficient reason
for such an attention: Mrs. and Miss Bates loved to be
called on; and she knew she was considered by the very few
who presumed ever to see imperfection in her as rather
n^ligent in that respect, and as not contributing what she
ought to the stock (tf their scanty comforts.
She had had many a hint from Mr. Knightley and some
from her own heart, as to her deficiency, but none were equal
to counteract the persuasion of its being very disagreeable,—
a waste of time — tiresome women — and eiU the horror of
being in danger of falling in with the second rate and third
late of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and
therefore she seldom went near them. But now she made
the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going
in; observing as she proposed it to Harriet, that, asw«ll as
she could calculate, they were just now quite safe from any
letter from Jane Fairlax.
by Google
The house belonged to people in business. Mrs. and
Miss Bates occupied the drawing-room floor; and there, in
the very moderate-sized apartment, which was every thing to
them, the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully
welcomed; the quiet neat old lady, who with her knitting
was seated in the wannest comer, wanting even to give up
her place to Misa Woodhouse, and her more active, tallting
daughter, almost ready to overpower them with care and
kindness, thanks for Uieir visit, solicitude for their shoes,
anxious inquiries after Mr. Woodhouse's health, cheeifiil
communications about her mother's, and sweet-cake & om
the buffet: —'Mrs. Cole had just been there, just called in
for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour
with them, and she had taken a piece of cake, and been so
kind as to say she liked it very much; and, therefore, she
hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the
favour to eat a piece too.'
The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that
of Mr. Elton. There was intimacy between them, and Mr.
Cole had heard ftoia Mr. Elton since his going away. Emma
knew what was coming: they must have the letter over again,
and settle how long he had been gone, and how much he was
engaged in company, and what a favourite he was wherever
he went, and how fiiU the Master of the Ceremonies'ball
had been; and she went through it very well, with all the
interest and all the commendation tiiat could be requisite,
and always putting forward to prevent Harriet's being obliged
to say a word.
This she had been prepared for when she entered the
house; but mean^ having once talked him handsomely over,
to be no & rtheT incommoded by any troublesome topic, and
to wander at large amongst all the mistresses and missea d
of Highbury, and their caid^[ > artiea. She had not been pre-
pared to hare Jane Fair & x succeed Mr. Elton; but he was
actual^ hurried ofFby Miss Bates; she jumped away from him
at last abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter form
her niece.
'Oh yes, — Mr. Elton, I understood, — certainly as to
dandng, — Mrs. Cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms
at Bath was — Mis. Cole was so kind as to sit some time with
n^ talking of Jane; for as soon as she came in, she began
by Google
Emma. IJI
inquiring after her, Jane is so veiy great a favourite there
Whenerer she is with us, Mrs. Cole does not kiiov how to
^ov her kindness enough ; and I must say that Jane deserves
it as much as any body can. And so ^e began inquiring
oftn her directly, saying, " I know you cannot have heard
fix > m Jane lately, bet^uae it isnothertime forwritisg; " and
when I immediately said, " But indeed we have, we had a
letter this very morning, " I do not know that I ever saw any
body mwe surprised " Have you, upon your hononrl " said
die; " well, that is quite mieiqtected. Do let me hear what
■he says. "'
Emma's politeness was at hand directly, to say, with
smiling interest, —
'Have you heard from Miss Fairfiut so lately I I am ex-
tremely happy. I hope she is well %'
'Thank you. You are so kind 1'replied the hiqtpily
deceived aunt, while eagerly hunting for the letter.'Oh,
here it is. I was sure it could not be far off; but I had
put n^ huswife upon it, you see, without being aware, and
so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand so very lately
that I was almost sure it must be on the table. I was read-
ing it to Mrs. Cole, and, since she went away, I was read-
ily it again to my mother, for it is such a pleasure to her— a
letter from Jane — that she can never hear it often enough;
so I knew it could not be far ofl, and here it is, only just
under my huswife, — and since you are so kind as to wish to
hear what she says ; but, first (^ all, I really must, in justice
to Jane, apologise for her writing so short a letter, only two
pages you se^ hardly two, and in general she fills the whole
paper and crosses halC My mother often wonders that I
can make it out so welL She often says, when the letter
is first opened, " Well, Hetty, now I think you will be put to
it to make out all that checkn-woik " — don't you ma'am 1
And then I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to moke
it out herself) if she bad nobody to do it for her, every word
of it, — I am sure she would pore over it till die had made
out every word. And, indeed, though my mother's eyes
are not so good «3 they were, she can see amaangly well still,
thank God 1 wil^ the help of spectadea It is such a
blessing I My mother's are really veiy good indeed. Jane
byGoogle
132 Emma.
t & ea says, when she is here, " I am sure, giandmaroma, you
muEt have had vety strong eyes to see as you do — and so
much fine work as you have done too 1 — I only wish my eyes
may last me as welL "'
All this spoken extremely & st obliged Miss Bates to stop
for breath ; and Emma said something very civil about the
excellence of Miss Fairfax's handwriting.
'You are extremely kind,'replied Miss Bates, highly
gratified ;'you who are such a judge, and write so beautifully
yourself. I am sure there is nobody's praise that could give
us so much pleasure as Miss Woodhouse's. My mother
does not hear ; she is a little deaf) you know. Ma'am,'
addressing her,'do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so
obliging to say about Jane's handwriting 1'
And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own nlly
compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady
could comprehend it. She was pondering, in the mean-
while, upon the possibility, without seeming veiy rude, of
making her escape from Jane Fairfax's letter, and had
almost resolved on huiiying away directly under some slight
excuse, when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her
attention.
'My mother's deafness is very trifling, you see, just
nothing at alL By only raising my voice, and saying any
thing two or three times over, she is sure to hear : but then
she is used to my voice. But it is very remarkable that she
should always hear Jane better than she does me. Jane
speaks so distinct I However, she will not find her grand-
mamma at all deafer than she was two years ago ; which is
saying a great deal at my mother's time of life, and it really
is fuU two years, you know, since she was here. We
never were so long without seeii^ hra before, and as I was
telling Mrs. Cole, we shall hardly know how to make enough
of her now.'
'Are you expecdng Miss Fair & x here soon I'
'Oh, yes ; next week.'
'Indeed I That must be a very great pleasure.'
'Thank you. You are veiy kind. Yes, next week.
Every body is so surprised ; and every body says the same
obli^g things. I am sure she will be as happy to see her
byGoo^^lc
friends at Highbury as they can be to see her. Yes, Friday
or Saturday ; she cannot say which, because CoL OunpbeU
will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days. So
very good of them to send her the whole way I But they
always do, you know. Oh yes, Friday or Saturday next
That is what she writes about That is the reason of her
writing out of rule, as we call it; for, in the common course,
we should not have heard from her before next Tuesday or
Wednesday.'
'Yes, so I imaged. I was afraid there could be little
chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to < lay.'
'So obliging of you I No, we should not have heard, if
it had not been for this partJculai circumstance, of her being
to come here so soon. My mother is bo delisted I for she
is to be three nionths with us at least Three months, she
says so, positively, as I am going to have the pleasure of
reading to you. The case is, you see, that the Campbells
are going to Ireland. Mrs. Dixon has persuaded her & ther
and mother to come over and see her directly. They had
not intended to go over till iha summer, but she is so
impatient to see them again ; for till she nuuried, last
October, she was never away imm them so much as a week,
which must make it very strange to be in different kingdoms,
I was going to say, but however different countries, and so
she wrote a very urgent letter to her mother, or her & ther,
— I declare I do not know which it was, but we shall see
presently in Jane's letter, — wrote in Mr. Dixon's name as
well as her own, to press their coming over directly ; and
they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them
back to their countiy-seat, Baly-craig, — a beautiful place I
& ncy. Jane has heikid a great deal of its beauty, — from
Mr. Dixon, I mean, — I do not know that she ever heard
about it frmn any body else,— but it was v«ry natural, you
know, that he should like to speak of his own place while he
was payii^ his addresses, — and as Jane used to be very
often walking out with them, — for Colonel and Mis. Campbell
were very particular about their daughter's not walking out
often with only Mr, Dixon, for which I do not at all blame
them : of course she heard every thing he might be telling
Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland ; and I think
by Google
T34 Emma.
she wrote us word that he had shown them some drawing!
of the place, views that he had taken himself. He is amost
amiable, chaiming young man, I believe. Jane was quite
longing to go to Irdand, from his account of things.'
At this moment an ingenious and animatiDg suspidon
entering Emma's brain with regard to Jane Faii & x, this
chanuing Mr. Dixon, and the not going to Ireland, she said,
with the insidious design of fiirther discovery, —
'You must feel it veiy fortunate that Miss Faii & x should
be allowed to come to you at such a time: Considering the
very particular friendship between her and K(ts. Dixon, you
could hardly have expected her to be excused from ac-
companying Colonel and Mrs Campbell'
'Very tru^ veiy true, indeed. The very thing tMt we
have always been rather afraid of; for we should not have
liked to have her at such a distance from us, for months to-
gether, — not able to come if any thing was to happen; but
you see every thing turns out for the best They want her
(Mr. and Mrs. Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel
and Mrs. Campbell; quite depend upon it; nothing can be
more kind or pressing than their /i^m/ invitation, Jane says,
as you will bear presently. Mr. Dixon does not seem in tiie
least backward in any attention. He is a most charming
young man. Eva since the service he rendered Jane at
Weymouth, when they were out in that party on the water,
and she, by the sudden whirling round of something or other
among the sails, would have been dashed into the sea al
once, and actually was all but gone, if he had no^ with
the greatest presence of mind, caught hold of her habi^
—I can never think of it without trembling I — but ever
since we had the history of that day, I have been so fond
of Mr. Dixon I'
'But, in spite of all her friends'urgency, and her own
wish of semg Ireland, Miss Fairlax prefeis devoting the
time to you and Mrs. " BaXes %'
'Yes— entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice;
and Colonel and Mrs. Campbell think she does quite righ^
just what they should recommend; and indeed they par-
ticularly wish her to tiy her native air, as she has not been
quite so well as usual lately.'
byGoogle
Emma. 135
'I am ooDcemed to heai of it I think thejr judge visely;
but Mrs. Dixon must be very much disappointed. Mrs.
Dixon, I understand, has no remiukable degree of personal
beauty, — u not by any means to be compared wiUi Misa
Fairiax.'
'Ob no. You are very obliging to say such thingsj but
certainly not There is no comparison between them. Miss
Campbell atways was absolutely plain, but extremely el^ant
and amiable,'
'Ves, that of course.'
'Jane cau^t a bad cold, poor thing t so long ago as the
7th of November (as I am going to read to you), and has
never been well since. A long time is not it, for a cold to
hang upon herl She never mentioned it before, because
die would not alarm us. Just Uce her ! so considerate 1 —
But, however, she is so far from well, that her kind friends
the Campbells think she had better come home, and try an
«lr that ^ways agrees with her: and they have no doubt that
three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her; and
it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here
than go to Ireland, if she is unwell Nobody could noise
her as we should do.'
■ It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the
world.'
'And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday,
and the Campbells leave town in their way to Holyhead the
Monday following, as you will find from Jane's letter. So
sudden .'— ^You may guess, dear Miss Woodhonse, what a
flurry it has thrown me in! If it was not for the drawback
of her iUness, — but I am afraid we must expert to see her
grown thin, and looking very poorly. I must tell you what
an unlucky thing happened to me as to that I always
make a point of reading Jane's letters through to myself first,
before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for fear
of there being any thing in them to distress her. Jane desired
me to do it, so I always do; and so I began tojay with my
usual caution: but no sooner did I come to the mention of
hra being unwell, than I burst out, quite frightened, with
" Bless me I poor Jane is ill ! " — which my mother being on the
watch heard distinctly, and was sadly alanned at However.
byGoOgk'
T36 Emma.
when I read on, I found it wa^ not near bo bad as I & nciecl
at first; and I make so light of it now to her, that she does
not think much about it : but I cannot imagine how I could
be so off my guard! If Jane does not getwell soon, we wiU
caU in Mr. Feny. The expense shall not be thought of;
and though he is so liberal and so fond of Jane, that I dare
«a.j he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance,
we conld not suffer it to be so, you know. He has a wife
and family to maintain, and is not to be giving away his
time; Well, now I have just given yon a hint of what Jane
writes about, we will turn to her letter ; and I am Bure she
tells her own stoiy a great deal better than I can tell it foe
her.'
'I am afraid we must be running away,'said Emms,
glandng at Harriet, and beginning to rise,'roy father wiO
be expecting us. I had no intention, I thought I had no
power, of staying more than five minutes^ when I first entered
the house. I merely called, because I would not pass the
door without inquiring after Mrs. Bates; but I have been so
pleasantly detaincdl Now, however, we must wish you and
Mrs. Bates good morning.'
And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded.
She regained the street, happy in this, that though much had
been forced on hei against hei will, though she had, in & ct,
heard the whole substance of Jane Fair & x's letter, she had
been able to esct^ the letter itsel£
CHAPTER II.
Jahx Fairfax was an orphan, die only child of Mrs. Bates'
youngest daughter.
The marriage of Lieut Fair^ of die r^meot of in-
fantry, and Mifs Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and
pleasure, hope and interest ; but nothing now remained of it
save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action
abroad — of his widow sinking under consumption and grief
soon afterwards — and this gid.
" By tnith she belonged to Highbury: and when at three
iM,..dbyGoogle
yean old, on losing her mother, she became the property,
the charge, the consolation, the fondling of her grandmother
and aunt, there had seemed every probability of her being
permanently fixed there; of her being taught only what very
limited means could command, and growing up with no
advantages of connection or improvement to be eugiafled on
what nature had given her in a pleasing peison, good under-
standing and waim-hearted, well-meaning relations.
But the compassionfite feelings of a Mend of her father gave
a change to her destiny. This was Col Campbell, who had
veiy highly regarded Fairfiuc, as an excellent officer and most
deserving young man; and fsrther, had been indebted to him
for such attentions, during a severe camp-fever, as be believed
had saved his life. These were claims which he did not
Icam to overlook, though some years passed away from the
deadi of poor Fairfax before his own return to ]^gland put
any thing in his power. When he did return, he sought out
the diild and took notice of her. He was a married man
with only one living child, a girl, about Jane's age: and
Jane be < ^me their guest, paying them long visits and grow^
ing a fovonrite widi all; and, before she wu nine years old,
his daughter's great fondness for ha, and his own wish of
bdng a real Mend, united to produce an offer from CoL
Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education.
It was accepted; and fixHu that period Jane had belonged
to CoL CampbeU's & niily, and bad lived with tiiem entirely,
only visiting ha grandmother from time to time.
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating
others; the very few hundred poimds which she inherited
& om her father making independence impossible. To pro-
vide for her otherwise was out of Col. CampbeU's power; for
though his income, by pay and appointments, was handsome,
bis fortune was moderate, and must be all his daughter's;
but, by giving her an education, he hoped to be supplying
the means of respectable subsistence hereafter.
Such was Jane Fairfax's histoiy. She had fallen into
good hands, known nothing but kindness from tix Camp-
bells, and been given an excellent education. Living ron-
■tantly with right-minded and well^nformed people, her
heart and understanding had received every advantage of
i,M.p:ibyGoogle
discipline and culture; and CoL Campbell's residence being
in London, every lighter talent had been done fiiU justice
to, by the attendance of fiist-rate mastos. Her disposition
and abilities vere equally worthy of all that friendship could
do; and at eighteen or nineteen she was, as far as such an
early age can be qualified for the care of children, fiilly
competent to the office of instruction herself; but she was
too mnch beloved to be parted with. Neither father nor
mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure
it The evil day was put off. It was easy to decide that
she was still too young; and Jane remained with them,
shaiing, as another daughter, in all the tatiotui pleasures
of an el^ant Eodety, and a judicious mixture of home
and amusement, with only the drawback of the fiiture, —
the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to
remind her that all this might soon be over.
The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment
of Miss Campbell in particulaj-, was the more honourable to
each par^ from the circumstance of Jane's decided superiority
both in beauty and acqnirements. That nature had given it
in feature coidd not be unseen by the young woman, nor
could her higher powers of mind be unfelt by the parents.
They continued together with unabated reg:iTd, however,
till the mairiage of Misa Campbell, who by that chance,
that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial
affairs, giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to
what is superior, engaged the affections of Mr. Dixon, a
young man rich and agreeable, almost as soon as they were
acquainted ; and was eligibly and happUy settled, while Jane
Faufax had yet her bread to earn.
This event had very lately taken place ; too lately for any
thing to be yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards
entering on her path of duty ; though she had now reached
the age which her own judgment had fixed on for beginning;
She had long resolved that one-and-twen^ should be the
period. With the fortitude of a devoted noviciate, she had
resolved at one-and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and
retire from all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse,
equal society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification
for ever.
by Google
Emma. 139
The good sense of CoL and Mrs. Campbell could not
oppose such a resolution, thou^ their feelings did. As loi^
as they lived, no exertions would be necessary, their home
might be hers for ever ; and for their own comfort they would
have retained her wholly ; but this would be selfishness : —
what must be at last, had better be soon. Perhaps they
b^an to feel it mi^t have been kinder and wiser to have
resisted the temptation of any delay, and spared her from a
taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now be
relinquished. StUl, however, aSecdon was ^ad to catch at
any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched
moment She had never been quite well since & e time
of their daughter's marriage; and till she should have
completely recovered her usual strength, they must forbid
her engaging in duties, which so fax from bemg compatible
with a weakened frame and varying spirits, seemed, unda
the most favourable circnmstances, to require something
more than human perfection of body and mind to be
dischai^^ed with tolerable comfort
With r^ard to her not accompanying them to Ireland,
her account to her aunt contained nothing but truth, & ough
there might be some truths not told. It was her own
choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury ; to
spend, perhaps, her last months of perfect liberty with those
lund relations to whom she was so very dear : and the
Campbells, whatever might be their motive or motives,
iriietiier sln^e, or double, or treble, gave the arrangement
their ready sanction, and said, that ihej depended more on
a few montlis spent in her nadve air, for the recovery of her
heidth, than on any thing else. Certain it was that she was
to come ; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that
perfect novelty which had been so long promised it — Mr.
Frank Churchill — ^must put up for the present with Jane
Fairfiix, who could bring only the freshness of a two year's
absence.
Emma was sony to have to pay civilities to a person she
did not like through three long monfiis I — to be always doing
more than she wished, and less than she ought t Why she
did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficult question to
answer : Mr. Knightley had once told ha it was because
,M..d by Google
140
Emma.
she saw in her the really accomplished young woman, which
she wanted to be thought heiself ; and though the accusation
had been eagerly refuted at the time, there were moments of
self-examination in which her conscience could not quite
acquit her. But'she could never get acquainted with her:
she did not know how it was, but there was such coldness
and reserve — such apparent indifference whether she pleased
or not — and tbeti, her aunt was such an eternal t^er t —
and she was made such a iaaa with by every body I— and it
had been always imagined that they were to be so intimate
because their ages were the same, every body had supposed
they must be so fond of each other.'These were her
reasons ; she had no better.
It was a dislike so little just,— every imputed & ult was so
magni & ed by & ncy, — that she never saw Jane Faitfu, the
first time ^ter any considerable absence, without feeling
that she had injured her ; and now, when the due visit was
paid, on her arrival, after a two years'interval, she was
particularly struck with the very appearance and manners,
which for those two whole years she had been depreciating.
Jane Fair & x was very el^ant, remarkably elegant ; and she
had herself the highest value for el^ance. He height was
pretty, just such as almost every body would think tall, and
nobody could think very tall ; her figure particulady grace-
fill ; her size a most becoming medium, between & t and
thint though a slight appearance of ill-health seemed to
point out the likeliest evil of the two. Emma could not but
feel all this; and then, her (ace — her features— there was
more beauty in them all together than she had remembered;
it was not r^ular, but it was very pleasing beauty. Her eyes,
a deep grey, with dark eyelashes and eyebrows, had never
been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been
used to cavil at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and
dehcacy which r^y needed no fuller bloom. It was a style
of beauty, of which elegance was the reigning chaiscter, and
as such, she must, in honour, by all her principles, admire
it : el^iance which, whether of person or of mind, she saw
so little in Highbuiy. There, not to be vulgar, was distinction
and merit
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane
byGoogIc
Fairfax widi twofold complacency, — the sense of pleasure
and the sense of rendering justice, and was determining
that she would dislike her no longer. When she took in
her histoty, indeed, her situation, as well as her beauty;
when she considered what all this elegance was destined to,
what she was going to sink from, how she was going to live,
it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion and
respect ; especially, if to every well-known particular, en-
titling her to interest, were added the highly probable
fdrcumstance of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which she had
BO naturally started to hei^elf. In that case, nothing could
be more pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she
had resolved on. Emma was very willing now to acquit
her of having seduced Mr. Dixon's affections from his wife,
or of any thing mischievous which her imagination had
suggested at first If it were love, it might be simple, single,
successless love on her side alone. She mig^t have been
unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, while a sliarer of
his conversation with her friend ; and from the best, the purest
of motives, might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland,
and resolving to divide herself efl^ectually from him and his
connections by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.
Upon the whole, Emma left her with such soflened,
charitable feelings, as made her look around in walking
home, and lament that Highbury afforded no young man
worthy of giving her independence, — nobody that she could
wish to scheme about for her.
These were charming feelings, but not lasting. Before she
had committed herself by any public profession of eternal
friendship for Jane Fairfax, or done more towards a recan-
tation of past prejudices and errors, than saying to Mr.
Knightiey,'She certainly is handsome; she is better than
handsome I'Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with
her grandmodier and aunt, and every thing was relapsing
much into its usual state. Former provocations re-appeared.
The aunt was as tiresome as ever ; more tiresome, because
anxiety for her health was now added to admiration of her
powers; and they had to listen to the description of exactly
how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how
small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well as to see
by Google
142 Emma.
exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her mother
and herself; and Jane's ofFenccs rose again. They had
music : Emma was obhged to play; and the thanks and
praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an af-
fectition of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to
show off in higher style her own very superior performance.
She was, besides, which was the worst of all, so cold, so
cautious ! There was no getting at her real opinion. Wrapt
up in a cloak of politeness, she seemed determined to hazard
nothing. She was disgustingly, was suspiciously reserved
If any thing could be more, where alt was most, she was
more reserved on the subject of Weymouth and the Dixons
than any thing. She seemed bent on giving no real insight
into Mr. Dixon's character, or her own value for his company,
or opinion of the suitableness of the match. It was all
genial approbation and smoothness j nothing delineated
or distinguished. It did her no service, however. Her
caution was thrown away. Emma saw its artifice, and
returned to her first suimises. There probably was some-
thing more to conceal than her own preference; Mr, Dixon,
perhaps, had been very near changing one Mend for the
other, or been fixed only to Miss (^mpbell, for the sake of
the fiiture twelve thousand pounds.
The like reserve prevailed on other topics. She and Mr.
Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the same time.
It was known that they were a little acquainted; but not a
syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what
he truly was.'Was he handsome )'—'She believed he was
reckoned a very fine young man.''Was he agreeable!'—
'He was generally thought so.''Did he appear a soluble
young man; a young man of information)'—'At a
watering-place, or in a common London acquaintance, it
was difficult to decide on such points. Manners were all
that could be safely judged oi, under much longer know-
ledge than they had yet had of Mr, Churchill She believed
every body found his manners pleasing.'Emma could not
forgive her.
byGoogle
CHAPTER in.
EmiA could not foipve her : but as neither provocation
nor resentment were discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had
been of,the party, and had seen oniy proper attention and
pleasing behaviour on each side, he was expressing the next
rooming, being at Haitfield again on business with Mr.
Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole ; not so openly as
he might have done had her father been out of the room, but
speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma.
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now
great pleasure in marking an improvement
'A very pleasant evening,'he began a^ soon as Mr.
Woodhouse had been talked into what was necessary, told
that he understood, and the papers swept away; —'par-
ticularly pleasajiL You and Miss Fairfax gave us some
very good music, I do not know a more luxurious state,
sir, than sitting at one's ease to be entertiined a whole
evening by two such young women; sometimes with music
and sometimes with conversation. I am sure Miss Fairfax
must have found the evening pleasant, Emma. You lefi
nothing undone, I was glad you made her play so much,
for having no instrument at her grandmother's, it must have
been a r^ indulgence.'
'I am happy you approved,'said Emma, smiling ;'but I
hope I am not often deficient in what is due to guests at
Haitfield.
'No, my dear,'said her father instantly ; thai I am sure
you are not There is nobody half so attentive and dvil as
you are. If any thing, you are too attentive. The muffin
last nighl, if it had been handed round once, I think it
would have been enough.'
'No,'said Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time ;'you
are not often deficient; not often deficient, either in manner
or comprehension. I think you understand me, therefore.'
An arch look expressed —'I understand you well enough;*
but she said only,'Miss Fairfax is reserved.'
'I always told you she was — a little; but you will soon
by Google
144 Emma.
overcome all that part of her reserve which ou^t to be over-
come, all that has its foundation in diffidence. What arises
from discretion innst be honoured.'
'You think her diffident I do not see iL'
'My dear Emma,'s^d he, moving from his chair into one
dose by her,'you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you
had not a pleasant evening.'
'Oh, no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in
asking questions, and amused to think how little infonnation
I obtained.'
'I am disappointed,'was his only answer.
'I hope evety body had a pleasant evening,'said Mr.
Woodhouse, in his quiet way.'I had. Once, I felt the
fire rather too much ; but then I moved back my chair a
little, a very little, and it did not disturb me. Miss Bates was
very chatty and good'humoured, as she always is, though she
sp^s rather too quick. However, she is very agreeable,
and Mrs. Bates, too, in a different way. I like old friends;
and Miss Jane Fairfax is a very pret^ sort of young lady ;
a very pretty and a very well behaved young lady indeed.
She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr. Knightley,
because she had Emma.'
'True, sir ; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.'
Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least
for the present, said, and with a sincerity which no one
could question, —
'She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep
one's eyes fixim. I am always watching her to admire ; and
I do pity her from my heart'■
Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he
cared to express; and before he could make any reply,
Mr. Woodhouse, whose thoughts were on the Bates's,
said, —
'It is a great pity that their drcumstancei should be so
confined! a great pity indeed! and I have often wished —
but it is so litde one can venture to do — small, trifling pre-
sents, of any thii^ uncommon. Now, we have killed a
porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg;
it is very small and delicate — Hartfield pork is not like any
other pork — but still it is pork — and, my dear Emma, unless
one could be sure of their making it into steaks, nicely
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 145
fried, aa ours aie Med, without the EmBlIest grease, aad not
roast it, foi no Etomach can bear roast pork — I think we had
better send the leg — do not you think so, my deart'
'My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quaiter. I knev
you would wish it There will be the leg lo be salted, you
know, which is so very nice, and the k > in to be dressed
directly, in any manner they like.'
'Hut's ri^t, my dear, very rig^t I had not thought of
it before, but that was the best way. They must not over-
salt the leg; and then, if it is not over-salted, and if it is very
thoroughly boiled, just as Serle boils ouis^ and eaten very
moderately o( with a boiled tumip, and a little carrot or
parsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome.'
■ ^nma,* said Mr. Knightley, presently,'I have a piece
of news for you. You like news — and I heard aa article in
my way hither that I think will interest you.'
'News I Oh yes, I always like news. What is it t — ^why
do you smile so I — where did you hear it I — at Randalls t'
He had time only to say, —
'No^ not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls,'—
when Uie door was thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss
Fairfax walked into the room. Full ofthanks, and full of news,
Miss Bates knew not which to give quickest. Mi. Knightley
soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that not another
syllable of communication could rest with him.
'Oh, my dear sir, how are you this morning 1 My dear
Miss Woodhouse — I come quite overpowered. Such a
beautiful hind-quarter of porkl You ore too bountiful!
Have you heard the newst Mr. Elton b going to be
maided.'
Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and
she was so completely suipiised, that she could not avoid a
little start, and a little blush, at the sound.
'There is my news: — I thought it would interest you,'said
Mr. Knightley, with a smile, which implied a conviction of
some part of what had passed between them.
'But where could ,}v» hear iti'cried Miss Batea'Where
could you possibly hear it, Mr. Knightley t For it is not
£ve minutes since I received Mrs. Cole's note — no. It can-
by GoOglc
146 Emtna.
not be more than fi« — or at least ten — for I had got my
bonnet and spencer on, just ready to come out — I was only'
gone down to speak to Fatty again about the pork — Jane
was standing in the passage — ^were not you, Jane I — for my
mother was so a & aid that we had not any siting-pan large
enough. So I said I would go down and see, and Jane said,
" Shall I go down instead 1 for I think you have a httle cold,
and Patty has been washing the kitchen, " — " Oh, my dear, "
saidi — well,andjust then came the note. A Miss Hawkins
— that's all 1 know — a Miss Hawkins of Bath. But, Mr.
Knightley, how could you possibly have heard it 1 fcff the
very moment Mr. Cole told Mrs. Cole of it, she sat down
and wrote to me. A Miss Hawkins'
'I was with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago.
He had just read Elton's letter as I was shown in, and
handed it to me directly.'
'l^ell! that is quite— I suppose there never was a piece of
news more generally interesting. My dear sir, you really
are too bountiful. My mother desires her very best compli-
ments and regards, and a thousand thanks, and says you
really quite oppress her.*
'We consider our Hartiield pork,'replied Mr. Wood-
house —'indeed it ceitainly is, so very superior to all Other
pork, that Emma and I cannot have a greater pleasure
than'
'Oh, my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends aie only
too good to us. If ever there were people who, without
having great wealth themselves, had every thing they could
wish for, I am sure it is us. We may well say, that " our lot
is cast in a goodly heritage. " Well, Mr. KnighUey, and so
you actually saw tlie letter — well'
'It was sliort, merely to announce — ^but cheeifiil, exulting
of course.'Here was a sly glance at Emma.'He had
been so fortunate as to — I forget the precise words— one has
no business to remember them. — The information was, as
you state, that he was going to be married to a Miss Haw-
kins. By his style, I- should imagine it just settled.'
'Mr. Elton going to be married!'said Emma, as soon as
she could speak.'He will have every body's wishes for his
happiness.'
by Google
Emma. 147
'He is veiy young to settle,'waa Mr. Woodhouae's obser-
v & doQ.'He had better not be in a huny. He seemed to
me veiy well off as he was. We weie alwaya glad to see him
at Hartfield.'
'A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse !'said Miss
Bates joyfully:'my mother is so pleasedl — she says she
cannot bear to have the poor old vicarage without a mis-
tress. This is great news, indeed. Jane, you have never
seen Mr. Elton: — no wonder that you have such a curiosity
to see him.'
Jane's curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature aa
wholly to occupy her.
'No, I have never seen Mr. Elton,'she replied, starting
on this appeal:'is he — is he a tall man 1'
* Who shall answer that question t'died Ff " " * "'My
fother would say, " Yes; " Mr. Knightley, " No; " and Miss
Bates and I, that he is just the happy medium. When you
have been here a little longer, Miss Fair^ix, you will under-
stand that Mr. Elton is the standard of perfection in High-
bury, both in person and mind.'
'Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. He is the very
best young man; — but, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told
you yesterday be was precisely the height of Mr. Perry.
Miss Hawkins,— I dare say, an excellent young woman.
His extreme attention to my mother — ^wanted her to sit in
the vicaiage-pew, that she might hear the better, for my
mother is a little deaf) you know — it is not much, but she
does not hear quite quick. Jane says that CoL Campbell is
ft tittle dea£ He fancied bathing might be good for it —
the warm bath — but she says it did him no lasting benefit Col.
Campbell, you know, is quite our angeL And Mr. Dixon secmt
a very charming young man, quite worthy of him. It is such
a happiness when good people get together — and they al-
ways do. Now, here will be Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins;
and there are the Coles, such very good people ; and the
Penys — I suppose there never was a happier or a better
couple liiaa Mr. and Mis. Perry. I say, sir,'turning to Mr.
Woodhouse,'I think there are few places with such society
as Highbury. I always say, we are quite blessed in our
by Google
Dcighbonrg. My dear sir, If there ta one thing my mother
lovea better that another, it is pork — a roast loin of pork'
'As to who^ or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has
been aoinainted mth her,'eaid Emma,'nothing, I suppose,
can be known. One feels that it cannot be a veiy long ac-
qnatntance. He has been gone only foar weeks.'
Nobody had any infoimatioQ to give; and, after a few
more wonderings, Emma said, —
'Vou are silent, Miss Fairfax — but I hope yon mean to
take an interest in this news > Yon, who have been hearing
and seeing BO much of late on these subjects, who must have
been so deep in the business on Miss Campbell's account —
we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr. Elton
and Miss Hawkins.'
'When I have seen Mr. Elton,'replied Jane,'I daie say
I shall be interested— but I believe it requires fAa/ with me.
And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married, the
impression may be a little worn off.'
'Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe,
Miss Woodhouse,'said Miss Bates,'four weeks yesterday :
— a Misa Hawkins : — ^well, I had always radier fancied it
would be some young lady hereabouts ; not that I ever^—
Mis. Cote once whispered to me — but I immediately stud,
" No, Mr. Elton is a most worthy young man — but " In
short, I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of
discoveries. I do not pretend to it What is before me, 1
see. At the same time, nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton
should have aspired Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on,
so good humouredly. She knows I would not offend for the
world. How does Miss Smith do ) She seems quite re-
covered now. Have you heard from Mrs. John ^lightley
latdy i Oh, those dear little children. Jane, do you know
lalways foncy Mr. Dixon Uke Mr. John Knightleyl I.mean
in person — tall, and with that sort of look — and not very
talkative.'
'Quite wrong, my dear aunt ; there is no likeness at alL'
'Very odd I but one never does form a just idea of any-
body beforehand. One takes up a notion, and runs away
with it Mr. Dixon, you say, is not, strictly speaking,
bandswne.'
byGoogle
Emma. 149
'Handsome ! Oh do — fsa from it— ootabtly {daiD. I
told you he waa plain.'
'My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow
him to be plain, and that you yourself'
'Oh, as for me, my jadgmeat is wordt nothing. When
I have a r^ard, I always think a person welMookin^ But
I gave what I believed the geneni opinioiv libea I called
him plaiiL'
'Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be nmning away.
The weather does not loolc well, and giandmanmia will be
uneasy. You are too obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse ;
but we nallf must take leave. This has been a most
agreeable piece of news indeed. I shall just go round by
Mrs. Cole's ; but I shall not stop three minutes : and, Jane,
you had better go home directly — I would not have yon out
in a shower I We think she is the better for Highbury
already. Thank yon, we do indeed. I shall not attempt
calling on Mrs. Goddard, for I really do not think she cares
for any thmg bat ioUtd pork : when we dress die leg it wtU
be another thing. Good morning to yon, tnydear sir. Oh,
Mr. Knightley is coming too. Well, that is so very I — I am
sure if Jane is tired, you will be so kind as to give her your
aim. Mr. Elton, and Miss Hawkins. Good monungto you.'
Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted
by him, while he lamented that young people would be in
such a huiiy to many— and to many strangers, too — and the
other half she could give to her own view of the subject
]t was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece of
news, as proving that Mr. Elton could not have suffered
long ; but she was sorry for Harriet : Harriet must feel it
— and all that she could hope was, by giving the first in-
formation herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly from
others. It was now about the time that she was likely
to calL If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way I— ^and
upon its beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect
that the weather would be detaining her at lbs. Goddard'^
and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon her
without preparation.
The shower was heavy, but short ; and it had wH been
over fin minutes, wheti ia came Hanie^ with Joat the
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
I JO Emma.
heated, agiuted look which hurrying thither with a full heart
was Ukely to give; and the'Oh, Miss Woodhouse, what do
you think has happened I'which instantly buist forth, had
all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. As the blow
was given, Emma felt that she could not now show greater
kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran
eagedy through what she had to tell.'She had set out from
Mrs. Goddard'shalf an hour ago — shehad been afiraid itwould
rain — she had been afraid it would pour down every moment
— but she thought she might get to Hartfield first — she had
hurried on as fast as possible ; but then, as she was passing by
the house where a young woman was making up a gown for
her, she thought she would just step in and see bow it went
on; and though she did not seem to stay half a moment there,
soonafter she came out it began to rain, and she did not know
what to do ; so she ran on directly, as fast as she could,
and took shelter at Ford's.'Ford's was the principal woollen-
diaper, linen-draper, and harberdashei's shop united — the
shop first in size and feshion in the place.'And so, there
she had sat, without an idea of any thing in the world, full
ten minutes, perhaps — when, all of a sudden, who should
come in — to be sure it was so very odd ! — ^but they always
dealt at Ford's — who should come in, but Elizabeth Mar-
tiQ and her brother! Dear Miss Woodhousel only think. I
thought I should have & inted. I did not know what to do.
I was sitting near the door — Elizabeth saw me directly; but
be did not ; he was busy with the umbrella. I am sure she
saw me, but she looked away directly, and took no notice ;
and they both went to quite the ferther end of the shop, and
I kept sitting near the door. Oh dear; I was so miserable]
I am sure I nmst have been as white as my gown. I could
not go away, you know, because of the rain; but I did so
wish myself any where in the world but there. Oh dear,
Miss Woodhouse — well, at last, I fiincy, he looked round
and saw me ; for, instead of going on with their buying^
they began whispering to one another. I am sure they were
talking of me ; and I could not help thinking that he was
persuading her to speak to me — (do you think he vns,
Miss Woodhousel) — for [Kcsently she came forward— came
quite up to me, aad asked me how I did, and seemed readjr
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 151
to shake hands, if I would. She did not do any of It in the
same way that she used ; I could see she was altered ; but,
however, she seemed to try to be very & iendly, and we shook
hands, and stood talking some time ; but I know no more
what I said — I was in such a tremble I 1 remember she
said she was sorry we never met now; which I diought
almost too kind ! dear Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely
miserable I By that time, it was beginning to hold up, and
I was determined that nothing should stop me from getting
away — and then — only think I — I found he was coming up
towards me, too — slowly, you know, and as if he did not
quite know what to do ; and so he came and spoke, and I
answered — and I stood for a minute, feeUng dreadfiilly, yon
know, one cannot tell how ; and then I took courage, and
said it did not rain, and I must go ; and so off I set ; and I
had not got three yards from the door, when he came after
me, only to say, if I was going to Hartfield, he thought I
had much better go round by Mr. Cole's stables, for I should
find the near way quite floated by this rain. Oh dear, I
thought it would have been the death of me 1 So I sdd, I
was very much obliged to him : you know I could not do
less; and then he went back to Elizabedi, and I came round
by die stables — I believe I did — but I hardly knew where I
was, or any thing about it Oh, Miss Woodhouse, I would
rather have done any thing thui had it happen ; and, yet,
you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him
behave so pleasantly and so kindly. And Elizabeth, too.
Oh, Miss Woodhouse, do talk to ma, end make me comfort-
able again.'
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not
immediately in hei power. She was obliged to stop and
think. She was not thoroughly comforUble herself. The
young man's conduct, and his sister's, seemed the result of
real feeling, and she could not but pity th^n. As Harriet
described it, there had been an interestiDg mixture of
wounded afTection and genuine dehcacy in their behaviour :
bat she had bdieved them to be well-meaning, worthy
people, before ; and what difference did this make in the
evils of the connection I It was folly to be disturbed by it
Of courK, he must be sorry to lose her, — they must be all
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
t$a Emma.
GOny : ambldoD, as well as love, had probably been morti-
fied. They might all have hoped to rise by Hamefa
acguaintance \ and besides, what was the value of Hamef s
descripdoD I So easily pleased, — so little discerning, — iftaX
ugnified her pmse I
She exerted heiself, and did tiy to make her comfortable,
by coopering all that had passed as a mere tnfle, and
quite unworthy of bdng dwelt on.
'It might be distressing for the moment,'said she,'but
you seem to have behav«l extremely well ; and it is over,
—and may never, — can never, aa a fiist meeting, — occur
again, and therefore you need not think about it'
Hatriet said,'Very true,'and ^e'would not think
about it; but sdll she talked of it— sdll she could talk
of nothing else; and Emma, at las^ in otder to put the
Maidns out of her head, was obliged to huny on the news,
which she had meant to give with so much teodcr caution,
hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angiy,
ashamed or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor
Harriet — such a confusion of Mr. Elton's importance with
her I
Mr, Elton's r^hts, however, gradually revived Thou^
she did not feel the first intelligence as she might have done
the day before, or an hour before, its interest soon increased ;
and before their first conversation was over, she had talked
herself into all the sensations of curiosity, wonderandr^rec,
pain and pleasure, as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which
could conduce to place the Martins under proper subordi-
nation in her fancy.
Emma learned to be rather glad that diere had been such
a meeting. It had been serviceable in deadening the first
shock, without retaining any influence to alarm. As Harriet
now lived, the Martins could not get at her, without seeking
her, where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or
the condescension to seek her; for since her refusal of the
brother, the sisters had never been at Mrs. Goddard's; and
a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown to-
gether again wiA any necessity, or even any power fA
speedi.
byGoogle
CHAPTER IV.
HtntAH nature Is so well disposed towards those who are
in intercstitig situations, that a young person, who eidier
marries or dies, is sure of being kindly spoVen o£
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was
first mentioned in Highbury, before she was, by some means
or other, discovered to have every recommendation of
person and mind, — to be handsome, elegant, highly accom-
plished, and perfectly amiable ; and when Mr. Elton himself
arrived to triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the
fame of her merits, there was very little more for him to do
tiian to tell her Christian name, and say whose muse she
principally played.
Mr, Elton returned, a very happy man. He had gone
away rejected and mortified, disappointed in a very sanguine
hope, ^ter a series of what had appeared to him strong en-
couragement; and not only losing the right lady, but finding
himself debased to the level of a very wrong one. He had
gone away deeply offended; he came back ei^aged to another,
and to another as superior, of course, to the first, as under
such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost
He came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring
nothing for Miss Woodhouse, and dejying Miss Smith.
The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the
usual advantages of perfect beauty and merit, was in pos-
session of an independent fortune, of so many thousands aa
would always be called ten, — a point of some digni^, as
well aa some convenience. The story told wel': he had
not thrown himself away — he had gained a woman of
10,000/., or thereabouts, and he had gained her with such
delightfiil rapidity; the first hour of introduction had been
so very soon followed by distinguishing notice; the histoty
which he had to give Mrs. Cole of the rise and progress
of the affair was so glorious; the steps so quick, from the
acddental rencontre to the dinner at Mr, Green's, and
the party at Mrs. BTown% — smiles and blushes rising in iro.
i,M.P:ibyG00gle
154- Emma.
portance, — with consciousness and agitation richly scattered;
the lady had been so easily impressed, — so sweetly disposed;
— had, in short, to use a most intelligible phrase, been so
very ready to have him, that vatutyand prudence were equally
contented.
He had caught both substance and shadow, both fortune
and affection, and was just the happy man he ought to be;
— talking only of himself and his own concerns, — expecting
to be congratulated, — ready to be laughed at, — and with
cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the young ladies
of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago, he would have been
more cautiously gallant
llie wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only
themselves to please, and nothing but the necessary prepar-
ations to wait for; and when he set out for Bath agfun, there
was a general expectation, which a certain glance of Mrs.
Cole's did not seem to contnidict, that when he next entered
Highbury he would bring his bride.
During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him;
but just enough to feel that the first meeting was over, and
to give her the impression of his not being improved 1^ the
mixture of pique and pretension now spread over his air.
She was, in fact, beginning very much to wonder that she
had ever thought him pleasing at all ; and his sight was so
insepaiably connected with some very disagreeable feelings,
that, except in a moral light — as a penance, a lesson, a source
of profitable humiliation to her own mind — she would have
been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again. She
wished him very well; but he gave her pain; and his welfare
twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction.
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however,
must certainly be lessened by his marriage. Many vain soli-
dtudes would be prevented — many awkwardnesses smoothed
by it. A Mrs. Elton would be an excuse for any change of
intercourse; former intimacy might sink without remark. It
would be almost beginning their life of civility again.
Of the lady individually, Emma thought very iittle. She
was good enough for Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished
enough for Highbury — handsome enough — to look plun,
probably, by Hamet's side. As to connection, there Emma
kGoo^^lc
Emma. I55
was perfectly easy; persuaded, that after all his oirn vaunted
claiios and disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing. On
that article, truth seemed attainable. What she was, must
be uncertain; but wh^i she was, might be found out ; and
setting aside the 10,000/., it did not appear that she was at
all Harriet's superior. She brought no name, no blood,
no alliance. Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two
daughters of a Bristol — merchaDt, of course, be must be
called; but, as the whole of the profits of his mercantile
life appeared so very moderate, it was not un^r to guess the
dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also.
Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath;
but Bristol was her home, the very heart of Bristol; for
though the father and mother had died some years ago, an
uncle remained — in the law line : — nothing more distinctly
honourable was hazarded of him, than that he was in the
law line; and with him the daughter had lived Emma guessed
him to be the drudge of some attorney, and too stupid to
rise. And all the grandeur of the coroiection seemed de-
pendent on the elder sister, who was very wdl married, to
a gentleman in a great way, near Bristol, who kept two
cairiagcsl That was the wind-up of the histoiy; that was
the glory of Miss Hawkins.
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all!
She had talked her into love ; but, alasl shewas not so easily
to be talked out of iL The chaim of an object to occupy
the many vacancies of Harriet's mind was not to be talked
away. He might be superseded by another; he certainly
would, indeed; nothing could be clearer; even a Robert
Martin would have been sufficient ; but nothing else, she
feared, would cure her. Hairiet was one of those, who,
having once begun, would be always in love. And now,
poor girl, she was considerably worse & om this reappearance
of Mr. Elton— she was always having a glimpse of him some-
where or other, Emma saw him only once; but two or
three rimes every day Harriet was sure jtat to meet with
him, or juit to miss \i\m,jtist to hear his voice, or see his
*hoii]der,yt»^to have something occur to preserve him in
her fanc^, in all the fovouring warmth of surprise and con-
jecture; She was, moreover, perpetu^y heatingabout him;
byGoo^lc
i;€ Emma.
fot, excepting vrb en at Harlfield, she was always among thoee
who saw no fault in Mr. Elton, And found nothing so int^
resting u the discussion of his concerns; and every report,
therefore, every guess, — all that had already occurred, all
that might occur in the arrangement of hia a & irs, com-
prehending income, servants and fiimiture, — ^was continu-
ally in agitation around her. Her regard was receiving
strength by invariable praise of him, end her regrets kept
alive, and feelings irritUed, by ceaseless repetitions of Miss
Hawkins's happiness, and continual observation of how
much he seemed attached! — his air as he walked by the
house — ^the veiy sitting of his hat, being all in proof of how
much he was in lovet
Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no
pain to her friend, or reproach to herself in the waverings
of Harriets mind, Emma would have been amused by its
variations. Sometimes Mr. Elton predominated, sometimes
the Martins ; and each was occasionally useful as a check
to the other. Mr. Elton's engagement had been the cure of
the agitation of meeting Mr. Mardn. The unhappiness pro-
duced by the knowledge of that engagement had been a little
put aside by Elizabeth Martin's calling at Mrs. Goddard's a
few days afterwards. Harriet had not been at home ; but a
note luul been prepared and left for her, written in the very
style to touch, — a small mixture of reproach with a great
deal of kindness; and till Mr. Elton himself appeared, she
had been much occupied by it, continually pondering over
what could be done in return, and wishing to do more than
she dared to confess. But Mr. Elton, in person, had driven
away all such cares. While he staid, the Martins were for-
gotten ; and on the very morning of his setting off for Bath
agiun, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned,
judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin's vinL
How that visit was to be acknowledged, what would be
necessary, and irtiat might be safest, had been a point of
some doubtfiil consideration. Absolute neglect of the mother
and sisters, when invited to come, would be ingratitude.
It must not be; and yet the danger of a renewal of the
acquaintance!
Afto much thinking, Ae couid detetmine on nothing
L.,.n.P:lbyG00glc
Mmma. 157
better dian Harriets retarning the visit ; but in a way diat,
if they had nnderstanding, should convince them that it was
to be only a formal acquaintance. She meant to take hei in
the carriage, leave her at the Abbey-Mill, while she drove a
little & ither, and call for her again so soon as to allow no
time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the
past, and give the most decided proof of what degree of in-
timaqr was chosen for the future.
She could think of nothing better ; and thou^^ there was
something in it which her own heart could not approve —
stmething of ingratitude, merely glossed over — it must be
done, or what would become of Harriet t
CHAPTER V.
Shall heart bad Hairiet for visiting. Only half an hour
befcne her & iend called for her at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil
stars had led her to the very spot, where, at that moment, a
tnmk, directed to 77u Reo. Phii^ EUon^ WiHeHart, Batk,
was to be seen under the operation of being lifted into the
butcher's cart, which was to convey it to where the coaches
passed ; and every thing in this world, excepting that trunk
and the direction, was consequently a blank.
She went, however; and when they readied the fann,and
she was to be put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel
walk, which led between espalier apple-trees to the front
door, the sight of every thing which had given her so much
pleasure the autumn before, was beginning to revive a Uttle
local agitation ; and when they parted, Enuna observed her
to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which
determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed
quarter of an hour. She went on herself to give that
portion of tune to an old servant who was married, and
settled in DonwelL
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white
gate again ; and Miss Smith receiving her summons, waa
by Google
158 Emma.
with her without delay, tmd unattended by any alanning
young man. She came solitarily down the gravel walk — a
Miss Martin just appearing at the door, and parting with her
■eemingly with ceremonious civility.
Harriet could not veiy soon give an intelligible acccmnt
She was feeling too much ; but at last Emma collected from
her enough to understand the sort of meeting, and the sort
of pain it was creating. She had seen only Mrs. MMtin and
the two gills. They had received her doubtingly, if not
coolly; and nothing beyond the merest common-place had
been talked almost all the time — till just at last, when Mrs.
Martin's saying, all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith
was grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and
a warmer manner. In that very room she had been mea-
sured last September with her two friends. There were the
pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by the
window, ffe had done it They all seemed to remember
the day, the hour, the party, the occasion, — to feel the same
consciousness, the same regrets, — to be ready to return to
the same good understanding ; and they were just growir^
again like themselves {Hainet, as Emma must suspect, aa
ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,) when the
caniage re-appeared, and all was over. The s^e of the
visit, and the shortness of it^ were then felt to be decisive.
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had
thankfiilly passed six weeks not six months ago I Enuna
could not but picture it all, and feel how justly they might
resen^ how naturally Harriet must suffer. It was a bad
business. She would have given a great deal, or endured a
great deal, to have had the Martins in a higb^: rank < ^ hfe.
They were so deserving, thata/(// & higher should have been
enough J but as it was, how could she have done otherwise )
Impossible! She could not repent They must be separated ;
but there was a. great deal of pain in the process — so much
to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of a
little consolation, and resolved on going home by way of
Randalls to procure it Het mind was quite sick of Mr.
Elton and the Martins. The refreshment of Randalls was
abs < ^tely necessary,
It was a good scheme i but on driving to the door diey
byGoogle
Emma. i gg
heard that nather'master nor mistress was at home :'they
had both been out some time ; die man believed they were
gone to Hattfield.
'This is too bad,'cried Emma, as thejr turned away.
* Aod now we shall just miss them ; too provolcing : I do nut
know when I have been so disappoiuted.'And she leaned
back in the comer, to indulge her murmurs, or to reason
them away; probably a little of both — such being the
commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind Presently
the caniage stopt : she looked up ; it was stopt by Mr. and
Mrs. Weston, who were standing to speak to her. There
was instant pleasure in the sight of them, and still greater
pleasure was conveyed in sound; for Mr. Weston imme-
diately accosted her with, —
,'How d'ye do) — how d'ye dot We have been sitting
with your father — glad to sge him so well. Frank comes to-
morrow — I had a. letter this morning — we see him to-morrow
by dinner-time to a certainty — he is at Oxford to-day, and hu
comes for a whole fortnight ; I knew it would be so. If he
had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days :
I was always glad he did not come at Christmas ; now we
are going to have just the right weather for him, — fine, dry,
settled weather. We shall enjoy him completely ; every
thing has turned out exactly as we could wish.
There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoid-
ing the influence of such a happy face as Mr. Weston's,
confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of
his wife, fewer and quieter, but not less to the purpose. To
know that sfie thought his coming certain was enough to make
Emma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice in their
joy. It was a most delightful re-animation of exhausted
spirits. The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness of
what was coming ; and in the rapidity of half a moment's
thouj^t, she hoped Mr. Elton would now be talked of no
more.
Mr. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at
Enscombe, which allowed his son to answer for having an
entire fortnight at his command, as well as the route and the
method of his journey ; and she listened, and smiled, and
congratulated.
Google
l6o Emma.
'1 shall soon bring him over to Hartfield,'said he, at the
conclusion.
Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the ann at this
speech, from his vife.
'We had better move oo, Mr. Weston,'sud she ;'we are
detaining the girls.'
'Well, well, I am read; ;'and turning again to Emma,
'but yon must not be expecting such a vay fine j^oung
man ; you have only had Piy account, you luiow ; I dare
■ay he is really nothing extraordinary,'— though his own
sparkling eyes at the moment wa« speaking a very different
conviction.
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent,
and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing.
'Think of me to^norrow, my dear Emma, about four
o'clock,'nas Mrs. Weston's parting injunction; spoken with
some anxiety, and meant only for her.
'Four o'clock! — depend upon it he will be hereby three, "
was Mr. Weston's quick amendment; and so ended a most
satisfactory meeting. Emma's spirits were mounted quite
up to happiness; every thing wore a different air; James and
his horses seemed not half so sluggish as before. When she
looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at least must
soon be coming outj and when she turned round to Harriet
she saw something like a look of spring, a tender smile even
there.
'Wll Mr. Rank Churchill pass through Bath as well as
Oxford}'was a question, however, triiich did not augur
much.
But neitha geography not tranquillity could come all at
once; and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they
should both come in time.
The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs.
Weston's faithful pupil did notfoiget eitherat ten, oi eleven,
or twelve o'clock, that she was to think of her at four.
< My dear, dear, anxious friend,'said she, in mental
soliloquy, while walking down stairs from her own room,
•always over < areful for every body's comfort but your own:
I see you now in all your little fidgets, going again and again
into lus room, to be sure that all is right'The dock struck
,,,_f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. tr > i
twelve as she passed through the hall.'Tis twelve,— I shall
not forget to think of you for hours hence ; and, by tbia time
to-moTTOw, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of the
possibility of their all calling here. I am sure they will
bring him soon.'
She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen
sitting with her & ther, — Mr. Weston and his son. They had
been arrived only a few minutes; and Mr. Weston had
scarcely finished his explanation of Frank's being a day be-
fore his time, and her father was yet in the midst of his veiy
civil welcome and congratulations, when she a^^ared, to
have her share of surprise, introduction, and pleasure.
The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest,
was actually before her— he was presented to her; and she
did not think too much had been said in his praise; he was
a very good looking young man; height, air, address, all
were unexceptionable, and his countenance had a great deal
of the spirit and Hveliness of his Other's; he looked quick
and sensible. She felt immediately that she should like him;
and there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a readiness
to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to be
acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.
He had reached Randalls the evening b^ore. She was
pleased with the eagerness to anive which had made him
alter his plan, and travel earlier, later, and quicker, that
he might gain half a day.
'I told you yesterday,'cried Mr. Weston with exultation,
■^'I told you all that he would be here before the time
named. I remember what I used to do myself. One can-
not creep upon a journey: one cannot help getting on ^ter
than one has planned; and the pleasure of coming in upon
one's friends before the look-out begins is worth a great
deal more than any little exertion it needs.'
• It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it,'said
the young roan,'though there are not many houses that I
should presume on so far; but in coming home I felt I might
do any thing.'
The word home made bis bther look on him with fresh
complacency. £mma was directly sure that he knew how
to make himself agreeable; the conviction was strengthened
byGoogle
1 62 Emma.
by what followed. He was very much pleased widi Randalls,
thought it is a most admirably arranged house, would hardly
allow it even to be very small, admired the situation, the walk
to Highbuiy, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and pro-
fessed himself to have always felt the sort of interest in the
countiy, which none but one's own country g^ves, and the
greatest cariosity to visit it That he should never have
been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before passed sus-
piciously through Emma's biain; but still if it were a false-
hood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled. His
manner had no air of study or exaggeration. He did really
look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment
Their subjects, in general, were such as belong to an open-
ing acquaintance. On his side were the inquiries, —'Was
she a horse-woman 1 — Pleasant rides t — Pleasant walks) —
Had they a large neighbourhood )— Highbury, perhaps,
afforded society enough ? — There were several very pretty
houses in and about it — Balls — had they balls % — Was it a
musical sodetyl'
But when satisfied on all these points, and their acqu^nt-
ance proportionably advanced, he contrived to find an op-
portunity, while their two Others were engaged with each
other, of introducing his mother-in-law, and speaking of her
with so much handsome praise, so much wann admiration,
so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to his
father, and her very kind reception of himself, as was an
additional proof of his knowing how to please — and of his
certainly thinking it worth while to tiy to please her. He
did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to
be thoroughly deserved by Mrs. Weston; but, undoubtedly,
he could know very little of the matter. He understood
what would be welcome; he could be sure of little else.
'His Other's marriage,'he said,'had been the wisest
measure; every friend must rejoice in it; and the family
from whom he had received such a blessing must be e\'er
considered as having conferred the highest obligation on
him.*
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss
Taylor's merits, without seeming quite to fotget that, in the
common course of things, it was to be rather supposed tliat
by Google
Emmu.
•63
Miss Tajrlor had fonned Misa Woodhouse's chaiacter, than
Miss Woodhouse Miss Tayloi's. And at last, as if resolved
to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its
object^ he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth
and beauty (^her person.
'£3t^ast, agreeable mannera, I was prepared for,'said he;
'but I confess that, considering every thing, I had not ex-
pected more than a very tolerably well-looking woman of a
certun age; I did not know that I was to find a pretty
young woman is Mrs. Weston.'
'You carmot sec too much perfection in Mrs. Weston, for
uiy feelings,* siud Emma:'were you to guess her to be
dghtetn, I should listen with pleasure; but sAe would be ready
to quarrd with you for using such words. Don't let her
imagine lliat you have spoken of her aa a pretty young
'I hope I should know better,'he replied;'no, depend
upon it (with a gallant bow), that in addressing Mrs. Weston
I shall understand whom I might praise without any danger
of being thought extravagant in my terms.'
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what
might be expected from their knowing each other, which
had taken strong possession of her mind, had ever crossed
his; and wbe & er his compliments were to be considered as
marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance. She must see
more of him to understand his ways; at present, she only
felt they were agreeable.
She had no doubt of what Mr. Weston was often thinVmg
about His quick eye she detected again and again glanc-
mg towards them with a happy expression; and even, when
he might have determined not to look, she was confident
that he was often listening.
Her own father's perfect exemption from any thought of
the kind, the entire deficiency in him of all such sort of
penetration or suspidon, was a most comfortable drcum-
stance. H^ > pily, he was not Either from approving matri-
mony than from foreseeing it. Though always objecting to
every marriage that was arranged, he never suffered before-
hand firom the apprehension of any; it seemed as if he
could uot ildnk so ill of any two persons'understanding as to
by Google
suppose they meant to many till It were proved against them.
She blessed the favouring blindness. He could now, with-
out the drawback of a angle unpleasant surmise, without a
glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest, give
way to all his natural kind-heaited civilly in solicitous in-
quiries after Mi. Frank Churchill's acconunodation on his
journey, through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the
toad, and express veiy genuine unmixed anxiety to know
that he had certainly escaped catching cold, — which, how-
ever, he could not allow hun to feel quite assured of himself
till after another ni^t
A reasonable visit paid, Mr. Weston began to move.
'He must be going. He had business at the Crown about
his hay, and agreat many errands forMrs. Weston at F(Hd's;
but he need not huny any body else.'His son, too well bred
to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying, —
'As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the
opportunity of paying a visit, which must be pud sonke day
or other, and therefore may as well be paid now. I have
the honour of being acquainted with a neighbour of yours
(turning to Emma), a lady residing in or near Highbury ; a
family of the name of Fair & x. I shall have no difficulty, I
suppose, in finding the house ; though Fairfax, I believe, is
not the proper name, — I should rather say Barnes or Bates.
Do you know any fiunily of that name!'
'To be sure we do,'cried his father :'Mrs. Bates — we
passed her house — I saw Miss Bates at the window. True,
true, you are acquainted with Miss Fairfax; I remember you
knew her at Weymouth, and a fine girl she is. Call upon
her, by all means.'
'There is no necessity for my calling this morning,'said
the young man :'another day would do as well ; but there
was that degree of acquaintance at Weymouth which'
'Oh, go to-day, go to-day. Donotdderit What is right to
be done cannot be done too soon. And, besides, I must give
you a hint, Frank — any want of attention to her Ain should be
carefully avoided. You saw her with the Campbells, when
she was the equal of every body she mixed with, but here she
is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely enough to
live on. If you do not call early tt will be a slight.'
by Google
The son looked convinced.
'I have heard her speak of the aoiuaintance,'said Emma :
* she is a veiy el^ant young woman.'
He agreed to it, but with so quiet a'Yes,'as inclined her
almost to doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be
a very distinct sort of elegance for the fa^onable world, if
JaneFairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it
'If you were never particularly struck by her manners
before,'said she,'I think you will to-day. You will see her
to advantage ; see her and hear her — no, I am afraid you will
not hear hei at all, for she haa an aunt who never holds
her tongue.'
'You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fair & x, sir, are you V
said Mr. Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in
conversation ;'then give me leave to assure you, that
you will find her a very agreeable young lady. She is stay-
ing here on a visit to her grandmamma and aunt^ very
worthy people ; I have known them all my life. " Hiey will
be extremely glad to see you, I am sure ; and one of my
servants shall go with you to show you the way.'
'My dear sir, upon no account in the worldj my fathei
can direct me.'
'But your & thcT is not going so br; he is only going to
the Crown, quite on the other side of the street, and there
are a great many houses : you might be veiy much at a loss,
and it is a very dirty walk, unless you keep on the footpath ;
but my coachman can tell you where you had best cross the
street'
Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as
he could ; and his & ther gave his hearty support, by calling
OUt,*My good fiiend, this is quite unnecessary; Fmnkknows
a puddle of water when he sees it, and as to Mrs. Bates's, he
may get there from the Crown in a hop, stei^ and jump.'
" They are permitted to go alone ; and with a cordial nod
from one, and a gracefiil bow from the other, the two gentle-
men took leave. Emma remained very well pleased with
this banning of the acquaintance, and could now engage
to thii^ of them all at Randalls any hour of the day, with
fill! confidence in their comfort
byGoogle
CHAPTER VI.
Thi next morning broi^tit Mr. Frank Churchill again. He
came widt Mis. Weston, to whom and to Highbury be
seemed to take very cordially. He bad been sitting widi
her, it appeared, most companionably at home, till her usual
hour of exercise ; and on being desired to chcxise their walk,
immediately fixed on Highbury.'He did not doubt then
being very pleasant walks in eveiy direction, but if left to
him, he should always choose the same. Highbury, that
oiiy, cbeerfiil, happy-looking Highbury, would be his constant
attraction.'Highbury, with Mrs. Weston, stood for Hart
field ; and she trusted to its bearing the same constJucdon
wiUi him. They walked thither directly.
Eomia had hardly expected them : for Mr, Weston, who
had called in for half a minute, in order to hear that his son
was very handsome, knew nothing of their plans ; and it was
an agreeable surprise to her, therefore, to perceive them
walking up to die house together, arm in arm. She was
wanting to see him again; and especially to see him in
company with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom her
opinion of hint was to depend. If he were deficient there,
nothing should make amends for it But on seeing them
together, she became perfectly satisfied. It was not merely
in fine words or hyperbolical compliment diat he paid his
duty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his
whole manner to ha, — nolMng could more agreeably denote
his wish of considering her as a fiiend and securing her
affection. And there was time enough for Emma to form
a reasonable judgment, as their visit included all die rest of
the morning. They were all three walking about blether
for an hour or two, — first round the shrubberies of Haitfield,
and afterwards in Highbury. He was deUghted with every
thing; admired Hartfield sufficiently for Mr. Woodhonse*!
ear: and when their going fiuther was resolved on, confessed
his wish to be made acquainted with the whole village^
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
and found maoer of commendadon and interest much
oftener than Emma could have supposed.
Some of the objects of his cuiiosi^ spoke very amiable
feelings. He begged to be shown the house which bis father
had lived in so long, and which had been the home of his
father's fathei; and on lecollecting that an old woman, who
bad nursed him, was still living, walked in quest of her cot-
tage, from one end of the street to the other; and tbouj^ in
some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive
merit, they showed, altogether, a good will towards Kgbbuiy
in general, whidi must be very like a merit to those he was
with.
Emma watched, and decided, that with snch feelings as
were now shown it could not be fiurly supposed that he had
been ever vt^untaiily absenting himself: that he bad not been
acting a part, w m^ing a parade of insincere pioCesaons ;
and that Mr. Knightie^ certainly had not done lum justice.
Their fint pause was at the Ciown Inn, an inconsiderable
house, though the principal one of the sort, where a couple
of pair oi post-hcoses were kept, more for the convenience of
the neighbouiiiood than from any run on the road; and his
companions had not expected to be detained by any interest
excited there: but in passing it they gave the history ot the
large room visibly added. It had been built many years
ago for a ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been
in a particularly populous, dancing state, had been occasion-
ally used as such: but such brilliant days had long passed
away; and now the highest purpose for which it was ever
wanted was to accommodate a whist club established among
l^e gentlemen and half gentlemen of the place. He was
immediately interested. Its character as a ball-room caught
him ; and instead of passing on, he stopt for several minutes
at the two superior sashed windows which were open, to
look in and contemplate its capatnlides, and kment that
its original purpose should have ceased He saw no & ult
in the room; he would acknowledge none which they sug-
gested. No ; it was long enough, broad enough, handsome
enough, Itwouldholdthe very number for comfort Thcj
ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through the
winter. Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former
byGoogle
l68 Emma.
good old days of Ae room f She who could do any thing
in Highbury! The want of proper families in the place, and
the conviction that none beyond the place and its immediate
environs could be tempted to attend, were mentioned; but
he was not satisfied. He could not be persuaded that so
many good-looking houses as he saw around him could not
furnish numbers enough for such a meeting; and evm irtien
paiticulani were given and famihes described, he was still
unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixbtie
would be any thing, or that there would be the smallest
difficulty in every body's returning into their proper place the
next morning. He argued like a young man veiy mudl
bent on dancing ; and Emma was rather surprised to see the
constitution of the Weston prevail so deddedty against the
halnts of the Churchills. He seemed to have edl the life and
spirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclinations of his & ther,
and nothing of the pride or reserve ofEnscombe. Ofpridc^
indeed, tiiere was, perhaps, scarcely enough ; his indifference
to a confhsion of rank bordered too much on inel^ance of
mind. He could be no judge, however, of the evil he was
holding cheap. It was but an effusion of lively spirits.
At bst he was persuaded to move onfromthefront of the
Crown } and being now almost facing die bouse where the
Bates's lodged, & nma recollected his intended visit the day
before, and asked him if he had paid iL
'Yes, oh yes,'he replied,'I was just going to mentkn it
A very successful visit I saw all the three ladies j and felt
very much obliged to you for your preparatory hint If tiie
talking aunt had taken me quite by surprise, it most have
been the death of me. As it was, I was only betrayed into
pa)-ing a most unreasonable visit Ten minutes would have
been all that was necessary, perhaps all that was proper}
tmd I had told my father I should certainly be at home
before him, but there was no getting away, no pause; and
to my utter asUnishment, I found, when he (finding me no
where else) joined me there at last, that I had been actually
sitting with them very nearly three quarters of hour. Th«
good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before.'
'And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking I'
'111, very ill; — that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed
byGoogIc
Emma. 169
to look ill: but the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs,
Weston, is Itl Indies con never look ill; and, seriously.
Miss Fmi & x is naturally so pale, as almost always to give
the appearance of ill healt}^— a most depIoraUe want of
ciMnplexion.'
Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence
of Miss Faii & x's complodOR.'It was certainly never
brilliant, but she would not allow it to have a sickly hue in
general ; and there was a softness and deUcacy in her skin
which'gave peculiar elegance to the character of her face.'
He listened with all due deference ; acknowledged that he
had heard many people say the same : but yet he must con-
fess, that to him nothing could make amends for the want of
the fine glow of health. Where features were indifierent, a
fine complexion gave beauty to them all ; and where th^
were go(xl, the effect was — fortunately he need not attempt
to describe what the effect was.
'Well,'said Emma,'there is no disputing about taste.
At least you admire her, except her complexion.'
He shook his head and lau^ied.'Icannot separate Misi
Fairfax and her complexion.'
'Did you see her (rften at Weymoudi t Were you often
in the same society *'
At this moment they were approaching Ford's, and he
hastily exclaimed,'Ha I this must be the veiy shop that
every body attends every day of their lives, as my father
informs me. He comes to Highbury himself, be says, six.
days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford's;
If it be not inconvenient to you, jnay let us go in, that I
may prove myself to belong to the place, — to be a true
citizen of Hi^bury. I must buy something at Ford's. It
will be taking out my freedom. I dare say they sell gloves.'
'Oh yes, gloves and every thing. I do admire your pa^
riotism. You will be adored in Highbury. You were very
popular before you came, because you were Mr. Weston's
son; but lay out half-a-guinea at Ford's, and your popularity
will stand upon your own virtues.'
They went in; and while the sleek, well tied parcels of
'Men's Beavers'and'York Tan'were bringing down and
di^Iaying on the counter, he said, —'But I b^ your pardon^
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
1^0 Bmnta.
Mits Woodhouse, you were speaking tome, you were saying
•omething at the very momeiit of this burst of my amor^atria.
Do not let me lose it; I assure you the utmost stretch of
public £ime would not make me amends for the loss of any
happiness in private life.'
'I merely aaked, whether you had known much < rf Miss
Faii & t and her paity at Weymouth I'
* And now that I undentand your question, I most pro-
nounce it to be a very un & ir one. It is always the lady's
right to decide on the d^jiee of acquaintance. Miss Fair-
fax must already have given her account I shall not commit
myself by claiming more than she may choose to allow.'
'Upon my word, you answer as discreetly as she could do
herseUl But htr account of every thing leaves so much
to be guessed ; she is so very reserved, bo very unwilling
to give the least infbrmatiou about any body, that I really
think yon may say what you like of your acquaintance with
her.'
'May I, indeed t Then I will speak the tmtb, and no-
thing suits me so welL I met her Erequently at Weymouth.
I had known the Campbells a little in town ; and at Wey-
mouth we were veiy much in the same set CoL Campbell
is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,
warm-hearted woman. I like them all.'
'You know Miss Fair & x's situation in life, I conclude;
what she is destined to be.'
'Yes'— (ratter heaitatingly^'I believe I do.'
'You get upon delicate subjects, Emma,'said Mrs. Wes-
ton, smiling;'remember that I am hen. Mr. Frank
Churchill haitlly knows what to say when you speak of Miss
Fairfax's situation in life. I will move a little ^rther oS.'
'I certainly do forget to think of Jitr,'said Emma,'as
having ever been any thing but my friend and my dearest
friend.'
He looked as if he fiilly understood and honoured such a
sentiment
When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the
shop agun, —'Did you ever hear the young lady we were
■peaking of play I'said Frank Churdiill.
.'Ever hear her I'repeated & nsia,'You forget how
byGoogIc
Emma. i^t
much she belongs to Highbury. I have heaid her every
year oi our livca since we both began. She fdays cbaniy
ingly.'
'You think so, < lo you ! I wanted the opinion of some
one who could really Judge. She appeared to me to play
well, that is, with considerable taste, but I know nothing of
the matter nyseUl I am excessively fond of nmsic but
without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body's
performance. I have been used to hear hers admired ; and
I Kmember one proof of her being thou^^t to pUy well :
a man, avery musical man, and in love with another woman
— engaged to her— on the point of marriage — would yet
never aak that other woman to sit down to the instiument^ if
the lady in quesdon could sit down instead— never seemed
to like to hear one if he could hear the othn. That I thought;
in a man of known musical talent, was some proo£'
'Proof] indeed I'said Enmia, highly amused.'Mr. Dixon
is very musical, is he ! We shall know more about them
all, in half an hour, from you, than Miss Fairfax would have
vouchsafed in half a year.'
'Yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the peisons;
and I thought it a very strong proof/
'Certainly, very strong it was; to own the truth, a great
deal Btroagertban, if /had been Miss Campbell, would have
been at all agreeable to me. I could not excuse a man's
having more music than love— 4nore ear than eye — a more
acute sensibility to fine sounds than to my fedings. How
did Miss Campbell appear to like it !'
'It was her very particular Mend, yon know.'
'Poor comforti'said Emma, laughing.'One would rather
have a stranger preferred than one's very particular Mend:
with a stranger it might not recur again; but the misery of
having a very particular & iend always at hand, to do every-
thing better than one does one's self I Poor M13. Dixon 1
Well, I am glad she is gone to settle in Ireland.'
'You are right. It was not very flattering to Miss Camp-'
bell; but she really did not seem to feel it'
'So much the better, or so much the worse : I do not
know which. But be it sweetness, or be it stupidity in her
^-quickness of friendship, or dulness of feeling — there wu
byGoOgk'
172 Emma.
one piinOD, I think, who must have Mt it — Miss Fair & t her-
selt SA^ most have felt the impropei and dangerous dis-
tinction.'
'As to that — I do not'
'Oh, do not imagine that I expect an account of Misa
Fairfax's sensations from you, or from anj body else. They
are known to no human being, I guess, but lieiself ; but if
she continued to play whenever she was asked by Mr. Dixon,
one may guess what one chooses.*
'There appeared such a perfectly good understanding
among them all'he began rather quickly, but checking
himself^ added,'however, it is impossible for me to say on
what terms they really were — how it might all be briiind the
scenes. I can only say that there was smoothness out-
wardly. But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a
child, must be a better judge of her character, and of how
she is likely to conduct herself in critical rituations^ than I
can be.'
'I have known her from a child, undoubtedly: we have
been children and women together; and it is natural to sup*
pote that we should be intimate, — that we should have taken
to each other whenever she visited her friends. But we
never did I hardly know how it has happened; a littl^
perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which was prone
to take disgust towards a girl so idol^ed and SO cried up as
she always was, by her aunt and grandmother, and all their
set And then, her reserve; I never could attach myself to
any one so completely reserved'
'It is a most repulsive quality, indeed,'said he.'Oftentimes
very convenient, no doub^ but never pleasing. There is
safety in reserve, but no attraction. One cannot love a
reserved peisoa'
'Not till the reserve ceases towards one's self; and then
the attraction may be the greater. But I must be more in want
of a fnend, or an agreeable companion, than 1 have yet been,
'to take the trouble of conquering any body's reserve to pro-
cure one. Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite
out of the question. I have no reason to think ill of her —
not the least — except that such extreme and perpetual
cautiousness of word and manner, such a dread of giving a
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
distmct idea about any body, is apt to suggest suapidons
of there being something to conceal'
He perfectly agreed with her; and after walking together
■o long, and thinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so
well acquainted with him, that she could hardly believe it to
be only th«r second meetiog. He was not exactly what she
had expected; less of the man of the world in some of his
notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune, therefore better
than she had expected. His ideas seemed more moderate
— his feelings wanner. She was particularly struck by his
manner of considering Mr. Elton's house, which, as well as
the church, he would go and look at, and would not join
them in finding much fault with. No, he could not believe
it a bad house; not such a house as a man was to be pitied
for having. If it were to be shared with the woman he loved,
he could not think any roan to be pitied for having that house.
There must be ample room in it for eveiy real comfort.
The man must be a blockhead who wanted more.
Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he
was talking about Used only to a large house himself, and
without ever thinking how many advantages and accom-
modations were attached to its size, he could be no judge of
the privadons inevitably belonging to a small one. But
Emma, in her own mind, determined that he did know what
he was talking about, and that he showed a very amiable
inclinadon to settle early in life, and to many, from worthy
motives. He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic
peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper's room, or a bad
butler's pantry; but no doubt he did perfectly feel that En-
scombe could not make him happy, and that whenever he
were attached, he would willingly give up much of wealth to
be allowed an eariy establishment
CHAPTER VH.
Ehua's very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little
shaken the following day, by hearing that he was gone off
to London, merely to have bis hair cut A sudden freak
by Google
174 Emma.
Eeemed to have seized him at break & st, and he had sent fn
a chaise and set off, intending to return to dinner, but with
no more impoitaot view that appeared than having bis hair
cut There was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteec
miles twice over on such an etrand; but there was an air o(
fopperjr and nonsense in it which she a)uld not a[^rove. It
did not accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation
in expense, or even the unselfish wannth of heart which she
had believed herself to discern in him yesterday. Vanity,
extravagance, love of change, restlessness of temper, which
must be doing somethings good or bad; heedlessness aa
to the pleasure of his £ither and Mrs. Weston, indifference as
to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these changes. His father only called him a
coxcomb, and thought it a very good story; but that Mrs.
Weston did not like it, was clear enough, by her passing it
over as quickly as possible, and making no other comment
tlian that'all young people would have their little whims.'
With the exception of this litdc blot, Emma found that
his visit hitherto had given her friend only good -ideas of
him. Mrs. Weston was very ready to say how attentive and
pleasant a companion he made himself, — how much she saw
to like in his disposition altogether. He appeared to have a
very open temper, — certainly a very cheerful and lively one;
she cinild observe nothing wrong in his notions, a great deal
decidedly right; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard,
was fond of talking of him; said he would be the best man
in the world if he were left to himself; and though there was
no being attached to the aunt, he acknowledged her kind-
ness with gratitude, and seemed to mean always to speak of
her with respect This was all very promising; and, but for
such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was
nothing to denote him unworthy of the distinguished honour
which her imagination had given him; the honour, if not
of being really in love with her, of being at least vei; near it,
and saved only by her own indifference— (for still her resolu-
tion held of never marrying) — the honour, in short, of being
marked out for her by all their joint acquaintance.
Mi; Weston, on lus side, added a virtue to the account
which must have some weight He gave her to understand
L.,,-,.p:ibyGoo < ^le
Emma. 1 75
that T^ank admired ber extremely — thought her very beaud-
(ill and very cbarming ; and with so much to be said for him
altogether, she found she must not judge him harshly: — as
Mrs. Weston observed,'all young people would have their
little whims.'
There was one person among his new acquaintance in
Surrey not so leniently disposed. In general he was judged,
throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury, with
great candour; liberal allowanced were made for the little
excesses of such a handsome young man, — one who smiled so
often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit among
them not to be softened, ftom its power of censure, by bows
or smiles, — Mr. Knightley. The circumstance was told hiro
at Haitfield: for the moment^ he was silent; but £nuna heard
him almost immediately afterwards say to himself^ over a
newspaper he held in his hand,'Hum! just the trifling, silly
fellow I took him for.'She had half a mind to resent; but
an instant's observation convinced her that it was really saiil
only to relieve his own feelings, and not meant to provoke;
and therefore she let it pass.
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings,
Mr. and Mrs. Weston's visit this morning was in another re-
spect particularly opportune. Something occurred while they
were at Hartfield to make Emma want their advice ; and, which
was still more lucky, she wanted exactly the advice they gave.
This was the occurrence : — The Coles had been settled
some years in Highbury, and were very good sort of people,
friendly, liberal, and unpretending ; but, on the other hand,
they were of low origin, in trade, and only moderately genteel.
On their first coming into the country, they hod lived in pro-
portion to their income, quietly, keeping Hltle company, and
that little un expensively; but the last year or two liad brought
them a considerable increase of means — the house in town
had yielded greater profits, and fortune in general had smiled
on them. With their wealth, their views increased ; their
want of a larger house, their inclination for more company.
They added to their house, to their number of servants, to
th^ expenses of every sort : and by this time were, in fortune
and style cS living, second only to the family at Haitfield.
Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared
by Google
lyO Emma.
every body for theii keeping dinner-company; and a few
parties, chiefly among the single men, had already taker,
place. The regular and best families Emma could hardly
suppose they would presume to invite, — neither Donwell,
nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. Nothing should tempt Aer to
go, if they did ; and she regretted that her Other's known
habits would be giving her refiisal less meaning than she
could wish. The Coles were very respectable in thai way,
but they ought to be taught that it was not for them to ax-
mnge the terms on which the superior families would visit
them. This lesson, she very much feared, they would receive
only from herself; she had little hope of Mr. Knightley, none
of Mr. Weston.
But she had made up her mind how to meet this presump-
tion so many weeks before it appeared, that when the insult
came at last, it found her very differently affected. Donwell
and Randalls had received their invitation, and none had
come for her fether and herself; and Mrs. Weston's ac-
counting for it with'I suppose they will not take the liberty
with you ; they know you do not dine out,'was not quite
Euflicient. She felt that she should like to have had the
power of refusal ; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to
be assembled there, consisting precisely of those whose
society (ras dearest to her, occurred again and again, she did
not know that she might not liave been tempted to accept
Harriet was to be there in the evening and the Bateses.
They had been speaking of it as they walked about High-
bury the day before, and Frank Churchill had most earnestly
lamented her absence. Might not the evening end in a
< lance I had been a. question of his. The bare possibili^ of
it acted as a further irritation on her spirits ; and her being
left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission to be
intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort
It was the arrival of this very invitation, while the Westons
were at Hartfield, which made their presence so acceptable;
for though her first remark on reading it was that'of course
it must be dedined,'she so very soon proceeded to ask tfaem
what they advised her to do, that their advice for her going
was most prompt and successftiL
She owned that, considering every tiling, she was not ab-
by Google
Emma. 1 77
solutely without inclination for the party. The Coles ex-
pressed themselves so properly — there was so much real
attention in the manner of it — so much consideration for her
fitther.'They would have solicited the honour earlier, but
had been waiting the arrival of a folding screen from Lou*
don, irtiich they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any
dmu^t of air, and therefore induce him the more readily to
give them the honour of his company.'Upon the whole,
she was very persuadable; and it being briefly settled among
themselves how it mi^t be done without ne^ecting his
comfort, — how certainly Mie. Goddard, if not Mrs. Bates,
might be depended on for bearing him company, — Mr.
Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his
dauf^ter's going out to dinner on a day now near at hand,
and spending the whole evening away from him. As for
hii going, Emma did not wish him to think it possible ;
the hours would be too late, and the party too numerous.
He was soon pretty well resigned.
'I am not fond of dinner-visiting,'said he ;'I never was.
No more is Emma. I^te hours do not agree with us. I
am sorry Mr. and Mrs. Cole should have done it I think it
would be much better if they would come in one afternoon
next summer, and take their tea with us ; take us in their
afternoon walk, which they might do, as our hours arc so
reasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp
of the evening. The dews of a summer evening are what I
would not expose any body ta However, as they are so
very desirous to have dear Emma dine with them, and as
yon will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to take care
of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be
what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy.'Then
turning to Mrs. Weston with a look of gentle reproach, —
* Ah, Miss Taylor, if you had not married, you would have
staid at home with me.'
'Well, sir,'cried Mr. Weston,'as I took Miss Tayi(»
away, it is incumbent on me to supply her place, if I
can ; and I will step to Mrs. Goddard in a moment, if yoa
wish it'
But the idea of any thing to be done in a momaU was
mcreasirg, not lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation. The
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gk'
t;;8 Efttma.
ladies knew better how to allay it Mr. Weston must be quiet,
itnd every thing deiiberatety ananged.
With tiiis treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed
enough for talking as usuai'He should be happy to see
Mrs. Goddard. He had a great regard for Mrs. Goddard ;
and Emma should wiite a line and invite her. James could
take the note. But first of all, there must be an answer
written to Mrs. Cole.'
'You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible.
You will say that I am quite aninvalid, and go ooiriiere, ood
therefore must decline their obliging invitation; beginsiug
widi my eomplimatis, of course. But you will do every thing
right I need not tell you what is to be done. We must
remember to let James know that the carriage will be wanted
un Tuesday. I shall have no fears for you with him^ Wc
have never been there above once since the new approach
was made ; but still I have no doubt that James will take
you very safely : and when you get there, you must tell him
at what time you would have him come for you i^ain; and
you had better name an early hour. You will not like stay-
ing late. You will get very tired when tea is over.'
'But you would not wish me to come away before I am
tired, papa 1'
'Ob no, my love; but you will soon be tired. There will
be a great many people talking at once. Yon will iwt Uke
the noise.'
'But, my dear sir,'cried Mr. Weston, * if Emma comes
away early, it will be breaking up the party.'
'And no great harm if it does,'said Mr. Woodhouse.
'The sooner every party breaks up the bettCT.'
'But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles,
Emma's going away directly aflei tea might be giving offen«-
They are good-natured people, and think little of their own
claims; but still they must feel that any body's hurrying
away is no great complimmt ; and Miss Woodhoase's doing
it would be more thought of than any other person's in the
room. You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the
Coles, I am sure, sir ; friendly, good sort of people as ever
lived, and who have been your neighbours these ten years.'
'No, upon no account in the World. Mr. Weston, 1 am
by Google
Mmma.
179
much obliged to yon for reminding me. I should be ex-
tremely Sony to be giving them any pain. I know what
worthy people they are. Pcny tells me that Mr. Cole nevet
touches malt liquor. You would not think it to look at him,
but he is bilious-— Mr. Cole is ve;y bilious. No, I would not
be the moans of giwng them any pain. My dear Emma, we
must consider this. I am sure^ rather than ran the risk of
hnrtii^ Mr. and Mts. Cole, you would stay a little longer
than you might wish. You will not regard being tired.
YoU'Witl be pwfectly safe, you know, among your friends.'
'Oh yes, yaipa. I have no fears at all for myself; and 1
should have do scraples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but
on your acoiunt I am only afiaid of your sitting up for
me. I am not afraid of your not being exceedingly com-
fortable with Mis. Goddard. She loves piquet, you luiow^
but when she is gone borne, I am afraid you will be sitting
up by yourseU) instead of going to bed at your usual time;
and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort
YDU.must promise me not to sit up.'
He did, on the condition of some prtmiises on her side:
such as tba^ if she came home cold, she would be sure to
warm herself thoroughly; if hungry, that she would take some-
thing to eat; that her own maid should sit up for her; and
that- Serle and the butler should see that every thing were
safe in the house as usual.
CHAPTER VIII.
Frank Churchill came back agun; and if he kept his
father's dinsjei watdiig it was not known at Haitfield; for
Mrs. Weston was too anxious for his being a favourite with
Mr. Woodhouse, to betray any imperfection which could be
concealed.
He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at him-
self with a veiy good grace, but without seeming really at all
ashamed of what he had done. He had no reason to wish
his hail longer to conceal any confusion of face; no reason to
wish the money unspent to improve his spirits. He waa
iM,..dbyG00gle
i8o Emma.
quite as undaunted and as lively as ever; and, oAsi seeing
him, Emma thus moralised to herself: —
'I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly
silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible
people in an impudent way. Wickedness is always wickedness,
but folly is not always folly. It depends upon the character of
those who handle it. Mr. Kni^tley, he is w^ a trifling, silly
young man. If he were, he would have done this differendy.
He would either have gloried in the achievement or been
ashamed of it There would have been either the ostenU-
tioQ of a coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too weak to
defend its own vanities. No, I am perfectly sure that he is
not trifling or silly.'
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him
again, and for a longer time than hitherto; e^ judging of his
general manners, and, by inference, of the meaning of his
manners towards herself; of guessing how soon it might be
necessary for her to throw coldness into her air; and of key-
ing what the observations of all those might be, who were
now seeing them together for the first time.
She meant to be very happy, in L-pite of the scene being
laid at Mr. Cole's; and without being able to forget that
among the filings of Mr. £Uton, even in the days of his
favour, none had disturbed her more than his propensi^ to
dine with Mr. Cole.
Her father's comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Bates as
well as Mrs. Goddard being able to come; and her last pleas-
ing duty, before she lefl the house, was to pay her respects
to them as they sat together aAer dinner; and while her
& tber was fondly noticing the beauty of her dress, to make
the two ladies all the amends in her power, by helping them
to large sHces of cake and fiiU glasses of wine, for whatever
unwilling self denial his care of their constitution might have
obliged them to practise during the meal. She had provided
a plentiful dinner for them; she wished she could know that
they had been allowed to eat it
She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and was
pleased to see that it was Mr. Knightley*s; for Mr. Knightley
keeping no horses, having little spare money and a great
deal of health, activity, and independence, was too apt, ia
by Google
Emma. 18 1
Emma's opinion, to get about as he could, and not use his
carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey.
She had an oppottunity now of speaking her approbation
while wann from her heait, for he stopped to hand her out
'This is coming as you should do,'said she;'like a gentle-
man. I am quite glad to see you.'
He thanked her, observing,'How lucky that we should
arrive at the same moment; for, if we had met first in the
dramng-room, I doubt whether you would have discerned
me to be more of a gentleman than usual. You might not
have distinguished how I came by my look or manner.'
'Yes I should; I am sure I should. There is always a
look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a wajr
which they know to be beneath them. You think you canr
it off very well, I dare say; but with you it is a sort of bravado,
an air of affected unconcern: I always observe it whenever I
meet you under those circumstances. Now you have noflung
to try for. You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed.
You are not striving to look taller than any body else. New
I shall really be very happy to walk into the same room with
you.'
'Nonsensical girl !'was his r^ly, but not at all in anger.
Emma had as much reason to b« satisfied with the rest of
lite party as with Mr. Knightley. She was received wift a
cordial respect which could not but please, and given all the
consequence she could wish for. When the Westons arrived,
the kindest looks of love, the strongest of admiration, were
for her, from both husband and wife: the son approached her
with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his pwcoliar
object, and at dinner she found him seated by her; and, as
she fiimly beUeved, not without some dexterity on his side.
The party was tatherla^e, as it included one other family,
^a proper unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles
had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance, —
and the male part of Mr. Cox's family, the lawyer of High-
bury. The less worthy females were to come in the evening,
with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith ; but already,
at dinner, they were too numerous for any subject of con-
versation to be general ; and, while politics and Mr. Elton
were talked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her attei^
by Google
1 82 Emma.
tion to the pleasantness of her neighbour. The first remote
sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend was the name
of Jane Fairfax. Mrs. Cole seemed to be relating something
of her that was expected to be very interesting. She listened,
and found it well worth listening to. That very dear parted
Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply. Mis. Cole
was telling that she had been calling on Miss Bates; and, as
soon as she entered the room, had been struck by die a^t
of a piano-forte, a very elegant looking instrument; bot a
grand, but a laige-«iied square piano-fbrte : and the substance
of the story, the end of all the dialt^e which ensued of sur >
prise, and inquiry, and congratulations on her side, and ex-
planations on Miss Bates's, was,'that this {sano-forte had
arrivedfrom Broadwood's the day before, to the great astoniah-
uient of both aunt and niece, entirely unexpected ; that, at
first, by Miss Bates's account, Jane herself was quite at a loai%
quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered
it; but now they were both perfectly satisfied that it could
be from only one qnarter,— of course it must be fixim
Colonel CampbdL
'One can suppose nothing else,'added Mia. Cole;'and
I was only surprised that there could ever have been a doubt.
But 3ane, it seems, had a letter from them very latdy, and
not a word was said about it She knows their ways best,
but I should not consider their silence as any leasni fw feeir
not meaning to make Hie present Tbcy might dtoose to
surprise her.'
Mrs. Cole had many to agree with her; every Ixxfy iriio
spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it most
cmne from Colonel Campbell, and equally rejoiced diatsadi
a present had been made; and there were enough ready to
speak to allow Emma to think her own way, and still listen
to Mra. -Cole.
'I dedare, I do not know when I have heard any tlung
that has given me more satisfaction. It always has quite
hurt me that Jane Fair & x, vho plays so delisJufiilty, should
not have an instrument It seemed quite a shame, espe-
cially considering how many houses there are where fine in-
stmments are absolutely thrown away. This is like giving
Qonelvcs a slap, to be sore; and it was but yesterday I waa
,,_-:! byGoogle
telling Mr. Cole I really was ashamed to look at our new
grand piano-forte in the drawing-room, while I do not know
one note from another, and our little giils, who are but just
beginning pertiaps may never make any thing of it; and there
is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not any
thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifiilest
old spinet in the world, to amuse herself with. I was saying
this to Mr. Cole but yesterday, and he quite agreed with me;
only he is so particularly fond of music that he could not
help indulging himself in the purchase, hoping that some of
our good neighbours might be so obliging occasionally to
put it to a better use than we can; and that really is the
reason why the instnnnent was bought— or else I am sure
we ou^t to be ashamed of it We are in great hopes that
Miss Woodhouie may be prevailed with to try it this evening.'
Miss WoodhoQse made the proper acquiescence ; and
finding that nothing more was to be entrapped from any
communication of Mrs. Cole's^ turned to Frank ChurdiilL
'Why do you smile t'said she.
'Nay, why do yon t'
'Me t I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Camp-
bell's b«ng BO rich and so liberal It is a handsome pre-
sent'
-'Very.'
'I rather wonder that it was never made before.'
'Perhaps Miss Fair & x has nevo- been staying here so long
before.'
'Or that he did not give her the use of their own instru-
ment, which must now be shut up in London, untouched by
any body.'
* That is a grand piano-forte, and he might think it too
large for Mrs. Bates's house.'
'You may say what you choose, but your countenance
testifies that your tiei^Ats on this subject are vety much like
mine.'
'I do not know. I rather believe you are giving me more
credit for acuteness than I deserve. I smile because you
smile, and sball'probably suspect whatever I find you suspect;
but at present I do not see what there is to question. If
Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can be f'
~0
byGoogk'
184 Emma.
'What do you say to Mrs. Dixon t'
'Mis. Dixon! very true, indeed I had not thou^^t of
Mrs. Dixon. She must know, as well as her father, how ac-
ceptable an instrument would be; and perhaps tbe mode of
it, the mystery, the surprise, is more like a young woman't
scheme than an elderly man's. It is Mrs. Dixon, I dare saj.
I told you that your suspicions would guide mine.'
'If so, you must extend your suspicions, and comprehend
Mr. Dixon in them.'
'Mr. Dixon I very welL Yes, I immediately perceive that
it must be the joint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon. We
were speaking the other day, you know, of his being so warm
an admirer of her peifomiance.'
'Yes, and what you told me on that head confirmed an
idea which I had entertained before. I do not mean to re-
ject upon the good intentions of either Mr. Dixon or Miss
Fair & x; but I cannot help suspecting either that, after mak-
ing his proposals to her & iend, he had the misfortune to & I1
in lore with her, or that he became conscious of a little
attachment on her side. One might guess twenty things
without guessing exactly the right; but I am sure there must
be a particular cause for her choosing to come to Highbury,
instead of going with the Campbells to Ireland. Here, she
must be leading a life of privation and penance; diere, il
would have been all enjoyment As to the pretence of try-
ing her native air, I look upon that as a mere excuse. In
the summer it might have passed; but what can any body's
native ur do for them in the months of January, Febmaiy,
and March 1 Good fires and carriages would be much more
to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and I dare
say in hers. I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions,
though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I
honesdy tell you what they are.'
'And, upon my word, they have an air of great probabili^.
Mr. Dixon's preference of her music to her friend's I can
answer for being very decided.'
'And then, he saved her life. Did you ever hear of thati
A water party ; and by some accident she was falling ovet < -
board. He caught her.'
'He did. I waa there — one of the party.'
,,,_f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 1 85
'Were you really 1 Well ! But you observed nothing, of
course, for it seems to be a new idea to you. If I had been
tbere, I think I should have made some discoveries.'
'I dare say you would ; but I, simple I, saw nothing but
the & ct, that Mias Fairfax was neaiiy dashed from the vessel,
and that Mr. Dixon cau^t her — it was the work of a moment
And though the consequent shock and alarm were vciy
great, and much mote durable — indeed I believe it was half
an hour before any of us were comfortable again — yet that
was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety
to be obserrable. I do not mean to say, however, that you
might not have made discoveries.'
The conversation was here interrupted. They irere called
on to share in the awkwardness of a rather long interval be-
tween the courses, and oUiged to be as formal and as
orderly as the othos; but when Uie table was again safely
covered, when every comer dish was placed exactly right,
and occupation and ease were generally restored, Emma
said, —
'The arrival of this piano-forte is decisive with me. I
wanted to know a litUe more, and this tells me quite enough-
Depend upon it, we shall soon bear that it is a present fixMn
Mr, and Mrs. Dixon.'
'And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knoiriedge
of it, we must conclude it to come from the Campbells.'
'No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. Miss Fair-
fax knows it is not from the Campbells, or they would have
been guessed at first She would not have been puEzled,
had she dared fix on them. I may not have convinced you,
perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr. Dixon
is a principal in the business.'
'Indeed you injure me if you supposed me unconvinced.
Your reasonings carry my judgment along with them entirely.
At first, iridic I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Camp-
bell was the giver, I saw it only as a paternal kindness, and
thought it the most natural thing in die world. But when
you mentioned Mrs. Dixon, I felt how much more pro-
bable that it should be the tribute of warm female friend,
ship. And nofw I can see it in no other light than as an
offering of love.'
J,g,l,z6:lbyG00gk'
There was no occa^oa to press th« matter gutber. The
conviction seemed real; he looked as if he felt it Sheiaid
DO more,— -other subjects took thdr turn ; and the rc & t of the
dinner passed avay ; the dessert succeeded ; the diildicn
came in, and were talked to and admired amid tbeusualnte
of conveisatbo; a few clever things said, a few downright
ahy, but by much the laiger proportion neither the one nor
the other — nothing worse than every-day remark^ dull repe-
titions, old news, and heavy jokes.
The ladies had not been long in the drawingrnxKn before
the other ladies, in their different divisions, arrived. Emma
watched tlie atirie of her own particuUr little friend ; and if
she could not exult in her dignity and grace, abe could not
only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner,
but could most heartily rejoice in that li^bt, cheeriiil, nosen-
timental disposition which allowed her so many alleviationa
of pleasure in the midst of the pangs of dia^pointed affection.
There she sat — and iriio would have guessed how many
tears she had been lately shedding t To be in company,
nicely dressed herself, and seeing others . nicdy dressed, to
sit and smile and look pretty, and say nothing was enough
for the happiness of the [sejait hour. Jane Faiibz did look
and move superior; but Emma suspected she mig^t have
been glad to change feelings •m & Hairiet,— -^raiy glad to
have purchased the mortification of having bned — ye^ of
having loved even Mr. £ltoninvaiD«— by thesunendnof all
As dangerous pleasure .of knowing herself beloved by the
husband of her friend.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Enunashould
approach her. She did not wish to qxak of the pianoforte,
she felt too much in the secret heisdf| to think the appear-
ance of curiosity or interest fair, and therefore purposely
kept at a distance ; but by the othen, the subject was almost
immediately introduced, and she saw the blnsh of conacions-
ness with which congratulations were received, the Mush of
guilt which accompanied the. name of'my excellent friend
Colonel Campbell.'
Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musics], was particulariy
tnteiested by the dicamstance^ and Emma could not help
being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subfcct ;
by Google

i8r
and having so much to ask and to say aa to tone, touch, and
pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little
about it as possibly which she plainly read in the bit he-
roine's countenance.
They vere soon joined by some of die gentlemen; and
the very firat of the early was Frank ChurdiilL In he
walked, the first and the handsomest; and after paying his
compliments tn passaid to Miss Bates and-htt niece, made
his way direcdy to the opposite side of the circle, where sat
Miss Woodhousc; and till he could find a scat by her, would
not sit at alL Emma divined triiat every body present must
be thinking;. She was his object, and ereiy body must per-
ceive i'. Sbt introduced him to her iriend Miss Smith,
and, at convenimt biomenls afterwards, heard vhat each
thought of the odier.'He had never seen so lovely a fitce^
and was delighted with her fiakjt^'And she;—'only to be
sure it was paying him too great a compHment, but she did
think there were some looks a litde like Mr. Elton.'Eioma
restrained her indignation, and only turned from ber in
^ence.
Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentle-
man on first glandng tomrds Miss Fairfax ; but it was most
prudent to avoid speech. He told her that he had been
impadent to leave the dining room— hated sitting long-
was always the first to move when he could — that his & theT,
Mr. Knighdey, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left very busy
over palish business — that as long as he bad staid, however,
it had been pleasant enough, as he found them in gennal
a set erf genUemen-like, sensible men; and spoke so hand-
Eoroely of Highbuiy altogedier— ^thought it so abundant in
agreeable families — that Emma began to feel she had
been used to des{Hse the place rather too much. She
questioned him as to the society in Yoricshire, the extent of
the neighbouilKKid about Enscoobe, and the sort; and
could make oat from his answers that,'as iar as Ekiscombe
was concerned, there was veiy litde going on; that i^eir
visitiogs were among a range of great ^milies, none veiy
near; and that even when days were fixed, and invitations
accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs. Churchill were not
in health or spirits for going; that they made a point of visit
by Google
lS8 Emma.
ing no fresh person; and that, though he had his separate
engagements, it was not without difficulty, without consider-
able address ai lima, that he could get away, tx introduce
an acquaintance for a night
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that High-
bury, taken in its best, might reasonably please a young man
who had more retirement at home than he liked. His impor-
tance at Enscombe was very evident He did not boast,
but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded his
aunt where his uncle could do nothing; and on her lauding
and noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting one
or two points) he could with time persuade her to any thing.
One of those points on which his influence failed he then
mentioned. He had wanted very much to go abroad — had
been very eager indeed to be allowed to travel — ^but she
would not hear of it This had happened the year before.
yVinc, he said, he was beginning to have no lotigcr the same
wish.
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention,
Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his & ther.
'I have made a most wretched discovery,'said he, after
a short pause.'I have been here a week to-morrow — half
ray time, I never knew days fly so fast A week to-
morrow! — and I have hardly begun to enjoy myself. But
just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others. I liate
the recollection.'
'Perhaps you may now b^n to r^ret that you spent one
whole day, out of so few, in having your hair cut'
'No,'said he, smiling,'that is no subject of regret at all.
I have DO pleasure in seei:^ myfiiends, unless I can believe
myself fit to be seen.'
The rest of the gentlemen bemg now in the room, Emma
found herself obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and
listen to Mr. Cole. When Mr. Cole had moved away, and
her attention could be restored as before, she saw Frank
Churchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fair & x,
who was sitting exactly opposite.
'What is the matter!'said sh &
He started.'Thank you for rousing me,'he replied.'I
believe I have been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has
u,a,i,z6:ibyGoO < ^le
done her hair in so odd a way — so veiy odd a way—
cannot keep my eyes from her. I never saw any thing so
cutrie 1 Those curls ! This must be a fancy of her own. I
see nobody else looking like her. I must go and ask her
whether it is an Irish fashion. Shall 1 T— Yes, I will— I de-
clare I will — and you shall see how she takes it; — whether
she colours.'
He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him
standing before Miss Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to
its effect on the young lady, as he had improvidently placed
himself exactly between them, exactly in front of Miss Fair-
fax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs.
Weston.
'This is the luxury of a large party,'said she:'one can get
near every body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I
am longing to talk to you. I have been making discoveries
and forming plans, just like yourself, and I must tell them
while the idea is fresh. Do you know how Miss Bates and
her niece came here 1'
'How! — They were invited, were not theyt'
'Oh yes — but how they were conveyed hither) — the
manner of their coming )'
'They walked, I conclude. How else could they come )'
'Very true. Well, a httle while ago it occurred to me how
very sad it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home
again, late at night, and cold as the nights are now. And as
I looked at her, though I never saw her appear to more ad-
vantage, it struck me that she was heated, and would there-
fore be particularly liable to take cold. Poor girll I could
not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston came into
the room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about the
carriage. You may guess how readily he came into my wishes;
and having his approbation, I made ray way directly to Miss
Bates, to assure her that the carriage would be at her service
before it took us home ; for I thought it would be makirtg
her comfortable at once. Good soul! she was as grateful as
possible, you may be sure. " Nobody was ever so fortunate
as herself ! " — but with many, many thanks,— " there was no
occastOQ to trouble us, Sat Mr. Knightley's carriage had
,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
igo Emma.
brought, and was to take them home again. " I vas quite sur-
piiscd; — veiy glad, I am surej but really quite surprised-
Such a veiy kind attention — and so thoughtful an attention!
— the sort of thing that so few men would think of. And, in
short, from knowing his usual ways, I am voy much inclined
to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was
used at alL I do suspect he would not have had a pair of
horses for himself and that it was only as an excuse for as-
sisting them.'
'Very likely,'said Emma,'nothing more likely. I know
no man more likely than Mr. Knighdey to do the sort of
thing — to do any thing really good-natured, useAil, conside-
rate, or benevoluit He is not a gallant man, but he is a very
humane one; and this, considering Jane Fairfax's ill health,
would appear a case of humanity to him , — and for an act of
unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix
on more than on Mr. Knighdey. I know he had hoises to-
day—for we arrived together; and I laughed at him about it,
but he said not a word that could betray.'
'Well,'said Mrs. Weston, smiling,'you give him credit
for more simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance
than I do; for while Miss Bates was speaking a suspicion
darted into my head, and I have never been able to get
it out a^in. The more I think of it, the more probable
it i^pears. In short, I have made a match between Mr.
Knighdey and Jane Fairfax. See the consequence of keep-
ing you company! — What do ydu say to itt'
'Mr. Knightley and Jane Faii^I'exclaimed Enuna.
'Dear Mrs. Weston, how could yon think of such a thing }
— Mr. Knightleyl — Mi. Knightley must not many! — You
would not have little Henry cut out from Donwelll — Oh
no, no, — Henry must have DonwelL I cannot at all con-
sent to Mr. Kiughtle/s marrying ; and I am sure it is not at
all likely. I am amazed that you should think of such a thing.'
'My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of
it I do not want the match — I do not want to injure dear
little Henry — but the idea has been given me by circum-
stances; and if Mr. Knighdey really wished to many, you
would not have him refrain on Henry's account, a boy of six
years old, who knows nothing of the matter!'
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
'Yea, I would. I could not bear to hare Henry snp-
ptaoted. Mr. Enightley many I No, I have never had sach
an idea, and I cannot adopt it now. And Jane Fairfax, too,
o€ all women 1'
'Nay, she has always been a fiist favourite with him as
you very well know.'
'But die imprudence ot such a match 1'
'I am not speaking ot its prudence — merely its proba-
Wlity. "
'I see no probabilit|r in it, unless you have any better
fimndation than what you mention. His good-nature, his
humanity, as I tell you, would be quite enough to account for
the horses. He has a great regard for the Batcses, you know,
independent of Jane Fair & x — and is always glad to show
them attention. My dear Mrs. Weston, do not take to
match-making. You do it very iH Jane Faiifaz mistress
of the Abbey! Oh no, no; — every feding revolts. For his
own sake, I would not have htm do so mad a tiling.'
'Imprudent, if yon please — but not m^ Excepting
inequality of fortune, and perhaps a little dispari^of age, I
caa see nothing unsuitaUc'
'But Mr. Enightley does not want to many. I am sure
be has not the least idea of it Do not put it into his head.
Why should he marryl He is as happy as possible by
himself; with his farm, and his sheep, and his library, and
all the palish to manage; and he is extremely fond of his
brothel's children. He has no occasion to marry, either to
fill up his time or his heart'
'My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so ; but if
he rea^y loves Jane Fairfax'
'Nonsense 1'He does not care about Jane Fairfax. In
the way of lore, I am sure he does not He would do any
good to her, or her family ; but'
'Well,'said Mrs, Weston, lai^hing,'perhaps the greatest
good he could do them would be to give Jane sudi a
lespflctable home.'
■ If it would be sood to her. I am sure it would be evil to
himself—a very snamefiil and degrading connection. How
would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to himt To
have hei haunting the Abbey, and thanking him all day long
,M..d by Google
for his great kindness in marrying Janet — " So very Icind and
obliging! But he always had been such a veiy kind aeJgb-
bourl " And then fly o^ through half a sentence, to hei
mother's old petticoat'* Not that it was such a veiy old
petticoat either — for still it would last a great while, — and,
indeed, she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all
very strong. "'
'For shame, Emma! Do not mimic her. Youdivertmc
against my conscience. And, upon my word, I do not think
Mr. Knigjitley would be much disturbed by Miss Bates.
Little things do not irritate him. She might talk on; and if
he wanted to say any thing himself, he would only talk
louder, and drown hei voice. But the question is not,
whether it would be a bad connection for him, but whether
he wishes it ; and I think he does. I have heard him speak,
and so must you, so very highly of Jane Fair & xl The
interest he takes in her — his anxiety about her health — his
concern that she should have no happier prospect ! I have
heard him express himself so warmly on those points J Such
an admirer of her performance on die pianoforte, and of her
voice 1 I have heard him say, that he could listen to her
for ever. Oh, and I had almost forgotten one idea that
occurred to me — this piano-forte that has been sent her by
somebody — though we have all been so well satisfied to
consider it a present from the Campbells, may it not be
from Mr. KnightleyY I cannot help suspecting him. I
think he is just the person to do it, even without being in
love.'
'Then it can be no a^ument to prove that he is in love.
But I do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do.
Mr. Knightley does nothing mysteriously.'
'I have heard him lamenting her having no instnmient
repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such a circum-
stance would, in the common course of things, occur to
him.'
'Very well ; and if be had intended to give her one, he
would have told her so.'
'There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.
I have a very strong notion that it comes from him. I am
sure he was particularly silent when Mrs. Cole told us of it
at dinner.'
L:,.n.P:lbyG00gle
Emma,
'93
'You take up an idea, Mt & Wecton, and nin away with it,
as yoo have many a time leproached me with doiof^ I see
DO sign of attachment I believe nothing of Oie pianoforte,
and proof only shall convince me that Mr. Knightley has any
thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.*
They combated the point some time longer in the same
way, Emma tather gaining ground over the mind of her
& iend; for Mis. Weston was the most used of the two to
yield; till a little bustle in the room showed diem that tea
was over, and the instiument in pteparation ; and at the
same moment Mr. Cole approaching to entreat Miss Wood-
house would do them the honour of trying it Frank
Churchill, of whom, in the eagerness of her conversation
with Mrs. Weston, she had been seeing nothing, except
that he had found a seat by Miss Faii & x, followed Mr.
Col < ^ to add his very pressing entreaties ; and as, in every
respect it suited Emma best to lead, she gave a. very propei
compliance.
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to
attempt more than she could perform with credit ; she
wanted neither taste nor spirit in the litde things which are
generally acceptable, and could accompany her own voice
well. One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably
by surprise — a second, slightly but correctly taken by Frank
Churchill. Her pardon was duly begged at the close of the
song, and every thing usual followed. He was accused of
having a delightfiil voice, and a perfect knowledge of mnsjc;
which was properly denied ; and that he knew nothing of the
matter, and had no voice at all, roundly aBseited. They
sang together once more; and Emma would then resign her
place to Miss Fairfax, whose peifoimance, both vocal and
instrumental, she never could attonpt to conceal & om her-
self was infinitely superior to her own.
With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance
fiom the numbers round the instrument, to listen. Frank
Churchill sang again. They had sung together once or
twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. But the sight of Mr.
Ktdghtley among the most attentive soon drew away half
E^nma's mind ; and she fell into a train of thinking on the
subject of Mn. Weston's suspicions, to which the sweet
by Google
194 Emma.
sounds of the united voices gave onljr moment & ry intemip-
tions. Her objections to Mr. Knightley's maxTfiXig did not
in the least subside^ She could see nothing but evO in it
It would be a great disappointment to Mi. John Knightley,
consequently to Isabella. A real injuiy to the children — a
most mortifyiDg change, and material loss to them all — a
vety great deduction from her father's daily comfort — and,
as to henel^ she could not at all endure the idea of Jane
Faii & x at Donvell Abbey. A Mrs. Knightley for them all
to give way to ! No — Mr. Kni^tley must never maTry.
little Heniy must remain the heir of DonwelL
Presently Mr. Knightley looked back, and came and sat
down by her. They talked at first only of the performance.
His admiration was certainly very warm ; yet she thought,
but for Mis. Weston, it would not have struck her. As a
sort of touchstone, however, she began to speak of hb kind-
ness in conveying the aunt and niece ; and though his answer
was in the spirit of cutting the matter short, she believed it
to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness
of his own.
'I often feel concerned,'stud she, * that I dare not make
our carriage more useful on such occasions. It is not that I
am without the wish; but you know how impossible my
father would deem it that James should put to for such a
purpose.'
'Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,'he
replied ;'but you must often wish it, I am sure.'And he
smiled with such seeming pleasure at the conviction, thatshe
must proceed another step.
'This present firom the Campbells,'said she —'this piano-
forte is very kindly given.'
'Yes,'he replied, and without the smallest apparent em-
barrassment'But they would have done better had they
given her notice of it Surprises are foolish things. The
pleasure is not enhanced, and the inconvenience is often
considerable. I should have expected better judgment in
Colonel Campbell'
From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that
Mr. Knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument
But whether he were entirely free from peculiar attachment
by Google
Emm & .
195
—whether there were do actual prefoence— remained a litde
longer doubtful. Towards the end of Jane's second song,
her voice grew thick.
'That will do,'said he, whm it was finished, thinking
aloud,'yoa have sung quite enough for one evening ; now
be quiet'
Another song, however, was soon begged for.'One
more ; — thef would not & tigue Miss Fairfax on xaj account,
and would only ask for one more.'And Frank Churchill
was heard to say,'I think you could manage this without
effort ; the first part is ao very trifling. The strength of the
Bong falls on the second.'
Mr. Knightley grew angry.
'That fellow,'said he, indignantly,'thinks of nothing
but showing off his own voice. This must not be.'And
touching Miss Bates, who at that moment passed near, —
'Miss Bates, ait you mad, to let your niece smg herself hoarse
in this manner 1 Go, and interfere. They have no mercy on
her.'
Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay
even to be grateful, before she stepped forward and put an
end to alt further singing. Here ceased the concert part of
the evening, for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the
only young lady performers; but soon (within five minutes)
the proposal of dancing — originating nobody exactly knew
where — was so eSectualty promoted by Mr. and Mrs. Cole,
that every thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper
space. Mrs. Weston, capital in her country dances, was
seated, and begiiming an irresistible waltz ; and Frank
Churchill, coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma,
had secured her hand, and led her up to the top.
While waiting till the other young people could pair them-
selves off, Emma found time, in spite of the compliments
■he was receiving on her voice and her taste, to look about,
and see y/hat became of Mr. Knightley. This would be a
trial. He was no dancer in general If he were to be very
oleit in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur some-
thing. There was no immediate appearance. No; he was
talking to Mrs. Cole— he was looking on unconcerned ;
by Google
Jane was asked by somebody els^ and he was still taUung
to Mrs. Col &
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry : his interest
was yet safe ; and she led off the dance with genuine spirit
and enjoyment Not more than five couple could be mas-
tered ; but the tarity and the suddenness of it made it very
delightful, and she found herself well matched in a partner.
They were a couple worth lootdng at
Two dances, unfortunately, were all thatcould beallowed.
It was growing late, and Miss Bates became anxious to get
home, on her mother's account After some attempts, there-
fore, to be permitted to begin again, they were obliged to
thank Mrs. Weston, took soirowAil, and have done.
'Peifa^^ it is as well,'said Frank Churchill, as he attended
Emma to her carriage.'I must have asked Miss Fairfax,
and her languid dandng would not have agreed with me, after
youra.'
CHAPTER IX.
EuMA didnotrepentfa»condesceasioningoingto the Coles.
The visit afforded her many pleasant recoUecdons the next
day ; and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the
side of d^;ni£ed seclusion must be amply repaid in the ^len-
dour of popularity. She must have delighted the Coles —
worthy people, who deserved to be made happy 1 — and left a
name behind her that would not soon die away.
Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and
there were two points on which she was not quite easy. She
doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of
woman by woman, in betraying her suspidons of Jane Fair-
& x's feelings to Frank Churchill, It was hardly right; but
it had been so strong an idea, that it would escape her, and
his submission to all that she told was a compliment to her
penetration which made it difficult for her to be quite certain
that she ought to have held her tongue.
The otherdrcumstanceofiegret related also to Jane Fair*
fax, and there she had no doubt She did unfcignedly and
by Google
Emtna. 197
tmequivocaUy regret the inferiority of her own playing and
■lining. She did most heartily grieve over the idleness of
her childhoodj and sat down and practised vigorously an
hour and a hal£
She was then inteinipted by Hairiefs coming in; and if
Hairief s praise could have sadsfied her, she might soon have
been comforted.
'Oh, if I could bnt play as well as you and MissFaiiiaxl'
'Dem't class us together, Harriet My playing is no mt«e
like hen Han a lamp is like sunshine.'
* O dear, I think you play the best of the two. I think
you play quite as well as she does. I am sure I had mucli
rather hear you. Every body last night said how well you
played.'
'Those who knew any thing about it must have felt the
difierence. The tniA is, Hwriet, that my playing is just
good enough to be prused, but Jane Fairfax's is much
b^ond it'
'Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as
she does, or that if there is any difference nobody would tvet
find it out Mr. Cole said how much taste you had; and
Hr. Frank Chnichill talked a great deal about yoai taste;
and that he valued taste much more than execution.'
'Ah, but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet'
'Are you sure t I saw she had execution, but I did not
know she had any taste. Nobody talked about it; and I
hate Italian singing: there is no understanding a word of it
Besides, if she docs play so very well, you know, it is no
more than she is obliged to do, because she will have to
teach. The Coxes were wondering last night whether she
would get into any great family. How did you think the
Coxes looked 1'
'Just as they always do, — very vulgar.'
'They told me something,'said Harriet, rather hesita-
tingly,'but it is nothing of any consequence.'
Enuna was obliged to ask what they bad told her, though
feaiM of its produdng Mr. £ItoiL
'They told me that Mr. Hartin dined with them last
Saturday.'
*OhI'
by Google
198
Emma.
'He came to their father upon some business, and he
asked him to stay diDner.'
'Oh!'
'They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne
Cox, I do not know what she meant, but she asked me if
I thought I should go and stay there again next summer.'
'She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an
Anne Cox should be.'
'She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there.
He sat by her at dinner. Miss Nash thinks either of the
Coxes would be very glad to marry him.'
'Very Hkely; I think they are, without exception, the most
vu^ar girls in Highbury.'
Harriet had business at Ford's, Emma thought it most
prudent to go with her. Another accidental meeting with
the Martins was possible, and, in her present state, would be
dangerous.
Harriet, tempted by every thing, and swayed by half a
word, was always very long at a purchase; and whSe she was
still hanging over muslins, and changing her mind, Emma
went to the door for amusement Much could not be hoped
from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;~Mr.
Perry walking hastily by; Mr. William Cox letting himself ia
at the office door; Mr. Cole's cairiage-horses returning from
exercise; or a stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the
liveliest objects she could presume to expect; and when her
eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray, a tidy old woman
travelling homewards from shop with her fiiU basket, two con
quarrelling over a dirty bone, and a string of dawdling
children round the baker's little bow-window eyeing the
gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain, and
was amused enough: quite enough still to stand at the door.
A mind lively and at ease can do with seeing nothing^ and
can see nothing that does not answer.
She looked down the Randalls road. The scene enlaigedj
two persons appeared; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law.
They were walking into Highbury; — to Hartfield of course:
they were stopping, however, in the first place at Mrs. Bates's,
whose bouse was a little nearer Randalls than Ford's, and
had all but knocked when Emma caught dieir eye. Inn
by Google
A^WiWit
199
mediatdsr they crossed the road and came forwaid to her ;
and the agTeeaUeoesB of yesterday's engagement seemed
to give firesh pteaaure to the present meeting. Mis. Weston
infbnned her that she was going to call on the Bateses, in
order to hear the new instrument.
'For my companion tells me,'said she,'that I absolutely
promised Miss Bates last night that I would come this morn-
ing. I was not aware of it mysel£ I did not know that I
had fixed a day; but as he says I did, I am going now.'
'And while Mrs. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed,
I hope,'said Frank ChurchiU,'to join your party and wait
for her at Hartfield, if you are going home.'
Mrs. Weston was disappointed.
• I thought you meant to go with xaa. They would be
very much pleased.'
* Me I I should be quite in the way. But, perhaps, I may
be equally in the way here. Miss Woodhouse looks as if she
did not want me. My aunt always sends me off when she
is shopping. She says I fidget her to death ; and Miss Wood-
house looks as if she could almost say the same. What an
I to dor
'I am here on no business of my own,'said Emma,'I am
only waiting for my friend. She will probably have sooil
done, and ihea we shall go home. But you had better go
with Mrs. Weston and hear the instrument'
'Well, if you advise it But (with a smDe) if Colonel
Cunpbell should have employed a careless friend, and if it
should prove to have an indifferent tone, what shall I say T
I shall be no support to Mrs. Weston. She might do very
well, by herself. A disagreeable truth would be palatable
thtongh her lips, but I am the wretchedest being in the world
at a dvil & lsehood.'
'I do not believe any such thing,'replied Emma;'I am
persuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbonts,
when it is necessaiy; but there is no reason to suppose the
instrument is indifferent Quite otherwise, indeed, if I under-
stood Miss Faiifiix's opinion last night'
'Do come with me,'said Mrs. Weston,'if it be not very
disigreeable to you. It need not detain us long. We wiD
go to Hartfield aiterwaids. We will follow them to Hartfield.
M.Pd by Google
I really wish you to call with me: it will be felt so great an
attention — and I always thought you meajit it'
He could say no more ; and, with the hope of Hartfield to
reward him, returned with Mis. Weston to Mis. Bates's door.
Emma watched them in, and then joined Harriet at the inte-
resting counter, trying, with all the force of her own mind, to
convince her that, if she wanted plain muslin, it was ot no
use to look at figured^ and that a blue riband, be it ever so
beautiful, would still never match her yellow pattern. At
last it was all settled, even to the destination of the parceL
'Should I send it to Mis. Goddaid's, ma'am t'asked Mrs-
Ford. —'Yes — no — yes, to Mrs. Goddard's. Only my pattern
gown is at Hartfield. No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if
you please. But then, Mrs. Goddard will want to see it And
I could take the pattern gown home any day. But I shall
want the riband directly; so it had better go to Hartfield —
at least the riband. You could make it into two paicels,
Mrs. Ford, could not you I'
'It is not worth while, Hauiet, to give Mrs. Fwd the
trouble oi two parcels.'
* No more it is.'
'No trouble in the world, ma'am,'said the obliging Mis.
Ford,
'Oh, but indeed I would much rather have it only in otie.
Then, if you please, you shall send it all to Mis. Goddard's
• — I do not know — ^no, I think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just
as well have it sent to Hartfield, and take it home with me
at night What do you advise t'
'That you do not give another half-second to the subject
To Haitfield, if you please, Mrs. Ford.'
'Ay, that will be much best,'said Harriet, quite satisfied ;
'I should not at all like to have it sent to Mis. Goddard's.'
Voices approached the shop, or rather, one voice and two
ladies; Mrs. Weston and Miss Bates met them at the door.
'My dear Miss Woodhouse,'said the latter,'I am just
run across to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down
with us a little while, and give us your opinion of our new
instrument — ^you and Miss Smith. How do you do, Miss
Smith t— Very well, I thank you.— And J begged Mrs.
Weston to ctmie with me, that I might be sure of sncccedii^'
by Google
Smma. 30i
'I hope Mra. Bates and Miss Faii & x are — —'
'Veiy well, I am much obliged to you. My motiier is
delightfully well ; and Jane caught no coldlastnight How
is Mr. Woodhousel I am eo glad to hear such a good ac >
count Mre. Weston told me you were here. — Oh, then,
said I, I must lun across; I am sure Miss Woodhouse will
allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in : my
mother wUl be so very happy to see her; and now we are
such a nice party, she cannot refuse. " Ay, pray do, " said
Mr. Frank Chuidiill, " Miss Woodhouse's opinion of the in-
strument will be worth having. " — But, said I, I shall be more
sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me. — " Oh, "
said he, " wait half a minute, till I have finished my job: "
for, would you beheve it. Miss Woodhouse, there he is, in
the most obliging manner in the world, fastening in the rivet
of my mother's spectacles. The rivet came out, you know,
this morning; so veiy obligingl — For my mother had no
use of her spectacles — could not put them on. And, by the
by, eveiy body ought to have two pair of spectacles ; they
should indeed. Jane said so. I meant to take them over to
John Saunders the first thing I did, but something or other
hindered me all the moming ; fiist one thing, then another,
there is no saying what, you know. At one time, Pat^
came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweep-
ing. Oh, sajd I, Patty, do not come with your bad news to
me. Here is the rivet of your mistress's spectacles out
Then the baked ^ples came home; Mrs. Wallis sent them
by her boy ; they are extremely civil and obliging to us, the
Wallises, always. I have heard some people say that Mrs.
Wallis can be uncivil wid give a very rude answer; bat we
have never known any thing but the greatest attention from
them. And it cannot be for the value of our custtxn now,
for what is our consumption, of bread, you know 1 only three
of us. Besides, dear Jane, at present — and she really eats
nothing, — makes such a shocking breakfast, you woi^d be
quite frightened if you saw it I dare not let my mother
know how little she eats ; so I say one thing, and then I say
another, and it passes off. But about the middle of the day
she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes so weD aa
by Google
these baked apples, and they are extremely wholesome i foi
I took the opportunity the othff day of asking Mr. Peny;
I happened to meet h^ in the stre«fL Not that I had any
doubt before. I have so often heard Mr. Woodhonse re-
commend A baked apple. I believe it is the only way that
Mr. Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome. We
have apple-dumplings, however, very oflen. Fatty makes an
excellent apple-dumpling. Well, Mrs. Weston, you hare
prevailed, I hope, and these ladies will oblige as.'
Emma would be'very happy to wait on Mis. Bates, & c,'
and they did at last move out of the shop, with no further
delay from Miss Bates than, —
'How do you do, Mrs. Ford 1 I b^ your pardon ; I did
not see yon before. I hear you have a channing collection
of new ribands from town. Jane came back delighted yes-
terday. Thank ye, the gloves do very well — only a littJe too
large about the wrist ; but Jane is taking them in.'
'What was I talking oft'said she, b^inning again when
they were all in the street
l^nma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.
* I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking o£ Oh,
my mother's spectacles. So very obhging of Mr. Frank
Churchill ! " Oh ! " said he, " I do think I can fasten the
rivet ; I like a job of this kind excessively, " Which, yon'
know, showed him to be so very.^— Indeed I must say
that, much as I had heud of him before, and much as I had
expected, he very far exceeds any thing I do con-
gratulate you. Mis. Weston, most wannly. He seems every
thing the fondest parent could " Oh 1 " said he, " I can
& sten the rivet I like a job of that sort excessively. " I
never shall fo^^et his manner. And when I biou^t out the
baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would
be so very obliging as to take some, " Oh ! " said he directly,
" there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these
are the finest looking home-baked apples I ever saw in my
lifle. " That, you know, was so very And I am sure, l^
his manner, it was no compliment Indeed they are very
deli^tful apples, and Mrs. Wallis does them full justice
only we do not have them baked more than twice, and Mr.
Woodhouse made us promise to have them done three time*}
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
Emma. 203
bat Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to meodOQ i^
The apples themselves axe the very finest sort foi baking)
beyond a doubt ; all from Donwell — some of Mr. Knightley's
most liberal supply. He sends us a sack eveiy year; and
certainly there never was such a keeping apple any vhoe ss
one of his trees — I believe there is two of them. My mother
says the orchard was always fomous in her younger day &
But I was really quite shocked the other day; for Mr,
Knightley called one morning, and Jane was eadng these
apples, and we talked about them, and said how much she
enjoyed them, and he asked whether we were not got to the
end of our stock. " I am sure you must be, " said he, " and
I will send you another supply ; for I have a great many
more than I can ever use. William lArkins let me keep a
larger quantity than usual this year. I will send you some
more, before th^ get good for nothing. " So I b^ged he
would not — for really as to ours being gone, I could not ab-
solutely say that we bad a great many left — it was but half a
dozen indeed ; but they should be aU kept for Jane ; and I
could not at all bear that he should be sending us more, so
liberal as he had been already; and Jane said the same.
And when he was gone, she almost quarrelled with me : no
I should not say quarrelled, for we never had a quarrel in
our hves; but she was quite distressed that I had owned the
apples were so nearly gone: she wished I had made him be-
lieve we had a great majiy left Oh, said I, my dear, I did
say as much as I could. However, the very same evening
William Larkins came over with a large basket of apples, the
same sort of ^ples, a bushel at least, and I was very much
obliged, and went down and spoke to William Laikins, and
said every thing, as you may suppose. William Larkins i^
«uch an old acquaintance I I am always glad to see him.
But, however, I found afterwards from Fatty, that William,
said it was all the apples of /^sorthis master had ; he had
brought them all — and now his master had not one left
to bake 01 boil. William did not seem to mind it himself^
he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many;
for William, you know, thinks more of his master's profit
than any thing; but Mrs. Hodges, he said, was quite di»-
pleased at their being all sent away. She could not bear
lM,..dbyGOOglC
304 Emma.
tiut her master should not be able to have another appl^
tart this spring. He told Patty this, but bid her not mind i^
and be sure not to say any thing to us about it, for Mis.
Hodges wotdd be cross sometimes, and as long as so many
sacks were sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder.
And so Patty told me, and I was excessively shocked, indeed!
I would not have Mr. Knightley know any thing atx > nt it for
the world ! He would be so very^— I wanted to ke^ it
from Jane's knowledge ; but, unluckily, I had mentioned it
before I was aware.'
Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and
her visitors walked up stairs without having any regular
narration to attend to, pursued only by the sounds of her
desultoiy good wilL
'Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the torn*
ing. Fray take care. Miss Woodhonse, ours is ntther a dark
staircase — rather da^er and nairower than one could wish.
Miss Smith, pray take care. Miss Woodhouse, I am quite
concerned, I am sure you hit your foot Miss Smith, thi >
step at die turning.'
CHAPTER X.
Tbk appeannce of die little sitting-room as they entered
was tranquillity itself; Mrs. Bates, deprived (£ her usual
employment, slumbering on one side of the fire, Frank
ChurdiiU, at a table near her, most dcedily occupied about
her spectacles, and Jane Fair & x, standing with her back to
diem, intent on her piano-forte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to
ahow a most hapi^ countenance on seeing Emma again.
'This is a pleasure,'said he, in rather a low voice,'conung
at least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated. Von
find me trying to be useful; tell me if you think I shall
succeed.'
'What!'said Mrs. Weston,'have not you finished ityetl
you would not earn a v^ good livelihood as a wnkin;
alversmitb at this rate.'
byGoogle
Emma. 205
'I have not been working onintemipteclly,'he replied,'I
have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her
instrument stand steadily ; it was not quite firm ; an uneven-
ness in die floor, I believe. You see we have been wedg-
ing one leg with paper. This was very kind of you to be
persuaded to come. I was almost afiaid you would be
hunying home.'
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and was
sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple
for her, and trying to make her help or advise him in his
work, till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the
pianoJbite again. That she was not immediately ready,
Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves; she
had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch
it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power
of peifoimance ; and Emma coold not but pity such feel-
ings, whatever th«r origin, and could not but resolve never
to expose them to her neighbour again.
At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly
given, the powers of die instrument were gradually done fiiU
justice ta Mrs. Weston had been delighted before, and
was delighted again; Emma joined her in all her praise;
and the piano-forte, with every proper discrimination, was
pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise.
'Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ,'said Frank
Churchill, with a smile at Emma,'Aeperson has not chosen
ilL I heard a good deal of Colonel Campbell's taste at
Weymouth; and the sofhiess of die upper notes I am sure is
exactly what he and ail thai party would particularly prize,
I dare say, Miss Furfax, that he either gave his friend very
minute directions, or wrote to ^xiadwood himself. Do not
yon think sol'
Jane did not look round, ^e was not obliged to
hear. Mrs. Weston had been speaking to her at the same
moment
'It is not icur,'said Emma, in a whisper;'mine was a
random guess. Do not distress her.'
He shook his head with a smile, and looked aa if he had
very little doubt and very little mercy. Soon afterwards he
began again, —
by Google
2o6 Emma.
'How much your friends in Ireland must be enjOTing
yoQT pleasure on this occasion, Miss Fairlax. I dare say
they often think of you, and wonder which will be the day,
the precise day of the instrument's coming to hand. Do
you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be
going forward just at this time 1 Do you imagine it to be
the consequence of an immediate commissioB from him, or
that he may have sent only a general direction, an order
indefinite as to time, to depend upon contingencies and
conveniences!'
He paused. She could not but hear; she could not avoid
answering, —
'Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell,'said she in a
voice of forced calmness,'I can imagine nothing with any
confidence. It must be all conjecture.'
'Conjecture ! ay, sometimes one conjectures r^t, and
sometimes one conjectures wrong. I wish I could con-
jecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm. What
nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hard at work,
if one talks at all; your real workmen, I suppose, hold thai
tongues; but we, gentlemen labourers, if we get hold of a
word — Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing.
There, it is done. I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs.
Bates,) of restoring your spectacles, healed for the present'
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and dai^-
ter; to escape a little from the latter, he went to the piano-
forte, and begged Miss Fair & jc, who was still sitting at it, to
play something more.
'If you are very kind,'said he,'it will be one of the
waltzes we danced last night; let me Uve them over again.
You did not enjoy them as I did; you appeared tired the
whole time. I believe yon were glad we dimced no longer;
but I would have given worlds— all the worlds one ever has
to give — for ano & er half hour.'
She played.
'What felicity it is to hear a tune again which has made
one happy! If I mistake not, that was danced at Wey-
mouth.'
She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and
,,_-:! byGoogle
Emma. 207
played something else. He to < A some mmk fiotn a. cbaii
near the piano-forte^ and turning to & iima, said,—
'Here is something quite new to me. Do you know iti
Cramer. And here are a new set of Irish melodies. That,
from such a quarter, one might expect This was all sent
with the instrument Very thoughtful of Colonel Campbell,
was not it 1 He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music
here. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it
shows it to have been so thoroug^y from the heart Nodiing
hastily done; nothing incomplete. True afiection only
could have prompted it'
Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not
help being amused; and when, on glancing her ^e towards
Jane Fairfax, she caught the remains of a smile; when she
saw that, with all the deep blush of consciousness, there had
been a smile of secret ddight, she had less scruple in the
amusement, and much less compunction with respect to her.
This amiable, upright, pofect Jane Faii & x was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible fbelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over
blether. Emma took the opportunity of whispering,—
'You speak too plain. She must undeistand you.'
'I hope she does. I would have her understand me. I
am not in the least ashamed of my meaning.'
'£ut, really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never
taken up the idea.'
'I am very glad you did, and that you cmnmunicated
it to me. I have now a key to all her odd looks and
ways. Leave shame to hef. If she does wrong, she ought to
feel it*
'She is not entirely without it, I think.'
'I do not see much sign of it She is playing Rabin Adair
at this moment — his & vounte.'
Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, pessmg near the window,
descried Mr. Knightley on horseback not far off
'■ Mr. Knightley, I declare ! I must speak to him, if pos-
sible, just to thank him. I will not open the window here ;
it will give you all cold ; but I can go into my mother's
room, you know. I dare say he will cwne in when he knows
iM,z.dbyG00gle
208 Emma.
who is here. Quite delightful to have you all meet so! Our
little room so honoured!'
She was in the adjoining chamber iriiile she still spoke,
and, opening llie casement there, immediately called Mr.
Knightley's attention, and every syllable of their convenation
was as distinctly heard by the others as if it had passed
within the same apartment
'How d'yt do I How d'ye do I Very well, I thank you.
So obliged to you for the carriage last night We were just
in time; my mother just ready for us. Pray come in ; do
come in. You will find some friends here.'
So began Miss Bates; and Mr. Kni^tley seemed deter-
mined to be heard in his turn, for most resolutely and com-
mandingly did he say, —
'How is your niece; Miss Bates 1 I want to inquire after
yon all, but particulariy your niece. How is Miss Faii & af
I hope she caught no cold last night How is she to dayl
Tell me how Miss Faii & x is.'
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer be-
fore he would hear her in any thing else. The hstenera
were amused; and Mrs. Weston gave Emma a look of par-
ticular meaning. But Emma still shook her head in steady
scepticism.
'So obliged to you ! — so very mudi obliged to you for die
carriage,'resumed Miss Bates.
He cut her short with, —
< I am going to Kin^too. Can I do any thing for you t'
'Oh dear, Kingston — are you % Mrs. Cole was saying die
other day she wanted something from Kingston.'
'Mrs. Cole has servants to send; can I do any thing tot
you}'
'No, X thank you. But do come in. Who do you think
is here t Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to
call to hear the new piano-forte. Do put up your horse at
the Crown, and come in.'
'Well'said he, in a deliberating manner,'for five minutes,
perhaps.'
'And here is Mn. Weston and Mr. fVank Churchill too I
Quite delightful; so manv friends !'
by Google
EmiHa, 209
'No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minuteE.
I must get on to Kingston as fitat u I can.'
* Oh, do come in. They i/ill be so very hap]^ to see
you.'
'No, no; your room is full enough. I will call another
day, and hear the piano-forte.'
'Well, I am so sorry I Oh, Mr. Knightley, what a delight-
ful party last night I how extremely pleasant I Did you ever
see such dandr^ I Was not it del^htfiil T Miss Woodhouse
and Mr. Frank Churchill; I never saw any thing equal to it'
'Oh, very delightful, indeed: I can say nothing less, for I
suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hear-
ing every dung that passes. And (raising his voice still
more) I do not see why Miss Faii & x should not be men-
tioned toa I think Miss Fairiax dancei. very well ; and
Mis. Weston is the very best coontiy-dance player, without
exception, in En^and. Now, if your friends have any
gratitude, they will say something pretty loud about you and
me in return; but I cannot stay to hear it'
'Oh, Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of
consequence — so shocked .'Jane and I are both so shocked
about the apples t'
'What is die matter now I'
'To think of your sending us all your store apples. You
said you had a great many, and now you have not one left.
We really are so shocked 1 Mrs. Hodges may well be angiy.
William I^ikins mentioned it here. You should not have
done it, indeed you should not Ah, he is off. He never
can bear to be thanked But I thought he would have stayed
now, and it would hare been a pity not to have mentioned
Well (returning mto the room), I have not been able
to succeed. Mr. Knightley cannot stop. He is going to
Kingston. He asked me ^ he could do any diing'
'Yes,'said Jane;'we heard his kind offers; we heard
every thing.'
'Oh yes, my dear, I dare say you mi^t ; because, you
know, the door was open, and the window was open, and Mr,
Knightley spoke loud. You must have heard every thing to
be sure. " Can I do any thing for you at Kingston I " said he j
by Google
so I just mentiotied Oh, Misi Woodhouse, must yaa be
g(»ng t You seem but juBt come ; so vety obliging of you.'
Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had
already lasted long ; and, on examining watches, so much of
die nwming was perceived to be gone, that Mrs. Weston
and hex companion, taking leave also^ could allow them-
selves only to walk with the two young ladies to Haitfield
gates, before they set off foi Randalls.
CHAPTER XI.
It may be posnble to do without dancing entirely. Instances
have been known of young people passing many, many
monAs successively, without being at any ball of any de-
toipdon, and no material injury accrue either to body or
mind; — but when a b^inning is made — ^when the fdid-
ties of rapid motion have once been, though slightly, felt — it
must be a veiy heavy set that does not ask for mote.
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and hmged
to dance ag^ ; and the last half-hour of an evening which
Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded to spend with his daughter
at Randalls was passed by the two young people in schemes
on die subject Frank's was the first idea, and his the greatest
seal ia pursuing it ; for die lady was the best judge of the
difficulties, and the most so & dtous for accommodatioa and
ippeaiance. But still she had inclination enough for show-
ing people again how delightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and
Miss Woodhouse danced— for doing that in which she need
not blush to compare henelf with JaUe Fairfax — and even
for simple dandng itseU| without any of the wicked aids ctf
vanity — to assist him first in pacing out the room they were
in to see what it could be made to hold — and then in taking
the dimensions of the other parlour, in the hope of disoover-
iag, in spite of all that Mr. Weston could say of their exacdy
cQiull stse, diat it was a little the largest
His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at
Mr. OdA should be finished there, — that the same party
should be collected, and the same musidan engaged, — met
:,a,i,;PdbyG00 < ^k'
Emma. 211
with the readiest acquiesc^ce. Mr. Weston entered into
the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs. Weston most
willingly undertook to play as long aa they could wish to
dance; and the interesting employment had followed, of
reckoning up exactly who there would be, and portioning
out the indispensable division of space to eveiy couple.
'Yon and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be iJiree, and
the two Miss Coxes five,'had been repeated many times over.
'And there will be the two Gilberts, young C < ^ my & ther,
and myself besides Mr. Knightley. Yes, that will be qidle
enough for pleasure. You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fair-
fiuc, will be three, and the two Misa Coxesfive; and for five
couple there will be plenty of room.'
But soon it came to be on one side, —
'But will there be good room for five couple t— I really do
not think there will.'
On another, —
'And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth
while to stand up. Five couple are nothing, when one thinks
seriously about iL It will not do to inviie five couple. It
can be allowable only as the thoi^ht of the moment'
Somebody said that Mist Gilbert was expected at her
brother's, and must be invited with the rest Somebody else
believed Mrs. Gilbert would have danced the other evening,
if she had been asked. A word was put in for a second
young Cox ; and at last, Mr, Weston naming one family of
cousins who must be included, and another of very old ac-
quaintance who could not be left out, it became a certainty
that the five couple would be at least ten, and a very
interesting speculation in what possible manner they could
be disposed of.
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other.
'Might not they use both rooms, and dance across the pas-
sage %'It seemed the best scheme ; and yet it was not so
good but that many of them wanted a better. Emma said
it would be awkward ; Mrs. Weston was in distress about the
sapper; and Mr. Woodhouse opposed it earnestly on the
score of health. It made him so very unhappy, iodeed, that
it could not be persevered itL
. * Oh nc^'said he;'it would be the extreme of imprudence.
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
212 Emma.
I could not bear it for Emnui I — ^ " " " la is not strong. She
would catch a. dreadful cold. So would poor little Harriet.
So you would alL Mis. Weston, yon would be quite laid up;
do not let them talk of sudi a wild thing ; piay do not let
them talk of it That young man {speaking lower) is veiy
thoughtless. Do not tell his fiuher, but tluit young man
is not quite the thing. He has been opoiing the doon veiy
often this evening, and keeping them open very ioconsider-
ateiy. He does not think of the draught I do not mean to
set you against him, but indeed he is not quite the thing.'
Mrs. Weston waa aoay for such a charge; She knew the
importance of it, and said every thing in her power to do it
away. Every door was now dosed, the passage plan given
up, and the fiist scheme, of rfunfing only in the room diey
were in, resorted to again ; and with such good will on Frank
Churchill's par^ that the space which a quarter (^ an hour
before had been deemed barely sudSdent for five couple, was
now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten.
'We were too magnificent,'said he.'We allowed unike-
cessary room. Ten couple may stand here veiy well'
Emina demurred.'It would be a crowd — a sad crowd ;
and what could be wane than dancing without spaCe to
turn inl'
'Very true,'he gravely replied;'it was very bad'But
still he went on measuring, and still he ended with, —
'I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.'
'No, no,'said she,'yon are quite unreasonable. It would
be dreadM to be stancUng so close. Nothing can be & rther
from pleasure than to be dancing in a crowd — and a crowd
in a little room.'
'There is no denjring it,'he replied.'I agree with you
exacdy. A crowd in alitde room — Miss Woodhouse, you
have Ae art of givmg pictures in I few words. Exquisite,
quite exquisite I Still, however, having proceeded so far, one
is unwilling to give & e matter up. It would be a disap-
pointment to my father — and altogedier — I do not know
that — I am rather of opinion that ten couple mig^t stand
here very wdL'
Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a
little seKwilled, and that he would rather oppose than lose
by Google
Emma, 213
tbe pleasure of daadng with her ; bnt she took the compli-
tnent, and forgave the rest Had she intended ever to marry
him, it might hare been worth while to pause and consider,
and try to undentand the value of his preference, and the
character of his temper; but for all the purposes of their
acquaintance he was quite amiable enough.
Before the middle of the next day he was at Hartfield ;
and he entered the room with sach an agreeable smile as
certified the continuance of the scheme. It soon speared
that he came to annonnce an improvement
'Well, Miss Woodhousc,'he almost inunediateljr began,
'your inclination for dandng has not been quite frightened
away, I hope, by the tenors of my fiuher's little rooms. I
bring a new proposal on the subject — a. thought of my
iather'B^ which waits only your approbation to be acted
up < m. May I h < ^ for the honour of your hand for the
two first dances of diis little [sojected baU, to be given, nol
at Randalls, but at the Crown Inn I'
'The Crown I'
'Yes ; if you and Mr, Woodbouse see no objection, and
I trust you cannot, my fother hopes his friends will be so kind
as to visit him there. Better accommodations he can pro-
mise them, and not a less grateful welcome than at Raniklls.
It is his own idea. Mrs. Weston sees no objection to it,
provided you are satisfied. This is what we all feel Oh,
yon were perfectly right I Ten couple, in either of the Ran-
dalls'rooms, would have been insuffemble — dreadfiil I I felt
how right you were the whole time, but was too anxious for
securing any tAitigto like to yield. Isnot it a good exchange I
You consent — I hope you consent 1'
'It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if
Mr. and Mrs. Weston do not I think it admirable ; and u
& r as I can answer for myself shall be most happy It
seems the only improvement that could be. Papa, do you
not think it an excellent improvement t'
She was obliged to repeat and e^lain it, before it was fiilly
comprehended ; and then, being quite new, fiirther tei^esen*
tations were necessaiy to make it acceptable;
'No ; he thought it very far from an improvement — a very
bad plvi — ^much worse than the other. A rocnn at an inn
byGoogle
314 Emma.
was Always damp and dangerous; never properly aired, or
fit to be inhabited. If they must dance, they had better
dance at Randalls. He had never been in the Toom at the
Crown in his life — did not know the people who kept it by
sght Oh no — a very bad plan. They would catch wcKse
colds at the Crown tJan any whwe.'
'I was going to observe, sir,'said Frank Churchill, * that
one of the great recommendations of this changewould be
tiie very little danger of any body's catching cold — so much
less danger at the Crown than at Randalls 1 Mr. Furry
might have reason to r^iet the alteration, but nobody else
could'
'Sir,'said Mr. Woodhouse, rather wannly,'you are very
much mistaken if you suppose Mr. Peny to be that sort trf
character. Mr. Peny is extremely concerned when any of
us are ilL But I do not understand how the room at die
Crown can be safer for you than your Other's house.'
'From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir. W«
shall have no occasion to open the windows at all — not once
the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit of opening
the windows, letting in cold Eur upon heated bodies, which
(as you well know, sir) does the nUschie£'
'Open the windows I but surely, Mr. Churchill, nobody
would think of opening the windows at Randalls. Nobody
could be so imprudent 1 I never heard of such a thing.
Dancing with open windows 1 I am sure, neither your
fotiier, nor Mrs, Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) irould
suffer it'
'Ah ! sir — but a thoughtless young person will sometimes
step behind a window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without
its been suspected. I have often known it done myself.'
'Have you, indeed, sir 1 Bless me ! I never could have
supposed it. But I live out of the world, and am oft«i
astonished at what I hear. However, diis does make a
difference; and, peHiaps, when we come to talk it over — but
these sort of things require a good deal of condderation.
One cannot resolve upon them in a hurry. If Mr. and Mrs.
Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning, we
tnay talk it over, and see what can be done.'
* But, unfiMtUDately, sir, my time is so limited'
iv.Goo^^lc
Emma, Jif
* Oh,* intemipfed Emma,'there will be plen^ of tine for
talking eveiy tiling over. There is no huny at alL If it
can be contrived to be at die Crown, papa, it will be veiy
convenient for the horses. Th^ will be so near their own
stable.'
'So they will, my dear. That is a great thing. Not that
James ever complains; but it is right to spare our horses
when we can. If I could be sure of the rooms being
thoroD^y aired— but is Mrs. Stokes to be trusted % I doubt
it I do not know her, even by sight'
'I can answer for eveiy thing of that nature, ar, because
it will be under Mrs. Weston's care. Mrs. Weston under'
lakes to direct the \rtioIe.'
'There, papa 1 Now you must be satisfied — our own dear
Mrs. Weston, who is caieliUness itse1£ Da not you remem-
ha what Mr. Peny said, so many years ago, when I had the
measles I " If Miss Taylor undertakes to wmp Miss Emma
up, you need not have any fears, sir. " How often have I
heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her I'
'Ay, very true. Mr. Peny did say so. I shall never
forget it Poor little Emmal You were veiy bad with the
measles ; that is, you would have been very bad, but for
Perry's great attention. He came four times a-dayfor a week.
He said, from the first, it was a very good sort — which was
our great comfort ; but the measles are a dreadful complaint
I ha^ whenever poor Isabella's little ones have the measles,
she will send for Peny,'
'My & ther and Mrs. Weston arc at the Crown at this
moment,'said Frank Churchill, * examining the capabilities
of the house. I left them there and came on to HartGeid, im-
patient for your opinion, and hoping you might be persuaded
to join them and give your advice on the spot I was desired
to say so from both. It would be the greatest pleasure to
them, if you could allow me to attend you ther & They can
do nothing satisfactorily without you.'
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council}
and, her & ther engaging to think it all over while she was
gone, the two young pe(^le set off togetlier without delay
for the Crown. There were Mr. and Mrs. Weston; delighted
to see her and receive her approbation, very busy and -very
byGoOgk'
910 Emma.
liappy in their different way; she, in some little distress; and
he, folding every thing perfect
'Emma,'said she,'this paper is worse than I expected
Look ! in places you see it is dreadfiilly dirty, and tbe wains-
cot is more yellow and forlorn than any thing one could
have imagined.'
'My dear, you are too particular,'said her husband.'What
does all that signify t You will see nothing of it by candle-
light It will be as dean as Randalls by candle-light We
never see any thing of it on our club-nights.'
The ladies here probably exchanged loolu which tnean^
'Men never know when things are dirty ot not;'and the
gentlemen perhaps thought each to himself'Women will
have their little nonsenses and needless cares.'
One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did
not disdain: it regarded a supper-room. At the time of the
ball^twm's being built, suppers had not been in question^
and a small caid-room adjoining was the only addition.
What was to be done f This caid-room would be wanted
as a card-room now; or, if cards were conveniently voted
uiuecessajy by their four selves, still was not it too small fw
any comfortaUe supper I Another room of much better size
might be secured for die purpose; but it was at the other
end of the house, and a long awkimd passage must be gone
throuf^ to get at it This made a difficulty. Mrs. Weston
was a & aid ^draughts for the young people in that passage;
and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the
prospect of b«ng miserably crowded at supper.
Mrs. Weston proposed having no r^nlar supper: merely
sandwiches, & c set out in the little room; but that waa
scouted as a wretched suggestion. A private dance, without
sitting down to supper, was pronounced an in & mous & aad
upon the rights of men and women; and Mn. Weston must
not speak oS it again. She then took another line of expe-
diency, and looking Into the doubtful room, observed, —
'I do not think it m so very small. We shall not be many,
you know. "
And Mr. Weston at the same time, walking briskly with
long steps duxnigh the passage, was calling out, —
'Yon talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my
byGoo^lc
Smma. 3iy
dear. It is a mere nothing afier all; and not the least
draught irom the stairs.'
'I wish,'said Mrs. Weston, * one could know which
airangement our gnesu in general would like best To do
what would be most generally pleasing must be our object
— if one could but tell what that would be.'
'Yes, very true,'cried Frank,'very true. You want your
neighbours'opinions. I do not wonder at you. If one
could ascertain what the chief of them — the Coles, for
instance. They are not far off. Shall I call upon them t
Or Miss Bates t She is still nearer. — And I do not know
whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand Uie in-
clinations of the rest of the people as any body. I diink we
do want a larger coundL Suppose I go and invite Miss
Sates to join us I'
'Well— 4f you please,'said Mrs. Weston, rather hesitating,
'if yon think she will be of any use.'
'You will get nothing to ibc purpose from Miss Bates,'
said Emma.'She will be all delight and gratitude, but she
will tell you nothing. She will not even listen to your
questions. I see no advantage in consulting Miss Bates.'
'But she Is so amusing, so extremely amusingi I am veiy
fond of hearing Miss Bates talk. And I need not bring the
whole family, you know.'
Here Mr. Weston joined them, and on hearing what was
proposed, gave it his decided approbation.
'Ay, do, Fiank. — Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end
the matter at once. She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure ;
and I do not know a praptnx person for showing us how to
do away difficulties. Fetch Miss Bates. We are growing a
little too nice. She is a standing lesson of how to be happy.
But fetch them both. Invite them both.'
'Both, sir I Can die old kdy V
'The old lady I No, the young lady, to be sure. I shall
think you a great blockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt
without the niece.'
'Oh I I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immediately
recollecL Undoubtedly, if you wish it, I will endeavour to
persuade them both.* And away he ran.
Long before he re-appeared, attending the short, neat,
L,,,.P:lbyG00gk'
Si8 Emma.
brisk-moving aunt, and her elegant niece, — Mn. Weston,
like a sweet-tempered woman and a good wife, had examined
the passage again, and found the evils of it mach less than
she had supposed before — indeed veiy trifling j and here
ended the difficulties of decision. All the rest, in specula-
tion at least, was perfectly smooth. All the minor anange-
Qieots of table and chair, lights and music, tea and supper,
made themselves j ck were left as mere trifles, to be settled
at any time between Mra. Weston and Mis. Stokes. Every
body invited was certainly to come; Frank had already
written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond
his fortnight, which could not possibly be refiiscd. And a
delightful dance it was to be.
Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree
that it must As a counsellor she was not wanted ; but as
an approver (a much safer character) she was truly welcome.
Her approbation, at once general and minute, wann and
incessant, could not but please ; and for another half-hour
they were all walldog to and fro between the different rooms,
some suggesting, some attending, and all in happy enjoy-
ment (^ the fiituie. The party did not break up without
Emma's being positively secured for the first two dances by
the hero of the evening, nor without her overhearing Mr.
Weston iriiisper to his wife,'He has asked her, my dear.
Thafs right I knew he would 1'
CHAPTER XIL
Onb tiling only was wanting to make the prospect of the
ball completely satisfactory to Emma, — its being fixed for a
day mthin the granted term of Frank Churchill's stay in
Surrey ; for, in spite of Mr. Weston's confidence, she could
net diink it so very impossible that the Church ills might
not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight
But this was not judged feasible^ The preparations must
take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the third
week were entered on, and for a fi^ days they must be
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 219
plaimiiiK proceeding and bopii^ in uncertainty — at the
ri^ — in her opinion, the great risk of its being all in vain.
Enscombe, however, was gracious, gracious in & ct, if not
inwnd. H^ wish of staying longer evidently did not please;
bat it was not opposed. All was safe and prosperous; and
as die removal of one solicitude generally makes way for
another, Enuna, being now certain of her ball, began to
adopt as the next vexation Mr. Kni^tley's provoking
indifierence about it Either because he cUd not dance
hinwfilf, or because the plan had been formed without hig
being consulted, he seemed resolved that it should not inte-
rest him, determined against its exciting any present cnriosity,
or affording him any future amusement To her voluntary
commnnications Enuna could get no more approving reply
tlian,
'Very well If the Weatons think it worth while to be at
all this trouble for a Eew hours of noisy entertainment, I have
nothing to say against i^ but that Qiey shall not choose
pleasures for me. — Oh, yes 1 I must be there ; I could not
refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I can ; but I would
rather be at home, looking over William Larkins's week's
account; much rather, I confess. — Pleasure in seeing dandngt
— not I, indeed, — I never look at it — I do not faiow who
does. — Fine dandng, I believe, like virtue, must be its own
reward. Those who are standing by are usually thinking of
something vety different'
This Emma felt was aimed at her ; and it made her quite
angry. It was not in comphment to Jane Fairfax, however,
that he was so indifferent, or so indignant ; he was not
guided 1^ Aa- feelings in reprobating the ball, for sAt enjoyed
the thought of it to an cxtraordinaiy d^ree. It made her
animated— open-hearted : she voluntarily said, —
'Oh 1 Miss Woodhouse, I hope noUung m^ happen to
prevent the ball ! What a disappointment it would be 1 I
do look forward to it, I own, with very great pleasure.'
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax, therefore, that he would
have preferred the society of William Larkins. No I — she
was more and more convinced ^t Mrs. Weston was quite
mistaken in diat surmise. There was a greatdeal of fiiendly
and of compassionate attachment on his side — but no love.
byGoogle
320 Emma.
Aias I there was soon no Insure fear quarrelling with Mr.
Knighdq:. Two days of joyfid security were immcdiatelj
followed by the oreithrow of every thing. A letter anived
from Mr. Churchill to urge his nephew's instant return. Mis.
Churchill was unwell — far too unwell to do without him ;
she had been in a. vtxj suffering state (so said her husband)
when writing to her nq > hew two days before, thou^ from hei
usual unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never
thinking of herself she had not mentioned it ; but now she
was too ill to trifle, and must entreat him to set off for Eos <
Gombe without delay.
The substance of this letter was fixwarded to Emma, in a
note from Mn. Weston, instantly. As to his goin^ it was
inevitable. He must be gone within a few hours, though
without feeling any real alann for his aunt, to lessen his re-
pugnance: He knew her ilhiesses ; they never occurred but
for her own convenience.
Mrs. Weston added,'that he could only allow himself
time to huny to Highbury, after breakfast, and take leave of
the few friends there whom he could suppose to feel any
interest in him ; and that he might be expected at Hartfidd
very soon.'
This wretched note was the finale of Emma's break & st
When once it had been read, there was no doing any thing,
but lament and exclaim. The loss of the ball — the loss of
tbe young man— and all that the young man might be feel-
ing 1— -It was too wretched 1 — Such a delightful evening as it
would have been I — Every body so happy ! and she and her
partner the happiest 1 —'I said it would be so,'was the only
consolation.
Her Other's feelings were quite distinct He thought
principally of Mrs. Churchill's illness, and wanted to know
how she was treated ; and as for the ball, it was shocking to
have dear Emma disappomted ; but they would all be safer
at home.
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he ap-
peared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience, his
sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come
might redeem him. He felt the going away ahnost Mo much
to speak of it His dejection was most evident He sat really
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
Emma. 22 1
lost in thought for the first few minutes ; and when rousing
himself it wu aiAy to say, —
'Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst'
'But you will come again,'said Emma.'This will not be
yoUT only visit to Randalls.'
'Ah I — (shaking his head) — the uncertainty of when I may
be able to return I — I shall try for it with a seal ! It will be
the object of all my thoughts an < ] cares t — and if my uncle
■ltd aunt go to town this spring — but I am a & aid — th^ did
not stir last spring — I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever.'
'Our poor ball must be quite given up.'
'Ah I that ball ! — ^why did we wait for any thing I — ^why
not seize the pleasure at once I — how often is happiness
destroyed by preparation, foolish preparation 1 — You told us
it would be so. — Oh I Miss WoocUiouse, why are you always
soric^tC
'Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance. I
would much rather have been merry than wise.*
'If I can come again, we are still to have our balL My
fotbor depends on it Do not forget your engagement'
Emma looked graciously.
'Such a fortnight as it has been I'he continued;'every
day more precious and more delightful than the day be-
fore ! — every day making me less fit to bear any otiier place.
Happy those who can remain at Highbury I'
'As you do us such ample justice now,'said Emma, laugh-
ing^'I will venture to ask, whether you did not come a Uttle
doubtingly at first 1 Do not we rather surpass your expec-
tations I I am sure we da I am sure you did not much
eitpect to like us. You would not have been so long in
coming if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury.'
He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the
sentiment, Emma was convinced that it had been so.
'And you must be off this very morning !'
'Yes ; my & ther is to join me here : we shall walk back
together, and I must be off immediately. I am almost a6aid
that every moment will bring him.'
'Mot & ve minutes to spare, even for your friends Miss
Faii & x and Miss Bates % How unlucky I Miss Bates's
byGoogle
322 Emma.
powerful, aigumentative mind might have strengthened
youis.'
•Yes — I Amv called there; passing the door, I thought
it better. It was a. light thing to do. I went in for three
minutes, and was detaJned by Miss Bates's being absent
She was out ; and I felt it impossible not to wait till she came
in. She is a woman that one may, that one must laugh at;
bnt that one would not wish to slight It was better to pay
my viat, then —'
He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.
'In short,'said he,'perhaps. Miss Woodhouse — I think
you can hardly be quite without suspicion.'—
He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts. She
hardly knew what to say. It seemed like the fore'^unner of
something absolutely serious, which she did not wish. Forc-
ing heiself to speak, therefore, in the hope of putting it by,
she calmly said, —
'You are quite in the right ; it was most natural to pay
your visit, then —'
He was silent She believed he was looking at her ;
probably reflecHng on what she had said, and trying to un-
derstand the manner. She heard him sigh. It was natural
for him to fed that he had cauit to sigh. He could not
believe her to be encouraging him. A few awkward moments
passed, and he sat down again ; and in a more determined
maimer said, —
* It was something to feel that all the rest of my time
might be given to Haitfield. My regard for Hartfield is
most warm, —
He stopped again, rose again, and seemed quite embar-
rassed. — He was more in love with her than Emma had
supposed ; and who can say how it mi^t have ended, if
his father had not made his appearance) Mr. Woodhouse
soon followed; and the necessity of exertion made him
composed.
A very few minutes more, however, ccanpleted the present
trial. Mr. Weston, always alert when business was to be
don^ and as incapable of procrastinating any evil that was
inevitable, as of foreseeing any that was doubtful, swl,'It
L.,.n.P:lbyG00glc
wu time to go / and the young man, thou^ he might and
did si^ could not but agree, and me to take leave.
■ I shall hear about you all,'said he ;'that is vay chief
consolation. I shall hear of every thing that is going on
among you. I have engaged Mrs. Weston to correspond
with me. She has been so kind as to promise it Oh 1 the
blessing of a. female correspondent, when one is really in-
terested in the absent ! — she will tell me every thing; In her
letters I shall be at dear Highbury again.'
A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest'Good
bye,'closed the speech, and the door had soon shut out
Frank ChurchilL Short had been the notice — short their
meeting ; he was gone ; and Emina felt so sorry to part,
and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his
absence, as to begin to be afraid of being too soiiy, and feel-
ing it too much.
It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost
every day since his arrival. Certainly his being at Randalls
had given great spirit to the last two weeks — indescribable
spirit; the idea, the expectation of seeing him which every
morning had brought, the assurance of his attentions, his
liveliness, his manners I It had been a very happy fortnight,
and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the coirmion
course of Hartfield days. To complete every other recom-
mendation, he had almost told her tiiat he loved her. What
strength, or what constancy of affection he might be subject
to, was another point; but at present she could not doubt
his having a decidedly warm admiration, a conscious prefer-
ence of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the rest,
made her think that she must be a little in love with him, in
spite of every previous determination against it
*I certainly must,'said she.'This sensation of listlcss-
ness, weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down
and employ myself diis feeling of every thing being dull and
insipid about the house ! — I must be in love ; I should be the
oddest creature in the world if 1 were not — for a few weeks
at least Well, evil to some is always good to others. I
shall have many fiellow-moumers for the ball, if not for Frank
Churchill; but Mr. Knightleywill be happy. He may spend
the evening with hii d^ William Laikiiu now if he likes.'
by Google
224 Emma.
Mr. Knightley, however, showed no triumphant happiness.
He could not say that he was sony on his own account ;
his veiy cheeifiil look would have contradicted him if he had;
but he said, and very steadily, that he was sony for the dis-
appointment of the othcis, and with consideiable kindness
added:—
'You, Ti'finma , who have so few opportunities of dancing,
you are really out of luck; you ore very much out of luck !'
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of
her honest regret in this woM change; but when they
did meet, her composure was odious. She had been par-
ticularly unwell, however, suffering from head-ache to a de-
gree, which made her aunt declare that, had the ball taken
place, she did not think .Jane could have attended it; and
it was chari^ to impute some of hei unbecoming indifference
to the languor of ill health.
CHAPTER XIII.
EvMA continued to entertain no donbt of her being in love.
Her ideas only varied as to the how much. At first, she
thought it was a good deal; and afterwards, but little. She
had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchill talked of;
and, for his sake, greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr.
and Mrs. Weston; she was very often thinking of him, and
quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he
was, how were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was
the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring. But,
on the other hand, she could not admit herself to be un-
ht^py, noT, after the first morning, to be less disposed for
employment than usual; she was still busy and cheeifiil;
and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have
& ults; and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as
she sat drawing or working, forming a thousand amusing
schemes for the progress and close of their attachment
fancying interestiDg dialogues, and inventing elegant letters ;
the conclusion of every inu^naiy declaration on his side
was that she refused him. Their affection was always to
byGoo^lc
lubdde into friendship. Everything tender and channind
waa to mark their parting; but still they were to pait When
she became sensible of this, it struck hei that she could not
be very much in love ; for in spite of her previous and fixed
determination never to quit her father, never to marry, a
strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle
thao she could foresee in her own feelings.
'I do not find myself making any use of the void saerifiee,'
said she.'In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate
negatives, is there any allusion to making a sacrifice. I do
suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness. So
much the better. I certainly will not persuade myself to feel
more than I da I am quite enough in love. I should be
Sony to be more.'
Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view
of his feelings.
'ffi is undoubtedly very mudi in love — every thing
denotes it — very much in love indeed! — and when he comes
again, if his affection continue, I must be on my guard not
to encouiage it It would be most inexcusable to do other-
wise, as my own mind is quite made up. Not that I imagine
he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. No;
if he had believed me at all to share his feelings, he would
not have been so wretched. Could he have thought himself
encouraged, his looks and language at parting would have
been different Still, however, I must be on my guard.
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what
it now is; but I do not know that I expect it will; I do not
look upon him to be quite the sort of man — I do not alto-
gether build upon his steadiness or constancy. His feelings
are wann, but I can imagine them rather changeable. Rvery
consideration of the subject, in short, makes me thankfiil that
my happiness is not more deeply involved. I shall do very
well again after a little while — and then, it will be a good
thing over; for they say every body is in love once in their
lives, and I shall have been let off easily.'
When his letter to Mrs. Weston- arrived, Emma had the
perusal of it; and she read it with a degree of pleasure and
admiration which made her at first shake her head over her
own seosations, and think she had undervalued their strength.
Q
,M..d by Google
226 Emma.
It was a long, well'Wiitten letter, giving the particnlara of his
journey and of his feelings, expressing all the affection,
gratitude, and respect which was natural and honourable,
and describing every thing exterior and local that could be
supposed aOracdve, with spirit and precision. No suspicious
flourishes now of apology or concern; it was the language of
real feeling towards Mis. Weston; and the transition from
Highbury to Enscombe, the contrast between the places in
some of the first blessings of social life, was just enough
touched on to show how keenly it was felt, and how much
more mis^t have been said but for the restraints of propriety.
— ^The charm of her own name was not wanting. MUs
Woodhouse appeared more than once, and never without a
something of pleasing connection, either a compliment to hei
taste, or a remembrance of what she had sud; and in the very
last time of its meeting her eye, unadorned as it was by any
such broad wreath of gallantry, she yet could discern the effect
of hei influence, and acknowledge the greatest compliment
perhaps of all conveyed. Compressed into the very lowest
vacant comer were these words —'I had not a spare moment
on Tuesday, as you know, for Uisa Woodhouse's beautiful
little fiiend. Piay make my excuses and adieus to her.'This^
Emma could not doubt, was all for herself. Harriet was
remembered only & om being her fiiend. His information
and prospects, as to Enscombe, were neither worse nor
better than bad been anticipated; Mrs. Churchill was re-
covering, and he dared not yet, even in his own imagination,
fix a time for coming to Randalls again.
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in
the material part, its sentiments, she yet found, when it was
folded up and returned to Mrs. Weston, that it had not added
any lasting warmth — that she could still do without the
writer, and that he must Icam to do without her. Her in-
tentions were unchanged. Her resolution of refusal only
grew m(H« interesting, by the addition of a scheme for his
subsequent consolation and happiness. His recollection cl
Harriet, and the words which clothed it, — the'beautiful
tittle fiiend,'— suggested to her the idea of Harrietts suc-
ceeding her in his affections. Was it impossible t — Na
Harriet undoubtedly was greatiy his iofi^riof in uAderstaod-
by Google
Emma. 337
Iqg; but he had been veiymudi struck irith the loveltoeu of .
her & ce and the wana simplicity of her raaQner; and all the
probabilities of circumstance and connection were in her
favour. For Harriet, it would be advantageous and delight-
ful indeed
'I must not dwell upon it,'said she;'I must not think
c^ it I know the danger of indulging such speculations.
But stranger things have happened; and when we cease to
care for each other as we do now, it will be the means of
confinning us in that sort of true disinterested friendship
which I can aheadj look forward to with pleasure.'
It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's behalf,
though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for
evil in that quarter was at hand. As Frank Churchill's
arrival had succeeded Mr. Elton's engagement in the con-
venation of Highbury, as the latest interest had entirely
homt down the first, so now, upon F^ank Cbmchill's disap-
pearance, Mr. Elton's concerns were assuming the most
irresistible form. — His wedding-day was named. He would
soon be among them again — Mr. Elton and his bride.
There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from
Enscombe, before'Mr. Elton and his bride'was in every
body's mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten. Emma
grew sick at the sound. She had had three weeks of happy
exemption from Mi. Elton; and Harriet's mind, she had
been willing to hope, had been lately gaining strength. With
Mr. Weston's ball in view at least, there had been a great
deal of insensibihty to other things; but it was now too
evident that she had not attained such a state of composure
as could stand against the actual approach — new carriage,
beQ ringing and alL
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all
the reasonings, and soothings, and attentions of every kind
that Emma could give. Emma felt that she could not do
-too much for her, that Harriet had a right to all her inge-
nui^ and all her patience; but it was heavy work to be fiir
ever convincing without [»odudng any effect; for ever
agreed to, without being able to make tbeb opinions -the
sam & Harriet listened submissively, and said,'it was very
true; it was just as Miss Woodhouse described — it was not
by Google
worth wbjle to think about them, — and she would not think ■
about them any longer.'But no change of subject could'
avail, and the next half hour saw her as anxious and restless
about the Eltons as before. At last Emma attached her on
another ground.
'Youi allowing yoniself to be so occupied and so unhappy
about Mr. Elton's marrying, Haniet, is the strongest reproach
you can make me. You could not give me a greater reproof
for the mistake I fell into. It was all my doing, I know. I
have not forgotten it, I assure you. Decdved myself I did
very miserably deceive you; and it will be a painiiil reflec-
tion to me for ever. Do not imagine me in danger of
forgetting it.'
Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words
of eager exclamation. Emma continued, —
'I have not said, exert yourself, Harriet, for my sake;
think less, talk less of Mr. Elton for my sake; because, for
your own sake rather, I would wish it to be done, for the
sakeof what is more important than my comfort, — a habit
of self-command in you, a consideration of what is your
duty, an attention to propriety, an endeavour to avoid the
suspidons of others, to save your health and credit, and
restore your tranquillity. These are the motives which I
have been pressing on you. They are very important, and
BOTiy I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon
them. My being saved from pain is a very secondary
consideration. I want you to save yourself from greater
pain. Perhs^ I may somerimes have felt that Harriet
would not forget what was due, — or rather, what would be
kind by me.'
This appeal to her affections did more than all Qit rest
The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss
Woodhouse, whom she really loved extremely, made her
wretched for a while; and when the violence of grief was
comforted away, slill remained powerful enough to prompt
to what was right, and support her in it very tolerably.
'You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life!
— Want gratitude to you I — Nobody is equal to you I I care
for nobody as I do for you! Oh, Miss Woodhouse, how
ungratefiil 1 have been!'
by Google
EmmiL 239
Such npresBions, asusted as die/ were by every thing
that look and manner could do, made Emma feel that she
had never loved Harriet so well, nor valued her affection so
highly before.
'Thereis no chaim equal to tenderness of heart,'said she
aflerwaids to hrasel£'There is nothii^ to be CDcapared to
it Warmth and tenderness of heart, with an affectionate;
open manner, will beat all the cleaniess of head in the
world, for attraction: I am sure it will It is tendoness
of heart which makes my dear father so generally be-
loved — which gives Isabdla all her popularity. I have
it not; but I know how to prize and respect it Harriet is
my superior in all the chann and all the fdicity it gives.
Dear Harriet! — I would not change you for the dearest-
headed, kingest-sighted, best-judging fbmole breathing. Oh,
the coldness of a Jane Faii & xt Harriet is worth a hundred
snch : and for a wife — a sensible man's wife — it is invaluable.
I mention no names ; but happy the man who changes
Emma for Harriet I'
CHAPTER XIV.
Mrs. Elton was first seen at church : but thou^ devotion
might be interrupted, curiosity could not be satisfied by a
Imde in a pew, anil it must be left for the visits in form «4iich
were then to be paid, to settle whether she were very pretty
indeed, or only rather pretty, or not pretty at all
Emma had feelings, less of cmiosity than of pride or
prc^riefy, to make her resolve on not being the last to pay
her respects ; and she made a point of Harriet's going with
her, that the worst of the business might be gone through as
soon as posEnble.
She could not enter the house again, could not be in the
same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated
three months ago, to lace up her boot, without retoliating.
A thousand vexatious thoughts would recur. Compliments^
charades, and horrible blunders; and it was not to be sup
poeed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too; but
,M..d by Google
030 Enima.
the behaved veiy well, and was only raths pale and sileDL
The visit was of course sbort ; and diere was so much em-
bamssment and occupation of mind to shoiten i^ that
Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion
of the lady, and on no account to give one, beyond the do-
thing-meaning temu of being'et^antfy dressed, and veiy
She did not really like hei. She would not be in a hurry
to find ianlt, but she suspected that there was no degance;
— ease, but not d^ance. She was almost sure that for a
young woman, a strai^ei, a bride, there was too much ease
Her person was tather good; her & ce not unpretty; but
neither feature nor air, nor voice, nw manner was degant
Emma thought, at least, it would turn oat so.
AsfbrMr. Elton, his manners did not fq > pear — ^batno,sbe
would not permit a hasty or a wit^ word fix > m herself about
his manners. It was an awkward ceremony at any time to
be receiving wedding-visits; and a man I^ need be aQ
grace to acquit himself weU through it. The woman was
better off; ^e might have the assistance of fine dothes, and
the privilege of bashfiilness; but the man had only his own
good sense to depend on: and when she considered how
peculiarly unlucky poor Mr. Elton was in bdng in the same
room at once with the woman he had just married, the wo-
man he had wanted to many, and die woman wham he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right
to look as httle wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as
little really, easy as could be.
'Well, Miss Woodhouse,'said Harriet, when they had
quitted the house, and after waiting in vain for her bKod to
btgin ;'Well, Miss Woodhouse (with a gentle si^), what do
you think of hert Is not she very cbanningt'
l^iere was a little hesitation in Emma's answer.
'Oh I yee — ^very — a veiy pteadng young wcHnan.'
'I think her b^tifiil, quite beautiiuL'
'Very nice^ dressed, indeed ; a remaikably dq|ant gown.'
* I am not at all surprised that she should have Men in
imt,'
'Obi no; there is nothing to surprise one at all; — apiet^
tortune; and she came in his way.'
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
'I dare axy,'returned Harriet, d^j^uag again,'I dare say
she was very omch attached to him.'
'Feiiiapa she might ; but it is not eveiy man's fate to
mairy the woman who loves him best Misi Hawkins, per-
haps, wanted a home, and thought diis the best offer she was
likely to have.'
'Yea,'said Harriet earnestly,'and well she might, nobody
could ever have a better. WeU, I wish them happy with all
my heart And now, Hiss Woodhouse, I do not think I
shall mind seeing them ag^iL He is jual as superior as ever:
but being married, you know, it ia quite a different thing.
No, indeed, Hiss Woodhouse, you need not be aJraid ; I can
sit and admire htm now without any great misery. To know
that he has not thrown himself away, is such a txiinfOTtl —
She does seem a charming young woman, just what he de-
serves, ^ppy creature I He called her " Augusta. " How
delightful 1'
When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind.
She could then see more and judge better, From Harrietts
happening not to be at Hartfield, and her father's being
present to eng^e Hr. Elton, she had a quarter of an hour
of the lady's conversation to herself and could composedly
attend to her; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced
her that Hrs. Elton was a vain woman, extremely well satis-
fied with herself, and thinking much of her own impor-
tance ; that she meant to shine and be very superior, but
wiA manners which had been formed in a bad school, pert
and familiar; that all her notions were drawn from one set
of people, and one s^le of living; that, if not foolish, she
was ignorant, and that her sodety would certainly do Mr.
Elton no good.
Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise or
refined herself^ she would have connected him with those
frho were; but Hiss Hawkins, it might be fairly supposed
from her easy conceit, had been the best of her own set
The rich brother-in-law, near Bristol, was the pride of the
alliance, and his place and his carriages were the pride < rf
him.
The very first subject, after being seated, was Haple
Grove, ■ Hy brother Mr. Suckling's seat ;'a comparison of
iM,z.dbyGoOgle
3^2 EfHma.
Hiirtfield to Maple Grove. The grounds of Hait & eld were
small, but neat and pretty; and the house was modem and
weU-built Mrs. Elton seemed most favourably impressed
by the size of the room, the entianc^ and all that she could
see or imagme.'Very like Maple Grove indeed ! She was
quite struck by the likeness ! — That room was the very
shape and size of the moining-^XMm at Maple Ckove; her
sister's bvourite room.'Mr. Elton was appealed to.'Was
not it astonishingly like 1 — She could really almost fancy het^
self at Maple Grove.'
'And the staircase. — You know, as I came in, I observed
how very like the staircase was ; placed exactly in the same
part of the house. I really could not help exclaiming ! I
assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is very delightful to roe to
be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple
Grove. I have spent so many happy months there! (with a
little sigh I3i sentiment) A charming place, undoubtedly.
Every body who sees it is struck by its beauty; but to me it
has been quite a home. Whenever you are transplanted,
like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will understand how vwy de-
lightfiil it is to meet with any thing at all like what one has
left behind. I always say this is quite one of the evils of
niatrimony.'
Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was
fully sufficient for Mrs. Elton, who only wanted to be talking
hersel£
'So extremely like Maple Grove ! And it is not merely
the house ; the gronnds, I assure you, as fiu- as I could ob-
EBTve, are strikingly like. The laurels at Maple Grove are in
the same profusion as here, and stand very much in the same
way, — ^just across the lawn; and I had a glimpse of a fine
large tree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly i%
mind! My brother and sister will be enchanted with this
place. People who have extensive grounds themselves are
always pleased with any thmg in the same style.'
Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment She had a
great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves
cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ;
but it was not worth while to attack an error lo double-dyed,
mnd she therefore only said in reply, —
byGoogle
Emma.
835
'When you have sees more of this country, I am afiaid
you will thiDk you have over-raled Haitfield. Surrey is fall
of beaudea.'
'Oh I yes, I am quite aware of that It is the garden of
England, ytm know. Surrey is the garden of England.'
'Ycsj but we must not rest our claims on that distinc-
tion. Many counties, I believe, are called the gaiden of
England, as well as Surrey.'
'No, I & ncy not,'replied Mis. Elton, with a most satisfied
smile.'I never heard any county but Surrey called so.'
Emma was silenced.
'My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the
spring or summer at fiuthest,'continued Mrs. Elton;'and
that will be our time for exploring. While they are with us,
we shall explore a great deal, I dare say. They will
have thtir barouche-landau, of course, which holds four
p^ectly; and therefore, without saying any thing of our
carriage, we should be able to explore the different beauties
extremdy well. They would hardly come in their chaise, I
think, at that season of the year. Indeed, when the time
draws on, I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the
baiouche-landau; it will be so very much preferable. When
people come into a beautihil country of this sort, you know.
Miss Woodhoose, one naturally wishes them to see as much
as possible; and Mr. Suckling is extremely fond of explor-
ing. We explored to King's-Weston twice last summer, in
that way, most delightfully, just after their first having the
barouche'landau. You have many parties of that kind hete, I
suppose, Hiss Woodhouse, every summer t'
'No; not immediately here. We are rather out of dis-
tance t^ the very striking beauties which attract the sort of
parties you speak of; and we are a very quiet set of people,
I beli < ve; more disposed to stay at home than engage in
schemes of pleasure.'
'Ah I there is nothing like staying at home, for real com-
fort Nobody can be more devoted to home than I am. I
was quite a proverb for it at Maple Grove. Many a time
has Selina said, when she has been going to Bristol, " I really
cannot get this girl to move from the house. I absolutely
must go in by myself) though I hate being stuck up in the
M.Pd by Google
barouche-landau without a companioo; but Augusta, I
believe, with her own good will, irould sever stir be^d die
park paling. " Manjr a time has she said so; and yet I am
no advocate for entire seclusion. I think, on the contrary,
when people shut themselves up entirely from society, it b a
very bad thing; and that it is much more advisable to mix
in die worid in a proper d^;ree, without living in it either too
much or too little. I perfectly understand your stuation,
however, Miss Woodhouse (looking towards Mr. Woodhouse),
your fiuher'a state of health must be a great drawback. Why
does not he tr^ %tht— Indeed he should. Let me recom-
mend Bath to you. I assure you I have no doubt of its
doing Mr. Woodhouse good.'
'My father Cried it more dian once, formeiiy, but without
receiving any benefit; and Mr. Peny, whose name, I dare
say, is not unknown to you, does not conceive it would be
at all more hkely to be usefiil now.'
'Ahl thafs a great pity; for I assure yon, Miss Wood-
house, where the waters do agree, it is quite wonderfiil the
relief they give. In my Bath life, I have seen such instances
of it I And it is GO cheerfiil a place, that it could not & il of
being of use to Mr. Woodhouse's spirits, whidi, I undo-stand,
are sometimes much depressed. And as to its recommen-
dation to you, I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell
on them. The advantages of Bath to the young are pret^
generally understood. It would be a channii^ introductioD
for you, who have lived so secluded a life; and I could im-
mediately secure you some of the best society in the place.
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquain-
tance; and my particular & iend, Mrs. Partridge, the lady I
have always resided with when in Bath, would be most
happy to show you any attentions, and would be flie veiy
person for you to go into public with.'
It was as much as Emma cotdd bear, without being im-
polite. The idea of her being indebted to Mrs. Elton for
what was called an tnimduetion — oS her going into public
under the auspices of a firiend c^ Mrs. Elton's, — probably
some vulgar, dashing widow, who, with die hdp trf'a boerde,
just made a shift to livet— The dignity of Mitt Woafiiouse,
of Hartfield, was sunk indeed !
kGoo^^lc
'She restrained herself, however, irom any of the reproofs
she coutd have ^ven, and only thanked Mrs. Elton coolly;
'but their going to Bath was quite out of the question; and
she was not perfectly convinced that the place might suit her
better than her father.'And then, to prevent fiirther out-
rage and indignation, changed the subject directly.
'I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs. Eltoo.
Upon these occasions, a lady^s character generally precedes
her; and Highbury has long known that you are a superior
performer.'
'Oh ! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea.
A superior performer ! — very far from it, I assure you: con-
sider £rom how partial a quarter your infonnation came. I
am doatingty fond of music — -passionately fond; and my
friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste; but as to any
thing else, upon my honour my performance is midiocre to
the last degree. You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play
delightfiiUy. I assure you it has been the greatest satis & c-
tion, comfort, and delight to me, to hear what a musical
society I am got into. I absolutely cannot do without
music ; it is a necessary of life to me; and having always
been used to a very musical society, both at Maple Grove and
in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice: I
honestly said as much to Mr. K when he was speaJung of
my future home, and expressing his fears lest the retirement
of it should be disagreeable; and the inferlori^ of the house
too— knowing what I had been accustomed to— of course
he was not wholly without apprehension. When he was
speaking of it in that way, I honestly s^d that tkt world I
could give up — parties, balls, plays — for I have no fear of
retirement. Blessed with so many resources within myself,
the world was not necessary to 7ne. I could do very well
without it To those who had no resources it was a different
thing; but my resoiirces made me quite independent And
as to smaller-sized rooms than I had been used to, I really
could not give it a thought. I hoped I was perfectly equal to
any sacrifice of that description. Certainly, I had been ac-
customed to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I did assure
him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness,
nor were q > acious apartments. " But, " said I, " to be quite
byGoOgk'
936 Emma.
honest, I do not thinlc I can live without something of >
musical society. I condition for nothing else; but, withoot
music, life would be a blank to me. "'
* We cannot suppose,'said Kmmaj smiling,'that Mr E^ton
would hesitate to assure you of there being a very musical
sode^ in Highbury; and I hope you will not find he has
outst^ > ped the truth more than may be pardoned, in con-
ndeiadon of the motive.'
'No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head. I am
delighted to find myself in such a circle: I hope we shall
have many sweet little concerts together. I thmlc, Miss
Woodhousc, you and I must establish a, musical dub, and
have regular weekly meetings at youi house, or ours. Will
not it be a good plan 1 If ov exert ourselves, I think we
shall not be long in want of allies. Somethil^[ of that
nature would be particulariy desirable for m^ as an induce-
ment to keep me in practice; for married women, you know
— there is a sad story against them, in general They are
but too apt to give up music'
'But yon, who arc so ejrtremely fond of i^ — there can be
no danger, surely.'
'I should hope not; but really, i^en I look round among
my acquaintance, I tremble. Setina has entirely given up
music; — never touches the instrument though she played
sweetly. And the same may be said of Mrs. Jefiereys —
Clara Partridge that was, — andof the two Milmans, now Mrs.
Bird and Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can enu-
merate. Upon my word, it is enough to put one in a fright
I used to be quite angry with Selina; but, really, I b^n
now to comprehend that a married woman has many
things to call her attention. I believe I was half an hour
this morning shut up with my housekeeper.'
'But every thing of that kind,'said Emma,'mil floon be
in so regular a train'
'Well,'said Mrs. Elton, laughing,'we shall see.'
Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her
unnc, had nothing more to say; and, after a moment's pause,
Mrs. Elton chose another subject
'We have been calling at Randalls,'sdd she,'and found
them both at home; and very pleasant people they seem to
byGoogle
Bmrna. 237
be. I like diem extremely. Mr. Weston seems an excel-
lent creature — quite a first-rate & vourite with me already, I
assure you. And sAe appears so truly good, — there is some-
thing so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins
upon one directly. — She was your governess, I think.'
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but
Mrs. Elton hardly waited for the affirmative before she went
on.
'Having understood as much, I was tather astonished to
find her so very lady-like. But she is really quite the gentle-
woman.'
'MiT. Weston's manners,'said Emma,'were always par-
ticularly good. Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance
would make them the safest model for any young woman.'
'And who do you think came in while we were there t'
Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some old
acquEuntance, and how could she possibly guess t
'Knightley !'continued Mrs. Elton; —'Knightley himself I
Was not it luckyl For, not being within when he called
the other day, I had never seen him before; and of course,
as so particular a friend of Mr. E.'s, I had a great curiosity.
" My fiiend Knightley " had been so often mentioned, that
I was really impatient to see him; and I must do my eara
speto the justice to say, that he need not be ashamed of his
friend. Knightley is quite the gentlemanj I like him very
much. Decidedly, I Uiink, a very gentlemanlike man.'
Happily, it was now time to be gone. They were off,
and Emma could breathe.
'Insufferable woman I'was her immediate exclamation.
'Worse than I had supposed. Absolutely insufferable I
Knightley! — I could not have believed it Knightley! —
never seen him in her life before, and call him Knightley I —
and discover that he is a gentieman! A little upstart^ vulgar
being, with her Mr. E. and her cara sposo, and her resources,
and an her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery.
Actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is a gendeman ! I
doubt whether he will return the compliment, and discover
her to be a lady. I could not have believed it ! And to
propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club !
One would fancy we were bosom friends! And Mrs. We»-
UigillzedbyGoOgk'
238 EmtMc:
ton I — Astonished that tiie person who had brought me up
^ould be a geutlewomanl Vfoise and worse; I never met
with her equal Much beyond my hopes. Harriet is dis-
graced by any comparison. Oh I what would Frank Churchill
say to her, if he were here 1 How angry and how diverted
he would bel Ah! there I am — thinking of him directly.
Always the first person to be thought of I How I catch
myself out! Frank Churchill comes as regularly into my
mind!'—
All this lan so g^bly dirough her thoughts, that by the
time her lather had aiiai^ed himself, ailer the bustle of the
Eltons* depaituie, and was ready to speak, she was very
tolerably capable of attending.
'Well, my dear,'he dclibera.tely began,'considering we
never saw her before, she seems a very pretty sort of young
lady ; and I dare say she was very much pleased with you.
She speaks a tittle too quick. A little quickness of voice
there is which rather hurts the ear. But I believe I am nice;
I do not like strange voices ; and nobody speaks like you
and poor Miss Taylor. However, she seems a very obliging,
pretty-behaved young lady, and no doubt will make him a
v^ good wife. Though I think he had better not have
nuiiied. I made the best excuses I could for not having
been able to wait on him and Mrs. Elton on ibis happy
occasion ; I said that I hoped I should in the course of the
summer. But I ought to have gone before. Not to wait
npon a bride is very remiss. Ah I it shows what a sad
invalid I am ! — But I do not like the comer into Vicarage-
lane.'
< I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr. Elton
knows you,'
* Yes : but a young lady — a bride — I ought to have paid
my respects to her if pos^ble. It was being very defident.'
'Bu^ my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and
therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects
to ft bride t It ought to be no recommendation to you. It
is encouraging people to many if you make so much of
them.'
'No, my dear, I never encxxuaj^ed any body to many,
but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to
byGoogle
Emma. 239-
a lady— and a bride, especially, is neret to be neglected.
More is avowedly due to her. A bride, you know, my dear,
is always the first in company, let the others be who they
may.'
'Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to mairy, I do
not know what is. And I should never have expected you
to be lending your sanction to such vani^baita for poor
young ladies.'
'My dear, you do not understand me. This is a matter of
mere common politeness and good-bieeding, and has nothing
to do with any enowragement to people to many.'
Emma had done. Her & ther was growing nervous, and
could not nndentand her. Her mind returned to Mrs.
Elton's offences, and long, very long, did they occupy her.
CHAPTER XV.
Emu was not lequiied, by any-subsequent discovery, to
retract her ill opinion of Mis. Elton. Her observation had
been pretty correct Snch as Mrs. Elton speared to her on
this second interview, such she appeared whenever they met
again, — selT-importan^ presuming, familiar^ ignorant, and ill-
bred She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment,
but so little judgment that she thought herself coming with
superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a
country neighbourhood j and conceived Miss Hawkins to
have held such a place in socie^ as Mrs. Elton's consequence
only could surpass.
There was no reason to suppose Mr. Elton thou^t at all
differently & om his wife. He seemed not merely happy with,
her, but proud. He had the air of congratulating himself on
having brought such a woman to Highbury, as not even Miss
Woodhouse could equal; and the greater part of her new ac-
qoaintanoe, disposed to commend, or not in the habit of
judging, rbllowing the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or taking
it for gnmted that the bride must be as clever and as agree-
able as she professed herselij were very well satisfied ; so that
Mrs. Elton's pmise passed from one mouth to another as it
byGoogle
oag^t to d < ^ aoimpeded by Miss Woodhouse, who readily
coDtmued her first contribudon, and talked with a good
grace of her being'very pleasant, and very elegantly
In one letpect Mrs. Elton grew even worse than she had
^ > peared at first Her feelings altered towards Emma. —
Offended, probably, by the little encouragment which her
proposals of intimacy met with, she drew back, In her tuni,
and gradually became much more cold and distant ; and
though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced
it was necessarily increasing Emma's dislike. Her manners
too— and Mr. Elton's, were unpleasant towards Harriet.
They were sneering and negligent Emma hoped it must
rapidly work Harriet's cure; but the sensations which
could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much. —
It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet's attachment
had been an offering to conjugal unreserve and her own
share in the story, under a colouring the least ikvourable to
her and the most soothing to him, had in all likelihood
been given also. She was, of course, the object of their
joint dislike. — ^When they had nothing dse to say, it must
be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and
the enmity which they dared not show in open disrespect
to hei, found a l^oader vent in contemptuous treatment of
Harriet
Mrs. Elton took a great & ncy to Jane Fairiax ; and from
the first Not merely when a state of warfare with one young
lady might be supposed to reconunend the other, but from
the very first; and she was not satisfied with expressing a
natural and reasonable admiration — but without solicitation,
or plea, or privilq;e, she roust be wanting to assist and be-
friend her.— Before Eknma had forfeited her confidence, and
about the third time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs.
Elton's kmght-errantry on the subject.
'Jane Faii^ is absolutely charming. Miss Woodhouse. — .
I quite lave about Jane Fairiax. — A sweet, interesting
creature So mild and lady-like — and with such talents I—
I assure you I think she has very extraordinaiy talents. I
do not scruple to say that she plays extremely welL I know
enough of music to speak decidedly on that point Oh !
byGoogIc
Emma. 241
she is absotutdy channingl You will laugb at xay «
but, upon my word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairiaz. —
And her eituadoD is so calculated to affect one I — Miss
Woodhouse, we must exert ourselves and endeavoui to do
something for her. We must bring her forward. Such
talents as hers must not be suffered to remain unknown.— I
dare say yon have heard those charming lines of the poet,
Andw
We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane
Fair & x.'
'I cannot think there ia any danger of it,'was Emma's
calm answer; —'and when you are better acquainted with
Miss Fairfax's situation, and understand what her home has
been, with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell, I have no idea that
you will suppose her talents can be unknowiL'
'Oh I but, dear Miss Woodhouse, she ia now in Buch
retirement, such obscurity, so thrown away. Whatever
advantages she may have enjoyed with the Campbells are so
palpably at an end ! And I think she feels it I am sure
she does. She is very timid and nlent One can see that
she feels the want of encouragement I like her the better
for it I must confess it is a recommendation to me. I am
a great advocate for timidity — and I am sure one does not
often meet with it But in those who are at all inferior, it is
extremely prepossessing. Oht I assure you, Jane Fair & x
is a very deli^tful character, and interests me more than I
can express.'
'You appear to feel a great deal — but I am not awaie how
you or any of Miss Fairfax's acquaintance hoe, any of
those who have known her longer than yourself, can show
her any other attention than'
'My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by
those who dare to act Vou and I need not be afraid. If
iM set the example, many will follow it as far as they can;
though all have not our situations. We have carriages to
fetch and convey her home; and we live in a style which
could not make Ae addition of Jane Fairfax at any time the
least inconvenient. I shonld be extremely displeased if
,M..d by Google
242 Emma.
Wright were to send as up such a dinner, as could make me
regret liaving asked more than Jane Fairfax to partake of it
I liAve no idea of that sort of thing. It is not likeljr that
I should, considering what I have been used to. My greatest
danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the other
way, in doing too much, and being too careless of expense.
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought
to be — for we do not at aJl affect to equal my brother, Mr.
Suckling, in income. However, my resolution is taken as
to noticing Jane Faiifex. I shall certainly have her very
often at my house, shall introduce her wherever I can, shall
have musical parties to draw out her talents, and shall be
constantly on the watch for an ehgible situation. My ac-
quaintance is so very extensive, that I have little doubt of
hearing of something to suit her shortly. I shall introduce
her, of course, vely particularly to my brother and sister when
they come to us. I am sure they will like her extremely;
and when she gets a little acquainted with them, her fears
will completely wear off, for there really is nothing in the
manners of either but what is highly conciliating. I shall
have her very often indeed while they are with me; and
I dare say we shaU sometimes find a seat for her in the
barouche- landau in some of our exploring parties.'
'Poor Jane Fairfax !'thought Emma, —'you have not
deserved this. You may have done wrong with regard to
Mr. Dixon; but this is a punishment beyond what you can
have merited! The kindness and protection of Mrs. Elton !
— " Jane Fairfax and Jane Fair & x. " Heavens I let me not
suppose that she dares go about Emma Woodhouse-ing me I
But, upon my honour, there seem no limits to the licentious-
ness of that woman's tongue !'
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again — to any
so exclusively addressed to herself — so disgustingly decorated
with a'dear Miss Woodhouse.'The change on Mrs. Elton's
side soon afterwards appeared, and she was left in peace —
nrither forced to be the very particular friend of Mrs. Elton,
nor, under Mrs. Elton's guidance, the very active patroness of
Jane Fair & x, and only sharing with others in a general way,
in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what waa
done.
,M.f:i by Google
Emma. 243
She looked on with some amusement. Miss Bates's gra-
titude for Mra. Elton's attentions to Jane was in the first style
of guileless simphcityand waimth. She was quite one of her
worthies — the most amiable, affable, delightful woman — just
as accomplished and condescending as Mrs. Elton meant to
be considered. Emma's only surprise was that Jane Fair-
fax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs. Elton as
she seemed to do. She heard of her walking with the Eltons,
sitting with the Eltons, spenaing a day with the Eltons !
This was astonishing I She could not have believed it pos-
sible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure
such society and friendship as the Vicarage had to offer.
'She is a riddle, quite a riddle,'said she. —'To choose to
remain here month after month, under privations of every
sort And now to choose the mortification of Mrs. Elton's
notice, and the penuiy of her conversation, rather than return
to the superior companions who have always loved her with
such real, generous affection. "
Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months ;
the Campbells were gone to Ireland for three months; but
now the Campbells had promised their daughter to stay at
least till Midsummer, and fresh invitations had arrived for
her to join them there. According to Miss Bates—it all
came from her — Mrs. Dixon had written most pressingly.
Would Jane but go, means were to be found, servants sent,
friends contrived — no travelling difficulty allowed to ejiist;
but still she had declined it
'She must have some motive, more powerful than appears,
for refusing this invitation,'was Emma's conclusion.'She
must be under some sort of penance, indicted either by the
Campbells or herself. There is great fear, great caution,
great resolution somewhere. She is not to be with the Dixotu-
The decree is issued by somebody. But why must she con-
sent to be with the Eltons 1 Here is quite a separate puzzle.'
Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the
subject before the few who knew her opinion of Mrs, EEton,
Mrs. Weston ventured this apology for Jane.
'We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the
Vicarage, my dear Emma — but it is better than being always
at home. Her aunt is a good creature; but, as a constant
,M.f:i by Google
companion, must be veiy tiresome. We must con^der what
Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste f(x what she
goes to.'
'You are right, Mrs. Weston,'said Mr. Knightley waimly;
'Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of forming a just
opinion of Mrs. Elton. Could she have chosen with whom
to associate, she would not have chosen her. But (with a re-
proachfiil smile at Emma) she receives attentions from Mis.
Elton, which nobody else pays her.'
Eruma felt that Mrs, Weston was giving her a momentary
glance, and she was herself struck by his waimth. With a
feint blush, she presently replied, —
'Such attentions as Mrs. Elton's, I should have imagined,
would rather disgust than gratify Miss F^rfax. Mrs. Elton's
invitations I should have imagined any thing but inviting.'
'I should not wonder,'said Mrs. Weston,'if Miss Fairfax
were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination, by
her aunt's eagerness in accepting Mis. Elton's civilities for
her. Poor Miss Bates may very likely have committed her
niece, and huiried her into a greater appearance of intimacy
than her own good sense would have lictated, in spite of the
very natural wish of a httle change.'
'Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again ; and,
after a few minutes'silence, he said, —
'Anotherthing must be taken into consideration K > o— Mrs.
Elton does not talk U Miss Fairfax as she speaks qf her.
We all know the difference between the pronouns be or she
and thou, tiie plainest spoken amongst us; we all feel the
influence of a something beyond common civility in our
personal intercourse with each other — a something more
eariy implanted. We cannot give any body the disagreeable
hints that we may have been very full of the hour before.
We feel things differently. And besides the operation of this,
as a general principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes
Mrs. Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner; and
that, face to face, Mrs. Elton treats her with all the respect
which she has a claim ta Such a woman as Jane Fairfax
probably never fell in Mrs. Elton's way before — and no
d^ree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own
comparative littieness in action, if not in c
by Google
£mmA 345
'I know how hi^y you think of Jane Faii & x,'said Emm &
Little Heniy was in her thoughts, and a. mixture of alonn
and delicacy made her iuesolute what else to say.
'Yes,'he replied,'any body may know how highly I think
of her.'
'And yet,'said Emma, beginning hastily, sod with sn
arch look, but soon stopping — it was better, however, to
know the worst at once— ^e hurried on,'and yet, perhaps,
you may hardly be aware yourself how highly it is. llie
extent of your admiration may take yov by stuprise some day
or other.'
Mr, Kn^htley was hard at woric upon the lower buttons
ofhisdiick leather gaiters, and either the exertion of getting
them together, or some o^er cause, brought the colour into
his & ce, as he answered, —
* Oh 1 are you there 1 Butyou are miserably behind^iand.
Mr. Cole gave me a hint of it six weeks ago.'
He stopped. Emma felt her foot pressed by Mts. Wes-
ton, and did not herself know what «) think. In a mtmient
he went on, —
That will never be, however, I can assure yon. Miss
Fair & x, I dare say, would not have me if I were to ask her;
and I am very sure t shall never a^ her.*
Emma rMumed her Mend's pressure with interest ; and
was pleased enough to exclaim, —
* You are not vain, Mr. Knightley. I will say that for
you.'
He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtfiil, and,
in a manner which ^owed him not pleased, soon afterwards
said, —
'So you have been settling that I should many Jane
Fau & x.'
'No, indeed, I have not You have scolded me too much
for match-making for me to presume to take such a Ubei^
with you. What I said just now meant nothing. One says
those sort of things, of course, without any idea of a serious
meaning. Oh 1 no ; upon my word I have not the smallest
wishforyourmanying Jane Fairfax, or Jane any body. You
would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way if
you were married.'
byGoogle
246 Emma.
Mr. Knightley was thoughtful again. The itsult of his
reverie was, —'No, Emma, I do not think the extent oi my
admiration for her will ever take me hy surprise. I never
had a. thought of her in that way, I assure you.'And, soon
afterwards,'Jane Fairfax is a very chaiming young woman
— ^but not even Jane Faii & x is perfect She has a fault
She has not the open temper which a man would wish for in
a wife.'
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a & mU.
'Well,'said she,'and you soon silenced Mr. Orie, I
suppose.'
'Yes, veiy soon. He gave me a quiet lunt ; I told him
he was misUken ; he asked my pardon, and said no more.
Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than his neigh-
boure.'
'In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who wants
to be wiser and wittier than all the world ! I wonder how
she speaks of the Coles — what she calls them. How can
she fold any aj^Ilation for them, deep enough in fiuniliar
vulgarity t She calls you Knightley; what can she do for
Mr. Cole t And so I am not to be surprised that Jane Fair-
fax accepts her civilities, and consents to be with her. Mrs.
Weston, your argument weig^ most with me. I can much
more mdily enter into the temptation of getting away from
Miss Bates, than I can believe in the triumph of Miss Fair-
fa^s mind over Mrs. Elton. I have no & ith in Mrs. Elton's
acknowledging herself the inferior in thought, word, or deed;
or in her being under any restraint beyond fa^ own scanty
rule of good breeding. I cannot imagine that she will not be
continually insulting her visiter with praise, encouragement,
and offers of service; that she will not be continually detail-
ing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring her a
permanent situation to die induding her in those deligfatAil
exploring parties which are to take place in the baroudie-
landan.'
'Jane Fairfax has feeling,'said Mr, Knightley ;'I do not
accuse her of want of feeUng. Her sensibilities, I suspect;
are strong, and her temper excellent in its power of forbear-
ance, patience, self-control ; but it wants openness. She is
resOTcd ; more reserved, I think, than she used to be : and
byGoogle
Emma. 347
I love an open temper. No; till Cole alluded to my sup-
posed attachment, it had never entered my head. I saw
Jane Fair & x, and conversed with her, with admiration aad
pleasure always ; but with no thought beyond.'
'Well, Mrs. Weston,* said Emma, triumphantly, when he
left them,'what do you say now to Mr. Knightle/a manying
JaneFaii^xT
'Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much
occupied by the idea of tut being in love with her, that I
should not wonder if it were to end in hia being so at last
Do not beat me.'
CHAPTER XVI.
Every body In and about Highbury, who had ever visited
Mr. Elton, was disposed to pay him attention on his mairiage.
Dinner panies and evening paities were made for him and
his lady ; and invitations flowed in so fast that she had soon
the pleasure of apprehending they were nevei to have a dis-
engaged day.
'I see how it is,'said she ;'I see what a life I am to lead
among you. Upon my word we shall be absolutely dis-
sipated. We really seem quite the fashion. If this is Uving
in the country, it is nothing very formidable. From Monday
next to Saturday, I assure you we have not a disengaged
day t A woman with fewer resources than I have need not
have been at a loss.'
No invitadon came amiss to her. Her Bath habits made
evening parties perfectly natural to her, and Maple Grove
had given her a taste for dinners. She was a little shocked
at the want of two drawing-rooms, at the poor attempt at
rout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury card
parties. Mrs. Bates, Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Goddard, and Others,
were a good deal behind hand in knowledge of the world,
but she would soon show them how every thing ought to be
arranged. In the course of the spring she must return theii
civilides by one very superior party; in which her card
tables should be set out with their separate candles and
unbroken packs in the true 5t)'le, and more waiters engaged
by Google
248 Emttia.
for the evening thut their own eata.bUshmeQt could furnish,
to cany round the refreshments at exactly the proper hour,
and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be s & tisfied without
a dinner at Hartfield for the Eltons. Th^ must not do less
than others, or she should be exposed to odious suipidons,
and imagined capable of pitiful resentment A dinner there
must be. After Emma had talked about it for ten minutes,
Mr. Wosdhouse felt no unwillingness, and only made the
usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottom of the table
himself, with the usual regular difficult of deciding who
should do it for him.
The persons to be invited required little thought Besides
the Eltons,itmu3tbe theWestonsandMr.Knightley; sofar
it was all of course: and it was hardly less inevitable that
poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth; but
this invitation was not given with equal satisiaction, and, on
many accounts, Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet's
b^ging to be allowed to decline iL'She would rather not
be in ^ company more than she could help. She was not
quite able to see him and his charming happy wife blether,
without feeling uncomfortable. If Miss Woodhouse would
not be displeased she would rather stay at home.'It was
precisely what Emma would have wished, had she deemed it
possible enough for wishing. She was delighted with the
fordtude of her litde friend, — ioi fortitude she knew it was
in her to give up being in company, and stay at home; and
she could now invite die very person whom she really wanted
lo make the eighth, Jane Fairfax. Since her last conversa-
tion with Mrs. Weston and Mr. Knighdey she was more con-
science-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been.
Mr. Knighdey's words dwelt with her. He had said that
Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs. Elton which no-
body else paid her.
'This is very true,'s^ she,'at least as fax as relates to
me, which was all that was meant, and it is very shameful
Of the same age, and always knowing her, I ought to have
been more her friend. She will never like me now. I have
neglected her too long. But I will show her greater attea
tion than I have done.'
byGoogIc
Smma. 249
Eveiy invitatioit was successful They were all disen-
gaged and all happy. The [vepaiato^ interest of this
dinner, however, was not yet over. A circumstance rather
vnlucky occuned. The two eldest little Kni^^tleys were
engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some
weeks in the spring, and their p^ia now proposed bringing
them, and staying one whole day at Haitfidd — which one
day would be the very day of this party. His professional
engagements did not allow of his being put c^, but both
father and daughter were disturbed by its happening w > .
Mr. Woodbouse considered eight persons at dinner together
as the utmost that his nerves could bear — and here would
be a ninth— and Emma apprdiended that it would be a ninth
very much out of humour at not being able to come even to
Hartfield for fot^-eight hours without falling in with a
dinner-paity.
She comforted her fiither better than she could comfort
herself, by representing that though be certainly would make
them nine, yet he always said so Uttle, that the increase of
noise would be very immateriaL She thought it in reality a
sad exchange for herself to have him, with his grave looks
and reluctant amversation, opposed to her instead of his
brother.
" Die event was more & vonrable to Mr. Woodhouse than
to Emma. John Knighdey came; but Mr. Weston was
unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the
very day. He mi^t be able to join them in the evening,
but certainly not to dinner. Mr. Woodhouse was quite at
ease ; and itie seeing hun so, with the arrival of the littie boys
and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing
his fate, removed the chief of even Emma's vexation.
The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and
Mr. John Knightley seemed early to devote himself to the
business of being agreeable. Instead of drawing his brother
off to a window while they waited for dinner, he was talking
to Miss Fairfax. Mra. B^ton, as elegant as lace and pearis
could make her, he looked at in dlence — ^wanting only to
observe enough for Isabella's information — but Miss Fair-
fax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could
talk to her. He hod met her before break & st as he wae
by Google
250 Emma.
returning from a walk with his little boys, when it had been
just beginning to rain. It was natural to have some dvil
hopes on the subject, and be said, —
'I hope you did not venture bi. Miss Fair & x, this
morning, or I am sure you must have been weL We
scarcely got home in time. I hope you tumed direcdy.'
'I went only to the post-office,'said she,'uid reached home
before the lain was much. It is my daily enand, I always
fetch the letters when I am here. It saves trouble, and is a
something to get me out A walk before breakfast docs me
good.'
'Not a walk in the rain I should imagine.'
'No; but it did not absolutely rain when I set oul'
Mr. John Knightley smiled, and repUed,—
'That is to say, you chose to have your walk, iot you
were not six yards from your own door when I had the
pleasure of meeting you; and Henry and John had seen
more drops than they could count long before. The post-
office has a great chann at one period of our Uves. When
you have lived to my age, you will begin to think letters are
never worth going through the rain for.'
There was a little blush, and then this answer: —
'I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the
midst of every dearest connection, and therefore I cannot
e]q > ect that simply growing older should make me indifieietU
about letters.'
'Indifferent I Oh no — I never conceived you could be-
come indifferent Letters are no matter of indifference; tbe^
are generally a very positive cuise.'
'You are speaking of letters oi business ; mine are letten
of friendship.'
'I have often thought them the worst of the two,'replied
he coolly.'Business, you know, may bring money, but fnend-
ship haidly ever does.'
'Ahl you are not serious now. I know Mr. John
Knightley too well — I am very sure he understands the
value of friendship as well as any body. I can easily be-
lieve that letters are vety httle to you, much less than to
ne; but it is not your being ten years older than myself
which makes the difinence, it is not age, but situation. You
,,_-:! byGoogle
Emma. 25 1
have every body dearest to you alvays at hand, I, probably,
never shall again; and therefore till I have outlived all my
affections, a post-office, I think, must always have power to
draw me out, in worse weather than to-day.'
'When I talked of your being altered by time, by the pro-
gress of years,'said John Knightley,'I meant to imply the
change of dtuattOD which time usually brings. I consider
one as including the other. Time will generally lessen the
interest of every attachment not within the daily circle — but
tiiat is not the change I had in view for you. As an old
friend, you will allow me to hope. Miss Fairfax, that ten
years hence you may have as many concentrated objects b &
I have.'
It wa£ kindly said, and very far from giving offence. A
pleasant'thank you'seemed meant to laugh it off; but a
blush, a quivering lip, a tear in the eye, showed that it was
felt beyond a laugh. Her attention was now claimed by Mr.
Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on such
occasions, making the circle of his guests, and paying his
paiticulai compliments to the ladies, was endir^ with her~
and with all his mildest urbanity, said,—
'I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out
this morning in the rain. Young ladies should take care of
themselves. Young ladies are delicate plants. They should
take care of their health and their complexion. My dear,
did you change your stockings )'
'Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by
your kind solicitude about me 1'
'My dear Miss Faii & x, young ladies are very sure to be
cared for. — I hope your good gnndroamma and aunt are
welL They are some of my very old friends. I wish my
health allowed me to be a better neighbour. You do us a
great deal of honour to-day, I am sure. My daughter and I
are both highly sensible of your goodness, and have the
greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Haitfield.'
The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and
feel that he had done his duty, and made every fiiir lady
welcome and easy.
By this time the walk in the rain had reached Mrs. Elton,
and her reinonstrances now opened upon Jane.
by Google
25 2 Emma.
* My dear Jbdc, what is this I bear t — Going to the po*^
office in the lain! — This must not be I assure you. You sad
girl, how could you do such a thing I It is a ngn I was not
there to take care of you.'
Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught
any cold.
'Oh I do not tell itu. You really are a veiy sad giri, and
do not know how to take care of youisel£ To the post-
office indeed I Mis. Weston, did you ever hear the likel
You and I must positively exert our authority.'
'My adirice,* said Mis. Weston kindly and persuasivdyt
'I certainly do feel tempted to give. — Miss Faii & z, yoa
must not run such risks. Liable as you have been to severe
colds, indeed you ought to be paiticulariy careful, especially
at this time of year. The spiing I always think requires
more than common care. Better wait an hour or two, or
even half a da.y for your letters, than run the risk of bringing
on your cough again. Now do not you feel that you had I
Yes, I am sure you are much too reasonable. You look as if
you would not do such a thing again.'
'Ohl ^t shall not do such a thing agun,'eagerly rejoined
Mis. Elton.'We will not allow her to do such a thing
again :'— and nodding significantly —'there must be some
airangenient made, there must indeed. I shall speak to Mr.
£. The man who fetches our letters evety morning (one of
our men, I forget his name) shall inquire for yours too and
bring them to you. That will obviate all difficolties you
know; and from us I really think, my dear Jane, yon caa
have no scruple to accept such an accommodation.'
'You are extremely kind,'said Jane;'but I cannot give
up mj early walk. I am advised to be out of doors as much
as I can; I must walk somewhere, and the post-office is an
object; and, upon my word, I have scarce^ ever had a bad
morning before.'
* My dear Jane, say no more about it The thing is deter-
mined, that is (laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume
to dctennine any tiling without the concurrence of my lord
and master. You know, Mrs. Weston, you and I must be
cautious how we express ourselves. But I do flatter mysel(
my dear Jan^ that my influence is not entirely worn out If
byGoogIc
Emma. 253
I meet with no insuperable difiicultie% thenfore, coasider
tiiat point as settled.'
'Excuse me,'said Jane earnestly,'I cannot by any means
consent to such an airangcment, so needlessly troublesome
to your servant If the errand were not a pleasure to me,
it could be done, as it always is when I am not here, by my
grandmamma's.'
'Oh 1 my dearj but so much as Pat^ has to do I — And it
is a kindness to employ our men.'
Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but,
instead of answering, she began speaking again to Mr. John
Knighdey.
'The post-office is a wonderful establishment 1'said
she.'The legulari^ and dispatch of iti Ifone thinks of all
that it has to do, and all that it does so well, it ia really
astonishing I
'It is certainty very well regulated.'
'So seldom that any n^ligence or blunder appears I So
seldom that a letter, among the thousands that are constandy
passing about the kingdom, is even carried wrong— And not
ene in a million, I suppose, actually lost! And when one
considers the variety of hands and of bad hands too, that are
to be deciphered, it increases the wonder.'
'The clerks grow expert from habit They must begin
with some quickness of sight and hand, and exerdse im-
proves them. If you want any fiirther explanadon,'continued
he, smiling,'they are paid for it That is the key to a great
d^ of capacity. The public pays and must be served
well'
The varieties of hand-writing were fiuther talked of, and
the usual observations made.
'I have heard it asserted,'said John Knightley,'that
the same sort of hand-wridng often prevails in a family; and
where the same master teaches, it is natural enough. But
for that reason, I should imagine the likeness must be chiefly
confined to the females, for boys have very litUe teaching
after an early age, and scramble into any hand they can get
Isabella and Emma, I think, do write very much alike. I
have not always known their writing apart'
by Google
254 Emma.
'Yes,'said his brother hesitatingly,'there is a likeness. I
know what you mean — but Emma's hand is the strongest "
'Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,'said ^f^.
Woodhouse;'and always did. And so does poor Mrs.
Weston'— with half a stgh and half a smile at her.
'1 never saw any gentleman's hand-writing'— Emma began,
looking also at Mis. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that
Mrs. Weston was attending to some one else — and the pause
gave her time to reflect'Now, how am I going to intro-
duce him t — Am I unequal to speaking his name at once
before all these people ? Is it necessaiy for me to use any
roundabout phrase I — Your Yorkshire friend — your corre-
spondent in Yorkshire; — that will be the way, I suppose, if I
were very bad. No, I can pronounce his name without the
smallest distress. I certainly get better and better. — Now
for it-
Mrs. Weston was disengaged, and Emma began again —
'Mr. Frank ChinchiU writes one of the best gendemen's
hands I ever saw.'
'I do not admire it,'said Mr. Knightley. ■ It is too small
—wants strength. It is tike a woman's writing.'
This was not submitted to by either lady. They vindicated
him agiunst the base aspersion.'No, it by no means wanted
strength — it was not a. large hand, but very clear and cer-
tainly strong. Had not Mis. Weston any letter about her to
producer No, she had heard from him very lately, but
having answered the letter, had put it away.
'If we were in the other room,'said Enuna —'if I had my
writing-desk, I am sure I could produce a specimen. I have
a note of his. — Do not you remember, Mrs. Weston, era-
ploying him to write for you one day)'
'He chose to say he was employed.'
'Well, weU, I have that note; and can show it after dinner
to convince Mr. Knighdey.'
'Oh ! when a gallant young man, like Mr. Frank Churchill,'
said Mr. Knighdey drily, * writes to a fair lady like Miss
Woodhouse, he will, of course, put forth his best'
Dinner was on table. Mrs. Elton, before she could be
spoken to, was ready; and before Mr. Woodhouse had
byGoogIc
Emma. 255
reached her widi his request to be allowed to hand her into
the dining-parlour, was saying —
'Must I go first I I really am ashamed of alvays leading
the way. "
Jane's solicitude about fetching her own lettns had not
escaped Emma. She had heard and seen it all; and felt
some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morn-
ing had produced any. She suspected that it had; that it
would not have been so resolutely encountered but in AiU
expectati < Hi of hearing fixim some one very dear, and that
it had not been in vain. She thought there was an air of
greater happiness than usual — a glow both of complexion and
spirits.
She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the ex-
pedition and the expense of the Irish mails; — it was at her
tongue's end — but she abstained. She was quite determined
not to utter a word that should hurt Jane Fairfax's feelings ;
and they followed the other ladies out of the room, arm in
ann, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming to the
beauty and grace of each.
CHAPTER XVII.
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner,
Emma found it hardly possible to prevent their making two
distinct parties ; — widi so much perseverance in judging and
behaving ill did Mrs. Elton engross Jane Fair & x and slif^t
herself She and Mrs. Weston were obliged to be almost
always either talking together or silent together. Mrs. Elton
left diem no choice. If Jane repressed her for a little time,
she soon began again ; and though much that passed between
them was in a half-whisper, especiaUy on Mrs. Elton's side,
there was no avoiding a knowledge of their principal subjects :
— The post-office — catching ajld — fetching letters — and
friendship, were long under discussion; and to them suc-
ceeded one which must be at least equally unpleasant to
Jane,^nquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
25 6 Emma.
likely to suit her, and [vofessions of Mia. Elton's meditated
activity.
'Here is April «»ael'said she;'I get quite anxious
about you. June will soon be here.'
'But I have never fixed on June or any other month —
merely looked forward to the summer in general'
'But have you really heard of nothing!'
'I have not even made any inquiry ; I do not wish to
make any yet'
'Oh I my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are not
aware of the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable
thing.'
'I not aware I'said Jane, shakiog her head ; * dear Mrs,
Elton, who can have thou^t of it as I have done t'
'But you have not seen so much of the world as I have
You do not know how many candidates there always are for
the Jlnt situations. I saw a vast deal of that in die neigh-
bourhood round Maple Grove. A cousin of Mr. Sudding^
Mra. Bragge, had such an infinity of applications ; eveiy body
was anxious to be in her family, for she moves in the fim
drcle. Wax-candles in the school-room 1 You may imagine
how desirable! Of all houses in the kingdom, Mrs. Brake's
is the one I would most wish to see you in.'
'Colonel and Mrs. Campbell are to be in town again by
midsummer,'said Jane.'I must spend some time with
them ; I am sure they will want it; — afterwards I may pro-
bably be glad to dispose of myself But I would not wish
you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present.'
'Trouble I ay, I know your scruples. You are afraid
of giving me trouble; but I assure you, my dear Jane, the
Campbells can hsrdly be more interested about you than I
am. I shall writs to Mrs. Partridge in a day or two, and
shall give her a strict cha^ to be on the look-out for any
thing eligible.'
'Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the
subject to her; till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to
be giving any body trouble.'
'But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is
April, and June, or say even July, is very near, with such
s to accomplish before us. Your inexperience really
by Google
Emma. 257
amuses nic I A situation such as you deserve, and your
friends would require for you, is no every-day occurrence,
J9 not obtained at a moments notice j indeed, Indeed, we must
begin inquiring directly.'
'Excuse me, ma'am, but this is by no means my intention ;
I make no inquiiy myseli^ and should be sony to have any
made by my friends. When I am quite determined as to
the time, I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed.
There are places in town, offices, where inquiry would soon
produce something — offices for the sale, not quite of human
flesh, but of human intellect'
'Oh 1 my dear, human flesh ! You quite shock me ;
if you mean a fling at the slave-trade, I assure you Mr.
Suckling was always rather a fnend to the abolition.'
'I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,'
replied Jane;'govemess-trade, I assure you, was all that
I had in view; widely different certainly as to the guilt of
those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the
victims, I do not know where it lies. But I only mean to
say that there are advertising offices, and that by applying
to them I should have no doubt of very soon meeting with
something that would do.'
'Something that would do !'repeated Mrs. Elton.'Ay,
t^at may suit your humble ideas of yourself; — I know what
a modest creature you are; but it will not satisfy your
friends to have you taking up with any thing that may offer,
any inferior common-place situation, in a family not moving
in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancies of life.'
'You are very obliging; but as to all that I am very indif-
ferent; it would be no object to me to be with the rich; my
mortifications, I think, would only be the greater; I should
suffer more from comparison. A gentleman's family is all
that I should condirion for.'
* I know you, I know you ; you would take up with any
thing; but I shall be a little more nice, and I am sure the
good Campbells will be quite on my side ; with your supe-
rior talents, you have a right to move in the first circle.
Your musical knowledge alone would entitle you to name
your own terms, have as many rooms as you like, and mis
in the family aa much as you diosej— that is — I do not
byGoogle
258 Emma.
know — if you knew the haip, you might do all that, I am
very sure; but you sing as wdl as play; — ^yes, I r«Uly be-
lieve you mi^t, even without the harp, stipulate for what
you cJiose;— 4Qd you must and shall be delig^itfully, hon-
ourably and comfortably settled before the Campbells or I
have any rest'
'You may well class the delight, the honour, and the com-
fort of such a situation together,'said Jane,'they are pretty
sure to be equal; however, I am very serious in not wishing
any thing to be attempted at present for me. I am exceed-
ingly obliged to you, Mis. Elton, I am obliged to any body
who feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishing nothing
to be done till the summer. For two or three months longer
I shall remain where I am, and as I am.'
'And I am quite serious too^ I assure you,'replied Mrs.
Elton gaUy, * in resolving to be always on the watch, and
employing my friends to watch also, that nothing really
unexceptionable may pass us.'
In this style she ran on ; never thoroughly stopped by any
thing till Mr. Woodhouse came into the room; her vaniqr
had then a change of object^ and Emma heard her saying iu
the same half-whisper to Jane, —
'Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest ! —
Only think of his gallantry ia coming away before the other
men 1 — ^what a dear creature he is I — I assure you I like him
excessively. I admire all that quaint, old-fa^oned polite-
ness; it is much more to my taste than modem ease;
modem ease often disgusts me. But this good old Mr.
Woodhouse, I wish you bad heard his gallant speeches to
me at dinn^. Oh ! I assure you I began to think my cara
sposa would be absolutely jealous. I fancy I am rather a
bvourite; he took notice of my gown. How do you like it!
Selina's choice — handsome, I think, but I do not know
whether it is not over-trimmed ; I have the greatest dislike
to the idea of being over-trimmed — quite a hoiror of finery.
I must put on a few ornaments nmf, because it is expected
of me. A bride, you know, must appear like a bride, but
my natural taste is all for simphcity; a simple style of diess
is 80 infinitely preferable to finery. But I am quite in the
minority, I believe; few people seem to value sin^ > licity < rf
byGoogIc
Emma. 359
dress,— 4bow and finery ore eveiy thing. I have some notion
of putting such a tiiinming as this to my white and silver
poplin. Do you think it will look well T'
The whole party wete but just rc-assembled in the draw-
ing-room when Mr. Weston niade bis appearance among
them. He had returned to a late dimier, and walked to
Haitfield as soon as it was over. He had been too much
expected by the best judges, for surprise — but there was great
joy. Mr. Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as
he would have been soiiy to see him before. John Knightley
only was in mute astonishmenL That a man who might
have spent his evening quietly at home after a day of
business in London, should set off again, and walk balf-a-
mile to another man's house, for the sake of being in mixed
company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of
civility and the noise of numbeis, was a circumstance to
strike him deeply. A man who haid been in motion since
eight o'clock in the morning, and might now have been still,
— who had been long talking, and might have been silent, —
who had been in more than one crowd, and might have
been alone! — Such a man, to quit the tranquilli^ and
independence of bis own fire-side, and on the evening of a
cold sleety April day rush out again into the world ! — Could
he, by a touch of his finger, have instantly taken back his
wife, there would have been a motive; but his coming would
probably prolong rather than break up the par^. John
Knightley looked at him with amazement, then shrugged his
shouldeis, and said,'I could not have believed it even of
him.'
Mr. Weston meanwhile perfectly unsuspicious of the
indignation he was exciting, happy and cheerful as usual,
and with all the right of being principal talker, which a day
qpent any where fi'om home confers, was making himself
agreeable among the rest; and having satisfied the inquiries
of his wife as to his dinner, convincing her that none of all
her carefiil dkecrions to the servants had been forgotten,
and spread abroad what public news he had heard, was
proceeding to a family communicadon, which, though princi-
pally addressed to Mrs. Weston, he had not the smallest
doubt of being highly interesting to every body in the room.
by Google
26o Emma.
He gave her a letter^it was from Frank, and to herself; he
had met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of
evening it
'Read it, read it,'said he, —'it will give you pleasure; only
a few lines — trill not take you long; read it to Emma.'
The two ladies looked over it together ; and he sat smil-
ing and talking to them the whole time, in a voice a little
subdued, but very audible to every body.
'Well, he is coming, you see ; good news, I think. Wdl,
what do you say to iti I always told you he would be here
again soon, did not II Anne, my dear, did not I always tell
you so, and you would not believe me] In town next week,
you see— at the latest, I dare say ; for tJU is as impatient as
the black gentleman when any thing is to be done : roost
likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her
iUness, all nothing, of course. But it is an ezcdleDt thing
to have Frank among us again, so near as town. They will
stay a good while when they do come, and he will be half
his time with us. This is precisely what I wanted. Well,
pretty good news, is not iti Have you finished itt Has
F.mma read it alii Put it up, put it up; we will have a good
talk about it some other time, but it will not do now. I
shall only just mention the drcumstance to the others in a
common way.'
Mrs. Weston was roost comfortably pleased on the occa-
sion. Her looks and words had nodiing to restrain them.
She was happy, she knew she was happy, and knew she
ought to be happy. Her congratulations \race warm and
openj but Emma could not speak so fluently. S^ was a
little occupied in weighing her own feelings, and trying to
understand the degree of her agitation, which she rather
thought was considerable.
Mr, Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too
communicative to want others to talk, was very well satisfied
with what she did say, and soon rooved away to make the
rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of what
the whole room must l^ve overheard already.
It was well that he took every body's joy for granted, or he
might not have thought either Mr. Woodhouse or Mr.
Knightley particularly delighted. They were the first entitled,
by Google
Emma. 261
after Mrs. Weston and Emma, to be made happy. From
theni he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax; bat she was
so deep in conveisation with John Knightley, that it would
have been too positive an interrapdon; and, finding himself
close to Mrs. Elton, and her attention disengaged, he neces-
■aril; began on the subject with her.
CHAPTER XVIII.
'I HOPE I shall soon have the pleasme of introducing my
son to you,'said Mr. Weston.
Mrs. Elton, veiy willing to suppose a particular compliment
intended her by such a hope, smiled most graciously.
'You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I preamne,'
he continued,'and know him to be my son, though he does
not bear my name.'
'Oh yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance.
I am sure Mr. Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and
we shall both have great pleasure in seeing him at the
Vicarage.'
'Yon are very obliging. Fmnk will be extremely happy,
I am sure. He is to be in town next week, if not sooner.
We have notice of it in a letter to-day. I met the letters in
my way this morning, and seeing my son's hand, presumed
to open it, though it was not directed to me — it was to Mrs.
Weston. She is his principal coirespondent, I assure you.
I hardly ever get a letter.'
'And so you absolutely opened what was directed to
herl Oh, Mr. Weston (laughing affectedly), I must protest
against that A most dangerous precedent indeed! I beg
you wilt not let your neighbours follow your example. Upon
my word, if this is what I am to expect, we married women
must begin to exert ourselves. Oh, Mr. Weston, I could not
have beUeved it of you 1'
'Ay, we men are sad fellows. You must take care of
yourself Mis. Elton. This letter tells us — it is a short letter
—written in ahuny, merely to give us notice : it tells us that
they are all coming up to town directly, on Mrs. Cfauichill's
by Google
ac < »unt: she has not been well the whole winter, and thinki
Enscombe too cold for her; so tbey are all to move south-
ward without loss of time.'
'Indeed I from Voiksbiie, I think. Enscombe is ia
YoAshiret'
'Yes, they are about 190 miles from London: a consider
able journey.'
'Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Six^-five miles
& rther ditm from Maple Grove to London. But what is dis-
tance, Mr. Weston, to people of lais^ fortune 1 You would
be amazed to hear how my brother, Mr. Suckling, sometimes
flies about You will hardly believe me, but twice in one
week he and Mr. Bragge went to London and bade again
with four horses.'
'The evil of l^e distance from Enscombe,'said Mc
Weston, < is, that Mrs. Churchill, as «v taiderstaiid, has not
been able to leave the so & for a week together. In Frank's
last letter she complained, he said, of being too weak to get
into her conservatory without having both his arm and his
uncle's. This, you know, speaks a great degree of weakness^
but now she is so impatient to be in town, that she means to
sleep only two nights on the road — so Frank writes word.
Certunly, delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitu-
tions, Mrs. Elton; you must grant me that'
'No, indeed, I shall grant you nodiing. I always take the
part of my own sex ; I do indeed. I give you notice, you
will find me a formidable antagtmist on that point I always
stand up for women; and I assure you, if you knew how
Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, you would not
wonder at Mis. Churchill's making incredible exertions to
avoid it Setina says it is quite horror to her; and I believe
I have caught a little of her nice^. She always travels with
her own sheets; an excellent precaution. Does Mrs. Churcb-
hill do the same t'
'Depend upon it, Mrs. Churchill does every thing that any
other fine lady ever did. Mrs. Churchill will not be second
to any lady in the land for'
Mrs. Elton eagerly interposed with, —
'Oh, Mr. Weston, do not mistake me. Selina is no fine
lady, I assure yoa. Do not run away with nicb an idea.'
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Emma, 36}
'Is not she 1 Then she is no rule for Mis. CbuTchill, who
is as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld.'
Mrs. Elton began to think she had been wrong in dis-
claiming so wannly. It was by no means her object to
have it believed that her sister was ma a fine tady; per-
haps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it ; and she
was considering in vdiat way she had best retract, when Mr.
Weston went on.
'Mrs. Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you
may suspect; but this ia quite between ourselves. She ia
very fond of Frank, and therefore I would not speak ill of
her. Besides, she ia out of health now ; but that indeed, by
her own account, she has always been. I would not say so
to every body, Mrs. Elton; but I have not much faith in
Mrs. Churchill's illness.'
'If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Westonl To
Bath, 01 to Chfton !'
'She has taken it into her head that Enacombe is too cold
(01 her. The tact ia, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe.
She haa now been a longer time stationary there than she
ever was before, and she begins to want change. It ia a re-
tired place. A fine place, but very retired'
'Ay — like Maple Oove, I dare say. Nothing can stand
more retired from the road than Maple Grove. Such an
immense plantation all round it! You seem shut out from
every thing — in the most complete retirement. And Mrs.
Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to en-
joy that sort of seclusion. Or, perhaps she may not have
resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country lif &
I always say a woman cannot have too many resources — and
I feel verythankfiilthat I have so many myself as to be quite
independent of sodety.'
'Frank was here in February for a fortnight'
'So I remember to have h^rd. He will find an additum
to the society of Highbury when he comes again ; that IS, if
I may presume to call myself an addition. But perhaps he
may never have heard of there bdng such a creature in the
world.'
This was too load a call for a comphment to be passed
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
264 Emma.
by, snd Mr. Weston, with a very good grace, immediately
exclaimed, —
'My dear madam! Nobody but yourself could imagine
Euch a thing possible. Not heard of you I I believe Mis.
Weston's letters lately have been full of veiy little else than
Mrs. Elton.'
He had done his duty, and could return to his son.
'When Frank left us,'continued he,'it was quite uncertain
when we might see him again, which makes this day's news
doubly welcome. It has been completely unexpected.
That is, / always had a strong peisuasion he would be here
again soon ; I was sure something favouiablc would turn up
— but nobody believed me. He and Mrs. Weston were
both dreadfully desponding. " How could he contrive to
come t And how could it be supposed that his nnde and
aunt would spare him again I " and so forth. Z always felt
that something would happen in our & vour; and so it has,
you see. I have observed, Mrs. Elton, in die course of my
life^ that if things are going untowaidly one month, they are
sure to mend the neitt'
'Veiy true, Mr. Weston, perfectly true. It is just what I
used to say to a certain gendenum in company in the days
of courtship, when, because things did not go quite right-
did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited his feel-
ings — he was apt to be in despair, and exclaim that he was
sure at tiiis rate it would be May before Hymen's safiron
robe would be put on for us! Oh! the pains I have been at
to dispel those gloomy ideas, and give him cheerfiiller views I
The carriage — ^we had disappointments about the carriage —
one momiDg, I remember, he came to me quite in despair.'
She was stopped by a slight fit of cou^ing, and Mr.
Weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on.
'You were mentioning May. May is the vciy month
which Mrs. Churchill is ordered, or has ordered herself to
spend in some warmer place than Enscombe — in short, to
spend in London; so that we have the agreeable prospect of
frequent visits from Frank the whole spring — precisely the
season of the year which one should have chosen for it: days
almost at ±e longest; weather genial and pleasant, always
inviting ooe ou^ and never too hot for exercise. When he
byGoogIc
Emma. 365
wai here before, we made the best of it ; but there was a
good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there always is in
February, you know; and ve could not do half that we
intended. Now will be the time. This will be complete
enjoyment] and I do not know, Mrs. Elton, whether the
uncertainty of oui meetings, the sort of constant expectation
there will be of his coming in to-day or to-morrow, and at
any hour, may not be more & iendly to happiness than having
him actually in the house. I think it is so. I think it is
the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight I
hope you will be pleased with my son; but you must not
expect a prodigy. He is generally thought a fine young
man, but do not expect a prodigy. Mrs. Weston's partiality
for him is very great, and, as you may suppose, most gratify-
ing to mc. She thinks nobody equal to hjin.'
'And I assure you, Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt
that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour. I have
heard so much in praise of Ur. Frank ChurchilL At the
same time it is fair to observe, that I am one of those who
always judge for themselves, and are by no means implicidy
guided by others. I give you notice, that as I find your son,
so I shall judge of him. I am no flatterer.'
Mr. Weston was muang,
'I hope,'said he presently,'I have not been severe upon
poor Mis. ChurchilL If she is ill, I should be sorry to do
ha injustice; but there are some trails in her character which
make it difScult for me to speak of her with the forbearance
I could wish. You cannot be ignorant, Mis. Elton, of my
connection with the family, nor of the treatment I have met
with; and, between ouisclves, the whole blame of it is to be
laid to her. She was the instigator. Frank's mother would
never have been slighted as she was but for her, Mr, Churchill
has pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife's; his is a quiet,
indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride, that would harm nobody
and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but
her pride is arrogance and insolence. And what inclines
one less to bear, she has no fair pretence of fiimily or blood.
She was nobody when he married her, barely the dau^ter
of a gentleman; but ever since her being turned into a
ChunMl, she has out-Chnrcbill'd Aem all in high and
by Google
366 Emma.
mighty claims : but in herself 1 usure jou, she is an up-
start.'
< Only tliink 1 well, that miut be infinitely proroking I I
have quite a. honor of upEtai1 & Maple Grove has given
me & thorough disgust to people of that sort; for there is a
^unily in that neif^bouifaood who are such an annoyance to
my brother and sister from the airs they give themsdves !
Your description of Mis, Churchill made me think of dion
directly. People of the name of Tupman, very lately settled
there, and encumbered mth many low connections, but
giving thcmselvea immense airs, and expecting to be on a
rooting with the old established femilies. A year and a half
is the very utmost that they can have lived at West Hall ;
and how they got their fcwtune nobody knows. They came
from Binningham, which is not k place to promise much, you
know, Mr. Weston. One has not great hopes from Birming-
ham. I always say there is something direful in the sound:
but nothing more is positively known of the Tupmans, though
a good many things, I assure you, are suspected; and yet by
their manners they evidently think themselves equal evtxi
to my brother, Mr. Suckling, who happens to be one of their
nearest neighbours. It is infinitely too bad. Mr. Suckling,
who has been eleven years a reddent at Maple Grove, and
whose father had it before him — I believe, at least — I am
almost sure that old Mr. Sucklinghad completed the purchase
before his death.'
They were interrupted. Tea was carrying round, and Mr.
Weston, having said all that he wanted, soon took the oppoi-
tunity of walking away.
After tea, Mr. and Mis. Weston, and Mr. Elton, sat down
with Mr, Woodhouse to caida. The remaining five were
lefr to their own powers, and Emma doubted their getting on
very well; for Kr. Knightley seemed little disposed for con-
versation J Mrs. Elton was wanting notice, which nobody had
inclination to pay, and she was herself in a wony of spirits
which would have made hei prefer being silent
Mr, John Knighdey proved more talkative than his bio & er.
He was to leave them early the next day; and he 50 < m began
with—
'Well, Emma, I do not believe I have any diing men to
,,_-:! byGoogle
Emma. 267
say about the boys ; but you have your Aster's letter, and
every thing is down at full length there we may be nite. My
chaige would be much more concise than her's, and probably
not much in the same spirit; all that I have to recommend
being comprised in — Do not apcnl them, and do not physic
them.'
'I latber hope to satisfy yoa both,'said Emma;'for I
shall do an in my power to nuke them ha|^y, which will be
enough for Isabella ; and hap[Hness must preclude false in-
dulgoice and physic'
'And if you fii > d them troublesome, you must send them
home again.'
'That ia veiy likely. You think so, do not you 1'
'I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your
fiither^ or even may be some incumbrance to you, jf your
visiting engagements continue to increase as much as they
have done lately.'
'Increase 1'
'Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year
has made a great difference in your way of life.'
'Difference! No, indeed I am not'
'There can be no doubt of your being much more en-
gaged with company than you used to be. Wtness this very
time. Here am I come down for only one day, and you are
engaged with a dinner-party 1 When did it happen before 1
or any thing like it t Your neighbourhood is increasing,
and you mix more with it A little while ago, eveiy letter to
Isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties ; diimera at
Mr. Cole's, or balls at the Crown. The difference which
Randalls, Randalls alone, makes in your gcungs-on is very
greaL'
'Yes,'said his brother quickly ;'it is Randalls that does
italL'
'Very well; and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to
have less influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible
thing, Enuna, that Heniy and John may be sometimes in
the way. And if they ai^ I (»ily beg you to send them
home.'
'No,'cried Mr. Knightley;'that need not be the conse-
by Google
268 Emma.
quence. Let them be sent to DoDwelL I ghall certainly be
at leisure.'
'Upon my word,'exclaimed Emma,'you amuse me I I
should like to know how many of all my numerous engage-
ments take place without your being of the paity; and why
I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure to attend
to the httlc boys. These amazing cngmements of mine —
what haye they been t Dining once with the Cole's, and
having a ball talked of^ which never took place. I can
understand you — (nodding at Mr. John KnigfaUey)— your
good fortune in meeting with so many of your & iends at once
here delights you too much to pass unnoticed — But yoa
(turning to Mr. Knightlcy,) who know how very, very seldom
I am ever two hours from Hartfield — ^why you should fore-
see such a. series of dissipation for me, I cannot imagine^
And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that if aunt Emma
has not time for them, Z do not think they would fare much
better with uncle Knightlcy, who is absent from h < »ne about
five hours where she is absent one; and who^ when he is at
hom^ is either reading to himself or settling his accounts.'
Mr. Knightlcy seemed to be tiying not to amile; and
mcceeded without difficult, upon Mis. Elton's beginning to
t^ to him.
BUS or TBX SICOND VOLmCI.
i,,,.f:lbyG00gle
" 69
VOLUHX TH > THUUX
CHAPTER 1.
A VEKY little quiet reflection was enough to tatiafy Emma
OS to the nature of her agitation on heating this news of
Frank Churchill. She was soon convinced that it was not for
henelf she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed —
it was for him. Her own attachment had really subsided
into a mere nothing — it was not worth thinking of; but if
he, who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in
love of the two, were to be returning with the same wannth
of sentiment which he had taken away, it would be very dis-
tressing. If a separation of two months should not have
cooled him, there were dangers and evils before her: caution
for him and for herself would be necessary. She did not
mean to have her own affections entangled again, and it
would be incumbent on her to avmd any encouragement of
his.
She wished she might be able to keep him & om an absolute
declaration. That would be so very painful a concludon of
their present acquaintance; and yet, she could not help
rather anticipating something decisive. She felt as if the
spring would not pass without bringing a crisis, an event, a
something to alter her present composed and tranquil state.
rt was not very long, though rather longer than Mr.
M'eston had foreseen, before she had the power of f < HTning
some opinion of Frank Churchill's feelings. The Enscombe
family were not in town quite so soon as had been imagined,
but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards. He rode down
for a couple of hours; he could not yet do more; but as he
came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield, she could then
exercise all her quick obfovfttion, and qteedily detennine
,M..d by Google
2/0 Emma.
how he was influenced, and how she must act They met
with the utmost friendliness. There could be no doubt < A
his gre & t pleasure in seeing her. But she had an ahnost in-
stant doubt of his caring for her as he had done, of bis feel-
ing the same tenderness in the same d^^ee. She vratched
him well. It was a dear thing he was less in love than he
had been. Absence, with the conviction probably of bee in-
diff'erence:, had produced this very natural and very desirable
effect
He was in high spirits ; as ready to talk and laugh as ever;
and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit, and recur
to old stories; and he was not without agitation. It was
notinhis calmness that she read his comparative indifference.
He was not calm; his spirits were evidendy fluttered ; there
was restlessness about him. Lively as be was, it seemed a
liveliness that did not satisfy himself: but what decided her
beli^ on the subject, was his staying only a quarter of an
hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury.
'He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he
passed — he had not stopped, he would not stop for more
than a word — but he had the vanity to think they would be
disappointed if he did not call; and, much as he wished to
stay longer at HartfieM he must huiry off.'
She had no doubt as to his being less in love, but neither
his agitated spirits nor his hurrying away seemed like a per-
fect cure; and she was rather inclined to think it implied a
dread of her returning power, and a discreet resolution of not
trusting himself with her long.
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course
often days. He was often hoping, intending to come; but
was always prevented. His aunt could not bear to have him
leave her. Such was his own account at Randalls. If he
were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it was to be in-
ferred that Mrs. Churchill's removal to London had been of
no service to the wilful or nervous part of her disorder. That
she was really ill was very certain; he had declared himself
convinced of it, at Randalls. Though much might be & ncy,
he could not doubt, when he looked back, that she was in a
weaker state of health than she had been half a year ago.
He did not believe it to proceed from any thing that care
byGoogle
Mid medicine might not remove, or at least that she might
not have many yean of existence before her; but he could
not be prevailed on, by all his father's doubts, to say that her
complaints were merely imaginary, or that she was as strong
as ever.
It soon appeared that London was not the place for her.
She could not endure its noise. Her nerves were under
continual irritation and suSering; and by the ten days'end,
her nephew's letter to Randalls communicated a change of
plan. They were going to remove immediately to Rich-
mond. Mis. Churchill had been recommended to the
medical skill of an eminent person there, and had other-
wise a & ncy for the place. A ready-fiimished house in a
favourite spot was engaged, and much benefit expected from
the change.
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of
this arrangement, and seemed most fiilly to appreciate the
blessing of having two months before him of such neai
neighbourhood to many dear friends; for the house was
taken for May and June. She was told that now he wrote
with the greatest confidence of being often with them, almost
as often as he could even wish.
Emma saw how Mr. Weston understood these joyous
prospects. He was considering her as the source of all the
happiness they offered. She hoped it was not sa Two
months must bring it to proof
Mr. Weston's own happiness was indisputable. He was
quite delighted. It was the very circumstance he could have
wished for. Now, it would be really having Frank in'their
ndghbouihood. What were nine miles lo a young man ) —
An hour's ride. He would be always coming over. The
difference in that respect of Richmond and London, was
enough to make the whole difference of seeing him always
and seeing him never. Sixteen miles — nay, eighteen — ^it
must be fiill eighteen to Manchester Street — was a serious
obstacle: Were he ever able to get away, the day would be
s[)ent in coming and returning. There was no comfort in
having him in London; he might as well be at Eascombe;
but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercouree.
Better than nearer I
byGoo^lc
One good thing was immediatel/ broughtto a certainty by
this removal, — the bal) at the Crown. It had not been for-
gotten before; but it had been soon acknowledged vain to
attempt to fix a day. Now, however, it was absolutely to be;
every preparation was resumed ; and very soon after the
Churchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines from Ftank,
to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change,
and that he had no doubt (k being able to join them for
twenty-four hours at any given time, induced Qiem to name
as early a day as possible.
Mr. Weston's ball was to be a real thing. A very few
lo-moiTows stood between the young people of Highbury
and happiness.
Mr. Woodhouse was resigned. The time of year light-
ened the evil to him. May was better for every thing than
February. Mis. Bates was engaged to spend the evening at
Haitfield; James had due notice, and he sanguinely hoped
that n«ther dear little Henry nor dear Lttle John would
have any thing the matter with them while dear Emma were
gone.
CHAPTER II.
No misfortune occurred, again to prevent the balL The day
approached, the day arrived; and, after a morning of some
arudous watching, Frank Churchill, in all the certainty of his
own seli^ reached Randalls before dinner, and every thing
was safe.
No second meeting had there yet been between him and
Emma. The room at the Crown was to witness it; but
it would be better than a common meeting in a crowd.
Mr. Weston had been so very earnest tn his entreaties for
her early attendance, for her arriving there as soon as pos-
sible after themselves, for the purpose of taking her opinion
as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any
other person came, that she could not refuse him, and
must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man's
company. She was to convey Harriet and they drove to
by Google
Emma. 273
the Crown in good time, the Randalls party just sufficiently
before them.
Fiank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch;
and though be did not say much, bis eyes declared that he
meant to have a deli^tfiil evening. They all walked about
together, to sec that every thing was as it should be ; and
within a few minutes were joined by the contents of another
carriage, which Emma could not hear the sound of at first,
without great surprise.'So unreasonably early 1'she was
g(ung to exclaim; but she presently found that it was a
family of old friends, who were coming, Uke herself, by par-
ticular desire, to help Mr. Weston's judgment; and they were
so veiy closely followed by another carnage of cousins, who
had been entreated to come early with the same distinguish-
ing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if half
the company might soon be collected together for the purpose
of preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste
on which Mi. Weston depended, and felt, that to be the
favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates
and confidants, was not the very first distinction in the scale
of vanity. She liked his open manners, but a Uttle less of
open-heartedness would have made him a higher character. —
General benevolence, but not general fiiendship, made a
man what he ought to be. — She could fancy such a man.
The whole party walked about, and looked, and praised
again ; and then, having nothing else to do, formed a sort of
half oFcle round the fire, to observe in their various modes,
till other subjects were started, that, though May, a fire in the
evenli^ was still very pleasant
Emma found, ^t it was not Mr. Weston's fault, that the
number of privy counsellors was not yet larger. They had
Stgpped at Mrs. Bates's door to ofihr the use of their carriage,
but the aunt and niece were to be brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a
restlessness, which showed a mind not at ease. He was
looking about, he was going to the door, he was watching for
the Bound < rf other carriages,'^impatient to begin, or aflaid of
bdng always near her.
Mrs. Elton was spoken ot'I think she must be here
,M..d by Google
274 Emma.
soon,'said he.'I have a. great cmiosi^ to see Mn. Elton,
I have heard so much of her. It cannot be lonft I think,
before she comes.'
A carriage was heard. He was on the move immediately;
but coming back, said, —
'I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her. I
have never seen either Itlr. oar Mrs. Elton. I have no buai-
nesi to put myself forward'
Mr. and Mrs. Elton appeared; tod all the smiles and the
[ffoprieties passed.
'But Miss Bates and Miss Fur & x I'sud Mr. Weston,
looking abouL'We thought you were to bring them.'
The mistake had been slight The caiiiage was sent for
tiiem Qow. Emma longed to know what Frank's first opinion
of Mrs. Elton might be; how he was affected by the studied
elegance of her dress, and htx smiles of gradousness. H*
was immediately qualiiyiiig himself to form an opinion, hj
giving her rery proper attention, after the introduction had
passed.
In a few minutes the carriage returned. — Somebody talked
of rain. —'I will see that there are umbrellas, nr,'said Frank to
his father :'Miss Bates must not be forgotten:'and away he
went Mr. Weston was following ; but Mrs. Elton detained
him, to gratify him by her opinion of bis son; and so briskly
did she begin, that the young man himself, though by no
means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.
'A very fine young man, indeed, Mr. Weston. You know
I candidly told you I should form my own opinion; and I
am happy to say that I am extremely {leased with hiin. You
may believe me. I never compliment I think him a very
handsome young man, and his manners are precisely vbat
I like and approve, — so trjily the gentleman, without the
least conceit or puppyism. You must know I have a vast
dislike to puppies — quite a horror of them. They were
Sever tolerated at Maple Grove. Neither Mr. Suckling nor
me had ever any patience with them; and we used sometimes
to say very cutting things. Selina, who is mild almost to a
fault, bore nth them much better.'
While she talked (A his son, Mr. Weston's attention was
chained; but when she got to Maple Grove, he could recol-
by Google
Emma. 275
lect that there were ladies joBt airiving to be Utended tfy,
and with happ^ Biniles must huiry away.
Mis. Elton turned to Mrs. Weston.'I have no doubt erf
its being our caniage with Miss Bates and Jane. Our
coacbman and horses are so extremely e:q > editiousI I believe
wc drive faster than any body. What a pleasure it is to send
one's carriage for a Mendl I understand you were so kind
as to offer, but another time it will be quite unnecessary.
You may be very sure I shall always take care of t?tem.'
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentle-
men, walked into the room; and Mrs. Elton seemed to think
it as much her duty as Mis. Weston's to receive them. Her
gestures and movements might be understood by any one
who looked on like Emma; but her words, every body's
words, were soon lostundertheincessant flow of Miss Bates,
who came in talking, and had not finished hei speech under
many minutes after her being admitted into the circle at the
fire. As the door opened she was heard, —
'So very obliging of you I — No rain at all Nothing to
signify. I do not caie for myself Quite thick shoes. And
Jane declares — Well ! (as soon as she was within the door),
well ! This is brilliant indeed i This is admirable ! Ex-
cellendy contrived, upon my word. Nothing wanting.
Could not have imagined it So well lighted up! Jane,
Jane, look ! did you ever see any thing I Oh I Mr. Weston,
you must really have had Aladdin's lamp. Good Mrs. Stokes
would not know her own room again. I saw her as I came
in; she was standing in the entrance. " Oh I Mrs. Stokes, "
8^ I — but I had not time for more.'She was now met by
Mrs. Weston.'Veiy well, I thank you, ma'am. I hope you
are quite well V^ happy to hear it So a & aid you might
have a headachi seeing you pass by so often, and knowing
how much trouble you must have. Del^^hted to hear it in-
deed. — Ah I dear Mrs. Elton, so obliged to you for the
carriage; excellent time; Jane and I quite ready. Did not
keep the horses a moment Most comfortable carriage. Oh I
and I am sure our thanks are due to you, Mrs. Weston, on
that sane. Mrs. Elton had roost kindly sent Jane a note,
or we should- have been. But two such offers in one day |
Never were such neighbours. I said to my mother, " Upcm
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
276 Emma.
my word, ma'am. " Thank you, my mother is lemaikably
well. Gone to Mr. Woodhouse's. I made her take h«
shawl, — for the evenings are not wann, — her large new shawl,
Mrs. Dixon's wedding present. So kind of her to think of
my mother I Bought at Weymouth, you know; Mr. Dixon'a
choice. There were three others, Jane says, which they
hesitated about some time. Colonel Campbell rather pre-
ferred an olive. — My dear Jane, are you sure you did not
wet your feett It was but a drop or two, but I am so a & aid:
but Mr. Frank Churchill was so extremely — and there was a
mat to step upon. I shall never foi^et hisextreme pohteness.
Oh I Mr. Frank Churchill, I must tell you my mother's spec-
tacles have never been in faultsince; the rivet never came out
agun. My mother often talks of your good-nature: does
not she Jane t Do not we often talk tUC Mr. Frank Churchill T
Ah! here's Miss Woodhouse. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how
do you do t Very well I thank you, quite well. This is
meeting quite in fairyland. Such a transformation! Must
not compliment, I know (eyeing Emma most complacently)
— that would be rude; but npon my word, Miss Woodhouse,
you do look — how Ao you like Jane's bair T You are a judge.
She did it all herseUl Quite woodeifiil how she does her
hairl No hairdresser from London, I think could. — AhlDr.
Hughes, I declare — and Mra. Hughes. Mustgoandspeakto
Dr. and Mrs. Hughes for a moment How do you dol
How do you do I Very well I thank you. This is delightfiil,
is not itt Where's dear Mr. Richard! Obi there he is.
Don't disturb bins. Much better employed talking to the
young ladies. How do you do, Mr. Richard I I saw you
the other day as you rode through the town. Mrs, Otway, I
protest! and good Mr. Otway, and Miss Otway, and Miss
Caroline. Such a host of friends! and Mr. George and Mr.
Arthur I How do you do ! How do you all do 1 Quite
well, I am much obliged to yoa Never better. Don't I
hear another carriage t Who can this -be 1 — very likely the
worthy Coles. Upon my word, this ia dianning, to be stand-
ing about among such friends! And such a noble fire I I
am quite roasted. No coffee, I thank you, for me; never
take coffee. A little tea, if you please, sir, by-and-by, no
hurry. Oh ! here it a)meB. Every thing so good !'
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma ; and as
i,M..dbyGoOgk
Emma. 277
soon as Miss Bates was quiet, she fouod berscif necessarily
overhearing the discourse of Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax,
who were standing a little way behind her. He was thought-
fiiL Whether he were overhearing too, she could not deter-
mine. After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress
and look, — compliments very quietly and properly taken, —
Mrs. Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented her-
self—and it was,'How do you like my gown % — How do
you like my trimming I — How has Wright done my hairl'
with many other relative questions, all answered with patient
politeness. Mrs. Elton then said, —
'Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do: but
upon such an occa^on as this, when every body's eyes are
so much upon me, and in compliment to the Westons, who
I have no dr.ubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour,
— I would not wish to be inferior to others: and I see very
few pearls in the room except mine. — So, Frank Churchill is
a capital dancer, I understand. We shall see if our styles
suit — A fine young man certainly is Frank ChutclulL I
like him very wclL'
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that
Emma could not but imagine he had overheard his own
praises, and did not want to hear more; — and the voices of
the ladies were drowned for awhile, till another suspension
brought Mis. Elton's tones again distinctly forward. Mr.
Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming^ —
'Oh ! you have found us out at last, have you, in our
seclusion} — I was this moment telling Jane, I thoi^t yon
would begin to be impatient for tidings < rf us.'
'Jane 1'repeated Frank Churchill with a look of surprise
and displeasure.'That is easy; but Miss Fairfax does not
disapprove it, I suppose.'
'How do you like Mis. Eltont'said Emma in a whisper.
'Not at alL'
'You arc ungratefiiL'
'Ungratefiil I — What do you meant'Then changing
from a frown to a smile, —'No, do not tell me, — I do not
want to know what you mean. Where is my father I When
are we to begin dancingt'
T^jnina could hardly understand him : he s <
b, Google
odd bnmour. Ke walked off to find his father, but was
quickly back again with both Mr. and Mrs. Weston. He
had met with them in a little petplexity, which must be laid
before Emma. It had just occurred to Mrs. Weston that
Mrs. Elton must be asked to begin the ball; that she would
expect it; which inteifcied with all their wishes of giving
Emma that distinction; Emma heard the sad truth with
fortitude.
'And what are we to do for a proper partner for bert'
said Mr. Weston.'She will think Frank ought to ask
her.'
Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim ber former
promise; and boasted himself an engaged man, which his
father looked his most perfect approbation of— and it Aen
ai^ > eaied that Mrs. Weston was wanting Aim to dance with
Mrs. Elton himself and that their business was to help to
persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon. Mr.
Weston and Mis. Elton led the way; Mr, Frank Churchill
and Miss Woodhouse followed. Emma must submit to
stand second to Mrs. Elton, though she had always con-
aidered the ball as peculiarly for her. It was almost enough
to make her think of marrying.
Mis. Elton had undoubtedly the advantage, at this time.
In vanity completely gratified; for though she had intended
to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose by the
change. Mr. Weston might be his son's superior. In spite
of this little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoy-
ment, delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it
was forming, and to feel that she had so many hours of
unusual festivity before her. She was more disturbed by
Mr, Knightle/s not dancing, than by any thing else; There
he was, among the stander^-by, where he ought not to be ;
he ought to be dancing, — not classing himself with the
husbands, and fathers, and whist-players, who were pretend-
ing to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers were
made up, — so young as he looked! He could not have
appeared to greater advantage perhaps any where, than
where he had placed hinisel£ His tall, firm, upright figure,
among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly
men, was sndi as Enmta fdt must draw every body's eyes;
byGoo^lc
Emma. 279
and, excepting her own partner, diere was not one among
the whole row of young men who could be compared with
him. He moved a few stq» nearer, and those few Aeps
were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner, with
what natural grace, he must have danced, would he but take
die trouble; Whenever the caught his eye, she forced him
to smile; but in general he was looking grave. She wished
he could love a ball-room better, and could like Frank
Churchill better. Be seemed often observing her. She
must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing; but
if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feel fufraid
There was nothing tike flirtation between her and her
partner. They seemed more like cheerful easy friends, than
lovers. That Frank Churchill thought less of her than lie
had done, was indubitable.
The ball proceeded pleasantly. The anxious cares, the
incessant attentions of Mis. Weston, were not thrown away.
Every body seemed happy; and the praise of being a delight-
fiil ball, which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has cea.sed
to be, was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the
existence of tins. Of very important, vny recordable events,
it was not more productive than such meetings usually are.
There was one, however, which Emma thought something
o£ — The two last dances before supper were begun, and
Harriet had no partner; — the only young lady sitting down;
— ^md so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers,
that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder.
But Emma's wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeing Mr.
Elton sauntering about He would not ask Harriet to
dance if it were possible to be avoided : she was sure he
would not — and she was expecting him every moment to
escape into the caid-room.
Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to the part
of the room where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to
some, and walked about in front of them, as if to show his
liberty, and his resolution of maintaining it He did not
omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith, or speaking
to those who were close to her. Emma saw it She was not
yet dancing; she was working her way up from the bottom,
and had therefore leisure to look around, and by only turn-
by Googlc
28o Emma.
ing her bead a little she saw it atl. When she was half way
up the set, the whale group were exactly behind her, aod
she would no longer allow her eyes to watch ; but Mr. Elton
was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue which
just then took place between him and Mn. Westonj and
she perceived that his wife, who was standing inimetUately
above her, was not only listening also, but even encouraging
him by significant Ranees. The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs.
Weston had left her seat to join him and say,'Do not you
dance, Mr. Elton 1'to which his prompt reply was,'Most
readily, Mis. Weston, if you will dance with me.'
'Me ! — oh ! no — I would get you a better partner than
myself. I am no dancer.'
'If Mre. Gilbert wishes to dance,'said he,'I shall have
great pleasure, I am sure ; for, though beginning to feel my-
self rather an old married man, and that my dancing days
are over, it would give me very great pleasure at any'time to
stand up with an old friend like Mis. Gilbert.'
'Mis. (Albert does not mean to dance, but there is a young
lady disengaged whom I sbould be very glad to see dancing
— ^Miss Smith,'
■ Miss Bmith — oh I — I had not observed. You are
extremely oUiging— and if I were not an old married man,—
but my dandng days are over, Mrs. Weston. You will ex-
cuse me. Any thing else I ^ould be most happy to do, at
your command — but my dancing days are over.'
Mrs. Weston said no morej and Emma could imagine
with what surprise and mortification she must be returning
to her seat This was Mr. Elton I the amiable, obliging^
gentle Mr. Elton. She looked round foramoment; he had
joined Mr. Knighdey at a little distance, and was arranging
himself for setded conversation, while smiles of high glee
passed between him and his wife.
She would not look again. Her heart was in a glow, and
she feaied her face might be as hot
In another moment a happier sight caught her — Mr.
Knightley leading Harriet to ^e set 1 — ^Never had she been
more surprised, seldom more delighted, than at that instant
She was all pleasure and gratitude, both for Hamet and her-
t«l( and longed to be thanking him; and thouf^ too distant
byGoogIc
Etnma. 281
for speech, ber countenance said much, u soon as she conld
catch hif eye again.
His dandng proved to be just what she had beUeved it,
extremely good; and Harriet would have seenied abaost
too lucky, if it had not been for the cruel state of things
before, and for the vety complete enjoyment and veiy high
sense of the distinction which her h^j^ features announced.
It was not thrown away on her; the bounded higher than
ever, flew & rther down the middle^ and was in a continual
course of smiles,
Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking
(Emma trusted) very foolish. She did not think he was
quite BO hardened as his wife, though growing very like her :
tit qwke some of her feelmg^ by obwrving audibly to her
'Knightley has taken pi^ on pooi little Miss Smith I —
Very good-natured, I declare.'
Supper was announced. The move b^an; voA Miss
Bates might be heard from that moment without intoruption,
till her being seated at table and taking up her spoon,
'Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you t Here is your
tippet Mrs, Weston b^ you to put on your tippet She
says she is aihud there will be draughts in the passage, though
every thing has been done — one door nailed up — quantities
of matting — my dear Jane, indeed you must Mr. Churchill,
oh I you are too obliging 1 — How well you put it on! —
so gmtified t Excellent dandng indeed 1 — Yes, my dear,
I ran home, as I said I should, to help grandmamma to bed,
and got back again, and nobody missed me. I set off with-
out saying a word, just as I told you. Grand m a mm a was
quite well, had a charming evenit^ with Mr. Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and back-gammon. Tea was made down
stJurs, biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came
away : amazing luck in some of her throws : and she in-
quired a great deal about you, how you were amused, and
who were your partners. " Oh I " said I, " I shall not forestall
Jane; I left her dandng with Mr. Geoige Otway; she will
love to tell you all about it herself to-morrow: her first
partner was Mr. Qton ; I do not know who will ask her
next, perhaps Mr. William Cox. " My dear sir, vou are too
by Google
2d3 Emma.
obliging. Is Acre nobody you would not rather I — I am
not helpless. Sir, you are most kind. Upon my word,
Jane on one ann, and me on the other t Stop, stop, let us
stand a little back, Mrs. Elton is going; dear Mrs. Elton,
how elegant she looks — beautiful lace ! — Now we all follow
in her tiain. Quite the queen of die evening I — ^Well,
here we are at the passage. Two steps, Jane, take care of
the two steps. Oh I no, there is but one. Well, I was per-
suaded there were twa How very odd 1 I was convinced
there were two, and there is but one. I never saw any
thing equal to the comfort and style — candles ever > ^vhe^e.
I was telling you of your grandmamma, Jane, — there was a
little disappointment The baked apples and biscuits, ex-
cellent in their way, yon know ; but there was a delicate
fricassee ctf sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at
first, and good Mr. Woodhouse, not thinlung the asparagus
qnite boiled enough, sent it all oat again. Now there is
nothing grandmamma loves better than sweetbread and
asparagus — so she was rather disappointed ; but we agreed
we would not speak of it to any body, for fear of its getting
round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be so veiy much
concerned 1 — ^Well, this is brilliant ! I am all amaaemenl 1^
could not have supposed any thing t — such elegance and pro-
fiisionl I have seen nothing like it since — ^Well, where shaQ
wesiti Where shall we sit 1 Any where, so that Jane is not
in a draught Where /sit is of no consequence. Oh I do you
Kcommend this side t Well, I am sure, Mr. ChutchiU-^
only it seems too good — but just as you please. What
you direct in this house cannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how
shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmamma.
Soup too 1 Bless me I I should not be helped so soon, but
it smells most excellent, and I cannot help beginning.'
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Knightley
till after supper; but, when they were all in the ballroom
again, her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and
be thanked. He was warm in bis reprobation of Mr, Elton's
conduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness: and Mrs.
Elton's looks also received the due share of censure.
'They aimed at wounding more than Harriet,'said he.
< Emma, why is it that they are your enemies I'
byGoOgk'
Emma. 383
He loolced with smiling penetration t and, on leceiving
no answer, added, < SAe ought not to be angiy with you, I
suspect, whatever he may be.— To that sannise you say no-
diing, of course : but confiess, Emma, that you did want him
to marry Harriet'
'I did,'replied Enmia,'and they cannot foigive me.'
He shook his head ; but there was a smile of indulgence
mth it, and he only said, —
'I shall not scoM you. I leave yon to your own reflee-
tions.'
'Can yon trust me with such flattererst Does my vain
spirit ever tell me I am wrong 1'
'Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit If one leads
you wrong, I am sure the other tells you of it'
'I do own myself to have been completely mistalEen in
Mr. Elton. There is a littleness about him which you dis-
covered, and which I did not: and I was fitlly convinced of
his bdng ID love with Harriet. It was through a series ot
strange blunders I'
'And, in return for your acknowledgii^ so mudi, I will do
you the justice to say, that you would have chosen for him
better than be has chosen for himself. Harriet Smith has
some first-rale qualities^ which Mrs. Ellon is totally without
An unpretending, single-minded, artless girl — infinitely to
be prefeired by any man of sense and taste to such a woman
as Mis. Elton. I found Harriet more conversable than I
expected.'
Emma was extremely gratified. They were interrupted
by the bustle of Mr. Weston calling on every body to begin
dancing again.
'Come, Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what
are you all doing 1 Come, Emma, set your companions the
example. Every body is lazy t Every body is asleep I'
'I am ready,'said F.mma,'whenever I am wanted.'
'Whom are you going to dance withl'asked Mr.
Knightley.
She hesitated a moment, and then replied,'Wth you, if
you will ask me.'
'Will you 1'said he, offering his hand.
'Indeed I wilL You have shown that you can daoc^
by Google
284 Emma,
and you kcov we are not really so much brother and t
OS to make it at all improper.'
'Brother and sister I — no, indeed.'
CHAPTER HI.
This little explanation with Mr. Knighdey gave Emma con-
siderable pleasure. It was one of the agreeable recollections
oi Ac ball, which she walked about the lawn the next morn-
to enji^. She was extremely glad that they had come to so
good an understanding respecting the Eltons, and that their
opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike; and
his praise of Harriet, his concession in her favour, was pecu-
liariy gratifying. The impertinence of the Eltons, which
for a few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her
evening had been the occasion of some of its highest satis-
& ctions; and she looked forward to another happy result —
the cure of Harriet's infatuation. From Harriet's manner
of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted the ball-
room, she had strong hopes. It seemed as if her eyes were
suddenly opened, and she were enabled to see that Mr. Elton
was not the superior creature she had believed him. The
fever was over, and Emma could harbour little fear of the
pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy. She
depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all
the discipline of pointed neglect that could be fUrther re-
quisite. Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too much
in love, and Mr. Knigbtley not wanting to quanel with her;
how very happy a summer must be before her I
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning. He
had told her, that he could not allow himself the pleasure of
stopping at Hartfield, as he was to be at home by the middle
of the day. She did not r^et it
Having arranged all these matters, looked them through,
and put them all to rights, she was just turning to the
house, with spirits freshened up for the demands of the two
little boys, as well as of their grandpapa, when the great
iioa swcep^ate opened, and two persons entered whom she
L.,:,-i:p:lbyG00glc
Emma. 285
had never less expected to see tt^ether — ¥Vank Churdiilt,
with Harriet leaning on his ana — actually Harriet ! A
moment sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary
had happened. Harriet looked white and & ightened, ^d
he was trying to cheer her. The iron gates and the front
door were not twenty yards asunder , — they were all three
soon in the hall; and Harriet immediately sinking into a
chiur, fiunted away.
A young lady who & ints must be recovered; questions
must be answered, and surprises be explained Such events
are very interesting; but the suspense of them cannot last
long A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole.
Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another pariour boarder
at Mrs. Goddard's, who had been abo at the ball, had
walked out together, and taken a road — the Richmond road,
which, though apparently public enough for safety, had
led them into alarm. About half a mile beyond Highbury,
making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms on each
side, it became for a considerable stretch very retired; and
when the young ladies had advanced some way into it, they
had suddraly perceived, at a small distance before them, on
abroaderpatch of greensward by the side, a party of gipsies,
A child on the watch came towards them to b^; and Miss
Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great scream, and
calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a steep bank, cleared
a slight hedge at the top, and made the best of her way by a
short cut back to Highbury, But poor Harriet could not
follow. She had suffered very much from cramp after danc-
ing, and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on
such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless ; and in
this state, and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to
remain-
How the tiampers might have behaved, had the young
ladies been more courageous, must be doubtful; but such
an invitation for attack could not be resisted; and Harriet
was soon assailed by half a dozen children, headed by a stout
woman and a great boy, all clamorous, and impertinent
in look, though not absolutely in word. More and more
frightened, she immediately promised them money, and
taking out her purse, gave them a shilling, and begged them
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
not to mnt more, or to use her ilL She was dien able to
walk, tbon^ but slowly, and was moring mway — but hex
terror and her puise were too tempting; and she wu followed,
or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding more.
In thb state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling
and condittoning, they loud and insolenL By a most fbr-
tunate chance, his leaving Highbury had been delayed so
as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment
The pleasantness of the morning had induced him b > walk
foTwaid, and leare his horses to meet him by another road,
a mile or two beyond Highbury; and happening to have
borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of Miss Bates,
and to have forgotten to restore them, he had been obliged
to stop at her door, and go in for a few minutes : he was
therefore later than he had intended ; and being on foot, was
unseen by the whole party till ahnost close to them. The
tenor which the woman and boy had been creating in
Harriet was then their own portion. He had left them
completely frightened; and Harriet eagerly clinging to him,
and hardly able to speak, had just strength enough to reach
Hartfield, before her spirits were quite overc(»ne. It was
his idea to bring her to Hartficld; he had thought of no
other place.
This was die amount of the whole story,— of his com-
munication and of Harriet's, as soon as she had recovered
her senses and speech. He dared not stay longer than to
see her well; these several delays left him not another mi-
nute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of hei
safety to Mrs. Goddard, and notice of there being such a set
of people in the neighbourhood to Mr. Knightley, he set off,
with all the grateful blessings tiiat she could utter for her
friend and herselfl
Such an adventure as this,— a fine young man and alovely
young woman thrown together in such a way, — could hardly
& il of suggesting certain ideas to the coldest heart and the
steadiest brain. So Enuna thought, at least Could a
Knguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematician
have seen whzt she did, have witnessed their appearance to-
gedicr, and heard then- history of it, without feelii^ diat
circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarly in-
byGoogIc
Emma. 387
tcFesdng to each other t How much more must an imaginist,
like herself be on fire with speculation and foresight I—
especially with such a ground-work of antidpation as her
mind had already made.
It was a vciy extraordinary thing 1 Nothing of the sort
had ever occurred before to any young ladies in the place,
within hei memory ; no rencontre, no alarm of the kind : and
now it had happened to the very person, and at the very
hour, when the other very person was chanring to pass by to
rescue her t It certainly was very extraordinary! And
knowing, as she did, the favourable state of mind of each at
this period, it struck her the more. He was wishing to get
the better of his attachment to herself, she just recovering
from her mania for Mr. Elton. It seemed as if every thing
united to promise the most interesting consequences. It
was not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly
recommending each to the other.
In the few minutes'conversation which she had yet had
with him, while Harriet had been partially insensible, he had
spoken of her terror, her naivetl, her fervor as she seized and
dung to his arm, with a sensibility amused and ddighted;
and just at last, after Harriet's own account had been given,
he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of
Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms. Every thing was
to take its natural course, however, neither impelled nor as-
sisted. She wculd not stir a step, nor drop a hint No, she
had bad enough of interference. There could be no harm
in a scheme, a mere passive scheme. It was no more than a
wish. Beyond it she would on no account proceed.
Emma's first resolution was to keep her fiither from the
knowledge of what had passed, aware of the anxiety and
alarm it would occasion : but she soon felt that conce^ment
must be impossible. Within half an hour it was known all
over Highbury. It was the very event to engage ^se who
talk most^ the young and the low; and all the youth and
servants in the place were soon in the happiness of frightful
news. The last night's ball seemed lost in Uie gipsies. Foot
Mr. Woodhonse trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had fore-
seen, would scarcely be satisfied without their promising
never to go beyond the shrubbery again. It was some
by Google
288 Emma,
comfort to him that many enquiries afler bunself and Miss
Woodhouse (for his Dcighbours knew that he loved to be
enquired after), as well as Miss Smith, were coming in during
the rest of the day ; and he had the pleasure of returning for
answer, that they were all very indiETerent; which, though
not exactly true, for she was perfectly well, and Harriet not
much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with. She had
an unhsqipy state of health in general for the child of such
a man, for she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if
he did not invent illnesses for her, she could make no figure
in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice ; th^
took themselves off in a hurry. The young ladies of Highbury
might have walked again in safety bef < vc their panic began,
and the whole history dwindled soon into a matter of little
importance but to Eouna and her nephews : in her imagi-
nation it maintained its ground ; and Henry and John were
Still asking every day fca the story of Harriet and ^e gipsies,
and still tenadously setting her right if sbe varied in the
slightest particular from the original recitaL
CHAPTER IV.
A VERT few days had passed after this adventure, when
Harriet came one morning to Emma with a small parcel
in her hand, and after sitting down and hesitating, thus
b^an: —
'Miss Woodhouse — if you are at leisure, I have something
that I should like to tell you ; a sort of confession to make
— and then, you know, it will be over.'
Emma was a good deal surprised; but begged her to
speak. There was a seriousness in Harriet's manner which
prepared her, quite as much as her words, for something
more than ordinary.
'It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish,'she con-
tinued,'to have no reserves with you on this subject As 1
am, happily, quite an altered creature in one resptci, it is very
fit that you should have the satis & ction of knowing it I do
byGoogIc
Enmui. 389
not vant to say more than is necessarj ; I am too much
ashamed of having given way as I have done, and I dare say
you understand me.'
'Yes,'said Emma,'I hope 1 da'
'How I could so long a time be bncying myself'cried
Harriet, wamily.'It seems Ske madness I I can see no*
thing at all extraon^naiy in him now. I do not care whether
I meet him or not, except Uiat, of the two, I had rather not
seelum; and, indeed, I would go any distance round to avoid
him; but I do not envy his wife in the least : I neither ad-
mire her noT envy her, as I have iaae. She is very charming,
I daie say, and all that ; but I thinlc her very ill-tempered
and disagreeable : I sluU never foiget her took the other
night However, I assure you. Miss Woodhouse, I wish her
no eviL No; let them be ever so happy together, it will not
give me another moment's pang; and, to convince you that
I have been speaking trath, I am now going to destroy —
what I ought to have destroyed long ^;o — what I ought
never to have kept : I know that veiy well (blushing as she
spoke). However, now I will destroy it all; and it is my
particular wish to do it in your presence, that you may see
how rational I am grown. Cannot you guess what this parcel
holds t'said she, with a conscious look.
'Not the least in the world. Did he ever give you any
thing 1'
'No — I cannot call them gifts ; but they are things that I
have valued very much.'
She held the pared towards her, and Emma read the
words'Most precious treasures'on the top. Her curiosity
was greatly excited. Haniet unfolded the parcel, and she
looked on with impatience. Within abundance of silver
paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which Harriet
opened ; it was well lined mth the softest cotton; but, ex-
cepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-
plaister.
'Now,'said Harriet,'you mutt recollect'
'No, indeed, I do not'
'Dear me 1 I should not have thought it possible yoti could
forget what passed in this veiy room about court-plaster, one
of the very last times we ever met in it It was but a very
by Google
290 Emma.
few days before I bad my sore thioat— Just before Mr, and
Mrs. Joha Kni^Uley came ; I think the veiy evening. I3o
not yon remember his cutting bis finger with your new pen-
knife, and your recomme & ding court-plaister I Bat, as you
had none about you, and knew I had, you desired me to
supply him; and so I took mine out, and cut him a piece;
but it was a great deal too laige, and he cut it smaller, and
kept playing some time with what was left before he gave it
back to me;. And so then, in my nonsense, I could not he^
making a treasure of it; so I put it by, never to be used, and
looked at U now and then as a great treat'
'My dearest Harriet I'cried Enuna, putting her hand
before her & ce, and jumping up,'you make me more
ashamed of myself than I can bear. Kemember it t Ay, I
remember it all now; all, except youi saving this relic : I
knew nothing of that till this moment, — but the^oitting the
finger, and my recommending conrt-plaister, and saying I had
none about me. — Oh I my sins, my sins I — And I had plenty
all the while in my pocket 1 One of my senseless tricks. I
deserve to be under a continual blush all die rest of my life.
— ^Well (sitting down again), go on ; what else I'
•And had you really some at hand yourself) I am 8m« I
never suspected it, you did it so natunlly.'
'And so you actually put this piece of coutt-plaister by for
his sake,'said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and
feeling, divided between wonder and amusement; and
secretly she added to herself,'Lord bless me 1 when should
I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece of couit-
plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about 1 1 never
was equal to this.'
'Here,'resumed Harriet, tummg to her box again, * here
is something still more valuable, — I mean that i < u ban more
valuable, — because this is what did really once belong to him,
which the court-^daister never did'
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
It was the end of an old pendl, the part without any lead.
'This was really his,'said Harriet'Do not you re-
member one momingt— no, I dare say you do not But one
morning — I f < uget exactly the day, — but perhaps it was the
Tuesday or Wednesday before tAat evatifig, he wanted to
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Bmma. 391
make a memorandum in his podcet-book ; tt wai about spruce
beer. Mr. Knightley had been teOing him something about
brewing spruce beer, and he wasted to put it down ; but
when he took out bis pencil, tiiere was so little lead that he
Boon cut it all away, and it would not do, so you lent him
another, and this was lefl upon the table aa good for nothing
But I kept my eye on it ; and, as soon as I dared, caught it
Up^ and never parted with it again froni that moment'
'X do remember it,'cried Emma;'I perfectly remember
it. Talking about spruce beer. Oh I yes. Mr. Knightley
and I both saying we liked it, and Mr. Elton's seeming re-.
solved to learn to like it toa I perfectly remember it —'
Stop; Mr. Knightley was standing just here, was not het I
have an idea he was standing just here.'
'Ah 1 1 do not know. I cannot recollect It is very odd,
but I cannot recollect Mr. Elton was sitting here, I re-
member, much about where I am now.*
'Well, go on.'
'Ohl that's alL I have nothing more to show you, or to
say, except that I am now going to Oirow them both behind
the fire, and I wish you to see me do it'
'My poor dear Harriet 1 and have you actually found
happiness in treasuring up these things I'
'Yes, simpleton as I was 1 — ^but I am quite ashamed of it
now, and wish I could forget as easily as I can bum them.
It was very wrong of me, you know, to keep any remem-
brances ailer he was married. I knew it was — but had not
resolution enough to part with thenL'
'But, Harriet, is it necessary to bum the court-plaister I I
have not a word to say for the bit of old pendl, but the
court-plaister might be useful.'
'I shall be happier to bum it,'replied Harriet. It has a
disagreeable look to me. I must get rid of every thing.
There it goes, and there is an end, thank Heaven I of Mr.
Mton.'
'And when,'thought Emma,'will there be a b^inning of
Mr. Churchilll'
She had soon afterwards reason to believe, that the begin-
ning was already made, and could not but hope that the
gipsy, thou^ she had told no fortune, might be proved to
i,z.:i by Google
292 Emma.
have made Hairiefs. About a fortnight after the alarm,
they came to a sufficient explanation, and quite undesign-
edly. Emma was not thinking of it at the moment^ which
made the information she recdved more valuable. She
merely said, in the course of some trivial chat,'Well, Harriet,
ii^ienever you many, I would advise you to do so and so'—
and thou^t no more of it, till after a minute's silence she
heard Harriet say, in a very serious tone,'I shall never
marry.'
Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was ;
and after a moment's debate, as to whether it should pass
unnoticed or not^ replied, —
* Never many ! — ^This is a new resolution.'
'It is one that I never shall change, however.'
After anodier short hesitation,'I hope it does not pro-
ceed from 1 hope it is tiot in compliment to Mr.
mtoni'
'Mr. Elton, indeed I'cried Harriet, indignantly. — * Oh I
no'— and Emma could just catch the words, * so superior to
Mr. Elton. "
She then took a longer time for consideration. Should
she proceed no farther ; — should she let it pass, and seem
to suspect nothing! — Perhaps Harriet might think her cold
or angiy if she did; or, perhaps, if she were totally silent, it
might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear too much;
and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been,
such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances,
she was perfectly resolved. She believed it would be wiser
for her to say and know at once, all that she meant to say
and know. Plain dealing was always best. She had pre-
viously determined how fax she would proceed, on any
application of the sort; and it would be Mtfer for both, to
have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with
speed. She was decided, and thus spoke, —
'Haniet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning.
Your resolution, or rather your expectation of never marry-
ing^ results from an idea that the person whom you might
prefer would be too greatly your superior in situation to think
of yon. Is not it sot'
'Oh, Miss Woodhouse, believe me, I have not the pre-
byGooglc
Emma. 293
sumption to suppose, — indeed I am not so mad. But it is
a pleasure to me to admire htm at a distance, and to think
of his infinite superiority to all the rest of the world, with
the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are so proper,
in me especially.'
'I am not at all surprised at you, Harriet. The service
he rendered you waa enou^ to wann your heart'
'Service I oh, it was such an inexpressible obligation I
The very recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time,
when I saw him coming, — ^his noble loolc, and my wretched-
ness before. Such a change! Inonemomentsndiadiai:^!
From perfect misery to perfect happiness 1'
'It is very natuiaL It is natiual, and it is honouiable.
Yes, honourable, I think, to choose so well and so grate-
fully. But that it will be a fortunate preference is more
.than I can piomisA I do not advise you to give way to
it, HarrieL I do not by any means engage for its being
returned. Consider whax you are about Perhaps it will
be wisest in yoa to check your feelings while you can : at
any rate do not let tbem cany you fax, unless yon are per-
suaded of his liking you. Be observant of him. Let his
behaviour be the guide of your sensations. I give you this
caution now, because I shall never speak to you again on
the subject I am determined against all interference.
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter. Let no
name ever pass our lips. We were very wrong before ; we
will be cautious now. He is your superior, no doubt, and
there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious
nature; but yet, Harriet, more wonderfiil things have taken
place ; there have been matches of greater disparity. But
take care of yourself. I would not have you too sanguine ;
though, however it may end, be assured that your raising
your thoughts to kirn, is a mark of good taste which I sh^
always know how to value.'
Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive grati-
tude. Emma was very decided in thinking such an attach-
ment no bad thing for her friend. Its tendency would be
to raise and refine her mind — and it must be saving her
from the danger of degradation.
by Google
CHAPTER V.
I» diis state of schemes, and hopes, and connivancy June
opened npon Haitfield. To Highbury, in general, it brought
no mateiial ch^ige. The Eltons were sdll talking ttf a
Tisit from the Sucklings, and of the use to be made at their
barouche-landau ; and Jane Fairfax waa still at ber giand-
mothei's ; and as the return of flie Campbells from Ireland
was again ddayed, and August, instead of Midsnsuner, fixed
for i^ she was likely to remain there fiill two months longer,
provided at least she were able to defeat Mia, Eton's activi^
in her service, and save herself from being hurried into a
deti^tful situation against her wilL
Mr. Knighdey, wh < ^ for some teason best known tO
himself had certamly taken an eariy dislike to Frank
Chnrdiill, was only growing to dislike hnn more. He
began to suspect him c^ some double dealing in his pursuit
of Emma. That Emma was his object appeared indispu-
table. Every thing declared it; his own attentions, bis
Other's hints, his mother-in-law's guarded silence, it was
all in unison ; words, conduct, discretion, and indiscretion,
told the same story. But while so many were devoting him
to Emma, and Emma herself making him over to Harriet;
Mr. Knightley b^an to suspect him of some indination to
trifle with Jane Fair & x. He could not understand it; but
there were symptoms of intelligence between them — he
thought so at leaat — symptoms of admiration on his side,
iriiich, having once observed, he could not persuade himself
to think entirely void of meaning, however he mif^t wish to
tacspe any of Emma's errcffs of imagination. Sie was not
present when the suspicion first arose. He was dining with
the Randalls'& mily and Jane at the Eltons'; and he had
seen a look, more than a single look, at Miss Faii & x, which,
from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemed somewhat
out of place. When he was again in their company, he
could not help remembering what he had seen; nor could
byGoogle
Emma. 29$
he avoid obsemtioos which, nnkss It were like Cowper utA
hia fire at twilight,
Hyself creating vhat I sftw,
bnnight him yet stronger mispidoD oS there being a ntne-
thing of private liking, of private imdentandiiig even,
between Frank Churchill and Jane.
He bad walked up one day after dinner, as he -raj often
did, to spend his evening at Haitfield. Enuoa and Harriet
were going to walk; he joiiked them; and, OQ returning
the; fell in with a larger party, who, like themselves, jadged
it wisest to take their exercise early, as the weather threatened
rain ; Mr. and Mrs. Weston and ^dr son, Miss Bates and
her niece, iriio had accidentally met They sll united ; and,
on reaching Hartfield gates, Emtna, who knew it was exactly
the sort of visiting that would be welcome to ha father,
pressed them all to go in and drink tea with hun. The
Randalls'party agreed to it immediately; and after a pretty
UMig speech from Miss Bates, which few persons listened to,
she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse's
most obliging invitation.
As they woe turning mto the grounds^ Mr. Ferry passed
by on horseback. The gentlemen spoke of his horse.
'By the bye,'said Frank Churchill to Mrs. Weston pre-
sently,'what became of Mr. Perry's plan of setting np his
caiiiaget'
Mrs. Weston looked surprised, and said, ■ I did not know
that he ever had any such plan.'
'Nay, I had it from you. Yoa wrote me word of it thrcfl
□xmthsago.'
'Mel impossible!'
'Indeed yoa did. I remember it perfectly. Yon men-
tioned it as what was certainly to be very soon. Mrs. Ferry
had told somebody, and was extremely h^ > py about it It
was owing to her persuasion, as she bought his being out
in bad weather did bira a great deal of hann. You must
remember it now 1'
'Upon my wcvd I never heard of it till this moment'
'Never 1 really never ! — Bless me 1 how could it be I
Then I must have dreamt it — bat I was complettiy pe^
by Google
296 Emtfia.
Buaded — Misa Smith, you walk as if you were tited Yon
will not be sony to find yourself at home.'
'Whatisthist — ^i^at is this}'cried Mr. Weston,'about
Peny and a carriage I Is Peny goiug to set up his carriage,
Frank 1 I am glad he can afford it You had it from him-
self, had yout'
'No, sir,'replied his son, laughing,'I seem to have had
it from nobody. Very odd I I really was persuaded of
Mis. Weston's having mentioned it in one of hei lettos to
Enscombe, many weeks ago, with all these particulars — bat
as she declares she never heard a syllable of it before, of
course it must have been a dream. I am a great dreamer.
I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away ; and
when I have gone through my particular friends, then I begin
dreaming of Mr. and Mrs, Perry,*
'It is odd though,'observed his & ther,'that you should
have had such a regular connected dream about people vAom
it was not very Ukely you should be thinking of at £ns-
comb & Felly's setting up his carriage 1 and his wife's per-
suading him to it, out of care for his health — ^just what will
happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only a little
[oemature. What an air of probability sometimes runs
through a dream I And at others, what a heap of absurdities
it is ! Well, Frank, your dream certainly shows that High-
bury is in your thou^ts when you are absent Emma, you
are a great dreamer, I think!*
Emma was out of hearing. She had hurried on before
her guests to prepare her father for their appeaiaoce^ and
was beyond the r^ch of Mr. Weston's hint
* Why, to own the truth,'cried Miss Bates, who had been
trying in vain to be heard the last two minutes,'if I must
speak on this subject, there is no denying that Mr. Fraitk
Churchill might have — I do not mean to ^y that he did not
dream it — I am sure I have sometimes the oddest dreams
in the world — but if I am questioned about it, I must ac-
knowledge that there was such an idea last spring : for Mrs.
Perry herself mentioned it to my mother and the Coles
knew of it as well as ourselves — but it was quite a secret,
known to nobody else, and only thought of about three
days. Mrs. Peny was very anxious that he should have a
L,,,.P:ibyGoOgle
carnage, and came to my mother in great spirits one mtnn-
ing because she dioi^t she had fvevailed. Jane, don't
you remember grandmamma's telling as of it when we got
home) I foiget where we had been walking to — ^very likely
to Randalls ; yes, I think it was to Randalls. Mrs. Peny
was always pardcularly fond of my motba— indeed I do not
know \rtio is not — and she had mentioned it to her in con-
fidence; she had no objection to her telling us, of course,
but it was not to go b^imd : and, frnn th^ day to this, I
never mentioned it to a soul that I know o£ At the same
time, I will not positively answer for my having never dropt
a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a Qung
before I am awaie. I am a talker, you knowj I am mther
a talker; and now and then I have let a thing escape me
which I should not I am not like Jane ; I wish I were.
I will answer for it tAe never betrayed the least thing in the
world. Where is she! Oh ! just behind. Perfectly remem-
ber Mia. Perry's coming. Extraordinary dieam indeed I'
They were entering the hall. Mr. Knightl^a eyes had
preceded Miss Bates's in a glance at Jane: From Frank
Churchill's face, where he thought he saw confusion sup-
pressed or laughed away, he had involuntarily turned to
bers; but she was indeed behind, and too busy with her
shawL Mr. Weston had walked in. The two other gentle-
men waited at the door to let her pass. Mr. Knightley
nspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catching
htx eye — he seemed watching her intently — in Tain, how-
ever, if it were so. Jane passed between them into the hall,
and looked at neither.
There was no time for further remark or explanation.
The dream must be borne with, and Mr. Knightley must
take his seat with the rest round the large modem circular
taUe which Emma had introduced at Hartfield, and which
none but Emma could have had power to place there and
persoade her father to use, instead of the small sised Pem-
broke on which two of his daily meals had, for forty years,
been crowded. Tea passed pleasantly, and nobody seemed
in a hnny to move.
'Miss Woodbouse,'said Frank Churchill, after examining
a table behind him, which he could reach as he sat,'have
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
398 Emma.
four nephewa taken away th^ alphabets— their box of
lett«isl It used to stand here. Where is hi Thisii a
■Oft ftf dtill4o(dung evening, that oog^t to be treated ndiei
as winter than summer. We had great amusement with
tbOK letters one morning I want to piuzle you again.'
Emma was pleased with the thought; and inododng
the box, the table was quickly scattered ov«r with alphabets,
which no one seemed so much di^ > 08ed to employ as theii
two selves. Thqr were rapidly forming wtKdi for eadi
other, or for any body else who would be pnxded. The
quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr.
Woodbousc^ who bad often b^n distressed by & e more
animated sort, which Mr. Weston had occaaioiially intto-
duced,andwho now sat happily occupied in IameDtiiig,witb
tender melancholy, over the departure of the'poor little
boys,'or in fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray let-
ter near him, how beautifully Emma had written iL
Frank Churchill placed a word befois Miss Fafa & x.
She ^ve a sli^t glance round the table, and Eq)i^ed her-
self to it. Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite to
them; and Mr. Knlghtley so placed as to see ihem «Uj
and it was bis object to see as much as he could* with as
little apparent observation. The word was discorcfed, and
with a iaiaX smile pushed awa.y. If meant to be immediately
mixed with the others, and buried & om sight, she should
have looked on the table instead of looking just across, for
it was not mixed ; and Hairiet, eager after every ftesh word,
and finding out none, directly took it up, and fell to work.
She was sitting by Mr. Knightley, and turned to him for
help. The word was blunder; and as Harriet exultingly
prochumed it, there was a blush on Jane's cheek which ^ve
it a meaning not otherwise ostensiU & Mr. Knightley con-
nected it with the dream; but how it could all be, was
beyond his comprehension. How the delicacy, the diacretitHt
of bis & vouiite could have been so lun asleep ! He feared
there must be some decided involvement. Diaingenuousncsa
and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn.
These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick
It was a child's play, chosen to ccaceal a deeper gainfi on
Frank Churchill's part
byGoogle
Smma. 299
With great hidignation did he continue to obserre him ;
whh greftf Alarm aod distrust, to obMTre also his two
bluided corap8mon & He saw a abort word prepared for
Eioma, and given to her vdth a look aiy and demure; He
law that & niaa bad soon made it out, and fbtmd tt highly
eatertaimng, ihot^ it was GOmething which she judged it
propcx to appear to censure ; for she said * Nonsense I tbr
■hamel'He beaid F^ank Churchill next aaj, with a ^ance
towBida Jaa^'I willg^ it to her, — shall It'and as dearly
heaid Eomia oi^osiag it with eager laughing warmth, —'No,
tu^ you must not, you shall not, indeed.'
It «M done, howerer. TIus gallant young man, who
■eemed to love without feeling, and to recommend himself
without complaisance, directly banded over die word to
Hiss Fait & s, and with a particulsr degree of sedate dvflity
entreated her to study it Mr. Knightley's excessive curi-
osity to know what this word might be, made him seize
eveiy possible moment for darting his eye towards it, and
it was not long before he saw it to be IXam. Jane Pair-
fax's perception seemed to accompany his; her comprehen-
sion was certainly more equal to the covert meaning the
superior intelligence, of those five letters so arranged. She
was evidently displeased ; looked up, and seeing herself
watched, blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived
her, and sayii^ only,'I did not know that proper names
were allowed,'pushed away the letters with even an angry
spirit and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word
that could be offered. Her face was averted from those who
had made the attack, and tnmed towards her aunt.
'Ay, very true, my dear,'cried the latter, though Jane had
not spoken a word ;'I was just going to say the same thing.
It is time for us to be going, indeed. The evening is
closing in, and grandmamma will be looking for ua My
dear sir, you are too obliging. We really must wish yoil
good night'
Jane's alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her
aunt had preconceived. She was immediately up, and
wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also moving
that she could not get away ; and Mr. Knightley thought he
saw another collection of letters, anxiously'pushed towards
,M..d by Google
her, and resolutely swept away by her nnexamined. She
was aftenraids looking for her shawl, — Frank ChuTchill was
looking also: it was growing dusk, and the room was in con-
fusion ; and how they parted, Mr. Knigbtley could not teO.
He remained at Hutfield after all the rest, his thou^ib
Aill of what he bad seen ; so fiill, that when the candles
came to asdst his observations, be amst, — yes, be certainly
must, as a Mend — an anxious friend — give Emms some
hint, ask her some question. He could not see her in a
situation of such danger, wkhout bying to iHcsore her. It
was his duty.
'Ftay, Emma,'said he,'m^ I ask in ■what lay & t great
amusement, the poignant sting of the last word given b > you
and Miss Fairfax 1 I saw the word, and am curious to know
liow it could be so very entotaining to the one, and so very
distressing to the other.'
£mma was extremely confiued. She could not endure to
give him the true e^Ianadon; for thoo^ her suspicions
were by so means remOTed, she was really ashamed (tf having
ever imparted them.
'Oh I'she died, in evident embarrassment,'it all meant
nothing : a mere joke among ourselves.'
'The joke,'he replied, gravely,'seemed confined to you
and lift. Churchill.'
He bad hoped she would speaL agun, but she did not
She would tadier busy bersdf about any thing & an speak.
He sat a litde iriiOe in doubt A variety of evOs crossed his
mind. Interference — fruitless interference. Emma's con-
tusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed to declare
her affection engaged. Yet he would speak. He owed it to
her, to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwel-
come interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter
any thing, rather than the reinentbrance of n^lect in sudi a
cause.
'My dear Emma,'said he at last, with earnest kindness,
'do you think you perfectly understand the degree of
acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been
'Between Mr. Frank Churchill, and Kiss Fairfax t Oh I
yei^ perfectly. Why do you make a doubt of it I'
i,M.p:ibyGoogle
EmtMA 301
'Have )rou never & t any time had reason to think AaX he
admired her, or that she admired him }'
'Never, never I'she cried with a most open eagerness :
'Never, for the twentieth part of a moment, did such an
idea occur to me. And how could it possibly come into
your head 1'
* I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment
between them ; certain expressive looks, which I did not
believe meant to be public'
'Oh 1 you amuse me excessively. I am delighted to
find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander;
but it will not do — very sony to check you in your firat
essay, but indeed it will not do. There is no admiration
between them, I do assure you ; and the appearances which
have caught you, have arisen from some peculiar circum-
stances I feelings rather of a totally different nature ; it is
impossible exacdy to explain ; there is a good deal of non-
sense in it ; but the part which is capable of being communi-
cated, which is sense, is, that they are as & r from any attach-
ment or admiration for one anodier, as any two beings in the
worid can be. That is, I presunu it to be so on her side,
and I can answer for its being so on his, I will answer for
the gentleman's indifference.'
She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a sati & r
faction which silenced Mr. Knighdey. She was in gay
spirits, and would have prolonged the conversation, wanting
to hear the particulars of his suspicions, evciy look described,
and all the wheres and hows of a circumstance which highly
entertained her; but his gaiety did not meet hers. He
found he could not be usefiil, and his feelings were too much
irritated for talking. That he might not be irritated into an
absolute fever by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse's tender
habits required almost every evening throughout the year, he
soon afterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the
coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
CHAPTER VI.
After being long fed with hopes of a speedy vidt from
Mr. and Mis. Suckling, the Highbury world vere obliged
to endure the mortifica,tion of hearing that they could not
possibly come till the autumn. No such importation of
novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present
In the daily interchange of nevs, they must be again re-
stricted to the other topics, with which for a while the
Sucklings'coming had been united, such as the last accounts
of Mis. Churchill, whose health seemed every day to supply
a different report, and the situation of Mrs. Weston, whose
happiness it was to be hoped might eventually be as much
increased by the arrival (^ a child, as that of all ber neigh-
bours was by the am)ioach of it
Mrs. Elton was very much disappointed. It was the
delay of a great deal ik pleasure and parade. Her intro-
ductions and recommendations must all wait, and eveiy
projected party be still only talked of So she thought at
first ; — but a little consideration convinced ha that every
thing Deed not be put off. Why should not they explore
to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come t They
could go there again with them in the autumn. It was set-
tled that they should go to Box HilL That there was to be
such a party had been long generally known ; it had even
given the idea of anothCT. Emma had never been to Box
Hill; she wished to see what every body found so well
wor^ seeing, and she and Mr. Weston had agreed to choose
some fine morning and drive thither. Two or three more
of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and
it was to be done in a quiet, uni^etending, elegant way, m-
finitely superior to the bustle and preparation, the regular
eating and drinking, and pic-nic parade of the Eltons and
the Sucklings.
This was so vety well understood between them, that
Emma could not but feel some surprise, and a little dis-
pleasure, on hearing from Mr. Weston that he bad been
byGoogle
proposing to lirs. Ettoii, as her tHt > ther and sister liad fiiil«d
her, that the two parties Ghould usite, and go together; and
that as Mrs. Eiton had very readily acceded to it, so it was
to be, if she had no objection. Now, as her objection waa
nothing but her very great dislike of Mrs. Elton, of which
Mr. Weston must already be perfccdy aware, it was not
worth bringing foward again i — it could not be done without
a reproof to him, which would be giving pain to his wife ;
and she found herself therefore, obliged to consent to aa
arrangement which she would have done a great deal to
avoid ; an antUigement which would, probably, expose her
even to the degradation of being said to be of Mrs. Elton's
party I Every feeling was offended; and the forbearance
of her outward subnussion left a heavy arrear due of secret
seventy In her reflections, on the unmanageable good-will of
Mr. Weston's temper.
'I am glad you approve of what I have done,'said he,
vety comfortably.'But I thought you would. Such
schemes as these are nothing without numbers. One cannot
have too large a party. A large party secures its ova
amusement And she is a good-natured woman after all.
Orte could not leave her out'
& nma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it
in private.
It was now the middle of June and the weather fine ; and
lifrs. Elton was growing impatient to name the day, and
settle with Mr. Weston as to pigeon-pies and cold larab,
when a lame carriage-horse threw every thing into sad
uncertainty. It might be weeks, it might be only a
few days, before the hcffse were useaUe; but no prepa-
rations could be ventured on, and it was all me l anch oly
stagnation. Mrs. Elton's resources were inadequate to such
anattadc.
■It not this most vexatious, Knightleyl'she cried;'and
such weather for exploring t these delays and disappoint-
ments are quite odious. What are we to dot The year
will wear away at this rate, and nothing done. Before this
time, last year, I asure you, we had a deli^tful exploring
party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.'
'You had better explore to Donwell,'replied Mr,
,,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
Knightle]'.'That aay be done without horses. Coni«^
and eat my Bliawberries : they are ripening fast'
If Mr. Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged
to proceed so; for his proposal was caufj^t at with delight;
and the'Oh 1 I should like it of all things,'was not plainer
in words ttian manner. Donwell was Vinous for its stiaw-
beiiy beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation : but no
plea was necessary ; cabbage-beds would have been enough
to tempt the lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere.
She promised him again and again to come — much oftencr
than he doubted — and was extremely gratified by audi a
proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment as she
chose to consider it
'You may depend upon me,'said she;'I certainly will
come. — Name your day, and I will com & — You will allow
me to bring Jane Fairfax I'
* I cannot name a day,'said he, * till I have spoken to
some others, whom I would wish to meet you.'
'Oh, leave all that to me ; only give me a carte-blanche.
—I am Lady Patroness, you know. It is my patty. I will
bring ftiends with me, "
'I hope you will bring Elton,'said he ;'but I will not
trouble you to give any other invitations.'
'Oh, now you are looking very sly } — but consider, — you
need not be afriud of del^ating power to m & I am no
young lady on her preferment Married women, you know,
may be safely authorised. It is my party. Leave it all to
me. I will invite your guests.'
'No,'he calmly replied,'there is but one married woman
in the world whom I can ever allow to mvite what guests she
pleases to Donwell, and that one is'
'Mrs. Weston, I suppose,'interrupted Mra. Elton, radier
mortified.
'No, — Mrs. Knightley; and, till she is in being, I will
manage such matters mysel£'
'Ah, you are an odd creaturel'she cried, satisfied to
have no one preferred to herself. * You are a humourist,
and may say what you like. Quite a humourist Well, I
shall bring Jane with me — J & ne and her aunt The rest
I leave to you. I have no objections at all to meeting the
by Google
Haitfield & mil]r. Don't Bcmple, I know ytni are attadied
to them.'
'You certainljr will meet them, if I can prevail; and I
shall call on Miss Bates in my way home.'
'That is quite unnecessaiyj I see Jane everyday; — but
ax you like. It is to be a morning scheme, you know,
Ki^htley; quite a simple thing. I shall wear a large
bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hanging on my
am. Here, — probably this basket with pink riband. No-
thing can be more simple, you see. And Jane will have
such another. There is to be no form or parade — a sort
of gipsy party. We are to walk about your gardens, and
gather die strawberries ourselves, and sit under trees ; and
whatever else you may like to provide, it is to be all out of
doors; a table sprrad in the shade, you know. Every
thing as natural and simple as possible. Is not that your
ideal'
'Not quite. My idea of the simple and the natural
will be to have the table spread in the dining-room. The
nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies, with
their servants and fiimiture, I think is best observed by
meals within doors. When you are tired of eating straw-
berries in the garden, tiiete shall be cold meat in the
house.'
'Well, as you please ; only don't have a great set-out.
And, by the bye, can I or my housekeeper be of any use
to you with our opinionl Fray be sincere, Knighdey.
If you wish me to talk to Mis. Hodges, or to inspect any
'I have not the least wish for it, I thank you.'
'Well, — but if any difficulties should arise, my house-
keeper is extremely clever.'
'I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself fiill as clever,
and would spurn anybody's assistance.*
'I wish we had a donkey. The thing would be for us
all to come on donkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me, and my
caro sposo walking by. I really must talk to him about pur-
chasing a donkey. In a country life 1 conceive it to be a
sort of necessary; for, let a womim have ever so many
resources, it is not possible for her to be always shut up
by Google
at home ; and v^y long walks you know — in smnioei tbcn
is dust, and in winter there is dirt'
< You will not find either between Donwdt and Hi^buiy.
Donwell-Luie is nevei dusty, and now it is periedly dnt*
Come oa a donkey, however, if you piefer it Yon can
boiTow Mrs. Cole's. I would wish every tiling to be u
much to yom taste ax possible.'
'That I am sure you would. Indeed I do you justice
my good fiiend. Under that peculiar sort of diy, blnnt
manner, I know you have the wannest heart As I t^
Mr. £., you are a thorough huniourist Yes, bdiere tos,
Knightley, I am fully se & uble of your attention to me in
the whole of this sdieme. You have hit upon the very
thing to please me.'
Mr. Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in
the shade. He wished to persuade Ur. Woodhouse, as wdl
as Emma, to join the party; and he knew that to have any
of them sitting down ont < ^ doors to eat would inevitably
make bim iU. Mr. Woodhouse must not, utkIct the spedous
pretence of a morning drive, and an hour or two spent at
Donwell, be tempted away to his misery.
He was invited cm good Mth. No hirking honors were
to upbraid him for his easy creduli^. He did consent He
had not been at Donwtll for two years. < Some vely fine
morning, he, Emma, and Harriet, could go very well ;uid he
could sit still with Mrs. Weston while the dear giiis walked
about the gardens. He did not su^qmse they couU be damp
now, in the middle of the day. He should like to see the
old house again exceedingly, and should be very h^^. to
meet Mr. and Mrs, Elton, and any other of his neigfabwirs.
He could not see any objection at all to his and Emma's,
and Harriet's, going there some very fine morning. He
thought it very well done of Mr. Knightley to invite them ;
veiy kind and sensible ; much cleverer than dining out He
was not fond of dining out'
Mr. Knightlqr was fortunate in every body's most ready
concurrence.'The invitation was every ndiete so well re-
ceived, that it seemed as if^ like Mrs. Elton, they were all
taking the scheme as a particular conqiliment to thonselvcs.
Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations oC
by Google -
pleasure from it ; and Mr. Weston, unasked, promiaed to get
Frankoverto join diem, if possible; a proof of approbation
and gratitude which could have been dispensed with. Mr.
Knigfadey was then obliged to say that he should be ^ad
to see him ; and Mr. Weston engaged to lose no time in
writing, and spare no argnmenti to induce him to come.
In the meanwhile the lame hone recovered so & s^ diat
die party to Box Hill was again under happy consider^
adoa; and at last Donwell was settled for one day, and
Box Hill for the next ; the weather appearing exactly ri^t
Under a bright mid'day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mc.
Woodhouse was saldy conveyed in his carriage, with one
window down, to pulake of diis < d fmco party; and in
one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey, espedaOy
prepared for him by a fire all the morning he was happily
placed, quite at his ease, ready to talk with pleasure (rf
what had been achieved, and advise everybody to come and
sit down, and not to heat themselves. Mrs. Weston, who
seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired, and
sit aH the time with him, remained, when all the others
were invited or persuaded out, his patient listener and sym-
pathiser.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that
as soon as she was satisfied of her fiithei's comfor^ she was
glad to leave hun, and look around her; eager to refresh
and correct her memory with more particular observation,
more exact undeistandiiig of a house and grounds which
must ever be so interesting to her and all her family.
She felt all the honest pride and complacency which hei
alliance with the present and future proprietor could fairly
warrant, as she viewed Ae respectable si« and style of flie
building, its suitable, becoming characteristic situation, low
and sheltered ; its ample gardens stretdiing down to mea-
dows washed by a stream, of which the Abbey, with all the
old neglect of prospect, had scarcely a sight, — and its abun-
dance of timber in rows and avenues, which neither fashion
nor extravagance had rooted up. The house was larger
than Hartfield, and totally unlike it, covering a good deal
of ground, rambling and irregular, with many comfortable
and one or two handsome rooms. It was just what it
,M..d by Google
3o8 Emma.
ought to be, and it looked what it was ; and Emma & It an
increasing respect for it, as the residence of a family of
such true gentility, untainted in blood and undeistandin^
Some faults of temper John Knightley had ; but Isabella
had connected herself unexceptionably. She had given them
neither men, nor names, nor places, that could raise a blush.
These were pleasant feelings, and she walked about and in-
dulged them till it was necessaty to do as the others did,
and collect round the strawbeny beds. The whole pai^
were assembled, excepting Frank Churchill, who was ex-
pected every moment from Richmond ; and Mrs. Elton in
all her apparatus of happincsa, her large bonnet and her
basket, was vciy ready to lead the way in gathering, accept-
ing or talking. Stcawberries, and only strawberries, could
now be thought or spoken o£'The best fruit in Eng-
land — every body's favourite — always wholesome. These
the finest beds and finest sorts. Delightfiil to gather for
one's self— the only way of really enjoying them. Morning
decidedly the best time — never tired— every sort good —
hautboy infinitely superior — no comparison — the others
hardly eatable — hautlx)ys very scarce — Chili preferred —
white wood finest flavour of all — price of strawberries in
London—abundance about Bristol — Maple Grove — cultiva-
tion — beds when to be renewed — gardeners thinkmg exactly
different — no general rule — gardeners never to be put out ol
thor way — delicious fruit— only too rich to be eaten much
of— inferior to cherries — currants more refreshing — only ob-
jection to gathering strawberries the stooping — glaring sua
— tired to death — could bear it no longer— ^nust go and sit
in the shade.'
Such, for half an hour, was the conversation ; inter-
rupted only once by Mrs. Weston, who came out, in her
sohdtude afler her son-in-law, to enquire if he were come ;
and she was a little uneasy. She had some fears of his horse.
Seats tolerably in the shade were found ; and now Emma
was obliged to overhear what Mrs. Elton and Jane Fair & x
were talking of. A situation, a most desirable situation,
was in question. Mrs. Elton had received notice of it that
morning, and was in raptures. It was not with Mrs.
Suckling, it was not vrith Mrs. & agge, but in felicity and
byGoogle
splendour it fell Bhort only of diem ; it waa with a cousin of
Mrs. Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs. Snclcling, a lady
known at Maple Grove. Delightful, chaining, superior,
first drdes, spheres, lines, ranks, every thing: and Mrs.
Elton was wild to have the offer closed with immediately.
On her side^ all was warmth, energy, and triumph ; and she
posithrely refused to take her friend's negative, though Miss
Fairfax continued to assure her that she would not at pre-
sent engage in any thing — repeating the same motives which
she had been heard to urge before^ Still Mrs, Elton insisted
OD being authorised to write an acquiescence by the morrow's
post How Jane could bear it at aQ, was astonishing to
Emma. She did look vexed : she did speak pointedly; and
at last, widi a dedsion of action unusual to her, propcsed a
renKmd. * Sbonld not they walk t Would not Mr. Knight-
le; show them the gardens — all the gardens t She wished to
seethe whole extent.'The peitinadtyof her friend seemed
more dian she could bear.
It was hot ; and after walking some time over the gardens
in a scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any three together,
they insensibly followed one another to the delicious shade
of a broad short avenue of limes, which, stretching beyond
the garden at an equal distance from the river, seemed the
finish of the pleasure grounds. It led to nothing; nothing
but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high
pilhis, which seemed intended, in thdr erection, to give the
ajqwaiaace of an approach to the house, which never had
been there. Dispuuble, however, as might be the taste of
such a termination, it was in itself a charming walk, and the
view which closed it Gctremely pretty. The considerable
slope, at nearly the foot of which die Abbey stood, gradually
acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds ; and at half a
mite distant was a bank of considerable abruptness and
grandeur, well clothed with wood ; and at the bottom of (his
bank, favourably placed and sheltered, rose the Abbey-Mill
Farm, with meadows in front, and the river making a dose
and handsome curve around iL
It was a sweet view — sweet to the eye and the mind.
English verdure, English culture, English comfort, seen
under a sun bright, without being oppressive.
by Google
310 £rMma.
lo this walk Emma and Mr. Weston found all the othcn
assembled ; and towards this view she immediately perceived
Mr. Knightley and Harriet distinct & om the rest, quied > -
leading the way. Mr. Kjiightlcy and Hairiet ! It was an
odd /iU4-fUei but she was glad to tee it There had been
a time when he would have scorned her as a companion, and
turned from her with little ceremony. Now they seemed in
pleasant conversation. There had been a time also when
Eouna would have been sony to se« Harriet in a spot so
favourable for the Abbey-Mill Farm ; but now she feared it
not. It might be safely viewed with all its appendages of
[vosperity and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading flodks,
orchard in blossom, and light column c^ smtdce ascending.
She Joined them at the wall, and found them mwe «igaged
in tadJdng than in looking around. He was giving Harriet
information as to modes of agricukun^ & c.; and EaaoA
recdved a smile which seemed to say,'These are my own
concons. I have a right to talk on such subjects, without
being suq > ected (tf intiodudng Robert Mutin.'She did not
suspect him. It was too old a stoiy. Robert Martin had
probably ceased to think of Harriet They took a few turns
together aloi% the walk. The shade was most re & ediing,
and Emms ibund it the pleasantest part of the day.
The neit remove was to the house ; they must all go in
and eat; and they were all seated and busy, and still Frank
Churchill did not come. Mrs. Weston looked, and looked
in vain. His & ther would not own himself uneasy, and
laughed at her fears ; but she could not be aired ot
irishing that he would part with his bladt vawtt. He had
ejqoeBsed himself as to ccHnm{^ with aaat than common
'His aunt was so much better, ^t he had not a doubt
of getting over to them.'Mrs. Churchill's state, however,
as many were ready to remind her, was liable to such sudden
variation as mig^ disappoint her nephew in the most itastm-
able dependence; and Mrs. Weston was at last persuaded to
believe, or to say, that it must be by some attack of Mis.
ChOTchill that he was prevented coming. Enuna looked at
Harriet while the point was under considerMion; she
behaved very well and betrayed no emotion.
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
Hie-cold repast wu over, and Ae par^ were to go out
once more to see what had not ^et been seen, die old Abbey
fidi-poDda ; pobaps get as & r as the clover, whidi vas to be
begun catting on the monow, or, at any rate, have tiie plea-
ture of being hot, and growing cool again. Mr. Woodhouse,
iriio had alitady taken his little round in the highest part of
die gudens, i^eie no damps fiom the river were imagined
even 1^ him, atined no moic; and his daughter resolved to
mum with him, that Mn. Weston mi^t be persuaded
uny 1^ her husband to the exetcise and variety which her
qnita seemed to need.
Ur. Knigfatley had done all in his power for Mr. Wood-
housed entertainment Books of engravings, dmwcrs of
mfidfh, cameoB, ctxals, shelh, and every odier fiunHy collec-
tion within his calmieto, had been prep^ed for his old friend,
to while away the moimng ; and ^e kindness had perfectly
answcKd. Hr. Woodhouse had been exceedingly well
amused. His. Weston had been showing them all to him,
and now he would show diem all to T'n'fna ; fortunate in
having no other resemblance to a child, than in a total want
of taste for wbax he saw, for he was slow, constant, and
mctfaodicaL Before tiiis second loddng over was begun,
however, Emma walked into the hall for the sake of a few
moments'free observation of the entrance and gromid-plot
oi the boose, and was hardly there, when Jajie Faii & x ap-
peared, coining quickly in ftom the ganlen, and with a look
of escape, little expecting to meet Miss Woodhouse so
900a, there was a start at fiiA ; but Miss Woodhouse was the
voy penon she was in quest of.
* Win yoQ be so kind,'said she,'when I am missed, as te
say tiiat I am gone home 1 I am going this moment My
aunt is not aware how late it is, nor how long ve have been
absent; but I am sure we shall be wanted, and I am deter-
mined to go directly. I have said nothing about it to any
body. It would only be ^ving trxmble and distress. Some
are g < me to the ponds, and some to tiie lime walk. Till
they all come in I shall not be missed ; and when they do,
will you have the goodness to say that I am gonef
'C«tunly, if yon wish it ; but you are not going to walk
to Highbury alonet *
by Google
312 Emma.
•Yes; what should hurt met I walk fiat Ishallbeat
htmie in twenty minutes.'
'But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alcne.
Let my father's servant go with you. Let me order die
carriage. It can be round in five minutes.'
'Thank you, thank you; but on do account; I would
father walk. And for m to be afraid of walking alone ; I,
who nuy^ bo soon have to guard others I'
She spoke with great agitation ; and Emma veiy fedin^
replied, —'That can be no reason for your being exposed to
danger now. I must order the caniage. The heat even
would be danger. You are bdgued abeady.'
'I am,'she answered,'I am fatigued ; but it ts not the
sort of fatigue— quick walking will refresh me. Miss Wood-
house, we all know at times what it is to be wearied in
spiiits. Mine, I confess, are exhausted. The greatest kind-
ness you can show me, will be to let me have my own way,
and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.'
Emma had not another word to oppose. She saw it all ;
and entering into her feelings, promoted her quitting the
bouse immediately, and watched her safely off wi & the zeal
of a friend. Her parting look was gratefril; and hei parting
wcods^'Oh ! Miss Woodhouse, the omfbrt of being some-
times alone I'seemed to burst from an over-charged heart,
and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be
practised by her, even towards some at those irtio loved her
best
'Such a home, indeed I such an aunt I'said £mma, as
she turned back into the hall again.'I do pity you. And
die more sensibility you betray of their just horron^ tiie
more I shall like you.'
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they
had only accompUshed some views of St Marit's Place,
Venice, when Frank ChurchiU entered the room. Emma
had not been thinking of him ; she had fixgotten to dnnk
of him; but she was very glad to see him. Mrs. Westtm
would be at ease. The black maie was blameless; tJirf
were right who had named Mn. Churchill as die cause.
He had been detained by a temporary incieise of illness in
her; — a nervous scizare, which had lasted some hours;
by Google
Emma. 313
and he had quite giveo np eveiy thou^t < tf coming till
vei7 late; and had he known how hot a ride he should
have, and how late, with all his huny, he most ho, he be-
Ueved he should not have come at alL The heat was exces-
sive; he had never suffered any thing like it — almost wished
he had staid at home — nothing killed him hke heat — be
could bear any degree (^ cold, & c., but heat was intolerable ;
and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from
the slight nmains of Mr. Woodhonse's fiie, looking veiy
deplorable.
* Yon will soon be cooler, if you sit still,'sdd Emma.
'As soon as I am cooler I shall go bock agsun. I could
veiy ill be spared ; but sudi a point had been made of my
comingl Yon will all be going bood, I suppose; tiie trtiole
party breaking up. I met one as I came — Madness in such
weather 1 — absolute madncM 1'
Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that
Frank Churchill's state mi^ be best defined by the ex-
pressive phrase of being out of humour. Some people were
always cross when they were hot. Such mig^t be his consti-
tution ; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often
the cure of such incidental ctmiplaints, she recommended
his taking some refreshment; he would find abundance'of
every thing in the dining-room; and she humanely pointed
out the door.
'No; he should not eat He was not hungry; it would
only make him hotter.'In two minutes, however, he re-
lented m his own & vour ; and muttoing sMnetbing about
spruce beer, walked oC i & nma retained all hw attention
to her £itber, saying in secret,—
'I am glad I have done being in love with him. I
should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by
a hot morning. Harriet's sweet easy temper will not mind
it'
He was gone long enouj^ to have bad a very comfortable
meal, and came back all the better — grown quite cool, and,
with good manners, like himself able to diaw a diair close
to tbem, take an interest in their employment, and regret^ in
a reasonable way, that he should be so late. He was not
in his best spirits, but seemed tiying to improve them ; and,
by Google
at last,maide himself talk nonsense very ^reeaUy. ThCf
vera looking over views in Swisseriand.
'Assoonunqr aunt gets wdl, I diall go abRad,'Eaid he,
I ahill never be easy tiU I haw seen some of these places.
Yoa irill hare 1117 sketches, some time or other, to look at —
cr nqr tour to read— or my poem. I shall do somediing to
eiqMMe myselt'
'Tbatnaybe— botnotbysketdiesinSwisseifand Yon
will never go to Siiiiseriand. Your unde and annt will never
allow yon to leave England.'
* They may be indaced to go too. A vann dimate may
be prescribed for her. I have m < »e than half an expectadon
of oar all going abroad. I assure you I have. I fed a
strong petsnascHi, tins morning, that I shaQ soon be abroad.
I o«^ to travel [ am tired of doti^ nothing. I want
ft diange^ I am serious, Miss Woodfaoose, w4iatever your
penetrating eyes nay & ncy — I am sick of Ei^Jand — and
would leave it tcMnonow, if I could.'
'You axe aok of pnsperi^ and indulgence. Cannot
you invent a few faarddtipa for youself, and be contented
toatayt'
Vaick of proqterity and indulgence! Yon are quite mis-
taken. I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or
indnlged. I am thwarted in every fting matetial. I do not
OHuidcT myself at oil a fimunate person.'
'You are not gnite so miser^le, though as when you
first cam & Go^ and eat and drink a litde more, and yon
will do very w«U. Anotlia slice of cold meat, anoAer
dian^ of Madein and wato; will make you neariy on a
par with the rest of us.'
* No — ^I shall not stir. I shall sk by yon. You are my
best core.'
'We are going to Box. Hill to-nunrow : yoti will join ua.
It is not Swisseriand, but it will be sometUng for a jniung
nan so much in want of a duioge. You wiB stay, vid go
withnst'
'No,catainlynot; I shall go hoote in the axA of tiie
eveniug.'
■But you nay cmne a^n in the co < A of to-morrow
Google
< No— It will not be worth iriule. If I comevlshill be
crass.'
* Tlwn pray stay at Ridunood.'
'But if I dot I shaU be aoma sdU. I can neva- bear to
think of yoit all there without me.'
'These aie difficnldei iriiidt you mast settle for yourtelt
Choose yooT owo degree of oossneis. I shall pien yon
The net of the patty weie now retnnring, and all were
soon ooUected. Wth some dure was gieat joy at the sight
of Fiank Chmchill; otben took it veiy oonqxiaedly; but
there was a veiy general distress and distuibance on Miss
Fatifiuc's disiqipeaiaiice being explained. That it was time
fix emy body to go^ ooochided the subfect; amd with a
ahort final atiaDgement for te neact cbLys scheme^ diey
parted. Ftatnk ChmduD's little indinaiion to exdnde
hynnff tf iQcieased so mwrhi that his laat words to Emma
were,—
'WeU > — if jvw wish me to stay and join the party, I wilL*
She snuled her a cceptance; and oodiing less titan a
annuoottsfron RidmiOBd was to take him Jm^ before the
CHAPTER VIL
Thxt bad arory fine d^ for Box HOI; and all the other
oulwaid ■'■ " ■■ I " ■^a'" *« of anangement, aocomntodatirai, and
piuctuali^, were in bvonr of a pleasant party. Mr. Weston
directed tiie whole, nfflpiating safely between Haitfidd and
tiie vicaiage, and every body was in good time. & nma and
Haniet went togetiter; Miss Bates and her niece, with the
Eho & s; the gentiemen on borsebadc. Mrs. Weston re-
mained widi Mr. Woodhooae. Nothing was wanting but
to be lu^ipy when they got there. Se^ tniks were tra-
Tdled in oqiectation of enjoyment^ and erciy body had a
burst of adnmation on first aniving; but in the general
amoont of the day thoe was deficiency. There was a
languor, a want of spirit^ a want of nnioa, which could not'
iM,..dbyGoOgle
3l6 Emma.
be got orer. The^ separated too much into parties. The
EltOQS valked tt^ether ; Mr. Knightley took charge of Miss
Bates and Jane ; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank
ChoTchilL And Mr. Weston tried in vain to make them
harmonise better. It seemed at first an accidental divi-
sion, but it never materially varied. Mr. and Mn. Elton,
indeed, showed no nnwillingness to miz, and be as agree-
able as they could : but during the two whole hours that
were spent on the hill, there seemed a ptindple of separa*
tion between the odier parties, too stroi^ for any fine pros-
pects, or any cold collation, or any cheerfiil Mr. Weston, to
remove.
At first it was downi^ht dulness to Emma. She had
never seen Frank Chordiill so silent and stupid. He said
nothing worth hearing — looked without seeing — admired
without intelligence — Glistened without knowing what she
Kud. While he was so dull, it was no vottder that Har-
riet should be dull likewise; and they were bo^ insnffer-
abl &
When they all sat down it was better— to hertastea great
deal better— for fiank Churchill grew talkative and gay,
making hei his first subject Every distingoishing attention
that could be paid, was paid to her. To amuse her, and
be agreeable in ha eyes, seemed all that he cared for, — and
Emma, glad to be enlivened, not soixy to be flattered, was
gay and easy too, arid gave him all Uie friendly encourage-
ment die admission to be gallant; which she had ever given
in the fint and most animating period of their acqoaint-
ance ; but which now, in her own estimation, meant nothing,
though in the judgment of most people looking on, it must
have had such an appearance as no En^iah word but flir-
tation could vety well describe. < Mr. Frank Churchill and
Miss Woodhouse flirted t < ^^er excessively.'Ilieywere
laying themselves open to that very phrase — and to having
it sent ofi* in a letter to Maple & ove by one lady, to
Ireland by another. Not that Emma was gay and thought-
less from any real felid^ ; it < ,was i^her because she felt
less happy than she had e:q > ected. She laughed because
she was disappointed; and though she liked him for bis
attention^ and thought them all, whether in friendship,
I .;, Google
Emma.
317
admiration, or pUyfiihiess, extremdy judicious, they were
not winiung back her heart She Btiil intended him for her
friend.
'How much I am obliged to you,'said he,'for telling me
to come to-day I— If it had not been for you, I should cer-
tainly have lost all the happiness of this p^rty. I had quite
determined to go away again.*
'Yes, you were rery cxosa; and I do not know what
about, except diat you were too late for the best strawberries,
I was a kinder friend than you deserved. But you were
humble. You b^^ed hard to be coromanded to come.'
■ Don't say I was cross. I was fatigued. The heat over-
came me.'
'It is hotter to-day.'
'Not to my feelings. I am perfecdy comfortable to-day.'
'You are comfortable because you are under command'
* Your command 1 — Yes.
'Periiapa I intended you to say so, but I meant self-com-
mand. You had, somehow or odier, broken bounds yester-
day, and run away from your own management ; but to-day
ygu are got back again — and as I cannot be always with you,
it is best to beUeve your temper under your own command
rather than mine.'
'It comes to the same thing. I can have no self- < »ni-
mand without a motive. You order me, whether you speak
or not. And you can be always with me. You are always
with me.'
'Dating from three o'clock yesterday. My perpetual
influence could not begin earlier, or you would not have
been so much out of humour before.'
'Three o'clock yesterday ! That is your date. I thought
I had seen you frist in February.'
'Your gallantry ia really unanswerable. But (lo*^»S
her voice) nobody speaks except ourselves, and it is rather
too much to be talking nonsense for the entertainment of
seven silent people.'
'I say noUiing of iriiich I am ashamed,'replied he, with
lively impudence.'I saw you first in February. Let every
body on the Hill hear roe if they can. Let my accents
sweU to Hickleham on one side, and Dorking on the other.
byGoogle
5l8 £mma.
I saw you fint ia Tebniuy.'And dien whispering, —'Our
companiou are exccsnely stupid. What dull we do to
rouse them I Any nonsense will serve. Tliey sMal/ talk.
Ladies and gentionen, I am ordend by Mias Woodbouse
(irtto, -mhett ever she is, pnsides,) to say, that she desires to
know what yoa aie aU thiakifig oL'
Some lau^Kd, and answered good humouredly. Uiss
Bates sud a great deal; Hn. Etton swelled at the idea of
Miss Woodhouse's i»«siding; Mr. Knightley's answer was
the most distincL
* Is Miss Woodhoose sure that she would like to bear
mhat we all ate thinking ofl'
'Oh, no, no I'cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as she
could, — ■'upon no account in the wi^d. It is die veiy last
thing I would stand the brunt of just now. Let me hear
any thing radier than what you are aQ t^mViwg e£ I will
not say quite alL There are one or two, perhaps ^ulancing
at Mr. Weston and HairieQ, lAoae thougtos I mi^t not be
a & aid of knowing.*
'It is a sort < rf'thing,'cried Mrs. Ehon emphatically,
'which / should not hare thouf^t myself privileged to
enquire into. Thou^ periiapa^ as the tkaperm cf die
party — / never was in any circle — exploring parties— young
ladies — matried women —'
Her mntteiings were ddefly to her husband; and he mur-
mured, in reply, —
'Very true, my love, very true. Exacdy so, indeed-^
quite tuiheard of— but some ladies s^ any thing. Better
pass it off as a joke. Every body knows what is due to
'It wiD not do,'whispered Frank to Emma,'they are
most of them afiionted. I will attack diem widi more
address ladies and gendemeo, I am ordered hj Miss
Woodhouse to say, that she waves her i^it of knowing
exactiy iriut yon may all be thinking of, and only requires
something very entertaining irom each of yon, in a general
way. Here are seven of yoo, besides myself (who, she is
pleased to say, am very entertdning already,) and she only
demands from each of you, either one thing very clever, be
it prose or verse, originat or repeated ; or two things raode-
by Google
rate^ devei; or thice things vety doll indeed; and «be
engages to laugh heaitily at thsni alL'
* Oh I very well,'exclaimed Miss Bates ;'then I need not
be nneaqr. " Three thinp vezy duU indeed. " That will
just do ibt me, you know. I shall be suie to say tiuee dull
diings as soon as ever I open mymoutfa, sha'nt II (looking
round with the most good4iumoured dt^tendence (w «veiy
body's assent.) Do not you all think I shall I *
EmnuL could not resist
'Ahl ma'am, but there may be a difficol^. Kccdon
me, but you will be limited as to the number, — (Ntly three
at once.'
Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her man-
ner, did not immediately catch her meaning; but, when it
bunt on her, it could not anger, thoi^ a sli^ bhnh
showed that it could pain her.
'Ah 1 well — to be sure. Yes, I see what she means (tam-
ing to Mr. Knightle)^, and I wUl try to hold my tongue; I
must make myself very disagreeaUe, or she woafal not have
said such a thing to an old friend.'
< I like your plan,'died Mr. Weston.'Agreed, agreed.
I will do my best I am making a conundrum. Uow will
a conundrum reckon 1'
'Low, I am afraid sir, very low,'answered his son;'but
we shall be indulgent, especially to any one who leads the
way.'
'No, no^'said Emma,'it will luit reckon low. A cmnn-
drum of Mr. Weston's shall clear him and his next nei^^ibour.
Cwne, ur, pngr let me bear it.'
'I doubt its being very clever myttH,'said Mr. Westoa.
'It is too much a matter of & ct; but here it is.— What two
letters of the alphabet are there that express perfection I'
'What two letters 1 — ex[n:esa perfection I I am auic I do
not know.'
'Ah I you will never guess. You (to Emma), I am cer-
tain, will never guess. Iwilltellyou. M.andA. Em-^ma.
Do you understand t'
Understanding and gratification came together. It might
be a very indifferent piece of wit ; but Enuna found a great
deal to laugh at and enjoy in it; and so did Frank and
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
HuTi«t It did not Geera to touch the rest of the parrr
cqualljr; some looked very stnpid about it ; and Mr. Kntght-
\ey gravely said, —
'This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and
Mr. Weston has done vety well for himself; but he must
have knocked up every body else. Perfectitm should not
have ctMoe quite so soon.'
'Oh ! for myself I protest I must be excused,'said Mrs.
Elton, /really cannot attempt — I am not at all fond of the
sort (tf thing. I had an acrostic once sent to tne upon my
own name, which I was notat all pleased with. I knew who
it came from. An abominable puppy I You know who I
mean (nodding to her husband). These kind of things are
very well at Cbristmaa, when one is sitting round the fire ; but
quite out trf'placx, in my opinion, when one is exploring
about the country in sommer. Miss WoodhouK must excuse
me. I lun not one of those iriio have wit^ things at every
body's service I dp not pretoid to be a wit I have a
great deal of vivacity in my own way, but I really must be
allowed to judge when to speak, and when to hold my
toi^e. Pass uo, if you please, Mr. Churchill Pass Mr.
E., Knigfatley, Jane, and myself. We have nothing clever to
say, — not one of us.'
'Yes, yes, pray pass m^'added her husband, widi a sort
of sneering consciousness;'/have nothing to say that can
entertain Miss Woodhouse, or any other young lady. An
old married man quite good for nothing. Shall we walk,
Augustal'
'Wth all my heart I am really dred of exploring so
long on one spot Come, Jane, take my other arm.'
Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife
walked off.'Happy couple 1'said Frank Churchill, as soon
as they were out of hearing ;'how well they suit one another I
Very lucky — marrying as they did, upon an acquaintance
forTDcd only in a public place I They only knew each other,
I think, a few weeks in Bath ! Peculiarly hicky ! for as to
any real knowledge of a person's disposition that Bath, or
any public phice, can give — it is all nothing; there can be
no knowledge. Jt is only by seeing women in thdr own
homes, among their own set^ just as they always are, that
iM,.p:ibyGoogle
Emma. 321
you can foim any just Judgment Short of that, it is all
guess and luck — and will generally be ill-luck. Hov many
a. man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and
lued it all the rest of his life I'
Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among
her own confederates, spoke now.
•Such things do occur, undoubtedly.'She wax stopped
by & cou^ Frank Churchill turned towards her to listen.
'You were speaking,'said he, gravely. She recovered
hei vmce.
'I was only going to observe, that thou^ sndi unfo^
tunate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and
women, I cannot imagine them to be very frequent A
hasty and imprudent attachment may aiise — but there is
generally time to recover ftom it afterwards. I would be
understood to mean, that it can be only weak, irresolute
chaiacters (whose happiness must be always at the mercy of
chance), who will suffer on unfortunate acquaintance to be
an inconvenience, an oppression for ever.'
He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in sub-
mission ; and soon aftowards said, in a lively tone, —
'Well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment,
that whenever I many, I hope somebody will dioose my
wife for me. Will youl (turning to Eioma]. 1\111 you
choose a wife f < x met I am sure I should lUie any body
fixed on by you. Vou provide for the family, you know
(with a smile at his father). Find somebody for me. I am
in no hurry. Ad < ^ her ; educate her.'
'And miake her like myselC'
* By all means, if you can.'
'Very welL I undertake the commission. You shall
have a charming wife.'
'She must be very lively, and have hade eyes. I care
for nothing else. I shall go abroad for a couple of years
^^nd when I return, I shall come to you fw my wife.
Remember.'
Emma was in no danger of foi^tting. It was a com-
mission to toudi eveiy favourite feeling. Would not Har-
riet be the very creature described! Hade eyes excepted,
two years more might make her all that he wished. He
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
323 SUUHO.
might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the motnent ;
who could sa.yl Referring the education to ber seemed to
imply it.
'Now, ma'am,'said Jane to her amit, * shall we join
Mis. Elton r
'If you please, my dear. With all my Jieait I am
quite ready. I was ready to have gone with her, but this
will do just as weU. We shall soon Overtake her. There
she is— no, that's somebody else. Tltafs . one of the
ladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her. Well I
declare—'
They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr.
Knighdey. Mr. Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet,
only remained ; and the young man's spirits now rose to a
pitch almost unfrfeaaanL Even Emma grew tired at last
of flattery and merriment, and wished herself rather walk-
ing quiet^ about with any of the others, or sitting almost
alone, and quite unattended to, in tranquil observation of
the beaudM views beneath her. The appearance of the
servants looking out for them to give notice of the carnages
was a joyful sight ; and even the bustle of collecting and
prqaring to depart, and the solicitude of Mrs. Elton to
have ier carriage & rst, were gladly endnred, in the prospect
of the quiet drive home iriiich was to dose dw very ques-
tionable enji^ments of this day of pleasure. Such anodier
scheme, composed of so many ill-assorted people she hoped
never to be betrayed into again.
While waiting for the carriage, she fotmd Mr, Knighdey
by her side. He looked around, as if to see that no One
were near, and then said, —
'Emitia, I must once more speak to you as I -hare been
used to do: a privilege rather endured than allowed, pei^
haps; but I must stiU use it I cannot see you acting
wrong, without a rononstrance; How could you be so unr
feeling to Miss Batest How could you be so insolent in
your wit to a woman of her character, age, and situation 1
Emma, I had not thought it possible.'
Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh
it off.
■Nay, how could, X help saying what I didl Nobody
by Google
Emma. 323
could have helped it It was not so very bod I dare uj
she did not undent & iid oci'
'I assure yon she did. She felt your full meaning. She
has talked of it since. I wish you could have heard how she
talked ot it — with what candour and generosity: I wish you
could have beard her honouring your forbearance, in being
able to pay her such, anentions, as she was for ever receiving
from yourself and your & t^, whra ber society must be ao
'Oh 1'died Emma,'I know thoe is not a bettcx
creature in the world: but you must allow, thtf what is
good and what. is ridiculous ate moM: unfortnnatfily. blended
in her.'
'They are blended,'said be,'I acknowledge ; and, were
she [ffosperous, I could allow much for the occasional pre-
valence of the ridiculous ova the good. , Were she a woman
of fortune, I would leave het every hannless absurdity
to take its chancy I weukl not quanel with you for any
liberties of manner. Were she your equal in situation —
but, Emma, consider how far this is from being the case.
£he is poor ; she has sank from the comforts she was bom
to ; and if she lira to old age, musb {wobably unk morq.
Her ntualion should secure your con^aasioa It was badly
done, indeed. ! Yoi^ whom she had known fitun an in & nt,
whom she had seen grow up from a period when her notice
was an bonow > ;— to bwre yon now, in thoughtless spirit^
and the pride of the moment, laugh at her, humble her~
and before hei niece, too — and before others, many of whom
(certainly same) would be entirely guided by /our treatment
of her. This is not pleasant to you, Emma — and it is very
fkr from pleasant to me ; but I mus^ I will, — I will tell
you truths while I can ; satisfied with proving myself your
friend by veiy & ith & d counsel, and trusting that you wiD
some time or other do me greater justice than you can do
now.'
While they talked, they were advancing towards the car*
riage ; it was ready ; and, before she could apeak i^aio, he
had handed her in. He had misinterpreted the £eelings
which had kept her Sace averted, and her tongue motionlesi.
They were combined only of anger against herself mortifica-
byGoOgk'
334 Emma.
tion, and deep ooacem. She had not been able to speal ;
and, oa entoing the ouiiag^ sunk back for a. moment over-
come ; then reproaching herself for having taken no leave,
making no acknowledgment, paitingin apparent sullenness,
she looked out with voice and hand eager to ^ow a dif-
ference ; but it was just too late. He had Rimed away, and
the hones were in motion. She continued to look back,
but in vain ; and soon, with what appeared unusual speed,
thej were half-way down the hill, and every thing 1 < A & r
belund. She was veied beyond vdiat could have been ex-
pressed — almost beyond what she could conceal. Never
had she felt so agitated, mortified, grieved, at any drcum-
stance in her life. She was most forcibly struck. The truth
of his re^sesentation there was no denying. She fdt it at
her heart. How could she have been so brutal, so duel to
Miss Bates I How could she have exposed herself to sudt
ill < ^nnion in any one she valued I And how suffer him
to leave her without saying one word of gratitude, of cxat-
cuirence, of common kindness I
Time did not compose her. As die reflected more, she
seemed but to feel it more. She never had been so de-
pressed. Happily it was not necessary to speak. There
was only Harriet, iriio seemed not in spirits herself & gged,
and very vritUng to be silent; and l & nma felt the tears
lunning down her cheeks almost all the way home, without
being at any trouble to check them, extraordinaiy as they
CHAPTER VIII.
Ths wretchedness of a sdieme to Box Hill was in Emma's
thoughts all the evening. How it might be consido^ by
the rest of the party, she could not telL They, in their
different homes, and their different ways, might be looking
back on it with pleasure; but in her view it was a morning
more completely mis-spent, more totally bare of rational
satis & ction at the time, and more to be abhorred in recol-
lectim, than any she had ever passed. A whole evenuig
I, Google
£mma. 335
of backprnimon mtb her father was fdidty to it T^tre,
indeed, lay real pleasure, for there she was giving up the
sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his comfort; and feel-
ing that, unmerited as might be the degree of his fond af-
fection and confiding esteem, she could not, in her general
conduct, be open to any severe repioach. As a daughter,
she hoped she was not without a heart She hoped no one
could have said to her,'How could you be so unfeeling to
your & ther 1 — I mus^ I will tell you truths while I can.'
Miss Bates should never again — no never I If attention,
In future, could do away the past, she might hope to be
foigiven. She had been often remiss, her conscience told
her so; remiss, perhaps, more in thought than fact ; scomfiil,
ui^iadou5. But it should be so no more. In the warmth
of true contrition, she would call upon her the very next
moTning, and it should be the beginning on her side, of a
r^ular, equal, kindly intercourse.
She was just as determined when the morrow came, and
went early, that nothing might prevent her. It was not un-
likely, she thought, that she might see Mr. Knightley in har
way ; or, perhaps, he might come in while she were paying
her visit She had no objection. She would not be ashamed
of the appearance of the penitence, so justly and truly hers.
Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked, but she saw
him not
'The ladies were all at home.'She had never rejoiced
at the sound before, nor ever before entered the passage, nor
walked up the stairs, with any wish of giving pleasure, but in
conferring obligation, or of deriving it, except in subsequent
There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of mov
ing and talking. She heard Miss Bates's voice ; something
was to be done in ahuny; the maid looked frightened and
awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait a moment,
and then ushered her in too soon. The aunt and niece
seemed both escaping into the adjoining room. Jane she
had a distinct glimpse o( looking extremely ill; and, before
the door had shut them out, she heard Miss Bates saying,
'Well, my dear, I shall tay you are laid down upon the bed,
fuid I am sure you are ill enough.'
by Google
326 Emma.
Poor old Mrs, Bates, dvil and humble as'usnal, looked a«
if she did not quite understand what wu going on.
'I am a£uid Jane is not very well,'said she,'but t do
not know ; they tdl me she is well. I dare say my daughter
will be here presently, Miss Woodhouse. I hope you find &
chair. 1 wish Hetty had not gone. I am very little able —
have you a chair, ma'am 1 Do yoa sit where yon like t I
am Euie she will be here presently.'
Emma seriously hoped she would. She had a moment's
fear of Miss Bates keeping away from her. But Miss Bates
soon came —'Very happy and obliged,'— but Emma's con-
science told her that there was not the same cheerful volu-
bility as before, — less ease of look and manner. A veiy
friendly enquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, ihight lead
the way to a return of old feelings. The touch seemed
immediate.
'Ah, Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are ! I suppose
you have heard — and are come to give us joy. Tins does
not seem much like joy, indeed in me (twinkling away &
tear or two); but it will be very trying for us to part with
her, after having had her ao long; and she has a ch'eadfal
headach JQSt now, writing aU themommg; such long let-
ters, you know, to be written to Colonel Campbell and Mrs:
Dixon. " My dear, " said I, " you will blind yourself " for
tears were in her eyes perpetually. One cannot WOTider,
one caimot wonder. It is a great change ; and diough she
is amazingly fortunate, — such a situation, I suppose, as nO
young woman before evermetwitfaonfirst going out; do not
think us ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising
good fortune (again dispersing her tears) — but, poor dear
soul; if you were to see what a headadi she has. When
one is in great pain, you know one caimot feel any blessing
quite as it may deserve. She is as low as possible . To lot*
at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy she is
to have secured such a situation. You will excuse her not
coming to you, she is not able, she is gone into her own
room. I want her to lie down upon the bed. " My dear, "
said I, " I shall say you are laid down upon the bed: " but,
however, she is not; she is walking about the room. But,
now that she has written her letters, she says she shall soon
byGoogIc
Empta. 327
be well. She will be extremely sorrjr to miss seeing you,
Miss Woodhouse, but your kinckiess will excuse her. You
w^e kept waiting at the door; I was quite ashamed; but
somehow there was a little bustle; for it so happened, that
we had not heard the knock; and, till you were on the stairs,
we did not know any body was coming. " It is only Mrs.
Cole, " said I, " depend upon it; nobody else would come
so early. " — " Well " said she, " it must be bome some time or
other, and it may as well be now. " But then Pat^ came in,
and said it was you. " Oh 1 " said I, " itisMiss Woodhous^
I am sure you will like to see her. " — " I can see nobody, " said
■be, and up she got, and would go away; and that was what
made us keep you waiting; and extremely sorry and ashamed
we weie. " If you must go, my dear, " said I, " you must, and
I will say you are laid down upon the bed. "'
Emma was most sincerely interested. Her heart had
been long growing kinder towards Jane ; and this picture of
her present sufiTerings acted as a cure of every former un-
generous suspicion, and left her nothing but pity; and the
remembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations of the
past, obliged her to admit that Jane might very naturally
resolve, on seeing Mrs. Cole, or any other steady inen < ^
when ^ might not bear to see berself. She spoke as she
fel^ with eamestr^et and solicitude; sincerely wishing that
the circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to b^
now actually determined on, might be as much for Miss
Fairfax's advantage and comfort as possible,'It must be a
severe trial to them all She had understood it was to-be
delayed till Colonel Campbell's return.'
'So veiy kind r replied Miss Bates; < but you are always
kind.'
There was no bearing such an'always;'and to break
through her dreadful gratitude Emma inade the direct en-
quiiy of—
'Where, may I ask, is Miss Fairfax going t'
'To a Mrs. Smalbidge, — charming woman, — most supe^
Jior, — to have the chaige of her three little girls, — delightAil
children. Impossible that any situation could be more
replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps, Mrs. Suck-
lii^^s own fiuuily, and Mrs. Bragge's; but Mrs. Smalkidge ia
by Google
33d Emma,
intimate with boA, and in the very same neighbouThood: —
lives < »ily four miles from Maple Grove. Jane will be only
four miles from Maple Grove.'
* Mn. Elton, I suppose, has been the penon, to whom
Miss Faiifuc owes'
'Yea, OUT good Mra. Elton. The most inde & t^able, true
friend. She would not take a deniaL She would not let
Jane say, " No ; " for when Jane firat heard of it (it was the
day before yesterday, the vety morning we vtxt at Domn^X
when Jane fiist hesjd of i^ she was quite decided agunst
accepting the offer, and for the reasons you mentioD; exactly
as you say, she had made up her mind to close with nothing
till Colonel Campbell's return, and nothing should induce
her to enter into any ei^agement at present — and so she
tiAA Mis. Elton over and over again — and I am sure I had
no more idea that she would change her mind; — but that
good Mrs. Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw & rther
than I did. It is not every body that would have stood out
in such a kind way as she did, and refused to take Jane's
answer; but she po^dvely declared she would not write
any sndi denial yesterday, as Jane wished her; she would
wait — and sure enough, yesterday evening, it was all settled
tiiat Jane should go. Quite a surprise to me ! I had not
the least idea 1 — Jane took Mrs. Elton aside, and told her at
once, that upon Uimking ova the advantages of Mrs, Sudc-
ling's situation, she had come to the resolution of accepting
it I did not know a word of it till it was all settled.*
'You spent the evening with Mrs. Elton 1'
'Yes, all of us ; Mrs. Elton would have ns come. It was
nettled so, upon the hill, while we were walking about widi
Mr. Knightley. " You »««/«// spend your evening with na, "
said she— " I positively must have you ail come. "'
'Mr, Knightley was there too, was he ?'
* No, not Mr. Knightley ; he declined it from the first ;
and though I thought he would come, because Mrs. Elton
declared she would not let him off, he did not; but my
mother, and Jane, and I, were all there, and a very agree-
able evening we bad. Such kind friends, you know. Miss
Woodhouse, one must always find agreeable, though every
body seemed rather fagged after the morning's party. Even
by Google
JSmma.
329
pleuuTc, jrou know, is fatiguing-— and I cumot way that any
of than secDMd very much to have cnjojrcd it However, /
sbaU always dank it a veiy pleannt paity, and feel extremely
obliged to the kind friends irtio included nw in it'
'MiasFati & x, I suppose, thou^ you were not aware of i^
had been " " ^^g up her mind the whc^ day.'
'I daie say she had.'
'Whenever the time may come, it most be unwdctH & e to
her and all her friends — but I hope her engagement will have
every alleviatioD that is possible — I mean, as to the character
and maimen of the fiunily.'
'Thank yon, dear Hiss Woodhouse. Yes, indeed, there
is every thing in the woAd that can make her happy in it
Except the Sucklings and Bmgges, there is not sudh another
nursoy establishment, so liberal and elegant, in all Mrs.
Elton's acquaintance. Mrs. Smalltidge, a most delightful
woman] A stjleofliving almost equal to Maple Grove— and
aa to the children, except the little Sucklings and litde
Biagges, there are not such el^ant sweet children any where.
Jane will be treated with such r^ard and kindness 1 It will
be nothing but pleasure, a life of pleasure. And her salary
—I really cannot venture to name her salary to you, Miss
Woodhouse. Even you, used as you are to great sums,
wonid hardly believe that so much could be given to a young
person like Jane.'
'Ah, madam,'cried Emma,'if Other children are at aD
like iriiat I remember to have been myself I should think nve
times the amount of what I have ever yet heard named as a
salary on such occasions dearly earned'
'Vou are so noble in your ideas.'
'And irtien is Miss Fair & z to leave you 1'
'Very soon, very soon, indeed ; that's the worst of it
Within a fOTtnight Mrs. SmaJlridge is in a great hutiy.
My poor mother does not know how to bear it So then, I
try to pot it out of her thoughts, and say, " Come, ma'am,
do not let OS think about it any more. "'
'Her fiiends must all be sony to lose her; and will not
Colonel and Mis. Campbell be sony to find that she has
engaged herself before their return 1'
'Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such
byGoogle
% atuadon h Ae cannot feel herself justified in decliouig;
I wu soastonisbed when ^e first told nte iduit die had
t > een saying to Mrs. Elton, and when Mis. £lt(xiattliesaiD«
moment came coDgratulatii^ me upon it It was before tea
— stay— no, it coald not be before tea, because wc were just
going to cards — and yet it was be & xe tea, becaiue I r &
member thinking — oh no, now I recollect, no > w I have it ;
something happened before tea, but not that Mr. Elton
was called out of the loom before tea, old John Abd/s- son
wanted to speak with him. Poor old John, I have a gieat
regard for bim ; be was clerk to my poor father twcn^-geren
years ; and now, poor old man, he is bed^riddcn, and very
poorly with the rheumatic goat in his joints — I must go and
sec him to-day; and so will Jane, I am sore, if she gets out at
olL And poor John's son came to talk to Mr. Elton about
relief horn die pansh : he is very well to do himself you
know, being head nun at the Crown, ostler, and every thii^
of that snt, but still he cannot keep his & thBr without soma
bdp ; and so, when Mr. Elton came back, he told us what
John ostler had been telling him, and dicn it came out
about the chaise having been sent to Randalls to take
Mr. Frank Churchill to Richmond. That was what hap-
pened before tea. It was after tea that Jane spdce to Mis.
Elton.'
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say bow per:
fecdy new this ckcnmstance was to her ; but, as without
supposing it possible that she could be ignorant of any of
the particulars of Mr. Fiaidt Churchill's going, she proceeded
to give them all, it was of no ccmseqaence:
What Mr. Elton had learned fit > m the ostler on the subject,
being the accumulation of the ostler's own knowledg^e, and
the biowledge of Ae servants at RandaHs, was, that a mes-
senger had come over & xnn Richmond soon after the return
of the party from Box Hill — which messenger, however, had
been no more than was expected ; and that Mr. Churchill
had sent his nephew a few lines, containing, upon the whole,
a tolerable account of Mrs. Churchill, and only wishmg him
not to delay coming back beyond the next morning eariy;
but that Mr. Frank Churchill having resolved to go home
directly, without waiting at all, and his horse seeming to have
h, Google
got a coU, Tom had been sent off immedrntely for the Crown
chaise, and the ostler bad stood out and seen it pass by, the
boy going a good pace, and dririt^ very steady.
There was nothing in all this eitherto astonish or interest,
and it caught Emma's attention only as it united with the
mbject which already engaged her mind. The contrast be-
.tween MiB, Churchill's impoitance in the world, and Jane
Fairfax's, struck her; one was eveiy thing, the other noting
— and she sat musing on the difierence of woman's destiny,
and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed, till roused
by Miss Bates's saying —
*Ay, I see wlut you are thinking o^ the pianorforte.
VlhuX is to become of tiiatl Very true. Poor dear Jane
was talking of it just now. " You must go, " said she. " You
and I must part You will have no business her & Let it
stay, however, " said she; " give it house-room till Colonel
Campbell comes back. I shall talk about it to htm ; he will
settle fu me ; he will help me out of all my diiBculties.''-^
And to this day, I do believe, she knows not whether it was
his present or his daughter's.'
Now Emma was obliged to think of the piano-forte ; and
the remembrance of all her former fanciful and unfair con-
jectures was so little pleasing, that she soon allowed herself
to believe her visit had been long enough ; and, with a re-
petition of everything that she could venture to say of the
good wishes which she really felt, took leave.
CHAPTER IX.
Ehha's pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not
intemiptcd; but on entering the parlour, she found tiiose
who must rouse her. Mr. Knightley and Harriet had
arrived during her absence, and were sitting with her father.
Mr. Knightley immediately got up, and, in a manner decid-
edly graver than usual, said, —
* I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no
time to spare, and therefine most now b« gone directly. I
an going to Lotidon, to spend a few days with John and
J,g,l,z6:lbyG00gk'
33a Smma.
Isabella. Have you any thing to send or say, besides the
** love, " which nobody caiiies I'
'Nothing at all. But u not this a sodden schemel'
'Yet-~Tathei^-I have been > hinHng of it some Httle
time.'
Emma was sme he had not foigiven her; he looked un-
like himselE Time, however, she thought, would tell him
that they ought to be friencb again. While he stood, as
if meaning to go, but not going— her & thcr began his
enquiries.
'Well, my dear, and did you get there safely 1 — ^And how
did you find my worthy old Mend and her daug^tert — I
daie say they must have been very much obliged to you for
coming. Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs. and Miss
Eates, Mr, Rnightiey, as I told you before. She is always
so attentive to them.'
Emma's colour was heightened by this tmjust ptaise ;
and with a smile and shake of the head, which spoke much,
she looked at Mr. Knightley. It seemed as if there were
an instantaneous impression in her bvoui, as if his eyes
received the truth from hers, and all that had passed of good
in her feelings were at once caught and honoured. He
looked at her with a glow ot r^;ard. She was warmly
gratified — and in another moment sdll more so, by a little
movement of more than common friendliness on his part
He took her hand ; — ^whether she had not herself made the
first motion, she could not say — she mi^t, perhaps, have
rather ofTered it — but he took her hand, pressed it, and cer-
tainly was on the point of canying it to his Ups — when,
from some fancy or other, he suddenly let it go. Why he
should feel such a scruple, why he should change his mind
when it was all but done, she could not percdve. He would
have judged better, she thought, if he had not stopped.
The intention, however, was indubitable; and whether
it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry, or
however else it happened, but ^e thought nothing became
him more. It was with him, of so simple, yet so dignified a
nature. She could not but recall the attempt with gre^
satis & ction. It spoke such perfect amity. He left them
immediately alterwaida — gone in a moment He always
by Google
nxrred with the alertness of a mind which could neither be
nndedded nor dilatory, but now he seemed more sadden
than usual in his disappearance.
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates,
but she wished she had left her tea minutes earlier; — it
would have been a great pleasure to talk over Jane Fairfax's
situadon with Mr. Kni^tley. Neither would she regret
that he should be going to Brunswick Square, for she knew
how much his visit would be enjoyed — but it might have
happened at a better time — and to have had longer notice
of it, would have been pleasanter. They parted thorough
friends, however; she could not be deceived as to the
meaning of his countenance, and his unfinished gallantry ;
~-it was all done to assure her that she had fully recovered
his good opinion. He had been sitting with them half an
hour, she found. It was a pity that she had not come back
earlier.
In the hope of diverting her father's thoughts fcom the
disagreeableness of Mr. Knightley's going to London; and
going so suddenly; and going on horseback, which she
knew would be all very bad; Emma communicated her
news of Jane Fair & x, and her dependence on the effect was
justified ; it supplied a veiy usehil check, — interested, with-
out disturbing him. He had long made up his mind to
Jane Fair & x's going oat as governess, and could talk of it
cheerfiiUy, but Mr. Knightley's going to London had been
an unexpected blow.
'I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so
comfortably settled. Mrs. Elton is very good-natured and
agreeable, and I dare say her acquaintance are jnst what
they ought to be. I hope it is a dry situation, and that her
health will be taken good care of It oi^t to be a first
object, as I am suie poor Miss Taylor's always was with me.
You know, my dear, she is going to be to this new lady
what Miss Taylor was to as. And I hope she will be better
off in one respect and not be induced to go away after it
has been her home so long.'
The following day brought news firom Richmond to throw
every thing else into the back-ground. An express arrived
at Rand^s to announce the death of Mrs. Churchill
by Google
334 Emma.
Though her nephew had Iiad do particular reason to hasten
back on her account, she had not lived above nx-and-thir^
hours after his return. A sudden Geieure,'of a different
nature from any thing foreboded by her general state, had
carried her off after » short struggle. The great Mis.
Churchill wad no iiior &'-
It was felt as such things must be fdt: Evety body had
a degree of gravi^ and sorrow; tendentess towards the
departed, ootidtude for the surviving friends; and, in a
reasonaUe time, curiosity to know whwe she would be
buried. Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops
to folly, she has nothing to do but to die; and when she
■toops to be disagreeable, it is equally to be recommended
as a clearer of ill fame. Mrs. Churchill, after being disliked
at least twenty-five years, was nOw spoken of with compas-
nonate allowances. In one point she'was ftilly justified.
£he had never been admitted before to be seriously UL The
event acquitted h^ of all the fancifutness, and all the selfish-
ness of imaginary complaints.
* Poor His. Qmrchill 1 no doubt'she had been suffering t
great ded: more than any body had ever sapposed— •and
continual pain would try the temper. It was a sad event-^
a great shock— with all her bults, what would Mr. Churchill
do without her t Mr. Churchill's loss would be dreadfiil, in-
deed. Mr. Churchill would never get over it'Even Mr,
Weston shook his head, and looked solemn, and said,'Aht
poor woman, who would have thought it!'and resolved, that
his mourning should be as handsome as possible; and his
wife sat dgfaiog and moralising over her broad hems with a
tommisetation and good sense true add steady. How it
would affect Frank was among die earliest thot^tt of both.
It was also a Very eaiiy speculation with Emma. The cha-
racter of Mrs. Churchill, the grief of her husband — her mind
glanced over them both with awe and compassion, — and then
rested with hghtened feelings on how Frank might be
.nffected by the event, how beitefited, how freed. She saw
in a m(»nent all the possible good. Now an attachment to
Harriet Smith would have nothing to ^rcounter. Mr.
Churchill, independent of his wife, was feared by nobody;
an easy, Ridable man, to be penuiad^ into any thing by
by Google
his nephew. All that rem^ed to be wished was, that the
nephew should form the attachment, as, with all her good
will in the cause, Emma could feel no certainty of it£ being
already formed.
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occa^on, with
great self-command. Whatever she might feel of brighter
hope, she betrayed nothing. Emma was gratified to observe
such a proof in her of strengthened character, and refrained
from any allusion th«t might endanger its maintenance. They
■poke, theiefc»e, of Mrs. Churchill's death with mutual for-
beaiaBce.
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, com-
municating aU that was immediately important of their state
and plans. Mr. Churchill was better than could be expected;
and their first removal, on the departure of the funeral for
Yorkshire^ was to be to the house of a very old friend in
Windsor, to whom Mr. Churchill had been promising a visit
the last ten years. At present, there was nothing to be
done for Harriet; good wishes fw the fiiture were all that
could yet be possible on Emma's side. .
It was a more pressing concern to show attention to Jane
Fuifiuc, whose prospects were closing, while Harriet's opened,
and whose engagements now allowed of no del^ in any
one at Highbury, who wished to show her kindness — and
with Emma it was grown into a 6ist wish. She had scarcely
a stronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person,
whom she had been so many months n^lecting, was now the
very (me oniriuxn she would have lavished every distinction of
re^od or sympathy. She wanted to be of use to her; wanted
to show a valoe for her society, and testify respect and con-
sideration. She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day
at Hactfield. A note was written to urge it The invitatioB
WHS refused, and by a verbal message.'Miss Fair & x was
not well enough to write;'and iriien Mr. Perry c^ed at
Hartfield, the same morning, it appeared that die was so
moch indisposed as to have been visited, thouf^ against her
own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering under
severe headachs, and a nervous Eever to a d^ree, irtiich
made him doubt the possil»h^ of her going to Mrs. Smdl-
ddge'i at the time pcopcsed. Her he^th seemed for the
by Google
336 Emma.
moment completely deranged — appetite quite gone — and
though there were no absolutely alarming sjmpMma, nothing
touching the pulmonary complaint, which was the standing
apprehension of the family, Mr. P«iy was uneasy about her.
He thought she had undertaken more than she was equal
to, and ^at she felt it so herself; though she would not own
it Her spirits seemed overcome. Her present home, he
could not but observe, was unfavourable to a nervous dis-
oider;^-confined alwajrs to one room; — he could have wished
it otherwise J— and her good aunt, thoi^h his very old friend,
he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for an
invalid of that description. Her care and attention couid
not be questioned ; they were, in & ct, only too great He
very rbndi feared that Miss Fair & x derived more evil than
good from them. Emma listened with the warmest concern;
grieved for her more and more, and looked around eager to
discover some way of beir^ useful To take her— be it
only an hour or two — from her aunt, to give her change of
air and scene, and quiet rational conversation, even for an
hour or two, might do her good; and the following morning
she wrote again to say, in the most feeling language she
could conmiand, that she would call for her in the carriage
at any hour diat Jane would name — mentioning that she had
Mr. Perry's decided opinion, in & vout of such exera'se for
his patient The answer was only in this short note : —
'Miss Fair & x's compliments and thanks, but is quite
unequal to any exercise.'
Emma felt that her own note had deserved something
better ; but it was impossible to quarrel widi words, whose
tremulons inequality showed indisposition so plainly, and
she thought only of how she might best counteract this
unwillingness to be seen or assisted. Is spit»of the answer,
therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove to Mrs.
Bates's, in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her
— but it would not do ; — Miss Bates came to the carriage
door, all gratitude, and agreeing widt her moat earnestly in
thinking an airing might be of the greatest service — and every
thing that message could do was tried — bnt all in vairL
Hiss Bates was ol^ed to tetum without success ; Jane waa
quite unpenuadaUe ; the mere proponl of going out seemed
u,a,i,z6:ibyGoOgle
Emma. 337
to make her worse. Emma, wished she could have seen her,
find tried ha own powers : but, almost before she could
hint the wish. Miss Bates made it appear that she had pro-
mised her niece on do account to let Miss Woodhouse in.
'Indeed, the truth was, that poor dear Jane could not bear
to see any body — any body at all — Mrs. Elton, indeed, could
not be denied — and Mrs. Cole had made such a point — and
Mrs. Perry had said so much — but, except them, Jane would
really see nobody.'
Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs. Eltons,
the Mrs. Peirys, and the Mrs. Coles, who would force them-
selves any where; neither could she feel any right of
preference herself — she submitted, therefore, and only ques-
tioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece's appetite and diet,
which she longed to be able to assist On that subject poor
Miss Bates was very unhappy, and very communicative ;
Jane would hardly eat any thing : — Mr, Perry recommended
nourishing food; but every thing they could command (and
never had any body such good neighbours) was distasteful.
Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly
to an examination of her stores ; and some arrow-root of
very superior qualify was speedily de^ > atched to Miss Bates
with a most fhendly note. In half an hour the arrow-root
was returned, with a thousand thanks from Miss Bates, but
'dear Jane would not be satisfied without its being sent
back : it was a thing she could not take — and, moreover,
she insisted on her saying, that she was not at all in want of
any thing.'
When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been
seen wandering about the meadows, at some distance from
H^hbury, on the afternoon of the very day on which she
had, under the plea of being unequal to any exercise, so
peremptcmly tefiised to go out with her in the carriage, she
could have no doubt — putting every thing together— that
Jane was resolved to receive no kindness from Aa-. Sha
was Bony, very sorry. Her heart was grieved for a stat^
which seemed but the more pitiable from this sort of irrita-
tion of spirits, inconsistency of action, and inequalify of
powers; and it mortified her that she was given so little
credit for proper feeling, or esteemed so little worthy as a
by Google
33 8 Emma.
Mend : but she hod the conaoUtion of knowing that her
intentions were good, and of being able to sa^ to herself^
that could Mr. Knightley have been privy to all her attempts
ttf assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seen into her
heai^ he wmdd not, on this occasion, have found any tiling
to reprove.
CHAPTER X.
Onk morning, about ten days after Mn. Churchill's decease,
Eknma was called down stairs to Mr. Weston, iriio'could
not stay five minutes, and wanted particulariy to speak with
her.'— He met her at the parlour door, and hardly asking
her how she did, in the natural key of his voice, suidc it
immediatdy, to say, unheard by her father, —
'Can you come to Randalls at any time this momingt —
Do, if it be possible. Mrs. Weston wants to see you. She
mnst see you.'
'Is sheunwdir
'No, no, not at all — only a little agitated. Sie would
have OTdered the carriage, and come to you, but she must
see you aioiu, and that you know (nodding towards her
father) — Humph ! can you come I'
'Certainly. This moment, if you please. It is impos-
sible to refiise what you ask in such a way, bat what can be
the matterl is she really n < A illt'
'Depend upon me, but ask no more questions. Von will
know it all in time. The most unaccountable business I
But hush, hush!'
To guess what all this meant was imposdtde eves for
Emma. Something really important seemed announced by
his looks ; but, as her fiiend was well, she endeavoured not
to be uneasy, and settling it with her fitther, that Aa would
take her walk now, she and Mr, Weston were soon out of
the house together, and on their way at a quick pace for
Randalls.
'Now,'said & nma, when they were & Hly beyond the
sweep gates —'now, Mt Weston, do let me know what luta
h^pened.'
by Google
Emma.
339
'Not no,'he gnvel/ replied.'Don't ask me. I pro >
miBed my wife to leave it aU to her. She will break it to
yo\x better than I can. Do not be impatient, Emma ; it will
all come out too soon.'
'Bieak it to me,'cried Emma, standing still with terror.
'Good God! Mr. Weston, tdl me at once. Something
has happened in Brunswick Square. I know it has. Tell
me, I charge you, tell me this moment what it is.'
'No, indeed, you are mistaken.'
'Mr. Weston, do not ta & e with me. Consider how many
of my dearest friends aie now in Brunswick Square. Whidi
of them is it! I charge you by all that is sacred not to
attempt concealment'
'Upon my word, Emma.'
'Your word I why not your honour 1 why not say upon
your honour, that it has nothing to do widi any of theml
Good heavens ! What can be to be broke to m^ that does
relate to one of that iamilyt'
'Upon my honour,'said he very seriously,'it does not
It is not in ^e sm^lest degree connected with any human
being of the name of Knightley.'
Emma's courage returned, and she walked on.
'I was wrong,'he continued,'in talking of its being broke
to you. I should not have used the expression. In fact,
it does not concern you, it concerns only myself ;— that is,
we hope. Humph I — In short, my dear Emma, there is no
occasion to be so uneasy about it I don't say that it is not
a disagreeable business, but things might be much wone.
If we walk & st, we shall soon be at Randalls.'
Emma found that she must wait; and now it required
little effort She asked no more questions therefbre, merely
employed her own fancy, and that soon pointed out to her
the probabili^ of its being some money concern, — something
just come to light, of a disagreeable nature in the circum-
stances of the family; something which the late event at
Richmond had brought forward. Her fancy was very active.
Half a dozen natural children, perhaps, and poor Frank cut
oS! This, though very undesirable, would be no matter of
agony to her. It inspired little more than an animating
curiosity.
byGoOgk'
'Who is that gentleman on horseback?'said she, as they
proceeded ; speaking more to assist Mr. Weston in keeping
his secret, than with any other view.
'I do not know. One of the Otways. — Not Frank ; it
is not Frank, I assure you. You will not see him. He is
hali vny to Windsor by this time.*
'Has your son been with you, thenV
'Ob t yes, did not you know ) Well, well, never mind.'
For a. moment he was silent ; and then added, in a tono
much more guarded and demure, —
'Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how
we did.'
They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls. —'Well,
my dear,'said he, as they entered the room, —'I have
brought her, and now I hope you will soon be better: I shall
leave you together. There is no use in delay. I shall not
be far off, if yon want me.'— ^And Emma distinctly heard
him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted the room, —'I
have been as good as my word. She has not the least idea.'
Mrs. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much
perturbadoD, that Emma's uneasiness increased; and the
moment they were alone, she eagerly said, —
'What is it, my dear friend! Something of a very unplea-
sant nature, I find, has occurred ; — do let me know directly
what it is. I have been walking all this way in complete
suspense We both abhor suspense. Do not let mine
continue longer. It will do you good to speak of your
distress, whatever it may be.'
'Have you, indeed, no ideal'said Mrs. Weston in a
trembling voice.'Cannot you, my dear Emma^-cannot you
form a guess as to what you are to heart'
'So & r as that it relates to Mr. Frank Churchill, I do
guess. "
'You are right It does relate to him, and I will tell yon
directly;'(resuming her work, and seemini; resolved against
looking up).'He has been here this very morning, on a
most extraordmary errand. It is impossible to express our
surprise. He came to speak to bis father on a subject, — to
announce an attachment'
She stopped to breathe. Emma thought first of herself
and then of HanieL
by Google
Emma. 34 1
'More than in attachment, indeed,'resumed Mrs. Weston :
'an engagement — a. positive engagement What will you
say, Emma — what will any body say — when it is known
that PraiJc. Chnichill and Miss Fair & x are engaged; nay,
that they have been long engaged!'
.Emma even jumped with surprise; and, hoiror-stnick,
exclaimed, —
'Jane Faiifiix ! Good God ! You are not serious t Yoa
do not mean itt'
'You may well be amaied,'returned Mia. Weston, still
averting hei eyes, and talking on with eagerness, that Emma
mi^t ^ve time to recover —'you may well be amased. But
it is even so. There has been a solemn engagement be-
tween them ever since October, — formed at Weymouth, and
kept a secret from every body. Not a creature knowing it
but themselves — neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor
his. It is so wonderful, that, though perfectly convinced of
the fact, it is yet almost incredible to myself. I can liardly
beliWe it I thought I knew him.'
Emma scarcely beard what was said. Her mind was
divided between two ideas ; her own former conversations
with him about Miss Fairfkx ; and poor Harriet : and for
some time she could only exclaim, and require confirmation,
repeated confirmation.
'Well !'said she at last, trying to recover herself;'this is
a drcumstance which I must think of at least half a day,
before I can at all comprehend it What t-~engaged to her
all the winter — before either of them came to Hi^buiyl'
'Engaged since October, — secretly engaged. It has hurt
me, Emma, very much. It has hurt his father equally. Simu
part of his conduct we cannot excuse.'
Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, —'I will
not pretend net to understand you ; and to give you all the
relief in my power, be assured that no such effect has followed
his attentions to me, as you are apprehensive of.'
Mrs. Weston looked up, a & aid to believe ; but Emma's
countenance was as steady as her words.
'That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast,
of my present perfect indifference,'she continued, I will
farther tell you, that there was a period in the early part
byGoogle
342
Efttma.
of our acquaintance, when I did like him— when I ww vei^
niuch disposed to be attached to him ; nay, was attached—
and how it came to cease, is perhaps the w(Hider. Fortu-
nately, however, it did cease. I have really for some time
past, for at least these three months, cared m)thiDg sbont
him. You may believe me, Mrs. Weston. This is the
simple truth.'
Mrs. Weston kissed her with tean of joy; and vAen she
could find utterance, assured her, that this protestattoo
had done her more good than any thing else in the worid
could do.
'Mr. Weston will be ahnost as much relieved aa ngnel^'
said she.'On this point we have been wretdied. It was
our dariing wish that you might be attached to eacb other,
and we wer« persuaded that it was so. ImBgine what we
have been feeling on your account'
'I have escaped; and that I should esc^x^ may be a
matter of giatefUl wonder to you and mysel£ But this doet
not acquit him, Mrs. Weston; and I mnst say, that I think
him greatly to blame. What right had he U > c« > me among
us with affection and faith engaged, and with mannen so
7try disengaged t What right had he to endeavoor Xa please,
.15 he ceruinly did — to distinguish any one young woman
with persevering attention, as he certainly did, while he
really belonged to anothert How could he tell what mischief
he might be doingi — How could he tell that he mig^t not
be making me in love with himl Voy wrong, very wrong
indeed.'
'From something that he said, my dear Emma, I rather
imagine'
'And how a)uldj.ifbe8T such befaaviouil Composure with
a witness! to look on, while repeated attentions were offer-
ing to another woman before her & ce, and not resent it.
Iliat is a d^;ree of placddi^,'riiidi I con nnther txaapn-
hend nor respect'
'There were niisimderstandings between them, Emma;
he said so expressly. He had not time to enter into rnocb
explanation. He was here only a quarter trf an hour, and
in a state of agitation which did not allow the jull use even
of the time he could stay — but that there had been misun-
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
EmfHO. 343
derstandings be deddedly said. The pKxat crisu, indeed,
seemed to be brought on by them; and those misunder-
standings might vety possibly arise & om the improprie^ d
his conduct'
'Impropriety I Oh 1 Mis. Weston, it is too calm a censure.
Much, much beyond impropriety! It has sunk him — I
cannot say bow it has sunk lum in my opinion. So unlike
what a man should be I None of that upright int^rity,
that strict adherence to tiuth and prindpte, that disdain of
trick and littleness, which a man should display in ereiy
transacdon of his life.'
'Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part ; fot though
he has been wrong in this instance, I have known him long
enough to answer for his having many, v^ many good
qualities j and'
'Good GodI'cried & nma, not attending to her. —'1^.
Smallridge, too I Jane actually on the point of going aa
govouess 1 What could he mean by such honible indelicacy I
To suflfer her to engage herself— to suffer her even to think
of such a measure I'
< He knew nothing about i^ Emma. On this article I
can fully acquit him. It was a private resotutioii of hers,
not communicated to him, or at least not ccKnmunicated in
a way to carry convictioa Till yesterday, I know, he said
he was in the dark as to her plans. They burst on faim, I
do not know how, but by some letter or message—rand it
was the discovery of what she was doin^ of this very project
of hers, which determined him to come forward at once,
own it all to his uncle, throw himself oa his kindness, aad, in
short, put an end to tiie miserable state of concealment (hat
had been carrying on so long.'
Emma began to listen better.
'I am to hear from him soon,'continued Mn. Weston.
'He told me at parting, that he should soon write ; and he
spoke in a manner which seemed to promise me many par-
ticulars that could not be given now. Let us wait, therefore,
for this letter. It may bring many extenuations. It may
make many things intelligible and excusable which now are
not to be underatood. Don't let us be severe; don't let us
be in a hurry to condemn him. Let us have patience; I
by Google
must love him ; and nov that I am satisfied on one point,
the one material point, I am sincerely anxious for its all
turning out veil, and ready to hope that it may. They
must both have suffered a great deal under such a. system of
secresy and concealment'
'ffis sufferings,'repUed Emma drily,'do not ^pear to
have done him much haim. Weil, and how did Mr, Churchill
take itt'
'Most fiivourab^ for his nephew— gave his consent with
scarcely a difficulty. Conceive what the events of a week
have done in that femily 1 While poor Mrs. Churchill lived,
I suppKise there could not have been a hope, a chance, a
possibility ; but scarcely are her remains at rest in the & mily
vault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly apposite
to what she mnild have required. What a blessing it is,
when undue influence does not survive the grave ! — He gave
his consent with veiy Kttle persuasion.'
*Ahl'thought Emma,'he would have done as much for
Harriet'
'This was settled last night, and Fiank was off with the
%ht this morning. He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates's,
I & uicy, some time, and then came on hither; but was in
such a hurry to get back to his unde, to whom he is just now
more necessary than ever, that, as I tell you, he could stay
with us but a quarter of an hour. He was very much
agitated — very much indeed — to a degree that made him
appear quite a different creature from any thing 1 had ever
seen him before. In addition to all the rest, there had been
the shock of finding her so very unwell, which he had had
no previous suspidon o^ and there was every appearance of
his having been feeling a great deal.'
'And do you really believe the affair to have been carry-
ing on with such perfect secresyl — The Campbells, the
Dixons — did none of them know of the engagementi'
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little
blush.
'Nwie; not one. He positively said that it had been
known to no being in Uie world but their two selves.'
'Wdl,'said Emma,'I suppose we shall gradually grow
reconciled to the idea, and 1 wish them very happy. But I
by Google
Emma. 345
shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding.
What has it been but a system of hypocrisy and deceit,—
espionage, and treachery 1-— To come among us with profes-
sions of openness and simplicity ; and such a league in secret
to judge us all I — Here have we been the whole winter and
spring completely duped, fancying ourselves all on an equal
footing of truth and honour, with two people in the midst of
us who may have been carrying round, comparing and sitting
in judgment on sentiments and words that were never
meant for both to hear. — ^They must take the consequence,
if they have heard each other spoken of in a way not per-
fectly agreeable I'
< I am quite easy on that head,'replied Mrs. Weston.'I
am very sure that I never said any thing of either to the
other, which both might not have heard,'
'You are in luck. — ^Your only blunder was confined to my
ear, when you imagined a certain fnend of ouis in love with
ttie lady.'
'True. But as I have always had a thoroughly good
opinion of Miss Fairfax, I never could, tmder any blunder,
have spoken ill of her j and as to speaking ill of him, there I
must have been safe.'
At this moment Mr. Weston appeared at a little distance
from the window, evidently on the watch. His wife gave
him a look nrfiich invited him in; and, while he was coming
round, added, —'Now, dearest £^ma, let me entreat you to
say and look eveiy thing that may set his heart at ease and
incline him to be satisfied with the match. Let us make
the best of it — and, indeed, almost every thing may be fairly
said in hei favour. It is not a connection to gratify ; but if
Mr. Churchill does not feel that, why should wel and it may
be a very fortunate circumstance for him, — for Frank, I
mean, — iat he should have attached himself to a girl of such
steadiness of character andgoodjudgmentas I have always
given her credit for — and still am disposed to give her credit
for, in Spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of
right And how much may be said in her situation for even
that error !'
'Much, indeed I'cried Emma, feelingly.'If a woman
can ever be excused for thinking only of herself, it is in a
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
346 Emma.
situation like Jane Fairfax's. — Of such, one toaj almost saj,
tliat " the world is not theirs, nor die woild's law. "
She met Mr. Weston on his enbance, with a smping
countenance, excl^ming, —
'A very pretty trick you have been playing ine, upon
nny word 1 This was a device, I suppose, to spott with my
curiosity, and exerdse my talent of guessing. £ut yoa
really frightened me. I thought yon had lost half your
property, at least And here, inst^d of its being a matter
of condolence, it turns out to be one of congratulation. — I
congratulate you, Mr. Weston, with all my heart, on the
prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished
young women in England for your daughter.'
A glance or two between him and his wife convinced him
that all was as right as this speech proclaimed; and its
happy effect on bis spirits was immediate. His air and
voice recovered their usual briskness; he shook her heartily
and giateHLUy by the hand, and entered on the subject in a
manner to prove that he now only wanted time and persua-
sion to think the engagement no very bad thing. His com-
panions suggested only what could palliate imprudence or
smooth objections ; and by the time they had talked it all
over together, and he had talked it all over again with Emma,
in their walk back to HartfieH he was become periectly
reconciled, and not far & om thinking it the very best thing
that Frank could possibly have done.
CHAPTER XI.
'Harsiet, poor Harriet I'— Those were the words ; in Biem
lay the tormenting ideas irtiich Emma could not get rid o^
.ind ^ich constituted the real misery of the business to her.
Frank Churchill had -behaved very ill by herself— very ill in
many ways, — ^but it was not so mudi his beharionr as her own,
which made her so angry with him. It was the scrape which
he had drawn her into on Harriet's account, that gave the
deepesthue to his offence. — Poor Harriet! to be a second time
the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery. Mr. Knightly
I .Google
Emma. 347
had spoken ptopbedcally, when he once said,'Emma, you
have been no friend to Harriet Smith.'— She was afraid she
had done her nothing but disservice. — It was true that she
had not to charge heiself in this instance, as in the fonner,
with being the sole and original author of the mischief;
with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise never
have entered Harriet's imaginatiOD ; for Hairiet had acknow-
ledged her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill
before she had ever givenherahinton the subject; but she
felt completely guilty of having encouraged what ^e might
have repressed. She might have prevented the indulgence
and increase of such sentiments. Her influencewould have
been enough. And now she was very consdoiu that she
ought to have prevented them. — She felt that she had been
risking her friend's happiness on most insafiident grouads.
Common sense would have directed her to tell Hamet that
she must not altow herself to think of him, and that there
were five hundred chances to one against his ever caring for
her. —'But, with common sense,'she added,'I am afraid I
have had little to do.'
She was extremely angry with heisel£ If she could not
have been angiy with Frank Churchill too, it would have
been dreadful — ^As for Jane Fairfax, she might at least
relieve her feelings from any present solicitude on her
account Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need no
longer be unhappy about Jane, whose troubles and whose ill
health having, of course, the same origin, must be equally
under core.— Her days of indgnificanoe and evil were over.
— She would soon be well, and hqipy, and proijKious.— ^
Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been
slighted. This discoveiy laid many nnaHer matters open.
No doubt it had been from jealousy. — In Jane's eyes she
had been a rival ; and well might any thing she could o9er
of assistance or regard be repulsed. An airing in the Hart-
fidd cairi^^e would have been the rack, and sirow-root from
the Hartfield store-room must have been poison. She under-
stood it all ; sad as far as her mind could disengage itself
from the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she ac-
knowledged that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation
nor happiness beyond her desert But poor Harriet was
,M..d by Google
348 Emma.
such an engrossing charge ! There was little sympathy to
be spared for any body else. Emma was sadly Tearful that
this second disappointment would be more s^ere than the
first Considering the veiy superi(»: claims of the object, it
ought ; and judging by its apparently stronger effect on
Harriet's mind, it would produce reserve and self-command.
—She must communicate the painful truth, however, and as
soon as possible. An injunction of secresy had been among
Mr. Weston's parting words.'For the present the whole
affair was to be completely a secret Mr. Churchill had
made a point of it, as a token of respect to the wife he had
so very recently lost ; and every body admitted it to be no
more than due decorum.'— Emma had promised; but atill
Harriet must be eiccepted. It was her superior duty.
In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it
almost ridiculous, that she should have the very same dis-
tressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet^ which
Mrs. Weston had just gone through by hersel£ The intel-
ligence, which had been so anxiously announced to her, she
was now to be anxiously announcing to another. Her heart
beat quick on hearing Harriet's footstep and voice ; so, she
supposed, had poor Mrs. Weston felt when she was approach-
ing EandaUs. Could the event of the dlsclmuie bear an
equal resemblance!— But of tha^ unfortunately, there could
be no chance.
'Well, Miss Woodhouse,'cried Harriet, coming eagerly
into the room,'is not this die oddest news that ever was I'
'What news do you meant'replied Enuna, unable to guess,
by look or voice, whether Harriet could indeed have received
any hint
'About Jane Faii & x. Did you ever bear any thing so
strange 1 Oh I — you need not be afiaid of owning it to me,
for Mr. Weston has told me himself. I met him just now.
He told me it was to be a great secret ; and, tiierefore, I
should not think of mentionii^ it to any body but you, but
he said you knew it'
'What did Mr. Weston tell youl'said Emma, still per-
plexed
'OhI he told me all about it; that Jane Fair & x and Mr.
Fiank Churchill are to be married, and that they have bem
byGoogIc
privately engaged to one another this long while. How very
odd!'
It was, indeed, so odd j Harriet's behaviourwas so extremely
odd, that Emma did not know how to understand it Her
character appeared absolutely changed. She seemed to pro-
pose showing no agitation, or disappointment, or peculiar
concern in the discovery. Enuna looked at her, quite unable
to speak.
'Had you any idea,'cried Harriet,'of his being in love
with herf — You, perhaps, might — You (blushing as she
spoke) who can see into every body's heart; but nobody
'Upon my word,'said Emma,'I begin to doubt my hav-
ing any such talent Can you seriously ask me, Harriet,
whether I imagined htm attached to another woman at the
very time that 1 was — tacitly, if not openly — encouraging you
to give way to your own feelings! — I never had the slightest
suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. Frank Churchill's
having the least regard for Jane Fairfex, You may be very
sure that, if I had,I should have cautioned you accordingly.'
'Mel'cried Harriet^ colouring, and astonished.'Why
should you caution me! — You do not think I care about
Mr. Frank Churchill'
'I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,'
replied Emma, smiling;'but you do not mean to deny that
there was a time — and not very distant either — when you
gave me reason to understand that you did care about him!'
'Him I — never, never. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could
you so mistake mel'(turning away distressed).
'Harriet,'cried ^mTna, aiier a moment's pause,'what do
you mean! — Good Heaven I what do you mean! — Mistake
yon 1 — Am I to suppose then ?'
She could not speak another word.— Ha voice was lost;
and she sat down, waiting in great terror dll Harriet should
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face
turned from her, did not immediately say any thing; and
when she did speak, it was in a voice nearly as agitated as
Emma's.
'I ihoald not have thought it possible,'she began,'that
,zp:ibyGoOgle
3 so £mma.
yon could have misunderstood me 1 I knov we agreed never
to name him — but considering how infinitely superior he is
to eveiy body else, I should not have thought it possible that
I could be supposed to mean soy other person. Mr, Frank
Chtuchill, indeed I I do not know who would ever look at
him in the company of the other. I hope I have a better
taste than to think < rf Mr. Frank ChurchiU, who is like
nobody by his side. And that you should have been so
mistaken, b amazing I — I am sure, but for bdieving that
you entirely approved uid meant to encourage me in my
attachment, I ^ould have considered it at first too great a
piesumption almost to dare to think of him. At first, if you
had not told me that more wonderful things had happened ;
that there had been matches of greater disparity (those were
your very words) , — I should not have dared to give way to
1 should not have thought it possible But if you,
who had always been acquainted with him——'
'Haiiiet,'cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely,'let
us understand each other now, without the possibility of
farther mistake. Are you speaking of— Mr. Knightley T'
'To be sure I am. I never could have an idea of any
body else, — and so I thought you knew. When we talked
about him, it was clear as possible.'
'Not quite,'returned Emma, with forced calmness ;'for
all that you then said appeared to me to relate to a different
person. I could almost assert that you had nanud Mr.
Frank OhurchilL I am sure the service Mr. Frank Churchill
had rendered you, in protecting yon from the gipsies, was
spoken of.'
'Oh, Miss Woodhouse, bow you do forget I'
'My dear Harriet, I p^ectly remember the substance of
what I said on the occasion. I told you that I did not
wonder at your attachment; that, considering the service he
had lendoed you, it was extremely natural: — and you
agreed to it, eipressiog yourself very warmly as to your sense
of that service, and mentioning even what youi sensations
had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue. The
impression of it is strong on my memory,'
'Oh, dear,'cried Harriet,'now I recollect what you
mean ; but I was thinking of something very difi'erent at the
by Google
time. It was not the gipsies — It was not Mr. Ftank
ChoTchill that I meant No! (with some elevation) I was
thinking of a much more precious drcumstaoce, — of Mr.
Knightte/a coming and asking me to dance, when Mr. Elton
would not stand up with roe, and when there was no other
partner in the room. That was the kind action ; that was
the noble benevolence and generosity ; that was the service
which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every
other being upon earth.'
'Good God !'cried ^''- " "'aj'this has been a most unfor-
tunate — most deplorable mistake 1 What is to be donet'
'You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had
undergb > od me. At least, however, I cannot be worse off
than I should have been, if the other had been the person ;
and now — it is possible'
She paused a few moments. Emma could not speak.
< I do not wonder. Miss Woodhouse,'she resumed,'that
you should feel a great difference between the two, as to me
or as to any body. You must think one five hundred
million times more above me than the other. But I hope.
Miss Woodhouse, that supposing — that if — strange as it may
l^ > pear But you know they were your own words, that
more wonderful things had happened; matches of grea/er
disparity had Xakea place than between Mr. Frank Churchill
and me ; and, therefore, it seems as if such a thing even as
this may have occurred before ; — and if I should be so for-
tunate, beyond expression, as to if Mr, Knightley should
really if li^ does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear
Miss Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it, and try
and put difficulties in the way. But you are too good for
^t, I am sure.'
Harriet was standing at one of the windows. Emma
turned round to look at her in consternation, and hastily
said, —
'Have you any idea < rf Mr. Knightley's retumii^ your
affection)'
'Yes,'replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully j'I must
say that I have.'
Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat
silently mediuiing, in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
byGoogle
A few minutes were sufficientfor making her acquainted with
her own heart A mind like hers, once opening to suspicion,
made rapid progress : she touched — she admitted — she ac-
knowledged the whole truth. Why was it so much worse
that Hairiet should be in love with Mr. Knightley, than
with Frank Churchill 1 Why was the evil so dreadfully
increased by Harriet's having some hope of a returat It
darted through her with the speed of an arrow, that Mr
Knightley must marry no one but herself !
Her own conduct, aa well as her own heart, was before her
in the same few minutes. She saw it all with a clearness
which had never blessed her before. How impropedy had
she been acting by Harriet 1 How inconsidoate, how indeli-
cate, how irrational, how unfeeling, had been her conduct !
What blindness, what madness, had led her on I It struck
her with dreadful force, and she was ready to give it every
bad name in the world. Some portion of respect for herself;
however, in spite of all these demerits — some concern for
her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice by Harriet
(there would be no need of contusion to the girl who be-
lieved herself loved by Mr. Knightley — but justice required
that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness
now) — gave Emma the resolution to ^t and endure ferther
with calmness, with even apparent kindness. For her own
advantage, indeed, it was fit that the utmost extent of Har-
rief s hopes should be enquired into ; and Harriet had done
nothing to forfeit the regajd and interest which had been so
voluntarily formed and maintained— or to deserve to be
slighted by the perwn whose counsels had never led her
right Rousing from reflection, therefore, and subduing her
emotion, she turned to Haniet again, and, in a more invit-
ing accent, renewed the conversation; for as to the subject
which had first introduced it, the wondeiful story of Jane
Fair & x, that was quite sunk and lost Neither of Uiem
diought but of Mr. Knightley and themselves.
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie,
was yet very glad to be called from it, by the now encourag-
ing manner of such a judge, and such a friend, as Miss
Woodhouse ; and only wanted inviution to give the history
of her hopes with great though trembling delight Emma's
by Google
Emma. 3S3
tremblings, aa she asked, and as she listened, were better
concealed than Haniet's, but they were not less. Her voice
was not unsteady; but her mind was in all the perturbation
that such a developement of self, such a burst of threatening
evil, such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions,
must create. She listened with much inward sufTenng, but
with great outward patience, to Harriet's detail. Methodical,
or well arranged, or very well delivered, it could not be ex-
pected to be; but it contained, when separated from all the
feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink
her spirit; especially with the corroborating drcuno stances
which her own memory brought in favour of Mr. Knightle/s
most improved opinion of Harriet
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his beha-
viour ever since those two decisive dances. Emma knew
that he had, on that occasion, found her much superior to
his expectation. From that evening, or at least from the
time of Miss Woodhouse's encouraging her to think of him,
Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much
more than she had been used to do, and of his having,
indeed, quite a different manner towards her ; — a manner of
kindness and sweetness. Latterly, she had been more and
more aware of it When they had been all walking together,
he had so often come and walked by her, and talked so very
delightfully ! — He seemed to want to be acquainted with her.
Emma knew it to have been very much die case : she had
often observed the change, to almost the same extent Har-
riet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him,
— and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with
what she had known of his opinion of Harriet He praised
her for being without art or affectation; for having simple,
honest, generous feelings. She knew that he saw such
recommendations in Harriet; be had dwelt on them to her
more than once. Much that lived in Harriet's memory;
many little particulars of the notice she had received from
him; a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to another,
a compliment implied, a preference inferred; had been un-
noticed, because unsuspected, by Emma. Circumstances
that might swell to half an hour's relation, and cx > ntained
mulriplied proofs to her who had seen them, had pasBsd
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gk'
nodiscemed by her who now heard them ; bat the two latest
occuircnces to be mentiotied — the two of strongest promise
to Harriet— were not without some degree of witness & om
Emma hei5el£ The fiist was his walking with her apart
from the others in the lime walk at Donwell, where they had
^ been walking some time before Emma came, and he had
taken pains (as she was convinced) to draw hei from the
rest to himself; and at first he had talked to her in a more
particular way than be had ever done before, — in a very
particular way indeed 1 — (Haniet could not recall it without
a blush.) He seemed to be almost asking her whether her
affections were engaged. But as soon as she (Miss Wood-
house,) appeared likely to join them, he changed the subject,
and b^an talking about Arming. The second was his
having sat talking with her nearly half an hour before ^nma
came back frx > m her visit, the veiy last morning of his bong
at Hartfield, — though, when he first came in, he had said
that he could not stay five minutes, — and his having told
her, during their conversation, that though he must go to
London, it was very much against his inclination that he left
home at all, which was much more (as Emma felt) than he
had acknowledged to htr. The superior degree of confidence
towards Haniet which this one article marked, gave her
Kverepain.
On ^e subject of the first of the two circumstances, she
did, after a little reflection, venture the following question :
—'Kight he not I — Is not it posuble, that when enquiring,
as you thought, into the state of your affections, he might be
alluding to Mr. Martin, — he might have Mr. Martin's interest
in viewl'But Haniet rejected the suspidon with spirit
* Mr. Martin 1 No, indeed ! — There was not a hint of
Mr. Martin. I hope I know better now, than to care for
Mr. Martin, or to be suspected of it'
When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to
her dear Miss Woodhouse, to say whether she had not good
ground for hope.
'I never should have presumed to think of it at first,'said
she,'but for you. You told me to observe him carefiilly,
and let his behaviour be the rule of mine — and so I have.
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him^ and that
by Google
if be does choose me, it will cot be aoy thing so wy
wondoAiL'
The bitter feelings occasicmed b; this speech, the many
bitter feelings, made the utmost exerdon necessary on
Emma's side, to enable her to say in reply, —
'Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley
is the last man in the world who would intentionally give
any woman the idea of his feeling for hei more than he
really does.'
Hairiet seemed ready to worship her fiiend for a sentence
BO satisfactdiy ; and Emma was only saved from r^tures
and Kindness, which at that moment would have been dread-
ful peoaoce, by the sound of her faiher's footsteps. He was
coming through the hall Hairiet was too much agitated to
encounter him.'She could not compose herselt— Mr. Wood-
house would be alarmed — she had better go;'— with most
ready encouragennent from her friend, thereforei she passed
off through another door — and the moment she was gone,
this was the spontaneousburstof Emma's feelings :'OGodI
that I had never seen her I'
The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough
for her thoughts. She was bewilder^ amidst the coofUsion
of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours. Every
moment had brought a fresh nirprise; and eveiy surprise
must be matter of humiliation to her. — How to understand
it all I How to undeistand the deceptions she had beei)
thus practising on herself and living under ! — The blunders,
the blindness of her own head and heart !— She sat still, she
walked about, she tried her own room, she tried the shrub-
bery — in every place, every posture, she perceived that she
had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by
others in a roost mortifying degree ; that she lud been im-
posing on henelf in a d^ree yet more mortifying ; that she
was wretched, and should probably find this day but th«
beginning of wretchedness.
To understand, tiioroughty understand her own heart, was
the first endeavour. To that point went every leisure
moment whidi her father's claims on her allowed, and every
tnoment of involuntary absence of mind.
How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every
by Google
feeling declared him now to bcT When had his influence,
tuch influence begunt When had he succeeded to that place
in her affection, which Frank Churchill had once for a short
period, occupied 1 — She looked back ; she compared the two
—compared them, as they had always stood in her estima-
tion, & om the time of the latter's becoming known to her — ■
and as they must at any time have been compared by her,
bad it — oh 1 had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her,
to institute the comparison. She saw that there never had
been a time when she did not conader Mr. Kni^tley as
infinitely the superior, or when his r^ard for her had not
been infinitely the most dear. She saw, that in persuading
herself in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had been
entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart
— ^nd, in short, that she had never really cared for Frank
Churchill at alll
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection.
Tbis was the knowledge of hersfl^ on the first question of
enquiry, which she reached; and without being long in
reaching it. She was most sorrowfiilly indignant ; ashamed
< rf every sensation but the one revealed to her — her affection
for Mr. Knightly. Evay other part of her mind was dis-
gusting.
With insufieiable vanity had she believed herself in the
secret of every body's feelings ; with unpardonable airogance
proposed to arrange every body's destiny. She was proved
to have been universaUy mistaken ; and she had not quite
done nodiing — for she had done mischief She had brought
evil on Harriet, on herself; and, she too much feared, on Mr.
Knightley. Were this most unequal of all connections to
take place, on ha must rest all the reproach of having given
it a beginning ; for his attachment, she must believe to be
produced only by a consciousness of Harriet's ; — and even
were this not the cas^ he would never have known Haniet
at an but for her folly.
Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith ! — It was an union to
distance every wonder of the kind. The attachment of Ftank
Churchill and Jane Fairfax became commonplace, thread-
bare, stale in the comparison, exciting no surprise, present-
ing no dispari^, affoiding nothing to be said or thought.
by Google
Emma. 3S7
Mr. Knightley and Haniet Smith I Sncb an elevation on
her side I Such a debasement on his 1 It was horrible to
Knuna to think how it must sink him in the general opinion,
to foresee the smiles, the sneers, the meniment it would
prompt at his expense; the mortification and disdain of his
brother, the thousand inconveniences to himselfl Could it
be I No ; it was impossible; And yet it was far, very far,
from impossible. — Was it a new drcumstance for a man of
first-rate abiUties to be captivated by very inferior powersl
Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize
of a girl who would seek himi Was it new for any thing in
this world to be unequal, inconsistent, mcoi^iuous— or for
chance and circumstance (as second causes) to direct the
human & tel
Oh I had she never brought Harriet forwaid ! Had she left
her where she ought, and where he had told her she ought I
Had she not, with a folly which no tongue could express,
prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man who
would have made her happy and respectable in the line of
life to which she ought to belong, all would have been safe;
none of this dreadful sequel would have been.
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise
her thoughts to Mr. Knighdey 1 — How she could dare to
iaacy herself the chosen of such a man till actually assured
of it I But Haniet was less humble, had fewer scruples than
formerly. Her inferiority, whether of mind or situation,
seemed litde Mt She had seemed more sensible of Mr.
Elton's being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed
ofMr. Knighdey'& Alas! was not thatherowndoing tool
Who had been at p^ns to give Harriet notions of self-conse-
quence but herself t Who but herself had tought her, that
she was to elevate herself if possible, and that her daims
were great to a high worldly establishment! If Harriet, from
bmg humble, were grown vain, it was her doing toa
,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
3S8
CHAPTER XIL
Till now that she vnts threatened with ita loss Yaami had
never known how tnudi of her happiness depended on
hcmg Jim with Mr. Knightlejr, first in interest and affectiOD.
Satisfied that it was bo, and feeling it her due, she had en-
joyed it without reflection ; and only in the dread of being
supplanted, found how inexpressibly important it had been.
Long, very long, she felt she had been first ; for, having no
female connections of his own, there had been only Isabella
whose claims could be compared with heis, and she had > !•
ways known exacUy how far he loved and esteemed Isabella.
She had herself been first with him fx many years past
She had not deserved It ; she had often been negligent or
perverse, slighting his advice, or even wilfiilly opposing hitn,
insensible of half his merib;, and qnarrelling with him because
he would itot acknowledge her falst and insolent estimate
of her own — but still, firom ftmily attachment and habit, and
thorough excellence of mind, he had loved her, and watched
over her from a gttl, with an endeavour to improve her, and
an anxiety for her doing ri^t, which no other creature had
at all shared. In spite of all her faults, she knew she was
dear to him ; might she not say, very dearl When Ae sug-
gestions of hope, howevo:, which must follow here, presented
themselves, she could not presume to indulge them. Har-
riet Smith mi^t think herself not unworthy of being pecu-
liarly, exclusively, passionately loved by Mr. Knighlley.
SAe could not She could not flatter herself with any idea of
blindness in his attachment to Aer. She had received a very
recent proof of its impartiality. How shocked had he been by
her behaviour to Miss Bates I How directiy, how strongly
had he expressed himself to her on the subject! Not too
strongly for the offence — but & r, far too strongly to issue
fi'om any feeling softer than upright justice and clear-sighted
good will. She had no hope, nothing to deserve the name
of hope, that he could have itiaX sort of affection for herself
which was now in question ; but there was a hope, (at times
byGoogIc
Emma. 3S9
a d^t (Hie, at times much stronger,) that Haniet might
have deceived herself and be over-raUog hia regard for /ur.
Wish it she must, for bis sake — be the consequence nothing
to heisel^ bat his lemainiiig single all his life. Could she
be secure of that, indeed, gf his never manTuig at all, she
believed she should be perfectly satisfied. Let him but
continue the same Mr. Knightley to her and her father, the
same Kr. Knightley to all the world ; let Donwell and Han-
field lose none of their picdous intercourse of friendship and
confidence, and her peace would be fiitly secured. Marriage,
in fact, would not do for her. It would be incoinpadble
with what she owed to her father, and with what she felt for
him. Nothing shoidd separate her from her father. She
would not many, even if ^e were asked by Mr. Knightley.
It must be her ardent wish that Haniet might be disap
pointed; and she hoped, that when able to see them to-
gether again, she might at least be able to ascertain what the
chances for it were. She should see them henceforward with
the closest observance ; and wretchedly as she had hitherto
misunderstood even those she was watching, she did not
know how to admit that she could be blinded here. He
was expected back every day. The power of observation
would be soon given — Mghtfiilly soon it appeared when her
thoughts were in one course. In the meanwhile, she resolved
against seeing Haniet It would do neither of them good,
it would do the subject no good, to be talking of it farther.
She was resolved not to be convinced, as long as she could
doubt, and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet's COa >
tidence. To talk would be only to irritate. She yrrote to
her, therefore, kindly, but decisively, to beg that she wonld
not, at present, come to Haitfield; ackoowled^ng it to be
her convicdon, that all farther confidential discussion of tmt
topic had better be avoided ; and hoping, that if a few daya
were allowed to pass before they met again, except in the
company of others — she objected only to a me^^Ue — they
mi^t be able to act as if they had foigatten the conversation
of yesterday. Haniet submitted, and approved, and was
gratefuL
This point was just atrang^ when a visitor arrived to
tear Rnuna's thoughts a little from the one subject iriiich had
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gk'
36o Emma.
engrossed them, ticking or wakmg, the laat twenty-four
hooiB — Mrs. Weston, who had been calling on her dat^jhter
in-law elect, and toot Hart£eld in her way home, almost as
much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herseU| to relate all
the paiticulus of so interesting an interview.
Mr. Weston had accompanied her to Mrs. Bates, and gone
through his share of this essential attention taost handsomely ;
but she having then induced Miss Fairfax to join her in an
airing^ wss now returned with m .ch more to say, and much
more to say widi satis & ction, th^n a quarter of an hour spent
in Mis. B^es's parlour, with all the incumbrance of awkward
feelings, could bare afforded.
A litde curiosity Emma had ; and she made the most of it
while her fiioad related. Mrs. Weston had set off to pay the
visit in a good deal of agitation herself; and in the first place
had wished not to go at all at present, to be allowed merely
to write to Miss Fairfox instead, and to defer this ceremo-
nious call till a little time had passed, and Mr. Churchill could
be reconciled to the engagement's becoming known; as,
considering every thing, she thought such a visit could not
be paid without leading to reports : but Mr. Weston had
thought differently; he was extremely anxious to show his
approbation to Miss Fairfax and her family, and did not
conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it; or if it
were, that it would be of any consequence; for'such things,'
he observed,'always got about'Emma smiled, and felt
diat Mr. Weston had very good reason for saying so. They
had gone, in short; and very great had been the evident
distress and confusion of the lady. She had hardly been
able to speak a word, and every look and action had shown
how deeply she was suffering from consciousness. The quiet,
heartfelt satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous ddight
of her daughter, who provedevcntoo joyous to talk as usual,
had been a gratifying, yet almost an affecting scene. They
were both so truly respectable in their happiness, so disin-
terested in every sensation ; thought so much of Jane ; so
much of every body, and so little of themselves, that'& itxy
kindly feeling was at work for them. Miss Fairfax's recent
illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs. Weston to invite her
to an airing; she had drawn back and dedined at fiis^ bu^
by Google
Emma. 361
on being pressed, had yielded ; and, in the course of dieir
drive, Mis. Weston had, by gentle encouragement^ overcome
so much of her embarrassment, as to bring her to converse
on the important subject. Apologies for her seemingly un-
gracious silence in tiieir first reception, and the warmest
expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards
herself and Mr. Weston, mnst necessarily open the cause;
but when these effusions were put by, they had talked a good
deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement
Mis. Weston was convinced that such conversation must be
the greatest rehef to her companion, pent up within her own
mind as every thing had so long been, and was very mudi
pleased with all that she had said on the subject
'On the misery of what she had suffered, during the con-
cealmrat of so many months,'continued Mrs. Weston,'she
was energetic. This was one of her expressions. " I will
not say, that since I entered into the engagement I have not
had some happy moments; but I can say, that I have never
known the blessing of one tranquil hour : " — and die quiver^
ing lip, Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation tiiat I felt
at my heart'
'Poor girl 1'said Emma.'She thinks herself wrot^ then,
for having consented to a private engagement I'
'Wrong I No one, I believe, can blame her more than
she is disposed to blame herselt " The consequence, " said
she, " has been a state of perpetual suffering to me ; and so
it ought But after all the punishment that misconduct can
bring, it is still not less misconduct Pain is no expiation,
I never can be blameless. I have been acting contrary to
all my sense of right ; and the fortunate turn that every thing
has taken, and the kindoess I am now receiving, is what my
< x)nscience tells me ought not to be. Do not imagine,
madam, " she continued, " that I was taught wrong. Do not
let any reflection fall on the principles or the care of the
friends who brought me up. The error has been all my own ;
and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that present
circumstances may appear to give, I shall yet dread making
the story known to Colonel Campbell. "'
* Poor giiil'said Emma again.'She loves him, then, ex-
cessively, I suppose. It must have been from attachment
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
only, that she cooM be led to form the engagemenL Her
affection must have overp o wered her judgmeDt;'
'Yes, I have DO doubt of her being extremdj attached to
'I am afiaid,'letonied ^J* " " ™. sig^iing'that I must often
have contributed to nuke her nnhappy/
'Ob your side, my lore, it was very innocent^ done. But
she probably had something of that in her tbong^t^ when
alluding to the misuoderstandings iriiich he had given us
hints of before. One natural consequence of the evil she
had mvolved herself in,* she said, * was that of making her
tMfmsonaiU. The consciousness of having doac amiss, bad
exposed her to a thousand inquietudes, and made her coi-
tions and uritable to a degree ibax must hare been — that had
been— hard for him tobear. " IdidnotmaketheaUowaDce^ "
said she, " whidi I oog^t to have d(»^ for his temper and
q)irits — his deligfalful spirits, and that guety, titat (JayfiUness
of disposition, which, under any other drcumstances, would,
I am sure, have been as constandybewitching tomeas they
ywK at first " She then began to speak of yon, and of the
great kindness you had shown her during her illness ; and,
with a blush which showed me how it was all connected,
desired m^ whcdever I had an oppcKtunity, to thank you —
I could not thank you too much— ^or every wish and evoy
endeavour to do her good. She was sennble that you had
never received any proper acknowledgment from heiseUl*
'If I did not know her to be happy now,'said Emma,
serious^,'which, in spite of every little drawback from her
scrapulous consdcnce, she must be, I could not bear these
thanks ; for, oh. Mis. Weston, if there were an account drawn
up of the evil and the good I have done Miss Fairfax
Well (checking herself and trying to be mwe lively), this is
all to be forgotten. You are very kind to bring me tiiese
inttfesting particulars: they show her to the greatest advan-
tage. I am sure she is very good : I hope she will be veiy
happy. It is fit that the fortune should be on his side, for I
think the merit will be all on hers.'
Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs.
Weston. She thought well of Frank in almost evet y respect;
and, what was more, she loved him vciy much, and her
by Google
Smma. $63
defence waa, therefore, earnest She ttlked widtagreBt deal
of reas < Hi, and it least eqiutl affection ; bot she had too
much to urge for Emma's attcntton : it wis soon gOne to
Bnmswidc Square or to Donwell: she forgot to attempt bb
listoi ; and when Mrs. Weston ended with,'We have not
fet had the letter we are so anxious for, you know, bat I
hope it will sooo come,'she was obliged to pause bcf(tfe she
answered, and at last obliged to answer at random, before
Bhe onild at all recollect what letter it was which they were
so anzionsfbr.
'Are yoa well, n^ Emmal'wms Mt» Weston^ parting
question,
'Oh, perfectly. I am always wtQ, you know. Be sure xo
gat me intelligence of the letter as soon as possible.'
'Mrs. Westm'a communications famished Emma witb
morefoodfor unpleasant reflection, by increasing her esteem
and compassion, and her sense of past injnstice towards Miss
Fairfax. She bitterly regretted not having sought a closer
acquaintance with h^, and blushed for the envious fieeling*
which had certainly been, in some measure, the cause. Had
the followed Mr. Knightley's known wishes in paying that
attention to Miss F^ifax which was every way her due ; had
she tried to know her better ; had she done her part towards
intiDiacy ; had she endeavoured to find a. fijend there instead
of in Harriet Smith ; she most, in all probability, have been
spared from eveiy pain whidi pressed on her now. Birtli,
abilities, and educadon had been equally making one as an
associate for her, to be received with gratitade; and the
odiCT — what was shet Supposing even that they had nevet
become intimate fiiends ; that she had never been admitted
into Miss Fair & x'a confidence on this important matter, —
which was most probaUe, — still, in knowing her as she ought,
and as she might, she must have been preserved from the
abominable suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr.
Oixon, which ^e had not only bo foolishly fashioned and
harboured herself but had so unpardonably imparted; an
idea which she greatly feared had been made a subject of
material distress to the delicacy of Jane's feelings, t^ the
levity or carelessness of Frank Charchill's. Of all the sources
oi evil surrounding the former, since her coming to Highbury,
,M..d by Google
Bbe was peisuaded that she ronst hMsdf have been the worst
She must have been a perpetual enem^. They never could
hare been all three together, without her having stabbed
Jane Fairfax's peace in a thousand instances; and on Box
HiU, perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would
bear no more:
" Hie evening of this day was very long, and melancholy,
at Hartfidd. The weather added irtiat it could of gloom.
A cold stormy rain set in, and nothing of July appeared but
in the trees and shrubs, which the wind was despoiling, and
the length of the day, which only made such cruel sights the
loi^^ visible.
The weather affected Mr. Woodhouse; and he could only
be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention
oa his daughter's side, and by exertions which had never
cost her half so much before. It reminded her of their
first forlorn tXe-d-tUe, on the evening of Mrs. Weston's wed-
ding-day ; but Mr, Knightley had walked in then, soon after
tea, and dissipated every melancholy foncy. Alas! such
del^htftil proofs of HartSeld'a attraction, as those sort of
visits conveyed, might shortly be over. The picture which
she had then drawn of the privations of the approaching
winter had proved erroneous ; no fiiends had deserted them,
no pleasures had been lost. But her present forebodings she
feared would experience no similar contradiction. The
prospect before her now was threatening to a d^ree that
could not be entirely dispelled — that might not be even par-
tially brightened. If all took place that might take place
among the circle of her friends, Hartfield must be compara-
tively deserted ; and she left to cheer her Cither wtdi the
spirits only of ruined happiness.
The child to be bom at Randalls must be a tie there even
dearer than herself; and Mrs. Weston's heart and time would
be occupied by it They should lose her ; and probably, in
great measure, her husband also. Frank Churchill would
return among them no more; and Miss Fairfax, it was rea-
sonable to suppose, would soon cease to belong to Highbury,
They would be married, and settled either at or near Ens-
oombe. All that were good would be withdrawn; and if to
these losses the loss of Donwell were to be added, vriiat
by Google
Emma.
3«5
would remain of cheerful or of rational socie^ within their
reach f Mr. Knightley to be no longer coining there for his
evening comfort 1 No longer walking in at all hours, as if
ever willing to change his own home for theirs ! How was
it to be enduredt And if he were to be lost to them for
Hairief s sake ; if he were to be thought of hereafter, as find-
ing in Haniet's society all that he wanted ; if Harriet were
to be the chosen, the first, the dearest, the friend, the wife
to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence ;
what could be increasing Emma's wretchedness but the re-
flection never far distant from hei mind, that it had been all
her own workl
When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not able to
refrain & om a start, or a heavy sigh, or even from walking
about the room for a few seconds; and the only source
whence any thing like consolation or composure could be
drawn, was in the resolution. of her own better conduct, and
the hope that, however inferior in spirit and gaiety might be
the following and every future winter of her life to the past,
it would yet find her more rational, more acquainted with
herself and leave her less to regret when it were g < me.
CHAPTER XIII
The weatha continued much the same all the following
morning; and the same loneliness, and the same melancholy,
seemed to reign at Hartfield ; but in the afternoon it cleared ;
the wind changed into a softer quarter; the clouds were
carried off; the sun appeared ; it was summer again. With
all the eagerness which such a. transition gives, Emma re-
solved to be out of doors as soon as possible. Never had
the exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil, warm,
and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive to her. She
longed for the serenity they might gradually introduce; and
on Mr. Perry's coming in soon after dinner, with a disen-
gaged hour to give ho'father, she lost no time in hurrying
into the shrubbery. There, with spirits freshened, and
thoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when
M..d by Google
she saw Mr. Knig^tley passing through die gudeo door, and
coming towardi her. It was the first intimation of his being
retained from London. She had been thinking of bim the
moment before, as unquestionably sixteen miles distant
There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind.
She must be collected and calm. In half a minute the^
were together. The'How d'ye do's'were quiet and coo-
stnuned on each side. She asked after their mutual friends ;
they were all welL When had he left tbemi Only that
morning. Hemust havehad awetride. Yesl He meant
to widk with her, she found.'He had just looked into the
dining room, and as he was not wanted there, prefeired being
out of doois.'She thought he neidier looked nor spoke
cheerfully ; and the first possible cause for it, su^iested by
her feais, was, that he had perhaps been conmiunicating )aa
plans to his brother, and was pained by the manner in which
they had been rccdved
They walked together. He was silent She thought be
was often looking at her, and trying for a fuller view of ha
& ce than it siuted her to give. And this belief produced
another dread. Perhaps he wanted to speak to her of hia
attachment to Harriet ; he might be watching for encourage-
ment to b^in. She did not, could not, feel equal to lead
the way to any such subject He must do it all him««'Tr
Yet she oiuld not bear diis silence. With him it was most
unnatural She considered, resolved, and, trying to smil^
b^an,—
'You have some news to hear, now you are come back,
that will rather surpiise you.*
'Have II'said he quietly, and looking at her; *of what
nature)'
'Oh, the best nature in the world — a wedding.'
Afler waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to
say no more, he replied, —
• If you mean Miss Fair & x and Frank Churchill, 1 have
heard that already.'
'How is it possibleV cried Emma, turning her glowing
cheeks towards him; for while she spoke, it occurred
to her that he might have called at Mrs. Goddard's in his
way,
I .Google
Emmei 367
'I had a few lines on parish business from Mr. Weston
this morning, and at the end of them he gare me a brief
sccouot of what had happened.'
Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with
a little more composure, —
'You probably have been less surprised than any of us,
for you have had your suspicions. I have not forgotten that
you once tried to give me a caution. I wish I had attended
to it — ^but (with a sinking voice and a heavy sigh) I seem to
have been doomed to blindness.'
For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was nn-
suspicious of having exdted any particular interest, till she
found her arm drawn within his, and pressed against hia
heart, and heard him thus saying, in a tone of great sensi-
bility, speaking low, —
'Time, my dearest Emma, time wiU heal the wonnd.
Your own excellent sense ; your exertions for your bthei's
sake ; I know you will not allow yourself'Her arm was
pressed again, as he added, in a more broken and subdued
accent,'The feelings of the wannest friendship — indigna-
tion—abominable scoundrel I'And in a louder, steadier
tone, he concluded with,'He will soon be gone. They
will soon be in Yorkshire. I am sony for her. She desoves
a better & te,'
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could recover
from the flutter of pleasure, exdted by such tender consider-
ation, replied, —
'You are veiy kind, but you are mistaken, and I must set
you right I am not in want cS that sort of compassion.
My blindness to irtkat was going on ted me to act by them
in a way that I must always be ashamed of, and I was very
foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well
lay me open to unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other
reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier.'
'Emma,'cried he, looking eagerly at her,'are you,
indeedr — but checking himself—'No, no, I understand you
—forgive me — I am pleased that you can say even so much.
He is no object of regret, indeed 1 and it will not be very
lon^ I hope, before that becomes the acknowledgment of
more than your reason. Fortunate that your afl^ections wert
,M..d by Google
36S Emma.
not & rthei entangled ! — I could never, I o)nfcs$, from your
TDEuiners, assure myself as to the degree of what you felt —
I could only be certain that there was a pi^erence — and a
preference which I never believed him to deserve. He is a
disgrace to the name of man. And is be to be rewarded
with that sweet young womant — Jane, Jane, you will be a
miserable creature.*
'Mi. Knightley,'said Emma, trying to be lively, but really
confused,—'I am in a very extraordinary situation. I can-
not let you continue in your error; and yet, perhaps, since
my manners gave such an impression, I have as much reason
to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been at all
attached to the person we are speaking o^ as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confessmg exactly the reverse.
But I never have.'
He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to speak,
but he would noL She supposed she must say more before
she were entitled to his clemency ; but it was a hard case to
be obliged still to lower herself in bis opinion. She went
on, however, —
'I have very little to say for my own conduct I was
tempted by his attentions, and allowed myself to appear
pleased. An old story, probably, — a common case, — and
no more than has happened to hundreds of my sex before;
and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets
up as I do for understanding. Many circumstances assisted
the temptation. He was the son of Mr. Weston — he was
continually here — I always found him very pleasant-^and,
in short, fbr (with a sigh) let me swell out the causes ever so
ingeniously, they all centre in this at last — ray vanity was
flattered, and I allowed his attentions. Latterly, however,
for some time, indeed, I have had no idea of iheir meaning
any thing. I tiiought them a habit, a trick, nothing that
called for seriousness on my side. He has imposed on me,
but he has not injured me. I have never been attached to
him. And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour.
He never wished to attach me. It was merely a blind to
conceal his real situation with another. It was his object to
blind all about him ; and no one, I am sure, could be more
effectually blinded than myself— except that ( was net blinded
h, Google
Eutma. 369
— that it was my good fortune — that, in shoi^ I was some-
how or other safe from him.'
She had hoped for an answer here — for a few words to say
that her conduct was at least intelligible; but be was silent ;
and, as far as she could Judge, deep in thought At last, and
tolerably in his usual tone, he s£ud, —
'I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill. I
can suppose, however, that I may have under-rated him.
My acquaintance with him has been but trifling. And even
if I have not under-rated him hitherto, he may yet turn
out welL With such a woman he has a chance. I have no
motive for wishing him ill — and for her sake, whose happiness
will be involved in his good character and conduct, I shall
certainly wish him welL'
'I have no doubt of their being happy together,'said
Ejnma;'I believe them to be very mutu^y and very sin-
cerely attached.'
'He is a most fortunate man,'returned Mr. Kn^htley, with
energy.'So early in life — at three-and-twenty— a period
when, if a man chooses a wife, he generally chooses IIL At
thiee-and-twenty to have drawn such a prize I What years
of felicity that man, in all human calculation, has before him 1
Assured of the love of such a woman — the disinterested love,
for Jane Fairfax's character vouches for her disinterested-
ness; every thing in his favour, — equality of situation — I
mean, as far as regards society, and all the habits and man-
ners that are important; equality in every point but one —
and that one, since the purity of her heart is not to be
doubted, such as must increase his fehcity, for it will be his
to bestow the only advantages she wants. A man would
always wish to give a woman a better home than the one he
takes her from; and he who can do it, where there is no doubt
of Air regard, must, I think, be the hf^ > pieEt of mortals.
Frank Churchill is, indeed, the ^vourite of fortune. Every
thing turns out for his good. He meets with a young woman
at a watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary
her by negligent treatment — and had he and all his family
sought round the world for a perfect wife for him, they conld
not have found her superior. His aunt is in the way. His
auat dies. He has only to speak. Hia friends are eager to
.OOgk'
3^0 Emma,
protnote his hAppiness. He has used every body ill— and
they are all delisted to forgive him. He is a fortanate man,
indeed!'
'You speak as if you en\ied him.'
'And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is the
object of my envy.'
Emma could toy no more. They seemed to be within
half a sentence of Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to
avert the subject, if possible. She made her plan ; she would
speak of something totally different — the children in Rims-
wick Square \ and she only waited for breath to b^in, when
Mr. Knightley startled her, by saying, —
'You wQl not ask me what is die point of envy. You are
determined, I see, to have no curiosity. You are wise — but
/cannot be Wise. Emma, I must tell what yon will not ask,
though I may wish it unsaid the next moment'
'Oh, then, don't speak it, don't speak it,'she e _
• Take a little dme, consider, do not commit yourselC*
'Thank you,'said he, in an accent of deep mortification,
and not another syllable followed.
Emma, could not bear to give him pain. He was wishing
to confide in her — perhaps to consult her; — cost her what it
would, she would listen. She might assist his resolution, or
reconcile him to it ; she might give just praise to Harriet, or,
by representii^ to him his own independence, reUeve him
fiara that state of indedsion, which must be more intolerable
than any alternative to soch a mind as his. They bad
reached the house.
'You are going in, I suppose,'said he.
'No,'replied Emma, quite confirmed by the depressed
manner in which he still spoke,'I should like to take another
turn. Mr. Perry is not gone.'And, after proceeding a. few
steps, she added, —'I stopped you ungraciously just now,
Mr. Knightley, and, I am afraid, gave you pain. But if you
have any wish to speak openly to me as afiiend, or to ask my
opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation — as
a friend, indeed, you may command me. I will hear what-
ever you like. I will tell you exactly what I think.'
'Asa friend I'repeated Mr. Knighdey.'Emma, that I
fear is a word — No, I have no wish. Stay, yes, why should
ivGoot^lc
Emma. 371
I hesitate) I have gone too fax aitaif fei oonceahnenL
Emma, I accept your offer, eztraordinaiy as it may seem, I
accept it, and refer myself to you as a & ieod. Tell me, then,
have I no chance of ever succeedingt'
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and
the expression of his eyes overpowered her,
'My dearest Emma,'said he,'for dearest yen will always
be, wtutever the event of this hour's conversation, my deares^
most beloved Emma — tell me at onc & Say " No, " if it is
to be said* She could really say nothing.'You are silent,'
he cried, with great animation ;'absolutely silent I at present
I ask no more.'
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of
this moment. The dread of being awakened from the hi^
piest dream was perhaps the most prominent feeling.
'I cannot make speeches, Emma :'— he soon resumed, and
in B tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as
was tolerably convincing.'If I loved you less, I might be
able to talk about it more. Sut you know what I am. Yoa
hear nothing but truth from me. I have blamed you, and
lectured you, and you have bome it as no other woman in
England would have bome it. Bear with the truths I would
tell you now, dearest Emma, as weU as you have bome with
them. The manner, perhaps, may have as little to recom-
mend them. God knows, I have been a very indifferent
lover. But you understand me. Yes, you see, you under-
stand my feelings — and will return them if you can. At
present, I ask only to hear, once to hear your voice.'
While he spoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and, with
all the wonderful velocity of thought, had been able — and
yet without losing a word — to catch and comprehend the
exact truth of the whole; to Me that Harriet's hopes had
been entirely groundless, a mistske, a delusion, as complete
a delusion as any of her own — that Hairiet was nothing; that
she was every thing herself; that what she had been saying
relative to Harriet had been all taken as the language of her
own feelings; and that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance,
her discouragement, had been all received as discouragement
from heisel£ And not only was there time for these convic-
tions, with all their glow of attendant happiness; there was
,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
373 Emma.
time also to rejoice that Hairief s secret had not escaped her,
and to resolve that it need not and should not It was all
the service she could now render her poor friend ; for as to
any of that heroism of sentiment which might have prompted
her to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to
Hairiet, as infinitely the most worthy of the two — or even
the more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once
and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive^ because he
could not many them both, Emma had it not She felt (ax
Harriet with pain and with contrition; but no flight oi
generosity run mad, opponng all that could be probable or
reasonable, entered her brain. She had led hei Mend astiay,
and it would be a reproach to her forever; but her judgment
was as strong as her feelings, and as strong as it bad ever
been before, in reprobating any such alliance for him, as most
unequal and degrading. Her way was dear, though not
quite smooth. She spoke then, on bdng so entreated.
What did she say t Just what she oug^t, of course. A lady
always does. She said enough to show there need not be
despair — and to invite him to say more himself He Aad
despaired at one period ; he had received such an in junction
to caution and silence, as for the time crushed every hope ;
— she had begun by refiising to hear him. The chajige had
perhaps been somewhat sudden; — her proposal of taking
another turn, her renewing the conversation which she had
just put an end to, mi^t be a tittle extraordinary. She felt
its inconsistency ; but Mr. Knightley was so obliging as to
put up with it, and seek no farther explanation.
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any
human disclosure ; seldom can it happen that something is
not a little disguised, or a little mistaken ; but where, as in
this case, Aough the conduct is mistaken, the feelings are
not, it may not be very matetiaL Mr. Knightley could not
impute to Emma a moie relenting heart than she possessed,
or a heart more disposed to accept of his.
He had, in fact, been wholly unsu^idous of his own
influence. He had fbllowed her into the shrubbery with no
idea of trying it. He had come, in his anxiety to see how
■he bore Frank Churchill's engagement, with no selfish view,
qp view at all, but of endeavouring if she allowed him an
by Google
opening, to soothe or to counsel ber. The rest had been
t^e work of the moment, the immediate effect of what he
heard, on his feelings. The delightfiil assurance of her total
indifference towards Frank Churchill, of hei having a heart
completely disengaged from him, had ^vcn birth to the hope
that, in time, he might gain her aSection himself; — but it
had been no present hope — he had only, in the momentary
conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspiied to be told that
she did not forbid his attempt to attach her. The superior
hopes which gradually opened were so much the more en-
chanting. The affection which be had been asking to be
allowed to create if he could, was already his. Within half
an hour he had passed from a thoroughly distressed state of
mind, to something so like perfect happiness, that it could
bear no othei name.
Her change was equal. This one half houi had ^ven to
each the same precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared
from each the same degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust
On his side, there had been a long-standing jealousy, old as
the airival, or even the expectation, of Frank ChurchilL
He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of Frank
Churchill, & om about the same period, one sentiment having
probably enlightened him as to the other. It was his
jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the
country. The Box Hill party had decided him on going
away. He would save himself from wimessing again such
permitted, encouraged attentions. He had gone to leant to
be indifferent But he had gone to a wrong place. There
was too much domestic happiness in his brother'a house;
women wore too amiable a form in it ; Isabella was too much
like Emma — differing only in those striking inferiorities
which always brought the other in brilliancy before him, for
much to have been done, even had bis time been longer.
He had staid on, however, vigorously, day. after day — till
this very morning's post had conveyed the history of Jane
Fairfax. Then, with the gladness which must be felt, nay,
which he did not scruple to feel, having never believed Ftaiik
Churchill to be at all deserving Emma, was there so much
fond soUcdtude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could
stay no longet. He had ridden home through the rain; and
by Google
had walked up directly alter dinner, to see how diis sweetest
and best of all creatures, Ikultless in spite of all her fiuiba,
bore the discovery.
He had found her agitated and low. Frank Churchill was
a villain. He heard her declare that she had never loved
him. Frank Churchill's character was not desperate. She
was his own Emma, by hand and word, when they returned
into the house; and if he could have thought of Fnmk
Churchill then, he might hare deemed him a very good sort
offeUow.
CHAPTER XIV.
What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the
house & om what she had brought out ! — she had then been
only daring to hope for a little respite of suffering ; — she was
now in an exquisite flutter of happiness, and such happiness
moreover, as she believed must still be greater when the
flutter should have passed away.
They sat down to tea — the same party round the same
table— bow ofteo it had been collected 1 and how often had
her eyes & llen on the same shrubs in the lawn, and observed
the same beautiful effect of the western sun I But never in
such a state of spirits, never in any thing like it ; and it was
with difficult that she could summon enough of her usual
self to be the attentive lady of the house, or even the atten-
tive daughter.
Poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting
against him in the breast of that man whom he was so cor-
dially welcoming, and so anxiously hoping might not have
taken cold from his ride. Could he have seen the heart, he
would have cared very little for the lungs; but without the
most distant imagination of the impending evil, without the
slightest perception of any thing extraordinary, in the looks
or ways of either, he repeated to them very comfortably all
the articles of news he had received fix)m Mr. Perry, and
talked on with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of
what diey could have told him in return.
by Google
Emma. 375
'As long as Mr. Kn^htley remained with them, Emma'i
fever continued ; but when he was gone, she began to be a
little tranquillized and subdued, and in the course of the
sleepless night, which was the tax for such an CTening she
found one or two such very serious points to consider, as
made her feel that even her happiness must hare some ollo^.
Her father — and Harriet. She could not be alone without
feeling the full weight of their separate claims j and how to
guard the comfort of both to the utmost, was die question.
With respect to her father, it was a question soon answered
She hardly knew yet what Mr. Knightley would ask ; but a
very shoit parley with her own heart produced the most
solemn resolution of never quitting her father. She even
wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought While he lived,
it must be only an engagement; but she flattered herself
that if divested of the danger of drawing her away, it mi^t
become an increase of comfort to him. How to do her best
by Haiiiet, was of more difficult decision ; how to spare her
firom any unnecessary pain ; how to make her any possible
atonement ; how to appear least her enemy. On tiiese sub-
jects, her perplexity and distress were very great — and her
mind had to pass again and again through every bitter re-
proach and soirowtiil r^ret that had ever surrounded it.
She could only resolve at last, that she would still avoid a
meeting with her, and communicate all that need be told by
letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her
removed just now for a time from Highbury, and — indulging
in one scheme more — ^nearly resolve, that it might be
practicable to get an invitation for her to Brunswick Square.
Isabella had been pleased with Harriet ; and a few weeks
spent in London must give her some amusement She did
not think it in Harriet's nature to escape being benefited by
sovelty and varie^, by tiie streets, the shops, and the chil <
dren. At any rate, it would be a proof of attention and
kindness in herself ftom ^om every thing was due ; a
separation for the present ; an averting of die evil day, when
they must all be together again.
She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet ; an em-
ployment which left her so very serious, so nearfy sad, that
Mr. Knightley, in walking up to Haitfield to breakfast, did
by Google
37^ Emma.
not airive at all too soon ; and half on hour stolen afterwaids
to go over the same grouad again with him, litentUy and
figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper
share of the happiness of the evening before^
He had not left her long, by no means long enough for
hts to have the slightest inclination for thinlcing of any body
dse, when a letter was brought her from Randalls — a very
thick letter; she guessed what it must contain, and depre-
cated the necessity of reading it. She was now in pofect
charity with Frank Chnrchill; she wanted no explanations,
she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself— and as for
understanding any thing he wrote, she was sure she was
incapable of it It must be waded through, howevo'. She
opened the packet ; it was too smely so ; — a note from Mrs.
Weston to herself, ushered in the letter from Frank to Mrs.
Weston.
'I have the greatest pleasure^ my dear Emma, in forwaid-
ing to you the enclosed. £ know what thorough justice you
vill do it, and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect I
diink we shall never materially disagree about the writer
agun ; but I wiU not delay you by a long preface. We are
quite weU. This letter has been the cure of all the little
nervousness I have been feeling lately. I did not quite like
your looks on Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and
thouf^ you will never own being affected by weather, I think
every body feels a north-east wind. I felt for your dear
& ther very much in the storm of Tuesday aftemoon and
yesterday morning, but had the comfort of hearing last night,
by Mr. Perry, that it had not made him iU.
'Yours ever,
'A.W.'
{TbMrs. Watm.]
'My dear Madam, Windior,— Joljr.
'Ir I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be
e]q > ected; but, expected or not, I know it will be read widt
candour and indulgence. You aie all goodness, and I believe
there will be need of even all your goodness to allow for
some parts of my past conduct But I have been forgiven
\ > y one who bad still more to resoit. My courage rises while
by Google
Emma. Z77
I write. It is Teiy difficult for the pn > speroiis to be humble.
I have alreadjrmet with such success in two applications for
pardon, that I msy be in danger of thinking myself too sure
of yours, and of those among your friends who have had any
ground of offence. You must all endeavour to comprehend
the exact nature of my situation when I fiist arrived at Ran-
dalls ; yon must consider me as having a. secret which was
to be kept at all hawrHa This was the fact My right to
place myself in a situation requiring such conc^dment is
another question. I shall not discuss it here. For my
temptation to think it a right, I refer every caviller to a brick
house, sashed windows below, and casements above, in
Highbniy. I daied not address her openly ; my difficulties
in the then state of Enscombe most be too well known to
require definition ; and I was fortunate enou^ to prevail,
before we parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most
upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a
secret engagement Had she refused, I should have gone
mad But you will be ready to say, What was your hope in
doing thisl What did you look forward to] To any thing,
every tlung — to time, chance, circumstance, slow effects,
sudden bursts, perseverance and weariness, health and sick-
ness. Every possibihty of good was before me, and the
first of blessings secured, in obtainii^ her promises of faith
and ccHTcspondcnce. If you need farther explanation, I
have die honour, my dear madam, of being your husband's
son, and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope
for good, which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever
equal the value of. See me, then, under these drcumstances,
arriving on my first visit to Randalls ; and here I am con-
sdons of wrong, for that visit might have been sooner paid.
Yon will look back, and see that I did not come till Miss
Fairfax was in H^hbury ; and as^iw were the person slighted,
you will forgive me instantly, but I mustwork on my father's
compassion, by reminding him, that so long as I absented
myself from his house, so long T lost the blessing of knowing
you. My behaviour, during the very happy fortnight which
I q > ent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to reprehen-
non, excepting on one point And now I come to the
principal, the only impOTtaot port of my conduct^ while
byGoogle
3^8 Emma.
belonging to you, which ezdtes my own anxie^, or requires
very solicitous explanatioii. With the greatest lespect; and
the wannest friendship, do I mention Miss Woodbouse j taj
father, perhaps, will think I ou^t to add, with the deepest
humiliadon. A few woida which dropped from him yester-
day spoke his opinion, and some censure I acknowledge
myself liable to. My behavionr to Miss Woodhouse indi-
cated, I believe^ more than it ought Id order to assist a
coQcealment so essential to me, I was led on to make mwe,
than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we
were immediately ^irown. I cannot deny that Miss Wood-
house was my ostensible object; but I am sure you will
believe the declaration, that had I not been convinced of
her indifference, I would not have been induced by any
selfish views to go on. Amiable and delightfiil as Miss
Woodhouse is, she never gave me the idea of a young woman
likely to be attached ; and that she was perfectly free from
any tendency to being attached to me, was as much my con-
viction as my wish. She received my attentions with an
easy, friendly, good-humoured playfiilness, which exactlj
suited m & We seemed to understand eacji other. From
our relative situation, those attentions were her due, and were
felt to be sa Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to
understand me before the e]q)iratioii of that fortnight^ I
cannot say : when I called to teke leave of her, I remember
that I was within a moment of confessing the truth, and I
then iancied she was not without suspicion ; but I have no
doubt of her having since detected me, — at least, in some
degree. She may not have surmised the whole, but her
quickness must have penetmted a part I caimot doubt it.
You will find, irfienever the subject becomes freed frtim its
present restraints, that it did not take her wholly by suipaise^
She frequently gave me hints of it I remember her telling
me at the ball, that I owed Mrs. Elton gratitude for her atten-
tions to Miss Fairiax. I hope this history of my conduct
towards her will be admitted by you and my & ther as great
extenuation of what you saw amiss. While you considered
me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse, I could
deserve nothing frcxn either. Acquit me here, and procure
for me, when it is allowably the acquittal and good wishes
U,:|-i:p:lbyG00glc
Emma. 379
of that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I T^ard with so much
brotherly affection as to long to have her as deeply and 03
happily in love as myself. Whatever strange things I said
or did during that fortnight, yaa have now a key to. My
heart was in Highbury, and my business was to get my body
thither as often as might be, and with the least mspicion.
If you remember any queemess, set them all to the right
acanmt Of the piano-forte SO much talked of, I feel it
only necessary to say, that its being ordered was absolutely
unknown to Miss F , who would never have allowed
me to send i^ had any choice been given her. The delicacy
of her mind throuf^out the whole engagement, my dear
madam, is much beyond my power of doing justice to. You
will soon, I earnestly hope, know her thoroughly yourselt
No description can describe her. She must tell you herself
what she is ; yet not by word, for never was there a human
creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit
Since I began this letter, which will be longer than I foresaw,
I have heard from her. She gives a good accoont of her
own health ; but, as she never complains, I dare not depend.
I want to have your opinion of her looks. I know you will
BOOD call on her ; she is hving in dread of the visit. Perhaps
it is p^d already. Let me hear from you without delay I I
am impatient for a thousand particulars. Remember how
few minutes I was at Randalls, and in how bewildered, how
mad a state: and I am not much better yetj still insane
either frxnn happiness or misery. When I think of the kind-
ness and fevour I have met with, of her excellence and
patience, and my uncle's generosity, I am mad with joy:
but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her,
and how little I deserve to be forgiven, I am mad with anger.
Jf I could but see her again 1 But I must not propose it yet :
my uncle has been too good for me to encroach. I must
■till add to this long letter. Vou have not heard all that you
ought to hear. I could not give any connected detail yester-
day; but the suddenness and, in one light, the unseasonable-
ness with which the affair burst out, needs explanation; for
though the event of the 36th ult, as you will conclude^
immediately opened to me the happiest prospects, I should
not have presumed on such early measures, but from tho
by Google
380 Emwia,
•mf paiticuUr drciuDstances which left me not on hour to
lose. I should myself have shrunk from aaj thing so haOj,
and she would have felt evay scruple of mine with multiplied
strength and refinement: but I had no choice. The hastf
engagement she had entered into with that woman
Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave off abruptly,
to recollect and compose myselfl I have been walking over
the couDtiy, and am now, I hope, rational enough to make
the rest of my letter what it ought to be. It is, in fiict, a.
most mortifying retrospect for me. I behaved shamefully.
And here I can admit, that my manners to Miss W., in being
unpleasant to Miss F., were highly blamable. She disap-
proved them, which ought to have been enough. My plea
of conccalmg the truth she did not think sufficient. She was
displeased; I thought unreasonably so: I thought her, on a
thousand occaaons, unnecessarily scrupulous and cautions :
I thought her even cold. But she was always ri^L If I
had followed hei judgment, and subdued my spirits to the
level of what she deemed proper, I should have escaped the
greatest unhappiness I have ever known. We quarrelled.
Do you remember the morning spent at Donwelll T^^re
every Httle dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to
a crisis. I was late; I met her walking home by herself and
wanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it She
absolutely refused to allow me, which I then thou^t most
unreasonable. Now, however, I see nothing in it but a very
natural and consistent degree of discretion. While I, to
blind the world to our engagement, was bdiaving one hour
with objectionable particularity to another woman, was she
to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have
made every previous caution uselessi Had we been met
walking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth
must have been suspected I was mad enough, however, to
resent I doubted her affection. I doubted it more the
next day on Box Hill ; when, provoked by such conduct on
my side, such shameful, insolent n^lect of her, and nich
aiq)aieDt devotion to Miss W., as it would have been impossi-
Ue for say woman of sense to endure, she spoke hei resent-
ment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me. In
sbor^ my dear madam, it was a quarrel blameless on ber
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
Emma. 381
ode, ab(»iuDabIe on mine; and I returned the same evening
to Richmond, though I might have staid with you till the
next morning merely because I would be as aogiy with her
as possible. Even then, I waa not such a. fool as not to
mean to be reconciled in time; but I was the injured person,
injured by her coldness, and I went away, determined that
she should make the first advances. I shall always congra-
tulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party. Had
you witnessed my behaviour there, I can hardly suppose you
would ever have thought well of me again. Its effect upon
her appears in the immediate resolution it produced: as
soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls, she
closed with the offer of that officious Mrs. Elton ; the irtiole
system of whose treatment of her, by the bye, has ever filled
me with indignation and hatred. I must not quarrel with
the spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended
towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest
against the share of it which that woman has known.'Jane,'
indeed 1 You will observe that I have not yet indulged
myself in calling her by that name, even to you. Think,
then, what I must have endured in hearing it bandied between
the Eltons, with all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and
all the insolence of imaginary superiority. Have patience
with me, I shall soon have done. She dosed with this offer,
resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the next day
to tell me that we never were to meet again. Sie fdt tkt
engagemai to be a source ofr^eniaiue and misery lo each : she
disselvedit. This letter reached me on the veiy morning of my
poor aunfs death. I answered it within an hour; but from
the confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business
falling onme at once, my answer, instead of being sent with
all the many other letters of that day, was locked up in my
writing desk ; and I, trusting that I had written enough, though
bat a few lines, to satisfy her, remained without any uneasiness.
I was rather disappointed that I did not hear from her again
speedily ; but I made excuses for her, and was too busy, and
— may I add I — too cheerful in my views to be captious.
We removed to Windsor ; and two days afterwards I received
a. parcel from her — my own letters dl returned ! — and a few
lines at the same time by the post, stating her extreme sur-
byGoo^lc
prise at Dot having had the smallest reply to bn last; and
addii^, that as silence on such a point could not be miscon-
strued, and as it must be equally desirable to both to have
every subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possible,
she now sent me, by a safe conveyance, all my letters, and re-
quested, that if I could not directly command heis, so as to
send them to Highbury within a week, I would forward
them after that period to her at : in diort, the fiiL direc-
tion to Mr. Smalliidge's, near Bristol, stared me in the & ce.
I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and instantl;
saw what she had been doii^. It was perfectly accOTdant
with that resolution of character which I knew her to possess ;
and the secrecy she had maintained, as to any such design
in her former letter, was equally descriptive of its anxious
delicacy. For the world would not die have seemed to
threaten me. Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I had
actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders
of the post What was to be donet One thing only. I
must speak to my uncle. Without his sanction I could not
hope to be listened to agaia I spoke ; circumstances were
in my favour; the late event had softened away his pride,
and he was, earlier than I could have anticipated, wholly re-
conciled and complying; and could say at last, poor man 1
with a deep sigh, that he wished I might find as much happi-
ness in the marriage state as he had done. I felt that it
would be of a different sort Are you disposed to piQr me
for what I must have suffered in opening the cause to him,
for my suspense while all was at stake! No; do not pity
me till I reached Highbury, and saw how ill I had made her.
Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks. I reached
Highbury at the time of day when, from my knowledge of
their late breakfast hour, I was certain of a good chance of
finding her alone. I was not disappointed; and at last I
was not disappointed either in the object of my journey. A
great deal of very reasonable, very just displeasure I had to
p«^uade away. But it is done ; we are reconciled, dearer,
much dearer, than ever, and no moment's uneasiness can
ever occur between us again. Now, my dear " " ■ftpf " , I will
release you ; but I could not conclude before. A thousand
and a thousand thanks for all die kindness you have ever
by Google
ihown me, and ten thousand for the attcatioDS your heart will
dictate towards her. If you think mc in a way to be happier
than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion. Miss W. calls
me the duld of good fortune. I hope she is right In ons
respect, my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to
subscribe myseU;
•Your obliged and affectionate Son,
'F. C Weston Churchill.'
CHAPTER XV.
This lettermust make its way to Emma's feelings. She was
obliged, in spite of her previous detennination to the con-
trary, to do it all the justice that Mrs. Weston foretold. As
soon as she came to her own name, it was irresistible : every
line relating to herself was interesting, and almost every line
agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the subject could
still maintain itself, by the natural return of her fonner regard
for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any pic-
ture < rf love must have for her at that moment She never
stopped till she had gone through the whole ; and though it
was impossible not to feci that he had been wrong, yet he
ha4 been less wrong than she had supposed ; and he had
suffered and was very soiiy; and he was so grateful to Mrs.
Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she was
so happy herself, that there was no being severe; and could
he have entered the room, she must have shaken hands with
him as heartily as ever.
She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knight-
ley came again, she desired him to read it She was sure of
Mrs. Weston's wishing it to be communicated ; especially to
one who, like Mr. Enightley, had seen so much to blame in
hia conduct
'I shall be very glad to look it over,'said h«, < but it seems
loi^. I will take it home with me at ni^t'
But that would not do. Mr. Weston was to call in the
evening ard she must return it by him.
,,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
384 Emma.
'I would nithei be talking to yon,'he replied;'but u it
seems a matter of justice, it shall be done'
He began — stopping, however, almost diiectly to saj,
'Had I been offered the sight of one of this geatleman's
tetters to his mother-in-law a few months ago, Emma, it
would not have been taken with such indifference.'
He proceeded a tittle farther, reading to himself; and dien,
with a smile, observed,'Humph ! — a fine complimentarf
opening ; but it is his way. One man's style must not be
the rule of another's. We will not be severe. "
'It will be natural for me,'he added, shordy aftenmds,
'to speak my opinion aloud as I read. By doing it, I dudl
feel that I am near you. It will not be so great a loss of
time; but if you dislike it'
'Not at alL I should wish it'
Mr. Knightley returned to his reading with greater
alacrity.
'He trifles here,'said he, * as to the temptation. He
knows he is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge. Bad.
He ought not to have formed the engagement " His
father's disposition: " — ^he is unjust, however, to his fother.
Mr. Weston's sanguine temper was a blessing on all his up-
right and honourable exertions; but Mr. Weston earned
every present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it Very
true ; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here.'
'And I have not forgotten,'said Emma,'how sue you
were that he might have come sooner if he would. You
pass it over very handsomely; — ^but you were peifecdy
right'
'I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Enmia ; but
yet, I think, had jam not been in the case, I should still haw
distrusted him.'
When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read
the whole of it aloud — all that related to her, with a smile,
a look, a shake of the head, a word or two of assent, or dis-
approbation, or merely of love, as the subject required;
concluding, however, seriously, and, after s^dy reflectKMi,
thus, —
•Very bad — though it might have been worse. Playing
a most dangerous game. Too much indebted to the event
by Google
Emma. $8$
for his KcquittaL No judge of his own manBcrs by you.
Always deceived, in & ct, by his own wishes, and regardless
of little besides his own convenience. Fancying you to have
fathomed his secret t Natural enough! his own mind full
of intrigue, that be should suspect it in others. Mystay —
finesse —how they pervert the undeistanding ! My Emina,
does not every thing sarve to prove more and more the
beauty of tnith and sincerity in all our dealings with each
other!'
Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on
Harrietts account, whidi she could not give any sincere ex-
phtnatioi) (rf!
* You had better go on,'said she.
He did so, but very soon stopped again to say,'The piano-
forte I Ah ! — that was the act of a very, very young man,
one too yotmg to consider whether the inconvenience of it
mig^t not very much exceed the pleasure. A boyish scheme,
indeed I I cannot comprehend a man's wishing to give a
woman any proof of affection which he knows she would
rather dispense with ; and he did know that she would have
prevented the instrument's coming if she could.'
Afler this, he made some progress without any pause.
Frank Churchill's confession of having behaved shamefully
was the first thing to call for more than a word in passing.
'I perfectly agree with you, sir,'was then his remark.
* You did behave very ahamcftilly. Vou never wrote a truer
'line.'And having gone through what immediately followed
ot the basis of their disagreement, and his persisting to act
in direct oiqxjsition to Jane Fairfax's sense of right, he made
a fiiller pause to say,'This is very bad. He had induced
her to place herself for his sake, in a situation of extreme
difficulty and uneasiness, and it should have been his first
object to prevent her from suffering unnecessarily. She must
have had much more to contend with in canying on the cor-
respondence than he could. He should have respected even
unreasonable scruples, had there been such ; but hers were
aU reasonable. We must look to her one & ult, and remem-
ber that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the
engagement, to bear that she should have been in such a
estate of punishment'
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgk'
EnnnakDewthat he was now getting to the Box HUlpai^
and grew uiicomfortabl & Her owo behaviour had been so
veiy improper I She was deeply ashamed, and a little a & aid
(rf his next look. It was all read, however, steadily, atten*
lively, and without the smallest remark; and, excepting one
momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear of
giving pain — no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to ezisL
'There is no saying much for the delicat? of our good
friends, the Eltons,'was his next observation.'His feelings
are naturaL What I actually resolve to break with him en-
tirely ! She felt the engagement to be a source (d repentance
and ausery to each — she dissolved it What a view this
gives of her sense of his behaviour I Well, he must be a
most extraordinaiy— ~'
'Nay, luty, read on. You will find how very much he
■uSeis.'
'I hope he does,'replied Mr. Knightle^, coelly, and re-
suming the letter. —'" SmaQiidger — ^Wfaat does this mean I
What is all this r
'She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge*s
children— a dear & iend of Mrs. Elton's — a neighbour ot
Maple Grove ; and, by the bye, I wondn how Mis. Elton
bears the disappointmenL'
'Say nothing, my dear Emma, -wlalt you oblige me td
read — not even of Mrs. Elton. Only one p^^ more. 1
shall soon have done. What a letter die man writes !'
*I wish you would read it wiA a kinder spirit towards
him.'
'Well, there ii feeling here. He does seem to have
suffered in finding hei ill Certainly, L can have no doubt ot
his being fond of her. " Dearer, much dearer than ever. "
I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a
reconciliation. He is a very liberal thanker, with his thou-
sands and tens of thousands. — " Happier than I deserve. "
Come, he knows himself there. " Miss Woodhouse calls me
the child of good fortune. " Those were Miss Woodhouse's
words, were they I And a fine ending — and there is a
letta. " Ilie d^d of good fortune 1 " Tiat was your name
fiu him, wasitl'
'You do not appear so well satisfied with bis letter as
by Google
I am; but stiU jrou mnst, at least I hope you mtu^ think the
betta of him for it I hope It does him some Mrrice with
you.*
'Yes, certainly it does. He has had great fiiults, — & ulta
of iDConsideration and thoughtlessness ; and I am very much
of his opinion in thinking him likely to be happier than he
deserves : but still as he is, beyond a doubt, really attached
to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it may be hoped, have the
advaotage of being constantly with her, I am very ready to
believe his character will improve, and acquire & om hen the
steadiness and delicacy of principle that it wuits. And now,
let me talk to you of somediing else. I have another per-
son's interest at present so much at heart, that I cannot
think any longer about Tank. ChurdiilL Ever since I left
you this morning, Enuna, my mind has been hard at work
on one snbjecL'
The subject foUowed ; it was in phin, unafEected, gende-
man-like Fr^g'* "'', such as Mr. Knighdey used even to the
woman he waa in love wi^ how to be able to ask her to
marry him, without attacking the happiness of her father.
Emma's answer was ready at the first word.'While her
dear & ther Uved, any change ot condition must be impossi-
ble Ibr her. She could never quit him.'Part only of this
answer, however, was admitted. The impossibiUty (rf her
quitting her & tiier, Mr. Knightley felt as strong a» herself;
but tix inadmissibility of any other change he could not
agree to. He bad bMn thinking it over most deeply, most
intendy; he bad at first hoped to induce Mr. Woodluiuse to
remove with her to Donwell; be had wanted to beUeve it
feasible, but his knowledge of Mr. Woodhouse wouM not
suffer him to deceive himself long; and now he confessed his
persuasion, that such a transplantation wonld be a risk of her
bther's comfort, perhs^s even of his life, which must not be
hmardgd Mr. Woodhouse taken from Hartfield I — No, he
felt that it ou^ not to be attempted. But the plan n^ich
had arisen on Ae saoifice of this, be tmsted his deaiest
^Doma would not find in any respect objectionable ; it was,
that he should be received at Hartfield I Aat so long as her
Other's happiness — in other words bis life~«quired Hart-
field to continue her bom^ it shonld be his likewise.
by Google
388 Emma.
Of theii kU removing to Donwell, Emma had already had
her own passing thoughts. Like him, she had tried the
scheme and rejected it ; but such an alternative as thi^i had
not ocaured to her. She was sensible or all the afGection it
evinced. Sbe felt that, in quitting I > onwell, he must be
saciifidag a great deal of independence of hours and habits;
that io living coostaotly with her father, and in no honae of
his own, th^ would be much, very much, to be borne with.
She promised to think of it, and advised him to think of it
more ; but he was fiilly convinced, that no reflection could
alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject. He had
given it, be could assure her, very long and calm considera-
tion; he had been walking away & om William Lsikins the
whole morning to have his thoughts to himself
'Ahl there is one difficulty unprovided for,', cried EtnTP a .
'I am sore William Laddns will not like it You most get
his consent before you ask mine.'
She promised, however, to think of it ; and pretty nearly
promised, moreover, to think of it, with the intentioD of find-
ing it a very good scheme.
It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, veiy many,
prants of view in which she was now beginning to consider
Donwdl Abbey, was never struck with any sense (£ injuiy
to her nei^iew Henry, whose rights as heir expectant had
formerly been so tenaciously regarded. Think she must of
the possible difference to the poem little boy; and yet she
only gave herself a saucy conscious smile about it, and found
amusonent in detecting the real cause of that violent dislike
of Mr. Knightley's marrying Jane Fairfax, oi any body else;
which at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable
solicitude of the sister and the aunt.
This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing
at Hartfield — the more she contemplated it the more pleas-
ing it became. His evib seemed to lessen, her own advan-
tages to increase, their mutual good to outweigh every dniw-
back. Such a companion for herself in the periods of
anxiety and cheerleasness before her 1 Such a partnei in all
those duties and cares to which time must be giving increase
of melancholy I
She would have been too happy, but for poor Harriet; but
by Google
Emma. 389
eveiy blessmg of her own seemed to involve and advance the
lufferings of her friend, who must now be even excluded from
Haitfield. The delightful famPy-paity which Emma was
•ecuring for herself poor Harriet must, in mere charitable
caution, be kept at a distance from. She wonld be a loaer
in eveiy way. Emma conld not deplore her fiimre absence
as any deduction from her own enjoyment. In such a party,
Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ; but
for the poor giil herself it seemed a peculiarly cruel neces-
sity that was to be placing her in su < di a state of unmerited
punishment
In time, < tf course, Mr. Kni^tley would be forgotten, that
is, supplanted ] but this could not be expected to happen
veiy early. Mr. Kni^tiey himself would be doing nothing
to assist the core ; not like Mr. Eltoa Mr. Knightley,
always so kind, so feeling, so truly considerate for eveiy body,
would never deserve to be less worshipped than now ; and it
really was too much to hope even of Harriet, that she could
be in lore with more than tMra men in one year.
CHAPTER XVL
It wii « very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desii^
ons OS herself to avoid a meeting. Their intercourse was
puofiil enough by letter. How much worse had they been
oUiged to meet I
Harriet expressed hei^elf very much, as might be supposed,
without reproaches, or apparent sense of ill usage ; and yet
Emma fimded there was a something of resentment, a some-
thing bordering on it in her style, which increased the desir*
ableness of their being separate. It might be only her own
consciousness; but it seemed as if an angel only could have
been quite without resentment under such a stroke.
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella's invitation;
and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking
it, without resorting to invention. There was a tooth amiss.
Harriet really wished, and had wished some time, to consult
a dentist Mrs. John Knightley was delighted to be of use ;
any thing of ill-health was a recommendation to her — and
,,,_f:ibyGoOgk'
390 Bmma.
thongii not so fond of a dentist u of a Mr. Wingfield, she
was qnite eager to have Haniet under her care. When it
was thus setded on her sister's side, Emma proposed it to
her friend, and found her very persuadable. Harriet was to
go; she waa invited for at least a fortnight; she was to be
conv^red in Hr. Woodhouse's carriage. It was all arranged,
it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in Kuaswick
^uare;
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knighdey's visits ;
now she could talk, and she could listen widi tme happineas,
unchecked by that sense of injustice, of guilt, of something
most painfiii, which had haunted her when remembering
how disappointed a heart was near her, how much mi^t at
that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the
feelings trftich she had led astray herself
The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard's, or in London,
made perhaps an unreasonable difference in Emma's sensa-
tions; but she could not think of her in London without
objects of curiosity and employment, which must be averting
the pas^ and cairying her out of herself
She would not allow any odier anxiety to succeed directly
to the place in her mind which Haniet had occupied.
There was a communication before her, one which she only
could be competent to make — the confession of her engage^
ment to her fiuher; but she would have nothmg to do with
it at present She had resolved to defer the disclosure till
Mrs. Weston was safe and weU. No additional agitation
should be thrown at this period among those she loved — and
the evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the
appointed time. A fortnight, at least, of leisure and peace
of mind, to crown every warmer, but more agitating delight,
should be hers.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure to
employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on
Miss Fairfax. She ought to go — and she was longing to
see her; the resemblance of their present sitoarions increas-
ing every Other motive of good will It would be a secret
satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of pros-
pect would certunly add to the interest with which she
Bhould attend to any dung Jane might communicate.
byGoo^^lc
. ... J
EmsKO. 39:1
She went — she had driven once tuisuccessftdly to Iht
door, bat had not been into the house dnce the meaning
after Box Hill, vhen poor Jane had been in nidi distress as
had filled her with compassion, dunigh all the wotst of her
sufihingi had been nnsnspected. The fear of being still
unwelcome detennined her, thou^ assured of their being at
home, to wait in die passage, and send up her name. Sie
heard Pat^ announcing it ; but no such bustle succeeded
as poOT Miss Bates had before made so happily intelligible.
No; she heard nothing but the instant reply o^'B^ her to
walk up;'and a moment afterwards she was met on the stain
by Jane hetsd^ comini^ eagerly forward as if no other recep-
tion of her were felt sv^dent Emma had never seen her
look so well, so lovely, so engaging. There was conscious-
nesi, animation, and warmth ; there was every thing which
her countenance or manner could ever have wanted. She
came f < Bwaid witii an offered hand ; and said, in a low, but
veiy feeling tone, —
'This is most kind, indeed ! Miss Woodhouse, it is im-
posnble lor me to e3^ > ress 1 hope you will belie v e'
Excuse me for being so entirely without words.'
Emma was gratified, and would soon have shown no want
of W(Hdfi if die sound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the titttng-
room had not checked her, and made it expedient to com-
press all her friendly and all her congmtulatoiy sensations
into a very, vny earnest shake of the hand.
Mts. Bates and Mrs. Elton were together. Miss Bates
was out, which accounted for the previous tranquilli^.
Emma could have wished Mrs. Elton elsewhere; but she
was in a humour to have patience with every body ; and aa
Mis. Elton met her with unusual giadousness, ^e hoped
the rencontre would do them no hann.
9ie soon believed herself to penetrate Mts. Elton's
thoughts^ and understand why s^e was, like herself in happy
spirits ; it was being in Miss Fairfax's confidence, and fan < 7-
ing herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other
people. Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the
expression of her & ce; and while paying her own com-
pliments to Mrs. Bates, and appearii^ to attend to the good
old lady's replies, she saw her with a scat of anxious parade
,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
593 Emma,
ctf mjrsterr ^^^ °P ^ letter which she had appatendf
been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it into Ae
purple and gold redcsle bjr her aide, saying^ with s^nificant
Dods, —
* We can finish this some other time, you know. Yon
And I shall not want opportunities ; and, in bxX, joa have
heard all the essendal already. I only wanted to pfore to
you diRt Mn. S. admits our aipAogj, and is not offended.
You see how delightfully she writes. Oh, she is a sweet
creature I You would have doated on her, had you gone.
— But not a word more. Let us be discreet — quite on oui
good behaviour. — Hush! — You remember diose lines — I
foi^ the poem at this moment : —
Now I say, my dear, in our case, for lady, read mumt a
word to the wise. I am in a fine flow of spirits, ain't I f But
I want to set your heart at ease as to Mrs. S. My re[weseD-
tadon, you see, has quite appeased her.'
And again, on Emma's merely turning her bead to look at
Urs. Bates's knitting, she added, in a half whisper, —
'I mentioned no names, you will observe. Oh not cau-
tions as a minister of state. I managed it extremely wdL'
Emma could not doubt. It was a palpable display, re-
peated OD every possible occasion. When they had all
talked a littie while in harmony of the weather and Mrs.
Weston, she fouitd hersdfahruptly addressed with, —
'Do not yon think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy litde
friend here is charmingly recovered! Do not you think her
cure does Ferty the hi^est credit! (here was a side glance
of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my word, Pory haa
restored her in a wooderfiil short time I Oh, if you had seen
her, as I did, when she was at the worst I'And when Mrs.
Bates was saying something to & nma, whispored & ither,
* We do not say a word of any tutistaiue that Perry might
have ; not a word of a certain young physician bom
Windsor. Oh no, Ferry shall have all the ctedit'
'I have scarce had the pleasure < ^ seeing you. Miss
Woodhouse,* she shortly afterwards tx^an,'since the par^
by Google
Smma. 393
to Box Hin. Very pleasant paitf. But yet I think diere
wu loiiiedung wanting. TUngs did not ■eem — tiut i > ,
there seemed a little cloud upon the ^irits < ^ scmte. So it
appealed to me, at least, but I mig^t be mistaken. How-
ever, I think it answered so & r as to tempt one to go again.
What lay you both to our collecting the same poi^ and ex-
pl < mng to Box Hill again, while the fine weather lastsT It
must be the same par^, you know, quite the same party, not
Socm after this Miss Bates came in, and & nma could not
help being diverted by the perplexity ol her first answer to
hnsel^ resulting she supposed, from doubt of what mij^t
be said, and impatience to say every thing.
'Thank you, dear Kiss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.
It is impossible to say — Yes, indeed, I quite understand —
dearest jane's prospects — that is, I do not mean. But she
is channin^y recovered. How is Mr. Woodhonset I am
so glad. — Quite out of my power. — Such a happy littie dide
as you find us here. — Yes, indeed. — ChamuDg young man ^^
that is~ao very friend^; I mean good Mr. Pertyl^.«uch
attention to Janel'Md from her grea^ her more than
commonly thankful delight towards Mrs. Elton for being
there, Emma guessed that there had been a little show of
resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which
was now graciously overcome. — After a few whispers, indeed,
vrtiidi placed it beyond a guess, Mrs. Elton, speaking
louder, said, —
'Yes, here I am, my good friend ; and here I have been
so lon£ that any where else I should think it necessary to
apologise : but, the trudi is, Aat I am waiting for my lord
and master. He promised to join me here, and pay his re*
q > ects to you.'
'What I are we to have & e pleasure of a call from Mr.
Eltonf That will be a fiivour indeedl for I know gentle-
men do not like morning visits, aod Mr, Elton's time is so
engaged.'
'Upon my word it is, Hiss Bates. He really is engaged
from morning to ni^t There is so end of pe < ^Ie^s coming
to him on anne pretence or other. The magistrates, and
ovcneers, and dinichwardens, are always wanting his
, : ,Gooyk'
394 StttiMH,
opiuaa. Tbey Mcm not able to do aaj thing without hinL
" Upon mf word, Mi. £., " I often say, " i & ther you than t.
1 do not know irhat would become of my crayons and my
iottrament, if I had half so many applicants. " Bad enougii
as it is, for I absolntely nc^ect them both to an unpardon-
able d^ree. I believe I hare not played a bar this fortnight
However, he is coming; I assure you : yes, indeed, on ptu-
pose to wait on yon alL'And putting up her hand to
screen her words fnxn Emma —'A congratulatoiy visi^ you
know. Oh I yei^ quite indispensable.'
Hiss Bates lodced about her, so h^pily.
'He i»omised to oome to me as soon as he could dis-
engsge himself frmn KnightJey ; but he and En^dey are
shut up together in deep cmisoltatioa. Mr. £. is Koightley's
right hand.'
Emma would not hare smiled far the world, and only
said,'Is Mr. Eltcmgoaeon foot to Dcmwdlt He will have
ahMwalk.'
Oh no, it is a meeting at the Crown— a regular meeting.
Weston and Cole will be diere too; but one is apt to speak
only of those who lead. I & ncy Mr. E. and Knij^tlcy have
every thing their own way.'
Have not you mistaken the dayt* said " ff " " " "'I am
almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to-
morrow. Mr. Knigfatley was at HartSeld yesterday, and
spoke of it as for Saturday.'
'Oh no, the meeting a certainly to-day,'was the abrupt
answer, which denoted the impossibili^ of any blunder on
Mn. Elton's side.'I do beUeve,'she continued,'this is
the most troublesome parish that ever was. We never heard
of snch things at Maple Grove.'
•Your parish there was small,'said Jane.
'Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never
heard the subject talked o£'
'But it ia proved by the smaUness of the school, which I
have heard you speak of) as under the patronage of your
sister and Mrs. Bragge ; Uie only school, and not toon than
five and twenty childreo.'
'Ahl you clever creature, thafs very true. What a think-
uig tniia you have I I say, Jao^ what a perfect character
byGoot^lc
Emtua. 39S
jva and I shonld make, if we coold be thaken together
My livehacaa and youi soHdi^ wonld produce perfection.
Not that I presume to insinuate, hovever, that wme people
may not think you perfection already. But hush 1 — not a
word, if you please^'
It aeemed an unnecesaaiy caution ; Jane was wanting to
give her woids, not to Mrs, Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse,
BB the Litter plainfy taw. The wiih of ttifringiti«hing her, as
bi as dvility penmtted, was veiy evident, though it could
not often proceed beyond a look.
Mr. Elton made lus appeaisnce. His lady greeted him
with some of her spaikling vivadty.
* Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to
be an eocumtxADce to my friends, BO long before you vouch-
safe to come. But you knew what a dutiful creature you had
to deal with. Yon knew I should not stir till my lord
and master appeared. Here hare I been sitting this hour,
giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obe-
dience; for who can say, you know, how soon it may be
wanted!'
- Mr. Ston was so hot and tired, that all dus wit seemed
thrown away. His civilities to the other ladies must be
paid; but his subsequent object was to lament over himseli^
for the heat he was suffering, and the walk he had had & x
nothing.
'When I got to Donwell,'said he,'Knightley could not
be found. Very odd 1 very unaccountable I after the note I
sent him this morning, and the message be returned, that he
should certainly be at home till one.'
. * Donwell 1'cried his wife.'My dear Mi. £., you have
not been to Donwell; you mean the Crown; you come
from the meeting at the Crown.'
'No, no, thaf s to-morrow ; and I particularly wanted to
see Knighdey to-day on that very account Such a dread-
ful broiling moming 1 I went over the fields too (speaking
in a tone of great ill usage), which made it so much the
worse. And then not to find him at home ! I assure you
I am not at all pleased. And no apology lef^ no message
for me. The hoosekeepei declared she knew nothing of my
beiiig expected. Very extraordinaiy I And nobody kl > ew
byGooyle
39C EmtHO.
at all iriudi way he trai gone. Pofa^is to HaitSel^ per-
haps to Ae Abb^ Mill, pcriiapa into his woods. Mitt
WoodhouBC, diis is not like our friend Enig^tley. Can jon
explain it t'
Eaima amused heiself by protesting Out it was veiy ez <
traordinaiy indeed, and that she had not a B)4IaUe to sajr
for him.
'I cannot ima^e,'cried Mn. Elton, (feeling the indignity
as a wife oi^t to do,)'I cannot im^;ine how he could do
such a thing by you, of all pe(q > le in the wmld I The veiy
last person whom one should expect to be forgotten I My
dear Mr. E., he must have left a message for you, I am sure
he must Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;
~-and his servants foigot it Depend upon it that was the
case : and veiy likely to happen widi the Donwell servants,
who are all, I have often observed, extremely awkward and
remiss. I am sure I would not have such a. creature as his
Hairy stand at our sideboard for any consideration, Andu
for Mis. Hodges, Wri^t holds her very dieap indeed. She
promised Wri^t a receipt, and never sent it'
'I met WUiam Laikins,'continued Mr. Elton,'as I got
near the house, and he told me I ^ould not find his master
at home, but I did not believe him. William seemed nther
out of humour. He did not know what was come to his
master lately, he said, but he could hanlly ever get tlie
speech of him. I have nothing to do widi William's wants,
but it really is of very great importance that / should see
Knightley to-day; and it becomes a matter, thereftne, of
very serious inconvenience that I should have had this hot
walk to no pui3»»e.'
Eknma felt that she could not do better than go home
directly. In all probabihty ^e was at this very time waited
for there; and Mr. Knightley might be preserved fexn
sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr. & t < m, if not
towards William Larkins.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Faiifox
determined to attend her out of die room, to go with her
even down stairs; it gave her an opportunity whidi she
immediately made use of^ to say, —
* It is as well, perhaps that I have not had die posabilitj.
,,,_f:ibyGoogle
Had yon not been surrounded by odia friends, I might
have been tempted to introduce a subject, to ask questions,
to speak more openly than might have been strictly correct
I feel that I should certainly have been impertinent'
'Oh I'ciied Jane, with a blush and a hesitation which
Emma diought infinitely more becoming to hci than all the
degance of her usual composure —'there would have been
no danger. The danger would have been of my wearying
yoo. You could not have gratified me more than by ex-
pressing an mterest . Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speak-
ing more collectedly,) with the consciousness which I have
of misconduct, very great misconduct, it is particularly con-
soling to me to know that those of my friends, whose good
< q > )nion is most worth preserving, are not disgusted to such
a d^ree as to — I have not time for half that I could wish to
say. I long to make f^logtes, excuses, to urge something
for myself I feel it so very due. But, unfortunately — in
short, if your compassion does not stand my Mend'
'Oh I you are too scrupulous, indeed you are,'cried
Emma, warmly, and taking her hand. * You owe me no
apologies ; and every body to whom you might be supposed
to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied, so delighted even —'
'You are very kind, but I know what my maimes were to
you. So cold and artificial 1 I had always a part to act.
It was a life of deceitl I know that I must have disgusted
you.'
'Pray say no more. I feel th^ all the apologies should
be on my side. Let us forgive each other at once. We
must do whatever is to be done quickest, and I think our
feelings will lose no time there. I hope you have pleasant
accounts from Windsor I'
'Very.'
'And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to
lose you — ^just as I begin to luiow you.'
* Oh I as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of
yeL I am here till claimed by Colonel and Mrs. Campbell.'
'Nothii^ can be actually settled yet, perhaps,'repHed
Emma, smiting, —'but, excuse me, it must be thought ot'
The smile was returned as Jane answered, —
'Yon are very right ; it has been thought of. And I will
h;,Goo < ^k'
398 Emma.
own to yon (I am sure it will be safe), tbat to & r is our
living with Mr, Churchill a.t Enscombe, it ii Ktded Tliere
mutt be three months, at least, of deep mourning; but when
tfaey are over, I imagine there wiU be nothing more to wait
for.'
'Thank jrou, diank you. This is just what I vnmted to
be assured oL Oh I if you knew how much I lore every
thing that is decided and open ) — Good by^ good bye.*
CHAPTER XVII.
Hits. Wkvion's friends were aU made happy by her safety,
and if Hx satisfaction of her weU-doing could be inireased
to Emma, it was by knowing her to be die mother of a little
girl She had been decided in wishing for a Miss Weston.
She would not acknowledge that it was with any view of
nuking a matdi for her, hereafter, with either of Isabdla's
sons; bnt she was convinced that a daugbta would snit
both Esther and mother best It would be a great comfort
to Ur. Weston, as he grew older — and even Mr. Weston
mi^it be growing oldo: ten years hence — to have his fire-
side enlivened by & e sports and the nonsense, the freaks
and the fandes of a child never banished fin»n home ; and
Mis. Weston — no one could doubt that a daughta would be
most to her ; and it would be quite a [Hty that any one who
so well knew how to teach, should not have their powers in
'She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on
me,'she continued —'like La Baronne d'Almane on La
Onntesse d'Ostalis, in Madame de Genlis'Adelaide and
Theodore, and we shall now see her own little Addaide
educated on a more perfect plan.'
'That is,'replied Mr. Kni^tley,'she will indulge her
even more than she did you, and believe that she does not
indulge her at all. It wUl be the only difference.'
'Poor childl'cried Emma;'at that nte, what win be-
come of hert'
-'Nothing rety bad. The & te of thoosinds. She will
byGooyle
be disagreeable ic inikncy, and correct herself as she grows
older. I am losing all my bitterness against spoiled children,
my dearest Emma. I, who am owing all my happiness to
yeu, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me to be severe
on themi'
T^'.mma laughed, and replied :'But I had the assistance of
all your endeavours to counteract l^e indulgence of other
people. I doubt whedier my own sense would have cor-
rected me without it'
'Do youl — I have no doubt. Nature gave you under-
standing : — Miss Taylor gave you principles. You must
have done welL My interference was quite as likely to do
harm as good. It was very natural for you to say, what
right has he to lecture meT and I am afi & id very nattural for
you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner. I
do not believe I did you any good. The good was all to
myself by making you an object of the tenderest affection
to me. I could not think about you so much without
doating on you, faults and all; and by dint of & ncying so
many errors, have been in love with you ever since you were
diirteen at least'
'I am sure you were of use to me,'cried Emma.'I was
very often influenced rightly by you — oftcner than I would
own at the time. I am veiy sure you did me good. And if
poor little Anna Weston is to be spoiled, it will be the
greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have
done for me, except faUing in love with her when she is
thirteen,'
* How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me,
irith one of your saucy looks, — " Mr. Knightley, I am going
to do so and so ; papa says I may ; " or, " I have Miss Taylor's
leave " —something which, you knew, I did not approve.
In such cases my interference was giving you two bad feel-
ings instead of one.'
* What an amiable creature I was 1 No wonder you should
hold my speeches in such affectionate remembntnce.'
'" Mr. Knightley. " You always called me, " Mr,
Knightley/'and, horn habit, it has not so very formal a
sound. And yet it is formal I want you to call me some-
thing else, but I do not know what'
kGoogk'
400 Emma.
'I remember once calling you " George, " in one of my
amiable fits, about ten yean aga I did it because I thouf^t
it would offead youj but, as you made no objection, I
never did it again.'
'And cannot you call mc " George " nowl'
'Impossible I I never can call you any thing but " Mr.
Xnightley. " I will not promise even to equal the el^ant
terseness of Mrs. Elton, by calling you Mr. K. But I win
promiae,'she added presently, laughing and blushing * I
will luwnise to call you once by your Christian name. I
do not say iriien, but peiitaps you may guess where ; — ia
die building in which N. takes M. for better, for worse.'
Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to
one important service which his better sense would have
rendered her, to the advice which would have saved her
from the worst of all her womanly follies — her wiUiil in-
timacy with Harriet Smith ; but it was too tender a subject.
She could not enter on it. Harriet was very seldom men*
doned between them. This, on bis side, might merely
proceed from her not being thought of; but Emma was
rather indined to attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion,
bom s < mie appearances, that their friend^p were dedining.
She was aware herself that, parting under any odier circum-
stances, they certainly should have corresponded more, and
that her intdligence would not have rested, as it nov
almost «diolly did, on Isabella's letters. He might observe
that it was sa llie pain of being obliged to practise con-
cealment towards him, was very little i^erior to the pain of
having nuide Harriet unhappy.
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visiter as
could be e]q)ected ; on her first arrival she had tiiougfat her
out of spirits, which appeared perfectly natural, as there was
a dentist to be consulted; but, since that business had been
over, she did not appear to find Harriet different from what
she had known h^ before. Isabella, to be sure, was no
very quick observer ; yet if Harriet had not been equal to
playing with the children, it would not have escaped her.
Emma's comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on,
by Harriet's being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to
be a month at least. Mr. and Mrs. John I^ii^tley were to
byGoogle
Emma. 46i
cotDc down in Ai^pu^ and she was invited to remain tilt
they could bring faer back.
'John does not even mention your friend,'said Mr.
Knightly. * Here is bis answer if you like to see it'
It was the answer to the communication of his intended
mamag & Emma accepted it with a very eager hand, with
an impatience all alive to know what he would gay abont it,
and not at all checked by hearing that her friend was un-
mentioned.
'John enters like & teother into my happiness,'continued
Mr. Knightley, < but he is no complimentcr ; and though I
well know him to have, likewise, a most tvotherly affection
for yon, he is so far from making flourishes, that any other
young woman might think him rather cool in her praise.
But I am not afraid of your ledng what he writes.'
'He writes like a sensible man,'replied Emma, when she
had read the letter.'I honour his sincerity. It is very
plain that he considers the good fcHtmie of the engagement
as all on my side, but that he is not without hope of my
growing, in time, as worthy of yotn affection, as you think
me already. Had he said any thing to bear a different con-
stiuction, I ^ould not have believed him.'
'My Emma, he means no such thing. He only mean s "'
'He and I ^ould differ very little in our estimation of
the two,'— 4nteiTupted the, widi a sort of serious smil^—
'much less, periiaps, than he is aware of) if we could enter
without ceremony or reserve on the subject'
'Emma, my dear Emma'
'Ohl'she cried with more thorough gaiety,'if you & mcy
yonr tHOther does not do me justice, only wait till my dear
& tbei is in the secret, and hear his opinion. Depend apoo
it, he will be much & rther from doing you justice. He will
think all the happiness, all the advantage, on your side
of the question ; all die merit on mine. I wish I may not
sink into " poor Emma " with him at once. His tender
compassion towards oppressed worth can go no farther.'
'Ahr he cried,'I wish your father might be half as easily
convinced as John will be, of our having every right that
equal worth can give, to be happy together. I am amused
by one part of John's letter-~did you notice itl — where he
by Google
4D3 Emma.
nys, that my infonnation did not take him wholly by sorprise,
that he was lather in expectation of hearing something of the
kind.'
'If I undeistand your brother, he only means so lar as
yow having some thoughts of manying. He had no idea of
me. He seems perfectly unprepared for that'
'Yes, yes— but I am amused that he should have seen so
far into my feelings. What has he been jud^ng byT I am
not conscious of any difference in my spirits or conveisadon
that could prepare him at this time for my manying any more
than at another. But it was so, I suppose. I dare say there
was a difference when I was staying with them the other day.
1 believe I did not play with the children quite so much as
usual. I remember one evening the poor boys saying,
" Uncle seems always tired now.'"
The time was coming when the news must Spread & rther,
and other persons'reception erf it be tried. As soon as Mrs.
Western was sufficiently recovered Xo admit Mr. Woodhouse's
visits, Emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings
should be employed in the cause, resolved first to announce
it at home, and then at Randalls. But how to break
it to her father at last I She had bound herself to do it,
in such an hour of Mr. Knighdey's absence, or when it
came to the point her heart would have & iled her, and she
must have put it off; but Mr. Knightley was to come at
such a time, and follow np the b^inning she was to make.
She was forced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too. She
must not make it a more decided subject of misery to him,
by a melancholy tone herself. She must not appear to think
it a misfortune. With all the spirits she could command,
she prepared him first for something strange, and then, in
few words, said, that if his consent and approbation could be
obtained— which, she trusted, would be attended with no
difficulty, since it was a plan to promote the happiness of all
— she and Mr. Knightley meant to many; by which means
Hart & eld would receive die constant addition of that person's
company, whom she knew he loved, next to his daughters
and Mrs. Weston, best m the wwld.
Poor man I — it was at first a con^derable shock to him,
and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it She was ro-
by Google
Emma, 403
minded, more than once, of her having always said she would
never many, and assured that it would be a great deal better
for her to remain single; and told of poor Isabella, and poor
Miss Taylor. But it would not da Emma hung about him
affectionately, and smiled, and said it must be so ; and that
he must not class her with Isabella and Mra. Weston, whose
marriages taking them from Hartfield had, indeed, made a
melancholy change; but she was not going from Haitfield;
she should be always there ; she was introducing no change in
theirnumbeisortheir comforts butfor the bcttjr; and she was
very sure that he would be a great deal the happier for having
Mr. Knightleyalways at hand, when he were once got used to
the idea. Did not he love Mr. Knightley very mucht He
wouldnotdenythat he did,she was sure. Whom did he ever
want to consult on business bnt Mr. Knighdeyt Who was so
useful to him, irtio so ready to write hia letters, who so glad
to assist him 1 Who so cheerfiil, so attentive, so attached to
himt Would not he Hke to have him alwajra on the spoti
Yes. That was all very true. Mr. Knightley could not be
there too often ; be shoald be glad to see him every day :
but th^ did see him every day as it was. Why could not
diey go on as they had donel
Mr. Woodhoufie could not be soon reconciled} bnt the
worst was overcome, the idea was given ; time and continual
repetition must do the rest To Emma's entreaties and as-
surances succeeded Mr. Knightley's, whose fond praise of
her gave the subject even q kind of welcome ; and he was
soon used to be talked to by each on every fair occasion,
They had all the assistance which Isabella could give, by
letters of the strongest approbation; and Mrs. Weston was
ready, on the fiist meeting, to consider the subject in the
most serviceable light; first, as a settled, and, secondly, as a
good one — ^well aware of the neariy equal importance of the
two recommendations to Mr. Woodhouse's mind. It was
agreed upon, as what was to be; and every body by whom
he was used to be guided assuring him that it would be for
his happiness; and having some feelings himself which
almost admitted it, he began to think that some time or other,
in another year or two, perhaps, it mig^t not be so very bad
if the mairiage did take place.
by Google
404 Emma,
Mis. Weston was acting no pat^ feigning no feelings in all
that she said to him in & vour of the event. She had been
extremely smpiised, Derer more bo, than when Emma fint
opened ibe oSaii to her; but she saw in it only increase of
happiness to all, and had no scn^e in urging him to the
utmost She had such a tegard for Mr. Knightley, as to
think he deserved even her dearest Enuna; and it waa in
every respect so proper, suitable^ and unexceptionable a
connectioo, and in one respect, one point < ^ the highest im-
portance, so peculiarly eligible^ so sii^ularly fortunate^ that
now it seemed as if Emma could not safely have attached
herself to any other creature, and that she had herself been
the stupidest of bemgs in not having thought of it, and wished
it long ago. How very few of those men in a rank of life to
address Emma would have renounced their own home for
Hart£eld I And who but Mr. Knightley could know and
bear with Mr. Woodhouse, so as to make such an arrange-
ment desirable I The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr.
Woodhouse had been always fdt in her husband's plans and
her own, for a marri^e between Frank and i & nma. Hov
to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had been a
continual impediment— leas acknowledged by MrWesbm
than by heisdf— but even he had never been aUe to finish
the subject better than by saying, —'Those matters will take
care of themselves; the young people will find a way.'But
here there was nothing to be shifted off in a wild speculation
on the future. It was all right, all open, all equaL No
sacrifice im any side worth the name. It was a union of the
highest promise of felicity in itself, and without one real, rai
tional diRicnlty to oppose or delay it
KiB. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in
such reflections as these, was one of the happiest women in
the world. If any thing could increase hei delight, it was
perc«ving that the baby would soon have ou^^wn its first
set of caps.
The news was universally a surprise wherei'er it spread ;
and Mr. Weston had his five minutes'share of it ; but five
minutes were enough to & miliarise the idea to his quickness
of mind. He saw the advantages of the match, and rejoiced
in them with all the constancy of his wife; but the wonder
by Google
of it was veijr soon nothing; and by the en^ of nn hour he
tna not far from believing that he had always foreseen it
* It is to be a secret^ I conclude,'said he. * These matteis
are always a secret, till It is found out that every body knows
them. Only let me be told when I may speak out I won-
der whether Jane has any suspicion,'
He went to Highbury the next momii^ and satisfied hint
self on that point He told hei the news. Was not she
like a daughter, his eldest daughter) — he must tell her; and
Miss Bates being present, it passed, of course, to Mis. Cole,
Mis. Feny.and Mrs. Elton, uniaediately ofterwarda. Itwaa
no more than the principals were prqiared forj they had
calculated from the time of its being ki;own at Randalls, how
soon it would be over Highbury; qnd were thinking of
themselves, as the evening wonder in many i ftunily cmi^
with great sagacity.
In general, it was a very well apprtwed match. Some
mi^t think him, and others might think her, the most in
luck. One set might recommend their all removing to Don-
weU, and leaving Hartfield for the John £nightleys; and
another might predict disagreements among their serv^ts;
but ye^ upon the whole, there was no serious objection
raised, except in one habitation'— the vicarage. There, the
surprise was not softened by any satisfaction. Mr. Elton
cared little about it, compared viih his wife; he only hoped
'the young lady's pride would now be contented;'and sup-
posed'she had always meant to catch Knighdey if she contdi*
and, on the point of living at Hartfield, could daringly ex-
claim, < Rather he than II'But Mrs. Elton was very much
discomposed indeed.'Poor Enightley ! poor fallow | — sad
business for him. She was extremely concerned ; for, diough
veiy eccentric, he had a thousand good qualities. How
could he be so taken inl Did not think him at all in love
— not in the least Poor Knightleyl There would be an
end ol all pleasant intercourse with him. How happy he
had been to come and dine with them whenever they asked
him I Bat that would be all over now. Poor fellow I Nq
more exploring parties to Donwell made for^n-. Oh no;
there would be a Mrs. Knightley to throw- cold water on
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gk'
4o€ Emma.
every thing. Extremely disagreeablel But she was not at
all Sony that she had abused the housekeeper the oth» day.
Shocking plan, living together. It would never do. She
knew a family near Maple Grove who had tiied it, and been
obliged to separate before the end < 3i the Gist quarter.'
CHAPTER XVIII.
TiuB passed on. A lew more to-mormws, and the party
frnm London would be arriving; It was an alarming change;
and Emma was thinking of it one moming as what must
biing a great deal to agitate and grieve her, when Mr. Knight-
ley came in, and distressing thoughts were put by. After the
first chat of pleasure, he was alent; and then, in a graver
lone, b^an with, —
'I have something to tell yon, Emma; some news.'
'Good or bad I'said she, quickly, looking up in his & c &
'I do not know which it ought to be called.'
'Oh, good, I am sure. I see it in your countenance.
Vou are tryjngnot to smita'
* I am i^raid,'said he, composing his features,'I am very
much afraid, my dear Emma, that you will not smile when
you hear it'
'Indeed! but why sot — ^I can hardly imagine that any
thing which pleases or amuses yon should not please and
amuse me too.'
'There is one subject,'he replied,'I hope but one, on
which we do not think alike. He paused a moment again
smiling, with his eyes fixed on her face.'Does nothing
occur to you 1 Do not you recollect? Harriet Smith.'
Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of
something, though she knew not what
'Have you heanl from her yourself this momingi'cried
he.'You have, I believe, and know the whole.'
'No, I have not: I know nothing; pray tell me.'
i,,,.f:ibyGoOgle
'You are prepared for the wont, I see ; and very bad it
is. Hairiet Smith tnanies Robert Martin.'
Emma gave a start, irfiich did not seem like being pre-
pared; and her eyes, in eager gaie, said,'No, this is impos-
sible I'but her lips were dosed.
'It is so, indeed I'continued lilr. Knightley ;'I have it
from Robert Martin himself He left me not half an hout
ago.'
She was still looking at him with the most speaking
'Yon like i^ my Emma, as little as I feared — I wish our
OfHUions w^e the same; But in time the^ wilL Time, you
may be very mn, will make one or the other of us tlUnk
differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need not talk mudk
oo the subject'
'You mistake m^ you quite mistake mc^* she replied,
exerting hersell'It is not tliat such a circumstance would
now make me unhappy, but I cannot beUeve it It seems
an impossibility I You cannot mean to say, that Harriet
Smith has accepted Robert Martin. You cannot mean that
he has even proposed to her again — ^yet Vou only mean,
that he intends it'
'I mean that be has done it,'answered Mr. Knightley,
with smiling but detennined dedsioo,'and been accepted.'
'Good God I'she cried.'Weill'— Then having recourse
to her work-basket, in excuse for leaning down her face, and
concealing all the exquisite feelings of delight and entertain-
ment which she knew ^e must be expressing, she added,
'Well, now tell me everything; make this intelligible tome.
How, where, when I Let me know it aU. I never was more
Burprised — ^but it does not make me unhappy, I assure you.
How — ^how has it been possiblel'
'It is a veiy simple story. He went to town on business
three days ago, and I got him to take charge of some papers
which I was wanting to send to John. He delivered these
papers to John, at his chambers, and was asked by him to
join their pat^ the same evening to Astle/s. They were
going to take die two eldest boys to Astle/s. The party
was to be our brother and sister, Henry, John , and Miss
SmiUk My fiiend Robert could not resist. They called
byGoogle
4o8 Emma.
for him in their way; were & 1I extremely amused ; and my
brother asked htm to dine with them U)e next day, vrhicJi
he did, and in the coui« of that visit (as I undn^tand) he
fband an opportunity of speaking to Haniet ; and cettainly
did not speak in vain. She made him, l^ her acceptance, as
happy even as he is deseiviog. He came down l^ yestenlay's
coach, and was with me Has montmg, immediately after
break & st, to report his proceedings, first on my affairs, and
then on his own. This is all that I can relate of the hoir,
where, and when. Yom: fiiend Harriet will make a much
longer history wiien you see her. She will give you aD the
minute particulars, which only woman's language can make
interesting. In our communications we deal only in the
greaL Howew, I must say, that Robert Martin's heart
seemed for Aim, and to me, very overflowing; and that he
did mention, without its being much to the purpose, dtat on
quitting their box at Astley's, my brother took charge of Mta,
John Knightley and little John, and he iidlowed, with Miss
Smith and Henry ; and that at one time they were in such a
crowd, as to make Miss & nith rather uneasy.'
He stopped. Eknma dared not attempt any immediate
reply. To speak, she was sure would be to betray a most
unreasonable degree of bapfwiess. She must wait a moment,
or he would think her mad. Her silence disturbed him;
and after observing her a little while, he added, —
'£jmna, my love, you said that this circumstance would
not now make you unhappy; but I am afraid it gives you
more pain than you expected. His situation is an evil; but
you must consider it as what satisfies your friend : and I will
answer for your thinking better and better of him as yoa
know him more : his good sense and good principles would
delight you. As far as the man is concerned, you could not
wish your fiiend in better hands. His rank in society I would
alter if I could ; which is saying a great deal, I assure you,
Emma. You laugh at me about William Ladcins; but I
could quite as ill spare Robert Martin.*
He wanted her to look up and smile; and ha^ng now
brought heiself not to smile too broadly, she did, cheeifhlly
answering, —
'You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to ttie
,M.f:i by Google
Enmia. 409
mittch. I think Hairiet is doing atremdy weU. fftr con-
necdoiisiiutybeworaethaa^: in respectability of chaiacter,
there can be no doubt that they are. I have been silent
from soTpiise merely, excessive suiprise. You cannot ima-
gine how suddenly it has come on me I how peculiarly
unprepared I was I for I had reason to believe her veiy lately
more detennined against him, much more than she was
before.'
* You ought to know your fiiend best,'replied U > . Knight-
ley;'but I should say she was a good-tempered, soft-heuted
girl, not likely to be veiy, very detennined against any young
man who told her he loved her.'
Emma could not help lau^iing as she answered, * Upon
my word, I believe yon know her quite as well as I do. But,
Mr. Knightley, are you perEectly sure that she has absolutely
and dovnri^t atc^ted him 1 I could suppose she mi^t in
time, but can she already! Did not you misunderstand him f
Vou were both talking of other things; of business, shows of
cattle, or new drills ; and might not you, in the confiision of
so many subjects, mistake himt It was not Hairief s hand
that he was certain of— it was the dimensions of some famous
ox.'
The contrast between tiie countenance and air of Mr.
Knig^dey and Robert Martin was, at tlus moment, so strong
to Emma's Eeelings, and so strong was the recollection of
all that had so recently passed on Hairief s side, so fresh
the sound of those words spoken with such empba^s,'No,
I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin,'that
she was really ezpecdDg the intelligence to prove, in some
measure premature. It could not be otherwise.
*Do you daie say this 1'cried Mr. Knightley.'Dojmn
dare to suppose me so great a blockhead, as not to know
what a man is talking oft What do you deserve 1'
'Oh 1 I always deserve the best treatment, because I
never put up witii any other ; and, therefore, you must give
me a plain, direct answer. Are you quite sure that you un-
derstand the terms on which Mr. Martin and Haniet now
arel'
'I am quite sure,'he replied, speaking very distinctly,
'diat he told me she had accepted him ; and that there
L,,,.P:ibyGoOgle
410 £mma.
was DO obscurity, nothing doubtful, in the words he used;
and I diink I can give you a proof that it must be so. He
asked mj opinion as to what he waa now to da He knew
of no one but Mts. Goddard to whom he could appiy for
infonnation of her relations or iiiends. Could I mention any
thing more fit to be done, than to go to Mrs. Goddard 1 I
asstued him that I could not Then, he said, he would en-
deavour to see her in the course of this day.
'I am perfectly satisfied,'leplied Emma, with die tnight-
est smiley'and most sincerely wish them happy.'
'You aie materially changed since we talked < m this sab-
ject before.'
'I hope so — for at that time I was a fooL'
'And I am changed also ; for I am now veiy willing to
grant you all Hairiet'a good qualities. I have takoi some
pains f < » your sake, and for Robert Martin's sake (lAom I
have always had leason to believe as much in love with hec
as ever),to get acqusunted with her. I have (rften talked to
her a good deal Vou must have seen that I did. Some-
times, indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me
of pleading poor Martin's cause, which was never the case ;
but, Irom all my observadoos, I am convinced of her being
an artless, amiable giri, with veiy good notions, veiy seriously
good principles, and placing her happiness in the affectiona
and utility of domestic life. Much of this, I have no doubt,
she may thank you for.'
'Me!'cried Emma, shaking her head'Ah, pooi Harriet I*
She checked herself, however, and submitted quiet^ to a
little more praise than she deserved.
Their conversation was soon afterwards dosed by the en-
trance of her father. She was not sony. She wanted to be
alone. Her mind was in a state of flutter and wonder,
which made it impossible for her to be collected. She was
in dandng, singing, exclaiming spirits ; and till she had
moved about and talked to herseli^ and laughed and re-
flected, she could be fit for nothing rational.
Her father's business was to announce James's bdng gone
out to put the horses to, preparatory to their now daily
drive to Randalls ; and she had, therefore, an immediate
excuse for disappearing.
by Google
The joy, tbe gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensa-
tions may be imagined. The sole grievance and alloy thus
removed in the prospect of Haiiiet's welfare, she was leaJly
in danger of becoming too happy for security. What had
she to wish for 1 Nothing, but to grow more woithy of him
whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to
her own. Nothing, but that the lessons of her past folly
might teach her humility and circtmispection in future.
Serious she was, very serious, in her thankfulness and in
her resolutions ; and yet there was no preventing a laugh,
sometimes in the very midst of tbcrau She must laugh at
such a clos»~8uch an end of the dolefiil disappointment of
five weeks back — such a heart — such a Harriet !
Now there would be pleasure in her returning ; eveiy
thing would be a pleasure : it would be a great pleasure to
know Robert Martin.
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities
was the reflection that all necessity of concealment from
Mr. Knightley would soon be over. The disguise, equivo-
cation, mystery, so hatcAil to her to practise, might soon be
over. She could now look forward to giving him that full
and perfect confidence which her disposition was most
-ready to welcome as a duty.
In the gayest and happiest spirits, she set forward with
her father, not always listening, but always agreeing, to
what he said i and, whether in speech or silence, conniving
at the comfortable persuasion of his being obliged to go to
Randalls every day, oi poor Hrs. Weston would be disap-
pointed.
They airived. Mrs. Weston was alone in the drawing-
room. But hardly had they been told of die baby, and Mr.
Woodhouse received the thanks for coming, which he asked
for, when a glimpse was caught throu^ the blind of two
figures passing near the window.
'It is Frank and Miss Fairfax,'said Mrs. Weston.'I
was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprise in seeing
him arrive this morning. He stays till to-morrow, and Miss
Fair & x has been persuaded to spend the day with us. They
are coming in, I hope.'
In half a minute they were in the room. Emma was
iM,..dbyG00gle
4 "

extremely glad to see him ; but there was a degiee of con-
fusion, a number of cmbarrassiDg recollections, on each dd &
They met icadUy and smiling, but with a consciousness
which at first allowed little to be said ; and having all sat
down again, there was for some time such a blank in the
.aide that Emma began to doubt whether tiie wish now in-
dulged, which she had long felt, of seeing Flank Churchill
once more, and of seeing bimwith Jane^ would yield its
proportion of pleasure. When Mr. Weston joined the party,
however, and when the baby was fetched, there was no
longer a want of snbject or animation, M of couiage and
opportuniqr for Frank Churdiill to draw neat her and say, —
'I hare to thank you. Miss Woodhouse, fcs a very kind,
forgiving message, in one of Mrs. Weston's letters, I hope
time has not made yon less willing to pardon : 1 hope ycu
do not retract what you then said.'
'No, indeed,'cried Emma, most happy to b^in ;'not in
the least I am paiticularly glad to see and shake hands
with you, and to give you joy in person.'
He thanked her with all his heart, and contbned some time
to speak with serious feehng of his gratitude and happiness.
'Is not she looking well 1'said he, turning his eyes towards
Jane, — * better than she ever used to do t You see how my
lather and Mrs. Weston doat upon her.'
But his spirits were soon li^ng again ; and, with laughing
eyes, after mentioning the expected return of the Campbell^
he named the name of Dixon. & nroa blushed, tuod forbade
its being pronounced in her hearing. -
'I can nem think of it^'she cried,'without extreme
* The shame,'he answered,'is all mine, or ought to be.
But is it possible that you had no suspicion I I mean of late:
early, I luiow, you bad none.'
'I never had the smallest, I assure you.'
'That appears quite wonderfuL I was once very near,
— and I wish I had ; it would have been better. But
though I was always doing wrong things, they were very
hui wrong things, and such as did me no service; It would
have been a much better transgression, had I broken the
braid of secrecy and told you every thing.
byGOOgIC
Emma. 413
.'It is now not worth a legiet,'said Emma.
'I have Gome hope,'resumed he,'of my ancle's being
persuaded to pay a visit at Randalla ; he wants to be in-
troduced to her. When the Campbells are letnrned, we
■hall meet them in London, and continue Qit^s, I tnist, till
we may cany her northward ; but now, I am at such a dis-
tance from her — is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse t Till this
moming, we have not once met since the day of reconcilia-
tion. Do not you pity me 1'
Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that, vrith a sudden
accession of gay thought, he cried, —
'Ah ! by the by,'— then sinking his voice, and looking de-
mure for the moment, —'I hope Mr Knightley is miW
He paused. She coloured and laughed.'I know you
saw my letter, and think you may remember my wish in
your fiivour. Let me return youi congratulations. I assure
you that I have heard the news with the warmest interest
and sadsiacdon. He is a man whom I cannot presume to
praise.'
Enuna was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in
Che same s^le ; but his mind was the next moment in his
own concerns and with his own Jane, and his next words
were, —
'Did you ever see such a skin f such smoothness, such
delicacy, and yet without being actually fair. One cannot
call her fm. It is a most uncommon complexion, with
her dark eyelashes and hair — a most distinguishing com-
plexion 1 So peculiady the lady in it Just colour enough
for beauty.'
'I have always admired her complexion,'replied Emma,
archly ;'but do not I remember the time when you found
& ult with her for being so. pale t When we first began to
talk of her. Have you quite forgotten t'
'Oh no ! — what an impudent dog I was I — ^how could I
But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma
could not help saying, —
'I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at
that time, you had very great amusement in tricking us alt.
I am sure you had. I am sure it was a consolation to you.'
,,,_KibyGoogle
414 Emma.
'Oh DO, no, no! — how can you snspect me of inch a
thing ! I vas the most miserable wretch.'
'Not quite so miserable as to be inscn^ble to miith. I
am sure it was a source of high entertainment to yon, to
feel that you were taking us oU in. Perhaps I am tiie rea-
dier to suspect, because, to tell you die tiulh, I think it
might have been some amusement to myself in the same
situation. I think there is a little likeness between us.'
He bowed.
'If not in our dispositions,'she presently added, widi a
look of true sensibility,'there is a likeness in our destiny ;
the destiny which bids fair to connect us with two characters
so much superior to our own.'
'True, tnie,'he answered, warmly.'No, not true on
your side. You can have no superior, but most true on
mine. She is a complete angeL Look at her. Is not
she an angel in every gesture t Observe the turn of her
throat Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my
father. You will be glad to hear (inclining his head, and
whispering seriously) that my uncle means to give her all my
aunt's jewels. They are to be new set I am resolved
to have some in an ornament for the head. Will not it be
beautiflil in her dark hail V
'Very beautiful, indeed,'replied Emma ; and she spoke
so kindly, that he giatefilly burst out, —
'How delighted I am to see you again 1 and to see yon
in such excellent looks I I would not have missed this
meeting for the world. I should certainly have called at
Hartfield had you failed to come,'
The others had been talking of the child, Mrs. Weston
giving an account of a little alarm she had been under the
evening before, from the infant's appearing not quite well
She bcheved she had been foolish, but it had alanned her,
and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr.
Peny. Perhaps she ought to be ashamed, but Mr. Weston
had been almost as uneasy as hersel£ In ten minutes, how-
ever, the child had been perfectly well again. This was her
history ; and particularly interesting it was to Mr, Woodhouse,
who commended her very much for thinking of sending for
Peiry, and only regretted that she had not done it'She
u,., ■,:.:! by Google
should always seod for Ferry, if the child appeared in the
slightest degree disordered, were it only for a moment. She
could not be too soon alarmed, nor send for Ferry too often.
Itwas a pity, peihaps, that he had not come last night ; for,
though the child seemed wdl nonr, very well considering, it
would probably have been better if Feny had seen it'
Frank Churchill caught the name.
'Perry I'said he to Emma, and trymg, as he spoke, to
catch Miss Fsdrfax's eye.'My friend Mr. Perry I What
are they saying about Mr. Ferry I Has he been here this
morning I And how does he travel now t Has he set up
hiscaniagel'
Emma soon recollected, and onderstood him ; and while
she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane's coun-
tenance that she too was really hearing him, though trying
to seem deaf.
'Suchanextraordinary dream of mine!'hecried.'lean
never think of it without laughing. She hears us, she hears
us, Miss Woodhouse. I see it in her cheek, her smile, her
vain attempt to frown. Look at her. Do not you see that,
at this instant, the very passage of her own letter, which sent
me the report, is passing under her eye ; that the whole
blunder is spread before her; that she can attend to nothing
else, though pretending to listen to the others 1'
Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment ; and
the smile partly remained as she turned towards him, and
said in a conscious, low, yet steady voice, —
'How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to
me I They n < ^ sometimes obtrude: but how can yoa court
themt'
He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertain
ingly; but Emma's feelings were chiefly with Jane in the
argument ; and on leaving Randalls, and falling naturally
into a comparison of the two men, she felt, that pleased as
she had been to see Frank Churchill, and really regarding
him as she did with friendship, she had never been more
sensible of Mr. Knightley's high superiority of character.
The happiness of this most happy day received its comple-
tion in die animated contemplation of his worth which this
comparison produced
by Google
CHAPTER XIX.
Ip Emma had stQl, at intervals, an anxiotis feeling for Harriet,
a noraentaiy doubt of its being passible for her to be really
cured of liei attachment to Mr. Knightley, and really able
to accept another man from unbiassed indimitioii, it was cot
long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any such
uncertainty. A very few days brought the party from Lon-
don ; and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one
hour alone with Harriet, than she became pofectly satisfied,
unaccountable as it was, that Robert Maitin bad diorougfaly
supplanted Mr. Knightley, and was now forming all her views
of happiness.
Harriet was a little distressed — did Ux > k a litde foolish at
first; but having once owned that she had been presump-
tuous and silly, and self-deceived, before, her pain and confu-
sion seemed to die away with the words, and leave her with-
out a care for the past, and with the fiillest exultation in the
present and future ; for, as to her friend's approbation, Emma
had instantly removed every fear of that nature, by meeting
h( r with the most unquali^ed congratulations. Harriet was
most happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley's,
and the dinner the next day; she could dwell on it all with
the utmost delight But what did such particulars explain 1
llie fact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that Harriet
had always liked Robert Martin ; and that his continuing to
love her had been irresistible. Beyond this, it most ever be
unintelligible to Emma.
The event, however, was most joyftil; and every day was
giving her fresh reason for thinking so. Harriet's parentage
became known. She proved to be the daughter of a trades-
man, rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance
whidi had ever been hers, and decent enough to have always
wished for concealment. Such was the blood of gentility
which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for 1 It
was likely to be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of
many a gentleman ; but what a connection had she been
by Google
Emma.
417
prepamig for Mi. Knightley, 01 for the Cbnrchills, or even
for Mr. Elton 1 The stain of iUegitiniacf, unbleached by
nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.
No objection was raised on the father's side; theyoung
man was treated liberally j it was all as it ehould be : and
as Emma became acquainted with Robert Maitin, who was
now introduced at Haitfield, she fully acknowledged in hint
all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid
Mrest for her little friend. She had no doubt of Harriet's
happiness with any good-tempered man ; but with him, and
in the home he offered, there would be die hope of more, of
security, stability, and improvement She would be placed
in the midst of those who loved her, and who had better
sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and occupied
enough lor cheeiiiilness. She would never be led into
temptation, nor left for it to Sod her out She would be
respectable and happy ; and Emma admitted her to be the
luckiest creature in tiie world, to have created so steady and
persevering an affection in such a man ; or, if not quite the
luckiest, to yield only to herself.
Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with
the Martins, was less and less at Haitfield, which wag not to
be regretted. The intimat^ between her and Emma must
sink ; their friendship must change into a calmet sort of
good-will i and, fortunately, what ought to be, and must be,
seemed already beginning, and in the most gpradual, natural
Before die end of September, Emma attended Harriet to
church, and taw her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with
so complete a satisfaction, as no remembrances, even con-
nected with Mr. Elton as he stood before them, could im-
pair. Perhaps, indeed, at that time, she scarcely saw Mr.
Elton, but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar
might next fall on hetself. Robert Maitin and Harriet
Smith, the latest couple engaged of the three, were die first
to be married.
Jane Fair & x had already quitted Highbury, and was
restored to the comforts of her beloved home widi die
Campbells. The Mr. Churchills were also in town ; and
they were only waiting for November.
L.,.nzP:lbyG00gle
The intennediate month was the one fixed on, as & r aa
thty dared, by Emma and Mr. Knlghtley. They had de-
termined that their mairiage ought to be conduded while
John and lubella were still at Haitfield, to allow them the
fortnight* B absence in a tour to the sea-Bide, which was the
plan. John and Isabella, and eveiy other fiiend, were
agreed in approving it But Mr. Woodhouse — how was
Mr. Woodhouse to be induced to consent I — he, who had
never yet alluded to dieir marriage but as a distant event
When first sounded on tlie subject, he was so miserable,
that they were almost hopeless. A second allusion, indeed,
gave less pain. He bc^an to think it was to be, and that he
could not prevent it — a veiy promising step of the mind on
its way to resignation. Still, however, be was not happy.
Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his danghto's
courage & Ued. She could not bear to see him suffering to
know him fimcying himself n^lected; and thon^ her
understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both
the Mr. Knighdeys, that when once the event were over, his
distress would be soon over too, she hesitated — she could
not proceed.
In this state of suspense, they were befriended, not by
any sudden illumination of Mr. Woodhouse's mind, or any
wonderful change of his nervous system, but I^ the opera-
tion of the same system in another way. Mra. Weston's
poultry-house was robbed one nig^t of all her turkeys,—
evidendy by die ingenuity of man. Other poultry-yards in
the ne^bourhood also suffered. Pilfering was Jbuse-
breaki^ to Mr. Woodhouse's fears. He was very uneasy ;
and but for the sense of his son-in-law's protection, would
have been under wretched alarm every night of his life.
The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of the Mr.
Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. While
either of them protected him and his, Hartfield was safe.
But Mr. John Knightley must be in London again by the
end of the first week in November.
The result of this distress was, that, with a much more
voluntary, cheerful consent, than his daughter bad ever
presum^l to hope for at the moment, she was able to fix
her wedding-day ; and Mr. Elton was called on, within a
by Google
month bam tbe maiiiage of Mr. and Mm Robert Mardn,
to join & e hands of Mr. Knightle^ and Miss Woodhonse.
The wedding was very much lU:e other weddings, where
the patties have no taste for fineiy or parade; and Mrs.
Elton, & om the particulars detailed by her husband, thought
it all extremely shabby, and veiy Inferior to her own.
'Veiy Uttle white satin, very few lace veils ; a most pitiful
bosiness I Selina would stare when she heard of it'But,
in spite of Aese defidendes, the wishes, the hcqjes, the con <
fidoice, the predictions of the small band of true Mends who
witnessed flie ceremony, were fijlly answered in the perfect
happiness of the union.

,,,_f:ibyGoogk'
v^
b, Google
b, Google
b, Google
I
I.Google
b, Google
