
:!i^i

■o
■CD
CO
HANDBOUND
AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2010 with funding from
University of Toronto
http://www.archive.org/details/emmaaustenOOaust
i's ^^

'^l
i EDITOR'S NOTE
Originally dedicated to the Prince Regent. During
I the composition of this novel, Miss Austen remarked
that she was " going to take a heroine whom no one
I but myself will much like, " while she afterwards
: disclosed to her friends that Mr. Woodhouse " survived
his daughter's marriage, and kept her and Mr.
Knightley from settling at Donwell about two years. "
,She also explained that " the letters placed by Frank
Churchill before Jane Fairfax, which she swept away
{ unread, contained the word'pardon.'"
I R. Brimley Johnson.
Pride and Prejudice, written between October, 1796, and
August, 1797, first published in 1813, and a second edition
the same year, third edition 181 7 ; Sense and Sensibility,
written in its present form between November, 1797, and
1798, though a portion was extracted from an earlier manu-
script, in the form of letters, entitled " Elinor and Marianne, "
first published in 181 1, second edition 1813 ; Northanger
Abbey, written during 179S, and first published in 1818;
Mansfield Park, written between 181 1 and 1814, and first
I published in 1814 ; second edition in 1816 ; Emma, written
between 1811 and 1816, and first published in 1816;
viii Editor's Note
Persuasion, written between 1811 and 1816, and first pub-
lished in 18 18. In this edition the novels are printed from
the last editions revised by the author, certain obvious mis-
prints, some of which do not occur in the earlier editions,
being corrected. All such corrections are indicated by the
words being enclosed in square brackets.

EMMA.
Cljapter %
EMMA WOODHOUSE, handsome, clever, and
rich, with a comfortable home and happy dis-
position, seemed to unite some of the best bless-
ings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty-one
years in the world with very little to distress or vex
her.
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most
affectionate, indulgent father ; and had, in consequence
of her sister's marriage, been mistress of his house from
a very early period. Her mother had died too long
ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance
of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an
excellent woman as governess, who had fallen litde
short of a mother in affection.
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr Wood-
house's family, less as a governess than a friend, very fond
of both daughters, but particulady of Emma. Between
them it was more the intimacy of sisters. Even before
Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of
governess, the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed
her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of autho-
rity being now long passed away, they had been living
together as friend and fiiend very mutually attached.
/
2 Emma
and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming
Miss Taylor's judgment, but directed chiefly by her
own.
The real evils, indeed, of Emma's situation were the
power of having rather too much her own way, and a
disposition. to think a little too well of herself: these
were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her
many enjoyments. The danger, however, was at present
so unperceived, that they did not by any means rank as
misfortunes with her.
Sorrow came — a gentle sorrow — but not at all in the
shape of any disagreeable consciousness. Miss Taylor
married. It was Miss Taylor's loss which first brought
grief. It was on the wedding day of this beloved friend
that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any con-
tinuance. The wedding over, and the bride people
gone, her father and herself were left to dine together,
with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening.
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner, as
usual, and she had then only to sit and think of what
she had lost.
The event had every promise of happiness for her
friend. Mr Weston was a man of unexceptionable
character, easy fortune, suitable age, and pleasant
manners ; and there was some satisfaction in consider-
ing with what self-denying, generous friendship she had
always wished and promoted the match ; but it was
a black morning's work for her. The want of Miss
Taylor would be felt every hour of every day. She
recalled her past kindness — the kindness, the affection
of sixteen years — how she had taught and how she had
played with her from five years old — how she had de-
voted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health
— and how nursed her through the various illnesses
of childhood. A large debt of gratitude was owing
here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years, the
Emma 3
equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon
followed Isabella's marriage, on their being left to each
other, was yet a dearer, tenderer recollection. It had
been a friend and companion such as few possessed :
intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all
the ways of the family, interested in all its concerns,
and peculiarly interested in herself, in every pleasure,
every scheme of hers ; — one to whom she could speak
every thought as it arose, and who had such an affection
for her as could never find fault.
How was she to bea the change ? It was true that
her friend was going only half a mile from them ; but
Emma was aware that great must be the difference
between a Mrs Weston, only half a mile from them,
and a Miss Taylor in the house ; and with all her
advantages, natural and domestic, she was now in great
danger of suffering from intellectual solitude. She
dearly loved her father, but he was no companion for
her. He could not meet her in conversation, rational
or playful.
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and
Mr Woodhouse had not married early) was much in-
creased by his constitution and habits ; for having been
a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind
or body, he was a much older man in ways than in
years ; and though everywhere beloved for the friendli-
ness of his heart and his amiable temper, his talents
could not have recommended him at any time.
Her sister, though comparatively but little removed
by matrimony, being settled in London, only sixteen
miles off, was much beyond her daily reach ; and many
a long October and November evening must be struggled
through at Hartfield, before CiTristmas brought the next
visit from Isabella and her husband, and their little
children, to fill the house, and give her pleasant society
again.
4 Emma
Highbury, the large and populous village almost
amounting to a town, to which Hartfield, in spite of its
separate lawn, and shrubberies, and name, did really
belong, afforded her no equals. The Woodhouses were
first in consequence there. All looked up to them.
She had many acquaintance in the place, for her father
was universally civil, but not one among them who could
be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even half a day. It
was a melancholy change ; and Emma could not but
sigh over it, and wish tor impossible things, till her
father awoke, and made it necessary to be cheerful.
His spirits required support. He was a nervous man,
easily depressed ; fond of everybody that he was used
to, and hating to part with them ; hating change of
every kind. Matrimony, as the origin of change, was
always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet re-
conciled to his own daughter's marrying, nor could
ever speak of her but with compassion, though it had
been entirely a match of affection, when he was now
obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his
habits of gentle selfishness, and of being never able to
suppose that other people could feel differently from him-
self, he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor
had done as sad a thing for herself as for them, and
would have been a great deal happier if she had spent
all the rest of her life at Hartfield. Emma smiled and
chatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from
such thoughts ; but when tea came, it was impossible
for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner —
" Poor Miss Taylor! — I wish she were here again.
What a pity it is that Mr Weston ever thought of
her ! "
*'I cannot agree with you, papa ; you know I can-
not. Mr Weston is such a good-humoured, pleasant,
excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a good
wife ; and you would not have had Miss Taylor live
Emma 5
with us for ever, and bear all my odd humours, when
she might have a house of her own ? "
" A house of her own ! — but where is the advantage
of a house of her own ? This is three times as large ;
— and you have never any odd humours, my dear. "
" How often we shall be going to see them, and
they coming to see us ! — We shall be always meeting !
We must begin ; we must go and pay our wedding-visit
very soon. "
" My dear, how am I to get so far ? Randalls is
such a distance. I could not walk half so far. "
" No, papa ; nobody thought of your walking. We
must go in the carriage, to be sure. "
" The carriage ! But James will not like to put the
horses to for such a little way ; — and where are the
poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ? "
" They are to be put into Mr Weston's stable, papa.
You know we have settled all that already. We talked
it all over with Mr Weston last night. And as for
James, you may be very sure he will always like going
to Randalls, because of his daughter's being housemaid
there. I only doubt whether he will ever take us any-
where else. That was your doing, papa. You got
Hannah that good place. Nobody thought of Hannah
till you mentioned her — James is so obliged to you ! "
" I am veiy glad I did think of her. It was very
lucky, for I would not have had poor James think him-
self slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will
make a very good servant ; she is a civil, pretty-spoken
girl ; I have a great opinion of her. Whenever I see
her, she always curtseys and asks me how I do, in a
very pretty manner ; and when you hape had her here
to do needlework, I observe she always turns the lock
of the door the right way and never bangs it. I am
sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a
great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody
6 Emma
about her that she is used to see. Whenever James
goes over to see liis daughter, you know, she will be
hearing of us. He will be able to tell her how we all
are.
Emma spared no exertions to maintain tliis happier
flow of ideas, and hoped, by the help of backgammon,
to get her father tolerably through the evening, and be
attacked by no regrets but her own. The backgammon-
table was placed ; but a visitor immediately afterwards
walked in and made it unnecessary.
Mr Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-
and-thirty, was not only a very old and intimate friend
of the family, but particularly connected with it, as the
elder brother of Isabella's husband. He lived about a
mile from Highbury, was a frequent visitor, and always
welcome, and at this time more welcome than usual,
as coming directly from their mutual connections in
London. He had returned to a late dinner after some
daj's'absence, and now walked up to Hartfield to say
that all were well in Brunswick Square. It was a
happy circumstance, and animated Mr Woodhouse for
some time. Mr Knightley had a cheerful manner,
which always did him good ; and his many inquiries
after " poor Isabella " and her children were answered
most satisfactorily. When this was over, Mr Wood-
house gratefully observed —
" It is very kind of you, Mr Knightley, to come out
at this late hour to call upon us. I am afraid you must
have had a shocking walk. "
" Not at all, sir. It is a beautiful moonlight night ;
and so mild that I must draw back from your great
fire. "
" But you must have found it very damp and dirty.
I wish you may not catch cold. "
" Dirty, sir ! Look at my shoes. Not a speck on
them. "
Emma 7
" Well ; i.nat is quite surprizing, for we nave had a
vast deal of rain here. It rained dreadfully hard for
half an hour while we were at breakfast. I wanted
them to put off the wedding. "
" By the bye, I have not wished you joy. Being
pretty well aware of what sort of joy you must both be
feeling, I have been in no hurry with my congratula-
tions ; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. How
did you all behave ? Who cried most ? "
" Ah ! poor Miss Taylor !'tis a sad business. "
" Poor Mr and Miss Woodhouse, if you please ;
but I cannot possibly say < poor Miss Taylor.'I have
a great regard for you and Emma ; but when it comes
to the question of dependence or independence ! — at
any rate, it must be better to have only one to please
than two. "
" Especially when one of those two is such a fanciful,
troublesome creature ! " said Emma playfully. " That
is what you have in your head, 1 know — and what you
would certainly say if my father were not by. "
" I believe it is veiy true, my dear, indeed, " said Mr
Woodhouse, with a sigh. " I am afraid I am some-
times very fanciful and troublesome. "
" My dearest papa ! You do not think I could
mean you, or suppose Mr Knightley to mean you.
What a horrible idea ! Oh, no ! I meant only myself.
Mr Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know —
in a joke — it is all a joke. We always say what we
like to one another. "
Mr Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people
who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse, and the
only one who ever told her of them ; and though this
was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself, she
knew it would be so much less so to her father, that
she would not have him really suspect such a circum-
stance as her not being thought perfect by everybody.
8 Emma
" Emma knows I never flatter her, " said Mr
Kniglitley, " but I meant no reflection on anybody.
Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons to
please; she will now have but one. The chances are
that she must be a gainer. "
" Well, " said Emma, willing to let it pass, " you
want to hear about the wedding ; and I shall be happy
to tell you, for we all behaved charmingly. Everybody
was punctual, everybody in their best looks : not a tear,
and hardly a long face to be seen. Oh, no ; we all felt
that we were going to be only half a mile apart, and
were sure of meeting every day. "
" Dear Emma bears everything so well, " said her
father. " But, Mr Knightley, she is really very sorry
to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I am sure she ivill miss
her more than she thinks for. "
Emma turned away her head, divided between tears
and smiles.
" It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a
companion, " said Mr Knightley. " We should not
like her so well as we do, sir, if we could suppose it :
but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Tay-
lor's advantage ; she knows how very acceptable it
must be, at Miss Taylor's time of life, to be settled in
a home of her own, and how important to hsr to be
secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot
allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure. Eveiy
friend of Miss Taylor must be glad to have her so
happily married. "
" And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me, "
said Emma, " and a very considerable one — that I made
die match myself. I made the match, you know, four
years ago ; and to have it take place, and be proved in
the right, when so many people said Mr Weston would
never marry again, may comfort me for anything. "
Mr Knightley shook his head at her. Her father
Emma 9
fondly replied, " Ah ! my dear, I wish you would not
make matches and foretel things, for whatever you say
always comes to pass. Pray do not make any more
matches. "
" I promise you to make none for myself, papa ; but
I must, indeed, for other people. It is the greatest
amusement in the world ! And after such success, you
know ! Everybody said that Mr Weston would never
marry again. Oh dear, no ! Mr Weston, who had
been a widower so long, and who seemed so perfectly
comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied
either in his business in town or among his friends here,
always acceptable wherever he went, always cheerful —
Mr Weston need not spend a single evening in the year
alone if he did not like it. Oh no ! Mr Weston cer-
tainly would never marry again. Some people even
talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed, and
others of the son and the uncle not letting him. AU
manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject,
but I believed none of it. Ever since the day (about
four years ago) that Miss Taylor and I met with him
in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to mizzle,
he darted away with so much gallantry, and borrowed
two umbrellas for us from Farmer Mitchell's, I made
up my mind on the subject. I planned the match from
that hour ; and when such success has blessed me in
this instance, dear papa, you cannot think that I shall
leave off matchmaking. "
" I do not understand what you mean by • success,'"
said Mr Knightley. " Success supposes endeavour.
Your time has been properly and delicately spent, if
you have been endeavouring for the last four years to
bring about this marriage. A worthy employment for
a young lady's mind ! but if, which I rather imagine,
your making the match, as you call it, means only your
planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, • I
lo Emma
think it would be a vci*y good thing for Miss Taylor if
Mr Weston were to marry her,* and saying it again to
yourself every now and then afterwards — why do you
talk of success ? where is your merit ? What are you
proud of? You made a lucky guess ; and that is all
that can be said. "
" And have you never known the pleasure and
triumph of a lucky guess ? I pity you. I thought you
cleverer ; for, depend upon it, a lucky guess is never
merely luck. There is always some talent in it. And
as to my poor word'success,'which you quarrel with,
I do not know that I am so entirely without any claim
to it. You have drawn two pretty pictures ; but I
think there may be a third — a something between the
do-nothing and the do-all. If I had not promoted
Mr Weston's visits here, and given many little en-
couragements, and smoothed many little matters, it
might not have come to anything after all. I think
you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that. "
" A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston,
and a rational, unaffected woman like Miss Taylor,
may be safely left to manage their own concerns.
You are more likely to have done harm to yourself,
tlian good to them, by interference. "
/^'Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good
to others, " rejoined Mr Woodhouse, understanding but
in part. " But, my dear, pray do not make any more
matches ; they are silly things, and break up one's
family circle grievously. "''
\*'Only one more, papa; only for Mr Elton. Poor
Mr Elton ! You like Mr Elton, papa ; I must look
about for a wife for him. There is nobody in High-
bury who deserves him — and he has been here a whole
year, and has fitted up his house so comfortably, that it
would be a shame to have him single any longer ; and I
thought when he was joining their hands to-day, he
Emma ii-^
looked so very much as if he would like to have the
same kind office done for him ! I think very well of
Mr Elton, and this is the only way 1 have of doing him
a service. " t'
f* " Mr Elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure,
and a very good young man, and I have a great regard
for him. But if you want to show him any attention,
my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day.
That will be a much better thing. I dare say Mr
Knightley will be so kind as to meet him. "
" With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time, "
said Mr Knightley, laughing : " and I agree with you
entirely, that it will be a much better thing. Invite him
to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of the fish
and the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife.
Depend upon it, a man of six or seven-and-twenty can
take care of himself. " M
Cl)at)ter HJl*
'\ A^R WESTON was a native of Highbury, and
I y j[ born of a respectable family, which for the last
two or three generations had been rising into
gentility and property. He had received a good educa-
tion, but, on succeeding early in life to a small inde-
pendence, had become indisposed for any of the more
homely pursuits in which his brothers were engaged ;
and had satisfied an active, cheerful mind and social
temper by entering into the militia of his county, then
embodied. //
Captain Weston was a general favourite ; and when
the chances of his military life had introduced him to
Miss Churchill, of a great Yorkshire family, and Miss
Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was surprized,
Ti2 Emma
except her brother and his wife, who had never seen
him, and who were full of pride and importance, which
the connection would offend.
Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the
full command of her fortune — though her fortune bore
no proportion to the family estate — was not to be dis-
suaded from the marriage, and it took place, to the
infinite mortification of Mr and Mrs Churchill, who
threw her off with due decorum. It was an unsuitable
connection, and did not produce much happiness. Mrs
Weston ouglit to have found more in it, for she had a
husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him
think everything due to her in return for the great
goodness of being in love with him ; but though she had
one sort of spirit, she had not the best. She had resolu-
tion enough to pursue her own will in spite of her
brother, but not enough to refrain from unreasonable
regrets at that brother's unreasonable anger, nor from
missing the luxuries of her former home. They lived
beyond their income, but still it was nothing in com-
parison of Enscombe : she did not cease to love her
husband ; but she wanted at once to be the wife of
Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill of Enscombe.
Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially
by the Churchills, as making such an amazing match,
was proved to have much the worst of the bargain ;
for when his wife died, after a three years'marriage,
he was rather a poorer man than at first, and with a
child to maintain. From the expense of the child,
however, he was soon relieved. The boy had, with
the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of
his mother's, been the means of a sort of reconciliation ;
and Mr and Mrs Churchill, having no children of
their own, nor any other young creature of equal
kindred to care for, offered to take the whole charge
of the little Frank soon after her decease. Some
Emma 23
^ xiples and some reluctance the widower-father n
'i supposed to have felt ; but as they were overcon'
by other considerations, the child was given up tc
the care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he had s
only his own comfort to seek, and his own situation to
improve as he could.
A complete change of life became desirable. He
quitted the militia and engaged in trade, having
brothers already established in a good way in London,
which afforded him a favourable opening. It was
a concern which brought just employment enough.
He had still a small house in Highbury, where most
of his leisure days were spent ; and between useful
occupation aud the pleasures of society, the next
eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully
away. lie had, by that time, realized an easy com-
petence — enough to secure the purchase of a little
estate adjoining Highbury, which he had always
longed for — enough to marry a woman as portionless
even as Miss Taylor, and to live according to the
wishes of his own friendly and social disposition.
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had
begun to influence his schemes ; but as it was not the
tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it had not shaken
lu8 determination of never settling till he could pur-
chase Randalls, and the sale of Randalls was long
looked forward to ; but he had gone steadily on, with
these objects in view, till they were accomplished.
He had made his fortune, bought his house, and ob-
tained his wife ; and was beginning a new period
of existence, with every probability of greater happi-
ness than in any yet passed through. He had never
been an unhappy man ; his own temper had secured
him from that, even in his first marriage ; but his
second must show him how delightfiil a well-judging
and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him
^ Emma
ex
j^;- pleasantest proof of its being a great deal bei;*?'" ?
chuse than to be chosen, to excite gratitude than [^ *
eel it.
He had only himself to please in his choice ; his
fortune was his own ; for as to Frank, it was more
than being tacitly brought up as his uncle's heir, it
had become so avowed an adoption as to have him
assume the name of Churchill on coming of age. It
was most unlikely, therefore, that he should ever want
his father's assistance. His father had no apprehension
of it. The aunt was a capricious woman, and governed
her husband entirely ; but it was not in Mr Weston's
nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong
enough to affect one so dear, and, as he believed,
so deservedly dear. He saw his son every year in
London, and was proud of him ; and his fond report
of him as a very fine young man had made Highbury
feel a sort of pride in him too. He was looked on as
sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits
and prospects a kind of common concern.
Mr Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of High-
bury, and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed, though
the compliment was so little returned that he had never
been there in his life. His coming to visit his father
had been often talked of but never achieved.
Now, upon his father's maniage, it was very generally
proposed, as a most proper attention, that the visit
should take place. There was not a dissentient voice
on the subject, either when Mrs Perry drank tea with
Mrs and Miss Bates, or when Mrs and Miss Bates
returned the visit. Now was the time for Mr Frank
Churchill to come among them ; and the hope strength-
ened when it was understood that he had written to his
new mother on the occasion. For a few days, every
morning visit in Highbury included some mention
of the handsome letter Mrs Weston had received.
Emma 23
Cljapter 3JF«
HARRIET SMITH'S intimacy at Hartfield was
soon a settled thing. Quick and decided in
her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, en-
couraging, and telling her to come very often ; and as
their acquaintance increased, so did their satisfaction in
each other. As a walking companion, Emma had very
early foreseen how useful she might find her. In that
respect Mrs Weston's loss had been important. Her
father never went beyond the shrubbery, where two
divisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk,
or his short, as the year varied ; and since Mrs Weston's
marriage her exercise had been too much confined. She
had ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was not
pleasant ; and a Haniet Smith, therefore, one whom she
could summon at any time to a walk, would be a valu-
able addition to her privileges. But in every respect,
as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was
confirmed in all her kind designs.
//Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet,
docile, grateful disposition, was totally free from conceit,
and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked
up to. Her early attachment to herself was very ami-
able ; and her inclination for good company, and power
of appreciating what was elegant and clever, showed
that there was no want of taste, though strength of
understanding must not be expected. // Altogether she
was quite convinced of Harriet Smith's being exactly
the young friend she wanted — exactly the something
which her home required. Such a friend as Mrs
Weston was out of the question. Two such could
never be granted. Two such she did not want. It
was quite a different sort of thing, a sentiment distinct
and independent. Mrs Weston was the object of a
24 Emma
regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem.
Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be
useful. For Mrs Weston there was nothing to be
done ; for Harriet everything.
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour
to find out who were the parents ; but Harriet could
not tell. She was ready to tell everything in her
power, but on this subject questions were vain. Emma
was obliged to fancy what she liked ; but she could
never believe that in the same situation she should
not have discovered tlie truth. Harriet had no pene-
tration. She had been satisfied to hear and believe just
what Mrs Goddard chose to tell her ; and looked no
farther.
Mrs Goddard and the teachers, and the girls, and
the affairs of the school in general, formed naturally a
great part of the conversation — and but for her ac-
quaintance with the Martins of Abbey Mill Farm, it
must have been the whole. But the Martins occupied
her thoughts a good deal ; she had spent two very
happy months with them, and now loved to talk of the
pleasures of her visit, and describe the many comforts
and wonders of the place. Emma encouraged her
talkativeness, amused by such a picture of another set
of beings, and enjoying the youthful simplicity which
could speak with so much exultation of Mrs Martin's
having " tivo parlours, two very good parlours, indeed ;
one of them quite as large as Mrs Goddard's drawing-
room ; and of her having an upper maid who had lived
five-and-twenty years with her ; and of their having
eight cows, tv\'o of them Aldemeys, and one a little
Welch cow, a very pretty little Welch cow, indeed ;
and of Mrs Martin's saying, as she was so fond of it, it
should be called her cow ; and of their having a very
handsome summer-house in their garden, where some
day next year they were all to drink tea ; a very
Emma 25
nandsome summer-house, large enough to ..old a dozer
people. "
For some time she was amused, v/ithout thinking
beyond the immediate cause ; but as she came to under-
stand the family better, other feelings arose. She had
taken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother and
daughter, a son and son's wife, who all lived together ;
but when it appeared that the Mr Martin, who bore
a part in the narrative, and was always mentioned with
approbation for his great good-nature in doing something
or other, was a single man — that there was no young
Mrs Martin, no wife in the case — she did suspect
danger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality
and kindness, and that, if she were not taken care of,
she might be required to sink herself for ever.
With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in.
number and meaning ; and she particularly led Harriet
to talk more of Mr Martin, and there was evidently no
dislike to it. Harriet was very ready to speak of the
share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry
evening games ; and dwelt a good deal upon his being
so very good-humoured and obliging. " He had gone
three miles round one day in order to bring her some
walnuts, because she had said how fond she was of
them, and in everything else he was so very obliging.
He had his shepherd's son into the parlour one night
on puqoose to sing to her. She was veiy fond of sing-
ing. He could sing a little himself. She believed he
was very clever, and understood everything. He had a
very fine flock, and, while she was with them, he had
been bid more for his wool than anybody in the country.
She believed everybody spoke well of him. His
motlier and sisters were very fond of him. Mrs Martin
had told her one day (and there was a blush as she
said it) that it v/as impossible for anybody to be a better
son, and tlierefore she was sure, whenever he married,
26 Emma
he would make a good husband. Not that she wanted
him to marry. She was in no hurrj'at all. "
" Well done, Mrs Martin ! " thought Emma. " You
know what you are about. "
" And when she had come away, Mrs Martin was
80 very kind as to send Mrs Goddard a beautiful
goose — the finest goose Mrs Goddard had ever seen.
Mrs Goddard had di'essed it on a Sunday, and asked
all the three teachers, Miss Nash, and Miss Prince, and
Miss Richardson, to sup with her. "
" Mr Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information
oeyond the line of his own business ? He does not
read? "
" Oh, yes ! — that is, no — I do not know — but I
believe he has read a good deal — but not what you
would think anything of. He reads the Agricultural
Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the
window seats — but he reads all them to himself. But
sometimes of an evening, before we went to cards, he
would read something aloud out of the * Elegant
Extracts,'very entertaining. And I know he has
read the'Vicar of Wakefield.'He never read the
'Romance of the Forest,'nor the'Children of the
Abbey.'He had never heard of such books before I
mentioned them, but he is determined to get them now
as soon as ever he can. "
The next question was —
" What sort of looking man is Mr Martin ? "
*'Oh ! not handsome — not at all handsome. 1
thought him very plain at first, but I do not think him
so plain now. One does not, you know, after a time.
But did you never see him ? He is in Highbury every
now and then, and he is sure to ride through every week
in his way to Kingston. He has passed you very
often. "
" That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times,
Emma 27
but without having any idea of his name. A young
farmer, whether on horseback or on foot, is the very
last sort of persc/O to raise my curiosity. The
yeomanry are pre.isely the order of people with whom
I feel I can hive nothing to do. A degree or two
lower, and a creditable appearance might interest me ;
I might hope to be useful to their families in some way
or other. But a farmer can need none of my help, and
is, therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice, as
in every other he is below it. "
" To be sure. Oh, yes ! it is not likely you should
ever have observed him ; but he knows you very well,
indeed — I mean by sight. "
" I have no doubt of his being a very respectable
young man. I know, indeed, that he is so, and, as
such, wish him well. What do you imagine his age to
be ? "
" He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and
my birthday is the 23rd — ^just a fortnight and a day's
difference — which is very odd. "
" Only four-and-twenty. That is too young to
settle. His mother is perfectly right not to be in a
hurry. They seem very comfortable as they are, and
if she were to take any pains to many liim, she would
probably repent it. Six years hence, if he could meet
with a good sort of young woman in the same rank
as his own, with a little money, it might be very
desirable. "
" Six years hence ! dear Miss Woodhouse, he would
be thirty years old ! "
" Well, and that is as early as most men can afford
to marry, who are not born to an independence. Mr
Martin, I imagine, has his fortune entirely to make —
cannot be at all beforehand with the world. What-
ever money he might come into when his father died,
whatever his share of the family property, it is, I dare
28 Emma
say, all afloat, all employed in his stock, and so forth ;
and though, with diligence and good luck, he may be
rich in time, it is next to impossible that he should have
realised anything yet. "
" To be sure, so it is. But they live very comfort-
ably. They have no in-doors man, else they do not
want for anything ; and Mrs Martin talks of taking a
boy another year. "
" I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet,
whenever lie does marry — I mean, as to being ac-
quainted with his wife ; for though his sisters, from
a superior education, are not to be altogether objected
to, it does not follow that he might marry anybody
at all fit for you to notice. The misfortune of your
birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your
associates. There can be no doubt of your being a
gentleman's daughter, and you must support your claim
to that station by everything within your own power, or
there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure
in degrading you. "
" Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are. But while I
visit at Hartfield, and you are so kind to me, Miss
Woodhouse, I am not afraid of v/hat anybody can
do. "
" You understand the force of influence pretty well,
Harriet ; but I would have you so firmly established in
good society, as to be independent even of Hartfield
and Miss Woodhouse. I want to see you permanently
well connected, and to that end it will be advisable to
have as few odd acquaintance as may be ; and, there-
fore, I say, that if you should still be in this country
when Mr Martin man-ies, I wish you may not be
drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters, to be ac-
quainted with the wife, who will probably be some
mere farmer's daughter, without education. "
" To be sure. Yes. Not that I think Mr Martin
I
Emma 29
would ever marry anybody but what had had some
education, and been very well brought up. However,
I do not mean to set up my opinion against yours —
and I am sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of
his wife. I shall always have a great regard for the
Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and should be very
sorry to give them up, for they are quite as well
educated as me. But if he manies a very ignorant
vulgar woman, certainly I had better not visit her, if I
can help it. "
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this
speech, and saw no alarming symptoms of love. The
young man had been the first admirer, but she trusted
there was no other hold, and that there would be no
serious difficulty, on Harriet's side, to oppose any
friendly arrangement of her own.
They met Mr Martin the veiy next day, as they
were walking on the Donwell road. He was on foot,
and after looking very respectfully at her, looked with
most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. Emma
was not sorry to have such an opportunity of survey ;
and walking a few yards forward, while they talked
together, soon made her quick eye sufficiently ac-
quainted with Mr Robert Martin. His appearance
was very neat, and he looked like a sensible young
man, but his person had no other advantage : and
when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen, she
thought he must lose all the ground he had gained
in Harriet's inclination. Harriet was not insensible
of manner ; she had voluntarily noticed her father's
gentleness with admiration as well as wonder. Mr
Martin looked as if he did not know what manner
was.
They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss
Woodliouse must not be kept waiting ; and Harriet
then came running to her with a smiling face, and in a
30
Emma
flutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very
soon to compose.
" Only think of our happening to meet him ! How
veiy odd. It was quite a chance, he said, that he had
not gone round by Randalls. He did not think we
ever walked this road. He thought we walked towards
Randalls most days. He has not been able to get the
'Romance of the Forest'yet. He was so busy the
last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it,
but he goes again to-morrow. So very odd we should
happen to meet ! Well, Miss Woodhouse, is he like
what you expected i What do you think of him i
Do you think him so very plain ? "
" He is very plain, undoubtedly ; remarkably plain ;
but that is nothing compared with his entire want of
gentility. I had no right to expect much, and I did
not expect much ; but I had no idea that he could be
so very clownish, so totally without air. I had imagined
him, I confess, a degree or two nearer gentility. "
" To be sure, " said Harriet, in a mortified voice,
" he is not so genteel as real gentlemen. "
•'" 1 think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us,
you have been repeatedly in the company of some such
very real gentlemen, that you must yourself be struck
with the difference in Mr Martin. At Haitfield, you
have had very good specimens of well-educated, well-
bred men. I should be surprized if, after seeing them,
you could be in company with Mr Martin again with-
out perceiving him to be a very inferior creature — and
rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought
him at all agreeable before. Do not you begin to feel
that now ? Were not you struck ? I am sure you
must have been struck by his awkward look and abnipt
manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard
to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here. "
" Certainly, he is not like Mr Knightley. He had
Emma
31
not such a fine air and way of walking as Mr Knightley.
I see the difference plain enough. But Mr Knightley
is so very fine a man ! "
" Mr Knightley's air is so remarkably good that it is
not fair to compare Mr Martin with htm. You might
not see one in a hundred with gentleman so plainly
written as in Mr Knightley. But he is not the only
gentleman you have been lately used to.il What say
you to Mr Weston and Mr Elton ? Compare Mr
Martin with either of them. Compare their manner of
carrying themselves, of walking, of speaking, of being
silent. You must see the difference. "
" Oh, yes, there is a great difference. But Mr
Weston is almost an old man. Mr Weston must be
between forty and fifty. "
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable.
The older a person grows, Harriet, the more important
it is that their manners should not be bad ; the more
glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, or
awkwardness becomes. What is passable in youth is
detestable in later age. Mr Martin is now awkward
and abrupt ; what will he be at Mr Weston's time
of life > . "
" Tliere is no saying, indeed, " replied Harriet, rather
solemnly.
" But there may be pretty good guessing. He will
be a completely gross, vulgar farmer, totally inattentive
to appearances, and thinking of nothing but profit and
loss. "
" Will he, indeed ? that will be very bad. "
" How much his business engrosses him already, is
very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to
inquire for the book you recommended. He was a
great deal too full of the market to think of anything
else — which is just as it should be, for a thriving man.
What lias he to do witii books ? And I have no
32
Emma
doubt that he nvill thrive, and be a very rich man in
time ; and his being illiterate and coarse need not dis-
turb us. "
" I wonder he did not remember the book, " was all
Harriet's answer, and spoken with a degree of grave
displeasure which Emma thought might be safely left to
stself. She, therefore, said no more for some time.
Her next beginning was —
" In one respect, perhaps, Mr Elton's manners are
superior to Mr Knightley's or Mr Weston's. They
have more gentleness. They might be more safely held
up as a pattern. There is an openness, a quickness,
almost a bluntness in Mr Weston, which everybody
likes in him, because there is so much good humour
with it — but that would not do to be copied. Neither
would Mr Knightley's downnght, decided, command-
ing sort of manner, though it suits htm very well : his
figure, and look, and situation in life seem to allow it ;
but if any young man were to set about copying him, he
would not be sufferable. On the contrary,tJ think a
young man might be very safely recommended to take
Mr Elton as a model, Mr Elton is good-humoured,
cheerful, obliging, and gentle. He seems to me to be
grown particularly gentle of late. I do not know
whether he has any design of ingratiating himself with
either of us, Harriet, by additional softness, but it
strikes me that his manners are softer than they used to
be. If he means anything, it must be to please you.
Did not I tell you what he said of you the other
day? " !\
She then repeated some warm personal praise which
she had drawn from Mr Elton, and now did full justice
to ; and Harriet blushed and smiled, and said she had
always thought Mr Elton very agreeable.
Mr Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for
diiving the young farmer out of Harriet's head. She
Emma 33
thought it would be an excellent match ; and only too
palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for her to have
much merit in planning it. She feared it was what
everybody else must think of and predict. It was not
likely, however, that anybody should have equalled her
in the date of the plan, as it had entered her brain during
the veiy first evening of Harriet's coming to Hartfield.
The longer she considered it, the greater was her sense
of its expediency. Mr Elton's situation was most suit-
able, quite the gentleman himself, and without low con-
nections ; at the same time, not of any family that could
fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet. He had
a comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very
sufficient income ; for though the vicarage of Highbury
was not large, he was known to have some independent
property ; and she thought very highly of him as a
good-humoured, well meaning, respectable young man,
without any deficiency of useful understanding or know-
ledge of the world.
She had already satisfied herself that he thought
Harriet a beautiful girl, which she trusted, with such
frequent meetings at Hartfield, was foundation enough
on his side ; and on Harriet's there could be little doubt
that the idea of being preferred by him would have all
the usual weight and efficacy. And he was really a
very pleasing young man, a young man whom any
woman not fastidious might like. He was reckoned
yery handsome ; his person much admired in general,
though not by her, there being a want of elegance
of feature which she could not dispense with : but
the girl who could be gratified by a Robert Martin's
riding about the country to get walnuts for her might
very well be conquered by Mr Elton's admiration.
34 Emma
Cl)apter F*
" T DO not know what your opinion may be, Mrs
I Weston, " said Mr Knightley, " of this great
intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but
I think it a bad thing. "
" A bad thing ! Do you really think it a bad thing ?
— why so i " "
" I think they will neither of them do the other any
good. "
" You surprize me ! Emma must do Harriet good ;
and by supplying her with a new object of interest,
Harriet may be said to do Emma good. I have been
seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure. How
very differently we feel ! Not think they will do each
other any good ! This will certainly be the beginning
of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr Knightley. "
" Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel
with you, knowing Weston to be out, and that you must
still fight your own battle. "
" Mr Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he
were here, for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject.
We were speaking of it only yesterday, and agreeing
how fortunate it was for Emma thai there should be
such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with. Mr
Knightley, I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in
this case. You are so much used to live alone, that you
do not know the value of a companion ; and, perhaps,
no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman
feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being
used to it all her life. I can imagine your objection to
Harriet Smith. She is not the superior yovaig woman
which Emma's friend ought to be. But, on the
other hand, as Emma wants to see her better in-
formed, it will be an inducement to her to read more
Emma 35
herself. They will read together. She means it, I
know. "
\)f* Emma has been meaning to read more ever since
she was twelve years old. I have seen a great many
lists of her drawing-up, at various times, of books that
she meant to read regularly through — and very good
lists they were, very well chosen, and very neatly ar-
ranged — sometimes alphabetically, and sometimes by
some other rule. The list she drew up when only
fourteen— I remember thinking it did her judgment so
much credit, that I preserved it some time, and I dare
say she may have made out a very good list now. But
I have done with expecting any course of steady read-
ing from Emma. She will never submit to anything
requiring industry and patience, and a subjection of the
fancy to the understanding. Where Miss Taylor failed
to stimulate, I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith
will do nothing. You never could persuade her to
read half so much as you wished. You know you
could not. " ) ^
\\'I dare say, " replied Mrs Weston, smiling, " that
I thought so then ; but since we have parted, I can
never remember Emma's omitting to do anything I
wished. " W
*'There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a
memory as that, " said Mr Knightley, feelingly ; and
for a moment or two he had done. " But I, " he soon
added, " who have had no such charm thrown over my
senses, must still see, hear, and remember. Emma is
spoiled by being the cleverest of her family. At ten
years old she had the misfortune of being able to answer
questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen. She
was always quick and assured ; Isabella slow and diffi-
dent. And ever since she was twelve, Emma has been
mistress of the house and of you all. In her mother
she lost the only person able to cope with her. She
36 Emma
inherits ner mother's talents, and must have been under
subjection to her. "
" I should have been sorry, Mr Knightley, to be
dependent on your recommendation, had I quitted Mi
Woodhouse's family and wanted another situation ; 1
do not think you would have spoken a good word for
me to anybody. I am sure you always thought me
unfit for the office I held. "
" Yes, " said he, smiling. " You are better placed
here — very fit for a wife, but not at all for a governess.
But you were preparing yourself to be an excellent
wife all the time you were at Hartfield. You might
not give Emma such a complete education as your
powers would seem to promise ; but you were receiving
a very good education from her, on the very material
matrimonial point of submitdng your own will, and
doing as you were bid ; and if Weston had asked me to
recommend him a wife, I should certainly have named
Miss Taylor. "
" Thank you. There will be very little merit in
making a good wife to such a man as Mr Weston. "
" Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather
thrown away, and that with every disposition to bear,
there will be nothing to be borne. We will not
despair, however. Weston may grow cross from the
wantonness of comfort, or his son may plague him. "
" I hope not that. It is not likely. No, Mr
Knightley, do not foretel vexation from that quarter. "
" Not I, indeed. I only name possibilities. I do
not pretend to Emma's genius for foretelling and guess-
ing. I hope, with all my heart, the young man may be
a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune. But
Harriet Smith, — I have not half done about Harriet
Smith. I think her the very worst sort of companion
that Emma could possibly have. She knows nothing
herself, and looks upon Emma as knowing everything.
Emma 37
She is a flatterer in all her ways ; and so much the
worse, because undesigned. Her ignorance is hourly
flattery. How can Emma imagine she has anything to
learn herself, while Harriet is presenting such a delight-
ful inferiority ? And as for Harriet, I will venture to
say that she cannot gain by the acquaintance. Hartfield
will only put her out of conceit with all the other places
she belongs to. She will grow just refined enough to
be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and
circumstances have placed her home. I am much mis-
taken if Emma's doctrines give any strength of mind, or
tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the
varieties of her situation in life. They only give a
little polish. "
" I either depend more upon Emma's good sense
than you do, or am more anxious for her present com-
fort ; for I cannot lament the acquaintance. How well
she looked last night ! "
" Oh, you would rather talk of her person than her
mind, would you ? Very well ; I shall not attempt to
deny Emma's being pretty. "
" Pretty ! say beautiful rather. Can you imagine
any thing nearer perfect beauty than Emma altogether
— face and figure i "
" I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess
that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing
to me than hers. But I am a partial old friend. "
" Such an eye ! — the true hazle eye — and so brilliant !
regular features, open countenance, with a complexion
— oh, what a bloom of full health, and such a pretty
height and size ! such a firm and upright figure ! There
is health not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her
head, her glance. One hears sometimes of a child being
'the picture of health ;'now, Emma always gives me
the idea of being the complete picture of grown-up
health. She is loveliness itself. Mr Knightley, is not
8he? "
38 Emma
" I have not a fault to find with her person, " he
replied. " I think her all you describe. I love to look
at her ; and I will add this praise, that I do not think
her personally vain. Considering how very handsome
she is, she appears to be little occupied with it ; her
vanity lies another way. Mrs Weston, I am not to be
talked out of my dislike of her intimacy with Harriet
Smith, or my dread of its doing them both harm. "
" And I, Mr Knightley, am equally stout in my
confidence of its not doing them any harm. With all
dear Emma's little faults, she is an excellent creature.
Where shall we see a better daughter, or a kinder sister,
or a truer fnend ? No, no ; she has qualities which
may be trusted ; she will never lead any one really
wrong ; she will make no lasting blunder ; where Emma
errs once, she is in the right a hundred times. "
" Very well ; I will not plague you any more. Emma
shall be an angel, and I will keep my spleen to myself
till Christmas brings John and Isabella. John loves
Emma with a reasonable, and therefore not a blind affec-
tion, and Isabella always thinks as he does, except when
he is not quite frightened enough about the children. I
am sure of having their opinions with me. "
" I know that you all love her really too well to be
unjust or unkind ; but excuse me, Mr Knightley, if I
take the liberty — (I consider myself, you know, as
having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma's
mother might have had) — the liberty of hinting that I
do not think any possible good can arise from Harriet
Smith's intimacy being made a matter of much discussion
among you. Pray excuse me ; but supposing any little
inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy,
it cannot be expected that Emma, accountable to no-
body but her father, who perfectly approves the acquain-
tance, should put an end to it, so long as it is a source
of pleasure to herself. It has been so many years my
Emma 39
province to give advice, that you cannot be suiprized,
Mr Knightley, at this little remains of office. "
" Not at all, " cried he ; " I am much obliged to you
for it. It is veiy good advice, and it shall have a
better fate than your advice has often found ; for it
shall be attended to. "
" Mrs John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might
be made unhappy about her sister. "
" Be satisfied, " said he, " I will not raise any out-
cry. I will keep my ill-humour to myself. I have a
very sincere interest in Emma. Isabella does not seem
more my sister ; has never excited a greater interest ;
perhaps hardly so great. There is an anxiety, a
curiosity in what one feels for Emma. I wonder what
will become of her. "
" So do I, " said Mrs Weston, gently, " very
much. "
" She always declares she will never marry, which,
of course, means just nothing at all. But I have no
idea that she has yet ever seen a man she cared for. It
would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in
love with a proper object. I should like to see Emma
in love, and in some doubt of a return ; it would do
her good. But there is nobody hereabouts to attach
her ; and she goes so seldom from home. "
\\ " There does, indeed, seem as litde to tempt her to
break her resolution at present, " said Mrs Weston, " as
can well be ; and while she is so happy at Hartfield, I
cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which
would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr Wood-
house's account. I do not recommend matrimony at
present to Emma, though 1 mean no slight to the state,
I assure you. "
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite
thoughts of her own and Mr Weston's on the subject
as much as possible. There were wishes at Randalls
40 Emma
respecting Emma's destiny, but it was not desirable to
have them suspected ; and the quiet transition which
Mr Knightley soon afterwards made to " What does
Weston think of the weather ?--shall we have rain ? "
— convinced her that he had nothing more to say or
surmise about Hartfield.ll
Cl)apter ¥%
EMMA could not feel a doubt of having given
Harriet's fancy a proper direction, and raised the
gratitude of her young vanity to a very good pur-
pose ; for she found her decidedly more sensible than
before of Mr Elton's being a remarkably handsome
man, with most agreeable manners ; and as she had no
hesitation in following up the assurance of his admira-
tion by agreeable hints, she was soon pretty confident
of creating as much liking on Harriet's side as there
could be any occasion for. She was quite convinced of
Mr Elton's being in the fairest way of falling in love, if
not in love already. She had no scruple with regard to
him. He talked of Harriet ; and praised her so warmly
that she could not suppose anything wanting which a
little time would not add. His perception of the striking
improvement of Harriet's manner, since he''introduction
at Hartfield, was not one of tlie least agreeable proofs
of his growing attachment.
" You have given Miss Smith all that she required, "
said he ; " you have made her graceful and easy. She
was a beautiful creature when she came to you ; but, in
my opinion, the attractions you have added are infinitely
superior to what she received from nature. "
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ;
but Harriet only wanted drawing out, and receiving a
Emma 41
few, very few hints. She had all the natural grace of
sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself. I have
done very little. "
" If it were admissible to contradict a lady " said
the gallant Mr Elton.
" I have, perhaps, given her a little more decision of
character — have taught her to think on points which
had not fallen in her way before. "
" Exactly so ; that is what principally strikes me.
So much superadded decision of character ! Skilful
has been the hand ! "
" Great has been the pleasure, I am sure. I never
met with a disposition more truly amiable. "
" I have no doubt of it. " And it was spoken with
a sort of sighing animation which had a vast deal of the
lover. She was not less pleased, another day, with the
manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers —
to have Harriet's picture.
" Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet ? "
said she ; " did you ever sit for your picture ? "
Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and
only stopt to say, with a very interesting naivete —
" Oh dear, no — never. "
No sooner was she out of sight than Emma ex-
claimed —
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her
would be ! I would give any money for it. I almost
long to attempt her likeness myself. You do not know
it, I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a great
passion for taking likenesses, and attempted several of
my friends, and was thought to have a tolerable eye in
general ; but, from one cause or another, I gave it up
in disgust. But, really, I could almost venture if
Harriet would sit to me. It would be such a delight to
have her picture ! "
1/ " Let me entreat you, " cried Mr Elton ; *'it would
42 Emma
indeed be a delight ; let me entreat you, Miss Wood-
house, to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your
friend. I know what your drawings are. How could
you suppose me ignorant ? Is not this room rich in
specimens of your landscapes and flowers ! and has not
Mrs Weston some inimitable figure pieces in her
drawing-room at Randalls ? "
Yes, good man ! thought Emma, but what has all that
to do with taking likenesses ? You know nothing of
drawing. Don't pretend to be in raptures about mine.
Keep your raptures for Harriet's face. " Well, if you
give me such kind encouragement, Mr Elton, I believe
I shall try what I can do. Harriet's features are very
delicate, which makes a likeness difficult ; and yet, there
is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye, and the lines
about the mouth, which one ought to catch. "
" Exactly so, — the shape of the eye and the lines
about the mouth, — I have not a doubt of your success.
Pray, pray attempt it. As you will do it, it will
indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisite posses-
sion. " fl
" But I am afraid, Mr Elton, Harriet will not like
to sit, — she thinks so little of her own beauty. Did
not you observe her manner of answering me ? How
completely it meant • Why should my picture be
drawn ?'"
" Oh, yes, T observed it, I assure you. It was not
lost on me. But still I cannot imagine she would not
be persuaded. "
Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost
immediately made ; and she had no scruples which
could stand many minutes against the earnest pressing of
both the others. Emma wished to go to work directly,
and therefore produced the portfolio containing her
various attempts at portraits, for not one of them had ever
been finished, that they might decide together on the
Emma 43
best size for Harriet. Her many beginnings were dis-
played. Miniatures, half-lengths, whole-lengths, pencil,
crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn.
She nad always wanted to do everything, and had made
more progress, both in drawing and music, than many
might have done with so little labour as she would ever
submit to. She played and sang, and drew in almost
every style ; but steadiness had always been wanting ;
and in nothing had she approached the degree of excel-
lence which she would have been glad to command, and
ought not to have failed of. She was not much
deceived as to her own skill, either as an artist or a
musician ; but she was not unwilling to have others
deceived, or sorry to know her reputation for accom-
plishment often higher than it deserved.
There was merit in every drawing, — in the least
finished, perhaps the most. Her style was spirited ; but
had there been much less, or had there been ten times
more, the delight and admiration of her two companions
would have been the same. They were both in extasies.
A likeness pleases everybody ; and Miss Woodhouse's
performances must be capital.
" No great variety of faces for you, " said Emma.
" I had only my own family to study from. There is
my father — another of my father — but the idea of sit-
ting for his picture made him so nervous, that I could
only take him by stealth, neither of them very like,
therefore. Mrs Weston again, and again, and again, you
see. Dear Mrs Weston — always my kindest friend on
every occasion. She would sit whenever I asked her.
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little
elegant figure — and the face not unlike. I should have
made a good likeness of her, if she would have sat
longer ; but she was in such a hurry to have me draw
her four children that she would not be quiet. Then,
here come all my attempts at three of those fotyr
44 Emma
children — there they are, Henry, and John, and Bella,
from one end of the sheet to the other, and any one of
them might do for any one of the rest. She was so
eager to have them drawn that I could not refuse ; but
there is no making children of three or four years old
stand still, you know ; nor can it be very easy to take
any likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, un-
less they are coarser featured than any mama's children
ever were. Here is my sketch of the fourth, who was
a baby. I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa,
and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you
would wish to see. He had nestled down his head
most conveniently : that's very like. I am rather
proud of little George. The comer of the sofa is very
good. Then here is my last, " — unclosing a pretty
sketch of a gentleman in small size, whole-length —
" my last and my best — my brother, Mr John
Knightley. This did not want much of being finished,
when I put it away in a pet, and vowed I would never
take another likeness. I could not help being pro-
voked ; for, after all my pains, and when I had i^eally
made a very good likeness of it — (Mrs Weston and I
were quite agreed in thinking it very like) — only too
handsome — too flattering — but that was a fault on
the right side — after a!) this, came poor dear Isabella's
cold approbation of — * Yes, it was a little like ; but, to
be sure, it did not do him justice.'We had had a
great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all. It
was made a great favour of; and altogether it was more
than I could bear ; and so I never would finish it, to
have it apologized over, as an unfavourable likeness, to
every morning visitor in Brunswick Square ; and, as I
said, I did then forswear ever drawing anybody again.
But, for Harriet's sake, or rather for my own, and as
there are no husbands and wives in the case at present,
I will break my resolution now. "
Emma 45
Mr Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted
by the idea, and was repeating, " No husbands and
wives in the case at present indeed, as you observe.
Exactly so. No husbands and wives, " with so in-
teresting a consciousness, that Emma began to consider
whether she had not better leave them together at once.
But as she vv^anted to be drawing, the declaration must
wait a little longer.
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait.
It was to be a whole-length in water-colours, like Mr
John Knightley's, and was destined, if she could please
herself, to hold a very honourable station over the
mantelpiece.
The sitting began ; and Harriet, smiling and blush-
ing, and afraid of not keeping her attitude and coun-
tenance, presented a very sweet mixture of youthful
expression to the steady eyes of the artist. But there
was no doing anything, with Mr Elton fidgetting behind
her, and watching every touch. She gave him credit
for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze
again without offence ; but was really obliged to put
an end to it, and request him to place himself else-
where. It then occurred to her to employ him in
reading.
" If he would be so good as to read to them, it
would be a kindness indeed ! It would amuse away
the difficulties of her part, and lessen the irksomeness of
Miss Smith's. "
Mr Elton was only too happy. Harriet listened,
and Emma drew in peace. She must allow him to be
still frequently coming to look ; anything less would
certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was
ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil to jump
up and see the progress, and be charmed. There was
no being displeased with such an encourager, for his
admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it
46 Emma
was possible. She could not respect his eye, but his
love and his complaisance were unexceptionable.
The sitting was altogether very satisfactory : she was
quite enough pleased with the first day's sketch to wish
to go on. There was no want of likeness ; she had
been fortunate in the attitude ; and as she meant to
throw in a little improvement to the figure, to give ?.
little more height, and considerably more elegance, she
had great confidence of its being in every way a pretty
drawing at last, and of its filling its destined place with
credit to them both, a standing memonal of the beauty
of one, the skill of the other, and the fiiendship of
both ; with as many other agreeable associations as Mr
Elton's very promising attachment was likely to add.
Harriet was to sit again the next day ; and Mi
Elton, just as he ought, entreated for the permission of
attending and reading to them again.
" By all means. We shall be most happy to consider
you as one of the party. "
The same civilities and courtesies, the same success
and satisfaction, took place on the morrow, and accom-
panied the whole progress of the picture, which was
rapid and happy. Everybody who saw it was pleased,
but Mr Elton was in continual raptures, and defended it
through every criticism.
" Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only
beauty she wanted, " observed Mrs Weston to him, not
in the least suspecting that she was addressing a lover.
" The expression of the eye is most correct, but Miss
Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. It is the
fault of her face that she has them not. "
" Do you think so i* " replied he. " I cannot agree
with you. It appears to me a most perfect resemblance
m every feature. I never saw such a likeness in my
life. We must allow for the effect of shade, you
know. "
Emma 47
" You have made her too tall, Emma/'said Mr
Knightley.
Emma knew that she had, but would not own it ;
and Mr Elton warmly added —
" Oh, no — certainly not too tall — not in the least
too tall. Consider, she is sitting down, which naturally
presents a different — which in short gives exactly the
idea — and the proportions must be preserved, you know.
Proportions, fore-shortening, — oh no ! it gives one ex-
actly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith's — exactly
so, indeed. "
" It is very pretty, " said Mr Woodhouse. " So
prettily done ! Just as your drawings always are, my
dear. I do not know anybody who draws so well as
you do. The only thing I do not thoroughly like is,
that she seems to be sitting out of doors, with only a
little shawl over her shoulders ; and it makes one think
she must catch cold. "
" But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer ; a
warm day in summer. Look at the tree. "
" But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear. "
'* You, sir, may say anything, " cried Mr Elton,
" but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy
thought, the placing of Miss Smith out of doors ; and the
tree is touched with such inimitable spirit ! Any other
situation would hai^e been much less in character. The
naivete of Miss Smith's manners — and altogether — oh,
it is most admirable ! 1 cannot keep my eyes from it.
I never saw such a likeness. "
The next thing wanted was to get the picture
framed ; and here were a few difficulties. It must be
done directly ; it must be done in London ; the order
must go through the hands of some intelligent person
whose taste could be depended on ; and Isabella, the
usual doer of all commissions, must not be applied to,
because it was December, and Mr Woodhouse could
48
Emma
not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the
fogs of December. But no sooner was the distress
known to Mr Elton than it was removed. His gallantry
was always on the alert. " Might he be trusted with
the commission, what infinite pleasure should he have in
executing it ! he could ride to London at any time.
It was impossible to say how much he should be gratified
by being employed on such an errand. "
** He was too good ! — she could not endure the
thought! — she would not give him such a troublesome
office for the world, " — brought on the desired repetition
of entreaties and assurances — and a very few minutes
settled the business.
Mr Elton was to take the drawing to London,
chuse the frame, and give the directions ; and Emma
thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safety with-
out much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly
fearful of not being incommoded enough.
" What a precious deposit ! " said he, with a tender
sigh, as he received it.
" This man is almost too gallant to be in love, "
thought Emma. " I should say so, but that I suppose
there may be a hundred different ways of being in love.
He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harriet
exactly ; it will be an'exactly so,'as he says himself;
but he does sigh and languish, and study for compli-
ments rather more than I could endure as a principal.
I come in for a pretty good share as a second. But it
is his gratitude on Harriet's account. "
Emma 49
THE very day of Mr Elton's going to London
produced a fresh occasion for Emma's services
towards her friend. Harriet had been at
Hartfield, as usual, soon after breakfast ; and, after a
time, had gone home to return again to dinner ; she
returned, and sooner than had been talked of, and with
an agitated, hurried look, announcing something extra-
ordinary to have happened which she was longing to
tell. Half a minute brought it all out. She had
heard, as soon as she got back to Mrs Goddard's, that
Mr Martin had been there an hour before, and finding
she was not at home, nor particularly expected, had
left a little parcel for her from one of his sisters, and
gone away ; and, on opening this parcel, she had
actually found, besides the two songs which she had
lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this
letter was from him — from Mr Martin — and contained
a direct proposal of marriage. " Who could have
thought it ? She was so surprized she did not know
what to do. Yes, quite a proposal of marriage ; and
a very good letter, at least she thought so. And he
wrote as if he really loved her very much — but she did
not know — and so, she was come as fast as she could
to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do. " Emma
was half-ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased
and so doubtful.
" Upon my word, " she cried, " the young man is
determined not to lose anything for want of asking.
He'will connect himself well if he can. "
" Will you read the letter ? " cried Harriet. " Pray
do, I'd rather you would. "
Emma was not sorry to be pressed. She read, and
was surprized. The style of the letter was much above
50 Emma
her expectation. l " here were not merely no gram-
matical errors, bvit as a composition it would not have
disgraced a gentleman ; the language, though plain, was
strong and unaffected, and the sentiments it conveyed
very much to the credit of the writer. It was short,
but expressed good sense, warm attachment, liberality,
propriety, even delicacy of feeling. She paused over
it, while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her
opinion, with a " Well, well, " and was at last forced
to add, " Is it a good letter ? or is it too short ? "
" Yes, indeed, a very good letter, " replied Emma,
rather slowly ; — " so good a letter, Harriet, that,
everything considered, I think one of his sisters must
have helped him. I can hardly imagine the young
man whom I saw talking with you the other day could
express himself so well, if left quite to his own powers,
and yet it is not the style of a woman ; no, certainly,
it is too strong and concise ; not diffuse enough for a
woman. No doubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose
may have a natural talent for — thinks strongly and
clearly — and when he takes a pen in hand, his thoughts
naturally find proper words. It is so with some men.
Yes, I understand the sort of mind. Vigorous, de-
cided, with sentiments to a certain point not coarse.
A better written letter, Harriet (returning it) than I
had expected. "
" Well, " said the still waiting Harriet ; " well — and
— and what shall I do ? "
" What shall you do ! in what respect ? Do you
mean with regard to this letter ? "
" Yes. "
" But what are you in doubt of? You must answer
it, of course, and speedily. "
*'Yes. But what shall I say ? Dear Miss Wood-
house, do advise me. "
" Oh, no, no ; the letter had much better be all
Emma 51
your own. You will express yourself very properly, I
am sure. There is no danger of your not being in-
telligible, which is the first thing. Your meaning must
be unequivocal ; no doubts or demurs ; and such ex-
pressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you are
inflicting as propriety requires, will present themselves
unbidden to your mind, I am persuaded. Tou need not
be prompted to write with the appearance of sorrow for
his disappointment. "
" You think I ought to refuse him, then ? " said
Harriet, looking down.
" Ought to refuse him ! My dear Harriet, what do
you mean ? Are you in any doubt as to that \ I
thought — but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have been
under a mistake. I certainly have been misunderstand-
ing you, if you feel in doubt as to the purport of your
answer. I had imagined you were consulting me only
as to the wording of it. "
Harriet was silent. With a little reserve of manner,
Emma continued —
" You mean to return a favourable answer, I
collect. "
" No, I do not ; that is, T do not mean — what shall
I do ? What would you advise me to do ? Pray,
dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought to do. "
" I shall not give you any advice, Harriet. I will
have nothing to do with it. This is a point which you
must settle with your own feelings. "
" I had no notion that he liked me so very much, "
said Harriet, contemplating the letter. For a little
while Emma persevered in her silence ; but, beginning
to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that letter might
be too powerful, she thought it best to say —
" I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a
woman doubts as to whether she should accept < i man
or not, she certainly ought to refuse him. If she can
52 Emma
hesitate as to « Yes,'she ought to say * No/ directly.
It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful
feelings, with half a heart. I thought it my duty as a
friend, and older than yourself, to say thus much to
you. But do not imagine that I want to influence
you. "
" Oh, no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to
— but if you would just advise me what I had best do
— no, no, I do not mean that — as you say, one's mind
ought to be quite made up — one should not be hesitat-
ing — it is a very serious thing. It will be safer to say
• No,'perhaps. Do you think I had better say
* No'? "
" Not for the world, " said Emma, smiling graciously,
" would I advise you either way. You must be the
best judge of your own happiness. If you prefer Mr
Martin to every other person, if you think him the
most agreeable man you have ever been in company
with, why should you hesitate ? You blush, Harriet,
Does anybody else occur to you at this moment under
such a definition ? Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive
yourself; do not be run away with by gratitude and
compassion. At this moment whom are you thinking
of? "
The symptoms were favourable. Instead of answer-
ing, Harriet turned away confused, and stood thought-
fully by the fire ; and though the letter was still in her
hand, it was now mechanically twisted about witliout
regard. Emma waited the result with impatience, but
not without strong hopes. At last, with some hesita-
tion, Harriet said —
" Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your
opinion, I must do as well as I can by myself; and I
have now quite determined, and really almost made up
my mind, to refuse Mr Martin. Do you think I am
right ? "
Emma 53
** Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet ; you
are doing just what you ought. While you were at all
in suspense, I kept my feelings to myself, but now that
you are so completely decided, I have no hesitation in
approving. Dear Harriet, I give myself joy of this.
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance-,
which must have been the consequence of your marrying
Mr Martin. While you were in the smallest degree
wavering, I said nothing about it, because I would not
influence ; but it would have been the loss of a friend
to me. I could not have visited Mrs Robert Martin,
of Abbey Mill Farm. Now I am secure of you for
ever. "
Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the
idea of it struck her forcibly.
" You could not have visited me ! " she cried, look-
ing aghast. " No, to be sure you could not ; but 1
never thought of that before. That would have been
too dreadful ! What an escape ! Dear Miss Wood-
house, I would not give up the pleasure and honour of
being intimate with you for anything in the world. "
" Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang
to lose you ; but it must have been. You would have
thrown yourself out of all good society. I must have
given you up. "
" Dear me ! How should I ever have borne it i
It woiJd have killed me never to come to Hartfield any
more. "
" Dear, affectionate creature ! Tou banished to
Abbey Mill Farm ! Tou confined to the society of
the illiterate and vulgar all your life ! I wonder how
the young man could have the assurance to ask it. He
must have a pretty good opinion of himself. "
" I Co not think he is conceited either, in general, "
said Harriet, her conscience opposing such censure ;
" at least, he is very good-natured, and I shall always
54 Emma
feel much obliged to him, and have a great regard for
— but that is quite a different thing from — and you
know, though he may like me, it does not follow that I
should — and, certainly, I must confess that since my
visiting here I have seen people — and if one comes to
compare them, person and manners, there is no com-
parison at all, one is so very handsome and agreeable.
However, I do really think Mr Martin a very amiable
young man, and have a great opinion of him ; and his
being so much attached to me — and his writing sucii a
letter — but as to leaving you, it is what I would not do
upon any consideration. "
" Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend.
We will not be parted. A woman is not to marry a
man merely because she is asked, or because he is
attached to her, and can write a tolerable letter. "
" Oh no ; and it is but a short letter, too. "
Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass
with a " Very true ; and it would be a small consolation
to her, for the clownish manner which might be offend-
ing her every hour of the day, to know that her husband
could write a good letter. "
" Oh yes, very. Nobody cares for a letter : the
thing is, to be always happy with pleasant companions.
I am quite determined to refuse him. But how shall I
do ? What shall I say ? "
Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the
answer, and advised its being written directly, which
was agreed to, in the hope of her assistance ; and
though Emma continued to protest against any assist-
ance being wanted, it was, in fact, given in the formation
of every sentence. The looking over his letter again,
in replying to it, had such a softening tendency, that it
was particularly necessary to brace her up with a fev/
decisive expressions ; and she was so very much con-
cerned at the idea of making him unhappy, and
Emma 55
thought 80 much of what his mother and sisters
would think and say, and was so anxious that they
should not fancy her ungrateful, that Emma believed, if
the young man had come in her way at that moment,
he would have been accepted after all.
This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and
sent. The business was finished, and Harriet safe.
She was rather low all the evening ; but Emma could
allow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved
them by speaking of her own affection, sometimes by
bringing forward the idea of Mr Elton.
" I shall never be invited to Abbey Mill again, " was
said in rather a sorrowful tone.
''Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with
you, my Harriet. You are a great deal too necessary
at Haitfield to be spared to Abbey Mill. "
" And I am sure I should never want to go there ;
for I am never happy but at Hartfield. "
Some time afterwaids it was, " I think Mrs Goddard
would be very much surprized if she knew what had
happened. I am sure Miss Nash would ; for Miss
Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it if
only a linen-draper. "
" One should be sorry to see greater pride or refine-
ment in the teacher of a school, Harriet. 1 dare say
Miss Nash would envy you such an opportunity as this
of being married. Even this conquest would appear
valuable in her eyes. As to anything superior for you,
I suppose she is quite in the dark. The attentions of a
ceitain person can hardly be among the tittle-tattle of
Highbury yet. Hitherto, I fancy you and I are the
only people to whom his looks and manners have
expilained themselves. "
Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about
wondering that people should like her so much. The
idea or Mr Elton was certainly cheering ; but still.
56
Emma
after a time, she was tender-hearted again tov/ards tlie
rejected Mr Martin.
" Now he has got my letter, " said she, softly. " I
wonder what they are all doing — whether his sisters
know — if he is unhappy, they will be unhappy too. I
hope he will not mind it so very much. "
" Let us think of those among our absent friends who
are more cheerfully employed, " cried Emma. " At
this moment, perhaps, Mr Elton is showing your picture
to his mother and sisters, telling how much more
beautiful is the original, and after being asked for it five
or six times, allowing them to hear your name — your
own dear name. "
" My picture ! But he has left my picture in Bond
Street. "
" Has he so ! Then I know nothing of Mr Elton.
No, my dear little modest Haniet, depend upon it, the
picture will not be in Bond Street till just before he
mounts his horse to-morrow. It is his companion all
this evening, his solace, his delight. It opens his
designs to his family, it introduces you among them, it
diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of
our nature — eager curiosity and warm prepossession.
How cheerful, how animated, how suspicious, how busy
their imaginations all are ! "
Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger.
CljatJtet F3131X
HARRIET slept at Hartfield that night. For
some weeks past she had been spending more
than half her time there, and gradually getting
to have a bedroom appropriated to herself; and Emma
judged it best in every respect, safest and kindest, to
Emma 57
keep her with them as much as possible just at present
She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or
two to Mrs Goddard's, but it was then to be settled that
she should return to Hartfield, to make a regular visit of
some days.
While she was gone, Mr Knightley called, and sat
some time mth Mr Woodhouse and Emma, till Mr
Woodhouse, who had previously made up his mind to
walk out, was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it,
and was induced by the entreaties of both, though
against the scruples of his own civility, to leave Mr
Knightley for that pui-pose. Mr Knightley, who had
nothing of ceremony about him, was offering, by his
short, decided answers, an amusing contrast to the pro-
tracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other.
*'Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr
Knightley, if you will not consider me as doing a
very rude thing, I shall take Emma's advice and go
out for a quarter of an hour. As the sun is out, I
believe I had better take my three turns while I can.
I treat you without ceremony, Mr Knightley. We
invalids think we are privileged people. "
" My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me. "
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter.
Emma will be happy to entertain you. And therefore
I think I will beg your excuse, and take my three turns
— my winter walk. "
" You cannot do better, sir. "
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr
Knightley, but I am a very slow walker, and my pace
would be tedious to you ; and, besides, you have another
long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey. "
" Thank you, sir, thank you ; I am going this
moment myself; and I think the sooner you go the
better. I wUl fetch your greatcoat and open the
garden-door for you. "
58 Emma
Mr Woodhouse at last was off ; but Mr Knigbtley,
instead of being immediately off likewise, sat down
again, seemingly inclined for more chat. He began
speaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more
voluntary praise than Emma had ever heard before.
" I cannot rate her beauty as you do, " said he ; " but
she is a pretty little creature, and I am inclined to think
veiy well of her disposition. Her character depends
upon those she is with ; but in good hands she will turn
out a valuable woman. "
" I am glad you think so ; and the good hands, I
hope, may not be wanting. "
" Come, " said he, " you are anxious for a compli-
ment, so I will tell you that you have improved her.
You have cured her of her school-girl's giggle ; she
really does you credit. "
" Thank you. I should be mortified, indeed, if I
did not believe I had been of some use ; but it is not
everybody who will bestow praise where they may.
Tou do not often overpower me with it. "
" You are expecting her again, you say, this mom-
bg? "
" Almost every moment. She has been gone longer
already than she intended. "
" Something has happened to delay her; some
visitors, perhaps. "
" Highbury gossips ! Tiresome wretches ! "
" Harriet may not consider everybody tiresome that
you would. "
Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and,
therefore, said nothing. He presently added, with a
smile —
" I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I
must tell you that I have good reason to believe your
little friend will soon hear of something to her advan-
tage. "
Emma 59
" Indeed ! how so ? of what sort ? "
" A very serious sort, I assure you, " still smiling.
" Very serious ! I can think of but one thing —
who is in love with her ? Who makes you their
confidant ? "
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr Elton's
having dropt a hint. Mr Knightley was a sort of
general friend and adviser, and she knew Mr Elton
looked up to him.
" I have reason to think, " he replied, " that Harriet
Smith will soon have an offer of marriage, and from a
most unexceptionable quarter — Robert Martin is the
man. Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this summer, seems to
have done his business. He is desperately in love, and
means to marry her. "
" He is very obliging, " said Emma ; " but is he sure
that Harriet means to marry him ? "
" Well, well, means to make her an offer, then.
Will that do ? He came to the Abbey two evenings
ago, on purpose to consult me about it. He knows I
have a thorough regard for him and all his family, and,
I believe, considers me as one of his best friends. He
came to ask me whether I thought it would be impru-
dent in him to settle so early ; whether I thought her
too young — in short, whether I approved his choice
altogether ; having some apprehension, perhaps, of her
being considered (especially since your making so much
of her) as in a line of society above him. I was very
much pleased with all that he said. I never hear
better sense from any one than Robert Martin. He
always speaks to the purpose ; open, straightforward,
and very well judging. He told me everything ; his
circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed
doing in the event of his marriage. He is an excellent
young man, both as son and brother. I had no hesita-
tion in advising him to marry. He proved to me that
6o Emma
he could afford it ; and that being the case, I v/as con-
vinced he could not do better. I praised the fair lady
too, and altogether sent him away very happy. If he
had never esteemed my opinion before, he would have
thought highly of me then ; and, I dare say, left the
house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man
ever had. This happened the night before last. Now,
as we may fairly suppose, he would not allow much
time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he does
not appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely
that he should be at Mrs Goddard's to-day ; and she
may be detained by a visitor, without thinking him at
all a tiresome wretch. "
" Pray, Mr Knightley, " said Emma, who had been
smiling to herself through a great part of this speech,
" how do you know that Mr Martin did not speak
yesterday ? "
" Certainly, " replied he, suiprized, " I do not abso-
lutely know it, but it may be inferred. Was not she
the whole day with you ? "
" Come, " said she, " I will tell you something in
return for what you have told me. He did speak
yesterday — that is, he wrote, and was refused. "
This was obliged to be repeated before it could be
believed ; and Mr Knightley actually looked red with
surprize and displeasure, as he stood up, in tall indigna-
tion, and said —
" Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed
her. What is the foolish girl about ? "
" Oh, to be sure, " cried Emma, " it is always incom-
prehensible to a man, that a woman should ever refuse
an offer of marriage. A man always imagines a woman
to be ready for anybody who asks her. "
" Nonsense ! a man does not imagine any such thing.
But what is the meaning of diis ? Harriet Smith refuse
Robert Martin ! Madness, if it is so ; but 1 hope you
ire mistaken. "
Emma 6i
" I saw her answer ! — nothing could be clearer. "
" You saw her answer ! — you wrote her answer too.
Emma, this is your doing. You persuaded her to refuse
him. "
" And if I did (which, however, I am far from
allowing), I should not feel that I had done wrong.
Mr Martin is a very respectable young man, but I can-
not admit him to be Harriet's equal ; and am rather
surprized, indeed, that he should have ventured to
address her. By your account he does seem to have
had some scruples. It is a pity that they were ever
got over. "
** Not Harriet's equal ! " exclaimed Mr Knightley,
loudly and warmly ; and with calmer asperity added, a
few moments afterwards, " No, he is not lier equal,
indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as in
situation. Emma, your infatuation about that girl
blinds you. What are Harriet Smith's claims, either
of birth, nature, or education, to any connection higher
than Robert Martin ? She is the natural daughter of
nobody knows whom, with probably no settled provision
at all, and certainly no respectable relations. She is
known only as parlour boarder at a common school.
She is not a sensible girl, nor a girl of any information.
She has been taught nothing useful, and is too young
and too simple to have acquired anything herself. At
her age she can have no experience ; and, with her
little wit, is not very likely ever to have any that can
avail her. She is pretty, and she is good-tempered,
and that is all. My only scruple in advising the match
was on his account, as being beneath his deserts, and a
bad connexion for him. I felt that, as to fortune, in
all probability he might do much better, and that, as to
a rational companion or useful helpmate, he could not
do worse. But I could not reason so to a man in love,
and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her ;
62 Emma
to her having that sort of disposition which, in good
hands like his, might be easily led aright, and turn out
very well. The advantage of the match I felt to be all
on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have
I now) that there would be a general cry out upon her
extreme good luck. Even your satisfaction I made
sure of. It crossed my mind immediately that you
would not regret your friend's leaving Highbury, for
the sake of her being settled so well. I remember say-
ing to myself, * Even Emma, with all her partiality for
Harriet, will think this a good match.'"
" I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little
of Emma as to say any such thing. What ! think a
farmer (and with all his sense and all his merit Mr
Martin is nothing more) a good match for my intimate
fiiend ! Not regret her leaving Highbury, for the sake
of marrying a man whom I could never admit as an
acquaintance of my own ! I wonder you should think
it possible for me to have such feelings. I assure you
mine are very different. I must think your statement
by no means fair. You are not just to Harriet's
claims. They would be estimated very differently by
others as well as myself; Mr Martin may be the richest
of the two, but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank
in society. The sphere in which she moves is much
above his. It would be a degradation. "
" A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance to be
married to a respectable, intelligent, gentleman-farmer ! "
^V'As to the circumstances of her biith, though in a
legal sense she may be called Nobody, it will not hold
in common sense. She is not to pay for the offence of
others, by being held below the level of those with
whom she is brought up. There can scarcely be a
doubt that her father is a gentleman — and a gentleman
of fortune. Her allowance is very liberal ; nothing
has ever been grudged for her improvement or comfort.
Emma 63
That she is a gentleman's daughter is indubitable to
me ; that she associates with gentlemen's daughters, no
one, I apprehend, will deny. She is superior to Mr
Robert Martin. " /|
" Whoever might be her parents, " said Mr Knight-
lev, " whoever may have had the charge of her, it does
not appear to have been any part of their plan to intro-
duce her into what you would call good society.
After receiving a very indifferent education, she Qis] left
in Mrs Goddard's hands to shift as she can — to move,
in short, in Mrs Goddard's line, to have Mrs Goddard's
acquaintance. Her friends evidently thought this good
enough for her ; and it tuas good enough. She desired
nothing better herself. Till you chose to turn her into
a friend, her mind had no distaste for her own set, nor
any ambition beyond it. She was as happy as possible
with the Martins in the summer. She had no sense of
superiority then. If she has it now, you have given it.
You have been no friend to Harriet Smith, Emma.
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far, if
he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined
to him. I know him well. He has too much real
feeling to address any v/oman on the hap-hazard of
selfish passion. And as to conceit, he is the farthest
from it of any man I know. Depend upon it, he had
encouragement. "
It was most convenient to Emma not to make a
direct reply to this assertion ; she chose rather to take
up her own line of the subject again.
" You are a very warm friend to Mr Martin ; but,
as I said before, are unjust to Harriet. Harriet's
claims to marry well are not so contemptible as you re-
present them. She is not a clever girl, but she has
better sense than you are aware of, and does not deserve
to have her understanding spoken of so slightingly.
Waving that point, however, and supposing her to be,
64
Emma
as you describe her, only pretty and good-natured, let
me tell you, that in the degree she possesses them, they
are not trivial recommendations to the world in general,
for she is, in fact, a beautiful girl, and must be thought
so by ninety-nine people out of an hundred ; and till it
appears that men are much more philosophic on the
subject of beauty than they are generally supposed, till
they do fall in love with well-informed minds instead of
handsome faces, a girl, with such loveliness as Harriet,
has a certainty of being admired and sought after, of
having the power of choosing from among many, con-
sequently a claim to be nice. Her good-nature, too, is
not so very slight a claim, comprehending, as it does,
real, thorough sweetness of temper and manner, a very
hum.ble opinion of herself, and a great readiness to be
pleased with other people. I am very much mistaken
if your sex in general would not think such beauty, and
such temper, the highest claims a woman could possess. "
" Upon my word, Emma^ to hear you abusing the
reason you have, is almost enough to make me think so
too. Better be without sense than misapply it as you
do. "
" To be sure, " cried she, playfully. " I know that
is the feeling of you all. I know that such a girl as
Harriet is exactly what every man delights in — v/hat at
once bewitches his senses and satisfies his judgment.
Oh, Haniet may pick and choose. Were you, your-
self, ever to marry, she is the very woman for you.
And is she, at seventeen, just entering into life, just
beginning to be known, to be wondered at because she
does not accept the first otFer she receives ? No — pray
let her have time to look about her. "
" I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy, "
said Mr Knightley presently, " though I have kept my
thoughts to myself; but I now perceive that it will be
a very unfortunate one for Harriet. You will puff her
Emma 65
up with such ideas of her own beauty, and of what she
has a claim to, that, in a little while, nobody within her
reach will be good enough for her. Vanity working on
a weak head produces every sort of mischief. Nothing
so easy as for a young lady to raise her expectations too
high. Miss Harriet Smith may not find offers of mar-
riage flow in so fast, though she is a very pretty girl.
Men of sense, whatever you may chuse to say, do not
want silly wives. Men of family would not be very
fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such
obscurity, — and most prudent men would be afraid of
the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved
in, when the mystery of her parentage came to be
revealed. Let her marry Robert Martin, and she is
safe, respectable, and happy for ever ; but if you en-
courage her to expect to marry greatly, and teach her
to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of conse-
quence and large fortune, she may be a parlour-boarder
at Mrs Goddard's all the rest of her life, — or, at least
(for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marry somebody
or other), till she grow desperate, and is glad to catch
at the old writing-master's son. "
« We think so very differently on this point, Mr
Knightley, that there can be no use in canvassing it.
We shall only be making each other more angry. But
as to my letting her many Robert Martin, it is impos-
sible : she has refused him, and so decidedly, I think,
as must prevent any second application. She must abide
by the evil of having refused him, whatever it may be ;
and as to the refusal itself, I will not pretend to say
that I might not influence her a little ; but I assure you
there was very little for me or for anybody to do. His
appearance is so much against him, and his manner so
bad, that if she ever were disposed to favour him, she is
not now. I can imagine, that, before she had seen any-
body superior, she might tolerate him. He was tlie
66 Emma
brother of her friends, and he took pains to please her ;
and altogether, having seen nobody better (that must
have been his great assistant), she might not, while she
was at Abbey-Mill, find him disagreeable. But the
case is altered now. She knows now what gentlemen
are ; and nothing but a gentleman in education and
manner has any chance with Harriet. "
" Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked ! "
cried Mr Knightley. " Robert Martin's manners have
sense, sincerity, and good-humour to recommend them ;
and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith
could understand. "
Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully
unconcerned, but was really feeling uncomfortable, and
wanting him very much to be gone. She did not repent
what she had done ; she still thought herself a better judge
of such a point of female right and refinement than he
could be ; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for
his judgment in general, which made her dislike having
it so loudly against her ; and to have him sitting just
opposite to her in angry state was very disagreeable-
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence, with only
one attempt on Emma's side to talk of the weather,
but he made no answer. He was thinking. The
result of his thoughts appeared at last in these words —
" Robert Martin has no great loss — if he can but
think so ; and I hope it will not be long before he
does. Your views for Harriet are best known to your-
self; but as you make no secret of your love of match-
making, it is fair to suppose that views, and plans, and
projects you have ; — and as a friend I shall just hint to
you, that if Elton is the man, I think it will be all
labour in vain. "
Emma laughed and disclaimed. He continued —
/f'Depend upon it, Eltcn will not do. Elton is a
Emma 67
very good sort of man, and a very respectable vicar of
Highbury, but not at all likely to make an imprudent
match. He knows the value of a good income as well
as anybody. Elton may talk sentimentally, but he will
act rationally. He is as well acquainted with his own
claims as you can be with Harriet's. He knows that
he is a very handsome young man, and a great favourite
wherever he goes ; and from his general way of talking
in unreserved moments, when there are only men pre-
sent, I am convinced that he does not mean to throw
himself away. I have heard him speak with great ani-
mation of a large family of young ladies that his sisters
are intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds
a-piece. " //
" I am very much obliged to you, " said Emma,
laughing again. " If I had set my heart on Mr Elton's
marrying Harriet, it would have been very kind to open
my eyes ; but at present I only want to keep Harriet
to myself. I have done with match-making, indeed.
I could never hope to equal my own doings at Ran-
dalls. I shall leave off while I am well. "
" Good morning to you, " said he, rising and walk-
ing off abruptly. He was veiy much vexed. He felt
the disappointment of the young man, and was morti-
fied to have been the means of promoting it, by the
sanction he had given ; and the part which, he was
persuaded, Emma had taken in the affair was provoking
him exceedingly.
Emma remained in a state of vexation too ; but there
was more indistinctness in the causes of hers than in his.
She did not always feel so absolutely satisfied with her-
self, so entirely convinced that her opinions were right
and her adversary's wrong, as Mr Knightley. He
walked off in more complete self-approbation than he
left for her. She was not so materially cast down,
however, but that a litde time and the return of Harriet
68 Emma
were very adequate restoratives. Harriet's staying
iway so long was beginning to make her uneasy. The
possibility of the young man's coming to Mrs God-
dard's that morning, and meeting with Harriet, and
pleading his own cause, gave alarming ideas. The
dread of such a failure, after all, became the prominent
uneasiness ; and when Harriet appeared, and in very
good spirits, and without having any such reason to give
for her long absence, she felt a satisfaction which settled
her with her own mind, and convinced her that, let Mr
Knightley think or say what he would, she had done
nothing which woman's friendship and woman's feelings
would not justify.
He had frightened her a little about Mr Elton ; but
when she considered that Mr Knightley could not have
observed him as she had done, neither with the interest
nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite of Mr
Knightley's pretensions) with the skill of such an ob-
server on such a question as herself, that he had spoken
it hastily and in anger, she was able to believe, that he
had rather said what he wished resentfully to be true,
than what he knew anything about. He certainly
might have heard Mr Elton speak with more unreserve
than she had ever done, and Mr Elton might not be of
an imprudent, inconsiderate disposition, as to money
matters : he might naturally be rather attentive than
otherwise to them ; but then, Mr Knightley did not
make due allowance for the influence of a strong
passion, at war with all interested motives. Mr
Knightley saw no such passion, and of course thought
nothing of its effects ; but she saw too much of it to
feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a
reasonable prudence might originally suggest ; and more
than a reasonable, becoming degree of prudence, she was
very sure did not belong to Mr Elton.
Harriet's cheerful look and manner established hers :
Emma ^ 69
f
she came back, not to think of Mr Martin, but to talk of
Mr Elton. Miss Nash had been tehing her something,
which she repeated immediately with great delight. Mr
Perry had been to Mrs Goddard's to attend a sick child,
and Miss Nash had seen him ; and he had told Miss
Nash, that as he was coming back yesterday from Clayton
Park he had met Mr Elton, and found, to his great
surprize, that Mr Elton was actually on his road to
London, and not meaning to return till the morrow,
though it was the whist club night, which he had been
never known to miss before ; and Mr Perry had re-
monstrated with him about it, and told him how shabby
it was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and
tried very much to persuade him to put off his journey
only one day ; but it would not do : Mr Elton had
been determined to go on, and had said, in a very parti-
cular way indeed, that he was going on business which he
would not put off for any inducement in the world;
and something about a very enviable commission, and
being the bearer of something exceedingly precious,
Mr Perry could not quite understand him, but he was
very sure there must be a lady in the case, and he told
him so ; and M r Elton only looked very conscious and
smiling, and rode off in great spirits. Miss Nash had
told her all this, and had talked a great deal more about
Mr Elton ; and said, looking so very significandy at her,
" that she did not pretend to understand what his busi-
ness might be, but she only knew that any woman whom
Mr Elton could prefer, she should think the luckiest
woman in the world ; for, beyond a doubt, Mr Elton
had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness, "
70
Emma
Cljaptet Ji%
MR KNIGHTLEY might quarrel with her, but
Emma could not quarrel with herself. He
was so much displeased, that it was longer than
usual before he came to Hartfield again ; and when
they did meet, his grave looks shewed that she was not
forgiven. She was sorry, but could not repent. On
the contrary, her plans and proceedings were more and
more justified, and endeared to her by the general
appearances of the next few days.
The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand
soon after Mr Elton's return, and being hung over the
mantelpiece of the common sitting-room, he got up to
look at it, and sighed out his half sentences of admira-
tion just as he ought ; and as for Harriet's feelings, they
were visibly forming themselves into as strong and steady
an attachment as her youth and sort of mind admitted.
Emma was soon perfectly satisfied of Mr Martin's being
no otherwise remembered, than as he furnished a con-
trast with Mr Elton, of the utmost advantage to the latter.
Her views of improving her little friend's mind, by
a great deal of useful reading and conversation, had
never yet led to more than a few first chapters, and the
intention of going on to-morrow. It was much easier
to chat than to study ; much pleasanter to let her
imagination range and work at Harriet's fortune,
than to be labouring to enlarge her comprehension, or
exercise it on sober facts ; and the only literary pursuit
which engaged Harriet at present, the only mental pro-
vision she was making for the evening of life, was the
collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort
that she could meet with, into a thin quarto of hot-pressed
paper, made up by her friend, and ornamented with
cyphers and trophies.
Emma yi
In this age of literature, such collections on a very
grand scale are not uncommon. Miss Nash, head-
teacher at Mrs Goddard's, had written out at least
three hundred ; and Harriet, who had taken the first
hint of it from her, hoped, with Miss Woodhouse's
help, to get a great many more. Emma assisted with
her invention, memory, and taste ; and as Harriet
wrote a very pretty hand, it was likely to be an
arrangement of the first order, in form as well as
quantity.
Mr Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the
business as the girls, and tried very often to recollect
something worth their putting in. " So many clever
riddles as there used to be when he was young — he
wondered he could not remember them ; but he hoped
he should in time. " And it always ended in " Kitty,
a fair but frozen maid. "
His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to
on the subject, did not at present recollect anything of
the riddle kind ; but he had desired Perry to be upon
the watch, and as he went about so much, something,
he thought, might come from that quarter.
It was by no means his daughter's wish that the
intellects of Highbury in general should be put under
requisition. Mr Elton was the only one whose assis-
tance she asked. He was invited to contribute any
really good enigmas, charades or conundrums, that he
might recollect ; and she had the pleasure of seeing him
most intently at work with his recollections ; and at
the same time, as she could perceive, most earnestly
careful that nothing ungallant, nothing that did not
breathe a compliment to the sex, should pass his lips.
They owed to him their two or three politest puzzles ;
and the joy and exultation with which at last he re-
called, and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known
charade —
72
Emma
My first doth affliction denote,
Which my second is destin'd to feel
And my whole is the best antidote
That affliction to soften and heal —
made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had
transcribed it some pages ago already.
" Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr
Elton ? " said she ; " that is the only security for its
freshness ; and nothing could be easier to you. "
" Oh, no ; he had never written, hardly ever, any-
thing of the kind in his life. The stupidest fellow !
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse " — he
stopt a moment — " or Miss Smith could inspire
him. "
The very next day, however, produced some proof
of inspiration. He called for a few moments, just to
leave a piece of paper on the table containing, as he
said, a charade which a friend of his had addressed to
a young lady, the object of his admiration ; but which,
from his manner, Emma was immediately convinced
must be his own.
" I do not offer it for Miss Smith's collection, " said
he. " Being my friend's, I have no right to expose it
in any degree to the public eye, but perhaps you may
not dislike looking at it, "
The speech vv^as more to Emma than to Harriet,
which Emma could understand. There was deep con-
sciousness about him, and he found it easier to meet
her eye than her friend's. He was gone the next
moment : — after another moment's pause —
" Take it, " — said Emma, smiling, and pushing the
paper towards Harriet — " it is for you. Take your
own.
But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch
it ; and Emma, never loth to be first, was obliged to
examine it her &'ilf.
Emma 73
To Miss
CHARADE.
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
Lords of the earth 1 their luxury and ease.
Another view of man, my second brings,
Behold him there, the monarch of the seas !
But ah ! united, what reverse we have I
Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flown :
Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply,
May its approval beam in that soft eye 1
She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the mean-
ing, read It through again to be quite certain, and quite
mistress of the lines, and then passing it to Harriet, sat
happily smiling, and saying to herself, while Harriet
was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope
and dulness, " Very well, Mr Elton, very well, indeed.
I have read worse charades. Courtship — a very good
hint. I give you credit for it. This is feeling your
way. This is saying very plainly —'Pray, Miss Smith,
give me leave to pay my add] esses to you- Approve
my charade and my intentions in the same glance.'
May its approval beam in that soft eye I
Harriet exactly. Soft is the very word for her eye —
of all epithets, the justest that could be given.
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply.
Humph — Harriet's ready wit ! All the better. A
man must be very much in love, indeed, to descnbe
her so. Ah ! Mr Knightley, I wish you had the
benefit of this ; I think this would convince you. For
once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself
D 2
74 Emma
mistaken. An excellent charade, indeed, and very
much to the purpose. Things must come to a crisis
soon now. "
She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant
observations, which were otherwise of a sort to run into
great length, by the eagerness of Harriet's wondering
questions.
*'What can it be, Miss Woodliouse ? — what can it
be ? I have not an idea — I cannot guess it in the
least. What can it possibly be ? Do try to find it
out. Miss Woodhouse. Do help me. I never saw
anything so hard. Is it kingdom ? I wonder who the
friend was — and who could be the young lady. Do
you think it is a good one ? Can it be woman ?
And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
Can it be Neptune ?
Behold him there, the monarch of the seas I
Or a trident ? or a mermaid ? or a shark ? Oh, no ;
shark is only one syllable. It must be very clever, or
he would not have brought it. Oh, Miss Woodhouse,
do you think we shall ever find it out ? "
" Mermaids and sharks ! Nonsense ! My dear
Harriet, what are you thinking of? Where would be
the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friend
upon a mermaid or a shark ? Give me the paper and
listen.
" For Miss , " read Miss Smith.
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,
Lords of the earth 1 tlieir luxury and ease
That is couri.
Another view ot man, my second brings ;
Behold him there, the monarch of the seas !
That is ship — plain as it can be Now for the cream.
Emma
75
But ah ! united (jcourtthip, you know), what reverse »•«
have I
Man's boasted power and freedom, all are flowr
Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,
And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.
A very proper compliment! — and then follows Ae
application which I think, my dear Harriet, you cannot
find much difficulty in comprehending. Read it in
comfort to yourseii. There can be no doubt of its
being written for you and to you. "
Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persua-
sion. She read the concluding lines, and was all
flutter and happiness. She could not speak. But she
was not wanted to speak. It was enough for her to
feel. Emma spoke for her.
" There is so pointed and so particular a meaning in
this compliment, " said she, " that 1 cannot have a
doubt as to Mr Elton's intentions. You are his object
— and you will soon receive the completes! proof of it.
I thought it must be so. I thought I could not be so
deceived ; but now it is clear : the state of his mind is
as clear and decided as my wishes on the subject have
been ever since I knew you. Yes, Harriet, just so long
have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen
which has happened. I could never tell whether an
attachment between you and Mr Elton were most
desirable or most natural. Its probability and its eligi-
bility have really so equalled each other ! I am very
happy. I congratulate you, my dear Harriet, with all
my heart. This is an attachment which a woman may
well feel pride in creating. This is a connection
which offers nothing but good. It will give you eveiy-
thing that you want — consideration, independence, a
proper home — it will fix you in the centre of all your
real friends, close to Hartfield and to me, and confirm
our intimacy for ever. This, Harriet, is an aUiaace
which can never raise a blush in either of us. "
76 Emma
" Dear Miss Woodhouse ! " and " Dear Miss Wood-
house ! " was all that Harriet, with many tender em-
braces, could articulate at first ; but when they did
arrive at something more like conversation, it was suffi-
ciently clear to her friend that she saw, felt, antici-
pated, and remembered just as she ought. Mr Elton's
superiority had very ample acknowledgment.
" Whatever you say is ahvays right, " cried Harriet,
" and therefore I suppose, and believe, and hope it
must be so ; but otherwise I could not have imagined
it. It is so much beyond anything I deserve. Mr
Elton, who might marry anybody ! There cannot be
two opinions about him. He is so very superior. Only
think of those sweet verses —'To Miss .'Dear
me, how clever ! Could it really be meant for
me? "
" I caHnot make a question, or listen to a question
about that. It is a certainty. Receive it on my judg-
ment. It is a sort of prologue to the play, a motto to
the chapter ; and will be soon followed by matter-of-
fact prose. "
" It is a sort of thing which nobody could have ex-
pected. I am sure, a month ago, I had no more idea
myself ! The strangest things do take place ! "
" When Miss Smiths and Mr Eltons get acquainted
— they do indeed — and really it is strange ; it is out of
the common course that what is so evidently, so palpably
desirable — what courts the pre-arrangement of other
people — should so immediately shape itself into the
proper form. You and Mr Elton are by situation
called together ; you belong to one another by every
circumstance of your respective homes. Your marry-
ing will be equal to the match at Randalls. There
does 8t;em to be a something in the air of Hartfield
which gives love exactly the right direction, and sends
it into the very channel where it ought to flow.
Emma 77
The course of true love never diil run smooth —
A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long
note on that passage. "
" That Mr Elton should really be in love with me —
me, of all people, who did not know him, to speak to
him, at Michaelmas. And he, the very handsomest
man that ever was, and a man that everybody looks up
to, quite like Mr Knightley. His company so sought
after, that everybody says he need not eat a single meal
by himself if he does not chuse it ; that he has more
invitations than there are days in the week. And so
excellent in the Church ! Miss Nash has put down all
the texts he has ever preached from since he came to
Highbury. Dear me ! When I look back to the first
time I saw him ! How little did I think ! — The two
Abbots and I ran into the front room, and peeped
through the blind when we heard he was going by, and
Miss Nash came and scolded us away, and staid to look
through herself; however, she called me back pre-
sently, and let me look too, which was very good-
natured. And how beautiful we thought he looked !
He was arm-in-arm with Mr Cole. "
" This is an alliance which, whoever — whatever your
friends may be, must be agreeable to them, provided, at
least, they have common sense ; and we are not to be
addressing our conduct to fools. If they are anxious to
see you happily married, here is a man whose amiable
character gives every assurance of it : if they wish b'
have you settled in the same country and circle which
they have chosen to place you in, here it will be accom-
plished ; and if their only object is that you should, in
the common phrase, be •well married, here is the com-
fortable fortune, the respectable establishment, the rise in
the world which must satisfy them. "
" Yes. very true. How nicely you talk ! I love to
hear you. You understand everything. You and Mr
yS Emma
Elton are one as clever as the other. This charade !
If I had studied a twelvemonth, I could never have
made anything like it. "
" I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner
of declining it yesterday. "
" I do think it is, without exception, the best charade
I ever read. "
" I never read one more to the purpose, certainly. "
" It is as long again as almost all we have had
before. "
" I do not consider its length as particularly in its
favour. Such things in general cannot be too short. "
Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear. The
most satisfactory comparisons were rising in her
mind.
" It is one thing, " said she, presently, her cheeks in
a glow, " to have very good sense in a common way,
like everybody else, and if there is anything to say, to
sit down and write a letter, and say just what you must,
in a short way ; and another, to write verses and
charades like this. "
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejec-
tion of Mr Martin's prose.
" Such sweet lines ! " continued Harriet, " these two
teafc ! But how shall I ever be able to return the paper,
s say I have found it out ? Oh, Miss Woodhouse,
w'hat can we do about that ? "
" Leave it to me. You do nothing. He will be
here this evening, I dare say, and then I will give it
him back, and some nonsense or other will pass between
us, and you shall not be committed. Your soft eyes
shall chuse their own time for beaming. Trust to
me.
" Oh, Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not
write this beautiful charade into my book ; I am sure I
have not got one half so good. "
Emma 79
" Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason
why you should not write it into your book. "
" Oh, but those two lines are "
" The best of all. Granted — for private enjoyment ;
and for private enjoyment keep them. They are not at
all the less written, you know, because you divide them.
The couplet does not cease to be, nor does its meaning
change. But take it away, and all appropriation ceases,
and a very pretty gallant charade remains, fit for any
collection. Depend upon it, he would not like to have
his charade slighted much better than his passion. A
poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities, or
neither. Give me the book. I will write it down,
and then there can be no possible reflection on you. "
Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly
separate the parts, so as to feel quite sure that her friend
were not writing down a declaration of love. It
seemed too precious an offering for any degree of
publicity.
" I shall never let that book go out of my own
hands, " said she.
" Very well, " replied Emma, " a most natural feeling,
and the longer it lasts, the better I shall be pleased.
But here is my father coming ; you will not object to
ray reading the charade to him. It will be giving him
so much pleasure. He loves anything of the sort,
and especially anything that pays woman a compliment.
He has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us all.
You must let me read it to him. "
Harriet looked grave.
" My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much
upon this charade. You will betray your feelings im-
properly, if you are too conscious and too quick, and
appear to affix more meaning, or even quite all the
meaning which may be affixed to it. Do not be over-
powered by such a little tribute of admiration. If he
8o Emma
had been anxious for secrecy, he would not have lefj
the paper while I was by, but he rather pushed it to-
wards me than towards you. Do not let us be too
solemn on the business. He has encouragement enough
to proceed, without our sighing out our souls over this
charade. "
" Oh no : I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it.
Do as you please. "
Mr Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the
subject again, by the recurrence of his very frequent in-
quiry of " Well, my dears, how does your book go on ?
Have you got anything fresh ? "
" Yes, papa ; we have something to read you, some-
thing quite fresh. A piece of paper was found on the
table this morning (dropt, we suppose, by a fairy), con-
taining a very pretty charade, and we have just copied
it in. "
She read it to him, just as he liked to have anything
read, slowly and distinctly, and two or three times
over, with explanations of every part as she pro-
ceeded ; and he was very much pleased, and, as she
had foreseen, especially struck with the complimentary
conclusion.
" Aye, that's very just, indeed ; that's very properly
said. Very true. * Woman, lovely woman.'It is
such a pretty charade, my dear, that I can easily guess
what fairy brought it. Nobody could have written so
prettily but you, Emma. "
Emma only nodded and smiled. After a little think-
ing, and a very tender sigh, he added —
" Ah, it is no difficulty to see who you take aftei .
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things. If
J had but her memory. But I can remember nothing ;
not even that particular riddle which you have heard
me mention ; I can only recollect the first stanza ; and
there are seveial —
Emma 8i
Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.
Kindled a flame I yet deplore ;
The hoodwink'd boy I called to aid,
Though of his near approach afraid.
So fatal to my suit before.
And that is all that I can recollect of it ; but it is very
clever all the way through. But I think, my dear, you
said you had got it. "
" Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page.
We copied it from the Elegant Extracts. It was
Garrick's, you know. "
" Ay, very true — I wish I could recollect more of
it —
Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.
The name makes me think of poor Isabella ; for
she was very near being christened Catherine, after
her grandmamma. I hope we shall have her here
next week. Have you thought, my dear, where you
shall put her, and what room there will be for the
children ? "
♦'Oh, yes — she will have her own room, of course ;
the room she always has ; and there is the nursery for
the children — ^just as usual, you know. Why should
there be any change ? "
" I do not know, my dear — but it is so long since
she was here — not since last Easter, and then only for
a few days. Mr John Knightley's being a lawyer is
very inconvenient. Poor Isabella ! she is sadly taken
away from us all ; and how sorry she will be, when she
comes, not to see Miss Taylor here. "
" She will not be surprized, papa, at least. "
" I do not know, my dear. I am sure I was very
much surprized when I first heard she was going to be
mamed. "
" We must ask Mr and Mrs Weston to dine with
us, while Isabella is here. "
82 Emma
« Yes, my dear, if there is time. But " (in a very
depressed tone) " she is coming for only one week.
There will not be time for anything. "
•'It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer, but
it seems a case of necessity. Mr John Knightley must
be in town again on the 28th; and we ought to be
thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole of the
time they can give to the country, that two or three
days are not to be taken out for the Abbey. Mr
Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas,
though you know it is longer since they were with him
than with us. "
" It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor
Isabella were to be anywhere but at Hartfield. "
Mr Woodhouse could never allow for Mr Knightley's
claims on his brother, or anybody's claims on Isabella,
except his own. He sat musing a little while, and then
said —
" But I do not see why poor Isabella should be
obliged to go back so soon, though he does. I think,
Emma, I shall try and persuade her to stay longer with
us. She and the children might stay very well. "
" Ah, papa, that is what you never have been able to
accomplish, and I do not think you ever will. Isabella
cannot bear to stay behind her husband. "
This was too true for contradiction. Unwelcome as
it was, Mr Woodhouse could only give a submissive
sigh ; and as Emma saw his spirits affected by the idea
of his daughter's attachment to her husband, she imme-
diately led to such a branch of the subject as must
raise them.
" Harriet must give us as much of her company as
she can while my brother and sister are here. I am
sure she will be pleased with the children. We are
very proud of the children, are not we, papa ? I
wonder which she will think the handsomest, Henry or
John? "
Emma 83
" Aye, I wonder which she will. Poor little dears,
how glad they will be to come. They are very fond of
being at Hartfield, Harriet. "
" I dare say they are, sir. I am sure I do not know
who is not. "
" Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his
mamma. Henry is the eldest ; he was named after
me, not after his father. John, the second, is named
after his father. Some people are surprized, I believe,
that the eldest was not, but Isabella would have him
called Henry, which I thought very pretty of her.
And he is a very clever boy, indeed. They are all
remarkably clever ; and they have so many pretty ways.
They will come and stand by my chair and say,
'Grandpapa, can you give me a bit of string ? * and
once Henry asked me for a knife, but I told him knives
were only made for grandpapas. I think their father is
too rough with them very often. "
" He appears rough to you, " said Emma, " because
you are so very gentle yourself; but if you could com-
pare him with other papas, you would not think him
rougli. He wishes his boys to be active and hardy ;
and if they misbehave, can give them a sharp word now
and then ; but he is an affectionate father — certainly Mi
John Knightley is an affectionate father. The children
are all fond of him. "
" And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up
to the ceiling in a very frightful way. "
" But they like it, papa ; there is nothing they like
80 much. It is such enjoyment to them, that if their
uncle did not lay down the rule of their taking turns,
whichever began would never give way to the other. "
** Well I cannot understand it. "
" That is the case with us all, papa. One half
of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the
other. "
8+
Emma
Later in the morning, and just as the girls were
going to separate, in preparation for the regular four
o'clock dinner, the hero of this inimitable charade
walked in again. Harriet turned away ; but Emma
could receive him with the usual smile, and her quick
eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having
made a push — of having thrown a die ; and she
imagined he was come to see how it might turn up.
His ostensible reason, however, was to ask whether Mr
Woodhouse's party could be made up in the evening
without him, or whether he should be in the smallest
degree necessary at Hartfield. If he were, everything
else must give way ; but otherwise his friend Cole had
been saying so much about his dining with him — had
made such a point of it — that he had promised him con-
ditionally to come.
Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his dis-
appointing his friend on their account ; her father was
sure of his rubber. He re-urged — she re-declined ;
and he seemed then about to make his bow, when,
taking the paper from the table, she returned it.
" Oh, here is the charade you were so obligmg as to
leave with us ; thank you for the sight of it. We
admired it so much that I have ventured to write it
into Miss Smith's collection. Your friend will not take
it amiss, I hope. Of course, I have not transcribed
beyond the first eight Hnes. "
Mr Elton certainly did not very well know what to
say. He looked rather doubtingly — rather confused ;
said something about " honour, " — glanced at Emma
and at Harriet, and then seeing the book open on the
table, took it up, and examined it very attentively.
With the view of passing off an awkward moment,
Emma smilingly said —
" You must make my apologies to your friend ; but
so good a charade must not be confined to one or two.
Emma 85
He may be sure ot every woman's approbation while he
writes with such gallantry. "
" I have no hesitation in saying, " replied Mr Elton,
though hesitating a good deal while he spoke — " I have
no hesitation in saying — at least if my friend feels at all
as / do — I have not the smallest doubt that, could
he see his little efRision honoured as / see it (looking
at the book again, and replacing it on the table), he
would consider it as the proudest moment of his life. "
After this speech he was gone as soon as possible.
Emma could not think it too soon ; for with all his
good and agreeable qualities there was a sort of parade
in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to
laugh. She ran away to indulge the inclination,
leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to
Harriet's share.
Ctiapter %
THOUGH now the middle of December, there
had yet been no weather to prevent the young
ladies from tolerably regular exercise ; and on
the morrow, Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a
poor sick family who lived a little way out of High-
bury.
Their road to this detached cottage was down
Vicarage Lane, a lane leading at right-angles from the
broad, though irregular, main street of the place ; and,
as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of Mr
Elton. A few inferior dwellings were first to be
passed, and then, about a quarter of a mile down the
lane, rose the vicarage, an old and not very good house,
almost as close to the road as it could be. It had no
advantage of situation ; but had been very much
smartened up by the present proprietor ; and, such as it
86 Emma
was, there could be no possibility of the two friends
passing it without a slackened pace and observing eyes.
Emma's remark, was —
" There it is. There go you and your riddle-book
one of these days. " Harriet's was —
" Oh, what a sweet house ! How very beautiful !
There are the yellow curtains that Miss Nash admires
80 much. "
" I do not often walk this way now, " said Emma,
as they proceeded, " but then there will be an induce-
ment, and I shall gradually get intimately acquainted
with all the hedges, gates, pools, and pollards, of this
part of Highbury. "
Harriet, she found, had never in her life been with-
in side the vicarage ; and her curiosity to see it was so
extreme, that, considering exteriors and probabilities,
Emma could only class it as a proof of love, with Mr
Elton's seeing ready wit in her.
" I wish we coiild contrive it, " said she ; " but I
cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in ; —
no servant that I want to inquire about of his house-
keeper — no message from my father. "
She pondered, but could think of nothing. After a
mutual silence of some minutes, Harriet thus began
again —
" I do so wonder. Miss Woodhouse, that you should
not be married, or going to be married — so charming as
you are. "
Emma laughed, and replied, —
" My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to
induce me to marry ; I must find other people charm-
ing — one other person at least. And I am not only
not going to be married at present, but have very little
intention of ever marrying at all. "
** Ah, so you say ; but I cannot believe it. "
" I must see somebody very superior to anv one I
Emma 87
have seen yet, to be tempted : Mr Elton, you know "
(recollecting herself), " is out of the question : and I do
not wish to see any such person. I would rather not
be tempted. I cannot really change for the better. If
I were to marry, I must expect to repent it. "
*'Dear me ! — it is so odd to hear a woman talk
so !
" I have none of the usual inducements of women to
marry. Were I to fall in love, indeed, it would be a
different thing ; but I never have been in love ; it is not
my way, or my nature ; and I do not think I ever
shall. And, without love, I am sure I should be a fool
to change such a situation as mine. Fortune 1 do not
want ; employment I do not want ; consequence I do
not want ; I believe few married women are half as
much mistress of their husband's house as I am of
Hartfield ; and never, never could 1 expect to be so
truly beloved and important ; so always first and always
right in any man's eyes as I am in my father's. "
" But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss
Bates ! "
" That is as formidable an image as you could present,
Harriet ; and if I thought I should ever be like Miss
Bates — so silly, so satisfied, so smiling, so prosing, so
undistinguishing and unfastidious, and so apt to tell
everything relative to everybody about me, I would
marry to-morrow. But between us, I am convinced
there never can be any likeness, except in being un-
married. "
" But still, you will be an old maid — and that's so
dreadful ! "
" Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old
maid ; and it is poverty only which makes celibacy
contemptible to a generous public ! A single woman
with a very narrow income must be a ridiculous, dis-
agreeable old maid ! the proper sport of boys and girls ;
88 Emma
but a single woman of good fortune is always respect-
able, and may be as sensible and pleasant as anybody
else ! And the distinction is not quite so much against
the candour and common sense of the world as appears
at first ; for a very narrow income has a tendency to
contract the mind, and sour the temper. Those who
can barely live, and who live perforce in a very small,
and generally very inferior, society, may well be
illiberal and cross. This does not apply, however, to
Miss Bates : she is only too good-natured and too
silly to suit me ; but, in general, she is very much to
the taste of everybody, though single and though poor.
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind : 1
really believe, if she had only a shilling in the world,
she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it :
and nobody is afraid of her — that is a great chanii. "
" Dear me ! but what shall you do ? How shall
you employ yourself when you grow old ? "
" If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy
mind, with a great many independent resources ; and I
do not perceive why I should be more in want of em-
ployment at forty or fifty than one - and - twenty.
Woman's usual occupations of eye, and hand, and
mind, will be as open to me then as they are now, or
with no important variation. If I draw less, I shall
read more ; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-
work. And as for objects of interest, objects for the
affections, which is, in truth, the great point of in-
feriority, the want of which is really the great evil to
be avoided in not marrying, I shall be very well off,
with all the children of a sister I love so much to care
about. There will be enough of them, in all proba-
bility, to supply every sort of sensation that declining
life can need. There will be enough for every hope
and every fear ; and though my attachment to none
can equal that of a parent, it suits my ideas of comfort
Emma 89
better than what is warmer and blinder. My nephews
and nieces : I shall often have a niece with me. "
" Do you know Miss Bates's niece ? That is, I
know you must have seen her a hundred times — but
are you acquainted ? "
" Oh, yes ; we are always forced to be acquainted
whenever she comes to Highbury. By-the-bye, that
is almost enough to put one out of conceit with a niece.
Heaven forbid, at least, that I should ever bore people
half so much about all the Knightleys together as she
does about Jane Fairfax. One is sick of the very
name of Jane Fairfax. Every letter from her is read
forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go
round and round again ; and if she does but send her
aunt the pattern of a stomacher, or knit a pair of garters
for her grandmother, one hears of nothing else for a
month. I wish Jane Fairfax very well, but she tires
me to death. "
They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle
topics were superseded. Emma was very compassion-
ate ; and the distresses of the poor were as sure of
relief from her personal attention and kindness, her
counsel and her patience, as from her purse. She
understood their ways, could allow for their ignorance
and their temptations, had no romantic expectations of
extraordinary virtue from those for whom education
had done so little, entered into their troubles with
ready sympathy, and always gave her assistance with as
much intelligence as good will. In the present in-
stance, it was sickness and poverty together which she
came to visit ; and after remaining there as long as she
could give comfort or advice, she quitted the cottage
with such an impression of the scene as made her say
to Harriet, as they walked away —
" These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good.
How trifling they make everything else appear ! I
90 Emma
feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor
creatures all the rest of the day ; and yet who can say
how soon it may all vanish from my mind ? "
" Very true, " said Harriet- " Poor creatures ! one
can think of nothing else, "
" And really, I do not think the impression will
soon be over, " said Emma, as she crossed the low
hedge, and tottering footstep which ended the narrow,
slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought
them into the lane again. " I do not think it will, "
stopping to look once more at all the outward wretched-
ness of the place, and recal the still greater within.
" Oh dear, no, " said her companion.
They walked on. The lane made a slight bend ;
and when that bend was passed, Mr Elton was imme-
diately in sight and so near as to give Emma time only
to say farther, —
" Ah, Harriet, here come a very sudden trial of our
stability in good thoughts. Well " (smiling), " I hope it
may be allowed that if compassion has produced exer-
tion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that is
truly important. If we feel for the wretched enough
to do all we can for them, the rest is empty sympathy,
only distressing to ourselves. "
Harriet could just answer, " Oh dear, yes, " before
the gentleman joined them. The wants and sufferings
of tlie poor family, however, were the first subject on
meeting. He had been going to call on them. His
visit he would now defer ; but they had a very in-
teresting parley about what could be done and should
be done. Mr Elton then turned back to accompany
them.
" To fall in u ith each other on such an errand as
this, " thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ;
this will bring a great increase of love on each side. I
should not wonder if it were to bring on the declara-
Emma 91
tion. It must, if I were not here. I wish I were
anywhere else. "
Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she
could, she soon after\vards took possession of a narrow
footpath, a little raised on one side of the lane, leaving
them together in the main road. But she had not been
tliere two minutes when she found that Harriet's habits
of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too,
and that, in short, they would both be soon after her.
This would not do ; she immediately stopped, under
pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing
of her half-boot, and stooping down in complete occupa-
tion of the footpath, begged them to have the goodness
to walk on, and she would follow in half a minute.
They did as they were desired ; and by the time she
judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had
the comfort of further delay in her power, being over-
taken by a child from the cottage, setting out, accord-
ing to orders, with her pitcher, to fetch broth from
Hartfield. To walk by the side of this child, and talk
to and question her, was the most natural thing in the
world, or would have been the most natural, had she
been acting just then without design ; and by this means
the others were still able to keep ahead, without any
obligation of waiting for her. She gained on them,
however, involuntarily ; the child's pace was quick, and
theirs rather slow ; and she was the more concerned at
it, from their being evidently in a conversation which
interested them. Mr Elton was speaking with anima-
tion, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention ;
and Emma having sent the child on, was beginning to
think how she might draw back a little more, when
they both looked around, and she was obliged to join
them.
Mr Elton was still talking, still engaged in soma
interesting detail ; and Emma experienced some dis-
92 Emma
appointment when she found that he was only giving his
fair companion an account of the yesterday's party at
his friend Cole's, and that she was come in herself for
the Stilton cheese, the north Wiltshire, the butter, the
cellery, the beet-root, and all the dessert.
" This would soon have led to something better, of
course, " was her consoling reflection ; " anything in-
terests between those who love ; and anything will
serve as introduction to what is near the heart. If I
could but have kept longer away. "
They now walked on together quietly till within
view of the vicarage pales, when a sudden resolution of
at least getting Harriet into the house, made her again
find something very much amiss about her boot, and fall
behind to arrange it once more. She then broke the
lace off short, and dexterously throwing it into a ditch,
was presently obliged to entreat them to stop, and
acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as
to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort.
" Part of my lace is gone, " said she, " and I do not
know how I am to contrive. I really am a most
troublesome companion to you both, but I hope I am
not often so ill-equipped. Mr Elton, I must beg leave
to stop at your house, and ask your housekeeper for a
bit of ribband or string, or anything just to keep my boot
on. "
Mr Elton looked all happiness at this proposition ;
and nothing could exceed his alertness and attention in
conducting them into his house, and endeavouring to
make everything appear to advantage. The room they
were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied, and
looking forwards ; behind it was another with which it
immediately communicated ; the door between them
was open, and Emma passed into it with the house-
keeper, to receive her assistance in the most comfortable
manner. She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she
Emma 93
found it ; but she fully intended that Mr Elton should
close it. It was not closed, however, it still remained
ajar ; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant con-
versation, she hoped to make it practicable for him to
chuse his own subject in the adjoining room. For ten
minutes she could hear nothing but herself. It could
be protracted no longer. She was then obliged to be
finished, and make her appearance.
The lovers were standing together at one of the
windows. It had a most favourable aspect ; and, for
half a minute, Emma felt the glory of having schemed
successfully. But it would not do ; he had not come
to the point. He had been most agreeable, most de-
lightful ; he had told Harriet that he had seen them go
by, and had purposely followed them ; other little
gallantries and allusions had been dropt, but nothing
serious.
" Cautious, very cautious, " thought Emma ; " he
advances inch by inch, and will hazard nothing till he
believes himself secure. "
Still, however, though everything had not been ac-
complished by her ingenious device, she could not but
flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much
present enjoyment to both, and must be leading them
forward to the great event.
Cljapter %%
MR EL,TON must now be left to himself. It
was no longer in Emma's power to superintend
his happiness, or quicken his measures. The
coming of her sister's family was so very near at hand,
that first in anticipation, and then in reslity; it became
henceforth her prime object of interest ; and during tne
94 Emma
ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be
expected — she did not herself expect — that anything
beyond occasional, fortuitous assistance could be afforded
by her to the lovers. They might advance rapidly if
they would, however ; they must advance somehow or
other, whether they would or no. She hardly wished
to have more leisure for them. There are people, who
the more you do for tliem, the less they will do for
themselves.
Mr and Mrs John Knightley, from having been
longer than usual absent from Surry, were exciting, of
course, rather more than the usual interest. Till this
year, every long vacation since their marriage had been
divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey ; but
all the holidays of this autumn had been given to sea-
bathing for the children ; and it was therefore many
months since they had been seen in a regular way by
their Surry connections, or seen at all by Mr Wood-
house, who could not be induced to get so far as London,
even for poor Isabella's sake ; and who, consequently,
was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in
forestalling this too short visit.
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her,
and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and
coachman, who were to bring some of the party the last
half of the way ; but his alarms were needless : the sixteen
miles being happily accomplished, and Mr and Mrs
John Knightley, their five children, and a competent
number of nursery - maids, all reaching Hartfield in
safety. The bustle and joy of such an arrival, the
many to be talked to, welcomed, encouraged, and
variously dispersed and disposed of, produced a noise
and confusion which his nerves could not have borne
under any other cause, nor have endured much longer
even for this ; but the ways of Hartfield and the
feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs John
Emma 95
Knightley, that in spite of maternal solicitude for the
immediate enjoyment of her little ones, and for their
having instantly all the liberty and attendance, all the
eating and drinking, and sleeping and playing, which
they could possibly wish for, without the smallest delay,
the children v/ere never allowed to be long a disturbance
to him, either in themselves or in any restless attendance
on them.
Mrs John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little
woman, of gentle, quiet manners, and a disposition re-
markably amiable and affectionate, wrapt up in her
family, a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so tenderly
attached to her father and sister that, but for these
higher ties, a warmer love might have seemed impos-
sible. She could never see a fault in any of them.
She was not a woman of strong understanding or any
quickness ; and with this resemblance of her father, she
inherited also much of his constitution ; was delicate in
her own health, over-careful of that of her children, had
many fears and many nerves, and was as fond of her
own Mr Wingfield in town as her father could be of
Mr PeiTy. They were alike, too, in a general benevo-
lence of temper, and a strong habit of regard for every
old acquaintance.
Mr John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and
very clever man, rising in his profession ; domestic, and
respectable in his private character : but with reserved
manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ;
and capable of being sometimes out of humour. He
was not an ill-tempered man, not so often unreason-
ably cross as to deserve such a reproach : but his temper
was not his great perfection ; and, indeed, with such a
worshipping wife, it was hardly possible that any natural
defects in it should not be increased. The extreme
sweetness of her temper must hurt his. He had all
the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted ;
96 Emma
and he could sometimes act an ungracious, ol say a
severe thing. He was not a great favourite with his
fair sister-in-law. Nothing wrong in him escaped her.
She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella,
which Isabella never felt herself. Perhaps she might
have passed over more had his manners been flattering
to Isabella's sister, but they were only those of a calmly
kind brother and friend, without praise and without
blindness ; but hardly any degree of personal compli-
ment could have made her regardless of that greatest
fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into,
the want of respectful forbearance towards her father.
There he had not always the patience that could have
been wished. Mr Woodhouse's peculiarities and fid-
gettiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational
remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill bestowed. It
did not often happen ; for Mr John Knightley had
really a great regard for his father-in-law, and generally
a strong sense of what was due to him ; but it was too
often for Emma's charity, especially as there was all the
pain of apprehension frequently to be endured, though
the offence came not. The beginning, however, of
every visit displayed none but the properest feelings,
and this being of necessity so short might be hoped to
pass away in unsullied cordiality. They had not been
long seated and composed when Mr Woodhouse, with
a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh, called his
daughter's attention to the sad change at Hartfield
since she had been there last,
" Ah, my dear, " said he, " poor Miss Taylor ! It
is a grievous business. "
" Oh yes, sir, " cried she, with ready sympathy,
♦'how you must miss her ! And dear Emma too.
What a dreadful loss to you both ! I have been so
grieved for you. I could not imagine how you could
possibly do without her. It is a sad change, indeed ;
but I hope she is pretty well, sir. "
Emma gy
** Pretty weU, my dear — I hope — pretty well. I do
not know but that the place agrees with her tolerably. "
Mr John Knightley here asked Emma, quietly,
whether there were any doubts of the air of Randalls.
" Oh no : none in the least. I never saw Mrs
Weston better in my life — never looking so well. Papa
is only speaking his own regret. "
" Very much to the honour of both, " was the hand-
some reply.
" And do you see her, sir, tolerably often ? " asked
Isabella, in the plaintive tone which just suited her
father.
Mr Woodhouse hesitated. " Not near so often, my
dear, as I could wish. "
" Oh, papa, we have missed seeing them but one
entire day since they married. Either in the morning
or evening of every day, excepting one, have we seen
either Mr Weston or Mrs Weston, and generally both,
either at Randalls or here ; and as you may suppose,
Isabella, most frequently here. They are very, very
kind in their visits. Mr Weston is really as kind as
herself. Papa, if you speak in that melancholy way,
you will be giving Isabella a false idea of us all. Every-
body must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed ;
but everybody ought also to be assured that Mr and
Mrs Weston do really prevent our missing her by any
means to the extent we ourselves anticipated — which is
the exact truth. "
" Just as it should be, " said Mr John Knightley,
" and just as I hoped it was from your letters. Her
wish of showing you attention could not be doubted,
and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all
easy. I have been always telling you, my love, that I
had no idea of the change being so very material to
Hartfield as you apprehended ; and now you have
Emma's account, I hope you will be satisfied. "
98 Emma
" Why, to be sure, " said Mr Woodhouse — " yes,
certainly. I cannot deny that Mrs Weston — poor Mrs
Weston — does come and see us pretty often ; but then,
she is always obliged to go away again. "
" It would be very hard upon Mr Weston if she did
not, papa. You quite forget poor Mr Weston. "
" I think, indeed, " said John Knightley, pleasantly,
" that Mr Weston has some little claim. You and I,
Emma, will venture to take the part of the poor
husband. I being a husband, and you not being a wife,
the claims of the man may very likely strike us with
equal force. As for Isabella, she has been married
long enough to see the convenience of putting all the
Mr Westons aside as much as she can. "
" Me, my love ? " cried his wife, hearing and under-
standing only in part. " Are you talking about me ?
I am sure nobody ought to be, or can be, a greater
advocate for matrimony than I am ; and if it had not
been for the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should
never have thought of Miss Taylor but as the most
fortunate woman in the world ; and as to slighting Mr
Weston — that excellent Mr Weston — I think there is
nothing he does not deserve. I believe he is one of the
very best-tempered men that ever existed. Excepting
yourself and your brother, I do not know his equal for
temper. I shall never forget his flying Henry's kite for
him that very windy day last Easter ; and ever since
his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in
writing that note, at twelve o'clock at night, on purpose
to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham,
I have been convinced there could not be a more feel-
ing heart nor a better man in existence. If anybody
can deserve him, it must be Miss Taylor. "
" Where is the young man ? " said John Knight-
ley. " Has he been here on this occasion, or has he
not ? "
Emma 99
" He has not been here yet, " replied Emma. " There
was a strong expectation of his coming soon after the
marriage, but it ended in nothing ; and I have not
heard him mentioned lately. "
" But you should tell them of the letter, my dear, "
said her father. " He wrote a letter to poor Mrs
Weston, to congratulate her, and a very proper, hand-
some letter it was. She shewed it to me. I thought
it very well done of him, indeed. Whether it was his
own idea, you know, one cannot tell. He is but young,
and his uncle, perhaps "
" My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty. You forget
how time passes. "
" Three-and-twenty ! is he, indeed ? Well, I could
not have thought it ; and he was but two years old
when he lost his poor mother. Well, time does fly,
indeed ! and my memory is very bad. However, it
was an exceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr and
Mrs Weston a great deal of pleasure. I remember it
was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept. 28th,
and began, *My dear Madam,'but I forget how it
went on ; and it was signed'F. C. Weston Churchill.'
I remember that perfectly. "
" How very pleasing and proper of him ! " cried the
good-hearted Mrs John Knightley. " I have no doubt
of his being a most amiable young man. But how sad
it is that he should not live at home with his father !
There is something so shocking in a child's being taken
away from his parents and natural home ! I never
could comprehend how Mr Weston could part with
him. To give up one's child ! I really never could
think well of anybody who proposed such a thing to
anybody else. "
" Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I
fancy, " observed Mr John Knightley, coolly. " But
you need not imagine Mr Weston to have felt what you
loo Emma
would feel in giving up Henry or John. Mr Weston
is rather an easy, cheerful-tempered man, than a man of
strong feelings : he takes things as he finds them, and
makes enjoyment of them somehow or other, depending,
I suspect, much more upon what is called society for his
comforts, that is, upon the power of eating and drink-
ing, and playing whist with his neighbours five times a
week, than upon family affection, or anything that home
affords. "
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection
on Mr Weston, and had half a mind to take it up ; but
she struggled, and let it pass. She would keep the
peace if possible ; and there was something honourable
and valuable in the strong domestic habits, the all-
suificiency of home to himself, whence resulted her
brother's disposition to look down on the common rate
of social intercourse, and those to whom it was important.
It had a high claim to forbearance.
C!)aptet %J%
MR KNIGHTLEY was to dine with them, rather
against the inclination of Mr Woodhouse, who
did not like that any one should share with him
in Isabella's first day. Emma's sense of right, how-
ever, had decided it ; and, besides the consideration of
what was due to each brother, she had particular plea-
sure, from the circumstance of the late disagreement
between Mr Knightley and herself, in procuring him
the proper invitation.
She hoped they might now become friends again.
She thought it was time to make up. Makin^-up,
indeed, would not do. She certainly had not been in
the wrong, and he would never own that he had. Con-
Emma lor
:es3ion must be out of the question ; but it was time to
appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled ; and she
hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship,
that when he came into the room she had one of the
children with her — the youngest, a nice little girl about
eight months old, who was now making her first visit to
Hartfield, and very happy to be danced about in her
aunt's arms. It did assist ; for though he began witli
grave looks and short questions, he was soon led on to
talk of them all in the usual way, and to take the child
out of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect
amity. Emma felt they were friends again ; and the
conviction giving her at first great satisfaction, and then
a little sauciness, she could not help saying, as he was
admiring the baby —
" What a comfort it is that we think alike about our
nephews and nieces ! As to men and women, our
opinions are sometimes very different ; but with regard
to these children, I observe we never disagree. "
" If you were as much guided by nature in your
estimate of men and women, and as little under the
power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them,
as you are where these children are concerned, we
might always think alike. "
" To be sure — our discordancies must always arise
from my being in the wrong. "
" Yes, " said he, smiling, " and reason good. I was
sixteen years old when you were born. "
" A material difference, then, " she replied ; " and
no doubt you were much my superior in judgment at
that peiiod of our lives ; but does not the lapse of one-
and-twenty years bring our understandings a good deal
nearer ? "
" Yes, a good deal nearer. "
" But still, not near enough to give me a chance of
being right, if we think differently. "
I02 Emma
" I have still the advantage of you by sixteen yeai " s*
experience, and by not being a pretty young woman and
a spoiled child. Come, my dear Emma, let us be
friends, and say no more about it. Tell your aunt,
little Emma, that she ought to set you a better example
than to be renewing old grievances, and that if she were
not wrong before, she is now. "
" That's time, " she cried, " very true. Little
Emma, grow up a better woman than your aunt. Be
infinitely cleverer, and not half so conceited. Now,
Mr Knightley, a word or two more, and I have done.
As far as good intentions went, we were both right,
and I must say that no effects on my side of the argu-
ment have yet proved wrong. I only want to know
that Mr Martin is not very, very bitterly disap-
pointed. "
" A man cannot be more so, " was his short, full
answer.
" Ah 1 Indeed 1 am very sorry. Come, shake
hands with me. "
This had just taken place, and with great cordiality,
when John Knighdey made his appearance ; and " How
d'ye do, George ? " and " John, how are you ? " suc-
ceeded in the true English style, burying under a
calmness that seemed all but indifference the real at-
tachment which would have led either of them, if
requisite, to do everything for the good of the other.
The evening was quiet and conversible, as Mr
Woodhouse declined cards entirely, for the sake of
comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and the little
paity made two natural divisions : on one side he and
his daughter ; on the other the two Mr Knightleys ;
their subjects totally distinct, or very rarely mixing,
and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other.
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pur-
suits, but principally of those of the eldei " , whose temper
Emma 103
was by much the most communicative, and who was
always the greater talker. As a magistrate, he had
generally some point of law to consult John about, or,
at least, some curious anecdote to give ; and as a
farmer, as keeping in hand the home-farm at Donwell,
he had to tell what every field was to bear next year,
and to give all such local information as could not fail
of being interesting to a brother whose home it had
equally been the longest part of his life, and whose at-
tachments were strong. The plan of a drain, the
change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the destin-
ation of every acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn,
was entered into with as much equality of interest by
John as his cooler manners rendered possible ; and if
his willing brother ever left him anything to inquire
about, his inquiries even approached a tone of eagerness.
While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr
Woodhouse was enjoying a full flow of happy regrets
and fearful affection with his daaghter.
" My poor dear Isabella, " said he, fondly taking her
hand, and interrupting, for a few moments, her busy
labours for some one of her five children, " how long
it is, how terribly long since you were here ! And
how tired you must be after your journey ! You must
go to bed early, my dear — and I recommend a little
gruel to you before you go. You and I will have a
nice basin of gruel together. My dear Emma, suppose
we all have a little gruel. "
Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing,
as she did, that both the Mr Knightleys were as un-
persuadable on that article as herself, and two basins
only were ordered. After a little more discourse in
praise of gruel, with some wondering at its not being
taken every evening by everybody, he proceeded to say,
with an air of grave reflection —
" It was an awkward business, my dear, your spend-
I04 Emma
ing the autumn at South End instead of coming here.
1 never had much opinion of the sea air. "
" Mr Wingfield most strenuously recommended it,
sir, or we should not have gone. He recommended it
for all the children, but particularly for the weakness in
little Bella's throat — both sea air and bathing. "
" Ah, my dear, but Perry had many doubts about
the sea doing her any good ; and as to myself, I have
been long perfectly convinced, though perhaps I never
told you so before, that the sea is very rarely of use
to anybody. I am sure it almost killed me once. "
" Come, come, " cried Emma, feeling this to be an
unsafe subject, " I must beg you not to talk of the sea.
It makes me envious and miserable ; I who have never
seen it ! South End is prohibited, if you please. My
dear Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry
about Mr Perry yet ; and he never forgets you. "
" Oh, good Mr Perry, how is he, sir ? "
" Why, pretty well ; but not quite well. Poor
Perry is bilious, and he has not time to take care of
himself ; he tells me he has not time to take care of
himself — which is very sad — but he is always wanted
all round the country. I suppose there is not a man in
such practice anywhere. But then there is not so clever
a man anywhere. "
" And Mrs Perry and the childi " en, how are they ?
Do the children grow ? I have a great regard for Mr
Perry. I hope he will be calling soon. He will be so
pleased to see my little ones. "
" I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a
question or two to ask him about myself of some con-
sequence. And, my dear, whenever he comes, you had
better let him look at little Bella's throat. "
" Oh, my dear sir, her throat is so much better that
I have hardly any uneasiness about it. Either bathing
has been of the greatest service to her, or else it is to
Emma 105
be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr Wing-
field's, which we have been applying at times ever since
August. "
" It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should
have been of use to her ; and if I had known you
were wanting an embrocation, I would have spoken
to "
" You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs and Mise
Bates, " said Emma ; " I have not heard one inquiry
after them. "
" Oh ! the good Bateses. I am quite ashamed of
myself, but you mention them in most of your letters.
I hope they are quite well. Good old Mrs Bates ! I
will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.
They are always so pleased to see my children. And
that excellent Miss Bates ! — such thorough worthy
people ! How are they, sir ? "
" Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. But
poor Mrs Bates had a bad cold about a month ago. "
" How sorry I am ! but colds were never so pre-
valent as they have been this autumn. Mr Wingfield
told me that he has never known them more general or
heavy, except when it has been quite an influenza. "
" That has been a good deal the case, my dear, but
not to the degree you mention. Perry says that colds
have been very general, but not so heavy as he has very
often known them in November. Perry does not call
.\t altogether a sickly season. "
" No, I do not know that Mr Wingfield considers
it very sickly, except "
" Ah, my poor dear child, the truth is, that in
London it is always a sickly season. Nobody is healthy
in London — nobody can be. It is a dreadful thing to
have you forced to live there ; — so far off! — and the
air so bad ! "
*'No, indeed, tve are not at all in a bad air. Our
E 2
io6 Emma
part of London is very superior to most others. You
must not confound us with London in general, my dear
sir. The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very
different from almost all the rest. We are so very airy !
I should be unwilling, I own, to live in any other part
of the town ; there is hardly any other that I could
be satisfied to have my children in : but we are so
remarkably airy ! Mr Wingfield thinks the vicinity
of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as
to air. "
" Ah, my dear, it is not like Hartfield. You make
the best of it — but after you have been a week at
Hartfield, you are all of you different creatures ; you
do not look like the same. Now 1 cannot say that I
think you are any of you looking well at present. "
" I am sorry to hear you say so, sir ; but I assure you,
excepting those little nervous headaches and palpitations
which I am never entirely free from anywhere, I am
quite well myself; and if the children were rather pale
before they went to bed, it was only because they were
a little more tired than usual, from their journey and
the happiness of coming. I hope you will think better
of their looks to-mOrrow ; for I assure you Mr Wing-
field told me, that he did not believe he had ever sent
us ofl[ altogether, in such good case. 1 trust, at least,
that you do not think Mr Knlghtley looking ill, " turning
her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband.
" Middling, my dear ; I cannot compliment you. I
think Mr John Knlghtley very far from looking well. "
" What is the matter, sir ? Did you speak to me : "
cried Mr John Knlghtley, hearing his own name.
" I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does
not think you looking well ; but I hope it is only from
being a little fatigued. I could have wished, however,
as you know, that you had seen Mr Wingfield before
you left home. "
Emma 107
" My dear Isabella, " exclaimed he, hastily, " pray
do not concern yourself about my looks. Be satisfied
with doctoring and coddling yourself and the children,
and let me look as I chuse. "
" I did not thoroughly understand what you were
telling your brother, " cried Emma, " about your friend
Mr Graham's intending to have a bailiff from Scotland,
to look after his new estate. But will it answer i Will
not the old prejudice be too strong ? "
And she talked in this way so long and successfully
that, when forced to give her attention again to her
father and sister, she had nothing worse to hear than
Isabella's kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane
Fairfax, though no great favourite with her in general,
she was, at that moment, very happy to assist in
praising.
" That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax ! " said Mrs John
Knightley. " It is so long since I have seen her, except
now and then for a moment accidentally in town. What
happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and
excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them ! I always
regret excessively, on dear Emma's account, that she
cannot be more at Highbury ; but now their daughter is
married, I suppose Colonel and Mrs Campbell will not
be able to part with her at all. She would be such a
delightful companion for Emma. "
Mr Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added —
" Our little friend, Harriet Smith, however, is just
such another pretty kind of young person. You will
like Harriet. Emma could not have a better companion
than Harriet. "
" I am most happy to hear it ; but only Jane Fairfax
one knows to be so very accomplished and superior, and
exactly Emma's age. "
This topic was discussed very happily, and others
succeeded of similar moment, and passed away with
io8 Emma
similar harmony ; but the evening did not close without
a little return of agitation. The gruel came, and su])-
plied a great deal to be said — much praise and many
comments — undoubting decision of its wholesomeness
for every constitution, and pretty severe philippics upon
the many houses where it was never met with tolerable ;
but, unfortunately, among the failures which the daughter
had to instance, the most recent, and therefore most
promment, was in her own cook at South End, a young
woman hired for the time, who never had been able to
understand what she meant by a basin of nice smooth
gruel, thin, but not too thin. Often as she had wished
for and ordered it, she had never been able to get any-
thing tolerable. Here was a dangerous opening.
" Ah, " said Mr Woodhouse, shaking his head, and
fixing his eyes on her with tender concern. The
ejaculation in Emma's ear expressed, " Ah, there is no
end of the sad consequences of your going to South
End. It does not bear talking of. " And for a little
whUe she hoped he would not talk of it, and that a
silent rumination might suffice to restore him to the
relish of his own smooth gruel. After an interval of
some minutes, however, he began with —
" I shall always be veiy sorry that you went to the
sea this autumn, instead of coming here. "
** But why should you be sony, sir ? I assure you,
it did the children a great deal of good. "
" And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had
better not have been to South End. South End is an
unhealthy place. Perry was surprized to hear you had
fixed upon South End. "
" I know there is such an idea with many people, but
indeed it is quite a mistake, sir. We all had our health
perfectly well there, never found the least inconvenience
rrom the mud, and Mr Wingfield says it is entirely a
mistake to suppose the place unliealthy ; and I am sure
Emma 109
he may be depended on, for he thoroughly understands
the nature of the air, and his own brother and family
have been there repeatedly. "
" You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you
went anywhere. Perry was a week at Cromer once,
and he holds it to be the best of all the sea-bathing
places. A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air.
And, by what I understand, you might have had lodg-
ings there quite away from the sea — a quarter of a mile
off — very comfoitable. You should have consulted
Perry. "
" But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey ;
only consider how great it would have been. A hundred
miles, perhaps, instead of forty. "
" Ah, my dear, as Perry says, where health is at
stake nothing else should be considered : and if one is
to travel, there is not much to chuse between forty
miles and an hundred. Better not move at all, better
stay in London altogether, than travel forty miles to get
into a worse air. This is just what Perry said. It
seemed to him a very ill-judged measure. "
Emma's attempts to stop her father had been vain ;
and when he had reached such a point as this, she
could not wonder at her brother-in-law's breaking out.
" Mr Perry, " said he, in a voice of very strong dis-
pleasure, " would do as well to keep his opinion till it
is asked for. Why does he make it any business of
his to wonder at what I do ? — at my taking my family
to one part of the coast or another ? I may be allowed,
I hope, the use of my judgment as well as Mr Perry.
1 want his directions no more than his drugs. " He
paused, and growing cooler in a moment, added, with
only sarcastic dryness, " If Mr Perry can tell me how
to convey a wife and five children a distance of an
hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense or
inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be as
no Emma
willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could
himself. "
" True, true, " cried Mr Knightley, with most ready
interposition — " veiy true. That's a consideration, in-
deed. But, John, as to what I was telling you of my
idea of moving the path to Langham, of turning it
more to the right that it may not cut through the home
meadows, I cannot conceive any difficulty. I should
not attempt it, if it were to be the means of inconveni-
ence to the Highbury people, but if you call to mind
exactly the present line of the path — the only way of
proving it, however, will be to turn to our maps. I
shall see you at the Abbey to-morrow morning, I hope,
and then we will look them over, and you shall give
me your opinion. "
Mr Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh
reflections on his friend Perry, to whom he had in fact,
though unconsciously, been attributing many of his own
feelings and expressions ; but the soothing attentions of
his daughters gradually removed the present evil, and
the immediate alertness of one brother, and better
Tecollections of the other, prevented any renewal of it.
Cl)apter ^IDHliX
THERE could hardly be a happier creature in the
world than Mrs John Knightley, in this short
visit to Hartfield, going about every morning
among her old acquaintance with her five children, and
talking over what she had done every evening with her
father and sister. She had nothing to wish otherwise,
but that the days did not pass so swiftly. It was a
delightful visit — perfect, in being much too short.
In general their evenings were less engaged with
Emma 1 1 1
friends than their mornings : but one complete dinner
engagement, and out of the house too, there was no
avoiding, though at Christmas. Mr Weston would take
no denial : they must all dine at Randalls one day ;
even Mr Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible
thing in preference to a division of the party.
How they were all to be conveyed, he would have
made a difficulty if he could, but as his son and daughter's
carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield, he was
not able to make more than a simple question on that
head ; it hardly amounted to a doubt ; nor did it occupy
Emma long to convince him that they might in one of
the carriages find room for Harriet also.
Harriet, Mr Elton, and Mr Knightley, their own
especial set, were the only persons invited to meet them
— the hours were to be early as well as the numbers
few ; Mr Woodhouse's habits and inclination being con-
sulted in everything.
The evening before this great event (for it was a
very great event that Mr Woodhouse should dine out on
the 24th of December) had been spent by Harriet at
Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed
with a cold, that, but for her own earnest wish of being
nursed by Mrs Goddard, Emma could not have allowed
her to leave the house. Emma called on her the next
day, and found her doom already signed with regard to
Randalls. She was very feverish and had a bad sore
throat : Mrs Goddard was full of care and affection,
Mr Perry was talked of, and Harriet herself was too
ill and low to resist the authority which excluded her
from this delightful engagement, though she could no'
speak of her loss without many tears.
Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her
in Mrs Goddard's unavoidable absences, and raise her
spirits by representing how much Mr Elton's would be
depressed when he knew her state ; and left her at last
112 Emma
tolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of hia
having a most comfortless visit, and of their all missing
her very much. She had not advanced many yards
from Mrs Goddard's door, when she was met by Mi
Elton himself, evidently coming towards it, and as they
walked on slowly together in conversation about the
invalid — of whom he, on the rumour of considerable
illness, had been going to inquire, that he might carry
some report of her to Hartfield — they were overtaken
by Mr John Knightley, returning from the daily visit to
Donwell, with his two eldest boys, whose healthy,
glowing faces showed all the benefit of a country run,
and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast
mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for.
They joined company and proceeded together. Emma
was just describing the nature of her friend's complaint
— " a throat very much inflamed, with a great deal of
heat about her, a quick low pulse, & c., and she was
sorry to find from Mrs Goddard that Harriet was liable
to very bad sore throats, and had often alarmed her
with them. " Mr Elton looked all alarm on the occa-
sion, as he exclaimed —
" A sore throat ! — I hope not infectious. I hope
not of a putrid infectious sort. Has Perry seen her ?
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of
your friend. Let me entreat you to run no risks. Why
does not Perry see her ? "
Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself,
tranquillized this excess of apprehension by assurances
of Mrs Goddard's experience and care ; but as there
must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she could
not wish to reason away, which she would rather feed
and assist than not, she added soon afterwards — as if
quite another subject —
" It is so cold, so very cold, and looks and feels so
very much like snow, that if it were to any other place
Emma 113
or with any other party, I should really try not to go
out to-day, and dissuade my father from venturing ; hut
as he has made up his mind, and does not seem to feel
the cold himself, I do not like to interfere, as I know
it would be so great a disappointment to Mr and Mrs
Weston. But upon my word, Mr Elton, in your case,
I should certainly excuse myself. You appear to me a
little hoarse already ; and when you consider what
demand of voice and what fatigues to-morrow will
bring, I think it would be no more than common prud-
ence to stay at home and take care of yourself
to-night. "
Mr Elton looked as if he did not very well know
what answer to make ; which was exactly the case ; for
though very much gratified by the kind care of such a
fair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her's, he
had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;
but Emma, too eager and busy in her own previous
conceptions and views to hear him impartially, or see
him with clear vision, was very well satisfied with his
muttering acknowledgment of its being " very cold, cer-
tainly very cold, " and walked on, rejoicing in having
extricated [him] from Randalls, and secured him the
power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of
the evening. "
" You do quite right, " said she ; " we will make
your apologies to Mr and Mrs Weston. "
But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her
brother was civilly offering a seat in his carriage, if the
weather were Mr Elton's only objection, and Mr Elton
actually accepting the offer with much prompt satisfac-
tion. It was a done thing ; Mr Elton was to go, and
never had his broad handsome face expressed more
pleasure than at this moment ; never had his smile been
stronger, nor his eyes more exulting than when he next
looked at her.
1 14 Emma
" Well, " said she to herself, *'this is most strange :
After I had got him oft so well, to chuse to go into
company, and leave Harriet ill behind ! Most strange
indeed ! But there is, I believe, in many men, espe-
pecially single men, such an inclination — such a passion
for dining out ; a dinner engagement is so high in the
class of their pleasures, their employments, their dignities,
almost their duties, that anything gives way to it, and
this must be the case with Mr Elton — a most valuable,
amiable, pleasing young man undoubtedly, and very
much in love with Harriet ; but still he cannot refuse
an invitation, he must dine out wherever he is asked.
What a strange thing love is ! he can see ready wit in
Harriet, but will not dine alone for her. "
Soon afterwards, Mr Elton quitted them, and she
could not but do him the justice of feeling that there
was a great deal of sentiment in his manner of naming
Harriet at parting ; in the tone of his voice, while
assuring her that he should call at Mrs Goddard's for
news of her fair friend, the last thing before he prepared
for the happiness of meeting her again, when he hoped
to be able to give a better report ; and he sighed and
smiled himself off in a way that left the balance of
approbation much in his favour.
After a few minutes of entire silence between i.hem,
John Knightley began with —
" I never in my life saw a man more intent on being
agreeable than Mr Elton. It is downright labour to
him where ladies are concerned. With men he can be
rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to please,
every feature works. "
" Mr Elton's manners are not perfect, " replied
Emma ; " but where there is a wish to please, one
ought to overlook, and one does overlook a great deal.
Where a man does his best with only moderate powers,
he will have the advanuge over negligent superiority.
Emma 115
There is such perfect good temper and good will in
Mr Elton, as one cannot but value. "
" Yes, " said Mr John Knightley presently, with
some slyness, " he seems to have a great deal of good
will towards ^OM. "
*'Me ! " she replied with a smile of astonishment ;
" are you imagining me to be Mr Elton's object ? "
" Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma ;
and if it never occurred to you before, you may as well
take it into consideration now. "
" Mr Elton in love with me ! What an idea ! "
" I do not say it is so ; but you will do well to con-
sider whether it is so or not, and to regulate your
behaviour accordingly. I think your manners to him
encouraging. I speak as a friend, Emma. You had
better look about you, and ascertain what you do, and
what you mean to do. "
" I thank you ; but I assure you, you are quite mis-
taken. Mr Elton and I are very good friends, and
nothing more ; " and she walked on, amusing herself in
the consideration of the blunders which often arise from
a partial knowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes
Vifhich people of high pretensions to judgment are for
ever falling into ; and not very well pleased with her
brother for imagining her blind and ignorant, and in
want of counsel. He said no more.
Mr Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind
to the visit, that in spite of the increasing coldness, he
seemed to have no idea of shrinking from it, and set
forward at last most punctually with his eldest daughter
in his own carriage, with less apparent consciousness of
the weather than either of the others ; too full of the
wonder of his own going, and the pleasure it was to
afford at Randalls, to see that it was cold, and too well
wrapt up to feel it. The cold, however, was severe ;
and by the time the second carriage was in motion, a
ii6 Emma
few flakes of snow were finding their way down, and
the sky had the appearance of being so overcharged as
to want only a milder air to produce a very white world
in a very short time.
Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the
happiest humour. The preparing and the going abroad
in such weather, with the sacrifice of his children after
dinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least, which Mr
John Knightley did not by any means like ; he antici-
pated nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the
purchase ; and the whole of their drive to the vicarage
was spent by him in expressing his discontent.
" A man, " said he, " must have a very good opinion
of himself when he asks people to leave their own fire-
side, and encounter such a day as this, for the sake of
coming to see him. He must think himself a most
agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing. It is
the greatest absurdity — actually snowing at this moment !
The folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at
home, and the folly of people's not staying comfortably
at home when they can ! If we were obliged to go out
such an evening as this, by any call of duty or business,
what a hardship we should deem it ; — and here are we,
probably with rather thinner clothing than usual, setting
forward voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance of the
voice of nature, which tells man, in everything given to
his view or his feelings, to stay at home himself, and
keep all under shelter that he can ;— here are we setting
forward to spend five dull hours in another man's house,
with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and
heard yesterday, and may not be said and heard again
to-morrow. Going in dismal weather, to return pro-
bably in worse ; four horses and four servants taken out
for nothing but to convey five idle, shivering creatures
into colder rooms and worse company than they might
have had at home. "
Emma 117
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased
assent, which no doubt he was in the habit of receiving,
to emulate the " Very true, my love, " which must have
been usually administered by his travelling companion ;
but she had resolution enough to refrain from making
any answer at all. She could not be complying ; she
dreaded being quarrelsome ; her heroism reached only
to silence. She allowed him to talk, and arranged the
glasses, and wrapped herself up, without opening her lips.
They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let
down, and Mr Elton, spruce, black, and smiling, was
with them instantly. Emma thought with pleasure of
some change of subject. Mr Elton was all obligation
and cheerfulness ; he was so very cheerful in his civili-
ties indeed, that she began to think he must have received
a different account of Harriet from what had reached
her. She had sent while dressing, and the answer had
been, " Much the same — not better. "
" My report from Mrs Goddard's, " said she, pre-
sently, " was not so pleasant as I had hoped : —'not
better,'was my answer. "
His face lengthened immediately, and his voice was
the voice of sentiment as he answered : —
" Oh no — I am grieved to find — I was on the point
of telling you, that when I called at Mrs Goddard's
door, which I did the very last thing before I returned
to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better, by
no means better, rather worse. Very much grieved and
concerned — I had flattered myself that she must be
better after such a cordial as I knew had been given her
in the morning. "
Emma smiled, and answered — " My visit was of use
to the nervous part of her complaint, I hope ; but not
even I can chanri away a sore throat ; it is a most
severe cold, indeed. Mr Perry has been with her, as
you probably heard. "
ii8 Emma
" Yes — I imagined — that is — I did not —'" *
" He has been used to her in these complaints, and I
hope to-morrow morning will bring us both a more
comfortable report. But it is impossible not to feel
uneasiness. Such a sad loss to our party to-day ! "
" Dreadful ! Exactly so, indeed. She will be
missed every moment. "
This was very proper ; the sigh which accompanied
it was really estimable ; but it should have lasted
longer. Emma was rather in dismay when only half a
minute afterwards he began to speak of other things,
and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment.
" What an excellent device, " said he, *'the use of a
sheep-skin for carriages. How very comfortable they
make it ; impossible to feel cold with such precautions.
The contrivances of modern days, indeed, have rendered
a gentleman's carriage perfectly complete. One is so
fenced and guarded from the weather, that not a breath
of air can find its way unpermitted. Weather becomes
absolutely of no consequence. It is a very cold after-
noon — but in this carriage we know nothing of the
matter. Ha 1 snows a little, I see. "
" Yes, " said John Knightley, " and I think we shall
have a good deal of it. "
" Christmas weather, " observed Mr Elton. " Quite
seasonable ; and extremely fortunate we may tliink our-
selves that it did not begin yesterday, and prevent this
day's party, which it might very possibly have done, for
Mr Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there
been much snow on the ground ; but now it is of no
consequence. This is quite the season, indeed, for
friendly meetings. At Christmas everybody invites
their friends about them, and people think little of even
the worst weather. I was snowed up at a friend's
house once for a week. Nothing could be pleasanter.
I went for only one night, and could not get away till
tiiat very day sennight. "
Emma 119
Mr John Knlghtley looked as if he did not compre-
hend the pleasure, but said only, coolly —
" I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Ran-
dalls. "
At another time Emma might have been amused,
but she was too much astonished now at Mr Elton's
spirits for other feelings. Harriet seemed quite for-
gotten in the expectation of a pleasant party.
" We are sure of excellent fires, " continued he,
" and everything in the greatest comfort. Charming
people, Mr and Mrs Weston ; Mrs Weston indeed is
much beyond praise, and he is exactly what one values,
so hospitable, and so fond of society ; it will be a small
party, but where small parties are select, they are, per-
haps, the most agreeable of any. Mr Weston's dining-
room does not accommodate more than ten comfortably ;
and for my part, I would rather, under such circum-
stances, fall short by two than exceed by two. I think
you will agree with me (turning with a soft air to
Emma), I think I shall certainly have your approba-
tion, though Mr Knightley, perhaps, from being used to
the large parties of London, may not quite enter into
our feelings. "
" I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir
— I never dine with anybody. "
" Indeed !'(in a tone of wonder and pity), " I had
no idea that the law had been so great a slavery. Well,
sir, the time must come when you will be paid for all
this, when you will have little labour and great enjoy-
ment. "
" My first enjoyment, " replied John Knightley, as
they passed through the sweep-gate, " will be to find
myself safe at Hartfield again. "
I20
Emma
Cljaptct %J¥*
SOME change of countenance was necessaiy foi
each gentleman as they walked into Mrs Wes-
ton's drawing-room ; — Mr Elton must com-
pose his joyous looks, and Mr John Knightley disperse
his ill-humour. Mr Elton must smile less, and Mr
John Knightley more, to fit them for the place.
Emma only might be as nature prompted, and show
herself just as happy as she was. To her, it was real
enjoyment to be with the Westons. Mr Weston was
a great favourite, and there was not a creature in the
world to whom she spoke with such unreserve as to his
wife ; not any one, to whom she related with such
conviction of being listened to and understood, of being
always interesting and always intelligible, the little
affairs, arrangements, perplexities, and pleasures of her
father and herself. She could tell nothing of Hart-
field, in which Mrs Weston had not a lively concern ;
and half an hour's uninterrupted communication of all
those little matters on which the daily happiness of
private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of
each.
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day's
visit might not afford, which certainly did not belong
to the present half hour ; but the very sight of Mrs
Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice, was grateful
to Emma, and she determined to think as little as
possible of Mr Elton's oddities, or of anything else
unpleasant, and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the
utmost.
The misfortune of Harriet's cold had been pretty
well gone through before her arrival. Mr WoodJiouse
had been safely seated long enough to give the history
of it, besides all the history of his own and Isabella's
Emma 121
coming, and of Emma's being to follow ; and had, in-
deed, just got to the end of his satisfaction that James
should come and see his daughter, when the others
appeared, and Mrs Weston, who had been almost
wholly engrossed by her attentions to him, was able to
turn away and welcome her dear Emma.
Emma's project of forgetting Mr Elton for a while
made her rather sorry to find, when they had all taken
their places, that he was close to her. The difficulty
was great of driving his strange insensibility towards
Harriet from her mind, while he not only sat at her
elbow, but was continually obtruding his liappy coun-
tenance on her notice, and solicitously addressing her
upon every occasion. Instead of forgetting him, his
behaviour was such that she could not avoid the internal
suggestion of " Can it really be as my brother ima-
gined ? can it be possible for this man to be beginning
\o transfer his affections from Harriet to me ? — Absurd
and insufferable ! " — Yet he would be so anxious for
her being perfectly warm, would be so interested about
her father, and so delighted with Mrs Weston ; and,
at last, would begin admiring her drawings with so
much zeal and so little knowledge, as seemed terribly
like a would-be lover, and made it some effort with
her to preserve her good manners. — For her own sake
she could not be rude ; and for Harriet's, in the hope
that all would yet turn out right, she was even positively
civil : but it was an effort, especially as something was
going on amongst the others, in the most overpowering
period of Mr Elton's nonsense, which she particularly
wished to listen to. She heard enough to know that
Mr Weston was giving some information about his
son : she heard the words " my son, " and " Frank, "
and " my son, " repeated several times over ; and, from
a few other half syllables, very much suspected that he
was announcing an early visit from his son ; but before
122 Emma
she could quiet Mr Elton, the subject was so com-
pletely past, that any reviving question from her would
have been awkward.
// Now it so happened, that, in spite of Emma's resolu-
tion of nevei marrying, there was something in the
name, in the idea, of Mr Frank Churchill, which
always interested her. She had frequently thought —
especially since his father's marriage with Miss Taylor —
that if she nvere to marry, he was the very person to suit
her in age, character, and condition. He seemed, by
this connection between the families, quite to belong to
her. She could not but suppose it to be a match that
everybody who knew them must think of. That Mr
and Mrs Weston did think of it, she was very strongly
persuaded ; and though not meaning to be induced by
him, or by anybody else, to give up a situation which
she believed more replete with good than any she could
change it for, she had a great curiosity to see him, a
decided intention of finding him pleasant, of being liked
by him to a certain degree, and a sort of pleasure in the
idea of their being coupled in their friends'imaginations.'^)
With such sensations, Mr Elton's civilities were
dreadfully ill-timed ; but she had the comfort of appear-
ing very polite, while feeling very cross ; — and of think-
ing that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass
without bringing forward the same information again, or
the substance of it, from the open-hearted Mr Weston.
So it proved ; — for, when happily released from Mr
Elton, and seated by Mr Weston at dinner, he made
use of the very first interval in the cares of hospitality,
the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton, to say
to her —
" We want only two more to be just the right number.
I should like to see two more here — your pretty little
friend. Miss Smith, and my son — and then I should say
we were quite complete. I believe you did not hear me
Emma 1 23
telling the others in the drawing-room that we are ex-
pecting Frank. I had a letter from him this morning,
and he will be with us within a fortnight. "
Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure,
and fully assented to his proposition, of Mr Frank
Churchill and Miss Smith making their party quite
complete.
" He has been wanting to come to us, " continued
Mr Weston, " ever since September : every letter has
been full of it ; but he cannot command his own time.
He has those to please who must be pleased, and who
(between ourselves) are sometimes to be pleased only
by a good many sacrifices. But now I have no doubt
of seeing him here about the second week in January. "
" What a very great pleasure it will be to you ! and
Mrs Weston is so anxious to be acquainted with him,
that she must be almost as happy as yourself. "
" Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be
another put-ofF. She does not depend upon his coming
so much as I do ; but she does not know the parties so
well as I do. The case, you see, is — (but this is quite
between ourselves ; I did not mention a syllable of it
in tlie other room. There are secrets in all families,
you know) — the case is, that a party of friends are
invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January, and that
Frank's coming depends upon their being put off. If
they are not put off, he cannot stir. But I know they
will, because it is a family that a certain lady, of some
consequence at Enscombe, has a particular dislike to ;
and though it is thought necessary to invite them once
in two or three years, they always are put off when it
comes to the point. I have not the smallest doubt of
the issue. I am as confident of seeing Frank here
before the middle of January, as I am of being here
myself; but your good friend there (nodding towards
the upper end of the table) has so few vagaries herself,
124 Emma
and has been so little used to them at Hartfield, that
she cannot calculate on their effects, as I have been long
in the practice of doing. "
" I am sorry there should be anything like doubt in
the case, " replied Emma ; " but am disposed to side
with you, Mr Weston. If you think he will come, I
shall think so too ; for you know Enscombe. "
" Yes — I have some right to that knowledge ; though
I have never been at the place in my life. She is an
odd woman ! But I never allow myself to speak ill of
her, on Frank's account ; for I do believe her to be
very fond of him. I used to think she was not capable
of being fond of anybody except herself; but she has
always been kind to him (in her way — allowing for
little whims and caprices, and expecting everything to be
as she likes). And it is no small credit, in my opinion,
to him, that he should excite such an affection ; for,
though I would not say it to anybody else, she has no
more heart than a stone to people in general, and the
devil of a temper. "
Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon
it to Mrs Weston, very soon after their moving into the
drawing-room, wishing her joy — yet observing that she
knew the first meedng must be rather alarming. Mrs
Weston agreed to it ; but added, that she should be
very glad to be secure of undergoing the anxiety of a
first meeting at the time talked of ; " for I cannot
depend upon his coming. I cannot be so sanguine a»
Mr Weston. I am very much afraid that it will ali
end in nothing. Mr Weston, I dare say, has been tell
ing you exactly how the matter stands ? "
" Yes — it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill-
humour of Mrs Churchill, which I imagine to be the
most certain thing in the world. "
" My Emma ! " replied Mrs Weston, smiling, " what
is the certainty of caprice i " Then turning to Isabella,
Emma 125
who had not oeen attending before, — " You must
know, my deai Mrs Knightley, that we are by no
means so sure of seeing Mr Frank Churchill, in my
opinion, as his father thinks. It depends entirely upon
his aunt's spirits and pleasure ; in short, upon her
temper. To you — to my two daughters — I may
venture on the truth. Mrs Churchill rules at Ens-
combe, and is a very odd-tempered woman ; and
his coming now depends upon her being willing to
spare him. "
" Oh, Mrs Churchill ! eveiybody knows Mrs
Churchill, " replied Isabella, " and I am sure I never
think of that poor young man without the greatest com-
passion. To be constantly living with an ill-tempered
person must be dreadful. It is what we happily have
never known anything of; but it must be a life of
misery. What a blessing that she never had any child-
ren ! Poor little creatures, how unhappy she would
have made them ! "
Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs Weston.
She should then have heard more. Mrs Weston would
speak to her with a degree of unreserve which she
would not hazard with Isabella ; and, she really
believed, would scarcely try to conceal anything relative
to the Churchills from her, excepting those views on
the young man, of which her own imagination had
already given her such instinctive knowledge. But
at present there was nothing more to be said. Mr
Woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing-
room. To be sitting long after dinner was a con-
finement that he could not endure. Neither wine
nor conversation was anything to him ; and gladly
did he move to those with whom he was always
comfortable.
While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found
an opportunity of saying —
126 Emma
" And so you do not consider this visit from youi
son as by any means certain. I am sorry for it
The introduction must be unpleasant, whenever it
takes place ; and the sooner it could be over the
better. "
" Yes ; and every delay makes one more apprehen-
sive of other delays. Even if this family, the Braith-
waites, are put off, I am still afraid that some excuse
may be found for disappointing us. I cannot bear to
imagine any reluctance on his side ; but I am sure there
is a great wish on the Churchills to keep him to them-
selves. There is jealousy. They are jealous even of
his regard for his father. In short, I can feel no
dependence on his coming, and I wish Mr Weston were
less sanguine. "
" He ought to come, " said Emma. " If he could
stay only a couple of days, he ought to come ; and one
can hardly conceive a young man's not having it in his
power to do as much as that. A young •woman, if she
fall into bad hands, may be teazed, and kept at a dis-
tance from those she wants to be with ; but one cannot
comprehend a young man's being under such restraint,
as not to be able to spend a week with his father, if he
likes it. "
*'One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways
of the family, before one decides upon what he can do, "
replied Mrs Weston. " One ought to use the same
caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any
one individual of any one family ; but Enscombe, I
believe, certainly must not be judged by general rules ;
ihe is so very unreasonable ; and everything gives way
lO her. "
" But she is so fond of the nephew ; he is so very
great a favourite. Now, according to my idea of Mrs
Churchill, it would be most natural, that while she
makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to
Emma 127
whom she owes everything, while she exercises incessant
caprice towards him, she should frequently be governed
by the nephew, to whom she owes nothing at all. "
" My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet
temper, to understand a bad one, or to lay down rules
for it : you must let it go its own way. I have no doubt
of his having, at times, considerable influence ; but it
may be perfectly impossible for him to know beforehand
ivhen it will be. "
Emma listened, and then coolly said, " 4 shall not
be satisfied unless he comes. "
" He may have a great deal of influence on some
points, " continued Mrs Weston, " and on others, very
little ; and among those, on which she is beyond his
reach, it is but too likely may be this very circumstance
of his coming away from them to visit us. "
Cl)aptcr %V^
MR WOODHOUSE was soon ready for his tea;
and when he had drank his tea he was quite
ready to go home ; and it was as much as his
three companions could do, to entertain away his notice
of the lateness of the hour, before the other gentlemen
appeared. Mr Weston was chatty and convivial, and
no friend to early separations of any sort ; but at last the
drawing-room party did receive an augmentation. Mr
Elton, in very good spirits, was one of the first to walk
rn. Mrs Weston and Emma were sitting together on a
sopha. He joined them immediately, and with scarcely
an invitation, seated himself between them.
Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement
afi^orded her mind by the expectation of Mr Frank
Churchill, was willing to forget his late improprieties.
128 Emma
and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his
making Harriet his very first subject, was ready to listen
with most friendly smiles.
He professed himself extremely anxious about her
fair friend — her fair, lovely, amiable friend. " Did she
know ? — had she heard anything about her, since their
being at Randalls ? — he felt much anxiety — he must
confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him
considerably. " And in this style he talked on for some
time very properly, not much attending to any answer,
but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad
sore throat ; and Emma was quite in charity with
him.
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed
all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad
sore throat on her account than on Harriet's — more
anxious that she should escape the infection, than that
there should be no infection in the complaint. He
began with great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from
visiting the sick chamber again, for the present, to en-
treat her to promise htm not to venture into such hazard
till he had seen Mr Perry and learnt his opinion ; and
though she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject
back into its proper course, there was no putting an end
to his extreme solicitude about her. She was vexed.
It did appear — there was no concealing it — exactly like
the pretence of being in love with her instead of Harriet;
an inconstancy, if real, the most contemptible and
abominable ! and she had difficulty in behaving with
temper. He turned to Mrs Weston to implore her
assistance : " Would not she give him her support ? —
would not she add her persuasions to his, to induce Miss
Woodhouse not to go to Mrs Goddard's, till it were
certain that Miss Smith's disorder had no infection ?
He could not be satisfied witiiout a promise — would
not she give him her influence in procuring it ? "
Emma 129
" So scrupulous for others, " he continued, " and yet
so careless for herself ! She wanted me to nurse my
cold by staying at home to-day, and yet will not pro-
mise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore
throat herself Is this fair, Mrs Weston ? Judge
between us. Have not I some right to complain ? I
am sure of your kind support and aid. "
Emma saw Mrs Weston's suqjrize, and felt that it
must be great, at an address which, in words and
manner, was assuming to himself the right of fu'st interest
in her ; and as for herself, she was too much provoked
and offended to have the power of directly saying any-
thing to the purpose. She could only give him a look ;
but it was such a look as she thought must restore him
to his senses, and then left the sopha, removing to a seat
by her sister, and giving her all her attention.
She had not time to know how Mr Elton took the
reproof, so rapidly did another subject succeed ; for Mr
Tohn Knightley now came into the room from examining
the weather, and opened on them all with the informa-
tion of the ground being covered with snow, and of its
still snowing fast, with a strong dnfting wind ; conclud-
ing widi these words to Mr Woodhouse —
" This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter
engagements, sir. Something new for your coachman
and horses to be making their way through a storm of
snow. "
Poor Mr Woodhouse was silent from consternation ;
but evei-ybody else had something to say ; everybody
was either surprized, or not surprized, and had some
question to ask, or some comfort to offer. Mrs Weston
and Emma tried earnestly to cheer him and turn his
attention from his son-in-law, who was pursuing his
triumph rather unfeelingly.
" I admired your resolution very much, sir, " said he,
" in ventuiing out in such weather, for of course you
F
130 Emma
saw there would be snow very soon. Everybody musi
have seen the snow coming on. I admired [your j spirit;
and I daresay we shall get home very well. Another
hour or two's snow can hardly make the road impass-
able ; and we are two carriages ; if one is blown over in
the bleak part of the common field there will be the
other at hand. I dare say we shall be all safe at Hart-
field before midnight. "
Mr Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was
confessing that he had known it to be snowing some
time, but had not said a word, lest it should make Mr
Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his
hurrying away. As to tliere being any quantity of snow
fallen or likely to fall to impede their return that was a
mere joke ; he was afraid they would find no difficulty.
He wished the road might be impassable, that he might
be able to keep them all at Randalls ; and with the
utmost good-will was sure that accommodation might
be found for everybody, calling on his wife to agree
with him, that, with a little contrivance, everybody
might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do,
from the consciousness of there being but two spare
rooms in the house.
" What is to be done, my dear Emma .''what is to be
done ? " was Mr Woodhouse's first exclamation, and
all that he could say for some time. To her he looked
for comfort ; and her assurances of safety, her repre-
sentation of the excellence of the horses, and of James,
and of their having so many friends about them, revived
him a little.
His eldest daughter's alarm was equal to his own.
The hoiTor of being blocked up at Randalls, while her
children were at Hartfield, was full in her imagination ;
and fancying the road to be now just passable for
adventurous people, but in a state that admitted no
delay, she was eager to have it settled, that her fathei
Emma 131
and Emma should remain at Randalls, while she and
her husband set foiward instantly, through all the
possible accumulations of drifted snow that might im-
pede them.
" You had better order the carriage directly, my
love, " said she ; " I dare say we shall be able to get
along, if we set off directly ; and if we do come to
anything very bad, I can get out and walk. I am not
at all afraid. I should not mind walking half the way.
I could change my shoes, you know, the moment I got
home ; and it is not the sort of thing that gives me
cold. "
" Indeed ! " replied he. " Then, my dear Isabella,
it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world,
for in general everything does give you cold. Walk
home ! — you are prettily shod for walking home, I
dare say. It will be bad enough for the horses. "
Isabella turned to Mrs Weston for her approbation
of the plan. Mrs Weston could only approve. Isa-
bella then went to Emma ; but Emma could not so
entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get
away ; and they were still discussing the point, when
Mr Knightley, who had left the room immediately
after his brother's first report of the snow, came back
again, and told them that he had been out of doors to
examine, and could answer for there not being the
smallest difficulty in their getting home, whenever they
liked it, either now or an hour hence. He had gone
beyond the sweep — some way along the Highbury road
— the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep — in
many places hardly enough to whiten the ground ; a
very few flakes were falling at present, but the clouds
were parting, and there was every appearance of its
being soon over. He had seen the coachmen, and
they both agreed with him in there being nothing to
apprehend.
132 Emma
To Isabella the relief " of such tidings was very great,
and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her
father's account, who was immediately set as much at
ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ;
but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased,
so as to admit of any comfort for him while he con-
tinued at Randalls. He was satisfied of there being
no present danger in returning home, but no assurances
could convince him that it was safe to stay ; and while
the others were variously urging and recommending,
Mr Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief
sentences ; thus —
" Your father will not be easy ; why do not you
go r "
" I am ready, if the others are. "
" Shall I ring the bell > "
" Yes, do. "
And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for.
A few mmutes more, and Emma hoped to see one
troublesome companion deposited in his own house to
get sober and cool, and the other recover his temper
and happmess when this visit of hardship were over
1 he carnage came ; and Mr Woodhouse, always
the first object on such occasions, was carefuJly attended
to his own by Mr Knightley and Mr Weston ; but not
a^l that either could say could prevent some renewal of
alarm at the sight of tlie snow which had actually
fallen, and the discovery of a much darker night than
he had been prepared for. " He was afraid they
snould have a very bad drive. He was afraid poor
Isabella would not like it. And there would be poo
Emma in the carnage behind. He did not know what
they had best do. They must keep as much t^geThe
as they could; " and James was talked to, and given a
charge to go very slow, and wait for the other cfrriage
Isabella «ept .n after her father; John Knightlfy
Emma 133
forgetting that he did not belong to their party, stept in
after his wife very naturally ; so that Emma found, on
being escorted and followed into the second carriage by
Mr Elton, that the door was to be lawfully shut on
them, and that they were to have a tete-a-tete drive.
It would not have been the awkwardness of a moment,
it would have been rather a pleasure, previous to the
suspicions of this very day ; she could have talked to
him of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile would
have seemed but one. But now, she would rather it
had not happened. She believed he had been drinking
too much of Mr Weston's good wine, and felt sure
that he would want to be talking nonsense.
To restrain him as much as might be, by her Own
manners, she was immediately preparing to speak, with
exquisite calmness and gravity, of the weather and the
night ; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had they
passed the sweep-gate and joined the other carriage,
than she found her subject cut up — her hand seized —
her attention demanded, and Mr Elton actually making
violent love to her : availing himself of the precious op-
portunity, declaring sentiments which must be already
well known, hoping — fearing — adoring — ready to die if
she refused him ; but flattering himself that his ardent at-
tachment and unequalled love and unexampled passion
could not fail of having some effect, and, in short, very
much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as
possible. It really was so. Without scruple — without
apology — without much apparent diffidence, Mr Elton,
the lover of Harriet, was professing himself her lover.
She tried to stop him ; but vainly ; he would go on,
and say it all. Angry as she was, the thought of the
moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she
did speak. She felt that half this folly must be drunk-
enness, and therefore could hope that it might belong
only to tiUe passing hour. Accordingly, with a mixture
134 Emma
of the serious and the playful, which she hoped wouid
best suit his half-and-half state, she replied —
" I am very much astonished, Mr Elton. This to
me! you forget yourself; you take me for my friend ;
any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver ;
but no more of this to me, if you please. "
" Miss Smith! — message to Miss Smith! What
could she possibly mean ? " And he repeated her
words with such assurance of accent, such boastful pre-
tence of amazement, that she could not help replying
with quickness —
" Mr Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct !
and I can account for it only in one way ; you are not
yourself, or you could not speak either to me or of
Harriet in such a manner. Command yourself enough
to say no more, and I will endeavour to forget it. "
But Mr Elton had only drunk wine enough to
elevate his spirits, not at all to confuse his intellects.
He perfectly knew his own meaning ; and having
wamily protested against her suspicion as most in-
jurious, and sliglitly touched upon his respect for Miss
Smith as her friend, but acknowledging his wonder
that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all, he resumed
the subject of his own passion, and was very urgent for
a favourable answer.
As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought
more of his inconstancy and presumption, and with
fewer struggles for politeness, replied —
" It is impossible for me to doubt any longer. You
have made yourself too clear. Mr Elton, my astonish-
ment is much beyond anything I can express. After
such behaviour as I have witnessed during the last
month, to Miss Smith — such attentions as I have been
in the daily habit of observing — to be addressing me in
this manner ; this is an unsteadiness of character, in-
deed, which I had not supposed possible. Believe me.
Emma 135
sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the object
of such professions. "
" Good Heaven ! " cried Mr Elton, " what can be
the meaning of this ? — Miss Smith ! I never thought of
Miss Smith in the whole course of my existence ; never
paid her any attentions, but as your friend ; never cared
whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend. If
she has fancied otherwise, her own wishes have misled
her, and I am very sorry, extremely sorry. But, Miss
Smith, indeed ! Oh, Miss Woodhouse, who can think
of Miss Smith when Miss Woodhouse is near ? No,
upon my honour, there is no unsteadiness of character.
I have thought only of you, I protest against having
pa'd the smallest attention to any one else. Everything
that I have said or done, for many weeks past, has been
with the sole view of marking my adoration of yourself.
Y^ou cannot really seriously doubt it. No " (in an
accent meant to be insinuating), " I am sure you have
seen and understood me. "
It would be impossible to say what Emma felt on
hearing this ; which of all her unpleasant sensations
was uppermost. She was too completely overpowered
to be immediately able to reply ; and two moments of
silence being ample encouragement for Mr Elton's san-
guine state of mind, he tried to take her hand again,
as he joyously exclaimed —
" Charming Miss Woodhouse ! allow me to interpret
this interesting silence. It confesses that you have long
understood me. "
" No, sir, " cried Emma, " it confesses no such
tiling. So far from having long understood you, I
have been in a most complete eiror with respect to
your views, till this moment. As to myself, 1 am
very sorry that you should have been giving way to
any feelings. — Nothing could be farther from my
wishes — your attachment to my friend Harriet — your
136 Emma
pursuit of her (pursuit it appeared) gave me great
pleasure, and I have been very earnestly wishing you
success ; but had I supposed tliat she were not your
attraction to Hartfield, I should certainly have thought
you judged ill in making your visits so frequent. Am
I to believe that you have never sought to recommend
yourself particularly to Miss Smith ? — that you have
never thought seriously of her ? "
" Never, madam, " cried he, affronted in his turn ;
" never, I assure you. / think seriously of Miss Smith !
— Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl : and I should
be happy to see her respectably settled. I wish her
extremely well ; and, no doubt, there are men who
might not object to Everybody has their level ;
but as for myself, I am not, I think, quite so much at a
loss. I need not so totally despair of an equal alliance
as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith ! No, madam,
my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only ; and
the encouragement I received "
" Encouragement! I give you encouragement! —
Sir, you have been entirely mistaken in supposing it. I
have seen you only as the admirer of my friend. In no
other light could you have been more to me than a
common acquaintance. I am exceedingly sorry ; but it
is well that the mistake ends where it does. Had the
same behaviour continued, Miss Smith might have been
led into a misconception of your views ; not being
aware, probably, any more than myself, of the very
great inequality which you are so sensible of. But, as
it is, the disappointment is single, and, I trust, will not
be lasting. I have no thoughts of matrimony at present. "
He was too angry to say another word, her manner
too decided to invite supplication ; and in this state of
swelling resentment, and mutually deep mortification,
they had to continue together a few minutes longer, for
the fears of Mr Woodhouse had confined them to a
Emma 137
foot-pace. If there had not been so mucn anger, there
would have been desperate awkwardness ; but their
straightforward emotions left no room for the little zig-
zags of embarrassment. Without knowing when the
carriage turned into Vicarage Lane, or when it stopped,
f.hey found themselves, all at once, at the door of his
house ; and he was out before another syllable passed.
Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good-
night. The compliment was just returned, coldly and
proudly ; and, under indescribable irritation of spirits,
she was then conveyed to Hartfield.
There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight,
by her father, who had been trembling for the dangers
cf a solitary drive from Vicarage Lane — turning a
corner which he could never bear to think of — and in
strange hands — a mere common coachman — no James ;
and there it seemed as if her return only were wanted
to make everything go well : for Mr John Knightley,
ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kindness and
attention ; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort
of her father, as to seem — if not quite ready to join him
in a basin of gruel — perfectly sensible of its being ex-
ceedingly wholesome ; and the day was concluding in
peace and comfort to all their little party, except herself.
But her mind had never been in such perturbation ; and
it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and
cheerful till the usual hour of separating allowed her the
relief of quiet reflection.
Cljapter ^F^♦
THE hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and
Emma sat down to think and be miserable. It
was a wretched business indeed. Such an over-
throw of everything she had been wishing for. Such a
138 Emma
development of everything most unwelcome ! Such *.
blow for Harriet ! — that was the worst of alL Every
part of it brought pain and humiliation of some sort or
other ; but, compared with the evil to Harriet, all was
light ; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet
more mistaken — more in error — more disgraced by mis-
judgment than she actually was, could the effects of her
blunders have been confined to herself.
" If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the
man, I could have borne anything. He might have
doubled his presumption to me — but poor Harriet ! "
How she could have been so deceived ! He pro-
tested that he had never thought seriously of Hairiet —
never 1 She looked back as well as she could ; but it
was all confusion. She had taken up the idea, she
supposed, and made everything bend to it. His man-
ners, however, must have been unmarked, wavering,
dubious, or she could not have been so misled.
The picture ! How eager he had been about the
picture ! — and the charade ! and an hundred other cir-
cumstances ; how clearly they had seemed to point at
Harriet I To be sure, the charade, with its " ready
wit " — but then, the " soft eyes " — in fact it suited
neither ; it was a jumble without taste or tmth. Who
could have seen through such thick-headed nonsense r
Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought
his manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ; but it had
passed as his way, as a mere error of judgment, of
knowledge, of taste, as one proof, among others, that he
had not always lived in the best society ; that, with all
the gentleness of his address, true elegance was some-
times wanting ; but, till this very day, she had never
for an instant susjiected it to mean anything but grate-
ful respect to her as Harriet's friend.
To Mr John Knightley was she indebted for her
first idea on the subject, for the first start of its poesi-
Emma 139
bility. There was no denying that those brothers had
penetration. She remembered what Mr Knightley had
once said to her about Mr Elton, the caution he had
given, the conviction he had professed that Mr Elton
would never marry indiscreetly ; and blushed to think
how much truer a knowledge of his character had been
there shown than any she had reached herself. It was
dreadfully mortifjring ; but Mr Elton was proving him-
self, in many respects, the very reverse of what she had
meant and believed him — proud, assuming, conceited ;
very full of his own claims, and little concerned about
the feelings of others.
Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr Elton's
wanting to pay his addresses to her had sunk him in her
opinion. His professions and his proposals did him no
service. She thought nothing of his attachment, and
was insulted by his hopes. He wanted to marry well,
and having the arrogance to raise his eyes to her, pre-
tended to be in love ; but she was perfectly easy as to
his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared
for. There had been no real affection either in his
language or manners. Sighs and fine words had been
given in abundance ; but she could hardly devise any
set of expressions, or fancy any tone of voice, less
allied with real love. She need not trouble herself to
pity him. He only wanted to aggrandize and enrich
himself; and if Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield, the
heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were not quite so
easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try
for Miss Somebody-else with twenty, or with ten.
But, that he should talk of encouragement, should
consider her as aware of his views, accepting his atten-
tions, meaning, in short, to many him ! — should suppose
himself her equal in connection or mind! — look down
upon her friend, so well understanding the gradations of
rank below him, and be so blind to what rose above, as
140 Emma
to fancy himself showing no presumption in addressing
her! — it was most provoking.
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how
very much he was her inferior in talent, and all the
elegancies of mind. The very want of such equality
might prevent his perception of it ; but he must know
that in fortune and consequence she was greatly his
superior. He must know that the Woodhouses had
been settled for several generations at Hartfield, the
younger branch of a very ancient family, and that the
Eltons were nobody. The landed property of Hart-
field certainly was inconsiderable, being but a sort of
notch in the Donwell Abbey estate, to which all the
rest of Highbury belonged ; but their fortune, from
other sources, was such as to make them scarcely
secondary to Donwell Abbey itself, in every other kind
of consequence ; and the Woodhouses had long held
a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood
which Mr Elton had first entered not two years ago, to
make his way as he could, without any alliances but in
trade, or anything to recommend him to notice but his
situation and his civility. But he had fancied her in
love with him ; that evidently must have been his de-
pendence ; and after raving a little about the seeming
incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head,
Emma was obliged in common honesty, to stop and
admit that her own behaviour to him had been so com-
plaisant and obliging, so full of courtesy and attention,
as (supposing her real motive unperceived) might war-
rant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy, like
Mr Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite.
If she had so misintcqireted his feelings, she had little
right to wonder that he, with self-interest to blind him,
should have mistaken hers.
The first error, and the worst, lay at her door. K
was foolish, it was wrong, to take so active a part in
Emma 141
bringing any two people together. It wa« adventuring
too far, assuming too much, making light of what ought
to be serious — a trick of what ought to be simple. She
was quite concerned and ashamed, and resolved to do
such things no more.
" Here have I, " said she, " actually talked ppor
Harriet into being very much attached to this man. She
might never have thought of him but for me ; and
certainly never would have thought of him with hope,
if I had not assured her of his attachment, for she is as
modest and humble as I used to think him. Oh that I
had been satisfied with persuading her not to accept
young Martin. There I was quite right : that was
well done of me ; but there 1 should have stopped, and
left the rest to time and chance. I was introducing her
into good company, and giving her the opportunity of
pleasing some one worth having ; I ought not to have
attempted more. But now, poor girl ! her peace is cut
up for some time. I have been but half a friend to her !
and if she were not to feel this disappointment so very
much, I am sure I have not an idea of anybody else
who would be at all desirable for her. William Coxe
—oh no, I could not endure William Coxe, — a pert
young lawyer. "
She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and
then resumed a more serious, more dispiriting cogitation
upon what had been, and might be, and must be. The
distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet, and
all that poor Harriet would be suffering, with the
awkwardness of future meetings, the difficulties of con-
tinuing or discontinuing the acquaintance, of subduing
feelings, concealing resentment, and avoiding eclat, were
enough to occupy her in most unmirthfiJ reflections
some time longer, and she went to bed at last with
nothing settled but the conviction of her having blun-
dered most dreadfully.
142 Emma
To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma's,
though under temporary gloom at night, the return of
day will hardly fail to bring return of spirits. The
youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy,
and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not
poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed, they will be
sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter
hope.
Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for
comfort than she had gone to bed ; more ready to see
alleviations of the evil before her, and to depend on
getting tolerably out of it.
It was a great consolation that Mr Elton should not
be really in love with her, or so particularly amiable as
to make it shocking to disappoint him ; that Harriet's
nature should not be of that superior sort in which
the feelings are most acute and retentive ; and that there
could be no necessity for anybody's knowing what had
passed except the three principals, and especially for her
father's being given a moment's uneasiness about it.
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of
a great deal of snow on the ground did her further
semce, for anything was welcome that might justify
their all three being quite asunder at present.
The weather was most favourable for her ; though
Christmas Day, she could not go to church. Mr
Woodhouse would have been miserable had his daughter
attempted it, and she was therefore safe from either
exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable
ideas. The ground covered with snow, and the atmo-
sphere in that unsettled state between frost and thaw
which is, of all others, the most unfriendly for exercise,
every morning beginning in rain or snow, and every
evening setting in to freeze, she was for many days a
most honourable prisoner. No intercourse with Harriet
possible but by note ; no church for her on Sunday any
Emma 143
more than on Christmas Day ; and no need to find
excuses for Mr Elton's absenting himself.
It was weather which might fairly confine everybody
at home ; and thougli she hoped and believed him to be
really taking comfort in some society or other, it was
pery pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his
being all alone in his own house, too wise to stir out ;
and to hear him say to Mr Knightley, whom no weather
could keep entirely from them —
" Ah, Mr Knightley, why do not you stay at home
like poor Mr Elton ? "
These days of confinement would have been, but for
her private perplexities, remarkably comfortable, as such
seclusion exactly suited her brother, whose feelings must
always be of great impoitance to his companions ; and
he had, besides, so thoroughly cleared off his ill-humour
at Randalls, that his amiableness never failed him during
the rest of his stay at Hartheld. He was always agree-
able and obliging, and speaking pleasantly of everybody.
But with all the hopes of cheerfulness, and all the
present comfort of delay, there was still such an evil
hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet,
as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at
ease.
Chapter ^¥J%
MR AND MRS JOHN KNIGHTLEY were not
detained long at Hartfield. The weather soon
improved enough for those to move who must
move ; and Mr Woodhouse having, as usual, tried to
persuade his daughter to stay behind with all her children,
was obliged to see the whole party set off, and return to
his lamenutions over the destiny of poor Isabella —
which poor Isabella, passing her life with those she
144 Emma
doated on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and
always innocently busy, might have been a model of
right feminine happiness.
The evening of the very day on which they went
brought a note from Mr Elton to Mr Woodhouse, a
long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with Mr Elton's
best compliments, " that he was proposing to leave High-
bury the following morning in his way to Bath ; where,
in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends,
he had engaged to spend a few weeks ; and very much
regretted the impossibility he was under, from various
circumstances of weather and business, of taking a per-
sonal leave of Mr Woodhouse, of whose friendly civilities
he should ever retain a grateful sense ; and had Mr
Woodhouse any commands, should be happy to attend
to them. "
Emma was most agreeably surprized. Mr Elton's
absence just at this time was the very thing to be desired.
She admired him for contriving it, though not able to
give him much credit for the manner in which it was
announced. Resentment could not have been more
plainly spoken than in a civility to her father, from
which she was so pointedly excluded. She had not
even a share in his opening compliments. Her name
was not mentioned ; and there was so striking a change
in all this, and such an ill-judged solemnity of leave-
taking in his graceful acknowledgments, as she thought,
at first, could not escape her father's suspicion.
It did, however. Her father was quite taken up with
the surprize of so sudden a journey, and his fears that
Mr Elton might never get safely to the end of it, and
saw nothing extraordinary in his language. It was a
very useful note, for it supplied them with fresh matter
for thought and conversation during the rest of their
lonely evening. Mr Woodliouse talked over his alarms,
and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away with
all her usual promptitude.
Emma 145
She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the
dark. She had reason to believe her nearly recovered
from her cold, and it was desirable that she should have
as much time as possible for getting the better of her
other complaint before the gentleman's return. She
went to Mrs Goddard's, accordingly, the very next
day, to undergo the necessary penance of communica-
tion ; and a severe one it was. She had to destroy all
the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding,
to appear in the ungr?.cious character of the one pre-
feiTed, and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and
misjudging in all her ideas on one subject, all her
observations, all her convictions, all her prophesies for
the last six weeks.
The confession completely renewed her first shame,
and the sight of Harriet's tears made her think that she
should never be in charity with herself again.
Harriet bore the intelligence very well, blaming
nobody, and in everything testifying such an ingenuous-
ness of disposition and lowly opinion of herself as
must appear with particular advantage at that moment to
her friend.
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and
modesty to the utmost ; and all that was amiable, all
that ought to be attaching, seemed on Harriet's side,
not her own. Harriet did not consider herself as
having anything to complain of. The affection of such
a man as Mr Elton would have been too great a dis-
tinction. She never could have deserved him ; and
nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Wood-
house would have thought it possible.
Her tears fell abundantly ; but her grief was so truly
artless, that no dignity could have made it more respect-
able in Emma's eyes ; and she listened to her, and tried
to console her with all her heart and understand-
ing — really for the time convinced that Harriet was the
146
Emma
superior creature of the two, and that to resemble her
would be more for her own welfare and happiness than
all that genius or intelligence could do.
It was rather too late in the day to set about being
simple-minded and ignorant ; but she left her with
every previous resolution confirmed of being humble
and discreet, and repressing imagination ail the rest of
her life. Her second duty now, inferior only to her
father's claims, was to promote Harriet's comfort, and
endeavour to prove her own affection in some better
method than by match-making. She got her to Hart-
iield, and shewed her the most unvarying kindness,
striving to occupy and amuse her, and by books and
conversation to drive Mr Elton from her thoughts.
Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being
thoroughly done ; and she could suppose herself but an
indifferent judge of such matters in general, and very
inadequate to sympathize in an attachment to Mr Elton
in particular ; but it seemed to her reasonable that at
Harriet's age, and with the entire extinction of all
hope, such a progress might be made towards a state of
composure by the time of Mr Elton's return, as to allow
them all to meet again in the common routine of
acquaintance, without any danger of betraying sentiments
or increasing them.
Harriet did think him all perfection, and main-
tain the non-existence of anybody equal to him in person
or goodness, and did, in truth, prove herself more
resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen ; but yet it
appeared to her so natural, so inevitable to strive
against an inclination of that sort unrequited, that
she could not comprehend its continuing very long in
equal force.
If Mr Elton on his return, made his own indifference
as evident and indubitable as she could not doubt he
would anxiously do, she could not imagine Harriet's
Emma 147
persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the
recollection of him.
Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place,
was bad for each, for all three. Not one of them had
the power of removal, or of effecting any material
change of society. They must encounter each other,
and make the best of it.
Harriet was further unfortunate in the tone of her
companions at Mrs Goddard's, Mr Elton being the
adoration of all the teachers and great girls in the
school ; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could
have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling
moderation or repellant truth. Where the wound had
been given, there must the cure be found, if anywhere ;
and Emma felt that till she saw her in the way of cure,
there could be no true peace for herself.
MR FRANK CHURCHILL did not come.
When the time proposed drew near, Mrs
Weston's fears were justified in the arrival of a
letter of excuse. For the present, he could not be
spared, to his " very great mortification and regret ; but
still he looked forward with the hope of coming to
Randalls at no distant period. "
Mrs Weston was exceedingly disappointed — much
more disappointed, in fact, than her husband, though her
dependence on seeing the young man had been so much
more sober ; but a sanguine temper, though for ever ex-
pecting more good than occurs, does not always pay for
its hopes by any proportionate depression. It soon flies
over the present failure, and begins to hope again. For
half an hour Mr Weston was surprized and sorry ; but
then he began to perceive that Frank's coming two or
148
Emma
three months later would be a much better plan, better
time of year, better weather ; and that he would be able,
without any doubt, to stay considerably longer with them
than if he had come sooner.
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while
Mrs Weston, of a more apprehensive disposition, fore-
saw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays ; and
after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer,
(juffered a great deal more herself.
Emma was not, at this time, in a state of spirits to
care really about Mr Frank Churchill's not coming, ex-
cept as a disappointment at Randalls. The acquaint-
ance, at present, had no charm for her. She wanted
rather to be quiet and out of temptation ; but still, as it
was desirable that she should appear, in general, Uke her
usual self, she took care to express as much interest in
the circumstance, and enter as warmly into Mr and Mrs
Weston's disappointment as might naturally belong to
their friendship.
She was the first to announce it to Mr Knightley ; and
exclaimed quite as much as was necessary (or, being
acting a part, perhaps rather more), at the conduct of
the Churchills in keeping him away. She then pro-
ceeded to say a good deal more than she felt of the ad-
vantage of such an addition to their confined society in
Surry ; the pleasure of looking at somebody new ; the
gala-day to Highbury entire, which the sight of him
would have made ; and ending with reflections on the
Churchills again, found herself directly involved in a
disagreement with Mr Knightley ; and, to her great
amusement, perceived that she was taking the other side
of the question from her real opinion, and making use
of Mrs Weston's arguments against herself.
" The Churchills are very likely in fault, " said Mr
Knightley coolly ; « but I dare say he might come if
lie would
Emma 149
•* I do not know why you should say so. He wishes
exceedingly to come ; but his uncle and aunt will not
spare him. "
" I cannot believe that he has not the power of com-
ing, if he made a point of it. It is too unlikely for me
to believe it without proof. "
" How odd you are ! What has Mr Frank Church-
ill done, to make you suppose him such an unnatural
creature ? "
" I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature,
in suspecting that he may have learnt to be above his
connections, and to care very little for anything but his
own pleasure, from living with those who have always
set him the example of it. It is a great deal more
natural than one could wish, that a young man, brought
up by tliose who are proud, luxurious, and selfish, should
be proud, luxurious, and selfish too. If Frank Church-
ill had wanted to see his father, he would have con-
trived it between September and January. A man at
his age — what is he ? — three or four-and-twenty —
cannot be without the means of doing as much as that.
It is impossible. "
** That's easily said, and easily felt by you, who have
always been your own master. You are the worst
judge in the world, Mr Knightley, of the difficulties of
dependence. You do not know what it is to have
tempers to manage. "
" It is not to be conceived that a man of three or
four-and-twenty should not have liberty of mind or
limb to that amount. He cannot want money, he can-
not want leisure. We know, on the contrary, that he
has so much of both, that he is glad to get rid of them
at the idlest haunts in the kingdom. We hear of him
for ever at some watering-place or other ; a little while
ago he was at Weymouth. This proves that he can
leave the Churchills. "
150 Emma
" Yes, sometimes he can. "
" And those times are, wlienever he thinks it worth
his while ; whenever there is any temptation of plea-
sure. "
" It is very unfair to judge of anybody's conduct
without an intimate knowledge of their situation. No-
body, who has not been in the interior of a family, can
say what the difficulties of any individual of that family
may be. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe,
and with Mrs Churchill's temper before we pretend to
decide upon what her nephew can do. He may, at times,
be able to do a great deal more than he can at others. "
" There is one thing, Emma, which a man can
always do, if he chuses, and that is, his du'y ; not %y
manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour and resolution.
It is Frank Churchill's duty to pay this attention to his
father. He knows it to be so, by his promises and
messages ; but if he wished to do it, it might be done.
A man who felt rightly would say at once, simply and
resolutely, to Mrs Churchill, • Every sacrifice of mere
pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your
convenience ; but I must go and see my father im-
mediately. I know he would be hurt by my failing in
such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion.
I shall, therefore, set off to-morrow.'If he would say
so to her at once in the tone of decision becoming a
man, there would be no opposition made to his goinri. "
" No, " said Emma, laughing ; « but perhaps there
might be some made to his coming back again. Such
language for a young man entirely dependent to use !
Nobody but you, Mr Knightley, would imagine it
possible ; but you have not an idea of what is requisite
in situations directly opposite to your own. Mr Frank
Churchill to be making such a speech as that to the
uncle and aunt who have brought him up, and are to
provide for him ! — standing up in the middle of the
Emma 151
room, I suppose, and speaking as loud as he could !
How can you imagine such conduct practicable ? "
" Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find
no difficulty in it. He would feel himself in the right ;
and the declaration, made, of course, as a man of sense
would make it, in a proper manner, would do him more
good, raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the
people he depended on, than all that a line of shifts and
expedients can ever do. Respect would be added to
affection. They would feel that they could trust him ;
that the nephew who had done rightly by his father
would do rightly by them ; for they know as well as
he does, as well as all the world must know, that he
ought to pay this visit to his father ; and while meanly
exerting their power to delay it, are in their hearts not
thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims.
Respect for right conduct is felt by everybody : if he
would act in this sort of manner on principle, con-
sistently, regularly, their little minds would bend to
his. "
" I rather doubt that. You are very fond of bending
little minds ; but where little minds belong to rich
people in authority, I think they have a knack of
swelling out till they are quite as unmanageable as great
ones. I can imagine that if you, as you are, Mr
Knightley, were to be transported and placed all at
once in Mr Frank Churchill's situation, you would be
able to say and do just what you have been recommend-
ing for him ; and it might have a very good effect.
The Churchills might not have a word to say in return ;
but then you would have no habits of early obedience
and long observance to break through. To him who
has, it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into
perfect independence, and set all their claims on his
gratitude and regard at nought. He may have as
strong a sense of what would be right as you can have,
152 Emma
without being so equal, under particular circumstances,
to act up to it. "
** Then it would not be so strong a sense. If it
failed to produce equal exertion, it could not be an
equal conviction. "
" Oh the difference of situation and habit ! I wish
you would try to understand what an amiable young
man may be likely to feel in directly opposing those
whom, as child and boy, he has been looking up to all
his life. "
" Your amiable young man is a very weak young
man, if this be the first occasion of his caiTying through
a resolution to do right against the will of others. It
ought to have been a habit with him, by this time, of
following his duty, instead of consulting expediency. I
can allow for the fears of the child, but not of the man^
As he became rational, he ought to have roused himself,
and shaken oft all that was unworthy in their authority.
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their
side to make him slight his father. Had he begun as
he ought, there would have been no difficulty now. "
" We shall never agree about him, " cried Emma ;
" but that is nothing extraordinary. I have not the
least idea of his being a weak young man ; I feel sure
that he is not. Mr Weston would not be blind to
folly, though in his own son ; but he is very likely to
have a more yielding, compl5nng, mild disposition than
would suit your notions of man's perfection. I dare
say he has ; and though it may cut him off from some
advantages, it will secure him many others. "
" Yes ; all the advantages of sitting still when he
ought to move, and of leading a life of mere idle
pleasure, and fancying himself extremely expert in find-
ing excuses for it. He can sit down and write a fine
flourishing letter, full of professions and falsehoods, and
persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best
Emma 153
method in the world of preserving peace at home, and
preventing his father's having any right to complain.
His letters disgust me. "
" Your feelings are singular. They seem to satisfy
everybody else. "
" I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs Weston. They
hardly can satisfy a woman of her good sense and quick
feelings: standing in a mother's place, but without a
mother's affection to blind her. It is on her account
that attention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must
doubly feel the omission. Had she been a person of
consequence herself he would have come, I dare say ;
and it would not have signified whether he did or no.
C " n you think your friend behind-hand in these sort of
considerations ? Do you suppose she does not often
say all this to herself? No, Emma; your amiable
young man can be amiable only in French, not in Eng-
lish. He may be very'ainiable,'have very good
manners, and be very agreeable ; but he can have no
English delicacy towards the feelings of other people —
nothing really amiable about him. "
" You seem determined to think ill of him. "
" Me ! not at all, " replied Mr Knightley, rather dis-
pleased ; " I do not want to think ill of him. I should
be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other
man ; but I hear of none, except what are merely per-
sonal — that he is well-grown and good-looking, with
smooth, plausible manners.
" Well, if he have nothing else to recommend hira, he
will be a treasure at Highbury. We do not often look
upon fine young men, well-bred and agreeable. We
must not be nice, and ask for all the virtues into the
bargain. Cannot you imagine, Mr Knightley, what a
sensation his coming will produce ? There will be but-
one subject throughout the parishes of Donwell and
Highbury ; but one interest — one object of cunosity ;
154 Emma
it will be all Mr Frank Churchill ; we shall think and
speak of nobody else. "
" You will excuse my being so much ovei-powered.
If I find him conversable, I shall be glad of his
acquaintance ; but if he is only a chattering coxcomb,
he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts. "
" My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation
to the taste of everybody, and has the power as well as
the wish of being universally agreeable. To you, he
will talk of farming ; to me, of drawing or music ; and
so on to everybody, having that general information on
all subjects which will enable him to follow the lead,
or take the lead, just as propriety may require, and to
speak extremely well on each ; that is my idea of
liim. "
" And mine, " said Mr Knightley warmly, " is, that if
he turn out anything like it, he will be the most in-
sufferable fellow breathing ! What ! at three-and-
twenty to be the king of his company — the great man
— the practised politician, who is to read everybody's
character, and make everybody's talents conduce to the
display of his own superiority ; to be dispensing his
flatteries around, that he may make all appear like fools
compared with himself! My dear Emma, your own
good sense could not endure such a puppy when it came
to the point. "
" I will say no more about him, " cried Emma —
" you turn everything to evil. We are both prejudiced !
you against, I for him ; and we have no chance of
agreeing till he is really here. "
*'Prejudiced ! I am not prejudiced. "
" But I am very much, and without being at all
ashamed of it. My love for Mr and Mrs Weston
gives me a decided prejudice in his favour. "
" He is a person I never think of from one month's
end to another, " said Mr Knightley, with a degree of
Emma 155
vexation, which made Emma immediately talk of some-
thing else, though she could not comprehend why he
should be angry.
To take a dislike to a young man, only because ht
appeared to be of a different disposition from himself,
was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was
always used to acknowledge in him ; for, with all the
high opinion of himself which she had often laid to his
charge, «he had never before for a moment supposed it
could make him unjust to the merit of another.
Chapter ^J%
EMMA and Harriet had been walking together one
morning, and, in Emma's opinion, had been
talking enough of Mr Elton for that day. She
could not think that Harriet's solace or her own sins
required more ; and she was therefore industriously
getting rid of the subject as they returned, but it burst
out again when she thought she had succeeded, and
after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer
in winter, and receiving no other answer than a very
plaintive — " Mr Elton is so good to the poor ! " she
found something else must be done.
They were just approaching the house where lived
Mrs and Miss Bates. She determined to call upon
them, and seek safety in numbers. There was always
sufiicient reason for such an attention ; Mrs and Miss
Bates loved to be called on ; and she knew she was
considered by the very few who presumed ever to see
imperfection in her, as rather negligent in that respect,
and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of
their scanty comforts.
She had had many a hint from Mr Knightley, and
156 Emma
some from her ovm heart, as to her deficiency, but none
were equal to counteract the persuasion of its being very
disagreeable — a waste of time — tiresome women — and
all the horror of being in danger of falling in with the
second rate and third rate of Highbury, who were call-
ing on them for ever > and therefore she seldom went
near them. But now she made the sudden resolution
of not passing their door without going in ; observing, as
she proposed it to Harriet, that, as well as she could
calculate, they were just now quite safe from any letter
from Jane Fairfax.
The house belonged to people in business. Mrs and
Miss Bates occupied the drawing-room floor ; and
there, in the very moderate-sized apartment, which was
everything to them, the visitors were most cordially and
even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady, who
with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner,
wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse,
and her more active, talking daughter almost ready to
overpower them with care and kindness, thanks for their
visit, solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiries after
Mr Woodhouse's health, cheerful communications
about her mother's, and sweet-cake from the beaufet : —
" Mrs Cole had just been there, just called in for ten
minutes, and had been so good as to sit an hour with
them, and she had taken a piece of cake, and been so
kind as to say she liked it very much ; and, therefore,
she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do
them the favour to eat a piece too. "
The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by
that of Mr Elton. There was intimacy between them,
and Mr Cole had heard from Mr Elton since his going
away. Emma knew what was coming : they must
have the letter over again, and settle how long he had
been gone, and how much he was engaged in company,
and what a favourite he was wherever he went, and how
Emma 157
full the Master of the Ceremonies'ball had been ; and
she went through it very well, with all the interest and
all the commendation that could be requisite, and always
putting forward to prevent Harriet's being obliged to
say a word.
This she had been ]:)repared for when she entered the
house ; but meant, having once talked him handsomely
over, to be no farther incommoded by any troublesome
topic, and to wander at large amongst all the Mistresses
and Misses of Highbury, and their card-parties. vShe
had not been prepared to have Jane Fairfax succeed Mr
Elton ; but he was actually hurried off by Miss Bates ;
she jumped away from him at last abruptly to the Coles,
to usher in a letter from her niece.
" Oh yes — Mr Elton, I understand — certainly as to
dancing — Mrs Cole was telling me that dancing at the
rooms at Bath was — Mrs Cole was so kind as to sit
some time with us, talking of Jane ; for as soon as she
came in she began inquiring after her, Jane is so very
great a favourite there. Whenever she is with us, Mrs
Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough ;
and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any-
body can. And so she began inquiring after her directly,
saying,'I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately,
because it is not her time for writing ;'and when 1
immediately said, " But indeed we have, we had a letter
this very morning,'I do not know that I ever saw any-
body more surprized. ♦ Have you, upon your honour ?'
said she ;'well, that is quite unexpected. Do let me
hear what she says.'"
Emma's politeness was at hand directly, to say, with
smiling interest —
" Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately i I
am extremely happy. I hope she is well ? "
" Thank you. You are so kind ! " replied the happily
deceived aunt, while eagerly hunting for the letter. " Oh,
158 Emma
here it 18. I was sure it could not be far off ; but I had
put my huswife upon it, you see, without being aware,
and so it was quite hid ; but I had it in my hand so
very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the
table. I was reading it to Mrs Cole, and, since she
went away, I was reading it again to my mother, for it
is such a pleasure to her — a letter from Jane — that she can
never hear it often enough ; so I knew it could not be far
off, and here it is, only just under my huswife — and since
you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says — but,
first of all, I really must, in justice to Jane, apologize for
her writing so short a letter — only two pages, you see,
hardly two, and in general she fills the whole paper and
crosses half. My mother often wonders that I can make
it out so well. She often says, when the letter is first
opened,'Well, Hetty, now I think you will be put to
it to make out all that checker- work'— don't you,
ma'am ? And then I tell her, I am sure she would
contrive to make it out herself, if she had nobody to do
it for her, every word of it — I am sure she would pore
over it till she had made out every word. And, indeed,
though my mother's eyes are not so good as they were,
she can see amazingly well still, thank God ! with the
help of spectacles. It is such a blessing ! My mother's
are really very good indeed. Jane often says, when she
is here, * I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very
strong eyes to see as you do, and so much fine work as
you have done too ! I only wish my eyes may last
me as well. "
All this, spoken extremely fast, obliged Miss Bates
to stop for breath ; and Emma said something very civil
about the excellence of Miss Fairfax's liandwriting.
" You are extremely kind, " replied Miss Bates, highly
gratified ; " you, who are such a judge, and write so
beautifully yourself. I am sure there is nobody's praise
that could give us so much pleasure as Miss Wood-
Emma 159
house's. My mother does not hear ; she is a little deaf,
you know. Ma'am, " addressing her, " do you hear
what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to say about Jane's
handwriting ? "
And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own
silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old
lady could comprehend it. She v/as pondering, in the
meanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very
rude, of making her escape from Jane Fairfax's letter,
and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly,
under some slight excuse, when Miss Bates turned to
her again and seized her attention.
" My mother's deafness is very trifling, you see, just
nothing at all. By only raising my voice, and saying
anything two or three times over, she is sure to hear ;
but then she is used to my voice. But it is very re-
markable that she should always hear Jane better than
she does me. Jane speaks so distinct! However, she
will not find her grandmama at all deafer than she was
two years ago ; which is saying a great deal at my mother's
time of life ; and it really is full two years, you know, since
she was here. We never were so long without seeing
her before ; and, as I was telling Mrs Cole, we shall
hardly know how to make enough of her now. "
" Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon ? "
" Oh, yes ; next week. "
" Indeed ! that must be a very great pleasure. "
" Thank you. You are very kind. Yes, next week.
Everj'body is so surprized ; and everybody says the
same obliging things. I am sure she will be as happy
to see her friends at Highbury as they can be to see
her. Yes, Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which,
because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage
himself one of those days. So very good of them to
send her the whole way ! But they always do, you
know. Oh, yes, Friday or Saturday next. That
i6o Emma
is what she writes about. That is the reason of her
writing out of rule, as we call it ; for, in the common
course, we should not have heard from her before next
Tuesday or Wednesday. "
" Yes, so I imagined. I was afraid there could be
little chance of my hearing anything of Miss Fairfax
to-day. "
" So obliging of you ! No, we should not have
heard, if it had not been for this particular circumstance,
of her being to come here so soon. My mother is so
dehghtedj for she is to be three months with us at
least. Three months, she says so, positively, as I am
going to have the pleasure of reading to you. The case
IS, you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland.
Mrs Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to
come over and see her directly. They had not in-
tended to go over till the summer, but she is so impa-
tient to see them again ;— for till she married, last
October, she was never away from them so much as a
week, which must make it very strange to be in dif-
ferent kingdoms, I was going to say, but, however,
different countnes, and so she wrote a very urgent
etter to her mother, or her father— I declare I do not
know which It was, but we shall see presently in Jane's
letter— wrote in Mr Dixon's name as well as her own,
to press their coming over directly ; and they would
give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back
to their country-seat, Baly-craig-a beautiful place, I
fancy Jane has heard a great deal of its beauty— from
Mr Dixon, I mean— I do not know that she ever
heard about it from anybody else — but it was very
natura , you know, that he should like to speak of his
own place while he was paying his addresses-and as
Jane used to be very often walking out with them
about their daughter's not walking out often with only
Emma i6i
Mr Dixon, for which I do not at all blame them : of
course she heard everything he might be telling Miss
Campbell about his own home in Ireland ; and I think
she wrote us word that he had shown them some draw-
ings of the place, views that he had taken himself. He
is a most amiable, charming young man, I believe.
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland, from his
account of things. "
At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspi-
cion entering Emma's brain with regard to Jane Fair-
fax, this charming Mr Dixon, and the not going to
Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of further
discovery —
*'You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax
should be allowed to come to you at such a time.
Considering the very particular friendship between her
and Mrs Dixon, you could hardly have expected her
to be excused from accompanying Colonel and Mrs
Campbell. "
" Very true, very true, indeed. The very thing that
we have always been rather afraid of; for we should
not have liked to have her at such a distance from us,
for months together, — not able to come if anything was
to happen ; but you see eveiything turns out for the
best. They want her (Mr and Mrs Dixon) exces-
sively to come over with Colonel and Mrs Campbell ;
quite depend upon it ; nothing can be more kind or
pressing than their joint invitation Jane says, as you will
hear presently. Mr Dixon does not seem in the least
backward in any attention. He is a most charming
young man. Ever since the service he rendered Jane
at Weymouth, when they were out in that party on the
water, and she, by the sudden whirling round of some-
thing or other among the sails, would have been dashed
into the sea at once, and actually was all but gone, if he
had not with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold
G
i62 Emma
of her habit, — 1 can never think of it without tremb-
ling ! — but ever since we had the history of that day, I
have been so fond of Mr Dixon ! "
" But, in spite of all her friends'urgency, and her
own wish of seeing Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers de-
voting the time to you and Mrs Bates ? "
" Yes — entirely her own doing, entirely her own
choice ; and Colonel and Mrs Campbell think she does
quite right, just what they should recommend ; and in-
deed they particularly iv'tsh her to try her native air, as
she has not been quite so well as usual lately. "
" I am concerned to hear of it. I think they judge
wisely ; but Mrs Dixon must be very much disappointed.
Mrs Dixon, I understand, has no remarkable degree of
personal beauty — is not, by any means, to be compared
with Miss Fairfax ? "
" Oh, no. You are very obliging to say such things,
but certainly not ; there is no comparison between them.
Miss Campbell always was absolutely plain, but ex-
tremely elegant and amiable. "
" Yes, that of course. "
" Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing ! so long ago as
the 7th of November (as I am going to read to you),
and has never been well since ? A long time, is not it,
for a cold to hang upon her ? She never mentioned it
before, because she would not alarm us. Just like her !
so considerate ! But, however, she is so far from well,
that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better
come home, and try an air that always agrees with her :
and they have no doubt that three or four months at
Highbury will entirely cure her ; and it is certainly a
great deal better that she should come here than go to
Ireland, if she is unwell. Nobody could nurse her as
we should do. "
" It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in
the world. "
Emma 163
•* And so she is to come to us next Friday or Satur-
day, and the Campbells leave town in their way to
Holyhead the Monday following, as you will find from
Jane's letter. So sudden ! You may guess, dear Miss
Woodhouse, what a flurry it has thrown me in. If it
was not for the drawback, of her illness — but I am afraid
we must expect to see her grown thin, and looking very
poorly. I must tell you what an unlucky thing hap-
pened to me as to that. I always make a point of
reading Jane's letters through to myself first, before I
read them aloud to my mother, you know, for fear of
there being anything in them to distress her. Jane de-
sired me to do it, so I always do ! and so I began to-
day with my usual caution : but no sooner did I come
to the mention of her being unwell, then I burst out,
quite frightened, with'Bless me ! poor Jane is ill !'
which my mother, being on the watch, heard distinctly,
and was sadly alarmed at. However, when I read on,
I found it was not near so bad as I had fancied at first ;
and I make so light of it now to her that she does not
think much about it : but I cannot imagine how I could
be so off my guard. If Jane does not get well soon, we
will call in Mr Perry. The expense shall not be
thought of; and though he is so liberal and so fond of
Jane, that I daresay he would not mean to charge any-
thing for attendance, we could not suffer it to be so, you
know. He has a wife and family to maintain, and is
not to be giving away his time. Well, now I have just
given you a hint of what Jane writes about, we will
turn to her letter, and I am sure she tells her own story
a great deal better than I can tell it for her. "
" I am afraid we must be running away, " said Emma,
glancing at Harriet, and beginning to rise, " my father
will be expecting us. I had no intention, I thought I
had no power, of staying more than five minutes, when
I first entered the house. I merely called because I
ij64
Emma
would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs
Bates ; but I have been so pleasantly deuined. Now,
however, we must wish you and Mrs Bates good morn-
ing. "
And not all that could be urged to detain her
succeeded. She regained the street, happy in this, that
though much had been forced on her against her will ;
though she had, in fact, heard the whole substance of
Jane Fairfax's letter, she had been able to escape the
letter itself.
Cl)aptet %^^
JANE FAIRFAX was an orphan, the only child
of Mrs Bates's youngest daughter.
The marriage of Lieut. Fairfax, of the
regiment of infantry, and Miss Jane Bates, had had its
day of fame and pleasure, hope and interest ; but nothing
now remained of it save the melancholy remembrance
of him dying in action abroad, of his widow sinking
under consumption and grief soon afterwards, and this
girl.
By birth she belonged to Highbury ; and when, at
three years old, on losing her mother she became the
property, the charge, the consolation, the fondling of her
grandmother and aunt, there had seemed every proba-
bility of her being permanently fixed there ; of her being
taught only what very limited means could command,
and growing up with no advantages of connection or
improvement, to be engrafted on what nature had given
her in a pleasing person, good understanding, and warm-
hearted, well meaning relations.
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her
father gave a change to her destiny. This was Colonel
Campbell, who had very highly regarded Fairfax, as an
Emma 165
excellent officer and most deserving young man ; and
farther had been indebted to him for such attentions,
during a severe camp-fever, as he believed had saved his
life. These were claims which he did mk learn to over-
look, though some years passed away from the death of
poor Fairfax before his own return to England put any-
thing in his power. When he did return, he sought
out the child and took notice of her. He was a
married man, with only one living child, a girl, about
Jane's age ; and Jane became their guest, paying them
long visits and growing a favourite with all, and before
she was nine years old, his daughter's great fondness for
her, and his own wish of being a real friend, united to
produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking
the whole charge of her education. It was accepted ;
and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel
Campbell's family, and had lived with them entirely,
only visiting her grandmother from time to time.
The plan was that she should be brought up for
educating others ; the very few hundred pounds which
she inherited from her father making independence im-
possible. To provide for her otherwise was out of
Colonel Campbell's power ; for though his income, by
pay and appointments, was handsome, his fortune was
moderate, and must be all his daughter's ; but, by giving
her an education, he hoped to be supplying the means of
respectable subsistence hereafter.
Such was Jane Fairfax's history. She had fallen
into good hands, known nothing but kindness from the
Campbells, and been given an excellent education.
Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed
people, her heart and understanding had received every
advantage of discipline and culture ; and Colonel Camp-
bell's residence being in London, every lighter talent
had been done full justice to, by the attendance of first-
rate masters. Her disposition and abilities were equally
i66 Emma
worthy of all that friendship could do ; and at eighteen
or nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can be
qualified for the care of children, fully competent to tlie
office of instruction herself ; but she was too much be-
loved to be parted with. Neither father nor mother
could promote, and the daughter could not endure it.
The evil day was put off. It was easy to decide that
she was still too young ; and Jane remained with them,
sharing as another daughter, in all the rational pleasures
of an elegant society, and a judicious mixture of home
and amusement, with only the drawback of the future —
the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding
— to remind her that all this might soon be over.
The affection of the whole family, the warm attach-
ment of Miss Campbell in particular, was the more
honourable to each party from the circumstance of Jane's
decided superiority, both in beauty and acquirements.
That nature had given it in feature could not be un-
seen by the young woman, nor could her higher powers
of mind be unfelt by the parents. They continued
together with unabated regard, however, till the mar-
riage of Miss Campbell, who, by that chance, that luck
which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs,
giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what
is superior, engaged the affections of Mr Dixon, a
young man, rich and agreeable, almost as soon as they
were acquainted ; and was eligibly and happily settled,
while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn.
This event had very lately taken place ; too lately
for anything to be yet attempted by her less fortunate
friend towards entering on her path of duty, though she
had now reached the age which her own judgment had
fixed on for beginning. She had long resolved that
one-and-twenty should be the period. With the forti-
tude of a devoted noviciate, she had resolved at one-
and-twenty to complete the sacrifice, and retire from
Emma 167
all the pleasures of life, of rational intercourse, equal
society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification
for ever.
The good sense of Colonel and Mrs Campbell could
not oppose such a resolution, though their feelings did.
As long as they lived, no exertions would be necessary,
their home might be hers for ever ; and for their own
comfort they would have retained her wholly ; but this
would be selfishness : what must be at last had better be
soon. Perhaps they began to feel it might have been
kinder and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any
delay, and spared her from a taste of such enjoyments
of ease and leisure as must now be relinquished. Still,
however, affection was glad to catch at any reasonable
excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment. She
had never been quite well since the time of their
daughter's marriage ; and till she should have com-
pletely recovered her usual strength, they must forbid
her engaging in duties, which, so far from being com-
patible with a weakened frame and varying spirits,
seemed, under the most favourable circumstances, to
require something more than human perfection of body
and mind to be discharged with tolerable comfort.
With regard to her not accompanying them to
Ireland her account to her aunt contained nothing but
truth, though there might be some truths not told. It
was her own choice to give the time of their absence to
Highbury ; to spend, perhaps, her last months of perfect
liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so
very dear ; and the Campbells, whatever might be their
motive or motives, whether single, or double, or treble,
gave the arrangement their ready sanction, and said that
they depended more on a few months spent in her
native air, for the recovery of her health, than on any-
thing else. Certain it was that she was to come, and
that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfect
1 68 Emma
novelty which had been so long promised it — Mr Frank
Churchill — must put up for the present with Jane
Fairfax, who could bring only the freshness of a two
years'absence.
Emma was soriy to have to pay civilities to a person
she did not like through three long months ! — to be
always doing more than she wished, and less than she
ought ! Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be
a difficult question to answer ; Mr Knightley had once
told her it was because she saw in her the really accom-
plished young woman which she wanted to be thought
herself; and though the accusation had been eagerly
refuted at the time, there were moments of self-
examination in which her conscience could not quite
acquit her. But " she could never get acquainted with
her ; she did not know how it was, but there was
such coldness and reserve ; such apparent indifference
whether she pleased or not ; and then, her aunt was
such an eternal talker ? — and she was made such a fuss
with by everybody! — and it had been always imagined
that they were to be so intimate ; because their ages
were the same, everybody had supposed they must be so
fond of each other. " These were her reasons ; she
had no better.
It was a dislike so little just — every imputed fault
was so magnified by fancy — that she never saw Jane
Fairfax, the first time after any considerable absence,
without feeling that she had injured her ; and now,
when the due visit was paid on her arrival, after a two
years'interval, she was particularly struck with the
very appearance and manners which for those two
whole years she had been depreciating. Jane Fairfax
was very elegant, remarkably elegant, and she had her-
self the liighest value for elegance. Her height was
pretty, just such as almost eveiybody would think tall,
and nobody could think very tall ; her fii^ure parlicu-
Emma 169
)arly gracefui : her size a most becoming medium,
between fat and tliin, though a slight appearance of ill-
health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two,
Emma could not but feel all this ; and then, her face —
her features — there was more beauty in them all together
than she had remembered ; it was not regular, but it was
very pleasing beauty. Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark
eyelashes and eyebrows, had never been denied their
praise ; but the skin, which she had been used to cavil
at, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy
which really needed no fuller bloom. It was a style of
beauty of which elegance was the reigning character,
and as such, she must, in honour, by all her priociples,
admire it ; elegance which whether of person or of
mind, she saw so little in Highbury. There, not to be
vulgar, was distinction and merit.
In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane
Fairfax with twofold complacency — the sense of
pleasure and the sense of rendering justice, and was
determining that she would dislike her no longer. When
she took in her history, indeed, her situation, as well as
her beauty ; when she considered what all this elegance
was destined to, what she was going to sink from, how
she was going to live, it seemed impossible to feel any-
thing but compassion and respect ; especially, if to
every well-known particular, entitling her to interest,
were added the highly probable circumstance of an at-
tachment to Mr Dixon, which she had so naturally
started to herself. In that case, nothing could be more
pitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had
resolved on. Emma was very willing now to acquit her
of having seduced Mr Dixon's affections from his wife,
or of anything mischievous which her imagination had
suggested at first. If it were love, it might be simple,
single, successless love on her side alone. She might
have been uDConsciously sucking in the sad poison,
G 2
170
Emma
while a sharer of his conversation with her friend ; and
from the best, the purest of motives, might now be
denying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving to
divide herself effectually from him and his connections
by soon beginning her career of laborious duty.
Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened,
charitable feelings, as made her look around in walking
home, and lament that Highbury afforded no young
man worthy of giving hfer independence — nobody that
she could wish to scheme about for her.
These were charming feelings, but not lasting. Before
she had committed herself by any public profession of
eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax, or done more
towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors, than
saying to Mr Knightley, •'She certainly is handsome :
she is better than handsome ! " Jane had spent an
evening at Hartfield with her grandmother and aunt,
and eveiything was relapsing much into its usual state.
Former provocations reappeared. The aunt was as
tiresome as ever ; more tiresome, because anxiety for
her health was now added to admiration of her powers ;
and they had to listen to the description of exactly how
little bread and butter she ate for breakfast, and how
small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well as to see ex-
hibitions of new caps and new work-bags for lier mo!her
and herself; and Jane's offences rose again. They had
music : Emma was obliged to play ; and the thanks
and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an
affectation of candour, an air of greatness, meaning only
to show off in higher style her own very superior per-
formance. She was, besides, which was the worst of
all, so cold, so cautious ! There was no getdng at her
real opinion. Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness, she
seemed determined to hazard nothing. She was dis-
gustingly, was suspiciously reserved.
If anytliing could be more, where all waa most, she
Emma 171
was more reservea on the subject of Weymouth and the
Dixons than anything. She seemed bent on giving no
real insight into Mr Dixon's character, or her own
value for his company, or opinion of the suitableness of
the match. It was all general approbation and smooth-
ness ; nothing delineated or distinguished. It did her
no service, however. Her caution was thrown away.
Emma saw its artifice, and returned to her first surmises.
There probably nvas something more to conceal than her
own preference ; Mr Dixon, perhaps, had been very
near changing one friend for the other, or been fixed
only to Miss Campbell, for the sake of the future twelve
tpousand pounds.
I .^he like reserve prevailed on other topics. She and
Mr Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the
same time./ y It was known that they were a little
acquainted, but not a syllable of real information could
Emma procure as to what he truly was. " Was he
handsome ? " — " She believed he was reckoned a very
fine young man. " — " Was he agreeable ? " — " He was
generally thought so. " — " Did he appear a sensible
young man ; a young man of information ? " — " At a
watering-place, or in a common London acquaintance,
it was difficult to decide on such points. Manners were
all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer
knowledge than they had yet had of Mr Churchill. She
believed everybody found his manners pleasing. "
Emma could not forgive her.
Cl)atJtet %%%
'MMA could not forgive her ; but as neither pro^
vocation nor resentment were discerned by Mr
Knightley, who had been of the party, and had
1 only proper attention and pleasing behavioia- on
172 Emma
each side, he was expressing the next morning, being
at Hartfield again on business with Mr Woodhouse, his
approbation of the whole ; not so openly as he might
have done had her father been out of the room, but
speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma.
He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had
now great pleasure in marking an improvement.
" A very pleasant evening, " he began, as soon as Mr
Woodhouse had been talked into what was necessary,
told that he understood, and the papers swept away —
" particularly pleasant. You and Miss Fairfax gave us
some very good music. I do not know a more luxu-
rious state, sir, than sitting at one's ease to be enter-
tained a whole evening by two such young women ;
sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation.
I am sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening
pleasant, Emma. You left nothing undone. I was
glad you made her play so much, for having no instru-
ment at her grandmother's, it must have been a real
indulgence. "
" I am happy you approved, " said Emma, smiling ;
" but I hope I am not often deficient in what is due to
guests at Hartfield. "
" No, my dear, " said her father, instantly ; " that I
am sure you are not. There is nobody half so atten-
tive and civil as you are. If anything you are too
attentive. The muffin last night — if it had been
handed round once, I think it would have been
enough. "
" No, " said Mr Knightley, nearly at the same time ;
" you are not often deficient ; not often deficient, either
in manner or comprehension. I think you understand
me, therefore. "
An arch look expressed — " I understand you well
enough ; " but she said only, " Miss Fairfax is re-
served. "
Emma 173
" I always told you she was — a little ; but you will
soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought
to be overcome, all that has its foundation in diffidence.
What arises from discretion muot be honoured. "
" You think her diffident, I do not see it. "
" My dear Emma, " said he, moving from his chair
into one close by her, " you are not going to tell me, I
hope, that you had not a pleasant evening ? "
" Oh no ; I was pleased with my own perseverance
in asking questions ; and amused to think how little
information I obtained. "
" I am disappointed, " was his only answer.
" 1 hope everybody had a pleasant evening, " said Mr
Wcodhouse, in his quiet way. " I had. Once, I felt
the fire rather too much ; but then I moved back my
chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me.
Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured, as she
always is, though she speaks rather too quick. How-
ever, she is very agreeable, and Mrs Bates, too, in a
different way. I like old friends ; and Miss Jane
Fairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady ; a very
pretty and a very well-behaved young lady indeed.
She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr
Knightley, because she had Emma. "
" True, sir ; and Emma, because she had Miss
Fairfax. "
Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at
least for the present, said, and with a sincerity which no
one could question —
" She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot
keep one's eyes from. I am always watching her to
admire ; and I do pity her from my heart. "
Mr Knightley looked as if he were more gratified
than he cared to express ; and before he could make
any reply, Mr Woodhouse, whose thoughts were on
the Bates's, said —
174 Emma
" It is a great pity that their circumstances should be
80 confined ! a great pity indeed ! and I have often
wished — but it is so little one can venture to do —
small, trifling presents, of anything uncommon. Now,
we have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending
them a loin or a leg ; it is very small and delicate —
Hartfield pork is not like any other pork — but still it is
pork — and, my dear Emma, unless one could be sure of
their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are
fried, without the smallest grease, and not roast it, for
no stomach can bear roast pork — I think we had bettei
send the leg — do not you think so, my dear ? "
" My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. 1
knew you would wish it. There will be the leg to be
salted, you know, which is so very nice, and the loin to
be dressed directly, in any manner they like. "
" That's right, my dear — very right. I had not
thought of it before, but that is the best way. They
must not over-salt the leg ; and then, if it is not over-
salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled, just as Serle
boils ours, and eaten veiy moderately of, with a boiled
turnip, and a little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider
it unwholesome. "
" Emma, " said Mr Knightley, presently, " 1 have a
piece of news for you. You like news — and I heard
an article in my way hither that I think will interest
you. "
" News ! Oh yes, I always like news. What is
it ? — why do you smile so ? — where did you hear it ? —
at Randalls?
He had time only to say —
" No, not at Randalls ; I have not been near Ran-
dalls, " — when the door was thrown open, and Miss
Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. Full
of thanks, ajid full of news, Miss Bates knew not which
to give quickest. Mr Knightley soon saw tint he had
Emma 175
lost his moment, and that not another syllable ot com-
munication could rest with him.
" Oh, my dear sir, how are you this morning ? My
dear Miss Woodhouse — I come quite overpowered.
Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork ! You are too
bountiful ! Have you heard the news ? Mr Elton is
going to be married. "
Emma had not had time even to think of Mr Elton,
and she was so completely surprized, that she could not
avoid a little start, and a little blush, at the sound.
" There is my news — I thought it would interest
you, " said Mr Knightley, with a smile, which implied
a conviction of some part of what had passed between
them.
" But where could you hear it ? " cried Miss Bates.
" Where could you possibly hear it, Mr Knightley?
For it is not five minutes since I received Mrs Cole's
note — no, it cannot be more than five — or at least ten —
for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready to
come out — I was only gone down to speak to Patty again
about the pork — Jane was standing in the passage — were
not you, Jane ? — for my mother was so afraid that we
had not any salting-pan large enough. So I said, I
would go down and see, and Jane said, * Shall I go
down instead ? for I think you have a little cold, and
Patty has been washing the kitchen.'—'Oh, my dear,'
— said I — well, and just then came the note. A Miss
Hawkins — that's all I know. A Miss Hawkins of
Bath. But, Mr Knightley, how could you possibly
have heard it ? for the very moment Mr Cole told Mrs
Cole of it, she sat down and wrote to me. A Miss
Hawkins —
" I was with Mr Cole on business an hour and a half
ago. He had just read Elton's letter as I was shown
in, and handed it to me directly. "
" Well ! that is quite — I suppose there never was a
176 Emma
piece of news more generally interesting. My dear sir,
you really are too bountiful. My mother desires her
very best compliments and regards, and a thousand
thanks, and says you really quite oppress her. "
" We consider our Hartfield pork, " replied Mr
Woodhouse — " indeed it certainly is, so very superior
to all other pork, that Emma and I cannot have a greater
pleasure than — "
" Oh, my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends
are only too good to us. If ever there were people
who, without having great wealth themselves, had every-
thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us. We may
well say, that *our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.'
Well, Mr Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter
—well— "
*'It was short — merely to announce — but cheerfvil,
exulting, of course. " Here was a sly glance at Emma.
" He had been so fortunate as to — I forget the precise
words — one has no business to remember them. The
information was, as you state, that he was going to be
married to a Miss Hawkins. By his style I should
imagine it just settled. "
" Mr Elton going to be married I " said Emma, as
soon as she could speak. " He will have everybody's
wishes for his happiness. "
" He is very young to settle, " was Mr Woodhouse's
observation. " He had better not be in a hurry. He
seemed to me very well off as he was. We were always
glad to see him at Hartlleld. "
" A new neighbour for us all. Miss Woodhouse ! "
said Miss Bates joyfully ; " my mother is so pleased ! —
she says she cannot bear to have the poor old Vicarage
without a mistress. This is great news, indeed. Jane,
you have never seen Mr Elton ; — no wonder that you
have such a curiosity to see him. "
Jane's curiosity did not appear of that absorbing
nature as wholly to occupy her.
Emma
177
" No, I have never seen Mr Elton, " she replied,
starting on this appeal :'• is he — is he a tall man ? "
" Who shall answer that question ? " cried Emma.
« My father would say,'Yes ;'Mr Knightley, * No ;'
and Miss Bates and I, that he is just the happy medium.
When you have been here a little longer, Miss Fair-
fax, you will understand that Mr Elton is the standard
of perfection in Highbury, both in person and
mind. "
" Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. He is
the very best young man ; — but, my dear Jane, if you
remember, I told you yesterday he was precisely the
height of Mr Perry. Miss Hawkins ! — I dare say, an
excellent young woman. His extreme attention to my
mother — wanting her to sit in the vicarage-pew, that
she might hear the better, for my mother is a little deaf,
you know — it is not much, but she does not hear quite
quick. Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little
deaf. He fancied bathing might be good for it — the
warm bath — but she says it did him no lasting benefit.
Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel. And
Mr Dixon seems a very charming young man, quite
worthy of him. It is such a happiness when good
people get together — and they always do. Now, here
will be Mr Elton and Miss Hawkins ; and there are the
Coles, such very good people ; and the Perrys — I sup-
pose there never was a happier or a better couple than
Mr and Mrs Perry. I say, sir, " turning to Mr Wood-
house, " I think there are few places with such society
as Highbury. I always say, we are quite blessed in our
neighbours. My dear sir, if there is one thing my
mother loves better than another, it is pork — a roast
loin of pork "
" As to who, or what, Miss Hawkins is, or how long
he has been acquainted with her, " said Emma, " nothing,
T suppose, can be known. One feels that it cannot be
178
Emma
a very long acquaintance. He has been gone only tour
weeks. "
Nobody had any information to give ; and, after a
few more wonderings, Emma said, —
" You are silent. Miss Fairfax — but I hope you
mean to take an interest in this news. You, who have
been hearing and seeing so much of late on these sub-
jects, who must have been so deep in the business on
Miss Campbell's account — we shall not excuse your
being indifferent about Mr Elton and Miss Hawkins. "
" When I have seen Mr Elton, " replied Jane, " I
dare say I shall be interested — but I believe it requires
that with me. And as it is some months since Miss
Campbell married, the impression may be a little worn
off " . "
" Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you
observe, Miss Woodhouse, " said Miss Bates, " four
weeks yesterday. A Miss Hawkins ! Well, I had
always rather fancied it would be some young lady here-
abouts ; not that I ever — Mrs Cole once whispered to
me — but I immediately said,'No, Mr Elton is a most
worthy young man — but'In short, I do not
think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries.
I do not pretend to it. What is before me, I see. At
the same time, nobody could wonder if Mr Elton should
have aspired — Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so
good-humou redly. She knows I would not offend for
the world. How does Miss Smith do ? She seems
quite recovered now. Have you heard from Mrs John
Knightley lately ? Oh, those dear little children.
Jane, do you know I always fancy Mr Dixon like Mr
John Knightley. I mean in person — tall, and with that
sort of look — and not very talkative. "
" Quite wrong, my dear aunt ; there is no likeness at
all. "
" V*.r\'odd ! but one never does form a just idea of
Emma 179
anybody beforehand. One takes up a notion and runs
away v/ith it. Mr Dixon, you say, is not, strictly
speaking, handsome ? "
" Handsome ! Oh no — far from it — certainly plain.
I told you he was plain. "
" My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not
allow him to be plain, and that you yourself "
" Oh, as for me, my judgment is worth nothing.
Where I have a regard, I always think a person well-
looking. But I gave what I believed the general
opinion, when I called him plain. "
" Well, my dear Jane. I believe we must be
running away. The weather does not look well, and
grandmamma will be uneasy. You are too obliging,
my dear Miss Woodhouse ; but we really must take
leave. This has been a most agreeable piece of news
indeed. I shall just go round by Mrs Cole's ; but I
shall not stop three minutes ; and, Jane, you had better
go home directly — I would not have you out in a
shower. We think she is the better for Highbury
already. Thank you — we do indeed. I shall not
attempt calling on Mrs Goddard, for I really do not
think she cares for anything but boiled pork ; when we
dress the leg it will be another thing. Good morning
to you, my dear sir. Oh, Mr Knightley is coming too.
Well, that is so very ! — I am sure if Jane is tired, you
will be so kind as to give her your arm. Mr Elton and
Miss Hawkins ! Good morning to you. "
Emma, alone with her father, had half her atten-
tion wanted by him, while he lamented that young
people would be in such a hurry to marry — and
to marry strangers too — and the other half she could
give to her own view of the subject. It was to her-
self an amusing and a very welcome piece of news, as
proving that Mr Elton could not have suffered long ;
but she was sorry for Harriet — Harriet must feel it —
i8o Emma
and all that she could hope was, by giving the first in-
formation herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly
from others. It was now about the time that she was
likely to call. If she were to meet Miss Bates in her
way ! — and upon its beginning to rain, Emma was
obliged to expect that the weather would be detaining
her at Mrs Goddard's, and that tlie intelligence would
undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.
The shower was heavy, but short ; and it had not
been over five minutes, when in came Harriet, with just
the heated, agitated look which hurrying thither with a
full heart was likely to give ; and the " Oh, Miss
Woodhouse, what do you think has happened ? " which
instantly burst forth, had all the evidence of correspond-
ing perturbation. As the blow was given, Emma felt
that she could not now show greater kindness than in
listening ; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through
what she had to tell. " She had set out from Mrs
Goddard's half an hour ago — she had been afraid it
would rain — she had been afraid it would pour down every
moment — but she thought she might get to Hartfield
first — she had hurried on as fast as possible ; but then,
as she was passing by the house where a j'oung woman
was making up a gown for her, she thought she would
just step in and see how it went [on] ; and though she
did not seem to stay half a moment there, soon after she
came out it began to rain, and she did not know what
to do ; so she ran on directly, as fast as she could,
and took shelter at Ford's. " Ford's was the prin-
cipal woollendraper, linendraper, and haberdasher's shop
united — the shop first in size and fashion in the place.
" And so there she had set, without an idea of anything
in the world, full ten minutes perhaps — when, all of a
sudden, who should come in — to be sure it was so verv
odd! — but they always dealt at Ford's — who should
come in, but Elizabeth Martin and her brother ! Dear
Emma i8i
Miss Woodhousc ! only think. I thought I should
have fainted. I did not know what to do. I was
sitting near the door — Elizabeth saw me directly ; but
he did not ; he was busy with the umbrella. I am sure
she saw me, but she looked away directly, and took no
notice ; and they both went to quite the farther end of
the shop ; and I kept sitting near the door. Oh dear,
I was so miserable ! I am sure I must have been as
white as my gown. I could not go away, you know,
because of the rain ; but I did so wish myself anywhere
in the world but there. Oh dear, Miss Woodhouse ! —
well, at last, I fancy, he looked round and saw me ; for
mstead of going on with her buyings, they began whis-
pering to one another. I am sure they were talking of
me ; and I could not help thinking that he was persuad-
ing her to speak to me — (do you think he was. Miss
Woodhouse?) — for presently she came forward — came
quite up to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready
to shake hands, if I would. She did not do any of it
in the same way that she used : I could see she was
altered ; but, however, she seemed to try to be very
friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some
time ; but I know no more what I said — I was in such
a tremble ! I remember she said she was sorry we never
met now, which I thought almost too kind ! Dear,
Miss Woodliouse, I was absolutely miserable ! By that
time, it was beginning to hold up, and I was determined
that nothing should stop me from getting away — and
then — only think ! — I found he was coming up towards
me too — slowly, you know, and as if he did not quite
know what to do ; and so he came and spoke, and I
answered — and I stood for a minute, feeling di-eadfully,
you know, one can't tell how ; and then I took courage,
and said it did not rain, and I must go ; and so off I
set ; and I had not got three yards from the door, when
he came after me, only to say, if I was going to Hart-
1 82 Emma
field, he thought I had much better go round by Mr
Cole's stables, for I should find the near way quite
floated by this rain. Oh dear, I thought it would have
been the death of me ! So I said I was very much
obliged to him : you know I could not do less ; and
then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by
the stables — I believe I did — but I hardly knew where
I was, or anything about it. Oh, Miss Woodhouse, I
would rather done anything than have had it happen ;
and yet, you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in
seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly. And
Elizabeth, too. Oh, Miss Woodhouse, do talk to me,
and make me comfortable again. "
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so ; but it was
not immediately in her power. She was obliged to stop
and think. She was not thoroughly comfortable herself.
The young man's conduct, and his sister's, seemed the
result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them.
As Harriet described it, there had been an interesting
mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in
their behaviour ; but she had believed them to be well-
meaning, worthy people before ; and what difference did
this make in the evils of the connection ? It was folly
to be disturbed by it. Of course, he must be sorry to
lose her, — they must be all sorry — ambition, as well as
love, had probably been mortified. They might all have
hoped to rise by Harriet's acquaintance ; and besides,
what was the value of Harriet's description ? So easily
pleased — so little discerning — what signified her praise ?
She exerted herself, and did try to make her com-
fortable, by considering all that had passed as a mere
trifle, and quite unworthy of being dwelt on.
" It might be distressing for the moment, " said she,
" but you seem to have behaved extremely well ; and it
is over, and may never — can never, as a first meeting
occur again, and therefore you need not think about it. "
Emma ib^
Harriet said, " Very true, " and she " would not
chink about it ; " but still she talked of it — still she
could talk of nothing else ; and Emma, at last, in order
to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to hurry
on the news, which she had meant to give with so much
tender caution, hardJy knowing herself whether to re-
joice or be angry, ashamed, or only amused, at such a
state of mind in poor Harriet — such a conclusion of Mr
Elton's importance with her !
Mr Elton's rights, however, gradually revived.
Though she did not feel the first intelligence as she
might have done the day before, or an hour before, its
interest soon increased ; and before their first conversa-
tion was over, she had talked herself into all the sensations
of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to
this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to
place the Martins under proper subordination in her
fancy.
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been
such a meeting. It had been serviceable in deadening
the first shock, without retaining any influence to alarm.
As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not get at
her, v;ithout seeking her where hitherto they had wanted
either the courage or the condescension to seek her ; for
since her refusal of the brother, the sisters never had
been at Mrs Goddard's ; and a twelvemonth might
pass without their being thrown together again, with any
necessity, or even any power of speech.
Chapter ^^Jt%
HUMAN nature is so well disposed towards those
who are in interesting situations, that a young
person, who either marries or dies, is sure of
being kindly spoken of.
i8d4
Emma
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name
was first mentioned in Highbury, before she was, by
some means or other, discovered to have every recom-
mendation of person and mind — to be handsome,
elegant, highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable ; and
when Mr Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy
prospects, and circulate the fame of her merits, there
was very little more for him to do than to tell her Christian
name, and say whose music she principally played.
Mr Elton returned, a very happy man. He had
gone away rejected and mortified, disappointed in a very
sanguine hope, after a series of what appeared to him
strong encouragement ; and not only losing the right
lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very
wrong one. He had gone away deeply offended, he
came back engaged to another ; and to another as
superior of course, to the first, as under such circum-
stances what is gained always is to what is lost. He
came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring
nothing for Miss Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith.
The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all
the usual advantages of perfect beauty and merit, was in
possession of an independent fortune, of so many
thousands as would always be called ten — a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience. The story
told well : he had not thrown himself away — he had
gained a woman of ;^ 10,000, or thereabouts, and he
had gained her with such delightful rapidity ; the first
hour of introduction had been so veiy soon followed by
distinguishing notice ; the history which he had to give
Mrs Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so
glorious ; the steps so quick, from the accidental ren-
contre, to the dinner at Mr Green's, and the party at
Mrs Brown's — smiles and blushes rising in importance
— with consciousness and agitation richly scattered ; the
lady had been so easily impressed — so sweetly disposed ;
Emma 185
< — had, in short, to use a most Intelligible phrase, been
so very ready to have him, that vanity and prudence
were equally contented.
f|He had caught both substance and shadow, both
fortune and affection, and was just the happy man he
ought to be ;/|-talking only of himself and his own
concerns — expecting to be congratulated — ready to be
laughed at — and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now
addressing all the young ladies of the place, to whom,
a few weeks ago, he would have been more cautiously
gallant.
The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had
only themselves to please, and nothing but the neces-
sary preparations to wait for ; and when he set out for
Bath again, there was a general expectation, which a
certain glance of Mrs Cole's did not seem to contra-
dict, that when he next entered Highbury he would
bring his bride.
During his present short stay, Emma had barely
seen him ; but just enough to feel that the first meeting
was over, and to give her the impression of his not
being improved by the mixture of pique and pretension
now spread over his air. She was, in fact, beginning
very much to wonder that she had ever thought him
pleasing at all ; and his sight was so inseparably con-
nected with some veiy disagreeable feelings, that, ex-
cept in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, a source of
profitable humiliation to her own mind, she would have
been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again.
She wished him very well ; but he gave her pain ; and
his v/elfare twenty miles off would administer most
satisfaction.
The pain of his continued residence in Highbuiy,
however, must certainly be lessened by his marriage.
Many vain solicitudes would be prevented — many
awkwardnesses smoothed by it. A Mrs Elton would
1 86 Emma
be an excuse for any change of intercourse ; former
intimacy might sink without remark. It would be
almost beginning their life of civility again.
Of the lady individually, Emma thought very little.
She was good enough for Mr Elton, no doubt ; accom-
plished enough for Highbury — handsome enough — to
look plain, probably, by Harriet's side. As to con-
nection, there Emma was perfectly easy ; persuaded
that, after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of
Harriet, he had done nothing. On that article, truth
seemed attainable. What she was, must be uncertain ;
but -who she was, might be found out ; and setting
aside the ;£ 10,000 it did not appear that she was at all
Harriet's superior. She brought no name, no blood,
no alliance. Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the
two daughters of a Bristol — merchant, of course, he
must be called ; but, as the whole of the profits of his
mercantile life appeared so very moderate, it was not
unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been
very moderate also. Part of every winter she had been
used to spend in Bath ; but Bristol was her home, the
very heart of Bristol ; for though the father and mother
had died some years ago, an uncle remained — in the
law line : nothing more distinctly honourable was
hazarded of him, than that he was in the law line ;
and with him the daughter had lived. Emma guessed
him to be the drudge of some attorney, and too stupid
to rise. And all the grandeur of the connection
seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was very
nvell married^ to a gentleman in a great ivay, near
Bristol, who kept two carriages ! That was the
wind-up of the history; that was the glory of Miss
Hawkins-
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about
it all ! She had talked her into love ; but, alas ! she
was not 80 easily to be talked out of it. The charm of
Emma 187
an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet's
mind was not to be talked away. He might be super-
seded by another ; he certainly would, indeed ; nothing
could be clearer ; even a Robert Martin would have
been sufficient ; but nothing else, she feared, would
cure her. Harriet was one of those, who, having once
begun, would be always in love. And now, poor girl,
she was considerably worse from this re-appearance o.'
Mr Elton — she was always having a glimpse of him
somewhere or other. Emma saw him only once ; but
two or three times every day Harriet was sure just to
meet with him, or just to miss him, just to hear his
voice, or see his shoulder, ywj/ to have something occur
to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth
of surprize and conjecture. She was, moreover, per-
petually hearing about him ; for, excepting when at
Hartfield, she was always among those who saw no fault
in Mr Elton, and found nothing so interesting as the
discussion of his concerns ; and every report, therefore,
every guess — all that had already occurred, all that
might occur in the arrangement of his affairs, compre-
hending income, sei-vants, and furniture — was continually
in agitation around her. Her regard was receiving
strength by invariable praise of him, and her regrets
kept alive, and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions
of Miss Hawkins's happiness, and continual observation
of how much he seemed attached ! his air as he walked
by the house, the very sitting of his hat, being all in
proof of how much he was in love !
Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been
no pain to her friend, or reproach to herself, in the
v/averings of Harriet's mind, Emma would have been
amused by its variations. Sometimes Mr Elton pre-
dominated, sometimes the Martins ; and each was occa-
sionally useful as a check to the other. Mr Elton's
engagement had been the cure of the agitat on of meet-
1 88 Emma
ing Mr Martin. The unhappiness produced by the
knowledge of that engagement had been a little put
aside by Elizabeth Martin's calling at Mrs Goddard's a
few days afterwards. Harriet had not been at home ;
but a note had been prepared and left for her, written
in the ver\^ style to touch, — a small mixture of reproach
with a great deal of kindness ; and till Mr Elton him-
self appeared, she had been much occupied by it, con-
tinually pondering over what could be done in return,
and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. But
Mr Ellon, in person, had driven away all such cares.
While he staid, the Martins were forgotten ; and on
the very morning of his setting off for Bath again,
Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned,
judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin's
visit.
How that visit was to be acknowledged, what would
be necessary, and what might be safest, had been a point
of some doubtful consideration. Absolute neglect of
the mother and sisters, when invited to come, would be
ingratitude. It must not be ; and yet the danger of a
renewal of the acquaintance !
After much thinking, she could determine on nothing
better than Harriet's returning the visit ; but in a way
that, if they had understanding, should convince them
that it was to be only a formal acquaintance. Siie
meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the
Abbey Mill, while she drove a little farther, and call for
her again so soon as to allow no time for insidious ippli-
cations or dangerous recurrences to the past, and give
the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was
chosen for the future.
She could tliink of nothing better ; and though there
was something in it which her own heart could not
approve'— something of ingratitude, merely glossed over
— it mus* be done, or what would become of Harriet ?
Emma 189
chapter llfililllj.
SMALL heart had Harriet for visiting. Only
half an hour before her friend called for her at
Mrs Goddard's, her evil stars had led her to the
very spot, where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to
The Rev. Philip Elton, White Hart, Bath, was to be
seen under the operation of being lifted into the butcher's
cart, which was to convey it to where the coaches past ;
and everything in this world, except that trunk and the
direction, was consequently a blank.
She went, however ; and when they reached the
farm, and she was to be put down, at the end of the
broad, neat gravel walk, which led between espalier
apple-trees to the front door, the sight of everything
which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before
was beginning to revive a little local agitation ; and
when they parted, Emma observed her to be looking
around with a sort of fearful curiosity, which deter-
mined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed
quarter of an hour. She went on herself, to give that
portion of time to an old servant who was married, and
settled in Donwell.
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the
white gate again ; and Miss Smith receiving her sum-
mons, was with her without delay, and unattended by
any alarming young man. She came solitarily down
the gravel walk — a Miss Martin just appearing at the
door, and parting with her seemingly with ceremonious
civility.
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible
account. She was feeling too much ; but at last
Emma collected from her enough to understand the
sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it was creating.
She had seen only Mrs Martin and the two girls. They
igo Emma
had received her doubtingly, if not coolly ; and nothing
beyond the merest common-place had been talked al-
most all the time — till just at last, when Mrs Martin's
saying all of a sudden, that she thought Miss Smith was
grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and a
warmer manner. In that very room she had been
measured last September with her two friends. There
were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the
wainscot by the window. He had done it. — They
all seemed to remember the day, the hour, the party,
the occasion — to feel the same consciousness, the same
regrets — to be ready to return to the same good under-
standing ; and they were just growing again like them-
selves (fiarriet, as Emma must suspect, as ready as the
best of them to be cordial and happy) when the carriage
reappeared, and all was over. The style of the visit,
and the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive.
Fourteen minutes to be given to those v/ith whom she
had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago !
Emma could not but picture it all, and feel how justly
they might resent, how naturally Harriet must suffer.
It was a bad business. She would have given a great
deal, or endured a great deal, to have had the Martins
in a higher rank of life. They were so deserving, that a
litt/e higher should have been enough ; but as it was,
how could she have done otherwise ? Impossible !
She could not repent. They must be separated ; but
there was a great deal of pain in the process — so much
to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity of
a little consolation, and resolved on going home by way
of Randalls to procure it. Her mind was quite sick of
Mr Elton and the Martins. The refreshment of
Randalls was absolutely necessary.
It was a good scheme ; but on driving to the door
they heard that neither " master nor mistress was at
home : " they had both been out some time ; the man
believed they were gone to Hartfield.
Emma
191
" This is too bad, " cried Emma, as they turned
away. " And now we shall just miss them ; too pro-
voking. I do not know when I have been so disap-
pointed. " And she leaned back in the comer, to
indulge her murmurs, or to reason them away ; probably a
little of both — such being the commonest process of a
not ill-disposed mind. Presently the canriage stopt : she
looked up ; it was stopt by Mr and Mrs Weston, who
were standing to speak to her. There was instant plea-
sure in the sight of them, and still greater pleasure was
conveyed in sound ; for Mr Weston immediately accosted
her with —
" How d'ye do ? — how d'ye do ? We have been sit-
ting with your father — glad to see him so well. Frank
comes to-morrow — I had a letter this morning — we see
him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty — he is at
Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight — I
knew it would be so. If he had come at Christmas he
could not have staid three days. I was always glad he
did not come at Christmas ; now we are going to have
just the right weather for him — fine, dry, settled
weather. We shall enjoy him completely ; everything
has turned out exactly as we could wish. "
There was no resisting such news, no possibility of
avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr
Weston's, confirmed as it all was by the words and the
countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but not less
to the purpose. To know that she thought his coming
certain was enough to make Emma consider it so, and
sincerely did she rejoice in their joy. It was a most
delightful reanimation of exhausted spirits. The worn-
out past was sunk in the freshness of what was coming ;
and in the rapidity of half a moment's thought, she
hoped Mr Elton would now be talked of no more.
Mr Weston gave her the history of the engagement >
at Enscombe, which allowed his son to answer foj
192
Emma
having an entire fortnight at his command, as well as
the route and the method of his journey ; and she
listened, and smiled, and congratulated.
" I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield, " said he,
at the conclusion.
Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at
this speech, from his wife.
" We had better move on, Mr Weston, " said she ;
" we are detaining the girls. "
" Well, well, I am ready ; " and turning again to
Kmma — " but you must not be expecting such a very
fine young man ; you have only had my account, you
know ; I dare say he is really nothing extraordinary, "
though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were
speaking a very different conviction.
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent,
and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing.
" Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about
four o'clock, " wai Mrs Weston's parting injunction,
spoken with some anxiety, and meant only for her.
" Four o'clock ! — depend upon it he will be here by
three, " was Mr Weston's quick amendment ; and so
ended a most satisfactory meeting. Emma's spirits were
mounted quite up to happiness. Everything wore a dif-
ferent air. James and his horses seemed not half so
sluggish as before. When she looked at the hedges,
she thouglit the elder, at least must soon be coming out ;
and when she turned round to Harriet she saw some-
thing like a lock of spring, a tender smile even there.
" Will Mr Frank Churchill pass through Bath as
well as Oxford i " was a question, however, which did
not augur much.
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all
at once ; and Emma was now in a humour to resolve
that they should both come in time.
The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs
Emma 193
Weston's faithful pupil did not forget eitiier at ten, or
eleven, or twelve o'clock, that she was to think of her
It four.
" My dear, dear anxious friend, " said she, in mental
soliloquy, while walking downstairs from her own room,
" always over-careful for everybody's comfort but your
own ; I see you now in all your little fidgets, going
again and again into his room, to be sure that all is
right. " The clock struck twelve as she passed through
the hall. "'Tis twelve ; I shall not forget to think of
you four hours hence ; and by this time to-morrow,
perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking of the pos-
sibility of their all calling here. I am sure they will
bring him soon. "
She opened the parlour door, aiid saw two gentlemen
sitting with her father — Mr Weston and his son. They
had been arrived only a few minutes ; and Mr Weston
had scarcely finished his explanation of Frank's being a
day before his time, and her father was yet in the midst
of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when she
appeared, to have her share of surprize, introduction,
and pleasure.
The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in
interest, was actually before her. He was presented
to her, and she did not think too much had been said
in his praise. He was a very good-looldng young man
— height, air, address, all were unexceptionable, and
his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and
liveliness of his father's — he looked quick and sensible.
S}ie felt immediately that she should like him ; and
there was a well-bred ease of manner, and a readiness
to talk, which convinced her that he came intending to
be acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon
must be.
He had reached Randalls the evening before. She
was pleased with the eagerness to arrive which had made
H
194 Emma
him alter his plan, and travel earlier, later, and quicker,
that he might gain half a day.
" I told you yesterday, " cried Mr Weston, with
exultation, " I told you all that he would be here before
the time named. I remembered what I used to do my-
self. One cannot creep upon a journey ; one cannot
help getting on faster than one has planned : and the
pleasure of coming in upon one's friends before the look-
out begins is worth a great deal more than any little
exertion it needs. "
" It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it, "
said the young man, " though there are not many houses
that I should presume on so far ; but in coming home I
felt I might do anything. "
The word home made his father look on him with
fresh complacency. Emma was directly sure that he
knew how to make himself agreeable ; the conviction
was strengthened by what followed. He was very
much pleased with Randalls, thought it a most admir-
ably-arranged house, would hardly allow it even to be
very small, admired the situation, the walk to Highbury,
Highbury itself, Hartfield still more, and professed him-
self to have always felt the sort of interest in the country',
which none but one's own country gives, and the
greatest curiosity to visit it. That he should never have
been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before passed
suspiciously through Emma's brain ; but still if it were
a falsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantly handled.
His manner had no air of study or exaggeration. He
did really look and speak as if in a state of no common
enjoyment.
Their subjects, in general, were such as belong to an
Dpening acquaintance. On his side were the inquiries —
" Was sJie a horse-woman ? Pleasant rides ? Pleasant
walks? Had they a large neighbourhood ? Highbury,
perhaps, afforded society enough ? There were several
Emma 195
rery pretty houses in and about it. Balls — had they
balls ? VVas it a musical society ? "
But when satisfied on all these points, and their
acquaintance proportionably advanced, he contrived
to find an opportunity, while their two fathers were en-
gaged with each other, of introducing his mother-in-law,
and speaking of her with so much handsome praise, so
much warm admiration, so much gratitude for the
happiness she secured to his father, and her very kind
reception of himself, as was an additional proof of his
knowing how to please — and of his certainly thinking it
worth while to try to please her. He did not advance
a word of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly
decerved by Mrs Weston ; but, undoubtedly, he could
know very little of the matter. He understood what
would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else.
" His father's marriage, " he said, " had been the wisest
measure : every friend must rejoice in it ; and the family
from whom he had received such a blessing must be
ever considered as having conferred the highest obliga-
tion on him. "
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss
Taylor's merits, without seeming quite to forget that, in
the common course of things, it was to be rather
supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Wood-
house's character, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor's.
And at last, as if resolved to qualify his opinion com-
pletely for travelling round to its object, he wound it
all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her
person.
" Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for, "
said he ; " but I confess that, considering everything,
I had not expected more than a very tolerably well-
looking woman of a certain age ; 1 did not know
that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs
Weston. "
196 Emma
" You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs Weston,
for my feelings, " said Emma ; " were you to guess her
to be eighteen, I should listen with pleasure ; but she
would be ready to quarrel with you for using such
words. Don't let her imagine that you have spoken of
her as a pretty young woman. "
" I hope I should know better, " he replied; " no,
depend upon it " (with a gallant bow), " that in ad-
dressing Mrs Weston, I should understand whom I
might praise without any danger of being thought
extravagant in my terms. "
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what
might be expected from their knowing each other,
which had taken strong possession of her mind, had
ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to
be considered as marks of acquiescence or proofs of
defiance. She must see more of him to understand his
ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable.
She had no doubt of what Mr Weston was often
thinking about. His quick eye she detected again and
again glancing towards them with a happy expression ;
and even when he might have determined not to look
she was confident that he was often listening.
Her own father's perfect exemption from any thought
of the kind, the entire deficiency in him of all such sort
of penetration or suspicion, was a most comfortable cir-
cumstance. Happily he was not farther from approv-
ing matrimony than from foreseeing it. Though always
objecting to every marriage that was arranged, he never
suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any ; it
seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two per-
sons'understanding as to suppose they meant to marry
till it were proved against them. She blessed the
favouring blindness. He could now, without the
drawback of a single unpleasant surmise, without a
glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest,
Emma i^y
give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility, in
solicitous inquiries after Mr Frank Churchill's accom-
modation on his journey, through the sad evils of sleep-
ing two nights on the road, and express very genuine
unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped
catching cold — which, however, he could not allow
him to feel quite assured of himself, till after another
night.
A reasonable visit paid, Mr Weston began to move.
" He must be going. He had business at the Crown
about his hay, and a great many errands for Mrs
Weston at Ford's ; hut he need not hurry anybody
else. " His son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose
immediately also, saying —
" As you are going farther on business, sir, I will
take the opportunity of paying a visit, which must be
paid some day or other, and therefore may as well be
paid now. I have the honour of being acquainted with
a neighbour of yours " (turning to Emma), " a lady
residing in or near Highbury ; a family of the name of
Fairfax. I shall have no difficulty, I suppose, in find-
ing the house ; though Fairfax, I believe, is not the
proper name — I should rather say Barnes or Bates.
Do you know any family of that name } "
" To be sure we do, " cried his father ; " Mrs Bates
— we passed her house — I saw Miss Bates at the
window. True, true, you are acquainted with Miss
Fairfax ; I remember you knew her at Weymouth,
and a fine girl she is. Call upon her, by all means. "
" There is no necessity for my calling this morning, "
said the young man ; " another day would do as well ;
but there was that degree of acquaintance at Weymouth,
which— "
" Oh, go to-day, go to-day. Do not defer it. What
is right to be done cannot be done too soon. And,
besides. I must give you a hint, Frank — any want of
198 Emma
attention to her here should be carefully avoided. You
saw her with the Campbells, when she was the equal of
everybody she mixed with, but here she is with a poor
old grandmother, who has barely enough to live on.
If you do not call early it will be a slight. "
The son looked convinced.
" I have heard her speak, of the acquaintance, " said
Emma ; " she is a very elegant young woman. "
He agreed to it, but with so quiet a " Yes, " as
inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and
yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the
fashionable world if Jane Fairfax could be thought
only ordinarily gifted with it.
" If you were never particularly struck by her
manners before, " said she, " I think you will to-day.
You will see her to advantage ; see her and hear her —
no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has
an aunt who never holds her tongue. "
" You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are
you ? " said Mr Woodhouse, always the last to make
his way in conversation ; " then give me leave to assure
you that you will find her a very agreeable young lady.
She is staying here on a visit to her grandmamma and
aunt, very worthy people ; I have known them all my
life. They will be extremely glad to see you, I am
sure ; and one of my servants shall go with you to show
you the way. "
" My dear sir, upon no accouut in the world ; my
father can direct me. "
« But your father is not going so far ; he is only
going to the Crown, quite on the other side of the
street, and there are a great many houses ; you might
be veiy much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk, un-
less you keep on the footpath ; but my coachman can
tell you where you had best cross the street. "
Mr Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as
Emma 199
senous as he could : and his father gave his hearty
support, by calling out, " My good friend, this is quite
unnecessary ; Frank knows a puddle of water when he
sees it, and as to Mrs Bates's, he may get there from
the Crown in a hop, step, and jump. "
They were permitted to go alone ; and with a cordial
nod from one, and a graceful bow from the other, the
two gentlemen took leave. Emma remained very well
pleased with this beo;ipning of the acquaintance, and
could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any
hour of the day, with full confidence in their comfort.
Ci)apter ^^JV*
THE next morning brought Mr Frank Churchill
again. He came with Mrs Weston, to whom
and to Highbuiy he seemed to take very cor-
dially. He had been sitting with her, it appeared, most
companionably at home, till her usual hour of exercise :
and on being desired to chuse their walk, immediately
fixed on Highbury. " He did not doubt there being
very pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him,
he should always chuse tlie same. Highbury, that airy,
cheerful, happy-looking Highbury, would be his con-
stant attraction. " Highbury with Mrs Weston, stood
for Hartfield : and she trusted to its bearing the same
construction with him. They walked thither directly.
Emma had hardly expected them : for Mr Weston,
who had called in for half a minute, in order to hear
that his son was very handsome, knew nothing of their
plans ; and it was an agreeable surprize to her, therefore,
to perceive them walking up to the house together, arm
in arm. She was wanting to see him again ; and
especially to see him in comnany with Mrs Weston,
200 Emma
upon his behaviour to whom her opinion of him was to
depend. If he were deficient there, nothing should
make amends for it. But on seeing them together she
became perfectly satisfied. It was not merely in fine
words or hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty ;
nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole
manner to her — nothing could more agreeably denote
his wish of considering her as a friend, and securing her
affection. And there was time enough for Emma to
form a reasonable judgment, as their visit included all
the rest of the morning. They were all three walking
about together for an hour or two — first round the
shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury.
He was delighted with everything ; admired Hartfield
sufficiently for Mr Woodhouse's ear ; and when their
going farther was resolved on, confessed his wish to be
made acquainted with the whole village, and found
matter of commendation and interest much oftener than
Emma could have supposed.
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very
amiable feelings. He begged to be shewn the house
which his father had lived in so long, and which had
been the home of his father's father, and on recollect-
ing that an old woman who had nursed him was still
living, walked in quest of her cottage, from one end of
the street to the other ; and though in some points of
pursuit or observation there was no positive merit, they
shewed altogether a good will towards Highbury in
general, which must be very like a merit to those he
was with.
Emma watched, and decided that with such feelings
as were now shewn it could not be fairly supposed that
he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself; that he
had not been acring a part, or making a parade of in-
smcere professions ; and that Mr Knightley certainlv
had not done him justice.
Emma 201
Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an incon-
«derable house, though the principal one of the sort,
where a couple of pair of post-horses were kept, more
for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from
any run on the road ; and his companions had not ex-
pected to be detained by any interest excited there ;
but in passing it they gave the history of the large room
visibly added. It had been built many years ago for a
ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been in a
particularly populous, dancing state, had been occasion-
ally used as such ; but such brilliant days had long
passed away ; and now the highest purpose for which
it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist-club,
established among the gentlemen and half gentlemen of
the place. He was immediately interested. Its char-
acter as a ball-room caught him ; and instead of passing
on, he stopt for several minutes at the two superior
sashed windows which were open, to look in and con-
template its capabilities, and lament that its original
purpose should have ceased. He saw no fault in the
room ; he would acknowledge none which they
suggested. No ; it was long enough, broad enough,
handsome enough. It would hold the very number
for comfort. They ought to have balls there at least
every fortnight through the winter. Why had not
Miss Woodhouse revived the former good old days of
the room ? She who could do anything in Highbury !
The want of proper families in the place, and the con-
viction that none beyond the place and its immediate
environs could be [tempted] to attend, were mentioned :
but he was not satisfied. He could not be persuaded
that so many good-looking houses as he saw around
him could not furnish numbers enough for such a
meeting ; and even when particulars were given and
families described, he was still unwilling to admit that
the inconvenience of such a mixture would be anything,
H 2
202 Emma
or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every-
body's returning into their proper place the next morn-
ing. He argued like a young man very much bent on
dancing ; and Emma was rather surprized to see the
constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against
the habits of the Churchills. He seemed to have all
the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclina-
tions of his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve
of Enscombe. Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps,
scarcely enough ; his indifference to a confusion of rank
bordered too much on inelegance of mind. He could
be no judge, however, of the evil he was holding cheap.
It was but an effusion of lively spirits.
At last he was persuaded to move on from the front
of the Crown ; and being now almost facing the house
where the Bateses lodged, Emma recollected his in-
tended visit the day before, and asked him if he had
paid it.
" Yes, oh yes ! " he replied ; " I was just going to
mention it. A very successful visit. I saw all the
three ladies ; and felt very much obliged to you for
your preparatory hint. If the talking aunt had taken
me quite by surprize it must have been the death of me.
As it was, I was only betrayed into paying a most un-
reasonable visit. Ten minutes would have been all that
was necessary, perhaps all that was proper ; and I had
told my father I should certainly be at home before
him, but there was no getting away, no pause ; and, to
my utter astonishment, I found, when he (finding me
nowhere else) joined me there at last, that I had been
actually sitting with them very nearly three quarters of
an hour. The good lady had not given me the possi-
bility of escape before. "
" And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking ? "
" III, very ill — that is, if a young lady can ever be
allowed to look ill ; but the expression is hardly admis-
Emma 203
sible, Mrs Weston, is it ? Ladies can never look ill ;
and seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale as almost
always to give the appearance of ill health — a most
deplorable want of complexion. "
Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm
defence of Miss Fairfax's complexion. " It was cer-
tainly never brilliant, but she would not allow it to have
a sickly hue in general ; and there was a softness and
delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the
character of her face. " He listened with all due defer-
ence ; acknowledged that he had heard many people say
the same ; but yet he must confess that to him nothing
could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health.
Where features were indifferent, a fine complexion gave
beauty to them all ; and where they were good, the
effect was — fortunately he need not attempt to describe
what the effect was.
" Well, " said Emma, " there is no disputing about
taste. At least you admire her, except her com-
plexion. "
He shook his head and laughed. " I cannot separate
Miss Fairfax and her complexion. "
" Did you see her often at Weymouth ? Were you
often in the same society ? "
At this moment they were approaching Ford's, and
he hastily exclaimed, " Ha ! this must be the very shop
that everybody attends every day of their lives, as my
father informs me. He comes to Highbury himself, he
says, six days out of the seven, and has always business
at Ford's. If it be not inconvenient to you, pray let
us go in, that I may prove myself to belong to the
place — to be a true citizen of Highbury. I must buy
sometliing at Ford's. It will be taking out my freedom.
I dare say they sell gloves. "
" Oh yes, gloves and everything. 1 do admire your
patriotism. You will be adored in Highbury. You
204 Emma
were very popular before you came, because yon were
Mr Weston's son ; but lay out half a guinea at Ford's,
and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues. "
They went in ; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels
of " Men's Beavers " and " York Tan " were bringing
down and displaying on the counter, he said — " But I
beg your pardon. Miss Woodhouse ; you were speaking
to me, you were saying something at the very moment
of this burst of my amor patria. Do not let me lose
it ; I assure you the utmost stretch of public fame would
not make me amends for the loss of any happiness in
private life. "
" I merely asked, whether you had known much of
Miss Fairfax and her party at Weymouth. "
" And now that I understand your question I must
pronounce it to be a very unfair one. It is always the
lady's right to decide on the degree of acquaintance.
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account. I
shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may
chuse to allow. "
" Upon my word you answer as discreetly as she
could do herself. But her account of everything leaves
so much to be guessed ; she is so very reserved, so verj'
unwilling to give the least information about anybody,
that I really think you may say what you like of your
acquaintance with her. "
" May I, indeed ? Then I will speak the truth, and
nothing suits me so well. I met her frequently at
Weymouth. I had known the Campbells a little in
town ; and at Weymouth we were very much in the
same set. Col. Campbell is a very agreeable man,
and Mrs Campbell a friendly warm-hearted woman.
I like them all. "
" You know Miss Fairfax's situation in life, I con-
clude ? — what she is destined to be ? "
" Yes " — (rather hesitatingly) — " I believe I do. "
I
Emma 205
" You get upon delicate subjects, Emma, " said Mrs
Weston, smiling ; " remember that I am here. Mr
Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say when you
speak of Miss Fairfax's situation in life. I will move
a little farther off. "
" 1 certainly do forget to think of /jtr, " said Emma,
" as having ever been anything but my friend and my
dearest friend. "
He looked as if he fully understood and honoured
such a sentiment.
When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted
the shop again — " Did you ever hear the young lady we
were speaking of play ? " said Frank Churchill.
" Ever hear her ? " repeated Emma. " You forget how
much she belongs to Highbury. I have heard her every
year of our lives since we both began. She plays
charmingly. "
" You think so, do you ? I wanted the opinion of
some one who could really judge. She appeared to me
to play well, that is, with considerable taste, but I know
nothing of the matter myself. I am excessively fond
of music, but without the smallest skill or right of judg-
ing of anybody's performance. I have been used to hear
hers admired ; and I remember one proof of her being
thought to play well : a man, a very musical man, and
in love with [another woman — engaged to her — on the
point of man'iage — would yet never ask that other
woman to sit down to the instrument, if the lady in
question could sit down instead — never seemed to
like to hear one if he could hear the other. That I
thought, in a man of known musical talent, was some
proof. "
" Proof, indeed ! " said Emma, highly amused
" Mr Dixon is very musical, is he ? We shall kno\ <
more about them all, in half an hour, from you, than
Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year. "
2o6 Emma
" Yes, Mr Dixon and Miss Campbell were the
persons ; and I thought it a very strong proof. "
" Certainly, very strong it was ; to own the truth, a
great deal stronger than, if / had been Miss Campbell,
would have been at all agreeable to me. I could not
excuse a man's having more music than love — more ear
than eye — a more acute sensibility to fine sounds than
to my feelings. How did Miss Campbell appear to
like it? "
" It was her very particular friend, you know. "
" Poor comfort ! " said Emma, laughing. " One
would rather have a stranger preferred than one's very
particular friend ; with a stranger it might not recur
again, but the misery of having a very particular friend
always at hand, to do everything better than one does
one's self. Poor Mrs Dixon ! Well, I am glad she is
gone to settle in Ireland. "
" You are right. It was not very flattering to Mis "
Campbell ; but she really did not seem to feel it. "
" So much the better, or so much the worse ; I do
not know which. But be it sweetness, or be it stupidity
in her — quickness of friendship, or dulness of feeling —
there was one person, I think, who must have felt it —
Miss Fairfax herself. She must have felt the improper
and dangerous distinction. "
" As to that — I do not — "
" Oh, do not imagine that I expect an account of
Miss Fairfax's sensations from you, or from anybody
else. They are known to no human being, I guess, but
herself ; but if she continued to play whenever she was
asked by Mr Dixon, one may guess what one chases. "
" There appeared such a perfectly good understand-
ing among them all — " he began rather quickly, but
checking himself, added, " however, it is impossible for
me to say on what terms they really were — how it
might all be behmd the scenes. I can only say that
Emma 207
there was smoothness outwardly. But you, who have
known Miss Fairfax from a child, must be a better
judge of her character, and of how she is likely to con-
duct herself in critical situations, than I can be. "
" I have known her from a child, undoubtedly ; we
have been children and women together ; and it is
natural to suppose that we should be intimate — that we
should have taken to each other whenever she visited
her friends. But we never did. I hardly know how
it has happened ; a little, perhaps, from that wickedness
on my side which was prone to take disgust towards a
girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was, by
her aunt and grandmother, and all their set. And then,
her reserve ! I never could attach myself to any one so
completely reserved. "
" It is a most repulsive quality, indeed, " said he.
" Oftentimes very convenient, no doubt, but never
pleasing. There is safety in reserve, but no attraction.
One cannot love a reserved person. "
*'Not till the reserve ceases towards one's self; and
then the attraction may be the greater. But I must be
more in want of a friend, or an agreeable companion,
than I have yet been, to take the trouble of conquering
an3^ody's reserve to procure one. Intimacy between
Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question. I
have no reason to think ill of her — not the least —
except that such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of
word and manner, such a dread of giving a distinct idea
about anybody, is apt to suggest suspicions of there
being something to conceal. "
He perfectly agreed with her ; and after walking
together so long, and thinking so much alike, Emma
felt herself so well acquainted with him that she could
hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. He
was not exactly what she had expected ; less of the
man of the world in some of his notions, less of the
2o8 Emma
spoiled child of fortune, therefore better than she had
expected. His ideas seemed more moderate — his feel-
ings warmer. She was particularly struck by his
manner of considering Mr Elton's house, which, as well
as the church, he would go and look at, and would not
join them in finding much fault with. No, he could
not believe it a bad house ; not such a house as a man
was to be pitied for having. If it were to be shared
with the woman he loved, he could not think any man
to be pitied for having that house. There must be
ample room in it for eveiy real comfort. The man
must be a blockhead who wanted more.
Mrs Weston laughed, and said he did not know
what he was talking about. Used only to a large house
himself, and without ever thinking how many advan-
tages and accommodations were attached to its size, he
could be no judge of the piivations inevitably belonging
to a small one. But Emma, in her own mmd, deter-
mined that he did know what he was talking about, and
that he showed a very amiable inclination to settle early
in life, and to marry from worthy motives. He might
not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be
occasioned by no housekeeper's room, or a bad butler's
pantry ; but no doubt he did perfectly feel that
Enscombe could not make him happy, and that when-
ever he were attached he would willingly give up much
of wealdi to be allowed an early establishment.
Chapter %%Tff.
EMMA'S very good opinion of Frank Churchill
was a little shaken the following day by hearing
that he was gone off to London, merely to have
his hair cut. A sudden freak seemed to have seized
Emma 209
him at breakfast, and he had sent for a chaise and set
off, intending to return to dinner, but with no more im-
portant view that appeared than having his hair cut.
There was certainly no harm in his travelling sixteen
miles twice over on such an errand ; but there was
an air of foppery and nonsense in it which she coulc'
not approve. It did not accord with the rationality of
plan, the moderation in expense, or even the unselfish
warmth of heart, which she had believed herself to
discern in him yesterday. Vanity, extravagance, love
of change, restlessness of temper, which must be doing
something, good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure
of his father and Mrs Weston, indifferent as to how his
conduct might appear in general ; he became liable to
all these [charges^. His father only called him a
coxcomb, and thought it a very good story ; but that
Mrs Weston did not like it was clear enough by her
passing it over as quickly as possible, and making no
other comment than that " all young people would have
their little whims. "
With the exception of this little blot, Emma found
that his visit hitherto had given her friend only good
ideas of him. Mrs Weston was very ready to say how
attentive and pleasant a companion he made himself —
hov/ much she saw to like in his disposition altogether.
He appeared to have a very open temper — certainly a
veiy cheerful and lively one ; she could observe nothing
wrong in his notions — a great deal decidedly right ; he
spoke of his uncle with warm regard — was fond of
talking of him ; said he would be the best man in the
world if he were left to himself ; and though there was no
being attached to the aunt, he acknowledged her kind-
ness with gratitude, and seemed to mean always to speak
of her with respect. This was all very promising ;
and but for such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair
cut, there was nothing to denote him unworthy of the
2IO Emma
distinguished honour which her imagination had given
him ; the honour, if not of being really in love with her,
of being at least very near it, and saved only by her
own indifference — (for still her resolution held of never
marrying) — the honour, in short, of being marked out
for her by all their joint acquaintance.
Mr Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account
which must have some weight. He gave her to under-
stand that Frank admired her extremely — thought her
very beautiful and very charming ; and with so much to
be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge
him harshly : as Mrs Weston observed, " all young
people would have their little whims. "
There was one person among his new acquaintance
in Surry not so leniently disposed. In general, he was
judged, throughout the parishes of Donwell and High-
bury with great candour ; liberal allowances were made
for the little excesses of such a handsome young man, —
one who smiled so often and bowed so well ; but there
was one spirit among them not to be softened, from its
power of censure, by bows or smiles — Mr Knightley.
The circumstance was told him at Hartfield ; for the
moment he was silent ; but Emma heard him almost
immediately aftenvards say to himself, over a news-
paper he held in his hand, " Hum ! just the trifling,
silly fellow I took him for. " She had half a mind to
resent ; but an instant's obsei-vation convinced her that
it was really said only to relieve his own feelings, and
not meant to provoke ; and therefore she let it pass.
Although in one instance the bearers of not good
tidings, Mr and Mrs Weston's visit this morning was
in another respect particularly opportune. Something
occurred while they were at Hartfield to make Emma
want their advice ; and, which was still more lucky, she
wanted exactly the advice they gave.
This was the occurrence :^The Coles had been
Emma 211
settled some years in Highbury, and were very good
sort of people, friendly, liberal, and unpretending ; but,
on the other hand, they were of low origin, in trade,
and only moderately genteel. On their first coming
into the country they had lived in proportion to their
income, quietly, keeping little company, and that little
unexpensively ; but the last year or two had brought
them a considerable increase of means — -the h ouse in i > u > aja-iuu^
town had yielded gi-eater profits, and fortune in general -*« 4^**^
Tiad smiled on them. With their wealth their views in-
creased ; their want of a larger house, their inclination
for more company. They added to their house, to
their number of servants, to their expenses of every
sort ; and by this time were, in fortune and style of
living, second only to the family at Hartfield. Their
love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared
everybody for their keeping dinner-company ; and a few
parties, chiefly among the single men, had already taken
place. The regular and best families Emma could
hardly suppose they would presume to invite — neither
Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. Nothing should
tempt her to go, if they did ; and she regretted that her
father's known habits would be giving her refusal less
meaning than she could wish. The Coles were very
respectable in their way, but they ought to be taught
that it was not for them to arrange the terms on which
the superior families would visit them. This lesson,
she very much feared, they would receive only from
herself; she had little hope of Mr Knightley, none of
Mr Weston.
But she had made up her mind how to meet this
presumption so many weeks before it appeared, that
when the insult came at last it found her very differently
affected. Donwell and Randalls had received their
invitation, and none had come for her father and her-
self ; and Mrs Weston's accounting for it with, " I
212 Emma
suppose they will not take the liberty with you ; they
know you do not dine out, " was not quite sufficient.
She felt that she should like to have had the power of
refusal ; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to be
assembled there, consisting precisely of those whose
society was dearest to her, occurred again and again,
she did not know that she might not have been tempted
to accept. Harriet was to be there in the evening, and
the Bateses. They had been speaking of it as they
walked about Highbury the day before, and Frank
Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence.
Might not the evening end in a dance ? had been a
question of his. The bare possibility of it acted as a
further irritation on her spirits ; and her being left in
solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission to be
intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort.
It was the arrival of this very invitation, while the
Westons were at Hartfield, which made their presence
so acceptable ; for though her first remark on reading it
was, that, " of course it must be declined, " she so very
soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to
do, that their advice for her going was most prompt
and successful.
She owned that, considering everything, she was not
absolutely without inclination for the party. The Coles
expressed themselves so properly — there was so much
real attention in the manner of it — so much consideration
for her father. " They would have solicited the honour
earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-
screen from London, which they hoped might keep Mr
Woodhouse from any draught of air, and, therefore,
induce him the more readily to give them the honour of
his company. " Upon the whole, she was very per-
suadable ; and it being briefly settled among themselves
how it might be done without neglecting his comfort, —
how ceruinly Mrs Goddard, if not Mrs Bates, might
Emma 213
be depended on for bearing him company, — Mr Wood-
house was to be talked into an acquiescence of his
daughter's going out to dinner on a day now near at
hand, and spending the whole evening away from him.
As for his going, Emma did not wish him to think it
possible ; the hours would be too late, and the party
too numerous. He was soon pretty well resigned.
" I am not fond of dinner-visiting, " said he ; " I
never was. No more is Emma. Late hours do not
agree with us. I am sorry Mr and Mrs Cole should
have done it. I think it would be much better if they
would come in one afternoon next summer and take
their tea with us ; take us in their afternoon walk,
v.'hich they might do, as our hours are so reasonable,
and yet get home without being out in the damp of the
evening. The dews of a summer evening are what I
would not expose anybody to. However, as they are
so very desirous to have dear Emma dine with them,
and as you will both be there, and Mr Knightley too,
to take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, pro-
vided the weather be what it ought, neither damp, nor
cold, nor windy. " Then turning to Mrs Weston, with
a look of gentle reproach, — " Ah, Miss Taylor, if you
had not married, you would have staid at home with
me. "
" Well, sir, " cried Mr Weston, " as I took Miss
Taylor away, it is incumbent on me to supply her place,
if I can ; and I will step to Mrs Goddard in a moment,
if you wish it. "
But the idea of anything to be done in a moment was
increasing, not lessening, Mr Woodhouse's agitation.
The ladies knew better how to allay it. Mr Weston
must be quiet, and everything deliberately arranged.
With this treatment Mr Woodhouse was soon com-
posed enough for talking as usual. " He should be
happy to see Mrs Goddard. He had a great regard for
214 Emma
Mrs Goddard ; and Emma should write a line and
mvite her. James could take the note. But first of
all there must be an answer written to Mrs Cole. "
" You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly ae
possible. You will say that I am quite an invalid, and
go nowhere, and therefore must decline their obliging
invitation ; beginning with my compliments, of course.
But you will do everything right. I need not tell you
what is to be done. We must remember to let James
know that the carriage will be wanted on Tuesday. I
shall have no fears for you with him. We have never
been there above once since the new approach was
made ; but still I have no doubt that James will take
you very safely ; and when you get there you must tell
him at what time you would have him come for you
again ; and you had better name an early hour. You
will not like staying late. You will get very tired when
tea is over. "
" But you would not wish me to come away before 1
am tired, papa ? "
" Oh no, my love ; but you will soon be tired.
There will be a great many people talking at once.
You will not like the noise. "
" But, my dear sir, " cried Mr Weston, " if Emma
comes away early it will be breaking up the party. "
" And no great harm if it does, " said Mr Wood-
house. " The sooner every party breaks up the
better. "
" But you do rot consider how it may appear to the
Coles. Emma's going away directly after tea might be
giving offence. They are good-natured people, and
think little of their own claims ; but still they must feel
that anybody's hurrying away is no great compliment ;
and Miss Woodhouse's doing it would be more thought
of than any other person's in the room. You would
not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, T am sure,
Emma 215
sir ; friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who
have been your neighbours these ten years. "
" No, upon no account in the world, Mr Weston,
I am much obliged to you for reminding me. I should
be extremely sorry to be giving them any pain. I
know what worthy people they are. Perry tells me
that Mr Cole never touches malt liquor. You would
not think it to look at him, but he is bilious — Mr Cole
is very bilious. No, I would not be the means of
giving them any pain. My dear Emma, we must con-
sider this. I am sure rather than run the risk of hurt-
ing Mr and Mrs Cole you would stay a little longer
than you might wish. You will not regard being tired.
Ycu will be perfectly safe, you know, among your
friends. "
" Oh yes, papa. I have no fears at all for myself ;
and I should have no scruples of stajang as late as Mrs
Weston, but on your account. I am only afraid of
your sitting up for me. I am not afraid of your
not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs God-
dard. She loves piquet, you know ; but when she is
gone home I am afraid you will be sitting up by your-
self, instead of going to bed at your usual time ; and
the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort.
You must promise me not to sit up. "
He did, on the condition of some promises on her
side ; such as that, if she came home cold, she would be
sure to warm herself thoroughly ; if hungry, that she
would take something to eat ; that her own maid should
sit up for her ; and that Serle and the butler should
see that everything were safe in the house as usual.
2i6 Emma
Cl)aptcr %%V%
FRANK CHURCHILL came back again; and
if he kept his father's dinner waiting it was not
known at Hartfield ; for Mrs Weston was too
anxious for his being a favourite with Mr Woodhouse,
to betray any imperfection which could be concealed.
He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at
himself with a very good grace, but without seeming
really at all ashamed of what he had done. He had no
reason to wish his hair longer to conceal any confusion
of face ; no reason to wish the money unspent to im-
prove his spirits. He was quite as undaunted and as
lively as ever ; and, after seeing him, Emrna thus
moralized to herself —
" I do not know whether it ought to be so, but cer-
tainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by
sensible people in an impudent way. Wickedness is
always wickedness, but folly is not always folly. It
depends upon the character of those who handle it.
Mr Knightley, he is not a trifling, silly young man. If
he were, he would have done this differently. He
would either have gloried in the achievement, or been
ashamed of it. There would have been either the os-
tentation of a coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too
weak to defend its own vanities. No, I am perfectly
sure that he is not trifling or silly. "
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing
him again, and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judg-
ing of his general manners, and, by inference, of the
meaning of his manners towards herself; of guessing
how soon it might be necessary for her to throw cold-
ness into her air ; and of fancying what the observations
of all those might be, who were now seeing them
together for the first time.
Emma 217
She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene
being laid at Mr Cole's ; and without being able to
forget that among the failings of Mr Elton, even in the
days of his favour, none had disturbed her more than
his propensity to dine with Mr Cole.
Her father's comfort was amply secured, Mrs Bates
as well as Mrs Goddard being able to come ; and her
last pleasing duty, before she left the house, was to pay
her respects to them as they sat together after dinner ;
and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of
her dress, to make the two ladies all the amends in her
power, by helping them to large slices of cake and full
glasses of wine, for whatever unwilling self-denial his
care of their constitution might have obliged them to
practice during the meal. She had provided a plentiful
dinner for them ; she wished she could know that they
had been allowed to eat it.
She followed another carriage to Mr Cole's door ;
and was pleased to see that it was M r Knightley's ; for
Mr Knightley, keeping no horses, having little spare
money and a great deal of health, activity, and inde-
pendence, was too apt, in Emma's opinion, to get about
as he could, and not use his carriage so often as became
the owner of Donwell Abbey. She had an opportunity
now of speaking her approbation while warm from her
heart, for he stopped to hand her out.
" This is coming as you should do, " said she ; " like
a gentleman. I am quite glad to see you. "
He thanked her, observing, " How lucky that we
should arrive at the same moment ; for, if we had met
first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether you would
have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than
usual. You might not have distinguished how I came
by my look or manner. "
" Yes I should ; I am sure 1 should. There is
always a look of consciousness or bustle when people
2i8 Emma
come in a way which they know to be beneath them.
You think you carry it off very well, I dare say ; but
with you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected un-
concern ; I always observe it whenever I meet you
under those circumstances. Noiv you have nothing to
try for. You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed.
You are not striving to look taller than anybody else.
Noiv I shall really be very happy to walk into the same
room with you. "
** Nonsensical girl ! " was his reply, but not at all in
anger.
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the
rest of the party as with Mr Knightley. She was re-
ceived with a cordial respect which could not but
please, and given all the consequence she could wish
for. When the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of
love, the strongest of admiration, were for her, from
both husband and wife ; the son approached her v/ith
a cheerful eagerness, which marked her as his peculiar
object, and at dinner she found him seated by her;
and, as she firmly believed, not without some dexterity
on his side.
The party was rather large, as it included one other
family — a proper unobjectionable country family, whom
the Coles had the advantage of naming among their
acquaintance — and the male part of Mr Cox's family,
the lawyer of Highbury. The less worthy females
were to come in the evening, with Miss Bates, Miss
Fairfax, and Miss Smith ; but already, at dinner, they
were too numerous for any subject of conversation to
be general ; and, while politics and Mr Elton were
tnlked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her atten-
tion to the pleasantness of her neighbour. The first
remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend
was the name of Jane Fairfax. Mrs Cole seemed to
be relating something of her that was expected to be
Emma 219
very interesting. She listened, and found it weh worth
listening to. That very dear part of Emma, her fancy,
received an amusing supply. Mrs Cole was tell-
ing that she had been calling on Miss Bates ; and as
soon as she entered the room, had been struck by the
sight of a pianoforte, a very elegant looking instrument ;
not a grand, but a large-sized square pianoforte : and
the substance of the story, the end of all the dialogue
which ensued of surprize, and inquiry, and con-
gratulations on her side, and explanations on Miss
Bates's, was, that this pianoforte had arrived from
Broadwood's the day before, to the great astonishment
of both aunt and niece, entirely unexpected ; that, at
first, by Miss Bates's account, Jane herself was quite
at a loss, quite bewildered to think who could possibly
have ordered it ; but now they were both perfectly
satisfied that it could be from only one quarter — of
course it must be from Colonel Campbell.
" One can suppose nothing else, " added Mrs Cole ;
" and I was only surprized that there could ever have
been a doubt. But Jane, it seems, had a letter from
them very lately, and not a word was said about it. She
knows their ways best ; but I should not consider their
silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the
present. They might chuse to surprize her. "
Mrs Cole had many to agree with her ; everybody
who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it
must come from Colonel Campbell, and equally rejoiced
that such a present had been made ; and there were
enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own
way, and still listen to Mrs Cole.
" I declare, I do not know when I have heard any-
thing that has given me more satisfaction. It always
has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, who plays so
delightfully, should not have an instrument. It seemed
(juite a shame, especially considering how many houses
220 Emma
there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown
away. This is like giving ourselves a slap, to be sure ;
and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr Cole I really
was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the
drawing-room, while I do not know one note from
another, and our little girls, who are but just beginning,
perhaps may never make anything of it ; and there is poor
Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not anything
of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifuUest
old spinnet in the world, to amuse herself with. I was
saying this to Mr Cole but yesterday, and he quite
agreed with me ; only he is so particularly fond of music
that he could not help indulging himself in the purchase,
hoping that some of our good neighbours might be so
obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we
can ; and that really is the reason why the instrument
was bought — or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed
of it. We are in great hopes that Miss Woodhouse
may be prevailed with to try it this evening. "
Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence ; and
finding that nothing more was to be entrapped from
any communication of Mrs Cole's, turned to Frank
Churchill.
" Why do you smile ? " said she.
" Nay, why do you ? "
" Me ! I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel
Campbell's being so rich and so liberal. It is a hand-
some present. "
« Very. "
" I rather wonder that it was never made before. "
" Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here
so long before. "
" Or that he did not give her the use of their own
instrument, which must now be shut up in London,
untouched by anybody. "
»* That is a grand pianoforte, and he might tliink it
too iarjje for Mrs Bates's house. "
Emma 221
" You may say what you chuse, but your countenance
testifies that your thoughts on this subject are very much
like mine. "
" I do not know. I rather believe you are giving me
more credit for acuteness than I deserve. I smile be-
cause you smile, and shall probably suspect whatever I
find you suspect ; but at present I do not see what there
is to question.. If Colonel Campbell is not the person,
who can be ? *'
" What do you say to Mrs Dixon ? "
" Mrs Dixon ! very true, indeed. I had not thought
of Mrs Dixon. She must know, as well as her father,
how acceptable an instrument would be ; and perhaps
the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, is more like a
young woman's scheme than an elderly man's. It is
Mrs Dixon, I dare say. I told you that your suspicions
would guide mine. "
" If so, you must extend your suspicions, and com-
prehend Mr Dixon in them. "
" Mr Dixon ! very well. Yes. I immediately per-
ceive that it must be the joint present of Mr and Mrs
Dixon. We were speaking the other day, you know,
of his being so warm an admirer of her performance. "
" Yes, and what you told me on that head confirmed
an idea which I had entertained before. I do not mean
to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr Dixon
or Miss Fairfax ; but I cannot help suspecting either
that, after making his proposals to her friend, he had the
misfortune to fall in love with her, or that he became
conscious of a little attachment on her side. One might
guess twenty things without guessing exactly the right -y
but I am sure there must be a particular cause for her
chusing to come to Highbury, instead of going with the
Campbells to Ireland. Here, she must be leading a life
of privation and penance ; there it would have been
all enjoyment. As to the pretence of trying her
222
Emma
native air, I look upon that as a mere excuue. In the
summer it might have passed ; but what can anybody's
native air do for them in the months of January, Feb-
ruary, and March ? Good fires and carriages would be
much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate
health, and I dare say in hers. I do not require you to
adopt all my suspicions, though you make so noble a pro-
fession of doing it, but I honestly tell you what they are. "
" And, upon my word, they have an air of great
probability. Mr Dixon's preference of her music to
her friend's I can answer for being very decided. "
" And then, he saved her life. Did you ever hear
of that ? A water party ; and by some accident she
was falling overboard. He caught her. "
" He did. 1 was there — one of the party. "
" Were you really ? Well ! But you observed
nothing, of course, for it seems to be a new idea to you.
If I had been there, I think I should have made some
discoveries. "
" I dare say you would ; but I, simple I, saw nothing
but the fact, that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from
the vessel, and that Mr Dixon caught her — it was the
work of a moment. And though the consequent shock
and alarm was very great, and much more durable —
indeed I believe it was half an hour before any of us
were comfortable again — yet that was too general a
sensation for anything of peculiar anxiety to be observ-
able. I do not mean to say, however, that you might
nci have made discoveries. "
The conversation was here interrupted. They
were called on to share in the awkwardness of a
rather long interval between the courses, and obliged
to be as formal and as orderly as the others ; but when
the table was again safely covered, when every comer
dish was placed exactly right, and occupation and ease
vere generally restored, Emma said —
Emma
22'
" The anival of this pianoforte is decisive with me.
I wanted to know a little more, and this tells me quite
enough. Depend upon it, we shall soon hear that it is
a present from Mr and Mrs Dixon. "
" And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all
knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the
Campbells. "
" No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. Miss
Fairfax knows it is not from the Campbells, or they
would have been guessed at first. She would not have
been puzzled had she dared fix on them, I may not
have convinced you, perhaps, but I am perfectly con-
vinced myself that Mr Dixon is a principal in the
business. "
" Indeed you injure me if you suppose me uncon-
vinced. Your reasonings carry my judgment along with
them entirely. At first, while I supposed you satisfied
that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only as
paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing
in the world. But when you mentioned Mrs Dixon,
I felt how much more probable that it should be the
tribute of warm female friendship. And now I can
see it in no other light than as an offering of love. "
There was no occasion to press the matter farther.
The conviction seemed real ; he looked as if he felt it.
She said no more — other subjects took their turn, and
the rest of the dinner passed away ; the dessert suc-
ceeded, the children came in, and were talked to and
admired amid the usual rate of conversation ; a few
clever things said, a few downright silly, but by much
the larger proportion neither the one nor the other —
nothing worse than everyday remarks, dull repetitions,
old news, and heavy jokes.
The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room
before the other ladies, in their different divisions, arrived.
Enuna watched the entree of her own particular little
224 Emma
friend ; and if she could not exult in her dignity and
grace she could not only love the blooming sweetness
and the artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice
in that light, cheerful, unsentimental disposition which
allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure in the
midst of the pangs of disappointed affection. There
she sat — and who would have guessed how many tears
she had been lately shedding ? To be in company,
nicely dressed herself, and seeing others nicely dressed,
to sit and smile and look pretty and say nothing,
was enough for the happiness of the present hour.
Jane Fairfax did look and move superior ; but Emma
suspected she might have been glad to change feelings
with Harriet — very glad to have purchased the morti-
fication of having loved — yes, of having loved even Mr
Elton in vain by the surrender of all the dangerous
pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of
her friend.
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma
should approach her. She did not wish to speak of
the pianoforte, she felt too much in the secret herself to
think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair, and
therefore purposely kept at a distance ; but by the others
the subject was almost immediately introduced, and she
saw the blush of consciousness with which congratula-
tions were received, the blush of guilt which accom-
panied the name of " my excellent friend. Col. Camp-
bell. "
Mrs Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was parti-
cularly interested by the circumstance, and Emma could
not help being amused at h^r perseverance in dwelling
on the subject ; and having so much to ask and to say
as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious
of that wish of saying as little about it as possible,
which she plainly read in the fair heroine's countenance.
They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen ;
Emma 225
and the very first of the early was Frank Churchill.
In he walked, the first and the handsomest ; and after
paying his compliments, en passant to Miss Bates and
her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of
the circle, where sat Miss Woodhouse ; and till he
could find a seat by her would not sit at all. Emma
divined what everybody present must be thinking. She
was his object, and everybody must perceive it. She
introduced him to her friend Miss Smith, and, at con-
venient moments afterwards, heard what each thought
of the other. " He had never seen so lovely a face,
and was delighted vAth her naivete. " And she —
" only to be sure it was paying him too great a compli-
ment, but she did think there were some looks a little
like Mr Elton. " Emma restrained her indignation, and
only turned from her in silence.
Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the
gentleman on first glancing towards Miss Fairfax ; but
it was most prudent to avoid speech. He told her that he
had been impatient to leave the dining-room — hated
sitting long — was always the first to move when he could
— that his father, Mr Knightley, Mr Cox, and Mr
Cole, were left very busy over parish business — that as
long as he had staid, however, it had been pleasant
enough, as he had found them in general a set of gentle-
menlike, sensible men ; and spoke so handsomely of
Highbury altogether — thought it so abundant in agree-
able families — that Emma began to feel she had been
used to despise the place rather too much. She ques-
tioned him as to the society in Yorkshire, the extent of
the neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort ; and
could make out from his answers that, as far as Ens-
combe was concerned, there was very little going on,
that their visitings were among a range of great families,
none very near ; and that even when days were fixed,
and invitations accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs
226 Emma
Churchill were not m health and spirits for going ; that
they made a point of visiting no fresh person ; and that,
though he had his separate engagements, it was not
without difficulty, without considerable address, at times,
that he could get away, or introduce an acquaintance for
a night.
She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that
Highbury, taken at its best, might reasonably please a
young man who had more retirement at home than he
liked. His importance at Enscombe was very evident.
He did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that
he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do
nothing, and on her laughing and noticing it, he owned
that he believed (excepting one or two points) he could
•with time persuade her to anything. One of those
points on which his influence failed he then mentioned.
He had wanted very much to go abroad — had been very
eager indeed to be allowed to travel — but she would not
hear of it. This had happened the year before. Now.,
he said, he was beginning to have no longer the same
wish.
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention,
Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father.
" I have made a most wretched discovery, " said he,
after a short pause. " I have been here a week to-
morrow — half my time. I never knew days fly so
fast. A week to-moiTow ! — and I have hardly begun
to enjoy myself. But just got acquainted with Mrs
Weston, and others. I hate the recollection.
" Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you
spent one whole day, out of so few, in having your hair
cut. "
" No, " said he smiling, " that is no subject of regret
at all. I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless
I can believe myself fit to be seen. "
The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room,
Emma
227
Emma found herself obliged to tui n from him for a few
minutes, and listen to Mr Cole. When Mr Cole had
moved away, and her attention could be restored as be-
fore, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across
the room at Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly
opposite.
" What is the matter ? " said she.
He started. " Thank you for rousing me, " he re-
plied. " I believe I have been very rude ; but really
Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd a way — so
very odd a way — that I cannot keep my eyes from her.
I never saw anything so outre ! Those curls ! This
must be a fancy of her own. I see nobody else looking
like her. I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish
fashion. Shall I ? Yes, I will — I declare I will ;
and you ahall see how she takes it — whether she
colours. "
He was gone immediately ; and Emma soon saw him
standing before Miss Fairfax, and talking to her ; but
as to its effect on the young lady, as he had improvi-
dently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish
nothing.
Before he could return to his chair it was taken by
Mrs Weston.
" This is the luxury of a large party, " said she ;
" one can get near everybody, and say everything. My
dear Emma, I am longing to talk to you. I have been
making discoveries and forming plans, just like yourselfj
and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you
know how Miss Bates and her niece came here ? "
" How ! They were invited, were not they i "
" Oh yes — but how they were conveyed hither ?~
the manner of their coming ? "
" They walked, I conclude. How else could they
come f "
228 Emma
" \^ery true. Well, a little while ago it occurred to
me how very sad it would be to have Jane Fairfax
walking home again, late at night, and cold as the nights
are now. And as I looked at her, though I never saw
her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she was
heated, and would therefore be particularly liable to take
cold. Poor girl ! I could not bear the idea of it ; so,
as soon as Mr Weston came into the room, and I could
get at him, I spoke to him about the carriage. You
may guess how readily he came into my wishes ; and
having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss
Bates, to assure her that the carriage would be at hei
service before it took us home ; for I thought it would
be making her comfortable at once. Good soul ! she
was as grateful as possible, you may be sure. * Nobody
was ever so fortunate as herself!'— but with many,
many thanks —'there was no occasion to trouble us, for
Mr Knightley's carriage had brought, and was to take
them home again.'I was quite surprized ; — very glad,
I am sure ; but really quite surprized. Such a very
kind attention — and so thoughtful an attention ! — the
sort of thing that so few men would think of. And,
in short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much
inclined to think that it was for their accommodation
the carriage was used at all. I do suspect he would not
have had a pair of horses for himself, and that it was
only as an excuse for assisting them. "
" Very likely, " said Emma, " nothing more likely.
I know no man more likely than Mr Knightley to do
the sort of thing — to do anything really good-natured,
useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not a gallant
man, but he is a very humane one ; and this, consider-
ing Jane Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case of
humanity to him ; and for an act of unostentatious
kindness there is nobody whom I would fix on more
than on Mr Knightley. I know he had horses to-day.
Emma 229
for we arrived together ; and I laughed at him about
it, but he said not a word that could betray. "
" Well, " said Mrs Weston, smiling, " you give him
credit for more simple, disinterested benevolence in this
instance than I do ; for while Miss Bates was speaking,
a suspicion darted into my head, and I have never been
able to get it out again. The more I think of it, the
more probable it appears. In short, I have made a
match between Mr Knightley and Jane Fairfax. See
the consequence of keeping you company ! What do
you say to it ? "
" Mr Knightley and Jane Fairfax ! " exclaimed
Emma. " Dear Mrs Weston, how could you think of
sucn a thing? Mr Knightley! — Mr Knightley must
not marry ! You would not have little Henry cut out
from Donwell ? Oh no, no ; Henry must have Don-
well. I cannot at all consent to Mr Knightley's marry-
ing ; and I am sure it is not at all likely. I am
amazed that you should think of such a thing. "
" My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to
chink of it. I do not want the match — I do not want
to injure dear little Henry — but the idea has been given
me by circumstances ; and if Mr Knightley really
wished to marry, you would not have him refrain on
Henry's account, a boy of six years old, who knows
nothing of the matter ? "
" Yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry
supplantevl. Mr Knightley marry ! No, I have never
had such an idea, and I cannot adopt it now. And
Jane Fairfax, too, of all women ! "
" Nay, she has always been a first favourite with
him, as you very well know. "
" But the impmdence of such a match ! "
" I am not speaking of its prudence— merely its
probability. "
" I see no probability in it, unless you have any
230 Emma
better foundation than what you mention. His good-
nature, his humanity, as I tell you, would be quite
enough to account for the horses. He has a great re-
gard for the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane
Fairfax — and is always glad to show them attention.
My dear Mrs Weston, do not take to match-making.
You do it very ill. Jane Fairfax mistress of the
Abbey ? Oh no, no — every feeling revolts. For his
own sake, I would not have him do so mad a thing. "
" Imprudent, if you please — but not mad. Except-
ing inequality of fortune, and perhaps a little disparity
of age, I can see nothing unsuitable. "
" But Mr Knighdey does not want to marry. I am
sure he has not the least idea of it. Do not put it into
his head. Why should he marry ? He is as happy as
possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep, and
his library, and all the parish to manage ; and he is
extremely fond of his brother's children. He has
no occasion to marry, either to fill up his time or his
heart. "
" My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so ;
but if he really loves Jane Fairfax — "
" Nonsense ! He does not care about Jane Fairfax.
In the way of love, I am sure he does not. He would
do any good to her, or her family ; but — "
" Well, " said Mrs Weston, laughing, " perhaps the
greatest good he could do them would be to give Jane
such a respectable home. "
" If it would be good to her I am sure it would be
evil to himself — a very shameful and degrading connec-
iion. How would he bear to have Miss Bates belong-
ng to him ? To have her haunting the Abbey, and
Uianking him all day long for his great kindness in
marrying Jane ? — < So very kind and obliging ! But he
always had been such a very kind neighbour.'And
then fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother's old
Emma 231
petticoat. * Not that it was such a very old petticoat
either — for stLIl it would, last a great while — and, indeed,
she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all
very strong.'"
" For shame, Emma ! Do not mimic her. You
divert me against my conscience. And, upon my word,
I do not think Mr Knightley would be much disturbed
by Miss Bates. Little things do not irritate him.
She might talk on ; and if he wanted to say anything
himself, he would only talk louder, and drown her voice.
But the question is not, whether it would be a bad con-
nexion for him, but whether he wishes it ; and I think
he does. I have heard him speak, and so must you, so
very highly of Jane Fairfax ! The interest he takes in
her — his anxiety about her health — his concern that she
should have no happier prospect ! I have heard him
express himself so warmly on those points. Such an
admirer of her performance on the pianoforte, and of
her voice. I have heard him say that he could listen to
her for ever. Oh ! and I had almost forgotten one idea
that occurred to me — this pianoforte that has been sent
here by somebody — though we have all been so well
satisfied to consider it a present from the Campbells,
may it not be from Mr Knightley ? I cannot help
suspecting him. I think he is just the person to do it,
even without being in love. "
" Then it can be no argument to prove that he
is in love. But I do not think it is at all a likely
Aing for him to do. Mr Knightley does nothing
mysteriously. "
" I have heard him lamenting her having no instru-
ment, repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such
a circumstance would in the common course of things
occur to him. "
" Very well ; and if he had intended to give her one,
he would have told her so. "
232 Emma
" There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma.
I have a very strong notion that it comes from him. I
am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs Cole told
us of it at dinner. "
" You take up an idea, Mrs Weston, and run away
with it, as you have many a time reproached me with
doing. I see no sign of attachment. I believe nothing
of the pianoforte, and proof only shall convince me
that Mr Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane
Fairfax. "
They combated the point some time longer in the
same way, Emma rather gaining ground over the mind
of her friend ; for Mrs Weston was the most used of
the two to yield ; till a little bustle in the room showed
them that tea was over, and the instrument in prepara-
tion ; and at the same moment, Mr Cole approaching
to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour
of trying it. Frank Churchill, of whom, in the eager-
ness of her conversation with Mrs Weston, she had
been seeing nothing, except that he had found a seat
by Miss Fairfax, followed Mr Cole, to add his very
pressing entreaties ; and as, in every respect, it suited
Emma best to lead, she gave a very proper com-
pliance.
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well
to attempt more than she could perform with credit ;
she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the little things
which are generally acceptable, and could accompany
her own voice well. One accompaniment to her song
took her agreeably by surprise ; a second, slightly, but
correctly taken by Frank Churchill. Her pardon was
diJy begged at the close of the song, and everything
usual followed. He was accused of iiaving a delightful
voice, and a perfect knowledge of music, which was
properly denied ; and that he knew nothing of the
matter, and had no voice at ail, roundly asserted.
Emma
233
They sang together once more ; and Emma would
thien resign her place to Miss Fairfax, whose perform-
ance, both vocal and instrumental, she never could
attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior
to her own.
With mixed feelings she seated herself at a little
distance from the numbers round the instrument, to
listen. Frank Churchill sang again. They had sung
together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth.
But the sight of Mr Knightley among the most attentive
soon drew away half Emma's mind ; and she fell into
a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs Weston's
suspicions, to which the sweet sounds of the united
voices gave only momentary intenoiptions. Her objec-
tions to Mr Knightley's marrying did not in the least sub-
side. She could see nothing but evil in it. It would
be a great disappointment to Mr John Knightley, con-
sequently to Isabella. A real injury to the children —
a most mortifying change and material loss to them all
— a very great deduction from her father's daily com-
fort — and, as to herself, she could not at all endure the
idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey. A Mrs
Knightley for them all to give way to ! No — Mr
Knightley must never marry. Little Henry must
remain the heir of Donwell.
Presently Mr Knightley looked back, and came and
sat down by her. They talked at first only of the
performance. His admiration was certainly very warm ;
yet she thought, but for Mrs Weston, it would not have
struck her. As a sort of touchstone, however, she
began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt
and niece ; and though his answer was in the spirit
of cutting the matter short, she believed it to indicate
only his disincllDation to dwell on any kindness of his
own.
" I often feel concern, " said she, " that I dare not
I 2
234 Emma
make our carriage more useful on such occasions. It is
not that I am without the wish ; but you know how
impossible my father would deem it that James should
put to for such a purpose. "
" Quite out of the question, quite out of the ques-
tion, " he replied ; " but you must often wish it, I am
sure. " And he smiled with such seeming pleasure at
the conviction, that she must proceed another step.
*'This present from the Campbells, " said she — " this
pianoforte is very kindly given. "
" Yes, " he replied, and without the smallest apparent
embarrassment. " But they would have done better had
they given her notice of it. Surprizes are foolish things.
The pleasure is not enhanced, and the inconvenience is
often considerable. I should have expected better
judgment in Colonel Campbell. "
From that moment Emma could have taken her oath
that Mr Knighdey had had no concern in giving the in-
strument. But whether he were entirely free from
peculiar attachment^whether there were no actual pre-
ference — remained a little longer doubtful. Towards
the end of Jane's second song her voice grew thick.
" That will do, " said he, when it was finished, think-
ing aloud ; " you have sung quite enough for one
evening ; now be quiet. "
Another song, however, was soon begged for. *'One
more ; they would not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any
account, and would only ask for one more. " And
Frank Churchill was heard to say, " I think you could
manage this without effort ; the first part is so veiy
trifling. The strength of the song falls on the second. "
Mr Knightley grew angry.
" That fellow, " said he, indignantly, " thinks of
notliing but shewing off his own voice. This must not
be. " And touching Miss Bates, who at that moment
passed near, " Miss Bates, are you mad, to let your niece
Emma 235
sing herseff hoarse in this manner ? Go, and interfere.
They have no mercy on her. "
Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly
stay even to be grateful, before she stept forward and
put an end to all further singing. Here ceased the
concert part of the evening, for Miss Woodiiouse and
Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers ;
but soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing
— originating nobody exactly knew where — was so
effectually promoted by Mr and Mrs Cole that every-
thing was rapidly clearing away, to give proper space.
Mrs Weston, capital in her country-dances, was seated,
and beginning an irresistible waltz ; and Frank Churchill,
coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma, had
secured her hand, and led her up to the top.
While waiting till the other young people could pair
themselves off, Emma found time, in spite of the com-
pliments she was receiving on her voice and her taste, to
look about, and see what became of Mr Knightley.
This would be a trial. He was no dancer in general.
If he were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now
it might augur something. There was no immediate
appearance. No ; he was talking to Mrs Cole — he was
looking on unconcerned ; Jane was asked by somebody
else, and he was still talking to Mrs Cole.
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry ; his
interest was yet safe ; and she led off the dance with
genuine spirit and enjoyment. Not more than five
couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the sud-
denness of it made it very delightful, and she found
herself well matched in a partner. They were a couple
worth looking at.
Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be
allowed. It was growing late, and Miss Bates became
anxious to get home, on her mother's account. After
some attempts, therefore, to be permirLud to begin again,
236
Emma
they were obliged to thank Mrs Weston, look sorrowful,
and have done.
" Perhaps it is as well, " said Frank Churchill, as
he attended Emma to her carriage. " I must have
asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancing would not
have agreed with me after yours. "
Cljapter ^¥3%
EMMA did not repent her condescension in going to
the Coles. The visit afforded her many pleasant
recollections the next day, and all that she might
be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified
seclusion must be amply repaid in the splendour of
popularity. She must have delighted the Coles —
worthy people ; who deserved to be made happy ! — and
left a name behind her that would not soon die away.
Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common ;
and there were two points on which she was not quite
easy. She doubted whether she had not transgressed
the duty of woman by woman, in betraying her sus-
picions of Jane Fairfax's feelings to Frank Churchill.
It was hardly right ; but it had been so strong an idea
that it would escape her, and his submission to all that she
told was a compliment to her penetration, which made
it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to
have held her tongue.
The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane
Fairfax, and there she had no doubt. She did un-
fcignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of her
own playing and singing. She did most heartily grieve
over the idleness of her childhood ? and sat down and
piactised vigorously an hour and a half.
olie was then interrupted by Harriet's coming in ;
Emma 237
and if Harriet's praise could have satisfied her, she
might soon have been comforted.
" Oh, if I could but play as well as you and Miss
Fairfax ? "
" Don't class us together, Harriet. My playing is
no more like hers than a lamp is like sunshine. "
" O dear, I think you play the best of the two. I
think you play quite as well as she does. I am sure I
had much rather hear you. Everybody last night said
how well you played. "
" Those who knew anything about it must have felt
the difference. The truth is, Harriet, that my plajring
is just good enough to be praised, but Jane Fairfax's is
much beyond it. "
" Well, I always shall think that you play quite as
well as she does, or that if there is any difference nobody
would ever find it out. Mr Cole said how much taste
you had ? and Mr Frank Churchill talked a great deal
about your taste, and that he valued taste much more
than execution. "
" Ah, but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet. "
" Are you sure ? I saw she had execution, but I
did not know she had any taste. Nobody talked about
it ; and I hate Italian singing , there is no understand-
ing a word of it. Besides, if she does play so very
well, you know, it is no more than she is obliged to
do, because she will have to teach. The Coxes were
wondering last night whether she would get into any
great family. How did you think the Coxes looked ? "
" Just as they always do — very vulgar. "
" They told me something, " said Harriet, rather
hesitatingly, " but it is nothing of any consequence. "
Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her,
though fearful of its producing Mr Elton.
" They told me that Mr Martin dined with t'«ere
last Saturday. "
238
Emma
« Oh ! "
" He came to their father upon some business, and
he asked him to stay to dinner. "
" Oh! "
" They talked a great deal about him, especially
Anne Cox. I do not know what she meant, but she
asked me if I thought I should go and stay there again
next summer. "
" She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such
an Anne Cox should be. "
" She said he was very agreeable the day he dined
there. He sat by her at dinner. Miss Nash thinks
either of the Coxes would be very glad to marry him. "
" Very likely : I think they are, without exception,
the most vulgar girls in Highbury. "
Harriet had business at Ford's. Emma thought it
most prudent to go with her. Another accidental
meeting with the Martins was possible, and in her
oresent state, would be dangerous.
Harriet, tempted by everything, and swayed by half
a word, was always very long at a purchase ; and while
she was still hanging over muslins and changing her
mind Emma went to the door for amusement. Much
could not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest
part of Highbury : — Mr Perry walking hastily by ; Mr
William Cox letting himself in at the office-door ; Mr
Cole's carriage horses returning from exercise ; or a
stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest
objects she could presume to expect ; and when her
eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray, a tidy old
woman travelling homewards from shop with her full
basket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone, and a
string of dawdling children round the baker's little
bow-window eyeing the gingerbread, she knew she had
no reason to complain, and was amused enough ; quite
en.ouj^h stiU to sund at the door. A mind lively and
Emma
239
at ease can do with seeing nothing, and can see nothing
that does not answer.
She looked down the Randalls road. The scene
enlarged : — two persons appeared : Mrs Weston and
her son-in-law. They were walking into Highbury ; —
to Hartfield of course; they were stopping, however, in
the first place at Mrs Bates's, whose house was a little
nearer Randalls than Ford's, and had all but knocked
when Emma caught their eye. Immediately they
crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the
agreeableness of yesterday's engagement seemed to give
fresh pleasure to the present meeting. Mrs Weston
informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses,
in order to hear the new instrument.
" For ray companion tells me, " said she, " that I
absolutely promised Miss Bates last night that I
would come this morning. I was not aware of it my-
self. I did not know that I had fixed a day ; but as
he says I did I am going now. "
" And while Mrs Weston pays her visit, I may be
allowed, I hope, " said Frank Churchill, " to join your
party and wait for her at Hartfield, if you are going
home. "
Mrs Weston was disappointed.
" I thought you meant to go with me. They would
be very much pleased. "
" Me ! I should be quite in the way. But, perhaps,
I may be equally in the way here. Miss Woodhouse
looks as if she did not want me. My aunt always sends
me off when she is shopping. She says I fidget her to
death ; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could
almost say the same. What am I to do ? "
" I am here on no business of my own, " said Emma,
" I am only waiting for my friend. She will probably
have soon done, and then we shall go home. But you
had better go with Mrs Weston and hear the instrument. "
240
Emma
" Well, if you advise it. But " (with a smile)
" if Colonel Campbell should have employed a careless
f/iend, and if it should prove to have an indifferent tone,
what shall I say ? I shall be no support to Mrs
Weston. She might do very well by herself. A dis-
agreeable truth would be palatable through her lips, but
I am the wretchedest being in the world at a civil
falsehood. "
" I do not believe any such thing, " replied Emma ;
" I am persuaded that you can be as insincere as your
neighbours, when it is necessary ; but there is no reason
to suppose the instrument is indifferent. Quite other-
wise, indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax's opinion
last night. "
" Do come with me, " said Mrs Weston, " if it be
not very disagreeable to you. It need not detain us
long. We will go to Hartfield afterwards. We will
follow them to Hartfield. I really wish you to call
with me : it will be felt so great an attention — and I
always thought you meant it. "
He could say no more ; and, with the hope of
Hartfield to reward him, returned with Mrs Weston to
Mrs Bates's door. Emma watched them in, and dien
joined Harriet at the interesting counter, trying, with all
the force of her own mind, to convince her that if she
wanted plain muslin, it was of no use to look at figured :
and that a blue ribbon, be it ever so beautiful, would
still never match her yellow pattern. At last it was all
settled, even to the destination of the parcel.
" Should I send it to Mrs Goddard's, ma'am ? "
asked Mrs Ford — " Yes — no — yes, to Mrs Goddard's.
Only my pattern -gown is at Hartfield. No, you shall
send it to Hartfield, if j'ou please. But then Mrs
Goddard will want to see it. And I could take the
pattern gown home any day. But I shall want the
ribbon directly ; so it had better go to Hartfield — at
Emma
241
least the ribbon. You could make it into two parcels,
Mrs Ford, could not you ? "
" It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs Ford
the trouble of two parcels. "
" No more it is. "
" No trouble in the world, ma'am,** said the obliging
Mrs Ford.
" Oh, but indeed I would much rather have it only
in one. Then, if you please, you shall send it all to
Mrs Goddard's — I do not know — no, I think. Miss
Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield,
and take it home with me at night What do you
advise ? "
" That you do not give another half-second to the
subject- To Hartfield, if you please, Mrs Ford. "
" Aye, that will be much best, " said Harriet, quite
satisfied ; " I should not at all like to have it sent to
Mrs Goddard's. "
Voices approached the shop, or rather, one voice and
two ladies ; Mrs Weston and Miss Bates met them at
the door.
" My dear Miss Woodhouse, " said the latter, " I am
just run across to entreat the favour of you to come and
sit down with us a little while, and give us your opinion
of our new instmment — you and Miss Smith. How
do you do. Miss Smith ? — Veiy well, I thank you. —
And I begged Mrs Weston to come with me, that I
might be sure of succeeding. "
" I hope Mrs Bates and Miss Fairfax are — "
" Very well, I am much obliged to you. My mother
is delightfully well ; and Jane caught no cold last night.
How is Mr Woodhouse ? I am so glad to hear such a
good account. Mrs Weston told me you were here.
'Oh, then,'said I,'I must run across ; I am sure
Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and
entreat her to come in : my mother will be so very
242 Emma
happy to see her ; and now we are such a nice party,
she cannot refuse.'* Ay, pray do,'said Mr Frank
Churchill, * Miss Woodhouse's opinion of the instrument
will be worth having. "'But,'said I,'I shall be more
sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me.'—
< Oh,'said he,'wait half a minute, till I have finished
my job ;'for, would you believe it. Miss Woodhouse,
there he is, in the most obliging manner in the world,
fastening in the rivet of my mother's spectacles. The
rivet came out, you know, this morning ; so very oblig-
ing ! — For my mother had no use of her spectacles —
could not put them on. And, by-the-bye, everybody
ought to have two pair of spectacles ; they should indeed.
Jane said so. I meant to take them over to John
Saunders the first thing I did, but something or other
hindered me all the morning ; first one thing, then an-
other, there is no saying what : you know. At one
time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney
wanted sweeping. * Oh,'said I, * Patty, do not come
with your bad news to me. Here is the rivet of youi
mistress's spectacles out.'Then the baked apples came
home ; Mrs Wallis sent them by her boy ; they are
extremely civil and obliging to us, the Wallises, always.
I have heard some people say that Mrs Wallis can be
uncivil and give a very rude answer ; but we have never
known anything but the greatest attention from them.
And it cannot be for the value of our custom now, for
what is our consumption of bread, you know ? only
three of us. Besides, dear Jane at present — and she
really eats nothing — makes such a shocking breakfast,
you would be quite frightened if you saw it. I dare
not let my mother know how little she eats ; so I say
one thing, and then I say another, and it passes off.
But about the middle of the day she gets hungry, and
there is nothing she likes so well as these baked apples,
and they are extremely wholesome ; for I took the
Emma
243
opportunity the other day of asking Mr Perry ; I hap-
pened to meet him in the street. Not that I had any
doubt before. I have so often heard Mr Woodhouse
recommend a baked apple. I believe it is the only way
that Mr Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly whole-
some. We have apple dumplings, however, very often.
Patty makes an excellent apple-dumpling. Well, Mrs
Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, and these ladies
will oblige us. "
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs Bates, "
& c., and they did at last move out of the shop, with no
further delay from Miss Bates than —
" How do you do, Mrs Ford ? I beg your pardon ; 1
did not see you before. I hear you have a charming
collection of new ribbons from town. Jane came back
delighted yesterday. Thank ye, the gloves do very
well — only a little too large about the wrist ; but Jane
is taking them in. "
" What was I talking of? " said she, beginning again
vvhen they were all in the street.
Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she
would fix.
" I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.
Oh, my mother's spectacles ! So very obliging of Mr
Frank Churchill !'Oh !'said he, < I do think I can
fasten the rivet ; I like a job of this kind excessively.'
Which, you know, showed him to be so very — Indeed
I must say that, much as I had heard of him before,
and much as I had expected, he very far exceeds any-
thing — I do congratulate you, Mrs Weston, most
warmly. He seems ever^'thing the fondest parent
could —'Oh !'said he,'I can fasten the rivet. I like
a job of that sort excessively.'I never shall forget
his manner. And when I brought out the baked apples
from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so
very obliging as to take some,'Oh I'said he, directly.
244
Emma
* there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good, and
these are the finest-looking home-baked apples I ever
saw in my life.'That, you know, was so very — And
I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment.
Indeed they are very delightful apples, and Mrs Wallis
does them full justice, only we do not have them baked
more than twice, and Mr Woodhouse made us promise
to have them done three times ; but Miss Woodhouse
will be so good as not to mention it. The apples
themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a
doubt ; all from Donwell — some of Mr Knightley's
most liberal supply. He sends us a sack every year ;
and certainly there never was such a keeping apple any-
where as one of his trees — I believe there is two of
them. My mother says the orchard was always famous
in her younger days. But I was really quite shocked
the other day ; for Mr Knightley called one morning,
and Jane was eating these apples, and we talked about
them, and said how much she enjoyed them, and he
asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock.
'I am sure you must be,'said he, * and I will send you
another supply ; for I have a great many more than I
can ever use. William Larkins let me keep a larger
quantity than usual this year. I will send you some
more, before they get good for nothing.'So I begged
he would not — for really as to ours being gone, I could
not absolutely say that we had a great many left — it
was but half-a-dozen indeed ; but they shoidd be all
kept for Jane; and I could not at all bear that he
should be sending us more, so liberal as he had been
already ; and Jane said the same. And when he was
gone she almost quarrelled with me — no, I should not
say quarrelled, for we never had a quarrel in our lives
but she was quite distressed that I had owned the apples
were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him
believe we had a great many left.'Oh,'said I, * my
Emma 245
dear, I did say as much as I could.* However, the
very same evening William Larkins came over with a
large basket of apples, the same sort of apples, a bushel
at least, and I was very much obliged, and went down
and spoke to William Larkins, and said everything, as
you may suppose. William Larkins is such an old
acquaintance ! I am always glad to see him. But-
however, I found afterwards from Patty that William
said it was all the apples of that sort his master had ;
he had brought them all — and now his master had not
one left to bake or boil. William did not seem to
mind it himself, he was so pleased to think his master
had sold so many ; for William, you know, thinks more
of his master's profit than anything ; but Mrs Hodges,
he said, was quite displeased at their being all sent
away. She could not bear that her master should not
be able to have another apple-tart this spring. He told
Patty this, but bid her not mind it, and be sure not to
say anything to us about it, for Mrs Hodges ivould be
cross sometimes and as long as so many sacks were
sold it did not signify who ate the remainder. And so
Patty told me, and I was excessively shocked indeed !
I would not have Mr Knightley know anything about
it for the world ! He would be so very — I wanted to
keep it from Jane's knowledge ; but, unluckily, I had
mentioned it before I was aware. "
Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door ;
and her visitors walked upstairs, without having any
regular narration to attend to, pursued only by the
sounds of her desultory good-will.
" Pray, take care, Mrs Weston, there is a step at the
turning. Pray, take care. Miss Woodhouse, ours is
rather a dark staircase — rather darker and narrower
than one could wish. Miss Smith, pray take care.
Miss Woodhouse, I am quite concerned, I am sure you
hit your foot. Mis* Smith, the step at the turning. "
chapter |^5^F3I3BX
THE appearance of the little sitting-room as they
entered was tranquillity itself ; Mrs Bates, de-
prived of her usual employment, slumbering on
one side of the fire, Frank Churchill, at a table, near
her, most deedily * occupied about her spectacles, and
Jane Fairfax, standing with her back to them, intent
on her pianoforte.
Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet
able to show a most happy countenance on seeing Emma
again.
" This is a pleasure, " said he, in rather a low voice,
" coming at least ten minutes earlier than I had calcu-
lated. You find me trying to be useful ; tell me if you
think I shall succeed. "
" What 1 " said Mrs Weston, " have not you finished
it yet ? you would not earn a very good livelihood as a
working silversmith at this rate. "
" I have not been working uninterruptedly, " he re-
plied, " I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to
make her instrument stand steadily ; it was not quite
firm ; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. You see
* Actively, diligently. West. Halliweli's Dk'wnari^ oj
Archaic and Provincial IVorJt Znd ed. 1852.
Emma 247
we have been wedging one leg with paper. This ivas
very kind of you to be persuaded to come. I was
almost afraid you would be hurrying home. "
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and
was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked
apple for her, and trying to make her help or advise
him in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit
down to the pianoforte again. That she was not
immediately ready Emma did suspect to arise from the
state of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the in-
strument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she
must reason herself into the power of performance ; and
Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their
origin, and could not but resolve never to expose them
to her neighbour again.
At last Jane began, and though the first bars were
feebly given, the powers of the instrument were gradu-
ally done full justice to. Mrs Weston had been de-
lighted before, and was delighted again ; Emma joined
her in all her praise ; and the pianoforte, with every
proper discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether
of the highest promise.
" Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ, " said
Frank Churchill, with a smile at Emma, " the person has
not chosen ill. I heard a good deal of Colonel Camp-
bell's taste at Weymouth ; and the softness of the upper
notes I am sure is exactly what he and ail that party
would particularly prize. I dare say. Miss Fairfax,
that he either gave his friend very minute directions,
or wrote to Broadwood himself Do not you think
80? "
Jane did not look round. She was not obliged to
hear. Mrs Weston had been speaking to her at the
same moment.
" It is not fair, " said Emma, in a whisper ; " mine
was a random guess. Do not distress her. "
248 Emma
He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he
had very little doubt and very little mercy. Soon
afterwards he began again —
" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoy-
ing your pleasure on this occasion, Miss Fairfax. I dare
say they often think of you, and wonder which will be
the day, the precise day, of the instrument's coming to
hand. Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the
business to be going forward just at this time ? Do you
imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commis-
sion from him, or that he may have sent only a general
direction, an order indefinite as to time, to depend upon
contingencies and conveniencies ? "
He paused. She could not but hear ; she could not
avoid answering —
" Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell, " said
she, in a voice of forced calmness, " I can imagine
nothing with any confidence. It must be all conjecture. "
" Conjecture ! aye, sometimes one conjectures right,
and sometimes one conjectures wrong. I wish I could
conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm.
What nonsense one talks. Miss Woodhouse, when hard
at work, if one talks at all ; your real workmen, I sup-
pose, hold their tongues ; but we, gentlemen labourers,
if we get hold of a word — Miss Fairfax said something
about conjecturing. There, it is done. I have the
pleasure, madam " (to Mrs Bates), " of restoring your
spectacles, healed for the present. "
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and
daughter ; to escape a little from the latter he went to
the pianoforte, and begged Miss Fairfax, who was still
sitting at it, to play something more.
" If you are verj- kind, " said he, " it will be one of
the waltzes we danced last night ; let me live them over
again. You did not enjoy them as I did : you appeared
tired the whole time. I believe you were glad wp
Emma 249
danced no longer ; but I would have given worlds — all
the worlds one ever has to give — for another half-hour. "
She played.
" What felicity it is to hear a tune again which has
made one happy ! If I mistake not, that was danced at
Weymouth. "
She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply,
and played something else. He took some music from
a chair near the pianoforte, and turning to Emma,
said —
" Here is something quite new to me. Do you
know it ? Cramer. And here are a new set of
Irish melodies. That, from such a quarter, one might
expect. This was all sent with the instrument. Very
thoughtful of Colonel Campbell, was not it ? He knew
Miss Fairfax could have no music here. I honour that
part of the attention particularly ; it shows it to have
been so thoroughly from the lieart. Nothing hastily
done, nothing incomplete. True affection only could
have prompted it. "
Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not
help being amused ; and, when, on glancing her eye to-
wards Jane Fairfax, she caught the remains of a smile ;
when she saw that, with all the deep blush of conscious-
ness, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had
less scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction
with respect to her. This amiable, upright, perfect
Jane F'airfax, was apparently cherishing very reprehen-
sible feelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked
it over together. Emma took the opportunity of
whispering —
" You speak too plain. She must understand
you. "
" I hope she does. I would have her understand
me. I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning. "
250 Emma
" But, really, I am half ashamed, and wish i had
never taken up the idea. "
" I am very glad you did, and that you communicated
it to me. I have now a key to all her odd looks and
ways. Leave shame to her. If she does wrong, she
ought to feel it. "
" She is not entirely without it, I think. "
" I do not see much sign of it. She is playing
* Robin Adair'at this moment — his favourite. "
Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the Mnn-
dow, descried Mr Knightley on horseback not far off.
" Mr Knightley, I declare ! I must speak to him,
if possible, just to thank him. I will not open the
window here ; it would give you all cold ; but I can
go into my mother's room, you know. I dare say he
will come in when he knows who is here. Quite
delightful to have you all meet so ! Our little room so
honoured ! "
She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke,
and, opening the casement there, immediately called Mr
Knightley's attention, and every syllable of their con-
versation was as distinctly heard by the others as if it
had passed within the same apartment.
" How d'ye do ? How d'ye do ? Very well, I
thank you. So obliged to you for the carriage last
night. We were just in time ; my mother just ready
for us. Pray come in ; do come in. You will find
some friends here. "
So began Miss Bates ; and Mr Knightley seemed
determined to be heard in his turn, for most resolutely
and commandingly did he say —
" How is your niece, Miss Bates ? I want to
inquire after you all, but particularly your niece. How
is Miss Fairfax ? I hope she caught no cold last
night? How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss
Fairfax is.'
Emma 251
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer
before he would hear her in anything else. The listeners
were amused ; and Mrs Weston gave Emma a look of
particular meaning. But Emma still shook, her head in
steady scepticism.
" So obliged to you ! — so very much obliged to you
for the carriage, " resumed Miss Bates.
He cut her short with —
" I am going to Kingston. Can I do anything for
you? "
" Oh, dear ! Kingston — are you ? Mrs Cole was
saying the other day she wanted something from
Kingston. "
" Mrs Cole has servants to send ; can I do anything
for you ? "
" No, I thank you. But do come in. Who do you
think is here ? Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith ; so
kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte. Do put up
your horse at the Crown, and come in. "
" Well, " said he, in a deliberating manner, " for five
minutes, perhaps. "
" And here is Mrs Weston and Mr Frank Churchill
too ! Quite delightful ! so many friends ! "
" No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two
minutes. I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can. "
" Oh, do come in ! They will be so very happy to
see you. "
" No, no ; your room is full enough. I will call
another day and hear the pianoforte. "
" Well, I am so sorry ! Oh, Mr Knightley, what a
delightful party last night ! how extremely pleasant !
Did you ever see such dancing ? Was not it delightful ?
Miss Woodhouse and Mr Frank Churchill ; 1 never
saw anything equal to it. "
" Oh, very delightful, indeed ! I can say nothing
less, for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr Frank
252 Emma
Churchill are hearing everything that passes. And'
(raising his voice still more) " I do not see why Miss
Fairfax should not be mentioned too. I think Miss
Fairfax dances very well ; and Mrs Weston is the very
best country-dance player, without exception, in Eng-
land. Now, if your friends have any gratitude, they
will say something pretty loud about you and me in
return ; but I cannot stay to hear it. "
" Oh, Mr Knightley, one moment more ; something
of consequence — so shocked ! Jane and 1 are both so
shocked about the apples ! "
" What is the matter now : "
" To think of your sending us all your store apples !
You said you had a great many, and now you have not
one left. We really are so shocked ! Mrs Hodges
may well be angry. William Larkins mentioned it
here. You should not have done it, indeed you should
not. Ah, he is off! He never can bear to be thanked.
But I thought he would have staid now, and it would
have been a pity not to have mentioned — well " (return-
ing to the room), " I have not been able to succeed. Mr
Knightley cannot stop. He is going to Kingston. He
asked me if he could do anything "
" Yes, " said Jane, " we heard his kind offers ; we
heard everything. "
" Oh, yes, my dear, I dare say you might ; because,
you know, the door was open, and the window was
open, and Mr Knightley spoke loud. You must have
heard everything, to be sure.'Can I do anything for
you at Kingston?'said he; so I just mentioned — Oh,
Miss Woodhouse, must you be going ? You seem but
just come ; so very obliging of you. "
Emma found it really time to be at home ; the visit
had already lasted long; and, on examining watches,
so much of the morning was perceived to be gone, that
Mrs Weston and her companion, taking leave also,
Emma 253
could allow themselves only to walk with the two
young ladies to Hartfield gates before they set oil for
Randalls.
Cl)apter %^J%,
IT may be possible to do without dancing entirely.
Instances have been known of young people pass-
ing many, many months successively without being
at any ball of any description, and no material injury
accrue either to body or mind ; but when a beginning is
made — when the felicities of rapid motion have once
been, though slightly, felt — it must be a very heavy set
that does not ask for more.
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and
longed to dance again ; and the last half-hour of an
evening which Mr Woodhouse was persuaded to spend
with his daughter at Randalls was passed by the two
young people in schemes on the subject. Frank's was
the first idea, and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ;
for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties, and
the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance.
But still she had inclination enough for showing people
again how delightfully Mr Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse danced — for doing that in which she need
not blush to compare herself with Jane Fairfax — and
even for simple dancing itself, without any of the wicked
aids of vanity — to assist him first in pacing out the room
they were in to see what it could be made to hold —
and then in taking the dimensions of the other parlour,
in the hope of discovering, in spite of all that Mr
Weston could say of their exactly equal size, that it
was a little the largest.
His first proposition and request, that the dance
begun at Mr Cole's should be finished there — that the
254 Emma
same party should be collected, and the same musician
engaged — met with the readiest acquiescence. Mr
Weston entered into the idea with thorough enjoy-
ment, and Mrs Weston most willingly undertook to
piay as long as they could wish to dance ; and the in-
teresting employment had followed, of reckoning up
exactly who there would be, and portioning out the in-
dispensable division of space to every couple.
" You and Miss Smith and Miss Fairfax will be
three, and the two Miss Coxes five, " had been
repeated many times over. " And there will be the
two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides
Mr Knightley. Yes, that will be quite enough for
pleasure. You and Miss Smith and Miss Fairfax will
be three, and the two Miss Coxes five, and for five
couple there will be plenty of room. "
But soon it came to be on one side —
" But will there be good room for five couple ? — I
really do not think there will. "
On another —
" And, after all, five couple are not enough to make
it worth while to stand up. Five couple are nothing
when one thinks seriously about it. It will not do to
invite five couple. It can be allowable only as the
thought of the moment. "
Somebody said that Miss Gilbert was expected at
her brother's, and must be invited with the rest. Some-
body else believed Mrs Gilbert would have danced the
other evening if she had been asked. A word was put
in for a second young Cox ! and at last, Mr Weston
naming one family of cousins who must be included,
and another of very old acquaintance who could not be
left out, it became a ceitainty that the five couple would
be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation in
what possible manner they could be disposed of.
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each
Emma 255
other. " Might not they use both rooms, and dance
across the passage ? " It seemed the best scheme ; and
yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a
better. Emma said it would be awkward ; Mrs
Weston was in distress about the supper ; and Mr
Woodhouse opposed it earnestly on the score of health.
It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not
be persevered in.
" Oh, no, " said he, " it would be the extreme of
imprudence. I could not bear it for Emma! — Emma is
not strong. She would catch a dreadful cold. So would
poor little Harriet. So you would all. Mrs Weston,
you would be quite laid up ; do not let them talk, of
such a wild thing ; pray do not let them talk of it.
That young man " (speaking lower) " is very thoughtless.
Do not tell his father, but that young man is not quite
the thing. He has been opening the doors very often
this evening, and keeping them open very inconsiderately.
He does not think of the draught. I do not mean to
set you against him, but indeed he is not quite the
tiling. "
Mrs Weston was sorry for such a charge. She knew
the importance of it, and said everything in her power
to do it away. Every door was now closed, the pass-
age plan given up, and the first scheme, of dancing only
in the room they were in, resorted to again ; and with
such goodwill on Frank Churchill's part, that the space
which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed
barely sufficient for five couple was now endeavoured to
r be made out quite enough for ten.
" We were too magnificent, " said he. " We allowed
unnecessary room. Ten couple may stand here very
well. "
Emma demurred. " It would be a crowd — a sad
crowd ; and what could be worse than dancing with-
out space to turn in ? "
256 Emma
" Very true, " he gravely replied ; " it was very bad. "
But still he went on measuring, and still he ended with —
" I think there will be very tolerable room for ten
couple. "
" No, no, " said she, " you are quite unreasonable.
It would be dreadful to be standing so close. Nothing
can be farther from pleasure than to be dancing in a
crowd — and a crowd in a little room. "
" There is no denying it, " he replied. " I agree
with you exactly. A crowd in a little room — Miss
Woodhouse, you have the art of giving pictures in a
few words. Exquisite, quite exquisite ! Still, how-
ever, having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give
the matter up. It would be a disappointment to my
father — and altogether — I do not know that — I am
rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very
well. "
Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was
a little self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than
lose the pleasure of dancing with her ; but she took the
compliment, and forgave the rest. Had she intended
ever to marry him, it might have been worth while to
pause and consider, and try to understand the value of
his preference, and the character of his temper ; but for
all the purposes of their acquaintance he was quite
amiable enough.
Before the middle of the next day he was at Hart-
field ; and he entered the room with such an agreeable
smile as certified the continuance of the scheme. It
soon appeared that he came to announce an improve-
ment.
" Well, Miss Woodhouse, " he almost immediately
began, " your inclination for dancing has not been quite
frightened away, I hope, by the terrors of my father's
little rooms. I bring a new proposal on the subject : a
thought of my father's, which waits only yoir appro-
Emma 257
Dation to be acted upon. May I hope for the honour
of your hand for the two first dances of this little pro-
jected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn ? "
" The Crown ! "
" Yes ; if you and Mr Woodhouse see no objection,
and I trust you cannot, my father hopes his friends will
be so kind as to visit him there. Better accommoda-
tions he can promise them, and not a less grateful
welcome than at Randalls. It is his own idea. Mrs
Weston sees no objection to it, provided you are satis-
fied. This is what we all feel. Oh, you were perfectly
right ! Ten couple, in either of the Randalls rooms,
wou'd have been insufferable — dreadful ! I felt how
right you were the whole time, but was too anxious
for securing anything to like to yield. Is not it a good
exchange ? You consent — I hope you consent ? "
" It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to,
if Mr and Mrs Weston do not. I think it admirable ;
and, as far as I can answer for myself, shall be
most happy — it seems the only improvement that could
be. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improve-
ment ? "
She was obliged to repeat and explain it before it
was fully comprehended ; and then, being quite new,
further representations were necessary to make it accept-
able.
" No ; he thought it very far from an improvement
— a very bad plan — much worse than the other. A
room at an inn was always damp and dangerous, never
properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. If they must
dance, they had better dance at Randalls. He had
never been in the room at the Crown in his life — did
not know the people who kept it by sight. Oh no — a
very bad plan. They would catch worse colds at the
Crown than anywhere. "
K
258 Emma
" 1 was going to observe, sir, " said Frank Churchill,
*'• that one of the gr^at recommendations of this change
would be the very little danger of anybody's catching
cold — so much less danger at the Crown than at Ran-
dalls ! Mr Perry might have reason to regret the
alteration, but nobody else could. "
" Sir, " said Mr Woodhouse, rather warmly, " you
are very much mistaken if you suppose Mr Perry to be
that sort of character. Mr Perry is extremely concerned
when any of us are ill. But I do not understand how
the room at the Crown can be safer for you than your
father's house. "
" From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir.
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all —
not once the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit
of opening the windows, letting in cold air upon heated
bodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief. "
" Open the windows ! but surely, Mr Churchill, no-
body would think of opening the windows at Randalls.
Nobody could be so imprudent ! I never heard of such
a thing. Dancing with open windows ! I am sure
neither your father nor Mrs Weston (poor Miss Taylor
that was) would suffer it. "
" Ah ! sir — but a thoughtless young person will some-
times step behind a window-curtain, and throw up a
sash, without its being suspected. I have often known
it done myself. "
" Have you, indeed sir ? Bless me ! I never could
have supposed it. But I live out of the world, and am
often astonished at what I hear. However, tliis does
make a difference ; and perhaps, when we come to talk
it over — but these sort of things require a good deal of
consideration. One cannot resolve upon them in a
hurry. If Mr and Mrs Weston will be so obliging as
to call here one morning we may talk it over, and see
what can be done. "
Emma 259
" But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited "
" Oh, " interrupted Emma, " there will be plenty of
time for talking everytJiing over. There is no hurry at
all. If it can be contiived to be at the Crown, papa, it
will be very convenient for the horses. They will be
so near their own stable. "
" So they will, my dear. That is a great thing,
Not that James ever complains ; but it is right to spare
our horses when we can. If I could be sure of the
rooms being thoroughy aired — but is Mrs Stokes to
be trusted ? I doubt it. I do not know her, even by
sight. "
" I can answer for everything of that nature, sir,
because it will be under Mrs Weston's care. Mrs
Weston undertakes to direct the whole. "
" There, papa ! now you must be satisfied — our
own dear Mrs Weston, who is carefulness itself. Do
not you remember what Mr Perry said, so many years
ago, when I had the measles ? < If Miss Taylor under-
takes to wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any
fears, sir.'How often have I heard you speak of it as
such a compliment to her ! "
" Aye, very true, Mr Perry did say so. I shall never
forget it. Poor little Emma ! You were veiy bad
with the measles ; that is, you would have been very
bad, but for Perry's great attention. He came four
times a day for a week. He said, from the first, it was
a very good sort — which was our great comfort ; but
the measles are a dreadful complaint. I hope whenever
poor Isabella's little ones have the measles she will send
for Perry. "
" My father and Mrs Weston are at the Crown at
this moment, " said Frank Churchill, " examining the
capabilities of the house. I left them there and came
on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping
you might be persuaded to join them and give your
26o Emma
ad <'ice on the spot. I was desired to say so from both.
It would be the greatest pleasure to them if you could
allow me to attend you there. They can do nothing
satisfactorily without you. "
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council :
and, her father engaging to think it all over while she
was gone, the two young people set oiF together without
delay for the Crown. Theie were Mr and Mrs
Weston ; delighted to see her and receive her appro-
bation, very busy and very happy in their different way :
she, in some little distress ; and he, finding everything
perfect.
" Emma, " said she, " this paper is worse than I
expected. Look ! in places you see it is dreadfully
dirty : and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than
anything [I] could have imagined. "
'* My dear, you are too particular, " said her husband.
" What does all that signify ? You will see nothing of
it by candle-light. It will be as clean as Randalls by
candle-light. We never see anything of it on our club-
nights. "
The ladies here probably exchanged looks which
meant, " Men never know when things are dirty (*r
not ; " and the gentlemen perhaps thought each to him-
self, " Women will have their little nonsenses and
needless cares. "
One perplexity, however, arose, which the gendemetl
did not disdain : it regarded a supper-room. At the
time of the ball-room's being built suppers had not been
in question ; and a small card-room adjoining was the
only addition. What was to be done i This card-
room would be wanted as a card-room now ; or, if
cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four
selves, still was it not too small for any comfortable
supper ? Another room of much better size might be
f-trcured for the puq)ose ; but it was at the other end of
Emma 261
the house, and a long awkward passage must be gone
through to get at it. Tliis made a difficulty. Mrs
Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people in
that passage ; and neither Emma nor the gentlemen
could tolerate the prospect of being miserably crowded
at supper.
Mrs Weston proposed having no regular supper ;
merely sandwiches, & c., set out in the little room ; but
that was scouted as a wretched suggestion. A private
dance without sitting down to supper, was pronounced
an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ;
and Mrs Weston must not speak of it again. She then
took another line of expediency, and looking into the
doubtful room, observed —
" I do not think it // so verj'small. We shall not
be many, you know. "
And Mr Weston at the same time, walking briskly
with long steps through the passage, was calling out, —
" You talk a great deal of the length of this passage,
my dear. It is a mere nothing after all ; and not the
least draught from the stairs. "
" I wish, " said Mrs Weston, " one could know
which aiTangement our guests in general would like
best. To do what would be most generally pleasing
must be our object — if one could but tell what that
would be, "
" Yes, very true, " cried Frank, " very tme. You
want your neighbours'opinions. I do not wonder at
you. If one could ascertain what the chief of them —
the Coles, for instance, they are not far off. Shall I
call upon them ? Or Miss Bates ? She is still nearer.
— And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as
likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the
people as anybody. I think we do want a larger
council. Suppose I go and invite Miss Bates to join
262 Emma
" Well — if you please, " said Mrs Weston, rather
hesitating. " If you think she will be of any use. "
" You will get nothing to the puipose from Miss
Bates, " said Emma ; " she will be all delight and
gratitude, but she will tell you nothing. She will not
even listen to your questions. I see no advantage in
consulting Miss Bates. "
" But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing ! I
am very fond of hearing Miss Bates talk. And I need
not bring the whole family, you know. "
Here Mr Weston joined them, and on hearing what
was proposed gave it his decided approbation.
" Aye, do, Frank ; go and fetch Miss Bates, and let
us end the matter at once. She will enjoy the scheme,
I am sure ; and I do not know a properer person for
shewing us how to do away difficulties. Fetch Miss
Bates. We are growing a little too nice. She is a
standing lesson of how to be happy. But fetch them
both. Invite them both. "
" Both, sir ? " Can the old lady i "
" The old lady ! No, the young lady, to be sure !
I shall think you a great blockhead, Frank, if you bring
the aunt without the niece. "
" Oh ! I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immedi-
ately recollect. Undoubtedly, if you wish it, I will
endeavour to persuade tliem both. " And away he ran.
Long before he re-appeared, attending the short,
neat, brisk-moving aunt, and her elegant niece — Mrs
Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman and a good
wife, had examined the passage again, and found the
evils of it much less than she had supposed before — in-
deed, very trifling ; and here ended the difficulties of
decision. All the rest, in speculation at least, was per-
fectly smootl-.. All the minor arrangements of table
and chair, lights and music, tea and supper, made them-
selves ; or were left as mere trifles, to be settled at any
Emma 263
time between Mrs Weston and Mrs Stokes. Every-
body invited was certainly to come ; Frank had already
written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days be-
yond his fortnight, which could not possibly be refused.
And a delightful dance it was to be.
Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she
agree that it must- As a counsellor she was not
wanted ; but as an approver (a much safer character)
she was truly welcome. Her approbation, at once
general and minute, warm and incessant, could not but
please ; and for another half-hour they were all walking
to and fro between the different rooms, some suggest-
ing, some attending, and all in happy enjoyment of the
future. The party did not break up without Emma's
being positively secured for the two first dances by the
hero of the evening, nor v/ithout her overhearing Mr
Weston whisper to his wife, " He has asked her, my
dear. That's right. I knew he would ! "
Cl)aptet: ^^fl»
ONE thing only was wanting to make the prospect
of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma —
its being fixed for a day within the granted
term of Frank Churchill's stay in Surry ; for, in spite
of Mr Weston's confidence, she coidd not think it so
very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their
nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight. But
this was not judged feasible. The preparations must
take their time, nothing could be properly ready till the
third week were entered on, and for a few days they
must be planning, proceeding, and hoping in uncertainty,
at the risk — in her opinion, the great risk — of its being
all in vain.
264
Emma
Enscombe, however, was gracious — gracious in fact,
if not in word. His wish of staying longer evidently
did not please ; but it was not opposed. All was safe
and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude
generally makes way for another, Zmma being now
certain of her ball, began to adopt as the next vexation
Mr Knightley's provoking indifference about it. Either
because he did not dance himself, or because the plan
had been formed without his being consulted, he seemed
resolved that it should not interest him, determined
against its exciting any present curiosity, or affording him
any future amusement. To her voluntary communica-
tions Emma could get no more approving reply than —
" Very well. If the Westons think it worth while
to be at all this trouble for a few hours of noisy enter-
uinment, I have nothing to say against it, but that they
shall not chuse pleasures for me. — Oh, yes ! I must be
there ; I could not refuse ; and I will keep as much
awake as I can ; but I would rather be at home, look'
ing over William Larkins's week's account ; much
rather, I confess. — Pleasure in seeing dancing ! — not I,
indeed — I never look at it — I do not know who docs.
— Fine dancing, I believe, like virtue, must be its own
reward. Those who are standing by are usually
thinking of something very different. "
This Emma felt was aimed at her ; and it made her
quite angry, ft was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax,
however, that he was so indifferent, or so indignant ; he
was not guided by her feelings in reprobating the ball,
for she enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary
degree. It made her animated — open-hearted ; she
voluntarily said —
«'Oh ! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen
to prevent the ball ! What a disappointment it would
be ! I do look forward to it, I own, with very gre;it
pleasure. "
Emma 265
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax, therefore, that he
would have preferred the society of William LarkinB.
No! — she was more and more convinced that Mrs
Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. There
was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate
attachment on his side — but no love.
Alas ! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with
Mr Knightley. Two days of joyful security were
immediately followed by the overthrow of everything.
A letter arrived from Mr Churchill to urge his
nephew's instant return. Mrs Churchill was unwell —
far too unwell to do without him ; she had been in a
very suffering state (so said her husband) when writing
to her nephew two days before, though from her usual
unwillingness to give pain, and constant habit of never
thinking of herself, she had not mentioned it ; but now
she was too ill to trifle, and must entreat him to set off
for Enscombe without delay.
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma,
in a note from Mrs Weston, instantly. As to his going,
it was inevitable. He must be gone within a few
hours, though without feeling any real alarm for his
aunt, to lessen his repugnance. He knew her illnesses ;
they never occurred but for her own convenience.
Mrs Weston added, " that he could only allow him-
self time to hurry to Highbury, after breakfast, and take
leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose
to feel any interest in him ; and that he might be ex-
pected at Hartfield very soon. "
This wretched note was the finale of Emma's break-
fast. When once it had been read there was no doing
anything but lament and [exclaim]. The loss of the
ball — the loss of the young man — and all that the young
man might be feeling ! It was too wretched ! Such
a delightful evening as it would have been ! Every-
body so happy ! and she and her partner the happiest !
— " I said it would be so, " was the only consolation.
K 2
266 Emma
Her father's feelings were quite distinct. He tliought
principally of Mrs Churchill's illness, and wanted to
know how she was treated ; and as for the ball, it was
shocking to have dear Emma disappointed ; but they
would all be safer at home.
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he
appeared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impa-
tience, his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when
he did come might redeem him. He felt the going
away almost too much to speak of it. His dejection
was most evident. He sat really lost in thought for the
first few minutes ; and when rousing himself it was only
to say —
" Of all horrid things leave-taking is the worst. "
" But you will come again, " said Emma. " This
V'ill not be your only visit to Randalls. "
" Ah! " — (shaking his head) — " the uncertainty of
when I may be able to return ? — I shall try for it with a
zeal ! It will be the object of all my thoughts and
cares ! — and if my uncle and aunt go to town this
spring — but I am afraid — they did not stir last spring
— I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever. "
" Our poor ball must be quite given up. "
" Ah ! that ball ! — why did we wait for anything ?
— why not seize the pleasure at once ? — How often is
happiness destroyed by preparation, foolish preparation !
— You told us it would be so. — Oh ! Miss Wood-
house, why are you always so right ? "
" Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance.
I would much rather have been merry than wise. "
" If I can come again, we are still to have our ball.
My father depends on it Do not forget your
engagement. "
Emma looked graciously.
" Such a fortnight as it has been ! " he continued ;
" every day more precious and more delightful than the
Emma 267
day before ! — every day making me less fit to bear
any other place. Happy those who can remain at
Highbury ! "
" As you do us such ample justice now, " said
Emma, laughing, " I will venture to ask whether you
did not come a little doubtfully at first .'Do not we
rather surpass [yourj expectations ? I am sure we do.
I am sure you did not much expect to like us. You
would not have been so long in coming if you had h'ld
a pleasant idea of Highbury. "
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying
the sentiment, Emma was convinced that it had been so.
ff And you must be off this very morning ? "
" Yes ; my father is to join me here : we shall walk
back together, and I must be off immediately. I am
almost afraid that every moment will bring him. "
" Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss
Fairfax and Miss Bates ? How unlucky ? Miss Bates's
powerful, argumentative mind might have strengthened
yours. "
" Yes — I have called there ; passing the door, 1
thought it better. It was a right thing to do. I went
in for three minutes, and was detained by Miss Bates's
being absent. She was out ; and I felt it im-
possible not to wait till she came in. She is a woman
that one may, that one must laugh at ; but that one
would not wish to slight. It was better to pay my
visit, then "
He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.
" In short, " said he, " perhaps, Miss Woodhouse —
I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion "
He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts.
She hardly knew what to say. It seemed like the
forerunner of something absolutely serious, which she
did not wish. Forcing herself to speak, therefore, in
die hope of putting it by, she calmly said —
268 Emma
** You are quite in the nght ; it was most natural to
pay your visit, then "
He was silent. She believed he was looking at her ;
probably reflecting on what she had said, and trying to
understand the manner. She heard him sigh. It was
natural for him to feel that he had cause to sigh. He
could not believe her to be encouraging him. A few
awkward moments passed, and he sat down again ; and
in a more determined manner said —
" It was something to feel that all the rest of my
time might be given to Hartfield. My regard for
Hartfield is most warm "
He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embar-
rassed. — He was more in love with her than Emma
had supposed ; and who can say how it might have
ended, if his father had not made his appearance ? Mr
Woodhouse soon followed ; and the necessity of
exertion made him composed. //
A very few minutes more, however, completed the
present trial. Mr Weston, always alert when business
was to be done, and as incapable of procrastinating any
evil that was inevitable as of foreseeing any that was
doubtful, said, " It was time to go ; " and the young
man, though he might and did sigh, could not but
agree, and rise to take leave.
" I shall hear about you all, " said he ; " that is my
chief consolation. I shall hear of everything that is
going on among you. I have engaged Mrs Weston to
correspond with me. She has been so kind as to pro-
mise it. Oh ! the blessing of a female correspondent,
when one is really interested in the absent ! — she will
tell me everything. In her letters I shall be at dear
Highbury again. "
A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest,
" Good-bye, " closed the speech, and the door had
soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short had been the
Hmma 269
notice — short their meeting ; he was gone ; and Emma
felt so sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their
little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid
of being too sorry, and feeling it too much.
It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost
every day since his arrival. Certainly his being at
Randalls had given great spirit to ihe last two weeks —
indescribable spirit ; the idea, the expectation of seeing
him which every morning had brought, the assurance of
his attentions, his liveliness, his manners ! It had been
a very happy fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking
from it into the common course of Hartfield days. To
complete every other recommendation, he had almost
told her that he loved her. What strength or what
constancy of affection he might be subject to was
another point ; but at present she could not doubt his
having a decidedly warm admiration, a conscious pre-
ference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the
rest, made her think that she must be a little in love
with him, in spite of every previous determination
against it.
" I certainly must, " said she. " Tliis sensation of
listlessness, weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to
sit down and employ myself, this feeling of everything's
being dull and insipid about the house ! — I must be in
love ; I should be the oddest creature in the world if
I were not — for a few weeks at least. Well, evil to
some is always gQpd to others. I shall have many
fellow-mourners for the ball, if not for Frank Church-
ill ; but Mr Knightley will be happy. He may spend
the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he
likes. "
Mr Knightley, however, showed no triumphant hap-
piness. He coidd not say that he was sorry on his
own account ; his very cheerful look would have con-
tradicted him if he had ; but he said, and very steadily,
270 Emma
that he was soiry for the disappointment ot the others,
and with considerable kindness added —
" You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of
dancing, you are really out of luck ; you are very
much out of luck ! "
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to
judge of her honest regret in this woeful change ; but
when they did meet her composure was odious. She
had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
headache to a degree which made her aunt declare
that, had the ball taken place, she did not think Jane
could have attended it ; and it was charity to impute
some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health.
EMMA continued to entertain no doubt of her being
in love. Her ideas only varied as to the how
much. At first she thought it was a good deal ;
and afterwards but little. She had great pleasure in
hearing Frank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake,
greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr and Mrs Weston ;
she was very often thinking of him, and quite impatient
for a letter, that she might know how he was, how were
his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance
of his coming to Randalls again thjs spring. But, on
the other hand, she could not admit herself to be un-
happy, nor, after the first morning, to be less disposed
for employment than usual ; she was still busy and
cheerful ; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine
him to have faults ; and farther, though thinking of him
so much, and, as she sat drawing or working, forming a
thousand amusing schemes for the progress and close of
their attachmxnt, fancying interesting dialogues, and in-
Emma 271
venting elegant letters ; the conclusion of every imaginai-y
declaration on his side was that she refused him. Their
affection was always to subside into friendship. Every-
tliing tender and charming was to mark their parting ;
but stiil they were to part. When she became sensible
of this, it struck her that she could not be very much in
love ; for, in spite of her previous and fixed determina-
tion never to quit her father, never to marry, a strong
attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle
than she could foresee in her own feelings.
" I do not find myself making any use of the word
sacrifice, " said she. " In not one of all my clever
replies, my delicate negatives, is there any allusion to
making a sacrifice. I do suspect that he is not really
necessary to my happiness. So much the better. I
certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I
do. I am quite enough in love. I should be sony to
be more. "
Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her
view of his feelings.
" He is undoubtedly very much in love — everything
denotes it — veiy much in love indeed! — and when he
comes again, if his affection continue, I must be on my
guard not to encourage it. It would be most inexcus-
able to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up.
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encourag-
ing him hitherto. No ; if he had believed me at all to
share his feelings he would not have been so wretched.
Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks
and language at parting would have been different. Still,
however, I must be on my guard. This is in the sup-
position of his attachment continuing what it now is ;
but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look
upon him to be quite the sort of man — I do not alto-
gether build upon his steadiness or constancy. His feel-
ings are warm, but I can imagine them rather changeable.
272 Emma
Every consideration of the subject, in short, makes me
thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved.
I shall do very well again after a little while — and then,
it will be a good thing over ; for they say everybody is
in love once in their lives, and I shall have been let off
easily. "
When his letter to Mrs Weston arrived Emma had
the perusal of it ; and she read it with a degree of
pleasure and admiration which made her at first shake
her head over her own sensations, and think she had
undervalued their strength It was a long, well written
letter, giving the particulars of his journey and of his
feelings, expressing all the affection, gratitude, and respect
which was natural and honourable, and describing every-
thing exterior and local that could be supposed attractive,
with spirit and precision. No suspicious flourishes now
of apology or concern ; it was the language of real
feeling towards Mrs Weston ; and the transition from
Highbury to Enscombe, the contrast between the
places in some of the first blessings of social life, was
just enough touched on to show how keenly it was felt,
and how much more might have been said but for the
restraints of propriety. — The charm of her own name
was not wanting. Mist IVoodhouse appeared more than
once, and never without a something of pleasing connec-
tion, either a compliment to her taste, or a remembrance
of what she had said ; and in the very last time of its
meeting her eye, unadorned as it was by any such broad
wreath of gallantry, she yet could discera the effect of
her influence, and acknowledge the greatest compliment
perhaps of all conveyed. Compressed into the very
lowest vacant comer were these words — " I had not a
spare moment on Tuesday, as you know, for Miss
Woodliouse's beautiful little friend. Pray make my
excuses and adieus to her. " This, Emma could not
doubt, was all for herself. Harriet was remembered
Emma
273
only from being her friend. His information and pros-
pects, as to Enscombe, were neither worse nor better
than had been anticipated ; Mrs Churchill was recover-
ing, and he dared not yet, even in his own imagination,
fix a time for coming to Randalls again.
Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter
in the material part, its sentiments, she yet found, when
it was folded up and returned to Mrs Weston, that it
had not added any lasting warmth — that she could still
do without the writer, and that he must learn to do
without her. Her intentions were unchanged. Her
resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by the
addition of a scheme for his subsequent consolation and
happiness. His recollection of Harriet, and the words
which clothed it — the " beautiful little friend, " — sug-
gested to her the idea of Harriet's succeeding her in
his affections. Was it impossible ? — No. Harriet un-
doubtedly was greatly his inferior in understanding ; but
he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her
face and the warm simplicity of her manner ; and all
the probabilities of circumstance and connection were
in her favour. For Harriet it would be advantageous
and delightful indeed.
" I must not dwell upon it, " said she ; " I must not
think of it. I know the danger of indulging such
speculations. But stranger things have happened ; and
when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it
will be the means of confirming us in that sort of true
disinterested friendship which I can already look for-
ward to with pleasure. "
It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet's
behalf, though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it
seldom ; for evil in that quarter was at hand. As
Frank Churchill's arrival had succeeded Mr Elton's
engagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the
latest interest had entirely born down the first, so now,
274 Emma
upon Frank Churchill's disappearance, Mr Ehon's con-
cerns were assuming the most irresistible form. — His
wedding-day was named. He would soon be among
them again — Mr Elton and his bride. There was
hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe
before " Mr Elton and his bride " was in everybody's
mouth, and Frank Churchill was forgotten. Emma
grew sick at the sound. She had had three weeks of
happy exemption from Mr Elton ; and Harriet's
mind, she had been willing to hope, had been lately
gaining strength. With Mr Weston's ball in view, at
least, there had been a great deal of insensibility to
other things ; but it was now too evident that she had
not attained such a state of composure as could stand
against the actual approach — new carriage, bell-ringing,
and all.
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which re-
quired all the reasonings, and soothings, and attentions
of every kind that Emma could give. Emma felt that
she could not do too much for her, that Harriet had
a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience ; but it
was heavy work to be for ever convincing without pro-
ducing any effect ; for ever agreed to, without being
able to make their opinions the same. Harriet listened
submissively, and said, " It was very true ; it was just
as Miss Woodhouse described — it was not worth while
to think about them — and she would not think about
them any longer. " But no change of subject could
avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxious and
restless about the Eltons as before. At last Emma
attacked her on another ground.
" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so
unhappy about Mr Elton's marrying, Harriet, is the
strongest reproach you can make me. You could not
give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into.
It was all my doing, I know. I have not forgotten it,
Emma 275
I assure you. Deceived myself, I did very miserably
deceive you ; and it will be a painful reflection to me
for ever. Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it. "
Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few
words of eager exclamation. Emma continued —
" I have not said, exert yourself, Harriet, for my
sake ; think less, talk less of Mr Elton for my sake ;
because, for your own sake rather, I would wish it ^o be
done, for the sake of what is more important tlian my
comfort — a habit of self-command in you, a considera-
tion of what is your duty, an attention to propriety, an
endeavour to avoid the suspicions of others, to save your
health and credit, and restore your tranquillity. These
are the motives which I have been pressing ou you
They are very important, and sorry I am that you can-
not feel them sufficiently to act upon them. My being
saved from pain is a very secondary consideration. I
v/ant you to save yourself from greater pain. Perhaps
I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not
forget what was due — or rather, what would be kind by
me. "
This appeal to her affections did more than all the
rest. The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration
for Miss Woodhouse, whom she really loved extremely,
made her wretched for a while ; and when the violence
of grief was comforted away, still remained powerful
enough to prompt to what was right, and support her in
n very tolerably.
" V^ou, who have been the best friend I ever had in
my lite i — Want gratitude to you ! — Nobody is equal
to you ! I care for nobody as I do for you ! Oh,
Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been ! "
Such expressions, assisted as they were by everything
that look and manner could do, made Emma feel that
she had never loved Harriet so well, nor valued her
affection so highly before.
276 Emma
" There is 00 charm equal to tenderness of hean, "
said she afterwards to herself. " There is nothing to be
compared to it. Warmth and tenderness of heart, witli
an affectionate, open manner, will beat all the clearness
of head in the world, for attraction : I am sure it will.
It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so
generally beloved — which gives Isabella all her popu-
larity. I have it not ; but I know how to prize and
respect it. Harriet is my superior in all the charm and
all the felicity it gives. Dear Harriet ! — I would not
change you for the clearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-
judging female breathing. Oh, the coldness of a Jane
Fairfax ! Harriet is worth a hundred such ; and for a
wife — a sensible man's wife — it is invaluable. I mention
no names ; but happy the man who changes Emma foi
Harriet ! "
Chapter n^nji%
MRS ELTON was first seen at church : but
though devotion might be interrupted, curiosity
could not be satisfied by a bride ^n a pew, and
it must be left for the visits in form which were then to
be paid, to settle whether she were very pretty indeed,
or only rather pretty, or not pretty at all.
Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or
propriety, to make her resolve on not being the last to
pay her respects : and she made a point of Harriet's
going with her, that the worst of the business might be
gone through as soon as possible.
She could not enter the house again, could not be
in the same room to which she had with such vain
artifice retreated three months ago, to lace up her boot,
without recoUeclitig. A thousand vexatious thoughts
would recur. Compliments, charades, and horrible
Emma 277
blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor
Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved
very well, and was only rather pale and silent. The
visit was of course short ! and there was so much em-
barrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it that
Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an
opinion of the lady, and on no account to give one, be-
yond the nothing-meaning terms of being " elegantly
dressed, and very pleasing. "
She did not really like her. She would not be in a
hurry to find fault, but she suspected that there was no
elegance ; — ease, but not elegance. She was almost
sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there
was too much ease. Her person was rather good ; her
face not unpretty ; but neither feature nor air, nor voice,
nor manner were elegant. Emma thought, at least, it
would turn out so.
As for Ml Eitou, his manners did not appear — but
no, she would not permit a hasty or a witty word from
herself about his manners. It was an awkward cere-
mony at any time to be receiving wedding visits ; and
a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well
through it. The woman was better off; she might
have the assistance of fine clothes, and the privilege of
bashfulness ; but the man had only his own good sense to
depend on : and when she considered how peculiarly
unlucky poor Mr Elton was in being in the same room
at once with the woman he had just married, the woman
he had wanted to marry, and the woman whom he had
been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the
right to look as little wise, and to be as much affectedly,
and as little really, easy as could be.
" Well, Miss Woodhouse, " said Harriet, when they
had quitted the house, and after waiting in vain for her
friend to begin; " well. Miss Woodhouse " (withagentle
sigh), " what do you think of her ? Is not she very
charming ?'*
278
Emma
Tliere was a little hesitation in Emma's answ
" Oh ! yes — very — a very pleasing young woman. "
" I think her beautiful, quite beautiful. "
" Very nicely dressed, indeed ; a remarkably elegant
gown. "
" I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen
in love. "
" Oh ! no ; there is nothing to surprize one at all ; a
pretty fortune, and she came in his way. "
" I dare say, " returned Harriet, sighing again, " I
dare say she was very much attached to him. "
" Perhaps she might ; but it is not every man's fate to
marrj'the woman who loves him best. Miss Hawkins,
perhaps, wanted a home, and thought this the best offer
she was likely to have. "
" Yes, " said Hamet, earnestly, " and well she might ;
nobody could ever have a better. Well, I wish them
happy with all my heart. And now. Miss Woodhouse,
I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. He
is just as superior as ever ; but being married, you
know, it is quite a different thing. No, indeed, Miss
Woodhouse, you need not be afraid ; I can sit and
admire him now without any great misery. To know
that he has not thrown himself away is such a com-
fort ! She does seem a charming young woman, just
what he deseives. Happy creature ! He called her
'Augusta.'Hovn^ delightful ! "
When the visit was returned Emma made up her
mind. She could then see more and judge better.
From Harriet's happening not to be at Hartfield, and
her father's being present to engage Mr Elton, she had
a quarter of an hour of the lady's conversation to her-
self, and could composedly attend to her ; and the
quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs Elton
was a vain woman, extremely well satisfied with herself,
and thinking much of her own importance •, that sho
Emma 279
meant to shine and be very superior, but with manners
which had been formed in a bad school ; pert and
familiar ; that all her notions were drawn from one set
of people, and one style of living ; that, if not foolish,
she was ignorant, and that her society would certainly
do Mr Elton no good.
Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise
or refined herself, she would have connected him with
those who were ; but Miss Hawkins, it might be fairly
supposed, from her easy conceit, had been the best of
her own set. The rich brother-in-law, near Bristol,
was the pride of the alliance, and his place and his
carriages were the pride of him.
The very first subject, after being seated, was Maple
Grove, " My brother, Mr Suckling's seat ; " a com-
parison of Hartfield to Maple Grove. The grounds of
Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty ; and the
house was modern and well-built. Mrs Elton seemed
most favourably impressed by the size of the room, the
entrance, and all that she could see or imagine. " Very
like Maple Grove indeed ! She was quite struck by
the likeness ! — That room was the very shape and size
of the morning-room at Maple Grove ; her sister's
favourite room. " Mr Elton was appealed to. " Was
not it astonishingly like ? — She could really almost
fancy herself at Maple Grove.
" And the staircase. — You know, as I came in, I
observed how very like the staircase was ; placed
exactly in the same part of the house. I really could
not help exclaiming ! I assure you, Miss Woodhouse,
it is very delightful to me to be reminded of a place I
am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove. I have
spent so many happy months there ! " (with a little
sign of sentiment.) " A charming place, undoubtedly.
Everybody who sees it is struck by its beauty ; but to
me it has been quite a home. Whenever you are trans-
28o Emma
planted, like me, Miss Woodhouse, you will understand
how very delightful it is to meet with anything at all
like what one has left behind. I always say this is
quite one of the evils of matrimony. "
Emma made as slight a reply as she could ; but it
was fully sufficient for Mrs Elton, who only wanted to
be talking herself.
" So extremely like Maple Grove ! And it is not
merely the house ; the grounds, I assure you, as far as I
could observe, are strikingly like. The laurels at Maple
Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand very
much in the same way — just across the lawn ; and 1 had
a glimpse of a fine large tree, with a bench round it,
which put me so exactly in mind ! My brother and
sister will be enchanted with this place. People who
have extensive grounds themselves are always pleased
with anything in the same style. "
Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment. She had
a great idea that people who had extensive grounds
themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of
anybody else ; but it was not worth while to attack an
error so double-dyed, and therefore only said in reply —
" When you have seen more of this countiy I am
afraid you will think you have overrated Hartfield.
Surry is full of beauties. "
" Oh ! yes, I am quite aware of that. It is the
garden of England, you know. Surry is the garden ol
England. "
" Yes ; but we must not rest our claims on that dia
tinction. Many counties, I believe, are called the gardei
of England, as well as Surry. "
" No, I fancy not, " replied Mrs Elton, with a most
satisfied smile. " [I] never heard any county but Surry
called so. "
Emma was silenced.
" My brother and sister have promised us a visit in
Emma 281
the spring, or summer at farthest, " continued Mrs
Elton ; " and that will be our time for exploring.
While they are with us we shall explore a great deal, 1
dare say. They will have their barouche-landau, of
course, which holds four perfectly ; and therefore, with-
out saying anything of our carriage, we should be able
to explore the different beauties extremely well. They
would hardly come in their chaise, I think, at that
season of the year. Indeed, when the time draws on,
I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche-
landau ; it will be so very much preferable. When
people come into a beautiful country of this sort, you
know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see
as much as possible ; and Mr Suckling is extremely fond
of exploring. We explored to King's-Weston twice
last summer, in that way, most delightfully, just after
their first having the barouche- landau. You have many
parties of that kind here, I suppose. Miss Woodhouse,
every summer ? "
" No ; not immediately here. We are rather out of
distance of the very striking beauties which attract the
sort of parties you speak of; and we are a very quiet
set of people, I believe ; more disposed to stay at home
than engage in schemes of pleasure. "
" Ah ! there is nothing like staying at home for real
comfort. Nobody can be more devoted to home than
I am. I was quite a proverb for it at Maple Grove.
Many a time has Selina said, when she has been going
to Bristol,'I really cannot get this girl to move from
the house. I absolutely must go in by myself, though
I hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without a
companion : but Augusta, I believe, with her own good
r/ill, would never stir beyond the park paling.'Many
a time has she said so ; and yet I am no advocate for
entire seclusion. I think, on the contrary, when people
shut themselves up entirely from society, it is a very bad
282 Emma
thing ; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the
world in a proper degree, without living in it either too
much or too little. I perfectly understand your situa-
tion however, Miss Woodhouse " (looking towards Mr
Woodhouse), " your father's state of health must be a
great drawback. Why does not he try Bath ? — Indeed
he should. Let me recommend Bath to you. I
assure you I have no doubt of its doing Mr Woodhouse
goocL "
" My father tried it more than once, formerly, but
without receiving any benefit ; and Mr Perry, whose
name, I dare say, is not unknown to you, does not
conceive it would be at all more likely to be useful
now. "
" Ah ! that'a a great pity ; for I assure you, Miss
Woodhouse, where the waters do agree, it is quite won-
derful the relief they give. In my Bath life J have
seen such instances of it ! And it is so cheerful a place
that it could not fail of being of use to Mr Woodhouse's
spirits, which, I understand, are sometimes much de-
pressed. And as to its recommendations to you, I fancy
I need not take much pains to dwell on them. The
advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally
understood. It would be a charming introduction for
you, who have lived so secluded a life : and I could
immediately secure you some of the best society in the
place. A line from me would bring you a little host of
acquaintance ; and my particular friend Mrs Partridge,
the lady I have always resided with when in Bath,
would be most happy to show you any attentions,
and would be the very person for you to go into public
with. "
It was as much as Emma could bear, without being
impolite ! The idea of her being indebted to Mrs
Elton for what was called an introduction — of lier going
into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs
Emma 283
Elton's — probably some vulgar dashing widow, who,
with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live !
The dignity of Miss Woodhouse, of Hartfield, was
sunk indeed !
She restrained herself, however, from any of the re-
proofs she could have given, and only thanked Mrs
Elton coolly ; " but their going to Bath was quite out
of the question ; and she was not perfectly convinced
that the place might suit her better than her father. "
And then, to prevent further outrage and indignation,
changed the subject directly.
" I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs Elton.
Upon these occasions a lady's character generally pre-
cedes her ; and Highbury has long known that you are
a superior performer. "
" Oh ! no, indeed ; I must protest against any such
idea. A superior performer! — very far from it, I
assure you : consider from how partial a quarter your
information came. I am doatingly fond of music —
passionately fond ; and my friends say I am not entirely
devoid of taste ; but as to anything else, upon my
honour my performance is mediocre to the last degree.
You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play delightfully.
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction, comfort,
and delight to me to hear what a musical society I am
got into. I absolutely cannot do without music ; it is
a necessary of life to me ; and having always been used
to a very musical society, both at Maple Grove and in
Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice. I
honestly said as much to Mr E. when he was speaking
of my future home, and expressing his fears lest the re-
tirement of it should be disagreeable ; and the inferiority
of the house too — knowing what I had been accustomed
to — of course he was not wholly without apprehension.
When he was speaking of it in that way, I honestly
said that the tuorld I could give up — parties, balls, plays
284 Emma
— for I had no fear of retirement- RIessed with so
many resources within myself, the world was not neces-
sary to me. I could do Tery well without it. To
those who had no resources it was a different thing ;
but my resources made me quite independent. And as
to smaller-sized rooms than I had been used to, I really
could not give it a thought. I hoped I was perfectly
equal to any sacrifice of that description. Certainly, I
had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove ;
but I did assure him that two carriages were not neces-
sary to my happiness, nor were spacious apartments.
< But,'said I,'to be quite honest, I do not think I can
live without something of a musical society. I coD'li-
tion for nothing else ; but, without music, life would be
a blank to me.'"
" We cannot suppose, " said Emma, smiling, " that.
Mr Elton would hesitate to assure you of there being a
very musical society in Highbury ; and I hope you will
not find he has outstepped the truth more than may be
pardoned, in consideration of the motive. "
" No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head.
I am delighted to find myself in such a circle : I hope
we shall have many sweet little concerts together. I
think. Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a
musical club, and have regular weekly meetings at your
house, or ours. Will not it be a good plan ? If < u > e
exert ourselves, I think we shall not be long in want of
allies. Something of that nature would be particularly
desirable for me, as an inducement to keep me in prac-
tice ; for married women, you know — there is a sad
story against them, in general. They are but too apt
to give up music. "
" But you, who are so extremely fond of it — there
can be no danger, surely ? "
" I should hope not ; but really when I look around
among my acquaintance, I tremble. Selina has entirely
Emma 285
given up music ; — never touches the instrument, though
she played sweetly. And the same may be siid of
Mrs Jeffereys — Clara Partridge that was — and of the
two Milmans, now Mrs Bird and Mrs James Cooper ;
and of more thsn I can enumerate. Upon my word,
it is enough to put one in a fright. I used to be quite
angry with Selina ; but, really, I begin now to compre-
hend that a married woman has many things to call her
attention. I believe I was half an hour this morning
shut up with my housekeeper. "
" But everything of that kind, " said Emma, " will
soon be in so regular a train "
'< Well, " said Mrs Elton, laughing, " we shall see. "
Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her
music, had nothing more to say ; and, after a moment's
pause, Mrs Elton chose another subject.
" We have been calling at Randalls, " said she, " and
found them both at home ; and very pleasant people
they seem to be. I like them extremely. Mr Weston
seems an excellent creature — quite a first-rate favourite
with me already, I assure you. And she appears so
truly good — there is something so motherly and kind-
hearted about her, that it wins upon one diiectly. — She
was your governess, I think ? "
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer ;
but Mrs Elton hardly waited for the affirmative before
she went on.
" Having understood as much, I was rather aston-
ished to find her so very ladylike. But she is really
quite the gentlewoman. "
" Mrs Weston's manners, " said Emma, " were
always particularly good. Their propriety, simplicity,
and elegance would make tliem the safest model for
any young woman. "
" And who do you think came in while we were
there > . "
286 Emma
Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some
old acquaintance, and how could slie possibly guess ?
" Knightley ! " continued Mrs Elton ; — " Knightley
himself! Was not it lucky ? For, not being within
when he called the other day, I had never seen him
before ; and of course, as so particular a friend of
Mr E.'s, I had a great curiosity. * My friend Knight-
ley'had been so often mentioned, that I was really
impatient to see him ; and I must do my cara sposo
the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his
friend. Knightley is quite the gentleman ; I like him
very much. Decidedly, I think, a very gentlemanlike
man. "
Happily, it was now time to be gone. They were
off, and Emma could breathe.
" Insufferable woman ! " was her immediate ex-
clamation. " Worse than I had supposed. Abso-
lutely insufferable ! Knightley ! — I could not have
believed it. Knightley! — never seen him in her life
before, and call him Knightley ! and discover that he
is a gentleman. A little upstart, vulgar being, with
her Mr E. and her cara sposo, and her resources,
and all her airs of pert pretention and underbred finery.
Actually to discover that Mr Knightley is a gentleman !
I doubt whether he will return the compliment, and dis-
cover her to be a lady. I could not have believed it !
And to propose that she and I should unite to form a
musical club ! One would fancy we were bosom
friends ! And Mrs Weston ! Astonished that the
person who had brought me up should be a gentle-
woman ! Worse and worse I I never met with her
equal. Much beyond my hopes ! Harriet is dis-
graced by any co.mparison. Oh ! what would Frank
Churchill say to her if he were here ? How angry and
how diverted he would be ! Ah ! there I am thinking
of him directly. Always the first person to be thought
Emma 287
of! How I catch myself out! Frank Churchill
conies as regularly into my mind ! "
All this ran so glibly through lier thoughts, that by
the time her father had arranged himself, after the
bustle of the Eltons'departure, and was ready to speak,
she was very tolerably capable of attending.
" Well, my dear, " he deliberately began, " consider-
ing we never saw her before, she seems a veiy pretty
sort of young lady ; and I dare say she was very much
pleased with you. She speaks a little too quick. A
little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the
ear. But I believe I am nice ; I do not like strange
voices ; and nobody speaks like you and poor Miss
Taylor. However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-
behaved young lady, and no doubt will make him a very
good wife. Though I think he had better not have
married. I made the best excuses I could for not
having been able to wait on him and Mrs Elton on this
happy occasion : I said that I hoped I should in the
course of the summer. But I ought to have gone
before. Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss. Ah !
it shows what a sad invalid I am ! But I do not like
the corner into Vicarage Lane. "
" I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mi
Elton knows you. "
*'Yes ; but a young lady — a bride — I ought to have
paid my respects to her if possible. It was being very
deficient. "
" But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony ;
and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your
respects to a bride ? It ought to be no recommenda
tion to you. It is encouraging people to marry if you
make so much of them. "
" No, my dear, I never encouraged anybody to
marry, but I would always wish to pay every proper
attention to a lady — and a bride especially, is never to
288 Emma
be neglected. More is avowedly due to her. A bride,
you know, my dear, is always the first in company, le:
the others be who they may. "
" Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry 1
do not know what is. And I should never have ex-
pected you to be lending your sanction to such vanity-
baits for poor young ladies. "
" My dear, you do not understand me. This is a
matter of mere common politeness and good-breeding,
and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people
to marry. "
Emma had done. Her father was growing nervous,
and could not understand her. Her mind returned ta
Mrs Elton's offences, and long, very long, did they
occupy her.
Cl)apter ^^^jfllllX
EMMA was not required, by any subsequent dis-
covery, to retract her ill opinion of Mrs Elton.
Her observation had been pretty correct. Such
as Mrs Elton appeared to her on this second interview,
such slie appeared whenever they met again : self-
important, presuming, familiar, ignorant, and ill-bred.
She had a little beauty and a little accomplishment, but
so httle judgment that she thought herself coming with
superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve
a country neighbourhood ; and conceived Miss Haw-
kins to have held such a place in society as Mrs
Elton's consequence only could surpass.
There was no reason to suppose Mr Elton thought
at all differently from his wife. He seemed not merely
happy with her, but proud. He had the air of con-
gratulating himself on having brought such a woman to
Highbury, as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal ;
Emma 289
and the greater part of her new acquaintance, disposed
to commend, or not in the habit of judging, following
the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or taking it for
granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable
as she professed herself, were very well satisfied ; so
that Mrs Elton's praise passed from one mouth to an-
other as it ought to do, unimpeded by Miss Wood-
house, who readily continued her first contribution, and
talked with a good grace of her being " very pleasant,
and very elegantly dressed. "
In one respect Mrs Elton grew even worse than she
had appeared at first- Her feelings altered towards
Emma. Offended, probably, by the little encourage-
ment which her proposals of intimacy met with, she
drew back, in her turn, and gradually became much
more cold and distant ; and though the effect was
agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was necessarily
increasing Emma's dislike. Her manners, too — and
Mr Elton's — were unpleasant towards Harriet. They
were sneering and negligent. Emma hoped it must
rapidly work Harriet's cure ; but the sensations which
could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very
much. It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet's
attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve,
and her own share in the story, under a colouring the
least favourable to her, and the most soothing to him,
had in all likelihood been given also. She was, of
course, the object of their joint dislike. When they
had nothing else to say, it must be always easy to begin
abusing Miss Woodhouse ; and the enmity which they
dared not show in open disrespect to her found a broader
vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet.
Mrs Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax ; and
from the first. Not merely when a state of warfare
with one young lady might be supposed to recommend
the other, but from the very first ; and she was not
L
290 Emma
satisfied with expressing a natural and reasonable admi-
ration, but without solicitation, or plea, or privilege, she
must be wanting to assist and befriend her. Before
Emma had forfeited her confidence, and about the third
time of their meeting, she heard all Mrs Elton's knight-
errantry on the subject.
" Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Wood-
house. I quite rave about Jane Fairfax. A sweet,
interesting creature. So mild and ladylike — and with
such talents ! — I assure you I think she has very extra-
ordinary talents. I do not scruple to say that she plays
extremely well. I know enough of music to speak
decidedly on that point. Oh ! she is absolutely charm-
ing ! You will laugh at my warmth, but, upon my
word, I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax — and her
situation is so calculated to affect one ! — Miss Wood-
house, we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do
something for her. We must bring her forward. Such
talent as hers must not be suffered to remain unknown.
I daresay you have heard those charming lines of the
poet —
"'Full many a flower is born to blush unseen
And waste its fragrance on the desei't air.'
We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane
Fairfax. "
" I cannot think there is any danger of it, " was
Emma's calm answer ; " and when you are better
acquainted with Miss Fairfax's situation, and under-
stand what her home has been, with Colonel and Mrs
Campbell, I have no idea that you will suppose her
talents can be unknown. "
" Oh ! but, dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in
such retirement, such obscurity, so thrown away.
Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed with the
Campbells are so palpably at an end ! And I think she
feels it. I am sure she docs. She is very timid ;uid
Emma 291
silent- One can see that she feels the want of en-
couragement. I like her the better for it. I must
confess it is a recommendation to me. I am a great
advocate for timidity — and I am sure one does not often
meet with it. But in those who are at all inferior, it is
extremely prepossessing. Oh ! I assure you, Jane
Fairfax is a very delightful character, and interests me
more than I can express. "
" You appear to feel a great deal ; but I am not
aware how you or any of Miss Fairfax's acquaintance
here, any of those who have known her longer than
yourself, can show her any other attention than "
** My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done
by those who dare to act. You and I need not be afraid.
If nve set the example, many will follow it as far as they
can ; though all have not our situations. IVe have
carriages to fetch and convey her home ; and nve live
in a style which could not make the addition of Jane
Fairfax at any time the least inconvenient. I should
be extremely displeased if Wright were to send us up
such a dinner as could make me regret having asked
more than Jane Fairfax to partake of it. I have no idea
of that sort of thing. It is not likely that I should^
considering what I have been used to. My greatest
danger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the other
way, in doing too much, and being too careless of ex-
pense. Maple Grove will probably be my model more
than it ought to be — for we do not at all affect to equal
my brother, Mr Suckling, in income. However, my
resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax. I shall
certainly have her very often at my house, shall intro-
duce her wherever I can, shall have musical parties to
draw out her talents, and shall be constantly on the
watch for an eligible situation. My acquaintance is so
very extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing of
something to suit her shortly. I shall introduce her, of
292
Emma
course, very particularly to my brother and sister when
they come to us. I am sure they will like her ex-
tremely ; and when she gets a little acquainted with
them, her fears will completely wear off, for there really
is nothing in the manners of either but what is highly
conciliating. I shall have her very often^ indeed, while
they are with me ; and I dare say we shall sometimes
find a seat for her in the barouche-landau in some of
our exploring parties. "
" Poor Jane Fairfax ! " thought Emma, " you have
not deserved this. You may have done wrong with
regard to Mr Dixon ; but this is a punishment beyond
what you can have merited. The kindness and protec-
tion of Mrs Elton ! —'Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax !'
Heavens ! let me not suppose that she dares go about
Emma Woodhouseing me ! But, upon my honour,
there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that
woman's tongue ! "
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again — to
any so exclusively addressed to herself — so disgustingly
decorated with a " dear Miss Woodhouse. " The
change on Mrs Elton's side soon aftenvards appeared,
and she was left in peace — neither forced to be the very
particular friend of Mrs Elton nor, under Mrs Elton's
guidance, the very active patroness of Jane Fairfax, and
only sharing with others in a general way, in knowing
what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.
She looked on with some amusement. Miss Bates's
gratitude for Mrs Elton's attentions to Jane was in the
first style of guileless simplicity and warmth. She was
quite one of her worthies — the most amiable, affable,
delightful woman — ^just as accomplished and condescend-
ing as Mrs Elton meant to be considered. Emma's
only surjjrize v/as that Jane Fairfax should accept those
attentions, and tolerate Mrs Elton as she seemed to
do. She heard of her walking with the Eltons, sitting
Emma 293
with the Eltons, spending a day with the Eltons !
This was astonishing ! She could not have believed it
possible that the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax
could endure such society and friendship as the Vicarage
had to offer.
" She is a riddle, quite a riddle, " said she. — " To
chuse to remain here month after month, under priva-
tions of every sort. And now to chuse the mortifica-
tion of Mrs Elton's notice, and the penuiy of her
conversation, rather than return to the superior com-
panions who have always loved her with such real,
generous affection. "
Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three
months ; the Campbells were gone to Ireland for three
months ; but now the Campbells had promised their
daughter to stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh in-
vitations had arrived for her to join them there. Ac-
cording to Miss Bates — it all came from her — Mrs
Dixon had written most pressingly. Would Jane but
go, means were to be found, servants sent, friends con-
trived — no travelling difficulty allowed to exist ; but
still she had declined it.
" She must have some motive, more powerful than
appears, for refusing this invitation, " was Emma's con-
clusion. " She must be under some sort of penance,
inflicted either by the Campbells or herself. There is
great fear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.
She is not to be with the D'txons. The decree is
issued by somebody. But why must she consent to be
with the Eltons ? Here is quite a separate puzzle. "
Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of
the subject, before the few who knew her opinion of
Mrs Elton, Mrs Weston ventured this apology for
Jane.
" We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoy-
ment at the Vicarage, my dear Emma — but it is better
294 Emma
than being always at home. Her aunt is a good
creature ; but, as a constant companion, must be veiy
tiresome. We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits,
before we condemn her taste for what she goes to. "
" You are right, Mrs Weston, " said Mr Knightley
warmly ; " Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of
forming a just opinion of Mrs Elton. Could she have
chosen with whom to associate, she would not have
chosen her. But " (with reproachful smile at Emma)
" she receives attentions from Mrs Elton, which nobody
else pays her. "
Emma felt that Mrs Weston was giving her a
momentary glance, and she was herself struck by his
warmth. With a faint blush, she presently replied —
" Such attentions as Mrs Elton's, I should have
imagined, would rather disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax.
Mrs Elton's invitations I should have imagined anything
but inviting. "
" I should not wonder, " said Mrs Weston, " if Miss
Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own
inclination, by her aunt's eagerness in accepting Mrs
Elton's civilities for her. Poor Miss Bates may very
likely have committed her niece, and hurried her into a
greater appearance of intimacy than her own good sense
would have dictated, in spite of the very natural wish of
a little change. "
Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again ;
and, after a few minutes silence, he said —
" Another thing must be taken into consideration too
— Mrs Elton does not talk to Miss Fairfax as she
speaks of her. We all know the difference between
the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken
amongst us ; we all feel the influence of a sometliing
beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with
each other — a something more early implanted. We
cannot give anybody the disagreeable hints that we may
Emma 295
have been very full of the hour before. We feel things
differently. And besides the operation of this, as a
general principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax
awes Mrs Elton by her superiority both of mind and
manner ; and that, face to face, Mrs Elton treats her
with all the respect which she has a claim to. Such a
woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs
Elton's way before — and no degree of vanity can pre
vent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness
in action, if not in consciousness. "
" I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax, "
said Emma. Little Henry was in her thoughts, and a
mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what
else to say.
" Yes, " be replied, " anybody may know how highly
I think of her. "
" And yet, " said Emma, beginning hastily, and with
an arch look, but soon stopping — it was better, however,
to know the worst at once — she hurried on, " and yet,
perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself how highly
it is. The extent of your admiration may take you by
surprize some day or other. "
Mr Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons
of his thick leather gaiters, and either the exertion of
getting them together, or some other cause, brought the
colour into his face, as he answered —
" Oh ! are you there ? But you are miserably be-
hindhand. Mr Cole gave me a hint of it six weeks ago. "
He stopped. Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs
Weston, and did not herself know what to think. In
a moment he went on —
" That will never be, however, I can assure you.
Miss Fairfax, I dare say, would not have me if I were
to ask her ; and I am very sure I shall never ask her. "
Emma returned her friend's pressure with interest ;
and was pleased enough to exclaim —
296 Emma
" You are not vain, Mr Knlghtley. I will say that
for you. "
He seemed hardly to hear her ; he was thoughtful,
and, in a manner which showed him not pleased, soon
afterwards said —
" So you have been settling that I should marry Jane
Fairfax ? "
" No, indeed, I have not. You have scolded me too
much for match-making for me to presume to take such
a liberty with you. What I said just now meant
notliing. One says those sort of things, of course, with-
out any idea of a serious meaning. Oh ! no ; upon my
word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying
Jane Fairfax, or Jane anybody. You would not come
in and sit with us in this comfortable way if you were
married. "
Mr Knightley was thoughtful again. The result of
his reverie was — " No, Emma, I do not think the
extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by
surprize. I never had a thought of her in that way, i
assure you. "
And soon afterwards, " Jane Fairfax is a very charm-
ing young woman — but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect
She has a fault. She has not the open temper which a
man would wish for in a wife. "
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a
fault.
" Well, " said she, " and you soon silenced Mr Cole,
I suppose ? "
" Yes, very soon. He gave me a quiet hint ; I told
him he was mistaken ; he asked my pardon, and said no
more. Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than
his neighbours. "
** In that respect how unlike dear Mrs Elton, who
wants to be wiser and wittier than all the world ! I
wonder how she speaks of the Coles — what she calls
Emma 297
them. How can she find any appellation for them,
deep enough in familiar vulgarity ? She calls you
Knightley ; what can she do for Mr Cole ? And so
I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her
civilities, and consents to be with her. Mrs Weston,
your argument weighs most with me. I can much more
readily enter into the temptation of getting away from
Miss Bates, than I can believe in the triumph of Miss
Fairfax's mind over Mrs Elton. I have no faith in
Mrs Elton's acknowledging herself the inferior in
thought, word, or deed ; or in her being under any
restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good breeding.
I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insult-
ing her visitor with praise, encouragement, and offers of
service ; that she will not be continually detailing her
magnificent intentions, from the procuring her a per-
manent situation to the including her in those delightful
exploring parties, which are to take place in the barouche-
landau. "
" Jane Fairfax has feeling, " said Mr Knightley ; " I
do not accuse her of want of feeling. Her sensibilities, I
suspect, are strong, and her temper excellent in its power
of forbearance, patience, self-controul ; but it wants
openness. She is reserved ; more reserved, I think,
than she used to be : and I love an open temper. No ;
till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment, it had never
entered my head. I saw Jane Fairfax, and conversed
with her, with admiration and pleasure always ; but
with no thought beyond. "
" Well, Mrs Weston, " said Emma, triumphantly,
when he left them, " what do you say now to Mr
Knightley's marr5ring Jane Faiifax ? "
" Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very
much occupied by the idea of not being in love with her,
that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being
so at last. Do not beat me. "
298
Emma
Cl)apter m^JV.
EVERYBODY in and about Highbury, who had
ever visited Mr Elton, was disposed to pay him
attention on his marriage. Dinner parties and
evening parties were made for him and his lady ; and
invitations flowed in so fast that she had soon the
pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a dis-
engaged day.
" I see how it is, " snid she ; " I see what a life I am
to lead among you. Upon my word we shall be abso-
lutely dissipated We really seem quite the fashion. If
this is living in the country, it is nothing very formid-
able. From Monday next to Saturday 1 assure you
we have not a disengaged day i A woman with fewer
resources than I have need not have been at a loss. "
No invitation came amiss to her. Her Bath habits
made evening parties perfectly natural to her, and Maple
Grove had given her a taste for dinners. She was a
litde shocked at the want of two drawing-rooms, at the
poor attempt at rout-cakes, and there being no ice in
the Highbury card-paities. Mrs Bates, Mrs Perry, Mrs
Goddard, and others, were a good deal behindhand in
knowledge of the world, but she would soon show
them how everything ought to be arranged. In the
course of the spring she must return their civilities by
one very superior party ; in which her card-tables should
be set out with their separate candles and unbroken
packs in the true style, and more waiters engaged for
the evening than their own establishment could furnish,
to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper
hour, and in the proper order.
Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied
without a dinner at Hartfield for the Eltons. They
must not do less than others, or she should be exposed
Emma 299
to odious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful
resentment. A dinner there must be. After Emma
had talked about it for ten minutes, Mr Woodhouse
felt no unwillingness, and only made the usual stipula-
tion of not sitting at the bottom of the table himself,
with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who should
do it for him.
The persons to be invited required little thought.
Besides the Eltons, it must be the Westons and Mi
Knightley ; so far it was all of course : and it was
hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be
asked to make the eighth ; but this invitation was not
given with equal satisfaction, and, on many accounts,
Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet's begging
to be allowed to decline it. " She would rather not be
in his company more than she could help. She was
not yet quite able to see him and his channing happy
wife together, without feeling, uncomfortable. If Miss
Woodhouse would not be displeased, she would rather
stay at home. " It was precisely what Emma would
have wished, had she deemed it possible enough for
wishing. She was delighted with the fortitude of her
little friend — for fortitude she knew it was in her to
give up being in company, and stay at home ; and she
could now invite the very person whom she really wanted
to make the eighth, Jane Fairfax. Since her last con-
veisation with Mrs Weston and Mr Knightley, she was
more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she
had often been. Mr Knightley's words dwelt with her.
He had said that Jane Fairfax received attentions from
Mrs Elton which nobody else paid her.
" This is very true, " said she, " at least as far as
relates to me, which was all that was meant, and it is
very shameful. Of the same age, and always knowing
her, I ought to have been more her friend. She will
never like me now. I have neglected her too long.
300 Emma
But I will show her greater attention than I Iiave
done. "
Every invitation was successful. They were all dis-
engaged and all happy. The preparatory interest of
this dinner, however, was not yet over. A circum-
stance rather unlucky occurred. The two eldest little
Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and
aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring and their papa
now proposed bringing them, and staying one whole day
at Hartfield — which one day would be the very day of
this party. His professional engagements did not allow
of his being put off, but both father and daughter were
disturbed by its happening so. Mr Woodhouse con-
sidered eight persons at dinner together as the utmost
that his nerves could bear — and here would be a ninth
— and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninth very
much out of humour, at not being able to come even to
Hartfield for forty-eight hours, without falling in with
a dinner party.
She comforted her father better than she could com-
fort herself, by representing that though he certainly
would make them nine, yet he always said so little,
that the increase of noise would be very immaterial.
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself, to
have him, with his grave looks and reluctant conversa-
tion, opposed to her instead of his brother.
The event was more favourable to Mr Woodhouse
than to Emma. John Knightley came ; but Mr
Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town, and
must be absent on the very day. He might be able to
join them in the evening, but certainly not to dinner.
Mr Woodhouse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him
so, with the arrival of the little boys, and the philo-
sophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate,
removed the chief of even Emma's vexation.
The day came, the party were punctually assembled,
Emma 301
and Mr John Knightley seemed early to devote himself
to the business of being agreeable. Instead of drawing
his brother off to a window while they waited for
dinner, he was talking to Miss Fairfax. Mrs Elton,
as elegant as lace and pearls could make her, he looked
at in silence — wanting only to observe enough for
Isabella's informdtion — but Miss Fairfax was an old
acquaintance and a quiet girl, and he could talk to her.
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning
from a walk with his little boys, when it had been just
beginning to rain. It was natural to have some civil
hopes on the subject, and he said —
" I hope you did not venture far. Miss Fairfax,
this morning, or I am sure you must have been wet.
IVe scarcely got home in time. I hope you turned
directly. "
" I went only to the post-office, " said she, " and
reached home before the rain was much. It is my
daily errand. I always fetch the letters when I am
here. It saves trouble, and is a something to get me
out. A walk before breakfast does me good. "
" Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine. "
" No ; but it did not absolutely rain when I set
out. "
Mr John Knightley smiled, and replied — -
" That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for
you were not six yards from your own door when I
had the pleasure of meeting you ; and Heniy and John
had seen more drops than they could count long befoie.
The post-office has a great charm at one period of our
lives. When you have lived to my age, you will begin
to think letters are never worth going through the rain
for. "
There was a little blush, and then this answer —
" I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in
the midst of every dearest connection, and therefore I
002 Emma
cannot expect that simply growing older should make me
indifferent about letters. "
" Indifferent ! Oh no — I never conceived you
could become indifferent. Letters are no matters of
indifference ; they are generally a very positive curse. "
" You are speaking of letters of business ; mine are
letters of friendship. "
" I have often thought them the worst of the two, "
replied he, coolly. " Business you know, may bring
money, but friendship hardly ever does, "
" Ah ! you are not serious now. I know Mr John
Knightley too well — I am very sure he understands the
value of friendship as well as anybody. I can easily
believe that letters are very little to you, much less than
to me ; but it is not your being ten years older than
myself which makes the difference ; it is not age, but
situation. You have everybody dearest to you always
at hand, I, probably, never shall again ; and therefore,
till I have outlived all my affections, a post-office, I
think, must always have pov/er to draw me out, in worse
weather than to-day. "
" When I talked of your being altered by time, by the
progress of years, " said John Knightley, " I meant to
imply the change of situation which time usually brings.
I consider one as including the other. Time will gener-
ally lessen the interest of every attachment not within
the daily circle — but that is not the change I had in
view for you. As an old friend, you will allow me to
hope. Miss Fairfax, that ten years hence you may have
as many concentrated objects as I have. "
It was kindly said, and veiy far from giving offence.
A pleasant " thank you " seemed meant to laugh it oft ;
but a blush, a quivering lip, a tear in the eye, showed
that it was felt beyond a laugh. Her attention was
now claimed by Mr AVoodhouse, who being, according
to his custom on such occasions, making the circle
Emma 303
of his guests, and paying his particular compliments to
the ladies, was ending with her — and with all his
mildest urbanity, said —
" I am very sorry to hear. Miss Fairfax, of your
being out this morning in the rain. Young ladies
should take care of themselves. Young ladies are
delicate plants. They should take care of their health
and their complexion. My dear, did you change your
stockings ? "
" Yes, sir, I did indeed ; and I am very much
obliged by your kind solicitude about me. "
" My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure
to be cared for. — I hope your good grandmamma and
aunt are well. Tliey are some of my very old friends.
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour.
You do us a great deal of honour to-day, I am sure.
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your
goodness, and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you
at Hartfield. "
The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit
down and feel that he had done his duty, and made
every fair lady welcome and easy.
By this time the walk in the rain had reached Mrs
Elton, and her remonstrances now opened upon Jane.
" My dear Jane, v/hat is this I hear ? — Going to the
post-office in the rain ! — This must not be, I assure you.
You sad girl, how could you do such a thing ? It is a
sign I was not there to take care of you. "
Jane very patiently assured her that she had not
caught any cold.
" Oh ! do not tell me. You really are a very sad
girl, and do not know how to take care of yourself.
To the post-office indeed ! Mrs Weston, did you evei
aear the like ? You and I must positively exert our
authority. "
" My advice, " said Mrs [Weston,] kindly and
OQA Emma
persuasively, " I certainly do feel tempted to give. —
Miss Fairfax, you must not run such risks. Liable as
you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought to be
particularly careful, especially at this time of year. The
spring I always think requires more than common care.
Better wait an hour or two., or even half a day for your
letters, than run the risk of bringing on your cough
again. Now do not you feel that you had ? Yes, I
am sure you are much too reasonable. You look as if
you would not do such a thing again. "
" Oh ! she shall not do such a thing again, " eagerly
rejoined Mrs Elton. " We will not allow her to do
such a thing again : " — and nodding significantly —
" there must be some arrangement made, there must
indeed. I shall speak to Mr E. The man who fetches
our letters every morning (one of our men, I forget his
name) shall inquire for yours too and bring them to you.
That will obviate all difficulties, you know ; and from
us I really think, my dear Jane, you can have no scruple
to accept such an accommodation.
" You are extremely kind, " said Jane ; " but I can-
not give up my early walk. I am advised to be out
of doors as much as I can ; I must walk somewhere,
and the post-office is an object ; and, upon my word,
I have scarcely ever had a bad morning before. "
" My dear Jane, say no more about it. The thing
is determined, that is " (laughing affectedly) " as far as I
can presume to determine anything without the concur-
rence of my lord and master. You know, Mrs Weston,
you and I must be cautious how we express ourselves.
But I do flatter myself, my dear Jane, that my influence
is not entirely worn out. If I meet with no insuperable
difficulties, therefore, consider that point as settled. "
" Excuse me, " said Jane earnestly, " I cannot by
any means consent to such an arrangement, so needlessly
troublesome to your servant. If the errand were not a
Emma 305
pleasure to me, it could be done, as it always is wnen 1
am not here, by my grandmamma's "
" Oh ! my dear ; but so much as Patty has to do ! —
And it is a kindness to employ our men. "
Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered ;
but, instead of answering, she began speaking again to
Mr John Knightley.
" The post-office is a wonderful establishment ! "
said she. " The regularity and dispatch of it ! If one
thinks of all that it has to do, and all that it does so
well, it is really astonishing ! "
" It is certainly veiy well regulated. "
" So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears !
So seldom that a letter, among the thousands that are
constantly passing about the kingdom, is even carried
wrong — and not one in a million, I suppose, actually
lost ! And when one considers the variety of hands,
and of bad hands too, that are to be deciphered, it
increases the wonder. "
" The clerks grow expert from habit. They must
begin with some quickness of sight and hand, and
exercise improves them. If you want any further ex-
planation, " continued he, smiling, " they are paid for it.
That is the key to a great deal of capacity. The public
pays and must be served well. "
The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of,
and the usual observations made.
" I have heard it asserted, " said John Knightley,
" that the same sort of handwriting often prevails in a
family ; and where the same master teaches, it is natural
enough. But for that reason, I should imagine the
likeness must be chiefly confined to the females, for
boys have very little teaching after an early age, and
scramble into any hand they can get. Isabella and
Emma, I think, do write very much alike. I have not
always known their writing apart. "
" Yes, " said his brother, hesitatingly ; " there is a
3o6 Emma
likeness. I know what you mean — but Emma's hand
is the strongest. "
" Isabella and Emma both write beautifully, " said
Mr Woodhouse ; " and always did. And so does poor
Mrs Weston " — with half a sigh and half a smile at her.
" I never saw any gentleman's handwriting " — Emnisi
began, looking also at Mrs Weston ; but stopped, on
perceiving that Mrs Weston was attending to some one
else — and the pause gave her time to reflect. " Now,
how am I going to introduce him ? — Am I unequal to
speaking his name at once before all these people ? Is it
necessary for me to use any roundabout phrase? — Your
Yorkshire friend — your correspondent in Yorkshire ; —
that would be the way, I suppose, if I were very bad.
No, I can pronounce his name without the smallest dis-
tress. I certainly get better and better. — Now for it. "
Mrs Weston was disengaged, and Emma began again
— " Mr Frank Churchill writes one of the best gentle-
man's hands I ever saw. "
" I do not admire it, " said Mr Knightley. " It is too
small — wants strength. It is like a woman's writing. "
This was not submitted to by either lady They
vindicated him against the base aspersion. " No,
it by no means wanted strength — it was not a large
hand, but very clear, and certainly strong. Had not
Mrs Weston any letter about her to produce ? " No, she
had heard from him very lately, but having answered
the letter, had put it away.
" If we were in the other room, " said Emma — " If
I had my writing-desk, I am sure I could produce a
specimen. I have a note of his — Do not you remem-
ber, Mrs Weston, employing him to write for you one
day ? "
" He chose to say he was employed. "
" Well, well, I have that note ; and can show it after
dinner to convince Mr Knightley. "
Emma
307
" Oh ! when a gallant young man, like Mr Frank
Churchill, " said Mr Knightley drily, " writes to a fair
lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will, of course, put forth
his best. "
Dinner was on table. Mrs Elton, before she could
be spoken to, was ready ; and before Mr Woodhouse
had reached her, with his request to be allowed to hand
her into the dining-parlour, was saying —
" Must I go first ? I really am ashamed of always
leading the way. "
Jane's solicitude about fetching her own letters had not
escaped Emma. She had heard and seen it all ; and
felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of
this morning had produced any. She suspected that it
had; that it would not have been so resolutely encoun-
tered but in full expectation of hearing from some one
very dear, and that it had not been in vain. She
thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual
— a glow both of complexion and spirits.
She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the
expedition and the expense of the Irish mails ; — it was
at her tongue's end — but she abstained. She was quite
determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane
Fairfax's feelings : and they followed the other ladies
out of the room, arm-in-arm, with an appearance of
good-will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of
each.
Cl^aptcr %%%V*
WHEN the ladies returned to the drawing-room
after dinner, Emma found it hardly possible
to prevent their making two distinct parties ;
— with so much perseverance in judging and behaving
ill did Mrs Elton engross Jane Fairfax and slight her-
3o8
Emma
self. She and Mrs Weston were obliged to be almost
always either talking together or silent together. Mrs
Elton left them no choice. If Jane repressed her for
a little time she soon began again ; and though much
that passed between them was in a half-whisper, especi-
ally on Mrs Elton's side, there was no avoiding a know-
ledge of their principal subjects : — the post-office —
catching cold — fetching letters — and friendship, were
long under discussion ; and to them succeeded one
which must be at least equally unpleasant to Jane —
inquiries whether she had yet heard of any situation
likely to suit her, and professions of Mrs Elton's
meditated activity.
" Here is April come, " said she ; " I get quite
anxious about you. June will soon be here. "
" But I have never fixed on June or any other
month — merely looked forward to the summer in
general. "
" But have you really heard of nothing ? "
" I have not even made any inquiry ; I do not wish
to make any yet. "
" Oh ! my dear, we cannot begin too early ; you are
not aware of the difficulty of procuring exactly the
desirable thing. "
" I not aware ! " said Jane, shaking her head ; " dear
Mrs Elton, who can have thought of it as I have done ? "
" But you have not seen so much of the world as I
have. You do not know how many candidates there
always are for thcjirst situations. I saw a vast deal of
that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. A
cousin of Mr Suckling, Mrs Bragge, had such an
infinity of applications ; everybody was anxious to be
in her family, for she moves in the first circle. Wax-
candles in the school-room ! You may imagine how
desirable ! Of all houses in the kingdom, Mrs Bragge's
is the one I would most v/ish to see you in. "
Emma 309
" Colonel and Mrs Campbell are to be in town again
by midsummer, " said Jane, " I must spend some time
with them ; I am sure they will want it ; — afterwards
I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. But I
would not wish you to take the trouble of making any
inquiries at present. "
" Trouble ! aye, I know your scruples. You are
afraid of giving me trouble ; but I assure you, my dear
Jane, the Campbells can hardly be more interested about
you than I am. I shall write to Mrs Partridge in a
day or two, and shall give her a strict charge to be on
the look-out for anything eligible. "
" Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention
the subject to her ; till the time draws nearer, I do not
wish to be giving anybody trouble. "
" But, my dear child, the time is drawing near ; here
is April, and June, or say even July, is very near, with
such business to accomplish before us. Your inexperi-
ence really amuses me ! A situation such as you
deserve, and your friends would require for you, is
no everyday occurrence, is not obtained at a moment's
notice ; indeed, indeed, we must begin inquiring
directly. "
" Excuse me, ma'am, but this is by no means my in-
tention ; I make no inquiiy myself, and should be sorry
to have any made by my friends. When I am quite
detennined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of
being long unemployed. There are places in town,
offices, where inquiry would soon produce something —
offices for the sale, not quite of human flesh, but of
human intellect. "
" Oh ! my dear, human flesh ! You quite shock
me ; if you mean a fling at the slave trade, I assure
you Mr Suckling was always rather a friend to the
abolition. "
" I did not mean — I was not thinking of the slave-
3IO
Emma
trade, " replied Jane ; *♦ governess-trade, I assure you,
was all that I had in view ; widely different, certainly,
as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the
greater misery of the victims, I do not know where it
lies. But I only mean to say that there are advertising
offices, and that by applying to them I should have no
doubt of very soon meeting with something that would
do. "
" Something that would do ! " repeated Mrs Elton.
" Aye, that may suit your humble ideas of yourself ; — I
know what a modest creature you are ; but it will not
satisfy your friends to have you taking up with anything
that may offer, any inferior commonplace situation, in a
family not moving in a certain circle, or able to command
the elegancies of life. "
" You are very obliging ; but as to all that I am veiy
indifferent ; it would be no object to me to be with the
rich ; my mortifications, 1 think, would only be the
greater ; I should suffer more from comparison. A
gentleman's family is all that I should condition for. "
" I know you, I know you ; you would take up with
anything ; but I shall be a little more nice, and I an)
sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side ; with
your superior talents, you have a right to move in the
first circle. Your musical knowledge alone would en-
title you to name your own terms, have as many rooms
as you like, and mix in the family as much as you
chose ; — that is — I do not know — if you knew the
harp, you might do all that, I am very sure ; but you
sing as well as play ; yes, I really believe you might,
even without the harp, stipulate for what you chose ;
— and you must and shall be delightfully, honourably,
and comfortably settled before the Campbells or I have
any rest. "
" You may well class the delight, the honour, and
the comfort of such a situation together, " said Jane,
Emma 311
" they are pretty sure to be equal ; however, I am very
serious in not wishing anything to be attempted at
present for me. I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs
Elton ; I am obliged to anybody who feels for me, but
I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the
summer. For two or three months longer I shall
remain where I am, and as I am. "
" And I am quite serious too, I assure you, " replied
Mrs Elton, gaily, " in resolving to be always on the
watch, and employing my friends to watch also, that
nothing really unexceptionable may pass us. "
In this style she ran on ; never thoroughly stopped
by anything till Mr Woodhouse came into the room ;
her vanity had then a change of object, and Emma
heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane —
*♦ Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest !
— Only think of his gallantry in coming away before
the other men ! — what a dear creature he is ! — I assure
you I like him excessively. I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness ; it is much more to my taste
than modern ease ; modern ease often disgusts me. But
this good old Mr Woodliouse, I wish you had heard
his gallant speeches to me at dinner. Oh ! I assure you
I began to think my cara sposa would be absolutely
jealous. I fancy I am rather a favourite ; he took
notice of my gown. How do you like it ? — Selina's
choice — handsome, I think, but I do not know whether
it is not over-trirr.med ; I have the greatest dislike to
the idea of being over-trimmed ; — quite a horror of
finery. I must put on a tew ornaments noiv, because it
is expected of me. A bride, you know, must appear
like a bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity ; a
simple style of dress is so infinitely preferable to finery.
But I am quite in the minority, I believe ; few people
seem to value simplicity of dress — show and finery are
everything. I have some notion of putting such a
312 Emma
trimming as this to my white and silver poplin. Do
you think it will look well ? "
The whole party were but just re-assembled in the
drawing-room, when Mr Weston made his appearance
among them. He had returned to a late dinner, and
walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over. He had
been too much expected by the best judges, for surprize
— but there was great joy. Mr Woodhouse was almost
as glad to see him now, as he would have been sorry to
see him before. John Knightley only was in mute as-
tonishment. That a man who might have spent his
evening quietly at home after a day of business in Lon-
don should set off again, and walk half a mile to another
man's house for the sake of being in mixed company till
bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility and
the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him
deeply. A man who had been in motion since eight
o'clock in the morning, and might now have been still
— who had been long talking, and might have been silent
— who had been in more than one crowd, and might
have been alone ! — Such a man to quit the tranquillity
and independence of his own fireside, and on the even-
ing of a cold sleety April day rush out again into the
world! — Could he, by a touch of his finger, have
instandy taken back his wife, there would have been a
motive ; but his coming would probably prolong rather
than break up the party. John Knightley looked at
him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and
said, " I coidd not have believed it even of him. "
Mr Weston, meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of
the indignation he was exciting, happy and cheerful as
usual, and with all the right of being principal talker,
which a day spent anyAvhere from home confers, was
making himself agreeable among the rest ; and having
satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinner, con-
vincing her that none of all her careful directions to tlie
Emma 313
seivants had been forgotten, and spread abroad what
public news he had heard, was proceeding to a family
communication, which, though principally addressed to
Mrs Weston, he had not the smallest doubt of being
highly interesting to everybody in the room. He gave
her a letter — it was from Frank, and to herself; he had
met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of
opening it.
" Read it, read it, " said he — " it will give you pleas-
ure ; only a few lines — will not take you long ; read it
to Emma. "
The two ladies looked over it together ; and he sat
smiling and talking to them the whole time, in a voice a
little subdued, but very audible to everybody.
" Well, he is coming, you see ; good news, I think.
Well, what do you say to it ? I always told you he
would be here again soon, did not 1 ? Anne, my dear,
did not I always tell you so, and you would not believe
me ? In town next week, you see — at the latest, I
dare say ; for she is as impatient as the black gentleman
when anything is to be done ; most likely they will be
there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her illness, ail
nothing, of course. But it is an excellent thing to have
Frank among us again, so near as town. They will
stay a good while when they do come, and he will be
half his time with us. This is precisely what I wanted.
Well, pretty good news, is not it ? Have you finished
it ? Has Emma read it all ? Put it up, put it up ; we
will have a good talk about it some other time, but it
will not do now. I shall only just mention the circum-
stance to the others in a common way. "
Mrs Weston was most comfortably pleased on the
occasion. Her looks and words had nothing to restrain
them. She was happy, she knew she was happy, and
knew she ought to be happy. Her congratulations
were warm and open ; but Emma could not speak so
314 Emma
fluently. She was a little occupied in weighing her owp
feelings, and trying to understand the degree of her
agitation, which she rather thought was considerable.
Mr Weston, however, too eager to be very observant,
too communicative to want others to talk, was veiy well
satisfied with what she did say, and soon moved away
to make the rest of his friends happy, by a partial com-
munication of what the whole room must have over-
heard already.
It was well that he took everybody's joy for granted,
or he might not have thought either Mr Woodhouse or
Mr Knightley particularly delighted. They were the
first entitled, after Mrs Weston and Emma, to be made
happy. From them he would have proceeded to Miss
Fairfax ; but she was so deep in conversation with John
Knightley, that it would have been too positive an
interruption ; and, finding himself close to Mrs Elton,
and her attention disengaged, he necessarily began on
the subject with her.
Cljaptet %%%Vy*
I HOPE I shall soon have the pleasure of introduc-
ing my son to you, " said Mr Weston.
Mrs Elton, very willing to suppose a particular
compliment intended her by such a hope, smiled most
graciously.
" You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I
presume, " he continued, " and know him to be my son,
though he does not bear my name. "
* < Oh, yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaint-
ance. I am sure Mr Elton will lose no time in calling
on him ; and we shall both have great pleasure in see-
ing him at the Vicarage. "
Emma 315
" You are very obliging. Frank will be extremely
happy, I am suie. He is to be in town next week, if
not sooner. We have notice of it in a letter to-day.
I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing
my son's hand, presumed to open it, though it was not
directed to me — it was to Mrs Weston. She is his
principal correspondent, I assure you. I hardly ever
get a letter. "
" And so you absolutely opened what was directed
to her! Oh, Mr Weston " (laughing affectedly), " I
must protest against that. A most dangerous preced-
ent indeed ! I beg you will not let your neighbours
follow your example. Upon my word, if this is what
I am to expect, we married women must begin to exert
ourselves. Oh, Mr Weston, I could not have believed
it of you ! "
" Aye, we men are sad fellows. You must take care
of yourself, Mrs Elton. This letter tells us — it is a
short letter, written in a hurry, merely to give us notice
— it tells us that they are all coming up to town directly,
on Mrs Churchill's account ! she has not been well the
whole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her ; so
they are all to move southward without loss of time. "
" Indeed ! from Yorkshire, I think. Enscombe is
in Yorkshire ? "
" Yes, they are about 190 miles from London: a
considerable journey. "
" Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Sixty-five
miles farther than from Maple Grove to London. But
what is distance, Mr Weston, to people ef large for-
tune ? You would be amazed to hear how rriy brother,
Mr Suckling, sometimes flies about. You will hardly
believe me, but twice in one week he and Mr Bragge
went to London and back again with four horses. "
" The evil of the distance from Enscombe, " said Mr
Weston, " is. that Mrs Churchill, us ive understand,
3i6 Emma
has not been able to leave the sopha for a week to-
gethej. In Frank's last letter she complained, he said,
of being too v/eak to get into her conservatory without
having both his arm and his uncle's. This, you know,
speaks a great degree of weakness ; but now she is so im-
patient to be in town, that she means to sleep only two
nights on the road — so Frank writes word. Certainly,
delicate ladies have very extraordinaiy constitutions,
Mrs Elton ; you must grant me thaL "
" No, indeed, I shall grant you nothing. I always
take the part of my own sex ; I do, indeed. I give
you notice, you will find me a formidable antagonist on
that point. I always stand up for women ; and 1
assure you, if you knew how Selina feels with respect
to sleeping at aa inn, you would not wonder at Mrs
Churchill's making incredible exertions to avoid it.
Selina says it is quite horror to her ; and I believe I
have caught a little of her nicety. She always travels
with her own sheets ; an excellent precaution. Does
Mrs Churchill do the same ? "
" Depend upon it, Mrs Churchill does everything
that any other fine lady ever did. Mrs Churchill v/ill
not be second to any lady in the land for "
Mrs Elton eagerly interposed with —
" Oh, Mr Weston, do not mistake me. Selina is no
fine lady, I assure you. Do not run away with such an
idea. "
" Is not she ? Then she is no rule for Mrs
Churchill, who is as thorough a fine lady as anybody
ever beheld. "
Mrs Elton began to think she had been wrong in
disclaiming so warmly. It was by no means her object
to have it believed that her sister was not a fine lady ;
perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it ;
and she was considering in what way she had best
retract, when Mr Weston went on.
Emma
317
" Mrs Churchill is not much in my good graces, a &
you may suspect ; but this is quite between ourselves.
She is very fond of Frank, and therefore I would not
speak ill of her. Besides, she is out of health now ; but
that indeed, by her own account, she has always been.
1 would not say so to everj^body, Mrs Elton ; but 1
have not much faith in Mrs Churchill's illness. "
" If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr
Weston ? To Bath, or to Clifton ? "
" She has taken it into her head that Enscombe ii
too cold for her. The fact is, I suppose, that she is
tired of Enscombe. She has now been a longer time
stationary there than she ever was before, and she begins
to want change. It is a retired place. A fine place,
but very retired. "
" Aye, like Maple Grove, I dare say. Nothing
can stand more retired from the road than Maple
Grove. Such an immense plantation all round it !
You seem shut out from everything — in the most com-
plete retirement. And Mrs Churchill probably has not
health or spirits like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclu-
sion. Or, perhaps, she may not have resources enough
in herself to be qualified for a country life. I always
say a woman cannot have too many resources — and I
feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be
quite independent of society. "
" Frank was here in February for a fortnight. "
" So I remember to have heard. He will find an
addition to the society of Highbury when he comes
again ; that is, if I may presume to call myself an addi-
tion. But perhaps he may never have heard of there
being such a creature in the world. "
This was too loud a call for a compliment to be
passed by, and Mr Weston, with a very good grace^
immediately exclaimed —
" My dear madaip -• Nobody but yourself could
31 8 Emma
imagine such a thing possible. Not heard of you ! I
believe Mrs Weston's letters lately have been full of
very little else than Mrs Elton. "
He had done his duty, and could return to his son.
" When Frank left us, " continued he, " it was quite
uncertain when we might see him again, which makes
this day's news doubly welcome. It has been com-
pletely unexpected. That is, / always had a strong
persuasion he would be here again soon ; I was sure
something favourable would turn up — but nobody be-
lieved me. He and Mrs Wrston were both dreadfully
desponding.'How could he contrive to come ? And
how could it be supposed that his uncle and aunt would
spare him again ?'and so forth. I always felt that some-
thing would happen in our favour, and so it has, you see.
I have observed, Mrs Elton, in the course of my life,
that if things are going untowardly one month, they an
sure to mend the next. "
" Very true, Mr Weston, perfectly true. It is jus
what I used to say to a certain gentlema i in company
in the days of courtship, when, because things did not
go quite right — did not proceed with all the rapidity
which suited his feelings — he was apt to be in despair,
and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be
May before Hymen's saffron robe would be put on for
us ! Oh ! the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy
ideas, and give him cheerfuller views ! The carriage —
we had disappointments about the carriage — one morning,
I remember, he came to me quite in despair. "
She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr
Weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on.
" You were mentioning May. May is the very
month which Mrs Churchill is ordered, or has ordered
herself, to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe
— in short, to spend in London ; so that we have the
agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank, the
whole spring — precisely the season of the yeai which
Emma 319
one should have chosen for it : days almost at the
longest : weather genial and pleasant, always inviting
one out, and never too hot for exercise. When he was
here before, we made the best of it : but there was a
good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather ; there always
is in February, you know ; and we could not do half
that we intended. Now will be the time. This will
be complete enjoyment ; and I do not know, Mrs Elton,
whether the uncertainty of our meetings, the sort of
constant expectation there will be of his coming in
to-day or to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more
friendly to happiness than having him actually in the
house. I think it is so. I think it is the state of mind
which gives most spirit and delight. I hope you will
be pleased with my sou ; but you must not expect a
prodigy. He is generally thought a fine young man,
but do not expect a prodigy. Mrs Weston's paitiality
for him is very great, and, as you may suppose, most
gratifpng to me. She thinks nobody equal to him. "
" And I assure you, Mr Weston, I have very little
doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour.
I have heard so much in praise of Mr Frank Churchill.
At the same time, it is fair to observe, that I am one of
those who always judge for themselves, and are by no
means implicitly guided by others. I give you notice,
that as I find your son, so I shall judge of him. I am
no flatterer. "
Mr Weston was musing.
" I hope, " said he, presently, " I have not been severe
upon poor Mrs Churchill. If she is ill, I should be
sorry to do her injustice ; but there are some traits in
her character which make it difficult for me to speak of
her with the forbearance 1 could wish. You cannot be
ignorant, Mrs Elton, of my connection with the family,
nor of the treatment I have met with ; and, between
ourselves, the whole blana« of it is to be laid to her.
320 Emma
She was the instigator. Frank's mother would never
have been slighted as she was but for her. Mr Churchill
has pride ; but his pride is nothing to his wife's ; his is
a quiet, indolent, gentleman-like sort of pride, that would
harm nobody, and only make himself a little helpless
and tiresome ; but her pride is arrogance and insolence.
And what inclines one less to bear, she has no fair
pretence of family or blood. She was nobody when he
married her, barely the daughter of a gentleman ; but
ever since her being turned into a Churchill, she has
out-Churchill'd them all in high and mighty claims ;
but in herself, I assure you, she is an upstart. "
" Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking !
I have quite a horror of upstarts. Maple Grove has
given me a thorough disgust to people of that sort ; for
there is a family in that neighbourhood who are such an
annoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they
give themselves ! Your description of Mrs Churchill
made me think of them directly. People of the name
of Tupman, veiy lately settled there, and encumbered
with many low connections, but giving themselves
immense airs, and expecting to be on a footing with
the old established families. A year and a half is the
very utmost that they can have lived at West Hall ;
and how they got their fortune nobody knows. They
came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise
much, you know, Mr Weston. One has not great
hopes from Birmingham. I always say there is some-
thing direful in the sound ; but nothing more is positively
known of the Tupmans, though a good many things, I
assure you, are suspected ; and yet by their manners
they evidently think themselves equal even to rr;y
brother, Mr Suckling, who happens to be one of their
nearest neighbours. It is infinitely too bad. Mr
Suckling, who has been eleven years a resident at Maple
Grove, and whose father had it before him — I believe.
Emma 321
at least — I am almost sure that old Mr Suckling had
completed the purchase before his death. "
They were interrupted. Tea was carrying round,
and Mr Weston, having said all that he wanted, soon
took the opportunity of walking [away].
After tea, Mr and Mrs Weston, and Mr Elton, sat
down with Mr Woodhouse to cards. The remaining
five were left to their own powers, and Emma doubted
their getting on very well ; for Mr Knightley seemed
little disposed for conversation ; Mrs Elton was wanting
notice, which nobody had inclination to pay, and she
was herself in a wony of spirits which would have
made her prefer being silent.
Mr John Knightley proved more talkative than his
brother. He was to leave them early the next day ;
and he soon began with —
" Well, Emma, I do not believe I have anything
more to say about the boys ; but you have your sister's
letter, and everything is down at full length there,
we may be sure. My charge would be much more
concise than hers, and probably not much in the same
spirit ; all that I have to recommend being comprised
in — Do not spoil them, and do not physic them. "
" I rather hope to satisfy you both, " said Emma ;
" for I shall do all in my power to make them happy,
which will be enough for Isabella ; and happiness must
preclude false indulgence and physic. "
" And if you find them troublesome, you must send
diem home again. "
" That is very likely. You diink so, do not you ? "
" I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for
your father ; or even may be some incumbrance to you,
if your visiting engagements continue to increase as much
as they have done lately. "
" Increase ! "
" Certainly , you must be sensible that the last
M
322 Emma
half-year has made a great difference m your way of
life. "
" Difference ! No, indeed, I am not. "
" There can be no doubt of your being much more
engaged with company than you used to be. Witness
this very time. Here am I come down for only one
day, and you are engaged with a dinner-party ! When
did it happen before, or anything like it ? Your
neighbourhood is increasing, and you mix more with it.
A little while ago, every letter to Isabella brought an
account of fresh gaieties ; dinners at Mr Cole's, or
balls at the Crown. The difference which Randalls,
Randalls alone, makes in your goings on is very
great. "
" Yes, " said his brother, quickly, " it is Randalls
that does it all. "
" Very well ; and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely
to have less influence than heretofore, it strikes me as a
possible thing, Emma, that Henry and John may be
sometimes in the way. And if they are, I only beg
you to send them home. "
" No, " cried Mr Knightley ; " that need not be the
consequence. Let them be sent to Donwell. I shall
certainly be at leisure. "
" Upon my word, " exclaimed Emma, " you amuse
me ! I should like to know how many of all my
numerous engagements take place without your being of
the party ; and why I am to be supposed in danger
of wanting leisure to attend to the little boys. These
amazing engagements of mine — what have they been :
Dining once with the Coles, and having a ball talked of,
which never took place. I can understand you " —
(nodding at Mr John Knightley) — " your good fortune
in meeting with so many of your friends at once here
delights you too much to pass unnoticed. — But you "
(turning to Mr Knightley), " who know how very, very
Emma 323
seldom I am ever two hours from Hartfield — why yot
should foresee such a series of dissipation for me, 1 can-
not imagine. And as to my dear little boys, I must
say, that if Aunt Emma has not time for them, I do
not think they would fare much better with Uncle
Knightley, who is absent from home about five hours
where she is absent one ; and who, when he is at home,
is either reading to himself or settling his accounts. "
Mr Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile ; and
succeeded without difficulty, upon Mrs Elton's begin-
ning to talk to him.
Cljaptet ^^^F3I3!.
n A VERY little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy
y~Y Emma as to the nature of her agitation on hear-
ing this news of Frank Churchill. She was soon
convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at
all apprehensive or embarrassed — it was for him. Her
own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing
— it was not worth thinking of; but if he, who had
undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of
the two, were to be returning with the same warmth of
sentiment which he had taken away, it would be very
distressing. If a separation of two months should not
have cooled him, there were dangers and evils before
her : caution for him and for herself would be necessary.
She did not mean to have her own affections entangled
again, and it would be incumbent on her to avoid any
encouragement of his.
She wished she might be able to [keep] him from an
absolute declaration. That would be so very painful a
conclusion of their present acquaintance ; and yet she
could not help rather anticipating something decisive.
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bring-
324 Emma
ing a crisis, an event, a something to alter her present
composed and tranquil state. \ V
It was not very long, though rather longer than Mr
Weston had foreseen, before she had the power of
forming some opinion of Frank Churchill's feelings.
The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon
as had been imagined, but he was at Highbury very soon
afterwards. He rode down for a couple of hours ; he
could not yet do more ; but as he came from Randalls
immediately to Hartfield, she could then exercise all
her quick, observation, and speedily determine how he
was influenced, and how she must act. They met with
the utmost friendliness. There could be no doubt of
his great pleasure in seeing her. But she had an almost
instant doubt of his caring for her as he had done, of
his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree.
She watched him well. It was a clear thing he was
less in love than he had been. Absence, with the con-
viction probably of her indifference, had produced this
very natural and very desirable effect.
He was in high spirits ; as ready to talk and laugh
as ever ; and seemed delighted to speak of his former
visit, and recur to old stories ; and he was not without
agitation. It was not in his calmness that she read his
comparative difference. He was not calm ; his spirits
were evidently fluttered ; there was restlessness about
him. Lively as he was, it seemed a liveliness that did
not satisfy himself; but what decided her belief on the
subject, was his staying only a quarter of an hour, and
hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury. " He
had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he
passed — he had not stopped, he would not stop for
more than a word — but he had the vanity to think they
would be disappointed if he did not call ; and, much as
he wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurry
ofl^. "
Emma 325
She had no doubt as to his behig less in love, but
neither his agitated spirits nor his hurrying away seemed
like a perfect cure ; and she was rather inclined to think
It implied a dread of her returning power, and a discreet
resolution of not trusting himself with her long.
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the
course of ten days. He was often hoping, intending to
come ; but was always prevented. His aunt could not
bear to have him leave her. Such was his own account
at Randalls. If he were quite sincere, if he really tried
to come, it was to be inferred that Mrs Churchill's
removal to London had been of no service to the wilful
or nervous part of her disorder. That she was really ill
was very certain ; he had declared himself convinced of
it, at Randalls. Though much might be fancy, he
could not doubt, when he looked back, that she was in
a weaker state of health than she had been half a year
ago. He did not believe it to proceed from anything
that care and medicine might not remove, or at least
that she might not have many years of existence before
her ; but he could not be prevailed on, by all his father's
doubts, to say that her complaints were merely imagin-
aiy, or that she was as strong as ever.
It soon appeared that London was not the place for
her. She could not endure its noise. Her nerves were
under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten
days'end, her nephew's letter to Randalls communicated
a change of plan. They were going to remove imme-
diately to Richmond. Mrs Churchill had been recom-
mended to the medical skill of an eminent person there,
and had otherwise a fancy for the place. A ready-
furnished house in a favourite spot was engaged, and
much benefit expected tVom the change.
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits
of this arrangement, and seemed most fully to appreciate
the blessing of having two months before him of such
326 Emma
near neighbourhood to many dear friends ; for the house
was taken for May and June. She was told that now
he wrote with the greatest confidence of being often
with them, almost as often as he could even wish.
Emma saw how Mr Weston understood these joyous
prospects. He was considering her as the source of all
the happiness they offered. She hoped it was not so.
Two months must bring it to the proof.
Mr Weston's own happiness was indisputable. Kc
was quite delighted. It was the veiy circumstance he
could have wished for. Now, it would be really having
Frank in their neighbourhood. What were nine miles
to a young man ? — An hour's ride. He would be
always coming over. The difference in that respect of
Richmond and London was enough to make the whole
difference of seeing him always and seeing him never.
Sixteen miles — nay, eighteen — it must be full eighteen
to Manchester Street — was a serious obstacle. Were
he ever able to get away, the day would be spent in
coming and returning. There was no comfort in having
him in London ; he might as well be at Enscombe ;
but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse.
Better than nearer !
One good thing was immediately brought to a cer-
tainty by this removal — the ball at the Crown. It had
not been forgotten before ; but it had been soon acknow-
ledged vain to attempt to fix a day. Now, however,
it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed ;
and very soon after the Churchills had removed to
Richmond, a few lines from Frank, to say that his aunt
felt already much better for the change, and that he had
no doubt of being able to join them for twenty-four
hours at any given time, induced them to name as early
a day as possible.
Mr Weston's ball was to be a real thing. A very
few to-morrows stood between the young people 0/
Highbury and happiness.
Emma 327
Mr Woodhouse was resigned. The time of year
lightened the evil to him. May was better for every-
thing than February. Mrs bates was engaged to spend
the evening at Hartfield ; James had due notice, and
he sanguinely hoped that neither dear little Henry nor
dear little John would have anything the matter with
them while dear Emma were gone
Cl)aptet ^^^F3I3I3I.
NO misfortune occurred again to prevent the ball.
The day approached, the day arrived ; and, after
a morning of some anxious watching, Frank
Churchill, in all the certainty of his own self, reached
Randalls before dinner; and everything was safe.
No second meeting had there yet been between him
and Emma. The room at the Crown wa? to witness
it ; but it would be better than a common meeting in a
crowd. Mr Weston had been so very earnest in his
entreaties for her early attendance, for her arriving there
as soon as possible after themselves, for the purpose of
taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort of
the rooms before any other persons came, that she could
not refuse him, and therefore must spend some quiet
interval in the young man's company. She was to con-
vey Harriet, and they drove to the Crown in good time,
the Randalls party just sufficiently before them.
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch ;
and though he did not say much, his eyes declared that
he meant to have a delightful evening. They all
walked about together, to see that everything was as it
should be ; and within a few minutes were joined by the
contents of another carriage, which Emma could not
hear the sound of at first without great surprise. " So
328 Emma
unreasonably early ! " she was going to exclaim ; but
jhe presently found that it was a family of old friends,
who were coming, like herself, by particular desire, to
help Mr Weston's judgment ; and they were so very
closely followed by another carriage of cousins, who had
been entreated to come early with the same distinguish-
ing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if
half the company might soon be collected together for
the purpose of preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste
on which Mr Weston depended, and felt that to be the
fiivourite and intimate of a man who had so many inti-
mates and confidantes, was not the very first distinction
in the scale of vanity. She liked his open manners,
but a little less of open-heartedness would have made
him a higher character. — General benevolence, but not
general friendship, made a man what he ought to be. —
She could fancy such a man.
The whole party walked about, and looked, and
praised again ; and then, having nothing else to do,
formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in
their various modes, till other subjects were started, that,
though May, a fire in the evening was still very
pleasant.
Emma found that it was not Mr Weston's fault that
the number of privy counsellors was not yet larger.
They had stopped at Mrs Bates's door to offer the use
of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be
brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily ; there
was a restlessness, which showed a mind not at ease.
He was looking about, he was going to the door, he
was watching for the sound of other carriages — impatient
*x) begin, or afraid of being always near her.
Mrs Elton was spoken of. " I think she must be
here soon, " said he. " I have a great curiosity to see
Emma 329
Mrs Elton, I have heard so much of her. It cannot
be long, 1 think, before she comes. "
A carriage was heard. He was on the move imme-
diately ; but coming back, said —
" I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her.
I have never seen either Mr or Mrs Elton. I have no
business to put myself forward. "
Mr and Mrs Elton appeared ; and all the smiles and
the proprieties passed.
*'But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax ! " said Mr
Weston, looking about. " We thought you were to
bring them. "
The mistake had been slight. The carriage was
sent for them now. Emma longed to know what
Frank's first opinion of Mrs Elton might be ; how he
was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and
her smiles of graciousness. He was immediately quali-
fying himself to form an opinion, by giving her very
proper attention, after the introduction had passed.
In a few minutes the carriage returned. — Somebody
talked of rain. — " I will see that there are umbrellas,
sir, " said Frank to his father:'Miss Bates must not
be forgotten ; " and away he went. Mr Weston was
following : but Mrs Elton detained him, to gratify him
by her opinion of his son ; and so briskly did she begin,
that the young man himself, though by no means moving
slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.
" A very fine young man, indeed, Mr Weston. You
know I candidly told you I should form my own
opinion ; and I am happy to say that I am extremely
pleased with him. You may believe me. I never
compliment. I think him a very handsome young man,
and his manners are precisely what I like and approve.
— so truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or
puppyism. You must know I have a vast dislike to
puppies — quite a horror of them. They were never
M 2
330 Emma
tolerated at Maple Grove. Neither Mr Suckling nor
me had ever any patience with tliem ; and we used
sometimes to say very cutting things. Selina, who is
mild almost to a fault, bore with them much better. "
While she talked of his son, Mr Weston's attention
was chained ; but when she got to Maple Grove, he
could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be
attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.
Mrs Elton turned to Mrs Weston. " I have no
doubt of its being our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane.
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !
I believe we drive faster than anybody. What a plea-
sure it is to send one's carriage for a friend ! I under-
stand you were so kind as to offer, but another time it
will be quite unnecessary. You may be very sure I
shall always take care of them. "
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two
gentlemen, walked into the room ; and Mrs Elton
seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs Weston's
to receive them. Her gestures and movements might
be understood by any one who looked on like Emma ;
but her words, everybody's words, were soon lost under
the incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came in talking,
and had not finished her speech under many minutes
after her being admitted into the circle at the fire. As
the door opened she was heard —
" So very obliging of you ! — No rain at all. Nothing
to signify. I do not care for myself. Quite thick
shoes. And Jane declares — Well ! " (as soon as she
was within the door), " well ! This is brilliant indeed !
This is admirable! Excellently contrived, upon my
word. Nothing wanting. Could not have imagined
it. So well lighted up ! Jane, Jane, look ! did you
ever see anything — ? Oh ! Mr Weston, you must
really have had Aladdin's lamp. Good Mrs Stokes
would not know her own room again. I saw her as I
Emma 331
came in ; she was standing in the entrance.'Oh !
Mrs Stokes,'said I — but I had not time for more. "
She was now met by Mrs Weston. " Very well, I
thank you, ma'am. I hope you are quite well. Vei " y
happy to hear it. So afraid you might have a headach !
seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much
trouble you must have. Delighted to hear it indeed !
— Ah : dear Mrs Elton, so obliged to you for the
carriage ; excellent time ; Jane and I quite ready. Did
not keep the horses a moment. Most comfortable
carriage. Oh ! and 1 am sure our thanks are due to
you, Mrs Weston, on that score. Mrs Elton had most
kindly sent Jane a note, or we should have been. But
two such offers in one day ! Never were such neigh-
hours. I said to my mother,'Upon my word,
ma'am —'Thank you, my mother is remarkably well.
Gone to Mr Woodhouse's. I made her take her shawl
— for the evenings are not warm — her large new shawl,
Mrs Dixon's wedding present. So kind of her to
think of my mother ! Bought at Weymouth, you
know ; Mr Dixon's choice. There were three others,
Jane says, which they hesitated about some time.
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive. — My dear
Jane, are you sure you did not wet your feet ? It was
but a drop or two, but I am so afraid ; but Mr Frank
Churchill was so extremely — and there was a mat to
step upon. I shall never forget his extreme politeness.
Oh ! Mr Frank Churchill, I must tell you my mother's
spectacles have never been in fault since ; the rivet
never came out again. My mother often talks of your
good-nature ; does not she, Jane ? Do not we often
talk of Mr Frank Churchill ? Ah ! here's Miss
Woodhouse. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you
do ,•• Very well, I thank you, quite well. This is
meeting quite in fairy land. Such a transformation !
Must not compliment, I know " (eyeing Emma most
332 Emma
complacently) — " that would be rude; but upon my
word, Miss Woodhouse, you do look — how do you
like Jane's hair : You are a judge. She did it all
herself. Quite wonderful how she does her hair ! No
hairdresser from London, I think, could — Ah ! Dr
Hughes, I declare — and Mrs Hughes. Must go and
speak to Dr and Mrs Hughes for a. moment. How do
you do ? How do you do ? Very well I thank you.
This is delightful, is not it ? Where's dear Mr Richard ?
Oh ! there he is. Don't disturb him. Much better
employed talking to the young ladies. How do you
do, Mr Richard ? I saw you the other day as you
rode through the town. Mrs Otway, I protest, and
good Mr Otwajf, and Miss Otway, and Miss Caroline.
Such a host of friends ! and Mr George and Mr
Arthur ! How do you do ? How do you all do ?
Quite well, I am much obliged to you. Never better.
Don't I hear another carriage ? Who can this be ? —
very likely the worthy Coles. Upon my word, this is
charming, to be standing about among such friends !
and such a noble fire ! I am quite roasted. No
coffee, I thank you, for me ; never take coffee. A
little tea, if you please, sir, by-and-by ; no hurry.
Oh ! here it comes. Everything is so good ! "
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma ;
and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet, she found herself
necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs Elton and
Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little way behind her.
He was thoughtful. Whether he were overhearing too
she could not determine. After a good many com-
pliments to Jane on her dress and look — compliments
very quietly and properly taken — Mrs Elton was
evidently wanting to be complimented herself — and it
was, " How do you like my gown ? How do you like
my trimming? — How has Wright done my hair? "
with many other relative questions, all answered with
patient politeness. Mrs Eiron then said —
Emma 333
" Nobody can think less of dress in general than I
do : but upon such an occasion as this, when everybody's
eyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the
Westons, who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly
to do me honour. I would not wish to be inferior to
others ; and I see very few pearls in the room except
mine. — So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer, I un-
derstand. We shall see if our styles suit. — A fine
young man certainly is Frank Churchill. I like him
very well. "
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously,
that Emma could not but imagine he had overheard
his own praises, and did not want to hear more ; — and
the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs Elton's tones again
distinctly forward. Mr Elton had just joined them,
and his wife was exclaiming —
" Oh ! you have found us out at last, have you, in
our seclusion ? — I was this moment telling Jane, I
thought you would begin to be impatient for tidings
of us. "
" Jane ! " repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of
surprize and displeasure. " That is easy ; but Miss
Fairfax does not disapprove it, I suppose. "
" How do you like Mrs Elton ? " said Emma, in a
whisper.
« Not at all. "
" You are ungrateful. "
" Ungrateful ! — What do you mean r " Then
changing from a frown to a smile, — " No, do not
tell me, — I do not want to know what you mean.
Where is my father ? When are we to begin
dancing ? "
Emma could hardly understand him ; he seemed in
an odd humour. He walked off to find his father, but
was quickly back again with both Mr and Mrs Weston.
334 Emma
He had met with them in a little ppr]5lexity, which
must be laid before Emma. It had just occurred to
Mrs Weston that Mrs Elton must be asked to begin the
ball ; that she would expect it ; which interfered with
all their wishes of giving Emma that distinction. Emma
heard the sad truth with fortitude.
" And what are we to do for a proper partner for
her ? " said Mr Weston. " She will think Frank
ought to ask her. "
Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former
promise ; and boasted himself an engaged man, which
his father looked his most perfect approbation of — and
it then appeared that Mrs Weston was wanting him to
dance with Mrs Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to persuade him into it, which was done
pretty soon. Mr Weston and Mrs Elton led the way ;
Mr Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed.
Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs Elton
though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly
for her. It was almost enough to make her think of
marrying.
Mrs Elton had undoubtedly the advantage, at this
time, in vanity completely gratified ; for though she had
intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not
lose by the change. Mr Weston might be his son's
superior. In spite of this little rub, however, Emma
was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see the re-
spectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel
that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before
her. She was more disturbed by Mr Knightley's not
dancing than by anything else. There he was, among
the standers-by, where he ought not to be ; he ought to
be dancing, not classing himself with the husbands, and
fathers, and whist-players, who were pretending to feel
an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up,
— so you» > g as he looked ! He could not have appeared
Emma 335
CO greater advantage perhaps anywhere, than where he
had placed himself. His tall, firm, upright figure,
among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the
elderly men, was such as Emma felt must draw every-
body's eyes ; and, excepting her own partner, there was
not one among the whole row of young men who could
be compared with him. He moved a few steps nearer,
and those few steps were enough to prove in how
gentlemanlike a manner, with what natural grace, he
must have danced, would he but take the trouble.
Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him to smile ;
but in general he was looking grave. She wished he
could love a ball-room better, and could like Frank
Churchill better. He seemed often observing her.
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her danc-
ing ; but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did
not feel afraid. There was nothing like flirtation
between her and her partner. They seemed more
like cheerful easy fiiends than lovers. That Frank
Churchill thought less of her than he had done was
indubitable.
The ball proceeded pleasantly. The anxious cares,
the incessant attentions of Mrs Weston were not thrown
away. Everybody seemed happy ; and the praise of
being a delightful ball, which is seldom bestowed till
after a ball has ceased to be, was repeatedly given in the
veiy beginning of the existence of tiiis. Of very im-
portant, very recordable events, it was not more produc-
tive than such meetings usually are. There was one,
however, which Emma thought something of. — The two
last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had
no partner ; — the only young lady sitting down ; and so
equal had been hitherto the number of dancers, that how
there could be any one disengaged was the wonder.
But Emma's wonder lessened soon afterwards, on see-
ing Mr Elton sauntering about. He would not ask
33^
Emma
Harriet to dance, if it were possible to be avoided ; she
was sure he would not — and she was expecting him
every moment to escape into the card-room.
Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to
the part of the room where the sitters-by were collected,
spoke to some, and walked about in front of them, as if
to show his liberty, and his resolution of maintaining it.
He did not omit being sometimes directly before
Miss Smith, or speaking to those who were close to
her. Emma saw it. She was not yet dancing ; she
was working her way up from the bottom, and had
therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning
her head a little she saw it all. When she was half
way up the set, the whole group were exactly behind
her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch ;
but Mr Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable
of a dialogue which just then took place between him
and Mrs Weston ; and she perceived that his wife, who
was standing immediately above her, was not only
listening also, but even encouraging him by significant
glances. The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs Weston had
left her seat to join him and say, " Do sot you dance,
Mr Elton ? " to which his prompt reply was, " Most
readily, Mrs Weston, if j^ou will dance with me. "
" Me ! — oh ! no — I would get you a better partner
than myself. I am no dancer. "
" If Mrs Gilbert wishes to dance, " said he, " I
shall have great pleasure, I am sure ; for, though be-
ginning to feel myself rather an old married man, and
that my dancing days are over, it would give me very
great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend
like Mrs Gilbert. "
" Mrs Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a
young lady disengaged whom I should be very glad to
see dancing — Miss Smith. "
" Miss Smith — oh ! — I had not observed. You a/e
Emma 337
extremely obliging — and if I were not an ola married
— but my dancing days are over, Mrs Weston. You
will excuse me. Anything else I should be most happy
to do, at your command — but my dancing days are
over. "
Mrs Weston said no more ; and Emma could
imagine with what surprize and mortification she must
be returning to her seat. This was Mr Elton ! the
amiable, obliging, gentle Mr Elton. She looked round
for a moment ; he had joined Mr Knightley at a little
distance, and was arranging himself for settled conversa-
tion, while smiles of high glee passed between him and
his wife. She would not look again. Her heart was
in a glow, and she feared her face might be as hot.
In another moment a happier sight caught her — Mr
Knightley leading Harriet to the set ! Never had she
been more surprized, seldom more delighted, than at
that instant. She was all pleasure and gratitude, both
for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him ;
and though too distant for speech, her countenance said
much, as soon as she could cstch his eye again.
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed
it, extremely good ; and Harriet would have seemed
almost too lucky, if it had not been for the cruel state
of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy
features announced. It was not thrown away on her ;
she bounded higher than ever, flew farther down the
middle, and was in a continual course of smiles.
Mr Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking
(Emma trusted) very foolish. She did not think he
was quite so hardened as his wife, though growing very
like her ; she spoke some of her feelings, by observing
audibly to her partner —
" Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith !
— Very good-natured, I declare. "
338
Emma
Supper was announced. The move began ; and
Miss Bates might be heard from that moment without
interruption, till her being seated at table and taking up
her spoon.
*'Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you ? Here
is your tippet. Mrs Weston begs you to put on your
tippet. She says she is afraid there will be draughts in
the passage, though everything has been done — one door
nailed up — quantities of matting — my dear Jane, indeed
you must. Mr Churchill, oh ! you are too obliging.
How well you put it on — so gratified ! Excellent
dancing indeed. Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I said
I should, to help grandmamma to bed, and got back
again, and nobody missed me. I set off without saying
a word, just as I told you. Grandmamma was quite
well, had a charming evening with Mr Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon. Tea was made
downstairs, biscuits and baked apples, and wine before
she came away : amazing luck in some of her throws :
and she inquired a great deal about you, how you were
amused, and who were your partners. * Oh !'said I,
< I shall not forestall Jane ; I left her dancing with Mr
George Otway ; she will love to tell you all about it
herself to-morrow : her first partner was Mr Elton ;
I do not know who will ask her next, perhaps Mr
William Cox.'My dear sir, you are too obliging. Is
there nobody you would not rather ? I am not helpless.
Sir, you are most kind. Upon my word, Jane on one
arm, and me on the other. Stop, stop, let us stand a
little back, Mrs Elton is going ; dear Mrs Elton, how
elegant she looks — beautiful lace. Now we all follow
in her train. Quite the queen of the evening ! Well,
here we are at the passage. Two steps, Jane, take care
of the two steps. Oh, no, there is but one. Well, I
was persuaded there were two. How very odd ! I
was convinced there were two, and there is but one. I
Emma
339
never saw anything equal to the comfort and style —
candles everywhere. I was telling you ot your grand-
mamma Jane — there was a little disappointment.
The baked apples and biscuits, excellent in their way,
you know ; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweet-
bread and some asparagus brought in at first, and good
Mr Woodhouse, not thinking the asparagus quite boiled
enough, sent it all out again. Now there is nothing
grandmamma loves better than sweetbread and asparagus
— so she was rather disappointed ; but we agreed we
would not speak of it to anybody, for fear of its getting
round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be so very
much concerned. Well, this is brilliant ! I am all
amazement! — could not have supposed anything^ — such
elegance and profusion ! I have seen nothing like it
since — Well, where shall we sit ? Where shall we sit ?
Anywhere, so that Jane is not in a draught. Where /
sit is of no consequence. Oh ! do you recommend
this side ? Well, I am sure, Mr Churchill — only it
seems too good — but just as you please. What you
direct in this house cannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how
shall we ever recollect half the dishes for grandmamma ?
Soup too ! Bless me ! I should not be helped so
soon, but it smells most excellent, and I cannot help
beginning. "
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr
Knightley till after supper ; but, when they were all in
the ball-room again, her eyes invited him irresistibly to
come to her and be thanked. He was warm in his
reprobation of Mr Elton's conduct ; it had been un-
pardonable rudeness ; and Mrs Elton's looks also
received the due share of censure.
" They aimed at wounding more than Harriet, " said
he. " Emma, why is it that they are your enemies ? "
He looked with smiling penetration ; and, on re-
ceiving no answer, added. " She ought not to be angry
340 Emma
with you, I suspect, whatever he may be. To that
surmise, you say nothing, of course ; but confess, Emma,
that you did want him to marry Harriet. "
" I did, " replied Emma, " and they cannot forgive
me.
He shook his head ; but there was a smile of indul-
gence with it, and he only said —
" I shall not scold you. I leave you to your own
reflections. "
" Can you trust me with such flatterers ? Does my
vain spirit ever tell me I am wrong ? "
" Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit. If
one leads you wrong, I am sure the other tells you of
it. "
" I do own myself to have been completely mistaken
in Mr Elton. There is a littleness about him which
you discovered, and which I did not : and I was fully
convinced of his being in love with Harriet. It was
through a series of strange blunders ! "
" And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I
will do you the justice to say, that you would have
chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself.
Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, v/hich Mrs
Elton is totally without. An unpretending, single-
minded, artless girl — infinitely to be preferred by any
man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs Elton.
I found Harriet more conversable than I expected. "
Emma was extremely gratified. They were inter-
rupted by the bustle of Mr Weston calling on every-
body to begin dancing again.
" Come, Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fair-
fax, what are you all doing ? Come, Emma, set your
companions the example. Everybody is lazy ! Every-
body is asleep ! "
" I am ready, " said Emma, " whenever I an:
wanted. "
Emma 341
" Whom are you going to dance with ? " asked Mr
Knightley.
She hesitated a moment, and then replied, " With
you, if you will ask me. "
" Will you ? " said he, offering his hand.
" Indeed I will. You have shown that you can
dance, and you know we are not really so much brother
and sister as to make it at all improper, "
" Brother and sister ! — no, indeed. "
Cljaptct %%9^J%
'" f^HIS little explanation with Mr Knightley gave
I Emma considerable pleasure. It was one of
the agreeable recollections of the ball, wiiich she
walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy.
She was extremely glad that they had come to so good
an understanding respecting the Eltons, and that their
opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike ;
and his praise of Harriet, his concession In her favour, was
peculiarly gratifying. The impertinence of the Eltons,
v/hich for a few moments had threatened to ruin the
rest of her evening, had been the occasion of some of its
hiighest satisfactions ; and she looked forward to an-
other happy result — the cure of Harriet's infatuation.
From Harriet's manner of speaking of the circumstance
before they quitted the ball-room she had strong hopes.
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened, and she
were enabled to see that Mr Elton was not the superior
creature she had believed him. The fever was over,
and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being
quickened again by injurious courtesy. She depended
on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the
discipline of pointed neglect that could be further re-
342 Emma
quisite. Harriet rational, Frank Churchill not too
much in love, and Mr Knightley not wanting to quarrel
with her, how very happy a summer must be before her.
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning.
He had told her that he could not allow himself the
pleasure of stopping at Hartiield, as he was to be home
by the middle of the day. Slie did not regret it.
Having arranged all these matters, looked them
through, and put them all to rights, she was just turning to
the house, with spirits freshened up for the demands of
the two little boys, as well as of their grandpapa, when
the great iron sweep-gate opened, and two persons
entered whom she had never less expected to see
together — Frank Churchill, with Harriet leaning on his
arm — actually Harriet ! A moment sufficed to con-
vince her that something extraordinary had happened.
Harriet looked white and frightened, and he was trying
to cheer her. The iron gates and the front-door were
not twenty yards asunder ; — they were all three soon in
the hall ; and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair,
fainted away.
A young lady who faints must be recovered ; questions
must be answered, and surprises be explained. Such
events are very interesting ; but the suspense of them
cannot last long. A few minutes made Emma
acquainted with the whole.
Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour
boarder at Mrs Goddard's, who had been also at the
ball, had walked out together, and taken a road — the
Richmond road, which, though apparently public
enough for safety, had led them into alarm. About
half a mile beyond Highbury, making a sudden turn,
and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it became for
a considerable stretch very retired ; and when the young
ladies had advanced some way into it, they had suddenly
perceived, at a small distance before them, en a broader
Emma 343
patch of greensward by the side, a party of gipsies. A
child on the watch came towards them to beg ; and
Miss Bickerton, excessively frightened, gave a great
scream, and calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a
steep bank, cleared a slight hedge at the top, and made
the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury.
But poor Harriet could not follow. She had suffered
very much from cramp after dancing, and her first
attempt to mount the bank brought on such a return
of it as made her absolutely powerless ; and in this
state, and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to
remain.
How the trampers might have behaved, had the
young ladies been more courageous, must be doubtful ;
but such an invitation for attack could not be resisted ;
and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children,
headed by a stout woman, and a great boy, all clamorous,
and impertinent in look, though not absolutely in word.
More and more frightened, she immediately promised
them money, and taking out her purse, gave them a
•ihilling, and begged them not to want more, or to use
her ill. She was then able to walk, though but
slowly, and was moving away — but her terror and
her purse were too tempting ; and she was followed,
or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding
more.
In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she
trembling and conditioning, they loud and insolent. By
a most fortunate chance, his leaving Highbury had been
delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this
critical moment. The pleasantness of the morning had
induced him to walk forward, and leave his horses to
meet him by another road, a mile or two beyond High-
bury ; and happening to have borrowed a pair of
scissars the night before of Miss Bates, and to have
forgotten to restore them, he had been obliged to stop
344 Emma
at her door, and go in for a few minutes ; he was
therefore later than he had intended ; and being on foot,
was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them.
/jThe terror which the woman and boy had been creating
in Harriet was then their own portion. He had left
them completely frightened ; and Harriet eagerly cling-
ing to him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength
enough to reach Hartfield, before her spirits were quite
overcome. It was iiis idea to bring her to Hartfield ;
he had thought of no other place.
This was the amount of the whole story — of his
communication and of Harriet's, as soon as she had
recovered her senses and speech. He dared not stay
longer than to see her well ; — these several delays left
him not another minute to lose ; and Emma engaging
to give assurance of her safety to Mrs Goddard, and
notice of there being such a set of people in the neigh-
bourhood to Mr Knightley, he set off, with all the
grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and
herself.
Such an adventure as this, — a fine young man and a
lovely young woman thrown together in such a way, —
could hardly fail of suggesting certain ideas to the
coldest heart and the steadiest brain. So Emma
thought, at least. Could a linguist, coiild a grammarian,
could even a mathematician have seen what she did,
have witnessed their appearance together, and heard
their history of it, without feeling that circumstances
had been at work to make them peculiarly interesting to
each other ? How much more must an imaginist, like
herself, be on fire with speculation and foresight ? —
especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her
mind had already made. //
It was a very extraordinary thing ! Nothing of the
sort had ever occurred before to any young ladies in the
place, within her memory ; no rencontre, no alarm of
Emma 345
the kind ; and now it had happened to the very person,
and at the very hour, when the other very person was
chancing to pass by to rescue her'It certainly was
very extraordinary ! And knowing, as she did, the
favourable state of mind of each at this period, it struck
her the more. He was wishing to get the better of his
attachment to herself, she just recovering from her mania
for Mr Elton. It seemed as if everything united to
promise the most interesting consequences. It was not
possible that the occurrence should not be strongly
recommending each to the other.
In the few minutes'conversation which she had yet had
with him, while Harriet had been partially insensible,
he had spoken of her terror, her naivete, her fervor as
she seized and clung to his arm, with a sensibility
amused and deliglited ; and just at last, after Harriet's
own account had been given, he had expressed his
indignation at the abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in
the warmest terms. Ever^^thing was to take its natural
course, however, neither impelled nor assisted. She
would not stir a step nor di op a hint. No, she had
had enough of interference. There could be no harm
in a scheme, a mere passive scheme. It was no more
than a wish. Beyond it she would on no account
proceed.
Emma's first resolution was to keep her father from
the knowledge of what had passed, aware of the anxiety
and alarm it would occasion ; but she soon felt that
concealment must be impossible. Within half an hour
it was known all over Highbury. It was the very event
to engage those who talk most — the young and the low ;
and all the youth and servants in the place were soon
in the happiness of frightful news. The last night's
ball seemed lost in the gipsies. Poor Mr Woodhouse
trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen, would
scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go
346 Emma
beyond the shrubbery again. It was some comfort to
him that many inquiries after himself and Miss Wood-
house (for his neighbours knew that he loved to be
inquired after), as well as Miss Smith, v/ere coming in
during the rest of the day ; and he had the pleasure of
returning for answer, that they were all veiy indifferent ;
which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly
well, and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not
interfere with. She had an unhappy state of health in
general for the child of such a man, for she hardly knew
what indisposition was ; and if he did not invent illnesses
for her, she could make no figure in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice ;
they took themselves off in a hurry. The young ladies
of Highbury might have walked again in safety before
their panic began, and the whole history dwindled soon
into a matter of little importance but to Emma and her
nephews : in her imagination it maintained its ground ;
and Henry and John were still asking every day for the
story of Harriet and the gipsies, and still tenaciously
setting her right if she varied in the slightest particular
from the original recital.
Cljapter j^H,
AVERY few days had passed after this adventure,
when Harriet came one morning to Emma with
a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down
and hesitating, thus began : —
" Miss Woodhouse — if you are at leisure, I have
something that I should like to tell you : a sort of con-
fession to make — and then, you know, it will be over. "
Emma was a good deal surprised ; but begged her to
speak. There was a seriousness in Harriet's manner
Emma 347
which preparea her, quite as much as her words, for
something more than ordinary.
" It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish, " she
continued, " to have no reserves with you on this sub-
ject. As I am, happily, quite an altered creature, in
one respect, it is very fit that you should have the satis-
faction of knowing it. I do not want to say more than
is necessary ; I am too much ashamed of having given
way as I have done, and I dare say you understand
me. "
" Yes, " said Emma, " I hope I do. "
" How I could so long a time be fancying myself — "
cried Harriet warmly. " It seems like madness ! I
can see nothing at all extraordinary in him now. I do
not care whether I meet him or not, except that, of the
two, I had rather not see him ; and, indeed, I would
go any distance round to avoid him ; but I do not envy
his wife in the least : I neither admire her nor envy her,
as I have done. She is very charming, I dare say, and
all that ; but I think her very ill-tempered and dis-
agreeable : I shall never forget her look the other night.
However, I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, I wish her
no evil. No ; let them be ever so happy together, it
will not give me another moment's pang ; and, to con-
vince you that I have been speaking truth, I am now
going to destroy — what I ought to have destroyed long
ago — what I ought never to have kept : I know that
very well " (blushing as she spoke). " However, now I
will destroy it all ; and it is my particular v/ish to do it
in your presence, that you may see how rational I am
grown. Cannot you guess what this parcel holds ? "
said she, with a conscious look.
" Not the least in the world. Did he ever give you
anything ? "
« No — I cannot call them gifts ; but they are things
that I have valued very much. "
348 Emma
She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the
words Most precious treasures on the top. Her curi-
osity was greatly excited. Harriet unfolded the parcel,
and she looked on with impatience. Within abundance
of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box,
which Harriet opened : it was well lined with the
softest cotton ; but, excepting the cotton, Emma saw
only a small piece of court-plaister.
" Now, " said Harriet, " you must recollect. "
" No, indeed, I do not. "
" Dear me ! I should not have thought it possible
you could forget what passed in this very room about
court-plaister, one of the very last times we ever met in
it. It was but a very few days before I had my sore
throat — ^just before Mr and Mrs John Knightley came ;
I think, the very evening. Do not you remember his
cutting his finger with your new penknife, and your re-
commending court-plaister ? But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply
him ; and so I took mine out and cut him a piece :
but it was a great deal too large, and he cut it smaller,
and kept playing some time with what was left, before he
gave it back to me. And so then, in my nonsense, I
could not help making a treasure of it ; so I put it by,
never to be used, and looked at it now and then as a
great treat. "
" My dearest Harriet ! " cried Emma, putting her
hand before her face, and jumping up, " you make me
more ashamed of myself than I can bear. Remember
it i* Aye, I remember it all now ; all, except your
saving this relick : I knew nothing of that till this
moment, — but the cutting the finger, and my recom-
mending court-plaister, and saying I had none about me.
— Oh ! my sins ! my sins ! — And I had plenty all the
while in my pocket 1 One of my senseless tricks. I
deserve to be under a continual blush all the rest of
Emma 349
my life. Well " (sitting down again), " go oo : what
else ? "
" And had you really some at hand yourself ? I am
sure I never suspected it, you did it so naturally. "
" And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister
by for his sake! " said Emma, recovering from her state
of shame and feeling, divided between wonder and amuse-
ment ; and secretly she added to herself, " Lord bless
me ! when should I ever have thought of putting by in
cotton a piece of couit-plaister that Frank Churchill
had been pulling about ! I never was equal to this. "
" Here, " resumed Harriet, turning to her box again,
" here is something still more valuable, — I mean that
has been more valuable, — because this is what did really
once belong to him, which the court-plaister never did. "
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure.
It was the end of an old pencil, the part without any
lead.
" This was really his, " said Harriet. " Do not you
remember one morning ? — no, I dare say you do not.
But one morning — I forget exactly the day — but per-
haps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before that
evening, he wanted to make a memorandum in his
pocket-book ; it was about spi " uce-beer. Mr Knightley
had been telling him something about brev/ing spruce-
beer, and he wanted to put it down ; but when he took
out his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut
it all away, and it would not do, so you lent him
another, and this was left upon the table as good for
nothing. But I kept my eye on it ; and, as soon as I
dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from
that moment. "
" I do remember it, " cried Emma ; " I perfectly
remember it. Talking about spruce-beer. Oh ! yes.
Mr Knightley and I both saying we liked it, and Mr
Elton's seeming resolved to learn to like it too. I perfectly
250 Emma
remember it. Stop — Mr Knightley was standing just
here, was not he ? I have an idea he was standing just
here. "
" Ah ! I do not know. I cannot recollect. It is
very odd, but I cannot recollect. Mr Elton was sitting
here, I remember, much about where I am now. "
«'Well, go on, "
" Oh 1 that's all. I have nothing more to show you,
or to say, except that 1 am now going to throw them
both behind the fire, and I wish you to see me do it. "
" My poor dear Harriet ! and have you actually
found happiness in treasuring up these things ? "
" Yes, simpleton as I was ! — but I am quite ashamed
of it now, and wish I could forget as easily as I can
bum them. It was very wrong of me, you know, to
keep any remembrances after he was married. I knew
it was — but had not resolution enough to part with
them. "
" But, Harriet, is it necessai-y to bum the court-
plaister ? I have not a word to say for the bit of old
pencil, but the court-plaister might be useful. "
" I shall be happier to bum it, " replied Harriet,
" It has a disagreeable look to me. I must get rid of
everything. There it goes, and there is an end, thank
Heaven ! of Mr Elton. "
" And when, " thought Emma, " will there be a be-
ginning of Mr Churchill ? "
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the
beginning was already made, and could not but hope
that the gipsy, though she had told no fortune, might be
proved to have made Harriet's. About a fortnight
after the alarm they came to a sufficient explanation, and
quite undesignedly. Emma was not thinking of it at
the moment, which made the information she received
more valuable. She merely said in the course of some
trivial chat, " Well, Harriet, whenever you marry, I
Emma 35 1
would advise you to do so and so " — and tho > 3ght no
more of it, till, after a minute's silence she heard
Harriet say, in a very serious tone, " I shall never
marry. "
Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it
was ; and after a moment's debate, as to whether it
should pass unnoticed or not, replied —
" Never marry ! — This is a new resolution. "
" It is one that I shall never change, however. "
After another short hesitation, " I hope it does not
proceed from — I hope it is not in compliment to Mr
Elton ? "
" Mr Elton, indeed ! " cried Harriet, indignantly
" Ch ! no " — and Emma could just catch the words,
" so superior to Mr Elton ! "
She then took a longer time for consideration.
Should she proceed no farther ? — should she let it pass,
and seem to suspect nothing ? — Perhaps Haniet might
think her cold or angry if she did ; or, perhaps, if she
were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into ask-
ing her to hear too much ; and against anything like
such an unreserve as had been, such an open and fre-
quent discussion of hopes and chances, she was perfectly
resolved. She believed it would be wiser for her to
say and know at once all that she meant to say and
know. Plain dealing was always best. She had pre-
viously determined how far she would proceed, on any
application of the sort ; and it would be safer for both
to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down
with speed. She was decided, and thus spoke —
" Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your
meaning. Your resolution, or rather your expectation
of never marrying, results from an idea that the person
whom you might prefer would be too greatly your
superior in situation to think of you. Is not it so ? "
" Oh, Miss Woodhouse, believe me, I have not the
352 Emma
presumption to suppose — indeed I am not so mad. But
it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a distance, and
to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of the
world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration which
are so proper, in me especially. "
" I am not at all surprised at you, Harriet- The
service he rendered you was enough to wann your
heart. "
" Service ! oh, it was such an inexpressible obliga-
tion ! The very recollection of it, and all that I felt at
the time, when I saw him coming — his noble look, and
my wretchedness before. Such a change ! In one
moment such a change ! From perfect misery to per-
fect happiness ! "
" It is veiy natural. It is natural, and it is honour-
able. Yes, honourable, I think, to choose so well and
so gratefully. But that it will be a fortunate prefer-
ence is more than I can promise. I do not advise you
to give way to it, Harriet. I do not by any means
engage for its being returned. Consider what you are
about. Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your
feelings while you can : at any rate do not let them
carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking
you. Be observant of him. Let his behaviour be the
guide of your sensations. I give you this caution now,
because I shall never speak to you again on the subject.
I am determined against all interference. Hencefor-
ward I know nothing of the matter. Let no name
ever pass our lips. We were very wrong before ; we
will be cautious now. He is your superior, no doubt,
and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very
serious nature ; but yet, Harriet, more wonderful things
have taken place : there have been matches of greater
disparity. But take care of yourself; I would not
have you too sanguine ; though, however it may end,
be assured that vour raising your thoughts to him is a
Emma 353
mark of good taste which I shall always know how tu
value. "
Harnet kissed her hand in silent and submissive
gratitude. Emma was very decided in thinking such
an attachment no bad thing for her friend. Its tendency
would be to raise and refine her mind — and it must be
saving her from the danger of degradation.
Cl)aptEr S^^%
IN this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance,
June opened upon Hartfield. To Highbury, in
general, it brought no material change. The
Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings,
and of the use to be made of their barouche-landau, and
Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother's ; and as the
return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed,
and August, instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she
was likely to remain there full two months longer, pro-
vided at least she were able to defeat Mrs Elton's
activity in her service, and save herself from being
hurried into a delightful situation against her will.
Mr Knightley, who, for some reason best known to
himself, had certainly taken an early dislike to Frank
Churchill, was only growing to dislike him more. He
began to suspect him of some double dealing in his
pursuit of Emma. That Emma was his object appeared
indisputable. Everything declared it ; his own atten-
tions, his father's hints, his mother-in-law's guarded
silence ; it was all in unison ; words, conduct, discre-
tion and indiscretion, told the same story. But while
so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emma her-
self making him over to Harriet, Mr Knightley began
to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane
N
354 Emma
Fairfax. He could not understand it ; but there were
symptoms of intelligence between them — he thought so
at least — symptoms of admiration on his side, which,
having once observed, he could not persuade himself to
think entirely void of meaning, however, he might wish
to escape any of Emma's errors of imagination. She
was not present when the sus])icion first arose. He was
dining with the Randalls family and Jane at the Eltons';
and he had seen a look, more than a single look, at
Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss Wood-
house, seemed somewhat out of place. When he was
again in their company, he could not help remembering
what he had seen ; nor could he avoid obsei-vations
which, unless it were like Cowper and his fire at twi-
light,
'• Myself creating what I saw, "
brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a some-
thing of private liking, of private understanding even,
between Frank Churchill and Jane.
He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very
often did, ,to spend his evening at Hartfield. Emma
and Harriet were going to walk ; he joined them ; and,
on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who like
themselves, judged it wisest to take their exercise early,
as the weather threatened rain ; Mr and Mrs Weston
and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had
accidentally met. They all united ; and, on reaching
Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it was exactly the
sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father,
pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him. The
Randalls party agreed to it immediately ; and after a
pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few persons
listened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss
Woodhouse's most obliging invitation.
As they were turning into the grounds, Mr Perry
Emma 355
passed by on horseback. The gentlemen spoke of his
horse.
" By the bye, " said Frank ChurchiH to Mrs Weston
presently, " what became of Mr Perry's plan of setting
up his carriage ? "
Mrs Weston looked surprised, and said, " I did not
know that he ever had any such plan. "
" Nay, I had it from you. You wrote me word of
it three months ago. "
" Me ! impossible 1 "
" Indeed you did. I remember it perfectly. You
mentioned it as what was ceitainly to be very soon.
Mrs Perry had told somebody and was extremely happy
about it. It was owing to her persuasion, as she thought
his being out in bad weather did him a greal deal of
harm. You must remember it now ? "
" Upon my word, I never heard of it till this
moment. "
" Never! really never! — Bless me! how could it
be ? Tlien I must have dreamt it — but I was com-
pletely persuaded — Miss Smith, you walk as if you were
tired. You will not be sorry to find yourself at home. "
" What is this ? — What is this ? " cried Mr Weston,
« about Perry and a carriage ? Is Perry going to set up
his carriage, Frank ? I am glad he can afford it. You
had it from himself, had you ? "
" No, sir, " replied his son, laughing. " I seem to
have had it from nobody. Very odd! I really was
persuaded of Mrs Weston's having mentioned it in one
of her letters to Enscombe, many weeks ago, with all
these particulars ; but as she declares she never heard a
syllable of it before, of course it must have been a
dream. I am a great dreamer. I di-eam of everybody at
Highbury, when I am away ; and when I have gone
through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of
Mr and Mrs Perry. "
356 Emma
" It is odd, though, " observed his father, " that you
should have had such a regular connected dream about
people whom it was not very likely you should be think-
ing of at Enscombe. Perry's setting up his carriage !
and his wife's persuading him to it, out of care for his
health — just what will happen, I have no doubt, some
time or other ; only a little premature. What an air of
probability sometimes runs through a dream ! And at
others, what a heap of absurdities it is ! Well, Franlc,
your dream certainly shows that Highbury is in your
thoughts when you are absent. Emma, you are a great
dreamer, I think ? "
Emrna was out of hearing. She had hurried on
before her guests to prepare her father for their appear-
ance, and was beyond the reach of Mr Weston's
hint.
" Why, to own the truth, " cried Miss Bates, who
had been trying in vain to be heard the last two minutes,
" if I must speak on this subject, there is no denying
that Mr Frank Churchill might have — I do not mean
to say that he did not dream it — I am sure I have some-
times the oddest di'eams in the world — but if I am
questioned about it, I must acknowledge that there was
such an idea last spring ; for Mrs Perry herself men-
tioned it to my mother, and the Coles knew of it as
well as ourselves — but it was quite a secret, known to
nobody else, and only thought of about three days.
Mrs Perry was very anxious that he should have a
carriage, and came to my mother in great spirits one
morning because she thought she had prevailed. Jane,
don't you remember grandmamma's telling us of it when
we got home ? 1 forget where we had been walking
to — very likely to Randalls ; yes, I think it was to
Randalls. Mrs Perry was always particularly fond ot
my mother — indeed I do not know who is not — and
she had mentioned it to her in confidence ; she had no
Emma 357
objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to
go beyond ; and from that day to this I never men-
tioned it to a soul that I know of. At the same time,
I will not positively answer for my having never dropt
a hint, because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing
before I am aware. I am a talker, you know ; I am
rather a talker ; and now and then I have let a thing
escape me which I should not. I am not like Jane ; I
wish I were. I will answer for it she never betrayed
the least thing in the world. Where is she ? Oh !
just behind. Perfectly remember Mrs Perry's coming.
Extraordinary dream, indeed ! "
They were entering the hall. Mr Knightley's eyes
had preceded Miss Bates's in a glance at Jane. From
Frank Churchill's face, where he thought he saw con-
fusion suppressed or laughed away, he had involuntarily
turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind, and too
busy with her shawl. Mr Weston had walked in. The
two other gentlemen waited at the door to let her pass,
Mr Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the deter-
mination of catching her eye — he seemed watching hei
intently — in vain, however, if it were so. Jane passed
between them into the hall, and looked at neither.
There was no time for fai ther remark or exolanation.
The dream must be borne with, and Mr Knightley must
take his seat with the rest round the large modern cir-
cular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield,
and wliich none but Emma could have had power to
place there and persuade her father to use, instead of
the small-sized Pembroke, on which two of his daily
meals had for forty years been crowded. Tea passed
pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.
" Miss Woodhouse, " said Frank Churchill, after ex-
amining a table behind him, which he could reach as he sat,
" have your nephews taken away their alphabets — their
box of letters ? It used to stand here. Where is it ?
358
Emma
This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be
treated rather as winter than summer. We had great
amusement with those letters one morning. I want to
puzzle you again. "
Emma was pleased with the thought ; and producing
the box, the table was quickly scattered over with
alphabets, which no one seemed so much disposed to
employ as their two selves. They were rapidly form-
ing words for each other, or for anybody else who
would be puzzled. The quietness of the game made it
particularly eligible for Mr Woodhouse, who had often
been distressed by the more animated sort, which Mr
Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat
happily occupied in lamenting, with tender melancholy,
over the departure of the " poor little boys, " or in
fondly pointing out, as he took up any stray letter near
him, how beautifully Emma had written it.
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax.
She gave a slight glance round the table, and applied
herself to it. Frank was next to Emma, Jane opposite
to them ; and Mr Knightley so placed as to see them
all ; and it was his object to see as much as he could,
with as little apparent observation. The word was
discovered, and with a faint smile pushed away. It
meant to be immediately mixed with the others, and
buried from sight, she should have looked on the table
instead of looking just across, for it was not mixed ;
and Harriet, eager after every fresh word, and finding
out none, directly took it up, and fell to work. She
was sitting by Mr Knightley, and turned to him for
help. The word was blunder ,• and as Harriet exult-
ingly proclaimed it, there was a blush on Jane's cheek
which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible. Mr
Knightley connected it with the dream ; but how it
could all be, was beyond his comprehension. How the
delicacy, the discretion of his favourite could have been
Emma 359
so lain asleep ! He feared there must be some decided
involvement. Disingenuousness and double dealing
seemed to meet him at every turn. These letters were
but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. It was a child's
play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank
Churchill's part.
With great indignation did he continue to observe
him ; with great alarm and distrust, to observe also his
two blinded companions. He saw a short word pre-
pared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and
demure. He saw that Emma had soon made it out,
and found it highly entertaining, though it was some-
thing which she judged it proper to appear to censure ;
for she said, " Nonsense ! for shame ! " He heard
Frank Churchill next say, with a glance towards Jane,
" 1 will give it to her — shall I ? " and as clearly heard
Emma opposing it with eager laughing warmth, — " No,
no, you must not, you shall not, indeed. "
It was done, however. This gallant young man, who
seemed to love without feeling, and to recommend him-
self without complaisance, directly handed over the
word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of
sedate civility entreated her to study it. Mr Knightley's
excessive curiosity to know what this word might be,
made him seize every possible moment for darting his
eye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it to
be Dixon. Jane Fairfax's perception seemed to ac-
company his ; her comprehension was certainly more
equal to the covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of
those five letters so arranged. She was evidently dis-
pleased ; looked up, and seeing herself watched, blushed
more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying
only, " I did not know that proper names were allowed, "
pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit, and
looked resolved to be engaged by no other word that
could be offered. Her face was averted from those
360
Emma
who had made the attack, and turned towards her
aunt.
" Ay, veiy true, my dear, " cried the latter, though
Jane had not spoken a word : " I was just going to say
the same thing. It is time for us to be going, indeed.
The evening is closing in, and grandmamma will be
looking for us. My dear sir, you are too obliging
We really must wish you good-night. "
Jane's alertness in moving proved her as ready as her
aunt had preconceived. She was immediately up, and
wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also mov-
ing, that she could not get away ; and Mr Knightley
thought he saw another collection of letters, anxiously
pushed towards her, and resolutely swept away by her
unexamined. She was afterwards looking for her
shawl — Frank Churchill was looking also : it was grow-
ing dusk, and the room was in confusion ; and how
they parted Mr Knightley could not tell.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his
thoughts full of what he had seen ; so full, that when
the candles came to assist his observations, he must —
yes, he certainly must, as a friend — an anxious friend —
give Emma some hint, ask her some question. He
could not see her in a situation of such danger without
trying to preserve her. It was his duty.
" Pray, Emma, " said he, " may 1 ask in what lay
the great amusement, the poignant sting of the last word
given to you and Miss Fairfax ? I saw the word, and
am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other. "
Emma was extremely confused. She could not en-
dure to give him the true explanation ; for though her
suspicions were by no means removed, she was really
ashamed of having ever imparted them.
" Oh ! " she cried in evident embarrassment, " it all
meant nothing, a mere joke among ourselves. "
Emma 261
" The joke, " he replied gravely, " seemed confined
to you and Mr Churchill. "
He had hoped she would speak again, but she did
not. She would rather busy herself about anything
than speak. He sat a little while in doubt. A variety
of evils crossed his mind. Interference — fruitless inter-
ference. Emma's confusion, and the acknowledged
intimacy, seemed to declare her affection engaged. Yet
he would speak. He owed it to her, to risk anything
that might be involved in an unwelcome interference,
rather than her welfare ; to encounter anything, rather
than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
" My dear Emma, " said he at last, with earnest
kindness, " do you think you perfectly understand the
degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady
we have been speaking of? "
" Between Mr Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax ?
Oh ! yes, perfectly. Why do you make a doubt of
it? "
" Have you never at any time had reason to think
that he admired her, or that she admiied him ? "
" Never, never ! " she cried with a most open eager-
ness. " Never, for the twentieth part of a moment, did
such an idea occur to me. And how could it possibly
come into your head ? "
" I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of
attachment between them ; certain expressive looks,
which I did not believe meant to be public. "
" Oh ! you amuse me excessively. I am delighted
to find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination
wander ; but it will not do — very sorry to check you in
your first essay, but indeed it will not do. There is no
admiration between them, I do assure you : and the
appearances which have caught you, have arisen from
some peculiar circumstances ; feelings rather of a totally
different nature ; it is impossible exactly to explain —
362 Emma
there is a good deal of nonsense in it — but the part
which is capable of being communicated, which is sense,
is, that they are as far from any attachment or admira-
tion for one another as any two beings in the world can
be. That is, I presume it to be 80 on her side, and I
can ansiver for its being so on his. I will answer for
the gentleman's indifference. "
She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a
satisfaction which silenced Mr Knightley. She was in
gay spirits, and would have prolonged the conversation,
wanting to hear the particulars of his suspicions, every
look described, and all the wheres and hows of a circum-
stance which highly entertained her ; but his gaiety did
not meet hers. He found he could not be useful, and
his feelings were too much irritated for talking. That
he might not be irritated into an absolute fever by the
fire which Mr Woodhouse's tender habits required
almost every evening throughout the year, he soon
afterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the
coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
Cl)apter ^J13I3!I»
AFTER being long fed with hopes of a speedy
visit from Mr and Mrs Suckling, the Highbury
world were obliged to endure the mortification
of hearing that they could not possibly come till the
autumn. No such importation of novelties could en-
rich their intellectual stores at present. In tlie daily
interchange of news, they must be again restricted to
the other topics, with which for a while the Sucklings'
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of
Mrs Churchill, whose health seemed every day to supply
a different report, and the situation of Mrs Weston,
Emma 363
whose happiness, it was to be hoped, might eventually
be as much increased by the arnval of a child, as that
of all her neighbours was by the approach of it.
Mrs Elton was very much disappointed. It was the
delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade. Her
introductions and recommendations must all wait, and
every projected party be still only talked of. So she
thought at first ; but a little consideration convinced
her that everything need not be put off. Why should
not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did
not come ? They could go there again with them in
the autumn. It was settled that they should go to
Box Hill. That there was to be such a party had
been long generally known ; it had even given the idea
of another. Emma had never been to Box Hill ; she
wished to see what eveiybody found so well worth
seeing, and she and Mr Weston had agreed to choose
some fine morning and drive thither. Two or three
more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join
them, and it was to be done in a quiet, unpretending,
elegant way, infinitely superior to the bustle and pre-
paration, the regular eating and drinking, and pic-nic
parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings.
This was so very well understood between them that
Emma could not but feel some surprise, and a little
displeasure, on hearing from Mr Weston that he had
been proposing to Mrs Elton, as her brother and sister
had failed her, that the two parties should unite, and go
together ; and that as Mrs Elton had very readily
acceded to it, so it was to be, if she had no objection.
Now, as her objection was nothing but her very great
dislike of Mrs Elton, of which Mr Weston must already
be perfectly aware, it was not worth bringing forward
again : — it could not be done without a reproof to him,
which would be giving pain to his wife ; and she found
herself, therefore, obliged to consent to an arrangement
364 Emma
which she would have done a great deal to avoid ; an
arrangement which would, probably, expose her even to
the degradation of being said to be of Mrs Elton's
party ! Every feeling was offended ; and the forbear-
ance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due
of secret severity in her reflections, on the unmanage-
able good-will of Mr Weston's temper.
" I am glad you approve of what I have done, "
said he, very comfortably. " But I thought you
would. Such schemes as these are nothing without
numbers. One cannot have too large a party. A
large party secures its own amusement. And she is a
good-natured woman after all. One could not leave
her out. "
Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none
of it in private.
It was now the middle of June and the weather fine ;
and Mrs Elton was growing impatient to name the day,
and settle with Mr Weston as to pigeon-pies and cold
lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw everything into
sad uncertainty. It might be weeks, it might be only a
few days, before the horse were useable ; but no pre-
parations could be ventured on, and it was all melan-
choly stagnation. Mrs Elton's resources were in-
adequate to such an attack.
" Is not this most vexatious, Knightley ? " she cried ;
" and such weather for exploring ! these delays and dis-
appointments are quite odious. What are we to do ?
The year will wear away at this rate, and nothing done.
Before this time last year, I assure you, we had had a
delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings
Weston. "
" You had better explore to Donwell, " replied Mr
Knightley. " That may be done without horses. Come
and eat my strawberries ; they are ripening fast, "
If Mr Knightley did not begin seriously, he waa
Emma 365
obliged to proceed so ; for hia proposal was caught s'.
with delight ; and the " Oh ! I should like it of ail
things, " was not plainer in words than manner. Don-
well was famous for its strawberry-beds, which seemed
a plea for the invitation ; but no piea was necessary ;
cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt the
lady, who only wanted to be going somewhere. She
promised him again and again to come — much oftener
than he doubted — and was extremely gratified by such
a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment as
she chose to consider it.
" You may depend upon me, " said she ; " I certainly
will come. — Name your day, and I will come. — You
will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax ? "
" I cannot name a day, " said he, " till I have spoken
to some others, whom I would wish to meet you. "
" Oh, leave all that to me ; only give me a carte-
blanche. — I am Lady Patroness, you know. It is my
party. I will bring friends with me. "
" I hope you will bring Elton, " said he ; " but I will
not trouble you to give any other invitations. "
" Oh, now you are looking very sly ; — but consider,
— you need not be afraid of delegating power to me. 1
am no young lady on her preferment. Married
women, you know, may be safely authorized. It
is my party. Leave it all to me. I will invite your
guests. "
" No, " he calmly rephed, " there is but one married
woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite
what guests she pleases to Donwell, and that one is
" Mrs Weston, I suppose, " interrupted Mrs Elton,
rather mortified.
« No, — Mrs Knightley ; and till she is in being, I
will manage such matters myself. "
" Ah, you are an odd creature ! " she cried, satisfied
366
Emma
to have no one preferred to herself. " You are a
iiumourist, and may say what you like. Quite a
humourist. Well, I shall bring Jane with me — Jane and
her aunt. The rest I leave to you. I have no
objections at all to meeting the Hattfield family.
Don't scruple, I know you are attached to them. "
" You certainly will meet them, if I can prevail ;
and I shall call on Miss Bates in my way home. "
" That's quite unnecessary ; I see Jane every day ; —
but as you like. It is to be a morning scheme, you
know, Knightley ; quite a simple thing. I shall wear
a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hang-
ing on my arm. Here, — probably this basket with
pink ribbon. Nothing can be more simple, you see.
And Jane will have such another. There is to be no
form or parade — a sort of gipsy party. We are to
walk about your gardens, and gather the strawberries
ourselves, and sit under trees ; and whatever else you
may like to provide, it is to be all out of doors ; a
table spread in the shade, you know. Everything as
natural and simple as possible. Is not that your idea ? "
" Not quite. My idea of the simple and the natural
will be to have the table spread in the dining-room.
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies,
with their servants and furniture, I think is best observed
by meals within doors. When you are tired of eating
strawberries in the garden, there shall be cold meat in
the house. "
" Well, as you please ; only don't have a great set-
out. And, by the bye, can I or my housekeeper be of
any use to you with our opinion ? Pray be sincere,
Knightley. If you wish me to talk to Mrs Hodges, or
to inspect anything "
" I have not the least wish for it, I thank you. "
" Well, — but if any difficulties should arise, my
housekeeper is extremely clever. "
Emma 367
" I will answer for it that mine thinks herself full as
clever, and would spurn anybody's assistance. "
" I wish we had a donkey. The thing would be for
us all to come on donkies, Jane, Miss Bates, and me,
and my car a sposa walking by. I really must talk to
him about purchasing a donkey. In a country life I
conceive it to be a sort of necessary ; for, let a woman
have ever so many resources, it is not possible for her
to be always shut up at home ; and very long walks,
you know — in summer there is dust, and in winter there
is dirt. "
" You will not find either between Donwell and High-
bury. Donwell Lane is never dusty, and now it is
perfectly dry. Come on a donkey, however, if you
prefer it. You can borrow Mrs Cole's. I would wish
everything to be as much to your taste as possible. "
" That I am sure you would. Indeed I do you
justice, my good friend. Under that peculiar sort of
dry, blunt manner, I know you have the warmest heart.
As I tell Mr E., you are a thorough humourist. Yes,
believe me, Knightley, I am fully sensible of your at-
tention to me in the whole of this scheme. You have
hit upon the very thing to please me. "
Mr Knightley had another reason for avoiding a
table in the shade. He wished to persuade Mr Wood-
house, as well as Emma, to join the party ; and he knew
that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to
eat would inevitably make him ill. Mr Woodhouse
must not, under the specious pretence of a morning drive,
and an hour or two spent at Donwell, be tempted away
to his misery.
He was invited on good faith. No lurking horrors
were to upbraid him for his easy credulity. He did
consent. He had not been at Donwell for two years.
" Some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet
could go very well ; and he could sit still with Mrs
368 Emma
Weston while the dear girls walked about the gardens.
He did not suppose they could be damp now, in the
middle of the day. He should like to see the old house
again exceedingly, and should be very happy to meet
Mr and Mrs Elton, and any other of his neighbours.
He could not see any objection at all to his, and
Emma's, and Harriet's going there some very fine
morning. He thought it very well done of Mr
Knightley to invite them j very kind and sensible ; much
cleverer than dining out. He was not fond of dining
out. "
Mr Knightley was fortunate in everybody's most ready
concurrence. The invitation was everywhere so well
received, that it seemed as if, like Mrs Elton, they were
all taking the scheme as a particular compliment to
themselves. Emma and Harriet professed very higli
expectations of pleasure from it ; and Mr Weston, un-
asked, promised to get Frank over to join them, if
possible ; a proof of approbation and gratitude which
could have been dispensed with. Mr Knightley was
then obliged to say that he should be glad to see him ;
and Mr Weston engaged to lose no time in writing, and
spare no arguments to induce him to come.
In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast
that the party to Box Hill was again under happy con-
sideration ; and at last Donwell was settled for one
day ; and Box Hill for the next, the weather appear-
ing exactly right.
Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer,
Mr Woodhouse was safely conveyed in his carriage,
with one window down, to partake of this al-fresco
party ; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the
Abbey, especially prepared for him by a fire all the
morning, he was happily placed, quite at his ease, ready
to talk with pleasure of what had been atchieved, and
advise everybody to come and sit down, and not to heat
Emma 369
themselves. Mrs Weston, who seemed to liave walked
there on purpose to be tired, and sit all the time with
him, remained, when all the others were invited or per-
suaded out, his patient listener and sympathizer.
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey,
that as soon as she was satisfied of her father's comfort,
she was glad to leave him and look around her ; eager
to refresh and correct her memory with more particular
observation, more exact understanding of a house and
grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all
her family.
il She felt all the honest pride and complacency which
her alliance with the present and future proprietor could
faiily warrant, as she viewed the respectable size and
style of the building, its suitable, becoming, character-
istic situation, low and sheltered ; its ample gardens
stretching down to meadows washed by a stream, of
which the Abbey, with all the old neglect of prospect,
had scarcely a sight — and its abundance of timber in
rows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extrava-
gance had rooted up. The house was larger than
Hartfield, and totally unlike it, covering a good deal of
ground, rambling and irregular, with many comfortable,
and one or two handsome rooms. It was just what it
ought to be, and it looked what it was ; and Emma felt
an increasing respect for it, as the residence of a family
of such true gentility, untainted in blood and under-
standing. Some faults of temper John Knightley had ;
but Isabella had connected herself unexceptionably. She
had given them neither men, nor names, nor places, that
could raise a blush. These were pleasant feelings, and
she walked about and indulged them till it was neces-
sary to do as tlie others did, and collect round the
strawberry-beds. jjThe whole party were assembled,
excepting Frank Churchill, who was expected every
moment from Richmond ; and Mrs Elton, in all her
370 Emma
apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket,
was very ready to lead the way in gathering, accepting,
or talking. Strawberries, and only strawberries, could
now be thought or spoken of. " The best fruit in
England — everybody's favourite — always wholesome.
These the finest beds and finest sorts. Delightful to
gather for one's self — the only way of really enjoying
them. Morning decidedly the best time — never tired
— every sort good — hautboy infinitely superior — no
comparison — the others hardly eatable — hautboys very
scarce — Chili preferred — white wood finest flavour of
all — price of strawberries in London — abundance about
Bristol — Maple Grove — cultivation — beds when to be
renewed — gardeners thinking exactly different — no
general rule — gardeners never to be put out of their
way — delicious fruit — only too rich to be eaten much
of — inferior to cherries — currants more refreshing —
only objection to gathering strawberries the stooping —
glaring sun — tired to death — could bear it no longer —
must go and sit In the shade.'j .
Such, for half an hour, was the conversation ; in-
terrupted only once by Mrs Weston, who came out, in
her solicitude after her son-in-law, to inquire if he were
come ; and she was a little uneasy. She had some
fears of his horse.
Seats tolerably in the shade were found ; and now
Emma was obliged to overhear what Mrs Elton and
Jane Fairfax were talking of. A situation, a most
desirable situation, was in question. • Mrs Elton had
received notice of it that morning, and was in raptures.
It was not with Mrs Suckling, it was not with Mrs
Bragge, but in felicity and splendour it fell short only
of them : it was with a cousin of Mrs Bragge, an
acquaintance of Mrs Suckling, a lady known at Maple
Grove. Delightful, charming, superior, first circles,
spheres, lines, ranks, everything : and Mrs Elton was
Emma 371
wild to have the offer closed with immediately. On
her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph ; and
she ])Ositively refused to take her friend's negative,
though Miss Fairfax continued to assure her that she
would not at present engage in anything — repeating the
same motives which she had been heard to urge before.
Still Mrs Elton insisted on being authorized to write
an acquiescence by the morrow's post. How Jane
could bear it at all, was astonishing to Emma. She
did look vexed, she did speak pointedly — and at last,
with a decision of action unusual to her, proposed a
removal. " Should not they walk ? Would not Mr
Knightley show them the gardens — all the gardens ?
Siie wished to see the whole extent. " The pertinacity
of her friend seemed more than she could bear.
*•'It was hot ; and after walking some time over the
gardens in a scattered, dispersed way, scarcely any
three together, they insensibly followed one another to
the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes,
'vhich, stretching beyond the garden at an equal dis-
tance from the river, seemed the finish of the pleasure
gj'ounds. It led to nothing ; nothing but a view at the
end over a low stone wall with high pillars, which
seemed intended, in their erection, to give the appear-
ance of an approach to the house, which never had
been there. Disputable, however, as might be the taste
of such a termination, it was in itself a charming walk,
and the view which closed it extremely pretty. The
considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which the
Abbey stood, gradually acquired a steeper form beyond
its grounds ; and at half a mile distant was a bank of
considerable abruptness and grandeur, well clothed with
wood ; and at the bottom of this bank, favourably
placed and sheltered, rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with
meadows in front, and the river making a close and
handsome curve around it.
372 Emma
It was a sweet view — sweet to the eye and the
mind. English verdure, English culture, English com-
fort, seen under a sun briglit, without being oppressive.//
In this walk Emma and Mr Weston found all the
others assembled ; and towards this view she immedi-
ately perceived Mr Knightley and Hairiet distinct froo)
the rest, quietly leading the way. Mr Knightley and
Harriet ! It was an odd tete-a-tete ; but she was glad
to see it. There had been a time when he would have
scorned her as a companion, and turned from her with
little ceremony. Now they seemed in pleasant con-
versation. There had been a time also when Emma
would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot so
favourable for the Abbey Mill Farm ; but now she
feared it not. It might be safely viewed, with all its
appendages of prosperity and beauty, its rich pastures,
spreading flocks, orchard in blossom, and light column
of smoke ascending. She joined them at the wall, and
found them more engaged in talking than in looking
around. He was giving Harriet information as to
modes of agriculture, & c. ; and Emma received a smile
which seemed to say, " These are my own concerns. I
have a right to talk on such subjects, without being
suspected of introducing Robert Martin. " She did
not suspect him. It was too old a story. Robert
Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet. They
took a few turns together along the walk. The shade
was most refreshing, and Emma found it the pleasantest
part of the day.
The next remove was to the house ; they must all
go in and eat ; and they were all seated and busy, and
still Frank Churchill did not come. Mrs Weston
looked, and looked in vain. His father would not own
himself uneasy, and laughed at her fears ; but she could
not be cured of wishing that he would part with his
black male. He had expressed himself as to coming with
Emma 373
more than common certainty. " His aunt wab'so much
better, that he had not a doubt of getting over to them. "
Mrs Churchill's state, however, as many were ready to
remind her, was liable to such sudden variation as might
disappoint her nephew in the most reasonable depend-
ence ; and Mrs Weston was at last persuaded to believe,
or to say, that it must be by some attack of Mrs
Churchill that he was prevented coming. Emma
looked at Harriet while the point was under considera-
tion ; she behaved very well, and betrayed no emotion.
The cold repast was over, and the party were to go
out once more to see what had not yet been seen, the
old Abbey fish-ponds ; perhaps get as far as the clover,
which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at
any rate, have the pjeasiu-e of being hot, and growing
cool again. Mr Woodhouse, who had already taken
his little round in the highest part of the gardens, where
no damps from the river were imagined even by him,
stirred no more ; and his daughter resolved to remain
with him, that Mrs Weston might be persuaded away
by her husband to the exercise and variety which her
spirits seemed to need.
Mr Knightley had done all in his power for Mr
V/oodhouse's entertainment. Books of engravings,
drawers of medals, cameos, corals, shells, and every
other family collection within his cabinets, had been
prepared for his old friend, to while away the morning ;
and the kindness had perfectly answered. Mr Wood-
house had been exceedingly well amused. Mrs Weston
had been showing them all to him, and now he would
show them all to Emma ; fortunate in having no other
resemblance to a child, than in a total want of taste for
what he saw, for he was slow, constant, and methodical.
Before this second looking over was begun, however,
Emma walked into the hall for the sake of a few
moments'free observation of the entrance and ground-
374 Emma
plot of the house, and was hardly there when Jane
Fairfax appeared, coming quickly in from the garden,
and with a look of escape. Little expecting to meet
Miss Woodhouse so soon, there was a start at first ; but
Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was in quest
of.
" Will you be so kind, " said she, " when I am
missed, as to say that I am gone home ? I am going
this moment. My aunt is not aware how late it is, nor
how long we have been absent ; but I am sure we shall
be wanted, and I am determined to go directly. I have
said nothing about it to anybody. It would only be
giving trouble and distress. Some are gone to the
ponds, and some to the lime-walk. Till they all come
in I shall not be missed ; and when they do, will you
have the goodness to say that I am gone ? "
" Certainly, if you wish it ; but you are not going to
walk to Highbury alone ? "
''Yes ; what should hurt me ? I walk fast. I shall
be at home in twenty minutes. "
" But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite
alone. Let my father's servant go with you. Let me
order the carriage. It can be round in five minutes. "
" Thank you, thank you — but on no account — I
would rather walk. And for me to be afraid of walking
alone ! — I, who may so soon have to guard others ! "
She spoke with great agitation ; and Emma very
feelingly replied — " That can be no reason for your
being exposed to danger now I must order the car-
riage. The heat even would be danger. You are
fatigued already. "
" I am, " she answered, " I am fatigued ; but it is
not the sort of fatigue — quick walking will refresh me.
Miss Woodhouse, we all know at times what it is to be
wearied in spirits. Mine, I confess, are exhausted.
The greatest kindness you can show me will be to let
Emma 375
me have my own way, and only say that I am gone
when it is necessary. "
Emma had not another word to oppose. She saw it
all ; and entering into her feelings, promoted her quit-
ting the house immediately, and watched her safelv off
with the zeal of a friend. Her parting look was grate-
ful ; and her parting words, " Oh ! Miss Woodhouse,
the comfort of being sometimes alone ! " seemed to
burst from an overcharged heart, and to describe some-
what of the continual endurance to be practised by her,
even towards some of those who loved her best.
" Such a home, indeed ! such an aunt ! " said Emma,
as she turned back into the hall again. " I do pity you.
And the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors,
the more I shall like you. "
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and
they had only accomplished some views of St Mark's
Place, Venice, when Frank Churchill entered the room.
Emma had not been thinking of him ; she had forgotten
to think of him, but she was very glad to see him.
Mrs Weston would be at ease. The black mare was
blameless ; they were right who had named Mrs
Churchill as the cause. He had been detained by a
temporary increase of illness in her — -a nervous seizure
which had lasted some hours ; and he had quite given
up every thought of coming till very late ; and had he
known how hot a ride he should have, and how late,
with all his hurry, he must be, he believed he should
not have come at all. The heat was excessive ; he had
never suffered anything like it — almost wished he had
staid at h ome — nothing killed him like heat — he could
bear any degree of cold, & c., but heat was intolerable ;
and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from
the slight remains of Mr Woodhouse's fire, looking very
deplorable.
" Yov viH soon be cooler, it you sit still, " said Emma.
376 Emma
" As soon 38 I am cooler I shall go back again. 1
could very ill be spared ; but such a point had been
made of my coming ! You will all be going soon, I
suppose ; the whole party breaking up. I met one as
I came — Madness in such weather ! — absolute mad-
ness ! "
Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that
Frank Churchill's state might be best defined by the ex-
pressive phrase of being out of humour. Some people
were always cross when they were hot. Such might be
his constitution ; and as she knew that eating and drink-
ing were often the cure of such incidental complaints,
she recommended his taking some refreshment ; he
would find abundance of everything in the dining-
room ; and she humanely pointed out the door.
" No ; he should not eat. He was not hungry ; it
would only make him hotter. " In two minutes, how-
ever, he relented in his own favour ; and muttering
something about spruce-beer, walked off. Emma re-
turned all her attention to her father, saying in secret —
** I am glad I have done being in love with him. I
should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a
hot morning. Harriet's sweet easy temper will not mind
it. "
He was gone long enough to have had a very com-
fortable meal, and came back all the better — grown
quite cool, and with good manners, like himself, able to
draw a chair close to them, take an interest in their em-
ployment, and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should
be so late. He was not in his best spirits, but seemed
trying to improve them ; and, at last, made himself talk
nonsense very agreeably. They were looking over
views in Swisserland.
" As soon as my aunt gets well I shall go abroad, "
said he. " I shall never be easy till I have seen some
of these places. You will have my sketches, some time
Emma 379
or other, to look at — or my tour to read — or ^.wanting
I shall do something to expose myself. " " were
" That may be — but not by sketches in Swisserlatiy
You will never go to Swisserland. Your uncle and aunt
will never allow you to leave England. "
" They may be induced to go too. A warm climate
may be prescribed for her. I have more than half an
expectation of our all going abroad. I assure you, I
have. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I
shall soon be abroad. I ought to travel. I am tired
of doing nothing. I want a change. I am serious,
Miss Woodhouse, whatever your penetrating eyes may
fancy — I am sick of England, and would leave it to-
morrow if I could. "
" You are sick of prosperity and Indulgence ! Cannot
you invent a few hardships for yourself, and be contented
to stay ? "
" / sick of prosperity and indulgence ! You are
quite mistaken. I do not look upon myself as either
prosperous or indulged. I am thwarted in everything
material. I do not consider myself at all a fortunate
person. "
" You are not quite so miserable, though, as when
you first came. Go and eat and drink a little more,
and you will do very well. Another slice of cold meat,
another draugiit of Madeira and water, will make you
nearly on a par with the rest of us. "
" No — I shall not stir. I shall sit by you. You
are my best cure. "
" We are going to Box Hill to-morrow : you will
join us. It is not Swisserland, but it will be some-
thing for a young man so much in want of a change.
You will stay and go with us ? "
" No, certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of
the evening. "
" But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow
morning. "
376
Emma
" A.« —'t will not be worth while. If I come, T
couM oe cross. "
rr " Then pray stay at Richmond. "
" But if I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never
bear to think of you all there without me. "
" These are difficulties which you must settle for
yourself. Choose your own degree of crossness. I
shall press you no more. "
The rest of the party were now returning, and all
were soon collected. With some there was great joy
at the sight of Frank Churchill ; others took it very
composedly ; but there was a very general distress and
disturbance on Miss Fairfax's disappearance being ex-
plained. That it was time for everj'body to go concluded
the subject ; and with a short final arrangement for the
next day's scheme, they parted. Frank Churchill's
little inclination to exclude himself increased so much,
that his last words to Emma were —
" Well ; — if you wish me to stay and join the party,I
will. "
She smiled her acceptance ; and nothing less than a
summons from Richmond was to take him back before
the following evening.
Chapter %%J,Ji%
THEY had a very fine day for Box Hill ; and all
the other outward circumstances of arrange-
ment, accommodation, and punctuality, were in
favour of a pleasant party. Mr Weston directed the
whole, officiating safely between Hartfield and the
vicarage, and everybody was in good time. Emma and
Harriet went together ; Miss Bates and her niece with
the Eltons ; the gentlemen on horseback. Mrs Weston
Emma 379
remained with Mr Woodhouse. Nothing was wanting
but to be happy when they got there. Seven miles were
travelled in expectation of enjoyment, and everybody
had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the
general amount of the day there was deficiency.
There was a languor, a want of spirits, a want of union,
which could not be got over. They separated too
much into parties. The Eltons walked together ; Mr
Knightley took charge of Miss Bates and Jane ; and
Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill.
And Mr Weston tried, in vain, to make them harmon-
ise better. It seemed at first an accidental division, but
it never materially varied. Mr and Mrs Elton, indeed,
showed no unwillingness to mix, and be as agreeable as
they could ; but during the tv/o whole hours that were
spent on the hill, there seemed a principle of separation
between the other parties, too strong for any fine
prospects, or any cold collation, or any cheerful Mr
Weston, to remove.
At first it was downright dulness to Emma. She
had never seen Frank Churchill so silent and stupid.
He said nothing worth hearing — looked without seeing
— admired without intelligence — listened without know-
ing what she said. While he was so dull, it was no
wonder that Haniet should be dull likewise ; and they
were both insuiferable.
When they all sat down it was better — to her taste a
great deal better — for Frank Churchill grew talkative
and gay, making her his first object. Every distinguish-
ing attention that could be paid, was paid to her. To
amuse her, and be agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that
he cared for — and Emma, glad to be enlivened, not
sorry to be flattered, was gay and easy too, and gave him
all the friendly encouragement, the admission to be
gallant, which she had ever given in the first and most
animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now.
380 Emma
in her own estimation, meant nothing, though in the
judgment of most people looking on, it must have had
such an appearance as no English word but flirtation
could very well describe. " Mr Frank Churchill and
Miss Woodhouse flirted together excessively. " They
were laying themselves open to that very phrase — and
to having it sent ofF in a letter to Maple Grove by one
lady, to Ireland by another. Not that Emma was gay
and thoughtless from any real felicity ; it was rather
because she felt less happy than she had expected.
She laughed because she was disappointed ; and though
she liked him for his attentions, and thought them all,
whether in friendship, admiration, or playfulness, ex-
tremely judicious, they were not winning back her
heart. She still intended him for her friend.
" How much I am obliged to you, " said he, " for
telling me to come to-day ! — If it had not been for you,
1 should certainly have lost all the happiness of this
party. I had quite determined to go away again. "
" Yes, you were very cross ; and I do not know
what about, except that you were too late for the best
strawberries. I was a kinder friend than you deserved.
But you were humble. You begged hard to be com-
manded to come. "
" Don't say I was cross. I was fatigued. The heat
overcame me. "
" It is hotter to-day. "
" Not to my feelings. I am perfectly comfortable
to-day. "
" You are comfortable because you are under com-
mand. "
" Your command ? — Yes. "
" Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-
command. You had, somehow or other, broken
bounds yesterday, and run away from your own manage-
•nent ; but to-day you are got back again — and as I
Emma 381
cannot be always with you, it is best to Deiieve your
temper under your own command rather than mine. "
" It comes to the same thing. I can have no self
command without a motive. You order me, whether
you speak or not. And you can be always with me.
You are always with me. "
" Dating from three o'clock yesterday. My per-
petual influence could not begin earlier, or you would
not have been so much out of humour before. "
" Three o'clock yesterday ! That is your date. I
thought I had seen you first in February. "
" Your gallantry is really unanswerable. But " (lower-
ing her voice) " nobody speaks except ourselves, and it is
rather too much to be talking nonsense for the entertain-
ment of seven silent people. "
" I say nothing of which I am ashamed, " replied he,
with lively impudence. " I saw you first in February.
Let everybody on the Hill hear me if they can. Let
my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and Dork-
ing on the other. I saw you first in February. " And
then whispering — " Our companions are excessively
stupid. What shall we do to rouse them ? Any non-
sense will serve. They shall talk. Ladies and gentle-
men, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever
she is, presides) to say, that she desires to k^ow what
you are all thinking of ? "
Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Miss
Bates said a great deal ; Mrs lilton swelled at the idea
of Miss Woodhouse's presiding ; Mr Knighdey's answer
was the most distinct.
" Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to
hear what we are all thinking of? "
" Oh, no, no ! " cried Emma,, laughing as carelessly
as she could — " upon no account in the world. It is
the very last thing I would stard the brunt of just now.
Let me hear anything rather than what you are all
382 Emma
thinking of. I will not say quite all. There are one
or two perhaps " (glancing at Mr Weston and Hairiet),
" whose thoughts I might not be afraid of knowing. "
" It is a sort of thing, " cried Mrs Elton emphatically,
" which /should not have thought myself privileged to
inquire into. Though, perhaps, as the chaperon of the
party — / never was in any circle — exploring parties —
young ladies — married women — "
Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband ; and he
murmured, in reply —
" Veiy true, my love, very true. Exactly so, indeed
— quite unheard of — but some ladies say anything.
Better pass it off as a joke. Everybody knows what
is due to you "
" It will not do, " whispered Frank to Emma, " they
are most of them affronted. I will attack them with
more address. Ladies and gentlemen, I am ordered by
Miss WoodJiouse to say, that she waves her right of
knowing exactly what you may ail be thinking of, and
only requires something very entertaining from each of
you, in a general way. Here are seven of you, besides
myself (who, she is pleased to say, am very entertaining
already ),:, and she only demands from each of you,
either onft thing very clever, be it prose or verse, original
or repeated ; or two things modeiately clever ; or three
things very dull indeed ; and she engages to laugh
heartily at then^ all. "
" Oh 1 very Well, " exclaimed Miss Bates ; " then I
need not be uneasy. * Three things very dull indeed.'
That will just do for me, you know. I shall be sure
to say three dull iJiings as soon as ever I open my
mouth, shan't I ? " (booking round with the most good-
humoured dependence (in everybody's assent. ) " Do not
you all think I shall .^ " ^
Emma could not resists
" Ah ! ma'am, but theite may be a difficulty. Pardon
Emma 383
me, but you will be limited as to number — only three
at once. "
Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her
manner, did not immediately catch her meaning ; but,
when it burst on her, it coiJd not anger, though a slight
blush showed that it could pain her.
" Ah ! well — to be sure. Yes, I see what she
means " (turning to Mr Knightley) " and I will try to
hold my tongue. I must make myself very disagreeable,
or she would not have said such a thing to an old
friend. "
" I like your plah, " cried Mr Weston. " Agreed,
agreed. I will do my best. I am making a conundrum.
How will a conundrum reckon ? "
" Low, I am afraid, sir, very low, " answered his
son ; " but we shall be indulgent, especially to any one
who leads the way. "
" No, no, " said Emma, " it will not reckon low. A
conundrum of Mr Weston's shall clear him and his next
neighbour. Come, sir, pray let me hear it. "
" I doubt its being very clever myself, " said Mr
Weston. " It is too much a matter of fact ; but here
it is — What two letters of the alphabet are there that
express perfection ? "
" What two letters — express perfection ? I am sure
I do not know. "
" Ah ! you will never guess. You " (to Emma), " I
am certain, will never guess. I will tell you. M and A.
Emma. Do you understand ?
Understanding and gratification came togetlier. It
might be a very indifferent piece of wit, but Emma
found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it : and so
did Frank and Harriet, It did not seem to touch the
rest of the party equally ; some looked very stupid about
it, and Mr Knightley gravely said —
" This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted,
384
Emma
and Mr Weston has done very well for himself: but he
must have knocked up everybody else. Perfection
should not have come quite so soon. "
" Oh ! for myself, 1 protest I must be excused, "
said Mrs Elton. " / really cannot attempt — I am not
at all fond of the sort of thing. I had an acrostic
once sent to me upon my own name which I was not
at all pleased with. I knew who it came from. An
abominable puppy! You know who I mean " (nodding
to her husband). " These kind of things are very well
at Christmas, when one is sitting round the fire ; but
quite out of place, in my opinion, when one is exploring
about the country in summer. Miss Woodhouse must
excuse me. I am not one of those who have witty
things at everybody's service. I do not pretend to be
a wit. I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way,
but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak,
and when to hold my tongue. Pass us, if you please, Mr
Churchill. Pass Mr E., Knightley, Jane, and myself.
We have nothing clever to say — not one of us. "
" Yes yes, pray pass to^, " added her husband, with a
sort of sneering consciousness ; " / have nothing to say
that can entertain Miss Woodhouse, or any other young
lady. An old married man — quite good for nothing.
Shall we walk, Augusta ? "
" With all my heart. I am really tired of exploring
so long on one spot. Come, Jane, take my other arm. "
Jane declined it, however, and the husband and \vife
walked off. jV'Happy couple ! " said Frank Churchill,
as soon as they were out of hearing ; " how well they suit
one another ! Veiy lucky — marrying as they did, upon
an acquaintance formed only in a public place ! They
only knew each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath !
Peculiarly lucky ! for as to any real knowledge of a
person's disposition that Bath, or any public place, can
give — it is all nothing ; there can be no knowledge.
Emma 385
It is only by seeing women in their own honies, among
their own set, just as they always are, that you can form
any just judgment. Short of that, it is all guess and
luck — and will generally be ill-luck. How many a
man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and
rued it all the rest of his life !'fj
Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except
among her own confederates, spoke now.
" Such things do occur, undoubtedly. " She was
stopped by a cough. Frank Churchill turned towards
her to listen.
" You were speaking, " said he, gravely. She re-
covered her voice.
" I was only going to observe, that though such unfortu-
nate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and
women, I cannot imagine them to be very frequent.
A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise — but
there is generally time to recover from it afterwards. I
would be understood to mean, that it can be only weak,
irresolute characters (whose happiness must be always at
the mercy of chance), who will suffer an unfortunate
acquaintance to be an inconvenience, an oppression for
ever. "
He made no answer ; merely looked, and bowed
in submission ; and soon afterwards said, in a lively
tone —
" Well, I have so little confidence in my own judg-
ment, that whenever I marry, I hope somebody will
choose my wife for me? Will you? " (turning to Emma).
" Will you choose a wife for me. I am sure I should
like anybody fixed on by you. You provide for the
family, you know " (with a smile at his father). " Find
somebody for me. I am in no hurry. Adopt her ;
educate her. "
" And make her like myself. "
" By all means, if you can. "
o
386 Emma
" Very well. I undertake the commission. You
ihall have a charming wife. "
" She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes. 1
care for nothing else. I shall go abroad for a couple of
years — and when I return, I shall come to you for my
wife. Remember. "
Emma was in no danger of forgetting. It was a
commission to touch every favourite feeling. Would
not Harriet be the very creature described ? Hazle
eyes excepted, two years more might make her all that
he wished. He might even have Harriet in his thoughts
at the moment ; who could say ? Referring the educa-
tion to her seemed to imply it.
" Now, ma'am, " said Jane to her aunt, " shall we
join Mrs Elton ? "
" If you please, my dear. With all my heart. 1
am quite ready. I was ready to have gone with her,
but this will do just as well. We shall soon overtake
her. There she is — no, that's somebody else. That's
one of the ladies in the Ir.sh car party, not at all like
her. Well, I declare — "
They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr
Knighdey. Mr Weston, his son, Emma, and Harriet
only remained ; and the young man's spirits now rose
to a pitch almost unpleasant. Even Emma grew tired
at last of flattery and merriment, and wished herself
rather walking quietly about with any of the others, or
sitting almost alone, and quite unattended to, in tranquil
observation of the beautiful views beneath her. The
appearance of the servants looking out for them to give
notice of the carriages was a joyful sight ; and even the
bustle of collecting and preparing to depart, and the
solicitude of Mrs Elton to have her carriage first, were
gladly endured, in tlie prospect of the quiet drive home
which was to close the very questionable enjoyments of
this day of pleasure. Such another scheme, composed
Emma 387
of so many ill-assorted people, she hoped never to be
betrayed into again.
While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr
Knightley by her side. He looked around, as if to see
that no one were near, and then said —
" Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have
been used to do ; a privilege rather endured than
allowed, perhaps, but I must still use it. I cannot see
you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. How could
you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates ? How could you
be so insolent in your wit to a woman of her character,
age, and situation ? Emma, I had not thought it
possible. "
Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to
laugh it off.
" Nay, how could I help saying what I did ?
Nobody could have helped it. It was not so very
bad. I dare say she did not understand me. "
" I assure you she did. She felt your full meaning.
She has talked of it since. I wish you could have
heard how she talked of it — with what candour and
generosity, I wish you could have heard her honour-
ing your forbearance, in being able to pay her such
attentions, as she was for ever receiving from yourself
and your father, when her society must be so irksome. "
* < Oh ! " cried Emma, " I know there is not a better
creature in the world ; but you must allow, that what
is good and what is ridiculous are most unfortunately
blended in her. "
" They are blended, " said he, " I acknowledge ;
and, were she prosperous, I could allow much for the
occasional prevalence of the ridiculous over the good.
Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every
harmless absurdity to take its chance ; I would not
quarrel with you for any liberties of manner. Were she
youi- equal in situation— but. Emma, consider how far
388
Emma
this is from being the case. She is poor ; she has sunk
from the comforts she was bom to ; and if she live to
old age must probably sink. more. Her situation should
secure your compassion. It was badly done, indeed !
You, whom she had known from an infant, whom she
had seen grow up from a period when her notice was
an honour — to have you now, in thoughtless spirits,
and the pride of the moment, laugh at her, humble
her — and before her niece, too — and before others,
many of whom (certainly some) would be entirely
guided by your treatment of her. This is not pleasant
to you, Emma — and it is very far from pleasant
to me ; but I must, I will — I will tell you truths
while I can ; satisfied with proving myself your friend
by very faithful counsel, and trusting that you will some
time or other do me greater justice than you can do
now. "
While they talked they were advancing towards the
carriage ; it was ready ; and, before she could speak
again, he had handed her in. He had misinterpreted
the feelings which had kept her face averted, and her
tongue motionless. They were combined only of
anger against herself, mortiiication, and deep concern.
She had not been able to speak ; and, on entering the
carriage, sunk back for a moment overcome ; then
reproaching herself for having taken no leave, making
no acknowledgement, parting in apparent sullenness, she
looked out with voice and hand eager to show a differ-
ence ; but it v/as just too late. He had turned away,
and the horses were in motion. She continued to look
back, but in vain ; and soon, with what appeared
unusual speed, they were half way down the hill, and
everything left far behind. She was vexed beyond
what could have been expressed — almost beyond what
she could conceal. Never had she felt so agitated,
mortified, greved, at any circumstance in her life.
Emma 389
She was most forcibly struck. The truth of his
representation there was no denying. She felt it at
her heart. How could she have been so brutal, so
cruel to Miss Bates ! How could she have exposed
herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued !
And how suffer him to leave her without saying
one word of gratitude, of concurrence, of common kind-
ness !
Time did not compose her. As she reflected more,
she seemed but to feel it more. She never had been so
depressed. Happily it was not necessary to speak.
There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits her-
self, fagged, and very willing to be silent ; and Emma
felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the
way home, without being at any trouble to check them,
extraordinary as they were.
Cl)aptcr ^ILIBF.
THE wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was
in Emma's thoughts ail the evening. How it
might be considered by the rest of the party she
could not tell. They, in their different homes, and
their different ways, might be looking back on it with
pleasure ; but in her view it was a morning more com-
pletely misspent, more totally bare of rational satisfaction
at the time, and more to be abhorred in recollection,
than any she had ever passed. A whole evening of
backgammon with her father was felicity to it. There,
indeed, lay real pleasure, for there she was giving up
the sweetest hours of the twenty-four to his comfort ;
and feeling that, unmerited as might be the degree of
his fond affection and confiding esteem, she could not,
in her general conduct, be open to any severe reproach.
390 Emma
As a daughter, she hoped she was not without a heart.
She hoped no one could have said to her, " How could
you be so unfeeling to your father ? — I must, I will tell
you truths while I can. " Miss Bates should never
again — no never ! If attention in future could do away
the past she might hope to be forgiven. She had been
often remiss, her conscience told her so ; remiss, per-
haps, more in thought than fact ; scornful, ungracious.
But it should be so no more. In the warmth of true
contrition she would call upon her the very next morn-
ing, and it should be the beginning, on her side, of a
regular, equal, kindly intercourse.
She was just as determined when the morrow came
and went early, that nothing might prevent her. It was
not unlikely, she thought, that she might see Mr Knight-
ley in her way ; or perhaps he might come in while
she were paying her visit. She had no objection. She
would not be ashamed of the appearance of the peni-
tence, so justly and truly hers. Her eyes were towards
Donwell as she walked, but she saw him not.
" The ladies were all at home. " She had never
rejoiced at the sound before, nor ever before entered
the passage, nor walked up the stairs, with any wish of
giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of deriv-
ing it, except in subsequent ridicule.
There was a bustle on her approach ; a good deal of
moving and talking. She heard Miss Bates's voice ;
something was to be done in a hurry ; the maid looked
frightened and awkward ; hoped she would be pleased
to wait a moment, and then ushered her in too soon.
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the ad-
joining room. Jane she had a distinct glimpse of,
looking extremely ill ; and, before the door had shut
them out, she heard Miss Bates saying, " Well, my
dear, I shall say you are laid down upon the bed, and I
am sure you are ill enouph "
Emma 391
Poor old Mrs Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked
as if she did not quite understand what was going
on.
" I am afraid Jane is not very well, " said she, " but
/ do not know ; they tell me she is well. 1 dare say
my daughter will be here presently, Miss Woodhouse.
I hope you find a chair. I wish Hetty had not gone.
I am very little able — have you a chair, ma'am ? Do
you sit where you like ? I am sure she will be here
presently. "
Emma seriously hoped she would. She had a
moment's fear of Miss Bates keeping away from her.
But Miss Bates soon came — " Very happy and obliged "
— but Emma's conscience told her that there was not
the same cheerful volubility as before — less ease of look
and manner. A very friendly inquiry after Miss
Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to a return of
old feelings. The touch seemed immediate.
" Ah, Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are ! I
suppose you have heard — and are come to give us joy.
This does not seem much like joy, indeed, in me "
(twinkling away a tear or two) ; " but it will be very
trying for us to part with her, after having had her so
long ; and she has a dreadful headach just now, writing
all the morning ; such long letters, you know, to be
written to Colonel Campbell and Mrs Dixon.'My
dear,'said I,'you will blind yourself,'for tears were in
her eyes perpetually. One cannot wonder, one cannot
wonder. It is a great change ; and though she is
amazingly fortunate, — such a situation, I suppose, as no
young woman before ever met with on first going out ;
do not think us ungrateful. Miss Woodhouse, for such
surprising good fortune " (again dispersing her tears) —
" but, poor dear soul ! if you were to see what a headach
she has. When one is in great pain, you know one
cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve. She
392 Emma
is as low as possible. To look at lier nobody would
think how delighted and happy she is to have secured
such a situation. You will excuse her not coming to
you ; she is not able, she is gone into her own room.
I want her to lie down upon the bed.'My dear,'
said I,'I shall say you are laid down upon the bed ;'
but, however, she is not ; she is walking about the room.
But, now that she has written her letters, she says she
shall soon be well. She will be extremely sorry to
miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness
will excuse her. You were kept waiting at the door :
I was quite ashamed ; but somehow there was a little
bustle ; for it so Happened that we had not heard the
knock ; and, till you were on the stairs, we did not
know anybody was coming. * It is only Mrs Cole,'
said I,'depend upon it ; nobody else would come so
early.'—'Well,'said she,'it must be borne some time
or other, and it may as well be now.'But then Patty
came in, and said it was you.'Oh !'said I, * it is
Miss Woodhouse, I am sure you will like to see her'—'I
can see nobody,'said she, and up she got, and would go
away ; and that was what made us keep you waiting ;
and extremely sorry and ashamed we were. ♦ If you
must go, my dear,'said I,'you must, and I will say
you are laid down upon the bed.'"
Emma was most sincerely interested. Her heart had
been long growing kinder towards Jane ; and this pic-
ture of her present sufferings acted as a cure of every
former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing but
pity ; and the remembrance of the less just and less
gentle sensations of the past obliged her to admit that
Jane might very naturally resolve on seeing Mrs Cole,
or any other steady friend, when she might not bear to
see herself. She spoke as she felt, with earnest regret
and solicitude — sincerely wishing that the circumsunces
which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually
Emma 393
determined on, might be as much for Miss Fairfax's
advantage and comfort as possible.
" It must be a severe trial to them all. She had un-
derstood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell's
return. "
" So very kind ! " replied Miss Bates ; " but you are
always kind. "
There was no bearing such an " always ; " and to
break through her dreadful gratitude Emma made the
direct inquiry of —
" Where, may I ask, is Miss Fairfax going ? "
" To a Mrs Smallridge — charming woman — most
superior — to have the charge of her three little girls —
delightful children ! Impossible that any situation
could be more replete with comfort: if we except,
perhaps, Mrs Suckling's own family, and Mrs Bragge's,
but Mrs Smallridge is intimate with both, and in the
very same neighbourhood:— lives only four miles from
Maple Grove. Jane will be only four miles from
Maple Grove. "
" Mrs Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom
Miss Fairfax owes "
" Yes, our good Mrs Elton. The most indefatigable,
true friend. She would not take a denial. She would
not let Jane say,'No ;'for when Jane first heard of
it (it was the day before yesterday, the very morning
we were at Donwell), when Jane first heard of it, she
was quite decided against accepting the offer, and for
the reasons you mention ; exactly as j'ou say, she had
made up her mind to close with nothing till Colonel
Campbell's return, and nothing should induce her to
enter into any engagement at present — and so she told
Mrs Elton over and over again — and I am sure I had
no more idea that she would change her mind ! — but
that good Mrs Elton, whose judgement never fails her,
saw farther than I did. It is not everybody that would
o 2
394 Emma
have stood out in such a kind way as she did, and re-
fuse to take Jane's answer ; but she positively declared
she would not write any such denial yesterday, as Jane
wished her ; she would wait — and, sure enough, yester-
day evening, it was all settled that Jane should go.
Quite a suqmse to me ! I had not the least idea! —
Jane took Mrs Elton aside, and told her at once, that,
upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs [^Smallndge'sJ
situation, she had come to the resolution of accepting it.
I did not know a word of it till it was all settled. "
" You spent the evening with Mrs Elton ? "
" Yes, all of us ; Mrs Elton would have us come.
It was settled so, upon the hill, while we were walking
about with Mr Knightley.'You must all spend your
evening with us,'said she —'I positively must have you
all come.'"
" Mr Knightley was there too, was he ? "
" No, not Mr Knightley ; he declined it from the
first ; and though I thought he would come, because
Mrs Elton declared she would not let him off, he did
not ; but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there,
and a very agreeable evening we had. Such kind
friends, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one must always
find agreeable, though everybody seemed rather fagged
after the morning's party. Even pleasure, you know, is
fatiguing — and I cannot say that any of them seemed
very much to have enjoyed it. However, / shall
always think it a very pleasant party, and feel ex-
tremely obliged to the kind friends who included me
in it. "
" Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not
aware of it, had been making up her mind the whole
day? "
^ I dare say she had. "
" Whenever the time may come it must be unwelcome
to her and all her friends — but I hope her engagernent
Emma 395
will have every alleviation that is possible — I nieao, as
to the character and manners of the family. "
" Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. Yes, indeed,
there is everything in the world that can make her
happy in it. Except the Sucklings and Bragges, there
is not such another nursery establishment, so liberal and
elegant, in all Mrs Elton's acquaintance. Mrs Small-
ridge, a most delightful woman ! A style of living
almost equal to Maple Grove — and as to the children,
except the little Sucklings and little Bragges, there
are not such elegant sweet children anywhere. Jane
will be treated with such regard and kindness ! It
will be nothing but pleasure — a life of pleasure. And
her salary — I really cannot venture to name her salary
to you. Miss Woodhouse. Even you, used as you are
to great sums, would hardly believe that so much could
be given to a young person like Jane. "
" Ah, madam, " cried Emma, " if other children are
at all like what I remember to have been myself, I
should think five times the amount of what I have evei
yet heard named as a salary on such occasions dearly
earned. "
" You are so noble in your ideas! "
" And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you ? "
" Very soon, very soon, indeed ; that's the worst ot
it. Within a fortnight. Mrs Smallridge is in a great
hurry. My poor mother does not know how to bear it.
So, then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and say,
* Come, ma'am, do not let us think about it any more.'"
" Her friends must all be sorry to lose her ; and will
not Colonel and Mrs Campbell be sorry to find that
she has engaged herself before their return ? "
" Yes ; Jane says she is sure they will ; but yet this
is such a situation as she cannot feel herself justified in
declining. I was so astonished when she first told me
what she had been sayirjg to Mrs Elton, and when Mrs
396 Emma
Elton at the same moment came congratulating me
upon it ! It was before tea — stay — no, it could not be
before tea, because we were just going to cards — and
yet it was before tea, because I remember thinking —
Oh, no, now I recollect, now I have it : something hap-
pened before tea, but not that. Mr Elton was called
out of the room before tea, old John Abdy's son wanted
to speak with him. Poor old John — I have a great
regard for him ; he was clerk to my poor father twenty-
seven years ; and, now, poor old man, he is bedridden,
and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints —
I must go and see him to-day ; and so will Jane, I am
sure, if she gets out at all. And poor John's son came to
talk to Mr Elton about relief from the parish : he is
very well-to-do himself, you know, being head man at
the Crown — ostler, and everything of that sort — but
still he cannot keep his father without some help ; and
so, when Mr Elton came back, he told us what John
ostler had been telling him, and then it came out about
the chase having been sent to Randalls to take Mr Frank
Churchill to Richmond. That was what happened be-
fore tea. It was after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs
Elton. "
Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how
perfectly new this circumstance was to her ; but as with-
out supposing it possible that she could be ignorant of
any of the particulars of Mr Frank Churchill's going,
she proceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence.
What Mr Elton had learned from the ostler on the
subject, being the accumulation of the ostler's own
knowledge, and the knowledge of the servants at Ran-
dalls, was, that a messenger had come over from Rich-
mond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill —
which messenger, however, had been no more than was
expected ; and that Mr Churchill had sent his nephew
a fev/ lines containing, upon the whole, a tolerable ac-
Emma 397
count of Mrs Churchill, and only wishing him not to
delay coming back bej'ond the next morning early ; but
that Mr Frank Churchill having resolved to go home
directly, without waiting at all, and his horse seeming to
have got a cold, Tom had been sent ofF immediately for
the Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen
it pass by, the boy going a good pace, and driving very
steady.
There was nothing in all this eithei to astonish or
interest, and it caught Emma's attention only as it united
with the subject which already engaged her mind. The
contrast between Mrs Churchill's importance in the
world and Jane Fairfax's struck her ; one was every-
thing, the other nothing — and she sat musing on the
difference of woman's destiny, and quite unconscious on
what her eyes were fixed, till roused by Miss Bates
saying —
" Ay, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte.
What is to become of that ? Very true. Poor dear Jane
was talking of it just now. * You must go,'said she.
'You and I must part. You will have no business here.
Let it stay, however,'said she ;'give it house-room
til! Colonel Campbell comes back. I shall talk about it
to him ; he will settle for me ; he will help me out of
all my difficulties.'And to this day, I do believe, she
knows not whether it was his present or his daughter's. "
Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte ;
and the remembrance of all her former fanciful and un-
fair conjectures was so little pleasing that she soon
allowed herself to believe her visit had been long enough ;
and, with a repetition of everything that she could ven-
ture to say of the good wishes which she really felt, took
leave
398 Emma
Cbapter ^3LF.
EMMA'S pensive meditations, as she walked home,
were not interrupted ; but on entering the par-
lour, she found those who must rouse her. M* "
Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her abseno ,
and were sitting with her father. Mr Knightley
immediately got up, and, in a manner decidedly graver
than usual, said —
" I would not go away without seeing you, but I
have no time to spare, and therefore must now be gone
directly. I am going to London, to spend a few days
with John and Isabella. Have you anything to send or
say, besides the'love,'which nobody carries ? "
" Nothing at all. But is not this a sudden
scheme ? "
" Yes — rather — I have been thinking of it some httle
time. "
Emma was sure he had not forgiven her ; he looked
unlike himself. Time, however, she thought, would
tell him that they ought to be friends again. While he
stood, as if meaning to go, but not going — her father
began his inquiries.
" Well, my dear, and did you get there safely ? —
And how did you find my worthy old friend and her
daughter ? — I dare say they must liave been very much
obliged to you for coming. Dear Emma has been to
call on Mrs and Miss Bates, Mr Knightley, as I told
you before. She is always so attentive to them. "
Emma's colour was heightened by this unjust praise ;
and with a smile and shake of the head, which spoke
much, she looked at Mr Knightley. It seemed as if
there were an instantaneous impression in her favour, as
if his eyes received the truth from hers, and all that had
passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and
Emma 399
honoured. He looked at her with a glow of regard.
She was warmly gratified — and in another moment still
more so, by a little movement of more than common
friendliness on his part. He took her hand ; — whether
she had not herself made the first motion, she could not
say — she might, perhaps, have rather offered it — but he
took her hand, pressed it, and certainly was on the
point of carrying it to his lips — when, from some fancy
or other, he suddenly let it go. Why he should feel
such a scruple, why he should change his mind when it
was all but done, she could not perceive. He would
have judged better, she thought, if he had not stopped.
The intention, however, was indubitable ; and whether
it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry,
or however else it happened, but she thought nothing
became him more. It was with him of so simple, yet
so dignified a nature. She could not but recall the
attempt with great satisfaction. It spoke such perfect
amity. He left them immediately afterwards — gone in
a moment. He always moved vvith the alertness of a
mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory,
but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his
disappearance.
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss
Bates, but she wished she had left her ten minutes
earlier ; — it would have been a great pleasure to talk
over Jane Fairfax's situation with Mr Knightley.
Neither would she regret that he should be going to
Brunswick Square, for she knew how much his visit
would be enjoyed — but it might have happened at a
better time — and to have had longer notice of it would
have been pleasanter. They parted thorough friends,
however ; she could not be deceived as to the meaning
of his countenance, and his unfinished gallantry ; — it was
all done to assure her that she had fully recovered his
good opinion. He had been sitting with them half an
400 Emma
hour, she found. It was a pity tlmt she had not corne
back, earlier.
In the hope of diverting her father's thoughts from
the disagreeableness of Mr Knightley's going to London,
and going so suddenly, and going on horseback, which
she knew would be all very bad, Emma communicated
her news of Jane Fairfax, and her dependence on the
effect was justified ; it supplied a very useful check —
interested, without disturbing him. He had long made
up his mind to Jane Fairfax's going out as governess,
and could talk of it cheerfully, but Mr Knightley's
going to London had been an unexpected blow.
" I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to
be so comfortably settled. Mrs Elton is very good-
natured and agreeable, and I dare say her acquaintance
are just what they ought to be. I hope it is a dry
situation, and that her health will be taken good care of.
It ought to be a first object, as I am sure poor Miss
Taylor's always was with me. You know, my dear,
she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor
was to us. And I hope she will be better off in one
respect, and not be induced to go away after it has been
her home so long. "
The following day brought news from Richmond to
throw everything else into the background. An ex-
press arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs
Churchill. Though her nephew had had no particular
reason to hasten back on her account, she had not lived
above six-and-thirty hours after his return. A sudden
seizure, of a different nature from anything foreboded
by her general state, had carried her off after a short
struggle. The great Mrs Churchill was no more.
It was felt as such things must be felt. Everybody
had a degree of gravity and sorrow ; tenderness towards
the departed, solicitude for the surviving friends ; and,
in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where she would
Emma
401
be buried. Goldsmith tells us, tim^ when lovely woman
stoops to folly, she has nothing to do but to die ; and
when she stoops to be disagreeable, it is equally to be
recommended as a clearer of ill-fame. Mrs Churchill,
after being disliked at least twenty-five years, was now
spoken of with compassionate allowances. In one point
she was fully justified. She had never been admitted
before to be seriously ill. The event acquitted her of
all the fancifixlness, and all the selfishness of imaginary
complaints.
" Poor Mrs Churchill ! no doubt she had been
suffering a great deal : more than anybody had ever
supposed — and continual pain would try the temper.
It was a sad event — a great shock — with all her faults,
what would Mr Churchill do without her? Mr
Churchill's loss would be dreadful, indeed. Mr Churchill
would never get over it. " Even Mr Weston shook
his head, and looked solemn, and said, " Ah, poor
woman, who would have thought it ! " and resolved
that his mourning should be as handsome as possible ;
and his wife sat sighing and moralizing over her broad
hems with a commiseration and good sense true and
steady. How it would affect Frank, was among the
earliest thoughts of both. It was also a very early
speculation with Emma. The character of Mrs
Churchill, the grief of her husband — her mind glanced
over them both with awe and compassion — and then
rested with lightened feelings on how Frank might be
affected by the event, how benefited, how freed. She
saw in a moment all the possible good. Now an
attachment to Harriet Smith would have nothing to
encounter. Mr Churchill, independent of his wife, was
feared by nobody ; an easy, guidable man, to be
persuaded into anything by his nephew. All that
remained to be wished was that the nephew should form
the attachment, as, with all her good-will in the cause,
402 Emma
Emma could feel no certainty of its being already
formed.
Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion —
with great self-command. Whatever she might feel of
brighter hope she betrayed nothing. Emma was gratified
to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character,
and refrained from any allusion that might endanger its
maintenance. They spoke, therefore, of Mrs Churchill's
death with mutual forbearance.
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls,
communicating all that was immediately important of
their state and plans. Mr Churchill was better than
could be expected ; and their first removal, on the
departure of the funeral for Yorkshire, was to be to the
house of a very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr
Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years.
At present, there was nothing to be done for Harriet ;
good wishes for the future were all that could yet be
possible on Emma's side.
It was a more pressing concern to show attention to
Jane Fairfax, whose prospects were closing while
Harriet's opened, and whose engagements now allowed
of no delay in any one at Highbury who wished to
show her kindness — and with Emma it was grown into
a first wish. She had scarcely a stronger regret than
for her past coldness ; and the person, whom she had
t)een so many months neglecting, was now the very one
on whom she would have lavished every distinction of
regard or sympathy. She wanted to be of use to her ;
wanted to show a value for her society, and testify
respect and consideration. She resolved to prevail on
her to spend a day at Hartfield. A note was written
to urge it. The invitation was refused, and by a verbal
message. " Miss Fairfax was not well enough to
write ; " and when Mr Perry called at Hartfield, the
same morning, it appeared that she was so much in-
Emma
403
disposed as to have been visited, though against her
own consent, by himself, and that she was suffering
under severe headachs, and a nervous fever to a degree
which made him doubt the possibility of her going to
Mrs Smallridge's at the time proposed. Her health
seemed for the moment completely deranged — appetite
quite gone ; and though there were no absolutely alarming
symptoms, nothing touching the pulmonary complaint
which was the standing apprehension of the family, Mi
Perry was uneasy about her. He thought she had
undertaken more than she was equal to, and that she
felt it so herself, though she would not own it. Her
spirits seemed overcome. Her present home, he could
not but obsei " ve, was unfavourable to a nervous disorder ;
— confined always to one room ; — he could have wished
it otherwise ; — and her good aunt, though his very old
friend, he must acknowledge to be not the best com-
panion for an invalid of that description. Her care
and attention could not be questioned ; they were, in
fact, only too great. He very much feared that Miss
Fairfax derived more evil than good from them. Emma
listened with the warmest concern ; grieved for her
more and more, and looked around eager to discover
some way of being useful. To take her — be it only
an hour or two — from her aunt, to give her change of
air and scene, and quiet, rational conversation, even for
an hour or two, might do her good ; and the following
moi-ning she wrote again to say, in the most feeling
language she could command, that she would call for
her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name —
mentioning that she had Mr Perry's decided opinion
in favour of such exercise for his patient, " ^he answer
was only in this short note : —
" Miss Fairfax's compliments and thanks, but is quite
unequal to any exercise. "
Emma felt that her own note had deserved something
404 Emma
better; but it was impossible to quarrel with words, whose
tremulous inequality showed indisposition so plainly, and
she thought only of how she might best counteract this
unwillingness to be seen or assisted. In spite of the
answer, therefore, she ordered the carriage, and drove
to Mrs Bates's, in the hope that Jane would be induced
to join her — but it would not do ; — Miss Bates came
to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeing with
her most earnestly in thinking an ainng might be of
the greatest service — and everything that message could
do was tried — but all in vain. Miss Bates was obliged
to return without success ; Jane was quite unpersuadable ;
the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her
worse. Emma wished she could have seen her, and
tried her own powers ; but, almost before she could
hint the wish, Miss Bates made it appear that she had
promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse
in. " Indeed, the truth was, that poor dear Jane could
not bear to see anybody — anybody at all — Mrs Elton,
indeed, could not be denied — and Mrs Cole had made
such a point — and Mrs Perry had said so much — but,
except them, Jane would really see nobody. "
Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs
Eltons, the Mrs Peirys, and the Mrs Coles, who would
force themselves anywhere ; neither could she feel any
right of preference herself — she submitted, therefore,
and only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece's
appetite and diet, which she longed to be able to assist.
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy, and
veiy communicative ; Jane would hardly eat anything.
Mr Perry recommended nouiishing food ; but every-
thing they could command (and never had anybody
such good neighbours) was distasteful.
Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper
directly to an examination of her stores ; and some
arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily de-
Emma 405
spatched to Miss Bate^, with a most friendly note. Id
half an hour the anowroot was returned, with a thousand
thanks from Miss Bates, but " dear Jane would not be
satisfied without its being sent back ; it was a thing she
could not take — and, moreover, she insisted on her
saying that she was not at all in want of anything. "
When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had
been seen wandering about the meadows, at some dis-
tance from Highbury, on the afternoon of the very day
on which she had, under the plea of being unequal to
any exercise, so peremptorily refused to go out with her
in the carriage, she could have no doubt — putting every-
thing together — that Jane was resolved to receive no
kindness from her. She was sony, very sorry. Her
heart was grieved for a state which seemed but the more
pitiable from this sort of irritation of spirits, inconsist-
ency of action, and inequality of powers ; and it morti-
fied her that she was given so little credit for proper
feeling, or esteemed so little worthy as a friend : but
she had the consolation of knowing that her intentions
were good, and of being able to say to herself, that
could Mr Knightley have been privy to all her attempts
of assisting Jane Fairfax, could he even have seen into
her heart, he would not, on this occasion, have found
anything to reprove.
Cl)at)tcr %%V%
ONE morning, about ten days after Mrs Churchill's
decease, Emma was called downstairs to Mr
Weston, who " could not stay five minutes, and
wanted particularly to speak with her.'* He met her
at the parlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did,
in the natural key of his voice, sunk it immediately, to
say, unheard by her father —
4o6 Emma
" Can you come to Rindalls at any time this morn-
ing ? Do, if it be possible. Mrs Weston wants to see
you. She must see you. "
" Is she unwell ? "
" No, no ; not at all ; only a little agitated. She
would have ordered the carriage and come to you, but
she must see you aloney and that you know " (nodding
towards her father) " — Humph ! can you come ? "
" Certainly. This moment, if you please. It is
impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way, but
what can be the matter ? is she really not ill i "
" Depend upon me ; but ask no more questions. You
will know it all in time. The most unaccountable
business'But hush, hush ! "
To gu.ss what all this meant was impossible even for
Emma. Something really important seemed announced
by his looks ; but, as her friend was well, she endea-
voured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father,
that she would take her walk now, she and Mr Weston
were soon out of the house together, and on their way
at a quick pace for Randalls.
" Now, " said Emmsi, when they were fairly beyond
the sweep gates — " now, Mr Weston, do let me know
what has happened. "
" No, no, " he gravely replied. " Don't ask me.
I promised my wife to leave it all to her. She will
break it to you better than I can. Do not be impatient,
Emma ; it will all come out too soon. "
" Break it to me ! " cried Emma, standing still with
terror. " Good God ! Mr Weston, tell me at once.
Something has happened in Brunswick Square. I
know it has. Tell me, I charge you, tell me thif
moment what it is.
" No, indeed, you are mistaken. "
" Mr Weston, do not trifle with me. Consider how
manv of my dearest friends are now in Brunswick
Emma
407
Square, Which of them is it ? I charge you by all
that is sacred not to attempt concealment. "
*'Upon my word, Emma "
" Your word ! why not your honour ! why not say
upon your honour, that it has nothing to do with any of
them ? Good heavens ! What can be to be broke to
me, that does [not] relate to one of that family ? "
" Upon my honour, " said he very seriously, " it does
aot. It is not in the smallest degree connected with
any human being of the name of Knightley. "
Emma's courage returned, and she walked on.
" I was wrong, " he continued, " in talking of its
being broke to you. T should not have used the expres-
sion. In fact, it does not concern you, it concerns only
myself; — that is, we hope. Humph! — In short, my
dear Emma, there is no occasion to be so uneasy about
it. I don't say that it is not a disagreeable business,
but things might be much worse. If we walk fast, wc
shall soon be at Randalls. "
Emma found that she must wait ; and now it required
little effort. She asked no more questions therefore,
merely employed her own fancy, and that soon pointed
out to her the probability of its being some money con-
cern — something just come to light, of a disagreeable
nature, in the circumstances of the family ; something
which the late event at Richmond had brought forward.
Her fancy was very active. Half a dozen natural
children, perhaps, and poor Frank cut off! This, though
very undesirable, would be no matter of agony to her.
It inspired little more than an animating curiosity.
" Who is that gentleman on horseback ? " said she,
as they proceeded ; speaking more to assist Mr Weston
in keeping his secret than with any other view.
" I do not know. One of the Otways. — Not Frank :
it is not Frank, I assure you. You will not see him.
He is half way to Windsor by this time. "
4o8 Emma
" Has your son been with you, then ? ^
" Oh ! yes, did not you know ? Well, well, nevei
mind. "
For a moment he was silent ; and then added, in a
tone much more guarded and demure —
" Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us
how we did. "
They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.
" Well, my dear, " said he, as they entered the room,
" I have brought her, and now I hope you will soon be
better. I shall leave you together. There is no use in
delay. I shall not be far off, if you want me. " — And
Emma distinctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before
he quitted the room — " I have been as good as my word.
She has not the least idea. "
Mrs Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of
so much perturbation, that Emma's uneasiness in-
creased : and the moment they were alone, she eagerly
said —
" What is it, my dear friend ? Something of a very
unpleasant nature, I find, has occurred ; — do let me
know directly what it is. I have been walking all this
way in complete suspense. We both abhor suspense.
Do not let mine continue longer. It will do you good
to speak of your distress, whatever it may be. "
" Have you, indeed, no idea ? " said Mrs Weston
in a trembling voice. " Cannot you, my dear Emma
— cannot you form a guess as to what you are to
hear? "
" So far as that it relates to Mr Frank Churchill, I
Jo guess. "
" You are right. It does relate to him, and I will
tell you directly ; " (resuming her work, and seeming
resolved against looking up.) " He has been here, this
very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. It is
impossible to express our surprise. He came to speak
Emma 409
to his father on a subject — to announce an attach-
ment "
She stopped to breathe. Emma thought first of
herself, and then of Harriet.
" More than an attachment, indeed, " resumed Mrs
Weston: " an engagement — a positive engagement.
What will you say, Emma — what will anybody say —
when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fair-
fax are engaged — nay, that they have been long
engaged ? "
Emma even jumped with surprise ; and, horror-struck,
exclaimed —
" Jane Fairfax ! Good God ! You are not seriovs?
Yea do not mean it ? "
" You may well be amazed, " returned Mrs Weston,
still averting her eyes, and talking on with eagerness,
that Emma might have time to recover — " you may well
be amazed. But it is even so. There has been a
solemn engagement between them ever since October —
formed at Weymouth, and kept a secret from every-
body. Not a creature knowing it but themselves —
neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his. It is so
wonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact,
it is yet almost incredible to myself. I can hardly be-
lieve it. I thought I knew him. "
Emma scarcely heard what was said. Her mind was
divided between two ideas ; her own former conversa-
tions with him about Miss Fairfax, and poor Harriet ;
and for some time she could only exclaim, and require
confirmation, repeated confirmation.
" Well ! " said she at last, trying to recover herself,
" this is'a circumstance which I must think of at least
half a day before I can at all comprehend it. What !
— engaged to her all the winter — before either of them
came to Highbury ? "
" Engaged since October — secretly engaged. It has
410
Emma
hurt me, Emma, very much. It has hurt his father
equally. Some part of his conduct we cannot excuse. "
Emma pondered a moment, and then replied : — " I
will not pretend not to understand you ; and to give you
all the relief in my power, be assured that no such effect
has followed his attentions to me as you are apprehen-
sive of. "
Mrs Weston looked up, afraid to believe ; but
Emma's countenance was as steady as her words.
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this
boast of my present perfect indifference, " she continued,
" I will farther tell you, that there was a period in the
early part of our acquaintance when I did like him —
when I was very much disposed to be attached to him ;
nay, was attached — and how it came to cease is perhaps
the wonder. Fortunately, however, it did cease. I
have really for some time past — for at least these three
months — cared nothing about him. You may believe
me, Mrs Weston. This is the simple truth. "
Mrs Weston kissed her with tears of joy ; and when
she could find utterance, assured her that this protesta-
tion had done her more good than anything else in the
world could do.
" Mr Weston will be almost as much relieved as
myself, " said she. " On this point we have been
wretched. It was our darling wish that you might be
attached to each other, and we were persuaded that it
was so. Imagine what we have been feeling on your
account. "
" I have escaped ; and that t should escape may be a
matter of grateful wonder to you and myself. But this
does not acquit him, Mrs Weston ; and I must«say that
I think him greatly to blame. What right had he to
come among us with affection and faith engaged, and
with manners so very disengaged ? What right had he
to endeavour to please, as he certainly did — to distinguish
Hmma 411
any one young woman with persevering attention, as Va
certainly did, while he really belonged to another ? How
could he tell what mischief " he might be doing ? How
could he tell that he might not be making me in love
with him ? Very wrong, veiy wrong, indeed. "
" From something that he said, my dear Emma, I
rather imagine "
" And how could she bear such behaviour ? Com-
posure with a witness ! to look on, while repeated
attentions were offering to another woman before her
face, and not resent it. That is a degree of placidity
which I can neither comprehend nor respect. "
" There were misunderstandings between them,
Emma ; he said so expressly. He had not time to
enter into much explanation. He was here only a
quarter of an hour, and in a state of agitation which did
not allow the full use even of the time he could stay —
but that there had been misunderstandings, he decidedly
said. The present crisis, indeed, seemed to be brought
on by them ; and those misunderstandings might very
possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct. "
" Impropriety ! Oh ! Mrs Weston, it is too calm a
censure. Much, much beyond impropriety ! It has
sunk him — I cannot say how it has sunk him in my
opinion. So unlike what a man should be ! None of
that upright integrity, that strict adherence to truth
and principle, that disdain of trick and littleness, which
a man should display in every transaction of his
life. "
" Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part ; for
though he has been wrong in this instance, I have
known him long enough to answer for his having many,
very many good qualities ; and
" Good God ! " cried Emma, not attending to her,
" Mrs Smallridge, too ! Jane actually on the point of
going as governess ! What could he mean by such
412
Emma
horrible indelicacy ? To suffer her to engage herself^ —
to suffer her even to think of such a measure ! "
" He knew nothing about it, Emma. On tliis
article I can fully acquit him. It was a private resolu-
tion of hers, not communicated to him, or at least not
communicated in a way to cairy conviction. Till
yesterday, I know, he said he was in the dark as to her
plans. They burst on him, I do not know how, but by
some letter or message — and it was the discovery of
what she was doing, of this very project of hers, which
determined him to come forward at once, own it all to
his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short,
put an end to the miserable state of concealment that
had been carrying on so long. "
Emma began to listen better.
" I am to hear from him soon, " continued Mrs
Weston. " He told me at parting that he should soon
write ; and he spoke in a manner which seemed to
promise me many particulars that could not be given
now. Let us wait, therefore, for this letter. It may
bring many extenuations. It may make many things
intelligible and excusable which now are not to be un-
derstood. Don't let us be severe ; don't let us be in a
hurry to condemn him. Let us have patience. I must
love him ; and now that I am satisfied on one point,
the one material point, I am sincerely anxious for its all
turning out well, and ready to hope that it may. They
must both have suffered a great deal under such a system
of secrecy and concealment. "
" His sufferings, " replied Emma, drily, " do not
appear to have done him much harm. Well, and how
did Mr Churchill take it ? "
" Most favourably for his nephew — gave his consent
with scarcely a difficulty. Conceive what the events of
a week have done in that family ! While poor Mrs
Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have been a
Emma 413
hope, a chance, a possibility ; but scarcely are her
remains at rest in the family vauJt, than her husband is
persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would
have required. What a blessing it is, when undue in-
fluence does not survive the grave ! He gave his con-
sent with very little persuasion. "
" Ah 1 " thought Emma, " he would have done as
much for Harriet. "
" This was settled last night, and Frank was off with
the light this morning. He stopped at Highburjr, at
the Bates's, I fancy, some time, and tnen came on
hither ; but was in such a hurry to get back to his
uncle, to whom he is just now more necessary than ever,
that, as I tell you, he could stay with us but a quarter
of an hour. He was very much agitated — very much
indeed — to a degree that made him appear quite a
different creature from anything I had ever seen him
before. In addition to all the rest, there had been the
shock of finding her so very unwell, which he had had
no previous suspicion of, and there was every appearance
of his having been feeling a great deal. "
" And do you really believe the affair to have been
carrying on with such perfect secresy ? The Campbells,
the Dixons — did none of them know of the engage-
ment ? "
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without
a little blush.
" None ; not one. He positively said that it had
been known to no being in the world but their two
selves. "
" Well, " said Emma, «'I suppose we shall gradually
grow reconciled to the idea, and I wish them very
happy. But I shall always think it a very abominable
sort of proceeding. What has it been but a system of
hypocrisy and deceit, espionage and treachery ? To
come among us with professions of openness and
414 Emma
aimplicity ; and such a league in secret to judge us ail !
Here have we been the whole winter and spring, conri-
pletely duped, fancying ourselves all on an equal footing
of truth and honour, with two people in the midst of us
who may have been carrying round, comparing and
sitting in judgment on sentiments and words that were
never meant for both to hear. They must take the
consequence, if they have heard each other spoken of in
a way not perfectly agreeable. "
" I am quite easy on that head, " replied Mrs
Weston. " I am very sure that I never said anytliing
of either to the other which both might not have heard. "
" You are in luck. Your only blunder was confined
to my ear, when you imagined a certain friend of ours
in love with the lady. "
" True. But as I have always had a thoroughly
good opinion of Miss Fairfax, I never could, under any
blunder, have spoken ill of her ; and as to speaking ill
of him, there I must have been safe. "
At this moment Mr Weston appeared at a little dis-
tance from the window, evidently on the watch. His
wife gave him a look which invited him in ; and, while
he was coming round, added —
" Now, dearest Emma, let me entreat you to say and
look everything tliat may set his heart at ease, and in-
cline him to be satisfied with the match. Let us make
the best of it — and, indeed, almost everything may be
fairly said in her favour. It is not a connexion to
gratify ; but if Mr Churchill does not feel that, why
should we ? and it may be a very fortunate circumstance
for him — for Frank, I mean — that he should have
attached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character
and good judgment as I have always given her credit for,
and still am disposed to give her credit for, in spite of this
one great deviation from the strict rule of right. And
how much may be said, in her situation, for even that
error ! "
Emma 415
" Much, indeed ! " cried Emma, feelingly. " If a
woman can ever be excused for thinking only of herself,
it is in a situation like Jane Fairfax's. Of such, one
may almost say, that < the world is not theirs, nor the
world's law.'"
She met Mr Weston on his entrance with a smiling
countenance, exclaiming —
" A veiy pretty trick you have been playing me, upon
my word ! This was a device, I suppose, to sport with
my curiosity, and exercise my talent of guessing. But
you really frightened me. I thought you had lost half
your property, at least. And here, instead of its being
a matter of condolence, it turns out to be one of con-
gratulation. I congratulate you, Mr Weston, with all
my heart, on the prospect of having one of the most
lovely and accomplished young women in England for
your daughter. "
A glance or two between him and his wife convinced
him that all was as right as this speech proclaimed ; and
its happy effect on his spirits was immediate. His air
and voice recovered their usual briskness ; he shook her
heartily and gratefully by the hand, and entered on the
subject in a manner to prove that he now only wanted
time and persuasion to think the engagement no very
bad thing. His companions suggested only what could
palliate imprudence or smooth objections ; and by the
time they had talked it all over together, and he had
talked it all over again with Emma, in their walk back
to Hartfield, he was become perfectly reconciled, and
no* far from thinking it the very best thing that Frank
could possibly have done.
4i6 Emma
Cljaptcr %3L¥J%
" TJARRIET, poor Harriet!''— Those were the
1^ I words ; in them lay the tormenting ideas
which Emma could not get rid of, and which
constituted the real misery of tiie business to her.
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself — very
ill in many ways — but it was not so much kis behaviour
as her own which made her so angry with him. It
was the scrape which he had drawn her into on
Harriet's account, that gave the deepest hue to his
offence. — Poor Harriet ! to be a second time the dupe
of her misconceptions and flatteiy. Mr Knightley had
spoken prophetically, when he once said,'* Emma, you
have been no friend to Harriet Smith. " — She was
afraid she had done her nothing but disservice. — It
was true that she had not to charge herself in this
instance, as in the former, with being the sole and
original author of the mischief: with having suggested
such feelings as might otherwise never have entered
Harriet's imagination ; for Harriet had acknowledged
her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before
she had ever given her a hint on tlie subject ; but she felt
completely guilty of having encouraged what she might
have repressed. She might have prevented the indul-
gence and increase of such sentiments. Her influence
would have been enough. And now she was very
conscious that she ought to have prevented them. — She
felt that she had been risking her friend's happiness on
most insufficient grounds. Common sense would have
directed her to tell Harriet that she must not allow
herself to think of him, and that there were five hun-
dred chances to one against his ever caring for her. —
" But with common sense, " she added, " I am afraid j
have had little to do. "
Emma
417
She was extremely angry with herself. If she could
not have been angry with Frank Churchill too, it would
have been dreadful. As for Jane Fairfax, she might
at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude
on her account. Harriet would be anxiety enough ;
she need no longer be unhappy about Jane, whose
troubles and whose ill health having, of course, the
same origin, must be equally under cure. — Her days of in-
significance and evil were over. — She would soon be well,
and happy and prosperous. — Emma could now imagine
why her own attentions had been slighted. This dis-
covery laid many smaller matters open. No doubt it
had been from jealousy. — In Jane's eyes she had been
a rival ; and well might anything she could offer of
assistance or regard be repulsed. An airing in the
Hartheld carriage would have been the rack, and arrow-
root from the Hartfield store-room must have been
poison. She understood it all ; and as far as her mind
could disengage itself from the injustice and selfishness
of angry feelings, she acknowledged that Jane Fairfax
would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her
desert. But poor Harriet was such an engrossing
charge ! There was little sympathy to be spared for
anybody else. Emma was sadly fearful that this second
disappointment would be more severe than the first.
Considering the very superior claims of the object, it
ought ; and judging by its apparently stronger effect on
Harriet's mind, producing reserve and self-command, it
would She must communicate the painful truth, how-
ever, and as soon as possible. An injunction of secrecy
had been among Mr Weston's parting words. " For
the present the whole affair was to be completely a
secret. Mr Churchill had made a point of it, as a
token of respect to the wife he had so very recendy
lost ; and everybody admitted it to be no more than
due decorum. " — Emma had promised ; but still Harriet
must be excepted. Tt was her superior duty,
p
4i8
Emma
In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling
it almost ridiculous, that she should have the very same
distressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet which
Mrs Weston had just gone through by herself. The
intelligence, which had been so anxiously announced to
her, she was now to be anxiously announcing to another.
Her heart beat quick on hearing Harriet's footstep
and voice ; so, she supposed, had poor Mrs Weston
felt when she was approaching Randalls. Could the
event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance ! —
But of that, unfortunately, there could be no chance.
" Well, Miss Woodhouse, " cried Harriet, coming
eagerly into the room, " is not this the oddest news that
ever was ?
" What news do you mean ? " replied Emma, unable
10 guess, by look or voice, whetlier Harriet could
indeed have received any hint.
" About Jane Fairfax. Did you ever hear anything
80 strange ? Oh ! — you need not be afraid of owning it
to me, for Mr Weston has told me himself. I met
him just now. He told me it was to be a great secret ;
and, therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to
anybody but you, but he said you knew it. "
" What did Mr Weston tell you? " said Emma, still
perplexed.
" Oh ! he told me all about it ; that Jane Fairfax
and Mr Frank Churchill are to be married, and that
they have been privately engaged to one another this
long while. How very odd ! "
It was, indeed, so odd ; Harriet's behaviour was so
extremely odd, that Emma did not know how to
understand it. Her character appeared absolutely
changed. She seemed to propose showing no agita-
tion, or disappointment, or peculiar concern in the dis-
covery. Emma looked at her, quite unable to speak.
" Had you any idea, " cried Harriet, " of his being
Emma 419
in love with her ? — You, perhaps, might. You " (blush,
ing as she spoke), " who can see into everybody's heart;
but nobody else "
" Upon my word, " said Emma, " I begin to doubf
my having any such talent. Can you seriously ask me,
Harriet, whether I imagined him attached to another
woman at the very time that I was — tacitly if not
openly — encouraging you to give way to your own
feelings ? — I never had the slightest suspicion, till within
the last hour, of Mr Frank Churchill's having the least
regard for Jane Fairfax. You may be very sure that,
if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly. "
" Me ! " cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished.
" Why should you caution me ? — You do not think I
care about Mr Frank Churchill ? "
" I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the
subject, " replied Emma, smiling ; " but you do not
mean to deny that there was a time — and not very
distant either — when you gave me reason to understand
that you did care about him ? "
" Him! — never, never. Dear Miss Woodhouse,
how could you so mistake me ? " (turning away dis-
tressed. )
" Harriet, " cried Emma, after a moment's pause,
" what do you mean ? — Good Heaven ! what do you
mean ? — Mistake you ! — Am I to suppose then ? "
She could not speak another word. — Her voice was
lost; and she sat down, waiting in great terror till
Harriet should answer.
Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and
with face turned from her, did not immediately say
anything ; and when she did speak, it was in a voice
nearly as agitated as Emma's.
" I should not have thought it possible, " she began,
" that you could have misunderstood me ! I know we
agreed never to name him — but considering how in-
420
Emma
finitely superior he is to everybody else, I should not
have thought it possible that I coild be supposed to
mean any other person. Mr Frank Churchill, indeed ! I
do not know who would ever look at him in the company
of the other. I hope I have a better taste than to
think of Mr Frank Churchill, who is like nobody by
his side. And tliat you should have been so mistaken,
is amazing! — I am sure, but for believing that you
entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my
attachment, I should have considered it at first too great
a presumption almost to dare to think of him. At first,
if you had not told me that more wonderful things had
happened ; that there had been matches of greater, dis-
parity (those were your very words) — I should not
have dared to give way to — I should not have thought
it possible ; — but \( you, who had been always acquainted
with him "
" Harriet, " cried Emma, collecting herself resolutely,
" let us understand each other now, without the possi-
bility of farther mistake. Are you speaking of — Mi
Knightley ? "
" To be sure I am- I never could have an idea of
anybody else — and so I thought you knew. When we
talked about him, it was as clear as possible. "
" Not quite, " returned Emma, with forced calmness ;
" for all that you then said appeared to me to relate to
a different person. I could almost assert that you had
named Mr Frank Churchill. I am sure the service Mr
Frank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you
from the gipsies, was spoken of. "
" Oh, Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget ! "
" My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the sub-
stance of what I said on the occasion. I told you that
I did not wonder at your attachment ; that, consider-
ing the service he had rendered you, it was extremely
natural ; — and you agreed to it, expressing yourself very
Emma 421
warmly as to your sense of that service, and mention.ng
even what your sensations had been in seeing him come
forward to your rescue. The impression of it is strong
on my memory. "
" Oh, dear, " cried Harriet, " now I recollect what
you mean ; but I was thinking of something very dif-
ferent at the time. It was not the gipsies — it was not
Mr Frank Churchill that I meant. No ! " (with some
elevation) " I was thinking of a much more precious
circumistance — of Mr Knightley's coming and asking
me to dance, when Mr Elton would not stand up with
me, and when there was no other partner in the room.
That was the kind action ; that was the noble benevo-
lence and generosity ; that was the service which made
me begin to feel how superior he was to every other
being upon earth. "
" Good God ! " cried Emma, " this has been a most
unfortunate — most deplorable mistake ! What is to be
done ? "
" You would not have encouraged me, then, if you
had understood me ? At least, however, I cannot be
worse off than I should have been, if the other had been
the person ; and novv'— it is possible "
She paused a few moments. Emma could not
speak.
" I do not wonr'er. Miss Woodhouse, " she resumed,
" that you should feel a great difference between the
two, as to me or as to anybody. You must think one five
hundred million times more above me than the other.
But I hope. Miss Woodhouse, that supposing — that ii
— strange as it may appear But you know they
were your own words, that more wonderful things had
happened ; matches of greater disparity had taken place
than between Mr Frank Churchill and me ; and, there-
fore, it seems as if such a thing even as this may have
occurred before — and if I should be so fortunate, be-
422 Emma
yond expression, as to — if Mr Knightley should really
— if he does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear Miss
Woodhouse, you will not set yourself against it and try
to put difficulties in the way. But you are too good
for that, I am sure. "
Harriet was standing at one of the windows. Emma
turned round to look at her in consternation, and hastily
said —
" Have you any idea of Mr Knightley's returning
your affection ? "
" Yes, " replied Harriet, modestly, but not fearfully ;
" I must say that I have. "
Emma's eyes were instantly withdrawn ; and she sat
silently meditating, in a fixed attitude, for a few minutes.
A few minutes were sufficient for making her acquainted
with her own heart. A mind like hers, once opening
to suspicion, made rapid progress ; she touched, she
admitted, she acknowledged the whole trutli. Why
was it so much worse that Harriet should be in love
with Mr Knightley than with Frank Churchill ? Why
was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet's having
some hope of a return ? It darted through her with the
speed of an arrow tliat Mr Knightley must marry no
one but herself!
Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was be-
fore her in the same few minutes. She saw it all with
a clearness which had never blessed her before. How
improperly had she been acting by Harriet ! How in-
considerate, how indelicate, how irrational, how unfeel-
ing, had been her conduct ! What blindness, what
madness had led her on ! It struck her with dreadful
force, and she was ready to give it every bad name in
the world. Some portion of respect for herself, how-
ever, in spite of all these demerits, some concern for
her own appearance, and a strong sense of justice by
Harriet (there would be no need of compassion to the
Emma 423
girl who believed herself loved by Mr Knightley — but
justice required that she should not be made unhappy
by any coldness now), gave Emma the resolution to sit
and endure farther with calmness, with even apparent
kindness. For her own advantage, indeed, it was fit
that the utmost extent of Harriet's hopes should be in-
quired into ; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit
the regard and interest which had been so voluntarily
formed and maintained, or to deserve to be slighted by
the person whose counsels had never led her right.
Rousing from reflection, therefore, and subduing her
emotion, she turned to Harriet again, and in a more
inviting accent renewed the conversation ; for as to the
subject which had first introduced it, the wonderful story
of Jane Fairfax, that was quite sunk and lost. Neither
of them thought but of Mr Knightley and themselves
Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy
reverie, was yet very glad to be called from it by the
now encouraging manner of such a judge, and such a
friend, as Miss Woodhouse ; and only wanted invitation
to give the history of her hopes with great though
trembling delight. Emma's tremblings, as she asked,
and as she listened, were better concealed than Harriet's,
but they were not less. Her voice was not unsteady,
but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a
development of self, such a burst of threatening evil,
such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions,
must create. She listened with much inward suffering,
but with great outward patience, to Harriet's detail.
Methodical, or well arranged, or very well delivered, it
could not be expected to be ; but it contained, when
separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the
narration, a substance to sink her spirit ; especially with
the corroborating circumstances which her own memory
brought in favour of Mr Knightley's most improved
opinion of Harriet.
424 Emma
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his
behaviour ever since those two decisive dances. Emma
knew that he had, on that occasion, found her much
superior to his expectation- From that evening, or at
least from the time of Miss Woodhouse's encouraging
her to think of him, Harriet had begun to be sensible
of his talking to her much more than he had been used
to do, and of his having, indeed, quite a different manner
towards her ; — a manner of kindness and sweetness.
Latterly, she had been more and more aware of it.
When they had been all walking together, he had so
often come and walked by her, and talked so very
delightfully ! — He seemed to want to be acquainted
with her. Emma knew it to have been very much the
case : she had often observed the change, to almost the
same extent. Harriet repeated expressions of approba-
tion and praise from him — and Emma felt them to be
in the closest agreement with what she had known of
his opinion of Harriet. He praised her for being
without art or affectation ; for having simple, honest,
generous feelings. She knew that he saw such recom-
mendations in Harriet ; he had dwelt on them to her
more than once. Much that lived in Harriet's memory,
many little particulars of the notice she had received
from him, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair
to another, a compliment implied, a preference inferred,
had been unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma,
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour's relation,
and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen
them, had passed undiscerned by her who now heard
them ; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned
— the two of strongest promise to Harriet — were not
without some degree of witness from Emma herself.
The first was his walking with her apart from the
others in the lime-walk at Donwell, where they had
been walking some time before Emma came, and he
Emma 425
had taken pains (as she was convinced) to araw he/
from the rest to himself; and at first he had talked to
her in a more particular way than he had ever done
before — in a very particular way indeed! — (Harriet
could not recall it without a blush. ) He seemed to be
almost asking her whether her affections were engaged.
But as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse) appeared likely
to join them, he changed the subject, and began talking
about farming. The second was his having sat talking
with her nearly half an hour before Emma came back
from her visit, the very last morning of his being at
Hartfield — though, when he first came in, he had said
that he could not stay five minutes — and his having told
her, during their conversation, that though he must go to
London, it was very much against his inclination that
he left home at all, which was much more (as Emma
felt) than he had acknowledged to her. The superior
degree of confidence towards Harriet which this one
article marked gave her severe pain.
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances,
she did, after a little reflection, venture the following
question: — " Might he not? — Is not it possible, that,
when inquiring, as you thought, into the state of your
affections, he might be alluding to Mr Martin — he might
have Mr Martin's interest in view ? " But Haniet
rejected the suspicion with spirit.
" Mr Martin ! No, indeed ! — There was not a hint
of Mr Martin. I hope I know better now than to care
for Mr Martin, or to be suspected of it. "
When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed
to her dear Miss Woodhouse to say whether she had
not good ground for hope.
" I never should have presumed to think of it at first, "
said she, " but for you. You told me to observe him
carefiilly, and let his behaviour be the rule of mine —
and so I have. But now I f^^va to feel that I mav
426
Emma
deserve htm ; and that if he does chuse me, it wilj not
be anything so very wonderful. "
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the
many bitter feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary
on Emma's side to enable her to say on reply —
" Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr
Knightley is the last man in the world who would in-
tentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for
her more than he really does. "
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a
sentence so satisfactory ; and Emma was only saved
from raptures and fondness, which at that moment would
have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her father's
footsteps. He was coming through the hall. Harriet
was too much agitated to encounter him. " She could
not compose herself — Mr Woodhouse would be alarmed
— she had better go ; " — with most ready encourage-
ment from her friend, therefore, she passed oft through
another door — and the moment she was gone, this was
the spontaneous burst of Emma's feelings : — " O God !
that I had never seen her ! "
The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly
enough for her thoughts. She was bewildered amidst
the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the
last few hours. Every moment had brought a fresh
sui^prise ; and every surprise must be matter of humilia-
tion to her. How to understand it all ! How to
understand the deceptions she had been thus practising
on herself, and living under ! The blunders, the blind-
ness of her own head and heart ! She sat still, she
walked about, she tried her own room, she tried the
shrubbery — in every place, every posture, she perceived
that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been im-
posed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that
she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more
mortifying ; that she was wretched, and should probabl y
find tliis day but the begmning of wietchedness.
Emma 427
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart,
was the first endeavour. To that point went every
leisure moment which her father's claims on her
allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of
mind.
How long had Mr Knightley been so dear to her, as
every feeling declared him now to be ? When had his
influence, such influence begun ? When had he suc-
ceeded to that place in her affection which Frank
Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied r —
She looked back ; she compared the two — compared
them, as they had always stood in her estimation, from
the time of the latter's becoming known to her — and as
they must at any time have been compared by her, had
it — oh ! had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her
to institute the comparison. She saw that there never
had been a time when she did not consider Mr Knightley
as infinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had
not been infinitely the most dear. She saw, that in per-
suading herself, in fancying, in acting to the contrary,
she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant
of her own heart — and, in short, that she had never
really cared for Frank Churchill at all !
This was the conclusion of the first series of [reflec-
tionsj . This was the knowledge of herself, on the first
question of inquiry, which she reached ; and without
being long in reaching it. She was most sorrowfully
indignant ; ashamed of every sensation but the one
revealed to her — her affection for Mr Knightley. Every
other part of her mind was disgusting.
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in
the secret of everybody's feelings ; with unpardonable
arrogance proposed to arrange everybody's destiny.
She was proved to have been universally mistaken ; and
she had not quite done nothing — for she had donf
mischief. She had brought evil on Harriet, on herself,
428
Emma
and, she tco much feared, on Mr Knightley. Were
this most unequal of all connections to take place, on
her must rest all the reproach of having given it a be-
ginning ; for his attachment she must believe to be
produced only by a consciousness of Harriet's ; — and
even were this not the case, he would never have known
Hairiet at all but for her folly.
Mr Knightley and Harriet Smith ! — It was an union
to distance every wonder of the kind. The attachment
of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax became common-
place, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no
surprise, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be
said or thought- Mr Knightley and Harriet Smith !
Such an elevation on her side ! Such a debasement on
his ! It was horrible to Emma to think how it must
sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles,
the sneers, the merriment it would prompt at his ex-
pense ; the mortification and disdain of his brother, the
thousand inconveniencies to himself. Could it be ?
No ; it was impossible. And yet it was far, very far,
from impossible. — Was it a new circumstance for a man
of first-rate abilities to be captivated by veiy inferior
powers ? Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek,
to be the prize of a girl who would seek him ? Was it
new for anything in this world to be unequal, inconsist-
ent, incongruous — or for chance and circumstance (as
second causes) to direct the human fate ?
Oh ! had she never brought Harriet forward ! Had
she left her where she ought, and where he had told
her she ought ! Had she not, with a folly which no
tongue could express, prevented her marrying the un-
exceptionable young man who would have made her
happy and respectable in the line of life to which she
ought to belong, all would have been safe ; none of this
dreadful sequel would have been.
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption
Emma 429
to raise her thoughts to Mr Knightley ! — How she
could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a man
till actually assured of it ! But Harriet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly. Her inferiority,
whether of mind or situation, seemed little felt. She
had seemed more sensible of Mr Elton's being to stoop
in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr Knightley's.
Alas ! was not that her own doing too ? Who had
been at pains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence
but herself ? Who but herself had taught her, that she
was to elevate herself if possible, and that her claims
were great to a high worldly establishment ? If Harriet,
from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing
too.
Cl)aptcr ^fL¥3n,
TILL now that she was threatened witli its loss,
Emma had never known how much of her
happiness depended on being Jirst v/ith Mr
Knightley, first in interest and affection. Satisfied that
it was so, and feeling it her due, she had enjoyed it
without reflection ; and only in the dread of being sup-
planted, found how inexpressibly important it had been.
Long, very long, she felt she had been first ; for,
having no female connections of his own, there had been
only Isabella whose claims could be compared with hers,
and she had always known exactly how far he loved and
esteemed Isabella. She had herself been first with him
for many years past. She had not deserved it ; she had
often been negligent or perverse, slighting his advice, or
even wilfully opposing him, insensible of half his merits,
and quarrelling with him because he would not acknow-
ledge her false and insolent estimate of her own — but
still, from family attachment and habit, and thorough
430
Emma
excellence of mind, he had loved her, and watched
over her from a girl, with an endeavour to improve her,
and an anxiety for her doing right, which no other
creature had at all shared. In spite of all her faults,
she knew she was dear to him ; might she not say, very
dear ? When the suggestions of hope, however, which
must follow here, presented themselves, she could not
presume to indulge them. Harriet Smith might think
herself not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively,
passionately loved by Mr Knightley. She could not.
She could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness
in his attachment to her. She had received a very re-
cent proof of its impartiality. How shocked had he
been by her behaviour to Miss Bates ! How directly,
how strongly had he expressed himself to her on the
subject ! Not too strongly for the offence — but far, far
too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright
justice and clear-sighted good-will. She had no hope,
nothing to deserve the name of hope, that he could have
that sort of affection for herself which was now in
question ; but there was a hope (at times a slight one,
at times much stronger) that Harriet might have de-
ceived herself, and be overrating his regard for her.
Wish it she must, for his sake — be the consequence
nothing to herself, but his remaining single all his life.
Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marry-
ing at all, she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.
Let him but continue the same Mr Knightley to her and
her father, the same Mr Knightley to all the world ; let
Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their precious inter-
course of friendship and confidence, and her peace would
be fully secured. Marriage, in fact, would not do for
her. It would be incompatible with what she owed to
her father, and with what she felt for him. Nothing
should separate her from her father. She would not
marry, even if she were asked by Mr Knightley.
Emma 43 1
It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be dis-
appointed ; and she hoped, that when able to see them
together again, she might at least be able to ascertain
what the chances for it were. She should see them
henceforward with the closest observance ; and
wretchedly as she had hitherto misunderstood even
those she was watching, she did not know how to admit
that she could be blinded here. He was expected back
every day. The power of observation would be soon
given — frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts
were in one course. In the meanwhile, she resolved
against seeing Harriet. It would do neither of them good,
it would do the subject no good, to be talking of it
farther She was resolved not to be convinced, as long
as she could doubt, and yet had no authority for oppos-
ing Harriet's confidence. To talk would be only to
irritate. She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, but de-
cisively, to beg that she would not, at present, come to
Hartfield ; acknowledging it to be her conviction that
all farther confidential discussion of one topic had better
be avoided ; and hoping, that if a few days were
allowed to pass before they met again, except in the
company of others — she objected only to a tete-a-tete —
they might be able to act as if they liad forgotten the
conversation of yesterday. Harriet submitted, and ap-
proved, and was grateful.
This point was just arranged when a visitor arrived to
tear Emma's thoughts a little from the one subject
which had engrossed them, sleeping or waking, the last
twenty-four hours — Mrs Weston, who had been calling
on her daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her
way home, almost as much in duty to Emma as in
pleasure to herself, to relate all the particulars of so
interesting an interview.
Mr Weston had accompanied her to Mrs Bates's,
and gone through his share of this essential attention
432
Emma
most handsomely ; but she having then induced Miss
Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned with
much more to say, and much more to say with satisfac-
tion, than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs Bates's
parlour, with all the incumbrance of awkward feelings,
could have afforded.
A little curiosity Emma had, and she made the most
of it while her friend related. Mrs Weston liad set off
to pay the visit in a good deal of agitation herself; and
in the first place had wished not to go at all at present,
to be allowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead,
and to defer this ceremonious call till a little time had
passed, and Mr Churchill could be reconciled to the
engagement's becoming known ; as, considering every-
thing, she thought such a visit could not be paid with-
out leading to reports ; but Mr Weston had thought
differently ; he was extremely anxious to show his ap-
probation to Miss Fairfax and her family, and did not
conceive that any suspicion could be excited by it ; or
if it were, that it would be of any consequence ; for
" such things " he observed, " always got about. "
Emma smiled, and felt that Mr Weston had very good
reason for saying so. They had gone, in short ; and
very great had been the evident distress and confusion
of the lady. She had hardly been able to speak a word,
and every look and action had shown how deeply she
was suffering from consciousness. The quiet, heart-felt
satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of
her daughter, who proved even too joyous to talk as usual,
had been a gratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene.
They were both so truly respectable in their happiness,
so disinterested in eveiy sensation ; thought so much of
Tane ; so much of everybody, and so little of them-
selves, that every kindly feeling was at work for them.
Miss Fairfax's recent illness had offered a fair plea for
Mrs Weston to invite her to an airing ; she had drawn
back and declined at first, but, on being pressed, Iiad
Emma 433
yielded ; and, in tlie course of tlieir drive, Mrs Weston
had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of her
embarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the im-
portant subject. Apologies for her seemingly un-
gracious silence in their first reception, and the warmest
expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling to-
wards herself and Mr Weston, must necessarily open
the cause ; but when these effusions were put by, they
had talked a good deal of the present and of the future
state of the engagement. Mrs Weston was convinced
that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her
companion, pent up within her own mind as everything
had so long been, and was very much pleased with all
that she had said on the subject.
" On the misery of what she had suffered, during the
concealment of so many months, " continued Mrs
Weston,'•'she was energetic. This was one of her ex-
pressions :'I will not say that since I entered into the
engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but
I can say, that I have never known the blessing of one
tranquil hour :'— and the quivering lip, Emma, which
uttered it was an attestation that I felt at my heart. "
" Poor girl ! " said Emma. " She thinks herself
wrong, then, for having consented to a private engage-
ment ? "
" Wrong ! No one, I believe, can blame her more
than she is disposed to blame herself.'The conse-
quence,'said she,'has been a state of perpetual suffering
to me ; and so it ought. But after all the punishment
that misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct.
Pain is no expiation. I never can be blameless. I have
been acting contrary to ail my sense of right ; and the for-
tunate turn that everything has taken, and the kindness I
am now receiving, is what my conscience tells me ought
not to be.'* Do not imagine, madam,'she continued,
'that I was taught wrong. Do not let any reflection
434 Emma
fall on the principles or the care of the friends who
brought me up. The error has been all my own ;
and I do assure you that, with all the excuse that
present circumstances may appear to give, I shall yet
dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell.'"
" Poor girl ! " said Emma, again. " She loves him,
then, excessively, I suppose. It must have been from
attachment only that she could be led to form the en-
gagement. Her affection must have overpowered her
judgment. "
" Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely
attached to him. "
" I am afraid, " returned Emma, sighing, " that I
must often have contributed to make her unhappy. "
" On your side, my love, it was very innocently
done. But she probably had something of that in her
thoughts, when alluding to the misunderstandings which
he had given us hints of before. One natural con-
sequence of the evil she had involved herself in, she
said, was that of making her unreasonable. The con-
sciousness of having done amiss had exposed her to a
thousand inquietudes, and made her captious and irrit-
able to a degree that must have been — that had been —
hard for him to bear.'I did not make the allow-
ances,'said she,'which I ought to have done, for his
temper and spirits — his delightful spirits, and that gaiety,
that playfulness of disposition, which, under any other
circumstances, would, I am sure, have been as constantly
bewitching to me as they were at first.'She then
began to speak of you, and of tlie great kindness you
had shown her during her illness ; and, with a blush
which showed me how it was all connected, desired me,
whenever I had an opportunity, to thank you — I could
not thank you too much — for every wish and every en-
deavour to do her good. She was sensible that you had
never received any proper acknowledgment from herself. "
Emma 435
" If I did not know her to be happy now, " said
Emma, seriously, " which, in spite of every little draw-
back from her scrupulous conscience, she must be, I
could not bear these thanks ; for, oh ! Mrs Weston, if
there were an account drawn up of the evil and the good
I have done Miss Fairfax Well " (checking her-
self and trying to be more lively), " this is all to be
forgotten. You are very kind to bring me these in-
teresting particulars ; they show her to the greatest
advantage. I am sure she is very good ; I hope she
will be very happy. It is fit that the fortune should be
on his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers. "
Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs
Weston. She thought well of Fiank in almost every
respect ; and, what was more, she loved him very much,
and her defence was, therefore, earnest. She talked
with a great deal of reason, and at least equal affection ;
but she had too much to urge for Emma's attention ; it
was soon gone to Brunswick Square or to Donwell ;
she forgot to attempt to listen ; and when Mrs Weston
ended with, " We have not yet had the letter we are so
anxious for, you know, but I hope it will soon come, "
fhe was obliged to pause before she answered, and at
last obliged to answer at random, before she could at
all recollect what letter it was which they were so
anxious for.
" Are you well, my Emma ? " was Mrs Weston's
parting question.
" Oh, perfectly. I am always well, you know. Be
sure to give me intelligence of the letter as soon as
possible. "
Mrs Weston's communications furnished Emma with
more food for unpleasant reflection, by increasing her
esteem and compassion, and her sense of past injustice
towards Miss Fairfax. She bitterly regretted not having
sought a closer acquaintance with her, and blushed for
436
Emma
the envious feelings which had certainly been, in some
measure, the cause. Had she followed Mr Knightley'a
known wishes, in paying that attention to Miss Fairfax
which was every way her due ; had she tried to know
her better ; had she done her part towards intimacy ; had
she endeavoured to find a friend there instead of in
Harriet Smith ; she must, in all probability, have been
spared from every pain which pressed on her now. Birth,
abilities, and education had been equally marking one as
an associate for her, to be received with gratitude ; and
the other — what was she ? Supposing even that they
had never become intimate friends ; that she had never
been admitted into Miss Fairfax's confidence on this
important matter — which was most probable — still, in
knov/ing her as she ought, and as she might, she must
have been preserved from the abominable suspicions of
an improper attachment to Mr Dixon, which she
had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured
herself, but had so unpardonably imparted ; an idea
which she greatly feared had been made a subject of
material distress to the delicacy of Jane's feelings, by
the levity or carelessness of Frank Churchill's. Of all
the sources of evil surrounding the former, since her
coming to Highbury, she was persuaded that she must
herself have been the worst. She must have been a
perpetual enemy. They never could have been all
three together, without her having stabbed Jane Fair-
fax's peace in a thousand instances ; and on Box Hill,
perhaps, it had been the agony of a mind that would
bear no more.
The evening of this day was very long and melan-
choly at Hartfield. The weather added what it could
of gloom. A cold stormy rain set in, and nothing of
July appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the
wind was despoiling, and the length of the day, which
only made such cruel sights the longer visible.
Emma 437
The weather affected Mr Woodhouse ; and he could
only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless
attention on his daughter's side, and by exertions which
had never cost her half so much before. It reminded
her of their first forlorn tete-a-tete, on the evening of
Mrs Weston's wedding-day ; but Mr Knightley had
walked in then, soon after tea, and dissipated every
melancholy fancy. Alas ! such delightful proofs of
Hartfield's attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed,
might shortly be over. The picture which she had then
drawn of the privations of the approaching winter had
proved erroneous ; no friends had deserted them, no
pleasures had been lost. But her present forebodings
she feared would experience no similar contradiction.
The prospect before her now was threatening to a degree
that could not be entirely dispelled — that might not be
even partially brightened. If all took place that
might take place among the circle of her friends. Hart-
field must be comparatively deserted ; and she left to
cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happi-
ness.
The child to be bom at Randalls must be a tie there
even dearer than herself; and Mrs Weston's heart and
time would be occupied by it. They should lose her ;
and probably, in great measure, her husband also. Frank
Churchill would return among them no more ; and Miss
Fairfax, it was reasonable to suppose, would soon cease
to belong to Highbury. They would be married, and
setded either at or near Enscombe. All that were
good would be withdrawn ; and if to these losses the
loss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain
of cheerful or of rational society within their reach ?
Mr Knightley to be no longer coming there for his
evening comfort ! No longer walking in at all hours,
as if ever willing to change his own home for theirs !
How was it to be endured ? And if he were to be
438
Emma
lost to them ior Harriet's sake ; if he were to be thought
of hereafter, as finding in Harriet's society all that he
wanted ! if Harriet were to be the chosen, the first, the
dearest, the friend, the wife to whom he looked for all
the best blessings of existence ; what could be increas-
ing Emma's wretchedness but the reflection, never far
distant from her mind, that it had been all her own
work ?
Wlien it came to such a pitch as this, she was not
able to refrain from a start, or a heavy sigh, or even
from walking about the room for a few seconds ; and
the only source whence anything like consolation or
composure could be drawn, was in the resolution of hei
own better conduct, and the hope that, however inferior
in spirit and gaiety might be the following and every
future winter of her life to the oast, it would yet find
her more rational, more acquainted with herself, and
leave her less to regret when it were gone.
Cljapter flL3I^,
THE weather continued much the same all the
following morning ; and the same loneliness,
and the same melancholy, seemed to reign at
Hartfield ; but in the afternoon it cleared ; the wind
changed into a softer quarter ; the clouds were carried
off: the sun appeared ; it was summer again. With
all the eagerness which such a transition gives, Emma
resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible. Never
had the exqusite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil,
warm, and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive
to her. She longed for the serenity they might gradually
introduce ; and on Mr Perry's coming in soon after
dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, sh(=
Emma 439
iost no time tii hurrying into the shrubbery. There,
with spirits freshened, and thoughts a little relieved, she
had taken a few turns, when she saw Mr Knightley
passing through the garden door, and coming towards
her. It was the first intimation of his being returned
from London. She had been thinking of him tlie
moment before, as unquestionably sixteen miles distant.
There was time only for the quickest arrangement of
mind. She must be collected and calm. In half a
minute they were together. The " How-d'ye-do's "
were quiet and constrained on each side. She asked
after their mutual friends ; they were all well. — When
had he left them i — Only that moniing. He must have
had a wet [ride]. — Yes ! — He meant to walk with her,
she found. " He had just looked into the dining-room,
and as he was not wanted there, preferred being out of
doors. " She thought he neither looked nor spoke
cheerfully ; and the first possible cause for it, suggested
by her fears, was, that he had perhaps been com-
municating his plans to his brother, and was pained
by the manner in which they had been received.
They walked together. He was silent. She thought
he was often looking at her, and trying for a fuller view
of her face than it suited her to give. And this belief
produced another dread. Perhaps he wanted to speak
to her of his attachment to Harriet, he might be watching
for encouragement to begin. She did not, could not,
feel equal to lead the way to any such subject. He
must do it all himself. Yet she could not bear this
silence. With him it was most unnatural. She con-
sidered, resolved, and, trying to smile, began —
" You have some news to hear, now you are come
back, that will rather surprise you. "
" Have I? " said he quietly, and looking at her;
" oi what nature ? "
" Oh, the best nature in the world — a wedding. "
440 Emma
After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended
to say no more, he replied —
" If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I
have heard that already. "
" How is it possible ? " cried Emma, turning her
glowing cheeks towards him ; for, while she spoke, it
occurred to her that he might have called at Mrs
Goddard's in his way.
" I had a few lines on parish business from Mr
Weston this morning, and at the end of them he gave
me a brief account of what had happened. "
Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say,
with a little more composure —
" You probably have been less surprised than any of
us, for you have had your suspicions. I have not for-
gotten that you once tried to give me a caution. I wisl(
I had attended to it — but " (with a sinking voice and a
heavy sigh) " I seem to have been doomed to blindness. "
For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was
unsuspicious of having excited any particular interest,
till she found her arm drawn within his, and pressed
against his heart, and heard him thus saying, in a ton;.
of great sensibility, speaking low —
" Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.
Your own excellent sense ; your exertions for your
father's sake : I know you will not allow yourself "
Her arm was pressed again, as he added, in a more
broken and subdued accent, " The feelings of the
warmest friendship — indignation — abominable scoun-
drel ! " And in a louder, steadier tone, he concluded
with, " He will soon be gone. They will soon be in
Yorkshire. I am sorry for her. She deserves a better
fate. "
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could
recover from the flutter of pleasure, excited by such
tender consideration, replied —
Emma 441
" You are very kind, but you are mistaken, and I
must set you right. I am not in want of that sort of
compassion. My blindness to what was going on led
me to act by them in a way that I must always be
ashamed of, and I was very foolishly tempted to say
and do many things which may well lay me open to
unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other reason to
regret that I was not in the secret earlier. "
" Emma, " cried he, looking eagerly at her, " are you
indeed ? " — but checking himself — " No, no, I under-
stand you — forgive me — I am pleased that you can say
even so much. He is no object of regret, indeed ! and
it will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes
the acknowledgment of more than your reason. For-
tunate that your affections were not farther entangled !
— I could never, I confess, from your manners, assure
myself as to the degree of what you felt — I could only
be certain that there was a preference — and a preference
which I never believed him to deserve. He is a dis-
grace to the name of man. And is he to be rewarded
with that sweet young woman ? — Jane ! Jane ! you will
be a miserable creature. "
" Mr Knightley, " said Emma, trying to be lively,
but really confused — " I am in a very extraordinary
situation. I cannot let you continue in your error ; and
yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression,
I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that
I never have been at all attached to the person we are
speaking of, as it might be natural for a woman to feel
in confessing exactly the reverse. But I never have. "
He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to
speak, but he would not. She supposed she must say
more before she were entitled to his clemency ; but it
was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in
his opinion. She went on, however.
" I have very little to say for my own conduct. I
442 Emma
was tempted by his attentions, and allowed myself to
appear pleased. An old story, probably — a common
case — and no more than has happened to hundreds of my
sex before ; and yet it may not be the more excusable
in one who sets up as I do for Understanding. Many
circumstances assisted the temptation. He was the
son of Mr Weston — he was continually here — I always
found him very pleasant — and, in short, for " (with a
sigh) ** let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously,
they all centre in this at last — my vanity was flattered,
and I allowed his attentions. Latterly, however — for
some time, indeed — I have had no idea of their mean-
ing anything. I thought them a habit, a trick, nothing
that called for seriousness on my side. He has im-
posed on me, but he has not injured me. I have never
been attached to him. And now I can tolerably com-
prehend his behaviour. He never wished to attach me.
It was merely a blind to conceal his real situation with
another. It was his object to blind all about him ; and
no one, I am sure, could be more effectually blinded
than myself — except that I was not blinded — that it
was my good fortune — that, in short, I was somehow
or other safe from him. "
She had hoped for an answer here — for a few words
to say that her conduct was at least intelligible ; but he
was silent ; and, as far as she could judge, deep in
thought. At last, and tolerably in his usual tone, he
said —
" I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.
I can suppose, however, that I may have under-rated
him. My acquaintance with him has been but trifling.
And even if I have not under-rated him hitherto, he
may yet turn out well. With such a woman he has a
chance. I have no motive for wishing hira ill — and for
her sake, whose happiness will be involved in his good
character and conduct, I shall certainly wish hira well. "
Emma 443
" I have no doubt of their being happy together, "
said Emma ; " I believe them to be very mutually and
very sincerely attached. "
" He is a most fortunate man, " returned Mr
Knightley, with energy. " So early in lif£ — at three-
and-twenty — a period when, if a man chuses a wife, he
generally chuses ill. At three-and-twenty to have
drawn such a prize ! What years of felicity that man,
in all human calculation, has before him ! Assured of
the love of such a woman — the disinterested love — for
Jane Fairfax's character vouches for her disinterested-
ness ; everything in his favour — equality of situation — I
mean, as far as regards society, and all the habits and
manners that are important ; equality in every point but
one — and that one, since the purity of her heart is not
to be doubted; such as must increase his felicity, for it
will be his to bestow the only advantages she wants.
A man would always wish to give a woman a better
home than the one he takes her from ; and he who can
do it, where there is no doubt of her regard, must, 1
think, be the happiest of mortals. Frank Churchill is,
indeed, the favourite of fortune. Everything turns out
for his good. He meets with a young woman at a
watering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary
her by negligent treatment — and had he and all his
family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him,
they could not have found her superior. His aunt is in
the way. His aunt dies. He has only to speak. His
friends are eager to promote his happiness. He has
used everybody ill — and they are all delighted to forgive
him. He is a fortunate man, indeed ! *'
" You speak as if you envied him. "
" And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is
the object of my envy. "
Emma could say no more. They seemed to be
within half a sentence of Harriet, and her immediate
444 Emma
feeling was to avert the subject, if possible. She made
her plan ; she would speak of something totally different
— the children in Brunswick Square ; and she only
waited for b/eath to begin, v/hen Mr Knightley startled
her by saying —
" You will not ask me what is the point of envy.
You are determined, I see, to have no curiosity
You are wise — but / cannot be wise. Emma, I must
tell what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaid
the next moment. "
" Oh, then, don't speak it, don't speak it, " she eagerly
cried. " Take a little time, consider, do not commit
yourself. "
" Thank you, " said he, in an accent of deep mortifi-
cation, and not another syllable followed.
Emma could not bear to give him pain. He was
wishing to confide in her — perhaps to consult her ; —
cost her what it would, she would listen. She might
assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it ; she might
give just praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him
his own independence, relieve him from that state of
indecision which must be more intolerable than any
alternative to such a mind as his. They had reached
the house.
" You are going in, I suppose ? " said he.
" No, " replied Emma, quite confirmed by the de-
pressed manner in which he still spoke, " I should like
to take another turn. Mr Perry is not gone. " And,
after proceeding a few steps, she added — " I stopped
you ungraciously, just nov/, Mr Knightley, and, I am
afraid, gave you pain. But if you have any wish to
speak openly to me as a friend, or to ask my opinion
of anything that you may have it ontemplation —
as a friend, indeed, you may cf .amand me. I will
hear whatever you like. I will tell you exactly what I
think. "
Emma 445
'As a friend ! " repeated Mr Knightley. " Emma,
that, I fear, is a word — no, I have no wish. Stay,
yes, why should I hesitate ? I have gone too far
already for concealment. Emma, I accept your offer,
extraordinaiy as it may seem, I accept it, and refer
myself to you as a friend. Tell me, then, have I no
chance of ever succeeding :* "
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question,
and the expression of his eyes overpowered her.
" My dearest Emma, " said he, " for dearest you will
always be, whatever the event of this hour's conversa-
tion, my dearest, most beloved Emma — tell me at once.
Say *No,'if it is to be said. " She could really say
nothing. " You are silent, " he cried, with great
animation ; " absolutely silent ! at present I ask no
more. "
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation
of this moment. The dread of being awakened from
the happiest dream was perhaps the most prominent
feeling.
" I cannot make speeches, Emma, " he soon resumed,
and in a tone of such sincere, decided, intelligible ten-
derness as was tolerably convincing. " If I loved you
less, I might be able to talk about it more. But you
know what I am. You hear nothing but truth from me.
I have blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne
it as no other woman in England would have borne it.
Bear with the truths I would tell you now, dearest
Emma, as well as you have borne with them. The
manner, perhaps, may have as little to recommend them.
God knows, I have been a very indiffererit lover. But
you understand me. Yes, you see, you understand my
feelings — and w. teturn them if you can. At present,
I ask only to hear— nee to hear your voice. "
While he spoke, Emma's mind was most busy, and,
with all the wonderful velocity of thought, had been
446
Emma
able — and yet without losing a word — to eaten and
comprehend the exact truth of the whole ; to see that
Harriet's hopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake,
a delusion, as complete a delusion as any of her own —
that Harriet was nothing ; that she was everything her-
self; that what she had been saying relative to Harriet
had been all taken as the language of her own feelings ;
and that her agitation, her doubts, her reluctance, her
discouragement, had been all received as discouragement
from herself. And not only was there time for these
convictions, with all their glow of attendant happiness,
there was time also to rejoice that Harriet's secret had
not escaped her, and to resolve that it need not, and
should not. It was all the service she could now
render her poor friend ; for as to any of that heroism of
sentiment which might have prompted her to entreat
him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, as
infinitely the most worthy of the two — or even the
more simple sublimity of resolving to refuse him at once
and for ever, without vouchsafing any motive because he
could not marry them both, Emma had it not. She
felt for Harriet, with pain and with contrition ; but no
flight of generosity run mad, opposing all that could be
probable or reasonable, entered her brain. She had led
her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to her for
ever ; but her judgment was as strong as her feelings, and
as strong as it had ever been before, in reprobating any
such alliance for him, as most unequal and degrading.
Her way was clear, though not quite smooth. She
spoke then, on being so entreated. What did she say ?
Just what she ought, of course. A lady always does.
She said enough to show there need not be despair —
and to invite him to say more himself. He haA
despaired at one period ; he had received such an in-
junction to caution and silence, as for the time crushed
every hope — she had begun by refusing to hear him.
Emma 447
The change had perhaps been somewhat sudaen — hei
proposal of taking another turn, her renewing the con-
versation which she had just put an end to, might be a
little extraordinary. She felt its inconsistency ; but
Mr Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it, and
seek no farther explanation.
Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to
any human disclosure ; seldom can it happen that some-
thing is not a little disguised, or a little mistaken ; but
where, as in this case, though the conduct is mistaken,
the feelings are not, it may not be very material. Mr
Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting
heart than she possessed, or a heart more disposed to
accept of his.
He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own
influence. He had followed her into the shrubbery
with no idea of trying it. He had come, in his anxiety
to see how she bore Frank Churchill's engagement, with
no selfish view, no view at all, but of endeavouring, if
she allowed him an opening, to soothe or to counsel
her. The rest had been the work of the moment, the
immediate effect of what he heard, on his feelings.
The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards
Frank Churchill, of her having a heart completely dis-
engaged from him, had given birth to the hope that, in
time, he might gain her affection himself; — but it had
been no present hope — he had only, in the momentary
conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told
that she did not foibid his attempt to attach her. The
superior hopes which gradually opened were so much
the more enchanting. The affection which he had
been asking to be allowed to create, if he could, was
already his. Within half an hour he had passed from a
thoroughly distressed itate of mind, to something so
like perfect happiness, that it could bear no other name.
Her change was equal. This one half-hour had given
448
Emma
to each the s^me precious certainty of being beloved,
had cleared from each the same degree of ignorance,
jealousy, or distrust. On his side, there had been a
long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the
expectation, of Frank Churchill. He had been in love
with Emma, and jealous of Frank Churchill, from about
the same period, one sentiment having probably enlight-
ened him as to the other. It was his jealousy of Frank
Churchill that had taken him from the country. The
Box Hill party had decided him on going away. He
would save himself from witnessing again such permitted,
encouraged attentions. He had gone to learn to be
indifferent. But he had gone to a wrong place. There
was too much domestic happiness in his brother's house ;
woman wore too amiable a form in it ; Isabella was too
much like Emma — differing only in those striking
inferiorities which always brought the other in brilliancy
before him, for much to have been done even had his
time been longer. He had stayed on, however, vigor-
ously, day after day — till this very morning's post had
conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax. Then, with the
gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not
scruple to feel, having never believed Frank Churchill
to be at all deserving Emma, was there so much fond
solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could
stay no longer. He had ridden home through the rain ;
and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how
this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite
of all her faults, bore the discovery.
He had found her agitated and low. Frank Churchill
was a villain. He heard her declare that she had
never loved him. Frank Churchill's character was not
desperate. She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house ; and if he could
have thought of Frank Churchill then, he might have
deemed him a very good sort of fellow.
Emma 449
chapter it«
WHAT totally different feelings did Emma take
back into the house from what she had
brought out ! — she had then been only
daring to hope for a little respite of suffering ; — she
was now in an exquisite flutter of happiness — and such
happiness, moreover, as she believed must still be greater
when the flutter should have passed away.
They sat down to tea — the same party round the
same table — how often it had been collected ! and how
often had her eyes fallen on the same shrubs in the lawn,
and observed the same beautiful effect of the western
sua I But never in such a state of spirits, never in any-
thing like it ; and it was with difficulty that she could
summon enough of her usual self to be the attentive
lady of the house, or even the attentive daughter.
Poor Mr Woodhouse little suspected what was plot-
ting against him in the breast of that man whLTn he
was so cordially welcoming, and so anxiously hoping
rniglit not have taken cold from his ride. Could he
have seen the heart, he would have cared very little for
the lungs ; but without the most distant imagination of
the impending evil, without the slightest perception of
anything extraordinary, in the looks or ways of either,
he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of
news he had received from Mr Perry, and talked on
with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of
what they could have told him in return.
As long as Mr Knightley remained with them,
Emma's fever continued ; but when he was gone she
began to be a little tranquillized and subdued, and in
the course of the sleepless night, which was the tax for
such an evening, she found one or two such very serious
points to consider, as made her feel, that even her happi-
Q
450 Emma
ness must have some alloy. Her father — and Harriet.
She could not be alone without feeling the full weight
of their separate claims ; and how to guard the comfort
of both to the utmost was the question. With respect
to her father, it was a question soon answered. She
hardly knew yet what Mr Knightley would ask ; but a
very short parley with her own heart produced the most
solemn resolution of never quitting her father. She
even wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought.
While he lived, it must be only an engagement ; but
she flattered herself, that if divested of the danger of
drawing her away, it might become an increase of com-
fort to him. How to do her best by Harriet was of
more difficult decision ; how to spare her from any un-
necessary pain ; how to make her any possible atone-
ment ; how to appear least her enemy ? On these
subjects her perplexity and distress were very great —
and her mind had to pass again and again through every
bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever sur-
rounded it. She could only resolve at last that she
would still avoid a meeting with her, and communicate
all that need be told by letter ; that it would be inex-
pressibly desirable to have her removed just now for
a time from Highbury, and — indulging in one scheme
more — nearly resolve that it might be practicable to get
an invitation for her to Brunswick Square. Isabella
had been pleased with Harriet ; and a few weeks spent
in London must give her some amusement. She did
not think it in Harriet's nature to escape being benefited
by novelty and variety, by the streets, the shops, and
the children. At any rate, it would be a proof of
attention and kindness in herself, from whom every-
thing was due ; a separation for the present ; an avert-
ing of the evil day, when tliey must all be together
again.
She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet ; an
Emma 451
employment which left her so very serious, so nearly
sad, that Mr Knightley, in walking up to Hartfield
to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon ; and
half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same
ground again with him, literally and figuratively, was
quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the
happiness of the evening before.
He had not left her long — by no means long enough
for her to have the slightest inclination for thinking of
anybody else — when a letter was brought her from
Randalls, a very thick letter ; she guessed what it must
contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it. She
was now in perfect charity with Frank Churchill : she
wanted no explanations, she wanted only to have her
thoughts to herself — and as for understanding anything
he wrote, she was sure she was incapable of it. It
must be waded through, however. She opened the
packet ; it was too surely so ; — a note from Mrs
Weston to herself, ushered in the letter from Frank to
Mrs Weston : —
" I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in
forwarding to you the enclosed. I know what thorough
justice you will do it, and have scarcely a doubt of its
happy effect. I think we shall never materially dis-
agree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you
by a long preface. We are quite well. This letter
has been the cure ot all the little nervousness I have
been feeling lately. I did not quite like your looks on
Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning ; and though
you will never own being affected by weather, I think
everybody feels a north-east wind. I felt for your
dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday after-
noon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of
hearing last night, by Mr Perry, that it had not made
liim ill. — Yours ever, " A. W. "
452 Emma
[To Mrs Weston.']
" Windsor. — July.
" Mv DFAR Madam, — If I made myself intelligible
yesterday, this letter will be expected ; but expected or
not, I know it will be read with candour and indulgence.
You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need
of even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my
past conduct. But I have been forgiven by one who
had still more to resent. My courage rises while I write.
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble. I
have already met with such success in two applications
for pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself
too sure of yours, and of those among your friends who
have had any ground of offence. You must all en-
deavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situa-
tion when I first arrived at Randalls ; you must con-
sider me as having a secret which was to be kept at all
hazards. This was the fiict. My right to place my-
self in a situation requiring such concealment is another
question. I shall not discuss it here. For my tempta-
tion to thini it a right, I refer every caviller to a brick
house, sashed windows below, and casements above, in
Highbury. I dared not address her openly ; my diffi-
culties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well
known to require definition ; and I was fortunate enough
to prevail, before we parted at Weymouth, and to induce
the most upright female mind in the creation to stoop
in charity to a secret engagement. Had she refused, I
should have gone mad. But you will be ready to say,
What was your hope in doing this ? What did you
look forward to i " To anything, everything — to time,
chance, circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts, per-
severance, and weariness, health and sickness. Every
possibility of good was before me, and the first of bless-
ings secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and corre-
Emma 453
spondence. Ir you need farther explanation, I hare the
honour, my dear madam, of being your husband's son,
and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope for
good, which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever
equal the value of. See me, then, under these circum-
stances, arriving on my first visit to Randalls ; and here
I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might have been
sooner paid. You will look back, and see that I did
not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury ; and as
you were the person slighted, you will forgive me
instantly ; but I must work on my father's compassion,
by reminding him, that so long as I absented myself
from his house, so long I lost the blessing of knowing
you. My behaviour, during the very happy fortnight
which I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to
reprehension, excepting on one point. And now I come
to the principal, the only important part of my conduct,
while belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety,
or requires very solicitous explanation. With the
greatest respect, and the warmest friendship, do I men-
tion Miss Woodhouse ; my father, perhaps, will think I
ought to add, v/ith the deepest humiliation. A few
words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his
opinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable
to. My behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated, I
believe, more than it ought. In order to assist a con-
cealment so essential to me, I was led on to make more
than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which
we were immediately thrown. I cannot deny that Miss
Woodhouse was my ostensible object ; but I am sure
you will believe the declaration, that had I not been
convinced of her indifference, I would not have been
induced by any selfish views to go on. Amiable
and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is, she never
gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be
attached ; and that she was perfectly free from any
tendency to being attached to me, was as much
454 Emma
my conviction as my wish. She received my atten-
tions with an easy, friendly, good-humoured playful-
ness which exactly suited me. We seemed to under-
stand each other. From our relative situation, those
attentions were her due, and were felt to be so.
Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand
me before the expiration of that fortnight I cannot say ;
when I called to take leave of her, I remember that T
was within a moment of confessing the truth, and I then
fancied she was not without suspicion ; but I have no
doubt of her having since detected me — at least in some
degree. She may not have surmised the whole, but
her quickness must have penetrated a part. I cannot
doubt it. You will find, whenever the subject becomes
freed from its present restraints, that it did not take her
wholly by surprise. She frequently gave me hints of It,
I remember her telling me at the ball that I owed Mrs
Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax. I
hope this history of my conduct towards her will be ad-
mitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what
you saw amiss. While you considered me as having
sinned against Emma Woodhouse, I could deserve
nothing from either. Acquit me here, and procure for
me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes
of that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so
much brotherly affection as to long to have her as deeply
and as happily in love as myself. Whatever strange
things I said or did during that fortnight you have now a
key to. My heart was in Highbury, and my business was
to get my body thither as often as might be, and with the
least suspicion. If you remember any queernesses set them
all to the right account. Of the pianoforte so much talked
of, I feel it only necessary to say, that its being ordered
was absolutely unknown to Miss F , who would
never have allowed me to send it had any choice been
given her. The delicacy of her mind throughout the
Emma 455
whole engagement, my dear madam, is much beyond
my power of doing justice to. You will soon, I
earnestly hope, know her thoroughly yourself. No
description can describe her. She must tell you herself
what she is ; yet not by word, for never was there a
human creature who would so designedly suppress her
own merit. Since I began this letter, which will be
longer than I foresaw, I have heard from her. She
gives a good account of her own health ; but as she
never complains, I dare not depend. I want to have
your opinion of her looks. I know you will soon call
on her ; she is living in dread of the visit. Perhaps it
is paid already. Let me hear from you without delay ;
I am impatient for a thousand particulars. Remember
how few minutes I was at Randalls, and in how
bewildered, how mad a state : and I am not much better
yet ; still insane either from happiness or misery. When
I think of the kindness and favour I have met with, of
her excelleace and patience, and my uncle's generosity,
I am mad with joy : but when I recollect all the un-
easiness I occasioned her, and how little I deserve to
be forgiven, I am mad with anger. If I could but see
her again ! But I must not propose it yet ; my uncle
has been too good for me to encroach. I must still
add to this long letter. You have not heard all that
you ought to hear. I could not give any connected
detail yesterday ; but the suddenness and, in one light,
the unseasonableness with which the affair burst out,
needs explanation ; for, though the event of the 26th
ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me
the happiest prospects, I should not have presumed on
such early measures, but from the very particular circum-
stances which left me not an hour to lose. I should
myself have shrunk from anything so hasty, and she
would have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied
strength and refinement : but I hat? no choice. The
456
Emma
hasty engagement she had entered into with that woman
< here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave off
abruptly, to recollect and compose myself. I have been
walking over the country, and am now, I hope, rational
enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to
be. It is, in fact, a most mortifying retrospect for me.
I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit that my
manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F.,
were highly blamable. iS " ^^ disapproved them, which
ought to have been enough. My plea of concealing
the truth she did not think sufficient. She was dis-
pleased : I thought unreasonably so ; I thought her, on
a thousand occasions, unnecessarily scrupulous and
cautious ; I thought her even cold. But she was
always right. If I had followed her judgment, and
subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed
proper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness
I have ever known. We quarrelled. Do you remem-
ber the morning spent at Donwell ? There every little
dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis.
I was late : I met her walking home by herself, and
wanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it.
She absolutely refused to allow me, which I then
thought most unreasonable. Now, however, I see
nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of
discretion. While I, to blind the world to our engage-
ment, was behaving one hour with objectionable particu-
larity to another woman, was she to be consenting the
next to a proposal which might have made every pre-
vious caution useless ? Had we been met walking
together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth
must have been suspected. I was mad enough, how-
ever, to resent I doubted her affection. I doubted it
more the next day on Box Hill ; when, provoked by
such conduct on my side, sucii shameful, insolent, neglect
of her, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it
Emma 457
would have been impossible for any woman of sense to
endure, she spoke her resentment in a form of words
perfectly intelligible to me. In short, my dear madam,
it was a quarrel blameless on her side, abominable on
mine ; and I returned the same evening to Richmond,
though I might have staid with you till the next morn-
ing, merely because I would be as angry with her as
possible. Even then, I was not such a fool as not to
mean to be reconciled in time ; but I was the injured
person — injured by her coldness — and I went away
determined that she should make the first advances. I
shall always congratulate myself that you were not of
the Box Hill party. Had you witnessed my behaviour
there, I can hardly suppose you would ever have
thought well of me again. Its effect upon her appears
in the immediate resolution it produced. As soon as she
found I was really gone from Randalls, she closed with
the offer of that officious Mrs Elton ; the whole system
of whose treatment of her, by the bye, has ever filled
me with indignation and hatred. I must not quarrel
with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly
extended towards myself; but, otherwise, I should
loudly protest against the share of it which that woman
has known. * Jane,'indeed ! You will observe that 1
have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that
name, even to you. Think, then, what I must have
endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltons, with
all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all the inso-
lence of imaginary superiority. Have patience with
me, I shall soon have done. She closed with this
offer, resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the
next day to tell me that we never were to meet again.
She felt the engagement to be a source of repentance and
misery to each : she dissohed it. This letter reached
me on the very morning of my poor aunt's death. 1
answered it within an hour ; but from the confusion of
458
Emma
my mind, and the multiplicity of business falling on me
at once, my answer, instead of being sent with all the
many other letters of that day, was locked up in my
writing-desk, and I, trusting that I had written enough,
though but a few lines, to satisfy her, remained without
any uneasiness. I was rather disappointed that I did
not hear from her again speedily ; but I made excuses
for her, and was too busy, and — may I add ? — too
cheerful in my views to be captious. We removed to
Windsor ; and two days afterwards I received a parcel
from her — my own letters all returned! — and a few
lines at the same time by the post, stating her extreme
surprise at not having had the smallest reply to her last ;
and adding that as silence on such a point could not be
misconstrued, and as it must be equally desirable to both
to have every subordinate arrangement concluded as
soon as possible, she now sent me, by a safe conveyance,
all my letters, and requested, that if I could not directly
command hers, so as to send them to Highbury within
a week, I would forward them after that period to her
at : in short, the full direction to Mr Small-
ridge's, near Bristol, stared me in the face. I knew the
name, the place, I knew all about it, and instantly saw
what she had been doing. It was perfectly accordant
with that resolution of character which I knew her to
possess ; and the secrecy she had maintained as to any
such design in her former letter, was equally descriptive
of its anxious delicacy. For the world would not she
have seemed to threaten me. Imagine the shock ;
imagine how, till I had actually detected my own
blunder, I raved at the blunders of the post. What
was to be done ? One thing only. I must speak to
my uncle. Without his sanction 1 could not hope to
be listened to again. I spoke ; circumstances were in
my favour ; the late event had softened away his pride,
and he was, earlier than I could have anticipated.
Emma 459
wholly reconciled and complying ; and could say at
last, poor man ! with a deep sigh, that he wished I
might find as much happiness in the marriage state as
he had done. I felt that it would be of a different
sort. Are you disposed to pity me for what I must
have suffered in opening the cause to him, for my sus-
pense while all was at stake ? No ; do not pity me till
I reached Highbury, and saw how ill I had made her.
Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks. I
reached Highbury at the time of day when, from my
knowledge of their late breakfast-hour, I was certain of
a good chance of finding her alone. I was not dis-
appointed ; and at last I was not disappointed either in
the object of my journey. A great deal of very rea-
sonable, very just displeasure I had to persuade away.
But it is done ; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer,
than ever, and no moment's uneasiness can ever occur
between us again. Now, my dear madam, I will re-
lease you ; but I could not conclude before. A thou-
sand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you
have ever shown me, and ten thousand for the atten-
tions your heart will dictate towards her. If you
think me in a way to be happier than I deserve, I am
quite of your opinion. Miss W. calls me the child of
good fortune. I hope she is right. In one respect my
good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to sub-
scribe myself, your obliged and affectionate Son,
" F. C. Weston Churchill. "
Cljaptcr fL%
THIS letter must make its way to Emma's feelings.
She was obliged, in spite of her previous deter
mination to the contrary, to do it all the justice
that Mrs Weston foretold. As soon as she came to her
460
Emma
own name, tt was irresistible ; every line relating to her-
self was interesting, and almost every line agreeable;
and when this charm ceased, the subject could still
maintain itself by the natural return of her former regard
for the writer, and the very strong attraction which any
picture of love must have for her at that moment. She
never stopt till she had gone through the whole : and
^ though it was impossible not to feel that he had been
wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she had sup-
posed ; and he had suffered and was very sorry ; and
he was so grateful to Mrs Weston, and so much in love
with Miss Fairfax, and she was so happy herself, that
there was no being severe ; and could he have entered
the room, she must have shaken hands with him as
heartily as ever.
She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr
Knightley came again she desired him to read it. She
was sure of Mrs Weston's wishing it to be communi-
cated ; especially to one who, like Mr Knightley, had
seen so much to blame in his conduct.
" I shall be very glad to look it over, " said he ; " but
it seems long. I will take it home with me at night. "
But that would not do. Mr Weston was to call in
the evening, and she must return it by him.
" I would rather be talking to you, " he replied ;
" but as it seems a matter of justice, it shall be done. "
He began — stopping, however, almost directly to say,
" Had I been offered the sight of one of this gentleman'*
letters to his mother-in-law a few months ago, Emma, it
would not have been taken with such indifference. "
He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself ; and
then, with a smile, observed, " Humph ! a fine compli-
mentary opening : but it is his way. One man's style must
not be the rule of another's. We will not be severe. "
" It will be natural for me, " he added shortly after-
wards, " to speak my opinion aloud as I read, liy
Emma 461
doing it, I shall feel that I am near you. It will not
be so great a loss of time ; but if you dislike it "
" Not at all. I should wish it. "
Mr Knightley returned to his reading with greater
alacrity.
" He trifles here, " said he, " as to the temptation.
He knows he is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.
Bad. He ought not to have formed the engagement.
* His father's disposition'— he is unjust, however, to his
father. Mr Weston's sanguine temper was a blessing
on all his upright and honourable exertions ; but Mr
Weston earned every present comfort before he
endeavoured to gain it. Very true ; he did not come
till Miss Fairfax was here. "
" And I have not forgotten, " said Emma, " how sure
you were that he might have come sooner if he would.
You pass it over very handsomely ; but you were per-
fectly right. "
" I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma ;
but yet, I think, had you not been in the case, I should
still have distrusted him. "
When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged
to read the whole of it aloud — all that related to her —
with a smile, a look, a shake of the head, a word or
two of assent, or disapprobation, or merely of love, as
the subject required ; concluding, however, seriously,
and, after steady reflection, thus —
" Very bad — though it might have been worse. Play-
ing a most dangerous game. Too much indebted to
the event for his acquittal. No judge of his own
manners by you. Always deceived, in fact, by his own
wishes, and regardless of little besides his own con-
venience. Fancying you to have fathomed his secret !
Natural enough ! his own mind full of intrigue, that he
should suspect it in others. Mystery — Finesse — how
they pervert the understanding'My Emma, does not
462
Emma
everything serve to prove more and more the beauty
of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each
other? "
Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on
Harriet's account, which she could not give any sincere
explanation of.
" You had better go on, " said she.
He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, " The
pianoforte ! Ah ! — that was the act of a very, very
young man, one too young to consider whether the in-
convenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure. A boyish scheme, indeed ! I cannot com-
prehend a man's wishing to give a woman any proof of
affection which he knows she would rather dispense
with : and he did know that she would have prevented
the instrument's coming if she could. "
After this, he made some progress without any pause.
Frank Churchill's confession of having behaved shame-
fully was the first thing to call for more than a word in
passing.
" I perfectly agree with you, sir, " was then his
remark. " You did behave very shamefully. You never
wrote a truer line. " And having gone through what
immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement,
and his persisting to act in direct opposition to Jane
Fairfax's sense of right, he made a fuller pause to say,
" This is very bad. He had induced her to place her-
self, for his sake, in a situation of extreme difficulty and
uneasiness, and it should have been his first object to
prevent her from suffering unnecessarily. She must
have had much more to contend with in carrying on the
correspondence than he could. He should have re-
spected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such ;
but hers were all reasonable. We must look to her
one fault, and remember that she had done a wrong
thing in consenting to tlie engagement, to bear that she
should have been in such a state of punishment. "
Emma 463
Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box
Hill party, and grew uncomfortable. Her ow " beliavi-
our had been so very improper ! She was deeply
ishamed, and a little afraid of his next look. It was all
*ead, however, steadily, attentively, and without the
smallest remark ; and, excepting one momentary glance
at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear of giving pain,
00 remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.
" There is no saying much for the delicacy of our
good friends, the Eltons, " was his next observation.
" His feelings are natural. What ? actually resolve to
break with him entirely ! She felt the engagement to
be a source of repentance and misery to each ; she
dissolved it. What a view this gives of her sense
of his behaviour ! Well, he must be a most extra-
ordinary "
" Nay, nay, read on. You will find how very much
he suffers. "
" I hope he does, " replied Mr Knightley, coolly,
and resuming the letter. "'Smallridge !'What does
this mean ? What is all this ? "
" She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs Small-
ridge's children — a dear friend of Mrs Elton's — a
neighbour of Maple Grove ; and, by the bye, I wonder
how Mrs Elton bears the disappointment ? "
" Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me
to read — not even of Mrs Elton. Only one page more.
1 shall soon have done. What a letter the man
writes ! "
" I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit
towards him. "
" Well, there is feeling here. He does seem to have
suffered in finding her ill. Certainly, I can have no
doubt of his being fond of her. ♦ Dearer, much dearer,
than ever.'I hope he may long continue to feel all the
value of such a reconciliation. He is a very liberal
464 Emma
ihanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands. —
♦ Happier than I deserve.'Come, he knows himself
there.'Miss Woodhouse calls me the child of good
fortune.'Those were Miss Woodhouse's words, were
they ? And a fine ending — and there is the letter.
* The child of good fortune !'That was your name
for him, was it ? "
" You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter
as I am ; but still you must, at least I hope you must,
think the better of him for it. I hope it does him some
service with you. "
" Yes, certainly it does. He has had great faults —
faults of inconsideration and thoughtlessness ; and I am
very much of his opinion in thinking him likely to be
happier than he deserves : but still as he is, beyond a
doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly
with her, I am very ready to believe his character wiU
improve, and acquire from hers the steadiness and deli-
cacy of principle that it wants. And now, let me talk
to you of something else. I have another person's in-
terest at present so much at heart, that I cannot think
any longer about Frank Churchill. Ever since I left
you this morning, Emma, my mind has been hard at
work on one subject. "
The subject followed ; it was in plain, unaffected,
gentlemanlike English, such as Mr Knightley used even
to the woman he was in love with, how to be able to
ask her to marry him without attacking the happiness
of her father. Emma's answer was ready at the first
word. " While her dear father lived, any change of
condition must be impossible for her. She could never
quit him. " Part only of this answer, however, was
admitted. The impossibility of her quitting her father
Mr Knightley felt as strongly as herself ; but the inad-
missibility of any other change he could Dot agree ta
Emma 465
He had been thinking it over most deeply, most intently ;
he had at first hoped to induce Mr Woodhouse to
remove with her to Donwell ; he had wanted to believe
it feasible, but his knowledge of Mr Woodhouse would
not suffer him to deceive himself long ; and now he
confessed his persuasion that such a transplantation
would be a risk of her father's comfort, perhaps even of
his life, which must not be hazarded. Mr Woodhouse
taken from Hartfield ! — No, he felt that it ought not to
be attempted. But the plan which had arisen on the
sacrifice of this, he ti^usted his dearest Emma would
not find in any respect objectionable ; it was, that he
should be received at Hartfield I that so long as her
father's happiness — in other words his life — required
Hartfield to continue her home, it should be his like-
wise.
Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already
had her own passing thoughts. Like him, she had
tried the scheme and rejected it ; but such an alter-
native as this had not occurred to her. She was sen-
sible of all the affection it evinced. She felt that, in
quitting Donwell, he must be sacrificing a great deal of
independence of hours and habits ; that in living con-
stantly with her father, and in no house of his own,
there would be much, very mucli, to be borne with.
She promised to think of it, and advised him to think
of it more ; but he was fully convinced that no reflec-
tion could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject.
He had given it, he could assure her, very long and
calm consideration ; he had been walking away from
William Larkins the whole morning to have his thoughts
to himself.
" Ah ! there is one difficulty unprovided for, " cried
Emma. " I am sure William Larkins will not like it.
You must get his consent before you ask mine. "
She promised, however, to think of it ; and pretty
466 Emma
nearly promised, moreover, to think of it with the in-
tention of finding it a very good scheme.
It is remarkable that Emma, in the many, very many,
points of view in which she was now beginning to con-
sider Don well Abbey, was never struck with any sense
of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as
heir expectant had formerly been so tenaciously regarded.
Think she must of the possible difference to the poor
little boy ; and yet she only gave herself a saucy con-
scious smile about it, and found amusement in detecting
the real cause of that violent dislike of Mr Knightley's
marrying Jane Fairfax, or anybody else, which at the
time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitude
of the sister and the aunt.
This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and con-
tinuing at Hartfield — tiie more she contemplated it the
more pleasing it became. His evils seemed to lessen,
her own advantages to increase, their mutual good to
outweigh every drawback. Such a companion for her-
self in the periods of anxiety and cheerlessness before her!
Such a partner in all those duties and cares to which
time must be giving increase of melancholy !
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet ;
but every blessing of her own seemed to involve and
advance the sufferings of her friend, who must now be
even excluded from Hartfield. The delightful family
party which Emma was securing for herself, poor
Harriet must, in mere charitable caution, be kept at a
distance from. She would be a loser in every way.
Emma could not deplore her future absence as any de-
duction from her own enjoyment. In such a party,
Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ;
but for the poor girl herself, it seemed a peculiarly cruel
necessity that was to be placing her in such a state of
unmerited punishment.
In time, of course, Mr Knightley would be forgotten,
Emma 467
that is, supplanted ; but this could not be expected to
happen very early. Mr Knightley himself would be
doing nothing to assist the cure ; not like Mr Elton.
Mr Knightley, always so kind, so feeling, so truly con-
siderate for everybody, would never deserve to be less
worshipped than now ; and it really was too much to
hope even of Harriet, that she could be in love with
more than three men in one year.
Cljapter iLIBX
IT was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet
as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting. Their
intercourse was painful enough by letter. How
much worse had they been obliged to meet !
Harriet expressed herself veiy much, as might be
supposed, without reproaches, or apparent sense of ill-
usage ; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of
resentment, a something bordering on it in her style,
which increased the desirableness of their being separate.
It might be only her own consciousness ; but it seemed
as if an angel only could have been quite without resent-
ment under such a stroke.
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella's invita-
tion ; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason
for asking it, without resorting to invention. There was
a tooth amiss. Harriet really wished, and had wished
some time, to consult a dentist. Mrs John Knightley
was delighted to be of use ; anything of ill health was
a recommendation to her ; and though not so fond of a
dentist as of a Mr Wingfield, she was quite eager to
have Harriet under her care. When it was thus settled
on her sister's side, Emma proposed it to her friend,
and found her very persuadable. Haniet was to go ;
468 Emma
she was Invited for at least a fortnight. She was to be
conveyed in Mr Woodhouse's carriage. It was all
arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was safe in
Brunswick Square.
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr Knightley's
visits ; now she could talk, and she could listen with
true happiness, unchecked by that sense of injustice, of
guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted her
when remembering how disappointed a heart was near
her, how much might at that moment, and at a little
distance, be enduring by the feelings which she had led
astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs Goddard's, or in
London made, perhaps, an unreasonable difference in
Emma's sensations ; but she could not think of her in
London without objects of curiosity and employment,
which must be averting the past, and carrying her out
of herself.
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed
directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had
occupied. Tiiere was a communication before her, one
which she only could be competent to make — the con-
fession of her engagement to her father j but she would
have nothing to do with it at present. She had re-
solved to defer the disclosure till Mrs Weston were
safe and well. No additional agitation should be
thrown at this period among those she loved — and the
evil should not act on herself by anticipation before the
appointed time. A fortnight, at least, of leisure and
peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more
agitating, delight, should be hers.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure,
to employ half an hour of this holiday of spirits in
calling on Miss Fairfax. She ought to go — and she
was longing to see her ; the resemblance of their present
situations increasing every other motive of good-will.
Emma 469
It would be a secret satisfaction ; but the consciousness
of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the
interest with which she should attend to anything Jane
might communicate.
She went — she had driven once unsuccessfully to the
door, but had not been into the house since the morning
after Box Hill, when poor Jane had been in such dis-
tress as had filled her with compassion, though all the
worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected. The
fear of being still unwelcome determined her, though
assured of their being at home, to wait in the passage,
and send up her name. She heard Patty announcing
it ; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bates
had before made so happily intelligible. No ; she
heard nothing but the instant reply of, " Beg her to
walk up ; " and a moment afterwards she was met on
the stairs by Jane herself coming eagerly forward, as if
no other reception of her were felt sufficient. Emma
had never seen her look so well, so lovely, so engaging.
There was consciousness, animation, and warmth ;
there was everything which her countenance or manner
could ever have wanted. She came forward with an
offered hand ; and said, in a low, but very feeling
tone —
" This is most kind, indeed ! Miss Woodhouse, it
IS impossible for me to express — I hope you will be-
lieve — Excuse me for being so entirely without words. "
Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no
want of words, if the sound of Mrs Elton's voice from
the sitting-room had not checked her, and made it
expedient to compress all her friendly and all her con-
gratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of
the hand.
Mrs Bates and Mrs Elton were together. Miss
Bates was out, which accounted for the previous tran-
quillity. Emma could have wished Mrs Elton else-
470 Emma
where ; but she was in a humour to have patience wrth
everybody ; and as Mrs Elton met her with unusual
graciousness, she hoped the rencontre would do them
no harm.
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs Elton's
thoughts, and understand why she was, like herself,
in happy spirits ; it was being in Miss Fairfax's con-
fidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what was
still a secret to other people. Emma saw symptoms of
it immediately in the expression of her face ; and while
paying her own compliments to Mrs Bates, and appear-
ing to attend to the good old lady's replies, she saw
her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a
letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to
Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold
ridicule * by her side, saying, with significant nods —
" We can finish this some other time, you know.
You and I shall not want opportunities ; and, in fact,
you have heard all the essential already. I only
wanted to prove to you that Mrs S. admits our apology,
and is not offended. You see how delightfully she
writes. Oh, she is a sweet creature ! You would
have doated on her, had you gone. — But not a word
more. Let us be discreet — quite on our good be-
haviour. — Hush ! — You remember those lines — I for-
get the poem at this moment : —
• For when a lady's in the case,
You know, all other things give place.'
Now I say, my dear, in our case, for lady, read — mum !
a word to the wise. I am in a fine flow of spirits, an't
I ? But I want to set your heart at ease as to Mrs S.
My representation, you see, has quite appeased her. "
And again, on Emma's merely turning her head
to look at Mrs Bates's knitting, she added, in a half
v/hisper —
* A corruption of " reticule. " — Johnson's DicrioNART
Emma 471
•» I mentioned no names, you will observe. Oh no !
cautious as a minister of state. I managed it extremely
well. "
Emma could not doubt. It was a palpable display,
repeated on every possible occasion. When they had
all talked a little while in harmony of the weather and
Mrs Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed
with —
" Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy
little friend here is charmingly recovered ? Do not you
think her cure does Perry the highest credit ? " (here«was
a side glance of great meaning at Jane). " Upon my
word, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time !
Oh, if you had seen her, as I did, when she was at the
worst ! ** And when Mrs Bates was saying something
to Emma, whispered farther, " We do not say a word
of any assistance that Perry might have ; not a word of
a certain young physician from Windsor. Oh ! no, Periy
shall have all the credit. "
" I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss
Woodhouse, " she shortly afterwards began, " since the
party to Box Hill. Very pleasant party. But yet I think
there was something wanting. Things did not seem —
that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of
some. So it appeared to me, at least, but I might be
mistaken. However, I think it answered so far as to
tempt one to go again. What say you both to our
collecting the same party, and exploring to Box Hill
again, while the fine weather lasts ? It must be the
same party, you know — quite the same party, not one
exception. "
Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could
not help being diverted by the perplexity of her first
answer to herself, resulting, she supposed, from doubt of
what might be said, and impatience to say everything.
" Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse you are all
472 Emma
kindness. It is impossible to say — Yes, indeed, I quite
understand — dearest Jane's prospects — that is, I do not
mean. — But she is charmingly recovered. How is Mr
Woodhouse ? I am so glad. — Quite out of my power.
— Such a happy little circle as you find us here. — Yes,
indeed Charming young man ! — that is — so very
friendly ; I mean good Mr Perry ! — such attention to
Jane ! " And from her great, her more than commonly
thankful delight towards Mrs Elton for being there,
Emma guessed that there had been a little show of
resentment towards Jane, from the Vicarage quarter,
which was now graciously overcome. — After a few
whispers, indeed, which placed it beyond a guess, Mrs
Elton, speaking louder, said —
" Yes, here I am, my good friend ; and here I have
been so long, that anywhere else I should think it neces-
sary to apologize ; but, the truth is, that I am waiting
for my lord and master. He promised to join me here,
and pay his respects to you. "
" What ! are we to have the pleasure of a call from
Mr Elton ? That will be a favour indeed ; for I know
gentlemen do not like morning visits, and Mr Elton's
time is so engaged. "
" Upon my word it is, Miss Bates. He really is
engaged from morning to night. There is no end of
people's coming to him, on some pretence or other.
The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are
always wanting his opinion. They seem not able to do
anything without him. * Upon my word, Mr E.,'I
often say, * rather you than I. I do not know what
would become of my crayons and my instmment if I
had half so many applicants.'Bad enough as it is, for
1 absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable
degree. I believe I have not played a bar this fortnight.
However, he is coming, I assure you : yes, indeed, on
purDOse to wait on you all. " And putting up her hand
Emma 473
to screen her words from Emma — " A congratulatory
visit, you know. Oh ! yea, quite indispensable. "
Miss Bates looked about her, so happily !
" He promised to come to me as soon as he could
disengage himself from Kniglitley ; but he and Knight-
ley are shut up together in deep consultation. Mr E.
is Knightley's right hand. "
Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only
said, " Is Mr Elton gone on foot to Donwell ? He
will have a hot walk. "
" Oh no, it is a meeting at the Crown — a regular
meeting. Weston and Cole will be there too ; but one
is apt to speak only of those who lead. I fancy Mr E.
and Knightley have everything their own way. "
" Have not you mistaken the day ? " said Emma.
" I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is
not till to-morrow. Mr Knightley was at Hartfield
yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday. "
" Oh no, the meeting is certainly to-day, " was the
abrupt answer, which denoted the impossibility of any
blunder on Mrs Elton's side. " I do believe, " she
continued, " this is the most troublesome parish that
ever was. We never heard of such things at Maple
Grove. "
" Your parish there was small, " said Jane.
" Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I
never heard the subject talked of. "
" But it is proved by the smallness of the school,
which I have heard you speak of, as under the patron-
age of your sister and Mrs Bragge ; the only school,
and not more than five-and-twenty children. "
" Ah 1 you clever creature, that's very tine. What
a thinking brain you have ! I say, Jane, what a per-
fect character you and I should make, if we could be
shaken together. My liveliness and your solidity would
produce perfection. Not that I presume to insinuate,
474 Emma
however, that some people may not think you perfection
already. But hush ! — not a word, if you please. "
It seemed an unnecessary caution ; Jane was want-
ing to give her words, not to Mrs Elton, but to Miss
Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw. The wish of
distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was very
evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a
look.
Mr Elton made his appearance. His lady greeted
him with some of her sparkling vivacity.
" Very pretty, sir, upon my word ; to send me on
here, to be an encumbrance to my friends, so long be-
fore you vouchsafe to come. But you knew what a
dutiful creature you had to deal with. You knew I
should not stir till my lord and master appeared. Here
have I been sitting this hour, giving these young ladies
a sample of true conjugal obedience ; for wlio can say,
you know, how soon it may be wanted ? "
Mr Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit
seemed thrown away. His civilities to the other ladies
must be paid ; but his subsequent object was to lament
over himself, for the heat he was suffering, and the walk
he had had for nothing.
" When I got to Donwell, " said he, " Knightley
could not be found. Very odd ! very unaccountable !
after the note I sent him this morning, and the message
he returned, that he should certainly be at home till
one. "
" Donwell ! " cried his wife. " My dear Mr E.,
you have not been to Donwell ! you mean the Crown j
you come fiom the meeting at the Crown. "
" No, no, that's to-morrow ; and I particularly
wanted to see Kniglitley to-day on that very account.
Such a dreadful broiling morning ! I went over the fields
too " (speaking in a tone of great ill usage), " which
m.ide it so much the worse. And then not to find
Emma
475
him at home ! I assure you T am not at all pleased.
And no apology left, no message for me. The house-
keeper declared she knew nothing of my being ex-
pected. Very extraordinary ! And nobody knew at
all which way he was gone. Perhaps to Hartfield,
perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.
Miss Woodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley'
Can you explam it ? "
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very
extraordinary, indeed, and that she had not a syllable
to say for him.
" I cannot imagine, " said Mrs Elton (feeling the
indignity as a wife ought to do), " I cannot imagine
how he could do such a thing by you, of all people in
the world ! The very last person whom one should
expect to be forgotten ! My dear Mr E., he must
have left a message for you, I am sure he must. Not
even Knightley could be so very eccentric ; and his
servants forgot it. Depend upon it that was the case ;
and very likely to happen with the Donwell servants,
who aie all, I have often observed, extremely awkward
and remiss. I am sure I would not have such a crea-
ture as his Harry stand at our sideboard for any con-
sideration. And as for Mrs Hodges, Wright holds her
very cheap indeed. She promised Wright a receipt,
and never sent it. "
" I met William Larkins, " continued Mr Elton, " as
I got near the house, and he told me I should not
find his master at home, but I did not believe him.
William seemed rather out of humour. He did not
know what was come to his master lately, he said, but
he could hardly ever get the speech of him. I have
nothing to do with William's wants, but it really is of
very great importance that / should see Knightley
to-day ; and it becomes a matter, therefore, of very
serious inconvenience that 1 should have had this hot
walk to no pui-pose. "
476 Emma
Emma felt that she could not do better than go
home directly. In all probability she was at this very
time waited for there ; and Mr Knightley might be
preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards
Mr Elton, if not towards William Larkins.
She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fair-
fax determined to attend her out of the room, to go
with her even downstairs ; it gave her an opportunity,
which she immediately made use of, to say —
" It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the pos-
sibility. Had you not been surrounded by other friends,
I might have been tempted to introduce a subject, to
ask questions, to speak more openly than might have
been strictly correct. I feel that I should certainly
have been impertinent. "
" Oh ! " cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation
which Emma thought infinitely more becoming to her
than all the elegance of all her usual composure —
" there would have been no danger. The danger
would have been of my wearying you. You could not
have gratified me more than by expressing an interest
. Indeed, Miss Woodhouse " (speaking more
collectedly), " with the consciousness which I have of
misconduct — very great misconduct — it is particularly
consoling to me to know that those of my friends whose
good opinion is most worth preserving, are not disgusted
to such a degree as to — I have not time for half that I
could wish to say. 1 long to make apologici, excuses,
to urge something for myself. I feel it so very due.
But, unfortunately — in short, if your compassion does
not stand my friend "
" Oh ! you are too scrupulous, indeed you are, " cried
Emma, warmly, and taking her hand. " You owe me
no apologies ; and everybody to whom you might be
supposed to owe them is so perfectly satisfied, so de-
lighted even "
Emma 477
" You are very kind, but I know what my manners
were to you. So cold and artificial ! I had always a
part to act. It was a life of deceit ! I know that I
must have disgusted you. "
" Pray say no more. I feel that all the apologies
should be on my side. Let us forgive each other at
once. We must do whatever is to be done quickest,
and I think our feelings will lose no time there. I
hope you have pleasant accounts from Windsor ? "
" Veiy. "
" And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are
to lose you — ^just as I begin to know you. "
" Oh ! as to all that, of course nothing can be
thought of yet. I am here till claimed by Colonel and
Mrs Campbell. "
" Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps, "
replied Emma, smiling — " but, excuse me, it must be
thought of "
The smile was returned as Jane answered —
" You are very right ; it has been thought of. And
1 will own to you (1 am sure it will be safe), that so
far as our living with Mr Churchill at Enscombe, it is
settled. There must be three months, at least, of deep
mourning ; but when they are over, I imagine there will
be nothing more to wait for. "
" Thank you, thank you. This is just what 1
wanted to be assured of. Oh ! if you knew how much
I love everything that is decided and open! — Good-bye,
good-bye. "
478 Emma
Cljaptcr JL3lI3D3i.
MRS WESTON'S friends were all made happy
by her safety ; and if the satisfaction of her
well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was
by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl. She
had been decided in wishing for a Miss Weston. She
would not acknowledge that it was with any view of
making a match for her, hereafter, with either of
Isabella's sons ; but she was convinced that a daughter
would suit both father and mother best. It vv'ould be a
great comfort to Mr Weston, as he grew older — and
even Mr Weston might be growing older ten years
hence — to have his fireside enlivened by the spoits and
the nonsense, the freaks and the fancies of a child never
banished from home ; and Mrs Weston — no one could
doubt that a daughter would be most to her ; and it
would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how
to teach, should not have their powers in exercise again.
" She has had the advantage, you know, of practising
on me, " she continued — " like La Baronne d'Almane
on La Comtesse d'Ostalis, in Madame de Genlis'
•Adelaide and Theodore,'and we shall now see her
own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan. "
" That is, " replied Mr Knightley, " she will indulge
her even more than she did you, and believe that she does
not indulge her at all. It will be the only difference. "
" Poor child ! " cried Emma ; " at that rate, what
will become of her ? "
" Nothing very bad. The fate of thousands. She
will be disagreeable in infancy, and correct herself aa
she grows older. I am losing all my bitterness against
spoilt children, my dearest Emma. I, who am owing
all my happiness to you, would not it be horrible ingrati-
tude in me to be severe on them •'"
Emma 479
Emma laughed, and replied : *'But I had the
assistance of all your endeavours to counteract the indul-
gence of other people. I doubt whether my own sense
would have corrected me without it. "
" Do you ? — I have no doubt. Nature gave you
understanding : — Miss Taylor gave you principles.
You must have done well. My interference was quite
as likely to do harm as good. It was very natural for
you to say, * What right has he to lecture me ?'and I
am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done
in a disagreeable manner. I do not believe I did you
any good. The good was all to myself, by making you
an object of the tenderest affection to me. I could not
tliink about you so much without doating on you, faults
and all ; and by dint of fancying so many errors, have
been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at
least. "
" I am sure you were of use to me, " cried Emma.
" I was very often influenced rightly by you — oftener
than I would own at the time. I am very sure you
did me good. And if poor little Anna Weston is to
be spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do
as much for her as you have done for me, except falling
in love with her when she is thirteen. "
" How often, when you were a girl, have you said
to me, with one of your saucy looks —'Mr Knightley, I
am going to do so-and-so ; papa says I may,'or'I
have Miss Taylor's leave'— something which, you
knew, I did not approve. In such cases my interfer-
ence was giving j-^ou two bad feelings instead of
one. "
" What an amiable creature I was ! No wonder
you should hold my speeciics in such affectionate
remembrance. "
" *Mr Knightley,'you always called me.'Mr
Knightley ;'and, from habit, it has not so very formal a
48o
Emma
sound. And yet it is formal. I want you to call me
something else, but I do not know what. "
" I remember once calling you'George,'in one of
my amiable fits, about ten years ago. I did it because
I thought it would offend you ; but, as you made no
objection, 1 never did it again. "
" And cannot you call me'George'now ? "
" Impossible ! I never can call you anything but
* Mr Knightley.'I will not promise even to equal the
elegant terseness of Mrs Elton, by calling you Mr K.
But I will promise, " she added presently, laughing and
blushing, " I will promise to call you once by your
Christian name. I do not say when, but perhaps you
may guess where ; — in the building in which N. takes
M. for better, for worse. "
Emma grieved that she could not be more openly
just to one important service which his better sense
would have rendered her, to the advice which would
have saved her from the worst of all her womanly
follies — her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith ; but
it was too tender a subject. She could not enter on it.
Harriet was very seldom mentioned between them.
This, on his side, might merely proceed from her not
being thought of; but Emma wa-s rather inclined to
attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some
appearances, that their friendship were declining. She
was aware herself that, parting under any other circum-
stances, they certainly should have corresponded more,
and that her intelligence would not have rested, as it
now almost wholly did, on Isabella's letters. He might
observe that it was so. The pain of being obliged to
practise concealment towards him was very little in-
ferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor
as could be expected ; on her first arrival she had
thought her out of spirits, which appeared perfectly
Emma 481
natural, as there was a dentist to be consulted ; but mnce
that business had been over, she did not appear to find
Harriet different from what she had known her before.
Isabella, to be sure, was no very quick observer ; yet if
Harriet had not been equal to plajnng with the children,
it would not have escaped her. Emma's comforts and
hopes were most agretably carried on, by Harriet's
being to stay longer ; her fortnight was likely to be a
month at least. Mr and Mrs John Knightley were to
come down in August, and she was invited to remaiD
till they could bring her back.
" John does not even mention your friend, " said Mr
Knightley. " Here is his answer, if you like to see it. "
It was the answer to the communication of his intended
marriage. Emma accepted it with a very eager hand,
with an impatience all alive to know what he would say
about it, and not at ail checked by hearing that her
friend was unmentioned.
" John enters like a brother into my happiness, " con-
tinued Mr Knightley, " but he is no complimenter ; and
though I well know him to have, likewise, a most
brotherly affection for you, he is so far from making
flourishes, that any other young woman might think him
rather cool in her praise. But I am not afraid of your
seeing what he writes. "
" He writes like a sensible man, " replied Emma,
when she had read the letter. " I honour his sincerity.
It is very plain that he considers the good fortune of
the engagement as all on my side, but that he is not
without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your
affection as you think me already. Had he said any-
thing to bear a different construction, I should not have
believed him. "
" My Emma, he means no such thing. He only
means "
" He and I should differ very little in our estimation
482
Emma
of the two, " — interrupted she, with a sort of serious
smile — " much less, perhaps, than he is aware of, if we
could enter without ceremony or reserve on the subject. "
" Emma, ray dear Emma "
" Oh! " she cried with more thorough gaiety, " if
you fancy your brother does not do me justice, only wait
till my dear father is in the secret, and hear his opinion.
Depend upon it, he will be much farther from doing
you justice. He will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question ; all the merit
on mine. I wish I may not sink into'poor Emma'
with him at once. His tender compassion towards
oppressed worth can go no farther. "
" Ah 1 " he cried, " I wish your father might be half
as easily convinced as John will be, of our having every
right that equal worth can give, to be happy together.
I am amused by one part of John's letter — did you
notice it ? — where he says that my information did not
take him wholly by surprise, that he was rather in ex-
pectation of hearing something of the kind. "
" If I understand your brother, he only means so far
as your having some thoughts of marrying. He had no
idea of me. He seems perfectly unprepared for that. "
" Yes, yes — but I am amused that he should have
seen so far into my feelings. What has he been judging
by ? I am not conscious of any difference in my spirits
or conversation that could prepare him at this time for
my marrying any more than at another. But it was so,
I suppose. I dare say there was a difference when I
was staying with them the other day. I believe I did
not play with the children quite so much as usual. I
remember one evening the poor boys saying,'Uncle
seems always tired now.'"
The time was coming when the news must spread
farther, and other persons'reception of it tried. As
soon as Mrs Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit
Emma 483
Mr Woodhouse's visits, Emma having it in view that
her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause,
resolved first to announce it at home, and then at Ran-
dalls. But how to break it to her father at last ! She
had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of Mr
Knightley's absence, or when it came to the point her
heart would have failed her, and she must have put it
off ; but Mr Knightley was to come at such a time, and
follow up the beginning she was to make. She was
forced to speak, and to speak cheerfully too. She must
not make it a more decided subject of misery to him, by
a melancholy tone herself. She must not appear to
think it a misfortune. With all the spirits she could
command, she prepared him first for something strange,
and then, in a few words, said, that if his consent and
approbation could be obtained — which, she trusted,
would be attended with no difficulty, since it was a plan
to promote the happiness of all — she and Mr Knightley
meant to marry ; by which means Hartfield would re-
ceive the constant addition of that person's company,
whom she knew he loved, next to his daughters and
Mrs Weston, best in the world.
Poor man ! — it was at first a considerable shock to
him, and he tried earnestly to dissuade her from it. She
was reminded, more than once, of having always said
she would never marry, and assured that it would be a
great deal better for her to remain single ; and told of
poor Isabella, and poor Miss Taylor. But it would not
do. Emma hung about him affectionately, and smiled,
and said it must be so ; and that he must not class her
with Isabella and Mrs Weston, whose marriages takmg
them from Hartfield had, indeed, made a melancholy
change : but she was not going from Hartfield ; she
should be always there ; she was introducing no change
in their numbers or their comforts but for the better ;
and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the
484 Emma
happier for having Mr Knightley always at hand, when
he were once got used to the idea. Did he not love
Mr Knightley very much ? He would not deny that
he did, she was sure. Whom did he ever want to con-
sult on business but Mr Knightley ? Who was so use-
ful to him, who so ready to write his letters, who so
glad to assist him ? Who so cheerful, so attentive, so
attached to him ? Would not he like to have him
always on the spot ? Yes. That was all very true.
Mr Knightley could not be there too often ; he should
be glad to see him every day ; but they did see him
every day as it was. Why could not they go on as
they had done ?
Mr Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled ; but
the worst was overcome, the idea was given ; time and
continual repetition must do the rest. To Emma's
entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr Knightley's,
whose fond praise of her gave the subject even a land
of welcome ; and he was soon used to be talked to by
each on every fair occasion. They had all the assistance
which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest
approbation ; and Mrs Weston was ready, on the first
meeting, to consider the subject in the most serviceable
light ; first as a settled, and, secondly, as a good one —
well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two
recommendations to Mr Woodhouse's mind. It was
agreed upon, as what was to be ; and everybody by whom
he was used to be guided assuring him that it would
be for his happiness, and having some feelings himself
which almost admitted it, he began to think that some
time or other, in another year or two, perhaps, it
might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place.
Mrs Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings
in all that she said to him in favour of the event. She
had been extremely surprised, never more so, than when
Emma first opened the affair to her ; but she saw in it
Emma 485
only increase of happiness to all, and had no scruple in
urg.ng h.m tothe utmost. She had such a regard for
Emma ; and u was m everyr respect so proper, suitable, and
unexceptzonable a connection, and in one respect one
pomt of the highest importance, so peculiarly eSe so
singularly fortunate, that now it seemed a^s if Emm^
could not safely have attached herself to any oThe
creature, and that she had herself been the stupfdettof
things m not having thought of it, and wished it Lg
ago. How very fevr of those men in a rank of life tf
address Emma would have renounced their own home
for Hartfield! And who but Mr Knightley couTd
know and bear with Mr Woodhouse, so^as to make
such an arrangement desirable ! The difficulty of dh-
posing of poor Mr Woodhouse had been always felt n
FrLr H P P^'"'" i^ " -''° " "'^'^'-arriage^betwe n
Frank and Emma. How to settle the claims of Ens-
combe and Hartfield had been a continual impedimen
-less acknowledged by Mr Weston than by herseTfl
iTnTTu \^ " ^ "''''■'^ " "'^^'^° fi'^'^h L sublet
better than by saying- " Those matters will take care
of themselves; the young people will find a way »
But here there was nothing to be shifted off in a wi d
speculation on the future. It was all right,all open all
equal. No sacrifice on any side worth the^name
It was a union of the highe'st promise of foHcitr.n
or delaylt. "'"'" ^''" ^'^ " ^^ ^^^^^^ ^° 4°-
Mrs Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulgina in
uch reflections as these, was one of the happiest women
.n the world. If anything could increase her delighUt
Tfi^sr^tXr''''-''^°^'-^^ ^- -S-n
The news was universally a surprise wherever it
spread; and Mr Weston had his five minutes'share o "
486 Emma
it ; but five minutes were enough to familiarize the idea
to his quickness of mind. He saw the advantages of
the match, and rejoiced in them with all the constancy
of his wife ; but the wonder of it was very soon
nothing ; and by the end of an hour he was not far from
believing that he had always foreseen it.
" It is to be a secret, I conclude, " said he. " These
matters are always a secret, till it is found out that
everybody knows them. Only let me be told when I
may speak out. I wonder whether Jane has any sus-
picion ? "
He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied
himself on that point. He told her the news. Was
not she like a daughter, his eldest daughter ? — ^he must
tell her ; and Miss Bates being present, it passed, of
course, to Mrs Cole, Mrs Perry, and Mrs Elton, im
mediately afterwards. It was no more than the princi-
pals were prepared for ; they had calculated from the
time of its being known at Randalls how soon it would
be over Highbury ; and were thinking of themselves, as
the evening wonder in many a family circle, with great
sagacity.
In general, it was a very well approved match.
Some might think him, and others might think her, the
most in luck. One set might recommend their all
removing to Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the
John Knightleys ; and another might predict disagree-
ments among their servants ; but yet, upon the whole,
there was no serious objection raised, except in one
habitation — the Vicarage. There, the surprize was not
softened by any satisfaction. Mr Elton cared little
about it, compared with his wife ; he only hoped " the
young lady's pride would now be contented ; " and
supposed " she had always meant to catch Knightley if
she could ; " and, on the point of living at Hartfield,
could daringly exclaim, " Rather he than I ! " But
Emma 487
Mrs Elton was very much discomposed indeed. *• Poor
Knightley ! poor fellow ! — sad business for him. She
was extremely concerned ; for though very eccentric, he
had a thousand good qualities. How could he be so
taken in ? Did not think him at all in love — not in the
least. Poor Knightley ! There would be an end of
all pleasant intercourse with him. How happy he had
been to come and dine with them whenever they asked
him ! But that would be all over now. Poor fellow !
No more exploring parties to Donwell made for her.
Oh no ; there would be a Mrs Knightley to throw cold
water on everything. Extremely disagreeable ; but she
was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper
the other day. Shocking plan, living together. It
would never do. She knew a family near Maple Grove
who had tried it, and been obliged to separate before
the end of the first quarter. "
CljatJter JLllF*
TIME passed on. A few more to-morrows, and
the party from London would be arriving. It
was an alarming change ; and Emma was think-
ing of it one morning, as what must bring a great deal
to agitate and grieve her, when Mr Knightley came in,
and distressing thoughts were put by. After the first
chat of pleasure, he was silent ; and then, in a graver
tone, began with —
" I have something to tell you, Emma ; some
news.*'
" Good or bad ? *'said she, quickly, looking up in his
face.
" I do not know which it ought to be called. "
" Ob good I am sure. I see it in your countenance.
You are trying not to Rmile. "
488
Emma
" I am afraid, " said he, composing his features, " I am
very much afraid, my dear Emma, that you will not
smile when you hear it. "
" Indeed ! but why so ? I can hardly imagine that
anything which pleases or amuses you should not please
and amuse me too. "
" There is one subject, " he replied, " I hope but one,
on which we do not think, alike. " He paused a moment,
again smiling, with his eyes fixed on her face. " Does
nothing occur to you ? Do not you recollect ? Harriet
Smith. "
Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid
of something, though she knew not whdt.
" Have you heard from her yourself this morning .'"
cried he. " You have, I believe, and know the
whole. "
" No, I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell me. "
" You are prepared for the worst, I see ; and very
bad it is. Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin. "
Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being
prepared ; and her eyes, in eager gaze, said, " No, this
is impossible ! " but her lips were closed.
" It is so, indeed ! " contined Mr Knightley ; " I
have it from Robert Martin himself. He left me not
half an hour ago. "
She was still looking at him with the most speaking
amazement.
" You like it, ray Emma, as little as I feared — I wish
our opinions were the same. But in time they will.
Time, you may be sure, will make one or the other of
us think differently ; and in the meanwhile, we need not
talk much on the subject. "
" You mistake me, you quite mistake me, " she re-
plied, exerting herself. " It is not that such a circum-
stance would now make iie unhappy, but I cannot
believe it . It seems an impossibility ! You cannot
Emma 489
mean to say that HaiTiet Smith has accepted Robert
Martin ! You cannot mean that he has even proposed
to her again — yet ! You only mean that he intends it. "
" I mean that he has done it, " answered Mr Knight-
ley with smiling but determined decision, " and been
accepted. "
« Good God ! " she cried. " Well ! " Then having
recourse to her work-basket, in excuse for leaning down
her face, and concealing all the exquisite feelings of
delight and entertainment which she knew she must be
expressing, she added, " Well, now, tell me every-
thing ; make this intelligible to me. How, where,
when i Let me know it all. I never was more sur-
prised — but it does not make me unhappy, I assure
you. How — how has it been possible ? "
" It is a very simple story. He went to town on
business three days ago, and I got him to take charge
of some papers which 1 was wanting to send to John.
He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and
was asked by him to join their party the same evening
to Astley's. They were going to take the two eldest
boys to Astley's. The party was to be our brother and
sister, Henry, John — and Miss Smith. My friend
Robert could not resist. They called for him in their
way ; were all extremely amused : and my brother asked
him to dine with them the next day, which he did, and
in the course of that visit (as I understand) he found an
opportunity of speaking to Harriet ; and certainly did
not speak in vain. She made him, by her acceptance,
as happy even as he is deserving. He came down by
yesterday's coach, and was with me this morning, im-
mediately after breakfast, to report liis proceedings,
first on my affairs, and then on his own. This Is all
that I can relate of the how, where, and when. Your
friend Haniet will make a much longer history when
you see her. She will give you all the minute par-
R 2
490 Emma
ticulars, which only woman's language can make in-
teresting. In our communications we deal only in the
great. However, I must say, that Robert Martin's
heart seemed for him, and to me, very overflowing ; and
that he did mention, without its being much to the
purpose, that on quitting their box at Astley's, my
brother took, charge of Mrs John Knightley and little
John, and he followed, with Miss Smith and Henry ;
and that at one time they were in such a crowd as to
make Miss Smith rather uneasy. "
He stopped. Emma dared not attempt any imme-
diate reply. To speak, she was sure, would be to
betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness. She
must wait a moment, or he would think her made Her
silence disturbed him ; and after observing her a little
while, he added —
" Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance
would not now make you unhappy ; but I am afraid it
gives you more pain than you expected. His situation
is an evil ; but you must consider it as what satisfies
your friend ; and I will answer for your thinking better
and better of him as you know him more ; his good
sense and good principles would delight you. As far
as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friend
in better hands. His rank in society I would alter if
I could, which is saying a great deal, I assure you,
Emma. You laugh at me about William Larkins ; but
I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin.'*
He wanted her to look up and smile ; and having
now brought herself not to smile too broadly, she did,
cheerfully answering —
" You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to
the match. I think Harriet is doing extremely well. Her
connexions may be worse than his : in respectability of
character, there can be no doubt that they are. I have
been silent from surprise, merely — excessive surprise.
Emma 491
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me .
how peculiarly unprepared I was ! for I had reason to
believe her very lately more determined against him,
much more than she was before. "
" You ought to know your friend best, " replied Mr
Knightley ; " but I should say she was a good-tem-
pered, soft-hearted girl, not likely to be very, very
determined against any young man who told her he
loved her. "
Emma could not help laughing as she answered,
" Upon my word, I believe you know her quite as well
as I do. But, Mr Knightley, are you perfectly sure
that she has absolutely and downright accepted him ?
I could suppose she might in time, but can she already ?
Did not you misunderstand him ? You were both
talking of other things ; of business, shows of cattle, or
new drills ; and might not you, in the confusion of so
many subjects, mistake him ? It was not Harriet's
hand that he was certain of — it was the dimensions of
some famous ox. "
The contrast between the countenance and air of
Mr Knightley and Robert Martin was, at this moment,
so strong to Emma's feelings, and so strong was the
recollection of all that had so recently passed on Har-
riet's side, so fresh the sound of those words spoken
with such emphasis, " No, I hope I know better than
to think of Robert Martin, " that she was really ex-
pecting the intelligence to prove, in some measure, pre-
mature. It could not be otherwise.
" Do you dare say this ? " cried Mr Knightley.
" Do you dare to suppose me so great a blockhead as
not to know what a man is talking of? What do you
deserve ? "
" Oh ! I always deserve the best treatment, because
I never put up with any other ; and, therefore, you
must give me a plain, direct answer. Are you quite
492 Emma
iure that you understand the terms on which Mr Martin
and Harriet now are ? "
*'I am quite sure, " he replied, speaking very dis-
tinctly, " that he told me she had accepted him ; and
that there was no obscurity, nothing doubtful, in the
words he used ; and I think I can give you a pcoof
that it must be so. He asked my opinion as to what
he was now to do. He knew of no one but Mrs
Goddard to whom he could apply for information of
her relations or friends. Could I mention anything
more fit to be done than to go to Mrs Goddard ? I
assured him that I could not. Then, he said, he
would endeavour to see her in the course of this day. "
" I am perfectly satisfied, " replied Emma, with the
brightest smiles, " and most sincerely wish them happy. "
" You are materially changed since we talked on this
subject before. "
" I hope so — for at that time I was a fool. "
" And I am changed also ; for I am now veiy
grilling to grant you all Harriet's good qualities. I
have taken some pains for your sake, and for Robert
Martin's sake (whom I have always had reason to
believe as much in love with her as ever), to get ac-
quainted with her. I have often talked to her a good
deal. You must have seen that I did. Sometimes,
indeed, I have thought you were half suspecting me of
pleading poor Martin's cause, which was never the case ;
but, from all my observations, I am convinced of her
being an artless, amiabie girl, with very good notions,
very seriously good principles, and placing her happiness
in the affections and utility of domestic life. Much of
this, I have no doubt, she may thank you for. "
" Me ! " cried Emma, shaking her head. " Ah,
poor Harriet ! "
She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly
to a little more praise than she deserved.
Emma 493
Their conversatioa was soon afterwards closed by the
entrance of her father. She was not sorry. She
wanted to be alone. Her mind was in a state of flutter
and wonder, which made it impossible for her to be
collected. She was in dancing, singing, exclaiming
spirits ; and till she had moved about, and talked to
herself, and laughed and reflected, she could be fit for
nothing rational.
Her father's business was to announce James's being
gone out to put the horses to, preparatory to their now
daily drive to Randalls ; and she had, therefore, an
immediate excuse for disappearing.
The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sen-
sations may be imagined. The sole grievance and alloy
thus removed in the prospect of Harriet's welfare, she
was really in danger of becoming too happy for security.
What had she to wish for ? Nothing, but to grow
more worthy of him, whose intentions and judgment
had been ever so superior to her own. Nothing but
that the lessons of her past folly might teach her
humility and circumspection in future.
Serious she was, very serious, in her thankfulness and
in her resolutions ; and yet there was no preventing a
laugh, sometimes in the very midst of them. She must
laugh at such a close — such an end of the doleful dis-
appointment of five weeks back — such a heart — such a
Harriet !
Now there would be pleasure in her returning ; every-
thing would be a pleasure ; it would be a great pleasure
to know Robert Martin.
High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt
felicities was the reflection that all necessity of conceal-
ment from Mr Knightley would soon be over. The
disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her to
practise, might soon be over. She could now look for-
ward to giving him that full and perfect confidence
494 Emma
which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a
duty.
In the gayest and happiest spirits, she set forward
with her father, not always listening, but always agree-
ing, to what he said ; and, whether in speech or silence,
conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being
obliged to go to Randalls every day, or poor Mrs
Weston would be disappointed.
They arrived. Mrs Weston was alone in the draw--
ing-room. But hardly had they been told of the baby,
and Mr Woodhouse received the thanks for coming,
which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through
the blind of two figures passing near the window.
'* It is Frank and Miss Fairfax, " said Mrs Weston.
" I was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprise
in seeing him arrive this morning. He stays till to-
morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend
the day with us. They are coming in, I hope. "
In half a minute they were in the room. Emma was
extremely glad to see him ; but there was a degree of
confusion, a number of embarrassing recollections, on each
side. They met readily and smiling, but with a con-
sciousness which at first allowed little to be said ; and
having all sat down again, there was for some time
such a blank in the circle that Emma began to doubt
whether the wish now indulged, which she had long
felt, of seeing Frank Churchill once more, and of seeing
him with Jane, would yield Its proportion of pleasure.
When Mr Weston joined the party, however, and when
the baby was fetched, there was no longer a want of
subject or animation, or of courage and opportunity for
Frank Churchill to draw near her and say —
" I have to thank you. Miss Woodhouse, for a very
kind, forgiving message, in one of Mrs Weston's letters.
I hope time has not made you less willing to pardon ; I
hope you do not retract what you then said. "
Emma
495
" No, indeed, " cried Emma, most happy to begin •
" not m the least. I am particularly glad to see and
shake hands with you, and to give you joy in person. "
He thanked her with all his heart, and continued
some time to speak with serious feeling of his gratitude
and happiness.
" Is not she looking well ? " said he, turning his eyes
towards Jane— " better than she ever used to do ? You
see how my father and Mrs Weston doat upon her. "
But his spirits were soon rising again; and, with
laughing eyes, after mentioning the expected return of
the Campbells, he named the name of Dixon. Emma
blushed, and forbad its being pronounced in her hearing.
" I can never think of it, " she cried, " without ex-
treme shame. "
« The shame, " he answered, « is all mine, or ought to
be. But IS it possible that you had no suspicion ? I
mean of late : eariy, I know, you had none. "
" I never had the smallest, I assure you. "
" That appears quite wonderful. I was once very
near— and I wish I had ; it would have been better.
But though I was always doing wrong things, they
were very 6ad wrong things, and such as did me no
service. It would have been a much better transgres-
sion had I broken the bond of secrecy and told you
everything. ^
" It is not now worth a regret, " said Emma.
" I have some hope, " resumed he, " of my uncle's
being persuaded to pay a visit at Randalls ; he wants to
be introduced to her. When the Campbells are re-
turned, we shall meet them in London, and continue
there, I trust, till we may carry her northward; but
now, I am at such a distance from her— is not it hard
Miss Woodhouse ? Till this morning, we have noJ
once met since the day of reconciliation. Do not vou
pity me ? "'
49^ Emma
Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a
sudden accession of gay thought, he cried —
" Ah ! by the bye, " then sinking his voice, and
looking demure for the moment, " I hope Mr Knightlej
is well ? " He paused. She coloured and laughed.
" I know you saw my letter, and think you may re-
member my wish in your favour. Let me return your
congratulations. I assure you that I have heard the
news with the warmest interest and satisfaction. He is
a man whom I cannot presume to praise. "
Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on
in the same style ; but his mind was the next moment
in his own concerns and with his own Jane, and his
next words were —
" Did you ever see such a skin ? such smoothness!
such delicacy! and yet without being actually fair. One
cannot call her fair. It is a most uncommon com-
plexion, with her dark eyelashes and hair — a. most dis-
tinguishing complexion ! So peculiarly the lady in it
Just colour enough for beauty. "
" I have always admired her complexion, " replied
Emma, archly ; " but do not I remember the time
when you found fault with her for being so pale ?
When we first began to talk of her. Have you quite
forgotten ? "
" Oh, no! — what an impudent dog I was! — how
could I dare "
But he laughed so heartily at the recollection that
Emma could not help saying —
" I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities
at that time, you had very great amusement in tricking
UP all. I am sure you had. I am sure it was a con-
solation to you. "
" Oh, no, no, no ! how can you suspect me of such a
thing ? I was the most miserable wretch. "
" Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth..
Emma 497
I am sure it was a source of high entertainment to you,
to feel that you were taking us all in. Perhaps 1 am
the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the truth, I
think it might have been some amusement to myself in
the same situation. I think there is a little likeness
between us. "
He bowed.
" If not in our dispositions, " she presently added,
with a look of true sensibility, " there is a likeness in
our destiny ; the destiny which bids fair to connect us
with two characters so much superior to our own. "
" True, true, " he answered, warmly. " No, not
true on your side. You can have no superior, but most
true on mine. She is a complete angel. Look at her.
Is not she an angel in every gesture ? Observe the turn
of her throat. Observe her eyes, as she is looking up
at my father. You will be glad to hear " (inclining his
head, and whispering seriously) " that my uncle means
to give her all my aunt's jewels. They are to be new set.
I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the
head. Will not it be beautiful in her dark hair ? "
" Very beautiful, indeed, " replied Emma ; and she
spoke so kindly that he gratefully burst out —
" How delighted I am to see you again ! and to see
you in such excellent looks ! I would not have missed
this meeting for the world. I should certainly have
called at Hartfield had you failed to come. "
The others had been talking of the child, Mrs
Weston giving an account of a little alarm she had been
under the evening before, from the infant's appearing not
quite well. She believed she had been foolish, but it
had alarmed her, and she had been within half a minute
of sending for Mr Perry. Perhaps she ought to be
ashamed, but Mr Weston had been almost as uneasy as
herself. In ten minutes, however, the child had been
perfectly well again. This was her history ; and par-
498 Emma
ticiJarly interesting it was to Mr Woodhouse, who
commended her very much for thinking of sending for
Perry, and only regretted that she had not done it.
" She should always send for Perry, if the child appeared
in the slightest degree disordered, were it only for a
moment. She could not be too soon alarmed, nor send
for Perry too often. It was a pity, perhaps, that he
had not come last night ; for, though the child seemed
well now — very well considering, — it would probably
have been better if Perry had seen it. "
Frank Churchill caught the name.
" Perry 1 " said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke,
to catch Miss Fairfax's eye. " My friend Mr Perry !
What are they saying about Mr Perry ? Has he been
here this morning ? And how does he travel now ?
Has he set up his carriage ? "
Emma soon recollected, and understood him ; and
while she joined in the laugh, it was evident from Jane's
countenance, that she too was really hearing him, though
trying to seem deaf.
" Such an extraordinary dream of mine ! " he cried.
" I can never think of it without laughing. She hears
us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse. I see it in her
cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. Look at
her. Do not you see that, at this instant, the very
passage of her own letter, which sent me the report, is
passing under her eye; that the whole blunder is spread
before her ; that she can attend to nothing else, though
pretending to listen to the others ? "
Jane was forced to smile completely for a moment;
and the smile partly remained as she turned towards
him, and said in a conscious, low, yet steady voice —
" How you can bear such recollections is astonishing
to me. They nvill sometimes obtrude ; but how you
can court them ! "
He had a great deal to say in return, and verj'enter-
Emma 499
tainingly ; but Emma's feelings were chiefly with Jane
in the argument ; and on leaving Randalls, and falling
naturally into a comparison of the two men, she felt,
that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill, and
really regarding him as she did with friendship, she had
never been more sensible of Mr Knightley's high
superiority of character. The happiness of this most
happy day received its completion in the animated con-
templation of his worth which this comparison produced.
Chapter ilF*
IF Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling foi
Harriet, a momentary doubt of its being possible
for her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr
Knighdey, and really able to accept another man from
unbiassed inclination, it was not long that she had to
suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty. A
very few days brought the party from London ; and she
had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone
with Harriet, than she became perfectly satisfied, un-
accountable as it was, that Robert Martin had thoroughly
supplanted Mr Knighdey ; and was now forming all
her views of happiness.
Harriet was a little distressed — did look, a litde foolish
at first : but having once owned that she had been pre-
sumptuous and silly, and self-deceived before, her pain
and confusion seemed to die away with the words, and
leave her without a care for the past, and with the fullest
exultation in the present and fiiture : for as to her
friend's approbation, Emma had instandy removed every
fear of that nature, by meeting her with the most un-
qualified congratulations. Harriet was most happy to
give every particular of the evening at Astley'e, and the
500 Emma
dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the
utmost delight But what did such particulars explain ?
The fact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that
Harriet had always liked Robert Martin ; and that his
continuing to love her had been irresistible. Beyond
this, it must ever be unintelligible to Emma.
The event, however, was most joyful ; and every
day was giving her fresh reason for thinking so.
Harriet's parentage became known. She proved to be
the daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her
the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers,
and decent enough to have always wished for conceal-
ment. Such was the blood of gentility which Emma
had formerly been so ready to vouch for ! It was
likely to be as untainted, perhaps, as the blood of many a
gentleman : but what a connection had she been prepar-
ing for Mr Knightley, or for the Churchills, or even
for Mr Elton ! The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached
by nobility or wealth, would have been a stain indeed.
No objection was raised on the father's side ; the
young man was treated liberally ; it was all as it should
be ; and as Emma became acquainted with Robert
Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield, she fully
acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and
worth which could bid fairest for her little friend. She
had no doubt of Harriet's happiness with any good-
tempered man ; but with him, and in the home he
offered, there would be the hope of more, of security,
stability, and improvement. She would be placed in
the midst of those who loved her, and who had better
sense than herself; retired enough for safety, and
occupied enough for cheerfulness. She would be never
led into temptation, nor left for it to find her out. She
would be respectable and happy ; and Emma admitted
her to be the luckiest creature in the world, to have
created so steady and persevering an affection in such
Emma 501
a man ; or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to
herself.
Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements
with the Martins, was less and less at Hartfield, which
was not to be regretted. The intimacy between her
jnd Emma must sink ; their friendship must change
into a calmer sort of good-will ; and, fortunately, what
ought to be, and must be, seemed already beginning,
and in the most gradual, natural manner.
Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet
IP church, and saw her hand bestowed on Robert
Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as no remem-
brances, even connected with Mr Elton as he stood
before them, could impair. Perhaps indeed, at that
time, the scarcely saw Mr Elton, but as the clergyman
whose blessing at the altar might next fall on herself.
Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple
engaged of the three, were the first to be married.
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was
restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the
Campbells. The Mr Churchills were also in town ;
and they were only waiting for November.
The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far
as they dared, by Emma and Mr Knightley. They
had determined that their marriage ought to be con-
cluded, while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield,
to allow them the fortnight's absence in a tour to
the sea-side, which was the plan. John and Isabella,
and every other friend, were agreed in approving it.
But Mr Woodhouse — how was Mr Woodhouse to be
induced to consent? — he, who had never yet alluded to
their marriage but as a distant event.
When first sounded on the subject, he was so miser-
able that they were almost hopeless. A second allu-
sion, indeed, gave less pain. He began to think it was
to be, and that he could not prevent it — a very promis-
502 Emma
ing 8tep of the mind on its way to resignation. Still,
however, he was not happy. Nay, he appeared so
much otherwise that his daughter's courage failed. She
could not bear to see him suffering ; to know hira
fancying himself neglected ; and though her under-
standing almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the
Mr Knightleys, that when once the event were over,
his distress would be soon over too, she hesitated — she
could not proceed.
In this state of suspense, they were befriended, not
by any sudden illumination of Mr Woodhouse's mind,
or any wonderful change of his nervous system, but by
the operation of the same system in another way. Mrs
Weston's poultry-house was robbed one night of all her
turkies — evidently by the ingenuity of man. Other
poultry-yards in the neighbourhood also suffered. Pil-
fering was house-breaking to Mr Woodhouse's fears.
He was very uneasy ; and but for the sense of his son-
in-law's protection, would have been under wretched
alarm eyery- night of his life. The strength, resolution,
and presence of mind of the Mr Knightleys com-
manded his fullest dependence. While either of them
protected him and his, Hartfield was safe. But Mr
John Knightley must be in London again by the end
of the first week in November.
The result of this distress, was, that, with a much
more voluntary, cheerful consent than his daughter had
ever presumed to hope for at the moment, she was able
to fix her wedding-day ; and Mr Elton was called on,
within a month from the marriage of Mr and Mrs
Robert Martin, to join the hands of Mr Knightley and
Miss Woodhouse.
The wedding was very much like other weddings,
where the parties have no taste for finery or parade ;
and Mrs Elton, from the particulars detailed by her
hurband, thought it all extremely shabby, and very in-
Emma 503
ferior to her own. " Very little white satin, very few
lace veils ; i most pitiful business ! Selina would stare
when she heard of it. " But, in spite of these defici-
encies, the wishes, the hopes, the confidence, the pre-
dictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed
the ceremony, were fully answered in the perfect happi-
ness of the union.
Finis.
Richard Clay & Sons, Limited,
bread street hill, e.c. ; and
bungay, suffolk.
I
'• " --| iinimim™ , lawj
PR Austen, Jane
A03i^ Emma
1906
Wallace
Hooa
PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY

