


ctnumtme
'test's TRAVEU.
•{
SWIFTS
ECT WORKS. i

TOL. n. it
r
I

MwBBMr and Brewis, Printers, Lore lAne» EM t c h na y .
ik
MIUS
ECT WORKS
ov
IAN SWIFT, D.I).
'" . PATRICKS, BUBLIJI.
COWPAtHTWO
: > F HIS POETICAL WORKS,
». I r!!??. " ** " ^—^ " *'.
KWCXLLAUovt Pong „
> A]|X0VI
f^ VOLUMES,
'I "
CD
TO NEV/~VC . .': ~
PUBLIC LlinAKY
MTOK, I.KMVZ AW O
• » ••
• •

nrro ■«¥■« & &
•E NATIONS
OF THS
^ORIiD.
■ < » ^ 909*^'
[UEL GULLIVER,
then a CapUOn of ieveralSMpt.
*OO > m0-
?OUR PARTS.
^ TOTAOB TO UXAIPUT.
rOYAOB TO MOBDXXOXAOk
TO LAPUTA, BALWARBX, LVMH AOtt.
BDRIB, AMD JAPAK. *
l.i'i

%'-
: t
ONTENTS.
rer'sTraTelt Z^
the Reader *•
aptain GnlliTer to his CotMia
vii.
PARTI,
TAOB TO LtLLIFUT.
JprclTtt lome aecoant ofhim •
nu first indncemeDts to travel.
Bd, aadtwiflu fisr his life ; seta
in the conntry of Lillipat ; it
% and carried up the country. 15
perpr of Lillipat, attended by
> bUity, comet to tee the Au-
emeni. The Emperor's person
u*'^J^'ffr*®^ men appointed

}
Ii.
;f ■
01^1. neAnUwT.bJuieitiaardlnlirTaln-
HfOB, prCTUU tn ioTABlon. A tili^ title of
koiour I* confBrnd ipon him. Ambuudon
uTin ft«n tbe Empenir of Blefmcn. and •!»
fbr peace- Tlw fatpTTirr'T iipulnieDti on flr«
by BCcldeat ; tba Autkor iiatraiiinital In ut-
Idc (kc rett Df the palace. i
(Aati. 0. Of Iha Inhabitasn of unipat ; thelr
leanhu-i Uwb, and cvmobd; tlie numper of
•ducatlos their eUlilren. The Antbor'i wkt
oTUrliicTii that cowitrj. HbTbidleatlaiiafa
Vnal ladj 1
Cliiv. T. The Aatbar, bcins Infbmied of a. de-
■1^ Is MCBM bin or U(C-ti«BioB, mkea hia
uetne to Ktteacm. Hli nentloB tliere ■ • I
CM9.i. TbaAnttor.bralBCkjaccldent.eadi
vaaw lo leaTS BlefBKa 1 and, after kdib dlf-
SraUiMiMtDniaaafBtBUautlTeCDaiUiT. • I
KdJtTIL
A YOTAfiB TO BaoBSIHGNAa.
rt^. 1. A ereat itana deacribed ; the lone-
boUMntiofeiciiirater; thnAitborEoavlUi
It ui dlKorer the ccviitTT. He li left on xhore
b aebmi br ene ofOie nitlTei, ud uiriEd to
^- "'--eceptloB.iHthie ■
of the InhabtML-.
Ckap. % A deierlf tloa of the ttirat
ler. 1W Author eanled to a ma . _.
■od tkea to tba BetnpoUi. Tba HRIcBlan
ofUijovne]'I»
Otar- *• The Aalhor MDt ftr te covrt. The
QeMa baja Um «* Ui aiaalartka ftraer. and
■reaoM & !■ to tke Daf . He dll
U» mUattft cnat icbdn*. Am
Ueoart prorldBd br the Aothor
Uch atnar vlih the QMSb H <
flu- the iMoear t* Ui ewa cmatTT.
nk with < be QaeeaH dvarf •
Ibr tomcliig amiBn IMS'- ThnUir^V*'''
COMTKHTS.
Page.
Iaee,aiid > oiiieacco«uitof themetrwoUi. The
A«t]K»r't way of tnTellinff. Tbe dblef temple
described. • 161
Chap, ft. Sereral adventnret that haapeaed to
the Awtkor. Tbe execution of a crimmaL The
Author ahevs his ttkill in navigatioa. • • • • 158
Chap. 6. Bereral contrivances at tbe Anthor to
pleaae the Kimr < uid Qaeen. He shows kbi
skill ia mnssie. The Kiag enq^res into the
state of Ea|^aad« which the Author relates to
him. The KioK's observations tibereoa. • • • lis
Chap, 7. Tbe Author's love of bis couatry. He
makes a proposal of much advantai^e to the
Kii^r* which Is rejected. The Kiag^s jrreat
igimruace m politics. The learning or that
comtry ▼0 > V Imperfect and coafined. Tbe
laws, and muitary afiMis, and parties in the
stattcw 18ft
MMap. 6. Hm Kins u > d Queen make a mrofrrem
to the flrooftiers. Tbe Author attends utem.
Tbe manner in which he leaves tiie country
very particalaily reialed. He returns to
■ 186
PJRT iZL
TOTAdt TO liAFOTA* BAJUtttBJAUl, UJGG
NAOO, OliVBDUBDftUr i^™ JAPAN.
Chop. 1. The Author sets out on his third voy-
»ge. Is taken by pirates. The malice of a
Dutchman. His amval at an island. He is
received into lApufa • ••• 913
Ckap, 9. The humours and dispositions of the
Laputimts described. Aa aiSsOdnt of flMlr.
leaminr. Of the Kinf aad Ms court. The
AutlMnrs reception. The inhabitants subject
to fear «ad disqaietades. Aa aocooM-of the
w s me a. • » • . |S1
Chap. 3. A pheaomeBOB solved by moderti
philosophy aad astronomy. iTbe LapuUans*
gfteat improvemei^ ia the laUer. The iUu^*s
method of ■ufpieiiieg iasurrectioa. « • • • • tM
CONTENT?.
Gftap«4* The Aathor leares Lapata; is con-
veyed to Balnlbarbi; arrivea at the metro-
polis. A dewiiption of the metropolis, and
the country adijominf. The Author hospitably'
received by a creat Lord. His conversation'
with that Lord 8*1
Chapm 5. The Author permitted to see the
G«nd academy of Larado. The academy
i^ly described. The arts wliereiB tlie
professors employ themselves. ••••••. 850
Chop* 6. A farther account of the academy.
The Author proposes some improvements,
which are honourably received 960
Chap. 7. The Author leaves Larado, arrives at
Maldonado. No ship ready. He takes a short
voyage to CHubdubdvib. Hisreceptimibytlie •
^povemor. .••••»,•••••••••• S6B
Chap, 8. A fhrther account of Glubdubdrib. -
Ancient and modem history corrected. • • • S7S
Chap, 9, Tlie Author returns to Ualdonado.
Sails to the kinrdom of lMggn»gg» The Au-'
thor confined. He is sent for to court. The -
manner of his admittance.'The ¥iag*» great
lenity to his sul^ects
Chap. 10. The Luggnaggians commended. A
jMurticular description of the,^truldbrugs, with
many conversations between the Author and
some eminent persons upon that sul^ect. • •
Chap. 11. The Author leaves Luggnagg, and
sails to Japan. From tlience he returns in a
Dutch ship to Amsterdam, and flrom Amster-
dam to Bnglaad*
PART jr.
JL yOTAGB TO THE COUNTBT OF THB
H0UTHNHNM8.
Chao, 1. The Author sets out as captain of a
ship. His men conspire against him, confine
him a long time to his cabiB, and set him on
shore In an unknown land. He travels up into
the country. The Taboot, a stnois^ «ot\. ot
aninml, described. The Author neef^a t:w < »
Ckap, 8. The Ati(kor eond^cted bf a Hottylu-
hnm to hi* bouse. The houae deaciibed. The
AatUpc** reception* The fiM > d of the Houyha*
luuns. 7^be Author in diatresBfiNr want of meat,
la at last relieved. Hia maaaer oifoedimg in
thlscoontry ,• 817
Chajf. S. The Authiv ttodiet to learn the Ian-
^uai^e. The Homyhnhnm« his master, assists
in ^eachiair him. The UoigmMge described^
Several Uouyhnhuns of qvodity come out or
cninosity to see the Author. He ^ives his mas-
ter a short account of his to jra^ 886
Chap* 4. I'he Houyhnhnm's notion of truth and
falsehood; Tha Author's discourse -disap-
pcoved by his master. Tlie Author gives a
m^re partieiilar account of himself, and the
acJEidenta of liis Voyage • 884
Ckap» 6. The Author, at his master'scommand»
in^mas'him of the state of England. The
causes of war among the {Hrinces of Europe.
7h0. Author. begins to explain the English
constitution. • 841
Chap. 6. A continuation of the state of England
under < 2ueen Anne. The character of a first
minister of state in European courts. • • . • 851
Qiap* 7. The Author** great love of his native
country. His master's observations upon the
constitution and administration of England,
as describedby the Author, witfaparallelcases
and comparisons. His master's observations
upon humstn nature, • 861
Chtkf'8. The Author relates several particulars
of the Taboos. The great virtues of the
Houyhnfanms. The education and exercise < tf
their youth. Their general assembly. • • • 878
Chap. 9. A grand debate atthe general assem-
bly of the Houyhnhnms, and how it was deter-
mined. The learning of the Houyhnhnms.
Their buildings. Their manner of burials.
1 he defectiveness of their language 881
Chap* 10. The Author's economy, and happy life
among the Houyhnhnms. His great improve-
ment in virtue by conversing with them.
Their conversations. The Author has notice
given him by his master, that he must depart
from the country. He falls into a swoon for
ribiitiAiilM. HaeintjrfTHulliiirta
C*ap.ll. TkaAMkor^
•Sits,
d, hdpluf te uttle tlwn
< *ad canM by torta Ma ■
. The cnatclTtUtlMof the
LBlhOT UTlTHat Bll(llllld ■ • M
tfeof^ TsruHt)!. Hii dnbn Im
nram tram ibc tnlb. Tha
iBMir frmn uy rioter emli
I ot|)Ka« luuwared. The
IfSSJ
PREFACE
TO
LLIVEE'S TRAVELS.
; part of tiiese Travels appeared in
e eecond early in 1727. Bishop
f, in a letter from Paris to Mr.
> ecember 24, 1726, having seen the
eritsed, expresses his impatience to
I shall long/ he says,'till it is with
March SI, 1727, adds, < I had the
f Gnlliver, but not tiie second; how-
is been sent me here, and I have
leasore of reading it. Both parts
ting here, thongh the French will
5 to relish the hnmonr nf ♦»»•♦ -»—
n PREFACE TO GULLIVER's TRAVELS.
ing its deformity in opposition to VirtaCy and
to amend the false systems of philosophy, by
pointing out the errors, and applying salutary
means to amend them/ Orrery.
* This important year [1727] sent into the
world " Gulliver's Trayels, " a production so
new and so strange, that it filled the reader
with a mingled emotion of merriment and
amazement. It was received with such avi-
dity, that the price of the first edition was
raised before the second could be made ; it
was read by the high and the low, the learned
and illiterate. Criticism was for a while lost
in wonder. No rules of judgment were ap-
plied to a book written in open defiance of
truth and regularity. But when distinctions
came to be made, the part which gave least
pleasure was that which describes the Flying
Jglandf and thit which gave most disgust
must be the history of the Houyhnhnms,
'VFbilst Swift ?f as enjoying the reputation of
his new work, the news of the king*s death
arrived, and be kissed the hands of the hew
king and quejen three days after their acces-
sion/ Johnson.
* « Gulliver's Travels " and the *'Tale of a
Tub*'are indisputably the two most capital
works of Swift.'" Warton,
* From the whole of those two voyages to
lallipat and Brobdingnag arises one general
remark, which, however jobvious, has been
overlooked by thosQ who .consider them as
little more than the sport of a wanton imagi-
oatioii. When human actions are ascribed to
PREFACB TO OCLLIVER 8 TR4VBLS. Uk
pigmies and giants, there are few that do not
exdte either contempt, disgust, or horror ; to
ascribe them therefore to such beings, was
perhaps the most probable method of en-
gaging the mind to examine them with atten-
tion, and judge of them with impartiality, by
suspending the fascination of habit, and ex-
hibiting familiar objects in a new Ught. The
use of the fable then is not less apparent than
important and extensive ; and that this use
was intended by the author, can be doubted
only by those who are disposed to afiirm,
that order and regularity are the effects of
chance.
'To mortify pride, which indeed was not
made for man, and produces not only the most
ridiculous follies, but the most extensive ca-
lamity, appears to have been one general
▼lew of the author in every part of these
Travels. Personal strength and beauty, the
wisdom and the virtue of mapkind, become
objects not of pride but of hnmili^, in the
diminutive stature and contemptible weak-
ness of the LiUimUians, in the horrid defor-
mity of the Broidingnagians, in the learned
folly of the LaputianSy and in the parallel
drawn between our manners and those of jthe
Houyhnhnms,* Hawkestvarth.
'The Lilliputians of Swift may pass for
probable beings, not so much because we
know that a belief in pigmies was once cur-
rent in the world (for the true ancient pigmy
was at least thrice as tall as those whom Gul-
liver visited)^ bat because we find t)h^\ «NeP|
Iv'pBtFACB TO OULUTtRll TRATBC0.
drcnmstaiioe relatiiig to them accords wit
Itself and tbeir supposed character. It is m
the size of tiie people only that is diminutive
their coontry, seas, ships, and towns are a
in exact proportion: their theological an
political principles, their passions, manner
customs, and all the parts of their conduc
betray a levity and littleness perfectly sm
able : and so shnple is the whole narratioi
and apparently so artless and sincere, that
should not wonder if it had imposed (as I ha^
been told it has) upon some persons of n
contemptible understanding. And some dc
gree of credit may, perhaps for the same res
son, be due to the giants.
* When Swift grounds his narrative upon
contradiction to nature ; when he presents u
with rational brutes, and irrational men
when he tells us of horses building houses fo
habitation, milking cows for food, riding ii
carriages, and holding conversations on tb
laws and policies of £iut > pe ; not all his genin
(and he there exerts it to the ntmost) is abli
to reconcile us to so monstrous a fiction : w <
may smile at some of his absurd exaggera
tions ; we may be pleased with the energy o
style, and accuracy of description, in particu
lar places; and a malevolent heart ma^
triumph in the satire : but we can never re
fish it as a fable, because it is at once unna
toral and self-contradictory/ Beattie.
THE PUBUSHER TO THE READER.
The antbor of these Travels, Mr. Lenmel
Gulliver, is my ancient and intimate friend ;
there is likewise some relation between vs oil
the mother's side. About three years a^^
Mr. Gulliver, growing weary of the conoonrse
orcorioQS people coming to him at his house
in Redriff, mad^ a small purchase of land^
with a convenient house, near Newark, in
Nottinghamshire, his native country ; where
he now lives retired, yet in good esteem
among his neighbours.
Although Mr. Gulliver was bom in Not-
tinghamshire, where his father dwelt, yet I
have heard . him say his family came froni
Oxfordshire ; to confirm which, I have 6b-
served in the church-yard at Banbury hi that
eouaty, several tombs and monuments of the
Gullivers.
Before he quitted Redriff, he left the cus-
tody of the following papers in my handk^
wid^ tiie liberty to dispose of them as I sboeld
think fit. I have carefully perused them
three times ; the style is very plain and^ sinw
pie ; and the only fault I find is, that the au-
thor, after the makiher of travellers, is a little
too drcmnstantial. There is an air of trutii
apparent through the whole ; and indeed the
author was so distinguished for his veracity^
Vl THB PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
that it became a sort of proverb among li
neighbours at Redriff, when any one affimM
a tMng, to say, * it was as true as if Mr. Q\
liver had spoken it.*
By the advice of several worthy persoi
to whom, with the anthor*8 permission, I co
auuiicated tliete papers, I now venture
send tiiem into the world, hoping they a
Im, at least for some time, a better enterti
ment to oar young noblemen, than the o
non scribbles of politics and party.
Thia volume would have been at least t?
as largo, if I had not made bold to strike
innumerable passages relating to thewi
and tides, as well as to the variations
bearings in the several voyages, together i
tiie minute descriptions of tiie managemei
the ship in storms, in tiie style of saik
likewise the accounts of longitudes and'
lodes ; wherein I have reason to apprelu
that Mr. Oulhver may be a little dissatis£
but I was resolved to fit the work as mac
possible to the general capacity of read
However, if my own ignorance in sea a£
shall have led me to commit some mistaki
alone am answerable for them: and if
traveler has a curosity to see the whole v
at large, as it came from the hands of
author, I will be ready to gratify him.
As for any further particulars relatinj
ide author, the reader will receive satii
tion from the first pages of the book.
RICHARD SYMPSO
A LETTER FROM CAPTAIN GULLIVER
TO HIS COUSIN SYMPSON
WriHen m the Year 1727.
I HOPE yoa will be ready to own publicly,
whenever yoa shall be called to it, that by
your great and frequent urgency you pre-
vailed on me to publish a very loose and un-
correct account of my travels, with direction
to hire some young gentleman of either uni-
versity to put them in order, and correct tlie
style, at my cousin Dampier did, by my ad-
vice, in his book called'A Voyage round the
World.'But I do not remember I gave you
power to consent that any thing should be
omitted, and much less that any- thing should
be inserted : therefore, as to < he latter, I do
here renounce every thing of that kind ; par-
ficularly a paragraph about her ms^esty queen
Anne of most pious and glorious memory ;
although I did reverence and esteem her-more
than any of human species. But you, or your
interpolator, ought to have considered, that
as it was not my inclination, so was it not de-
cent to praise any animal of our composition
before my master Hauyhnhnm: And besides,
the fact was altogether false ; for to my know-
ledge, being in England during some part of
hex majesty's veign, she did govern by a chief
TIU A LEtTER ITROM GULLIVER
minister ; uay even by two successively, tfa*
first whereof was the lord of Godolphin, ani
the second the lord of Oxford ; so that yoi
have made me say the tiling that was nol
Likewise in the account of the academy o
projectors, and several passages of my dli
course to my master Houyhnhnm, you hav
either omitted some material circumstances
or minced or changed them in such a mannei
that I do hardly know my own work. Whei
I formerly hinted to you something of this iJ
a letter, you were pleased to answer,'Tha
you were afraid of giving offence ; that peoph
in power were very watchfiil over the press
and apt not only to interpret, but to punisl
every thing which looked like an inuendo, (aj
I think you call it). But, pray how coulc
that which I spoke so many years ago, and w
above ^ye thousand leagues distance, in ano'
ther reign, be applied to any of the Yahoos
who now are said to govern the herd ; espe <
dally at a time when I litfle thought, oi
feared, the unhappiness of living under them'.
Have not I tiie most reason to complain
when I see tiiese very Yahoos carried b}
Houyhnhnms in a vehicle, as if they wen
brutes, and those the rational creatures ? Am
Indeed to avoid so monstrous and detestabl <
a sight was one principal motive of my retire
ment hither.
Thus much I tbonght proper to tell yoii ii
relation to yourself, and to the trust I reposec
in you.
I do in the next place complain of my owi
TO Hit COUSIN flTMPtOH / - ix
great want of judgment, in bdng prevailed
upon by tiie entreaties and false reasonings of
yon and some others, very mucli against my
own opinion to suffer my travels to be pub-
lished. Pray bring to your mind how often
I desired you to consider, when you insisted
OB tiie motive of public good, that the Yahoot
were a species^of animals utterly incapable of
amendment by precepts or example t and 89
it has proved ; f < M-, instead of seeing a full
stop put to an abuses and corruptions, at least
in this little island, as I had reason to expect ;
behold, after above six months warning, I
cannot learn that my book has produced one
single effect according to my intentions. I
desired you would let me know, by a letter,-
when party and faction were extinguished;
judges learned and upright; pleaders honest
and modest, with some tincture of common
sense, and Smithfield blazing with pyramids
of faiw books ; the young nobility's education
entirely changed; the physicians banished;
the female Yahoos abounding in virtue^ ho-
nour, truth, and good sense; courts and
levees of great ministers thoroughly weeded
and swept; wit, merit, and learning reward-
ed ; all disgracers of the press in prose and
verse condemned to eat nothing but their own
cotton, and quench their thirst with their own
ink. These, and a thousand other reforma-
tions, I firmly counted upon by your encou- >
ragement; as indeed they were plainly de-
ducible fiom the precepts delivered in my
book . And it must be owned, that M; < v«ok
X k LETTER FROM GULLIVER
months were a sufficient time to correct every
vice and folly to which Yahoos are subject, U
their natures had been capable of the least
disposition to virtue or wisdom. Yet, so fai
have yon been from answering my expecta-
tion in any of your letters ; that on the con-
trary yon are loading our carrier every week
with libels, and keys, and reflections, and
memoirs, and second parts; wherein I see
myself accused of reflecting upon great state
folks ; of degrading human nature (for so they
have still the confidence to style it), and oi
abusing the female sex. I find likewise thai
the writers of those bundles are not agreed
among themselves; for some of them will not
allow me to be the author of my own travels ;
and others make me author of books, to whicl
I am wholly a stranger.
I find likewise that your printer has beei
so careless as to confound the times, and mis-
take the dates, of my several voyages an(j
returns ; neither assigning the true year, noi
the true month, nor day of the month* : and
* That the original copy of these Travels was alterec
by the perMm throngh whoa* handf it was conveyed t(
the prefti, is a fact ; bat the passagea of which Mr. Gal
liver cumplaiiM in this letter are to be found only in ih <
first editions; for the Dean having restored the texi
wherever it had been altered, sent the copy to the lat <
Mr. Motte by the hands of Mr. Chailes Ford. Thii
copy ba^ been exactly followed in every subsequeni
edition, except that printed in Ireland by Mr. Faulkner
the editor of which, supposing the Dean to be serioui
when he mentioned the corruptions of dates, and yei
finding them unaltered, thought fit to alter them him
•elf; there is however scarce one of these alterations it
which he hat cot committed a blunder : though vrhilt
TO HIS COUSIK 8TMPS0N. zi
I hear the origmal manuscript is all destroyed
since the publication of my book ; neither have
I any copy left; however, I have sent you
some corrections, which you may insert, if
ever there should be a second edition : and
yet I cannot stand to them ; but shall leave
that matter to my judicious and candid rea-
ders to adjust it as they please.
I hear some of our sea Yahoos find fault
with my sea language, as not proper in many
parts, or now in use. I cannot help it. In
my first voyages, while I was young, I was
instructed by the oldest mariners, and learned
to speak as they did. But I have since
found that the sea Yahoos are apt, like
the land ones, to become new-fangled in their
words, which the latter change every year;
insomuch, as I remember upon each return to
my own country, their old dialect was so al-
tered, that I could hardly understand the
new. And I observe, when any Yahoos
come from London out of curiosity to visit me
at my house, we neither of us are able to de-
liver our conceptions in a manner intelligible
to the other.
If the censure of the Yahoos could any
way afifect me, I should have great reason to
complain, that some of them are so bold as to
think my book of travels a mere fiction out of
mine own brain ; and have gone so far as to
drop hints, that Ihe Houtthnhnms and Yahoos
he was thus buy in defacing the parts that were per >
feet, be raffered the accidental blemiihei of otfaer# to
rsnwiu. 0.
Xii ^ LETTER PROM GDLUVER
have no more existence than the hihabltants
of Utopia.
Indeed I must confess, that as to the peo-
ple of Lilliput, JBrobdingrag, (for so tiie
word should have been spelt, and not errone-
-OQsly Brohdingnag) and LaputUf I haye
never yet heard of any Yahoo so presumptu-
ous as to dispute their being, or the ^ts I
have related concerning them; because the
truth immediately strikes every reader with
conviction. And is there less probability in
my account of the Houyhnhntm or Yahoos,
when it is manifest as to the latter, there are
io many thousands even in this country, who
only differ from their brother brutes in Hou-
■yhnhnm^land, because they use a sort of jab-
ber, and do not go naked? I wrote for their
amendment, and not their approbation. The
united praise of the whole race would be of
less consequence to me, than the neighing of
those two degenerate Houynhnhnmt I keep
in my stable ; because from these, degenerate
as they are, I still improve in some virtues
without any mixture of vice.
Do these miserable animals presume to
think, that I am so degenerated as to defend
my veracity?'Yahoo as I am, it is well known
through all Honkynhnmrlandy that, by the
Instructions and example of my iUustrioui
master, I was able in the compass of two
yefurs (although I confess with the utmost dif-
ficulty) to remove that infernal habit of lying,
•haffliag, deceiving, and equivocatuig, so
TO HIS COUSIN 8TMPS0N, Xui
deeply rooted in the very souls of all my spe-
cies ; espedally the Europeans.
I have other complaints to make upon this
vexatious occasion; but I forbear troubling
myself or you any further. I must freely
confess, that8incemyretum.soiiie corruptioiis
of my Yahoo nature have revived in me by
conversing with a few of your species, and
particularly those of my own family, by an
unavoidable necessity; else I should nevei
have attempted so absurd a project as that of
reforming the Yahoo race in tliis kingdom:
But I have now done with all such visionary
schemes for ever.
April 2, 1727.
VOYAGE TO LILLIPU T.
PART I.
CHAPTER I.
rhe Author gives wme account of himself trnd
family; his first inducements totrarel. He
is shipwrecked, and swims for hisl^e; gets
safe on shore in the country of LiUiput; is
made a prisoner ^ and carried up the country,
.tlY father had a small estate in Nottiiigham-
ihlre ; I was the third of five sons. He sent
me to Emanael-college in Cambridge, at four-
teen years old, where I resided three years,
and applied myself close to my studies ; but
the charge of maintaining me, although I had
a very scanty allowance, being too great for
a narrow fortune, I was bound apprentice to
Mr. James Bates, an eminent surgeon in
Loudon, with whom I continued four years ;
and my father now and then sending me small
sums of money, I laid them out in learning
navigation, and other parts of the mathema-
tics, useful to those who intend to travel, as
I always believed it would be, some t\m & ot
16 GULLIVER*8 TRAVELS.
other, my fortune to do. When I left!
Bates, I went down to my father ; where,
the assistance of him and my uncle John,
some other relations, I got forty pounds,
a promise of thirty pounds a year to main
me at Leyden ; there I studied physic
years and seven months, knowing it woolf
useful in long voyages.
Soon after my return from Leyden, I'
recommended by my good master, Mr. Ba
to be surgeon to the Swallow, Captain Al
ham Pannell, commander ; with whoi
continued three years and a half, makii
voyage or two into the Levant, and s <
other parts. When I came back I resol
to settle in London ; to which Mr. Bates,
master, encouraged me, and by Uim'I'
recommended to several patients. I t
part of a small house in the Old Jewry ; ;
being advised to alter my condition, I man
Mrs. Mary Burton, second daughter to j
A^mund Bmton, hosier, in Newgate-str <
with whom I received four hundred pou
for a portion*
But my good master Bates dying in 1
years after, and I having few friends, my
siness began to fail ; for my conscience wo
not suffer me to imitate the bad practic <
too many among my brethren. Having the
ibre consulted with my wife, and some of
acquaintance, I determined to go again to a
I was surgeon snccessively in two ships, i
made several voyaf^es, fot %\il > ) < ^«x«^ to
East and West Indies^ b^ yi\ms3ei\ %oV*
" ^ A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT. 17
idfiition to my fortune. My hours of leisure
I spent in reading the best authors, ancient
and modem, being always provided with a
good number of books ; and when I . was
ashore, in observing the manners and dispo-
sitions of the people, as well as learning their
language ; wherein I had a great facility, by
the strength of my memory.
The last of these voyages not provmg very
fortunate, I grew weary of the sea, and in-
tended to stay at home with my wife and
family. I removed from the Old .Jewry to
Fetter-lane, and from thence to Wapping,
hoping to get business among the sailors, but
it would not turn to account. After three
years'expectation that things would mend, I
accepted an advantageous offer from Captain
William Prichard, master of the Antelope,
who was making a voyage to the South Sea.
We set sail from Bristol, May 4, 1699, and
our voyage at first was very prosperous.
It would not be proper, for some reasons,
to trouble the reader ¥rith the particulars of
our adventures in those seas ; let it suffice to
inform him, that in our passage from thence
to the East-Indies, we were driven by a vio-
lent storm to the north-west of Van Diemen's
Land. By an observation, we found ourselves
in the latitude of 30 degrees 2 minutes south.
Twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate
labour and ill food ; the rest were in a very
weak conditicm. On the 5th of November,
which was the beginning of summer in tliose
parts, the weather being very hazy, the sea-
18 gulliyer's travels;
men spied a rock within half a cable's length
of the ship ; but the wind was so strong, thtt
we were driven directly upon it, and immedi-
ately split. Six of tlie crew, of whom I was
one, having let down the boat into the set,
made a shift to get clear of the ship and the
rock. We rowed, by my computation, about
three leagues, till we were able to work no
longer, being already spent with labour while
we were in the ship. We therefore trusted
ourselves to the mercy of the waves, and in
about half an hour the boat was overset by a
sadden flurry from the north. What became
of my companions in the boat, as well as of
those who escaped on the rock, or were left
in the vessel, I cannot tell ; but conclude they
were all lost. For my own part, I swam as
fortune directed me, and was pushed forward
by wind and tide. I often let my legs drop,
tad could feel no bottom ; but when I was
almost gone, and able to i^truggle no longer,
I found myself within my depth ; and by tliis
time the storm was much abated. The decli-
vity was so small, that I walked near a mile
before I got to the shore, which I conjectured
y^tis about eight o'clock in tlie evening. I then
advanced forward near half a mile, but could
not discover any sign of houses or inhabitants ;
at least I was In so weak a condition, that I
did not observe them. I was extremely tired,
and with that, and the heat of the weather,
and about half a pint of brandy tliat I drank
as I left the ship, I found myself much incH-
iied to aleep* I lay down on the ^tftsft, NAsidi
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPOt. l9
was very short and soft, where I slept soundef
than ever I remembered to have done m my
life, and, as I reckoned, about nine hoars;
for when I awaked, it was just day-light. I
attempted to rise, but was not able to stir :
for as I happened to lie on my back, I foun < l
my arms and legs were strongly fastened on
each side to the ground ; and my hair, which
was long and thick, tied down in the same
manner. I likewise felt several slender liga-
tures across my body, from my arm-pits to
my thighs. I could only look upwards, the
sun began to grow hot, and the light offended
my eyes. I heard a confused noise about
me ; but in the posture I lay, could see nothing
except the sky. In a little time I felt some-
thing alive moving on my left leg, which
advancing gently over my breast, came almost
op to my < ^in ; when bending my eyes down-
ward as much as I could, I perceived it to be
a human creature not six inches high, with a
bow and arrow in his hands, and a quiver at
his back. In the mean time, I felt at least
forty more of the same kind (as I conjectured)
following the first. I was in the utmost as-
tonishment, and roared so loud, that they all
ran back in a fright ; and some of them, as I
was afterwards told, were hurt with the falls
they got by leaping from my sides upon the
ground. However, they soon returned, and
one of them, who ventured so far as to get a
fun sight of my face, lifting up his hands and
eyes by way of admiration, cried out in a
shrill but distinct voice, hekinah degvl: the
20 GtJLLIV£R*S TRAV£LS.
others repeated tk.e same words several times^
but I then knew not what they meant. I lay
ail this while, as the reader may believe, in
great uneasiness ; at length, sti'uggling to get
loose, I had the fortune to break the strings,
and wrench out the pegs that fastened my
left arm to the ground ; for, by lifting it up
to my face, I discovered the methods they had
taken to bind me, and at the same time with
a violent pull, which gave me excessive pain,
I a little loosened the strings that tied down
my hair on the left side, so that I was just
able to turn my head about two inches. But
the creatures ran off a second time, before I
could seize them ; whereupon there was a
great shout in a very shrill accent, and aftei
it ceased I heard one of them cry aload, tolgc
phonac ; when in an instant I felt above a
hundred arrows discharged on my left band,
which pricked me like so many needles ; and,
besides, tliey shot another flight into the air,
as we do bombs in Europe, whereof many, I
suppose, fell on my body, (though I felt them
not) and some on my face, which I immedi-
ately covered with my left hand. When this
shower of arrows was over, I fell a groaning
with grief and pain, and then striving again
to get loose, they discharged another volley
larger than the first, and some of them at-
tempted with spears to stick me in the sides ;
but by good luck I had on me a buff jerkin,
which they could not pierce. I thought it the
most prudent method to lie still, and my de-
s'gn was to continue so till night, when, my
A VOYAmtTO'hlULtPVri ti
left hand being already loose, I ooold easily
free myself: and as for the inhabitants, I had
reason to believe I might be a match for the
greatest army they could bring against me, if
they were all of the same size with him that
I saw. But fortune disposed otherwise of me.
When the people observed I was quiet, they
discharged no more arrows ; but, by the noise
I heard, I knew their numbers increased ; and
about four yards from me, over against my
right ear, I heard a knodong for above an
hour, like that of people at work ; when tum < ^
ing my head that way, as well as the pegs
and strings would peimit me, I saw a stage
erected about a foot and half from the ground,
capable of holding four of the inhabitants,
with two or three ladders to mount it : from
whence one of them, who seemed to be a per^
ton of quality, made me a long speech, where-
of I understood not one syllable. But I
should have mentioned, that before the prin-
cipal person began his oration, he cried out
three times, Langro dehul san ; (these words
and the former were afterwards repeated and
explained to me.) Whereupon, immediately
about fifty of the inhabitants came and cut the
strings that fastened the left side of my head,
which gave me the liberty of turning it to the
right, and of observing the person and gesture
of him that was to speak. He appeared to
be of a middle age, and taller than any of the
other three whio attended him, whereof one
was a page that held up his train, and seemed
to be somewhat longer than my middle finger ;
23'oulutbr's travels,
t)ie other two stood one on each side to i
port him. He acted every part of an ora
And I coold observe many periods of thi
enings, and others of promises, pity,
kindness. I answered in a few words,
in the most submissive manner, lifting a]
left hand and both my eyes to the sni
calling him for a witness ; and being al
famished with hanger, having not eat
morsel for some hours before I left the
I found the demands of nature so strong
me that I could not forbear showing m;
patience (perhaps against the strict ml
decency) by putting my finger frequent
my month, to signify that I wanted
The kurgo (for so they call a great lord
afterwards learnt) understood me very
He descended from the stage, and comma
that several ladders should be applied 1
sides, on which above a hundred of the
bitants mounted, and walked toward
mouth, laden witii baskets full of meat, i
had been provided and sent thither b;
king*s orders, upon the first intelligem
received of me. I observed there wa
flesh of several animals, but could not d
guish them by the taste. There were sfa
ers, legs, and loins, shaped like thot
mutton, and very well dressed, but sn
than the wings of a lark. I ate them b;
or three at a mouthful, and took three I
at a time, about the bigness of musket bu
They supplied me as fast as they could, s
mg a tfaoiisand marki of wondei «iid «aIi
r ngiiy umi j. wouicu uhiul. xuKy
by my eating that a small quantity
not suffice me ; and being a most inge-
eople^ they slung up, with great dez-
one of their largest hogsheads, thea
it towards my hand, and beat out the
drank it off at a draught, which I
weU do, for it did not hold half a pint,
sted like a small wine of Burgundy,
ch more delicious. They brought me
td hogshead, which I drank in the same
r, and made signs for more : but they
De to give me. When I had performed
ironders, they shouted for joy, and
upon my breast, repeating sereral
18 they did at first, Hekinah degyd.
nade me a sign that I should throw
the two hogsheads, but first warning
iple below to stand out of the way, cry-
nd. Borsch mevolah ; and when they
le vessels in the air, there was a uni-
shout of Hekinah defful. I confess I
ten tempted, while tiiiey were pasting
nrdfl and forwards on mv bodv, to
24 Gulliver's travels.
had treated nie with so much expense and
DiaguiticcDcc. However, in my thoughts I
conld not sufficiently wonder at the intrepidity
of these diminutive mortals, who dorat ventnre
to mount and walk up my body, while one of
my hands was at liberty, ¥rithout trembling at
the very sight of so prodigious a creature as I
must appear to them. After some tine,
when tiiey observed that I made no more
demands for meat, there appeared before m»
a person of high rank from his imperial ma-
jesty. His excellency, having mounted on
the small of my right leg, advanced forwards
up to my face, with about a dozen of his reti-
nue ; and producing bis credentials under the
aignet royal, which he applied dose to my
eyes, spoke about ten minutes without any
signs of anger, but with a kind of determinate
resolution; often pointing forwards, which,
as I afterwards found, was towards the capi-
tal city, about half a mile distant ; whither it
was agreed by his majesty in council, that I
must be conveyed. I answered in few words,
but to no purpose, and made a sign with my
hand that was loose, putting it to the other,
(but over his excellency's head for fear of
hurting him or his train) and then to my own
head and body, to signify that I desired my
liberty. It appeared that he understood me
well enough, for he'shook his head by way of
disapprobation, and held his hand in a posture
to ihow that I must be carried as a prisoner.
However, he made other signs to let me nn-
dentand, that I ghonld bxf e ibshX iii4
{
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT. 25
enongfay and very good treatment MHiere-
upon I once more thought of attemptiof to
biteak my bonds ; bnt again, when I felt the
smart of their arrows npon my face and hands,
which were all in bUsters, and many of the
darts still sticking in them, and observing
likewise that the number of my enemies in-
creased, I gave tokens to let them know
that they might do with me what they pleased.*
Upon tl^s, tbe hurgo and his train withdrew,
with mnch civility and cheerful countenancet «
Soon after I heard a general shont, with fre-
quent repetitions of the words Peplotn selan ;
and I felt great numbers of people on my left
ride relaxing the cords to such a degree, that
I ¥ras able to turn upon my right, and to ease
Iteself by making water ; which I very plen-
tifully did, to the great astonishment of the
people ; who, conjecturing by my motion what
I was going to do, immediately opened to the
right and left on that^ide, to avoid the torrent,
which . fell with such noise and violence from
me. But before this, they had daubed my
face and both my hands with a sort of oint-
ment, very pleasant to the smell, which, in a
few minutes, removed all the smart of their
arrows. These circumstances, added to the
refreshment I had received by their victuals
and drink, which were very nourishing, dis-
posed me to sleep. I slept about eight hours,
as I was afterwards assured ; and it was no
wonder, for the physicians, by the emperor*s
order, had mingled a sleepy potion in the
hogsheads offline.
2 D
20 Gulliver's travels.
It seems that upon the first moment I wa
discovered sleeping on the ground, -after m^
landing, tlie emperor had early notice of it b^
by an express; and determined in coundl
that I should be tied in the manner I havi
related, (which was done in the night while'.
slept ;) that plenty of meat and drink shooli
be sent me, and a machine prepared to carr^
me to the capital city.
This resolution perhaps may appear ver
bold and dangerous, and I am confident, woal <
not be imitated by any prince in Europe oi
the like occasion. However, in my opinion
it was extremely prudent, as well as generoos
for, supposing these people had endeavonre <
to kill me wiUi their spears and arrows, whili
I was asleep, I should certainly have awake <
with the first sense of smart, which might »
far have rouzed my rage and strength, as tt
have enabled me to break the sti'ings where
with I was tied; after which, as they wen
not able to make resistance, so they couU
expect no mercy.
These people are most excellent mathema
ticians, and arrived to a great perfection ii
mechanics by the countenance and encourage
ment of the emperor, who is a renowne <
patron of learning, lliis prince has seven
machines fixed on wheels, for the carriage o
trees and other great weights. He oftei
builds his largest men of war, whereof somi
are nine feet long, in the woods where th*
timber grows, and has them carried on thesi
engines three or four hundred yards to th(
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT. 27
sea. Five hnndred carpenters and ei^gineers
were immediately set at work to prepare the
greatest engine they had. It was a trame of
wood raised three inches from the ground,
about seven feet long, and four wide, moving
upon twenty-two wheels. The shout I heard
was npon the arrival of this engine, which it
seems set out in four hours after my landing.
It was bronght parallel to me, as I lay. But
the principal difficulty was to raise and place
me in this vehicle. Eighty poles, each of one
foot high, were erected for this purpose, and
very strong cords, of the bigness of pack-
tiiread, were fastened by hooks to many
bandages, which the workmen had girt round
Jiy neck, my hands, my body, and my legs.
Nine hundred of the strongest men were em-
ployed to draw up these cords, by many pul-
leys fastened on the poles, and thus, in less
tium three hours, I was raised and slung into
the engine, and there tied fast. All this I
was told ; for, while the operation was per-
ibrming, I lay in a profound sleep, by the
force of that soporiferous medicine infused
into my liquor. Fifteen hundred of the em-
peror's largest horses, each about four inches
and a half high, were employed to draw me
towards the metropolis, which, as I said, was
half a mile distant.
About four hours after we began our jour-
ney, I awaked by a very ridiculous accident;
for the carriage being stopped awhile, to ad-
just something that was out of order, two or
three of the young natives had the conotsU^f t»
28 Gulliver's tratbls.
see how I looked when I was asleep, they cUmb-
ed up into the engine, and advanciiig very soft-
ly to my face, one of them, an officer in the
gnards, put the sharp end of his half-pike a
good way into my left nostril, which tickled
my nose like a straw, and made me sneeze
violently* ; whereupon they stole off unper-
ceived, and it was three weeks before I knew
the cause of my waking so suddenly. We
made a long march the remaining part of the
day, and rested at night with five hundred
gnards on each side of me, half with torches,
and half with bows and arrows, ready to
to shoot me if I should offer to stir. The
next morning at sun-rise we continued our
march, and arrived within two hundred yards
of the city gates about noon. The eniperor,
and all his court, came out to meet us ; bat
his great officers would by no means suffer
his majesty to endanger his person, by mount-
mg on my body.
At the place where the carriage stopped
there stood an ancient temple, esteemed to be
the largest in the whole kingdom; which^
* It has been remarked, that coarage, in whatever
caose, thongh it sometimes excites indignation. Is ntret
the object of contempt ; bnt this appears to b« trae,
only because conraee is supposed to imply superiority |
for this officer in tlie guards becomes extremely rtdi-
culoiu and contemptible by an act of the most daring
curiosity, which sets him in comparison with OnlUver,
to whom he was so much inferior, that a blast of thf
man-mountain's nostrils would have endangered hH
1if«; and If heroism itself is not proof againtt f MIcMe,
they mnly are jLUUjmtiam in phUowphy who cwul*
det iMJCQic us the tut of trulhv— U.
A VOYAGE TO LIILIPUT. 29
having being polluted some years before by
an mmataral murder, was, according to the
zeal of those people, looked upon as profane^
and therefore had been appUed to common
use, and all the ornaments and furniture car-
ried away. In this edifice it was determined
I should lodge. The great gate fronting to
the north, was about four feet high, and al-
most two feet wide, through which I could
easily creep. On each side of the gate was
a small window, not above six inches from
the ground : into that on the left side, the
king's smith conveyed fourscore and eleven
chains, like those that hang to a lady's watch
in Europe, and almost as large, which were
locked to my left leg with six-and-thirty pad-
locks. Over against this temple, on the other
side of the great highway, at twenty feet
distance, there was a turret at least five feet
high. Here the emperor ascended, with
many principal lords of his court, to have an
opportunity of vie\.ing me, as I was told, for I
could not see them. It was reckoned that
above a hundred thousand inhabitants came
out of the town upon the same errand ; and
in spite of my guards, I beUeve there could
not be fewer than ten -thousand at several
times, who mounted my body by the help of
ladders. But a proclamation was soon issued,
to forbid it upon pain of death. When the
workmen found it was impossible for me to
break loose, they cut all the strings that bomid
toe ; whereupon I rose up, with as melancholy
a disposition as ever I had in my Ufc. Bu(
-.t
so Gulliver's travels.
the noise and astonishment of the people,
seeing mc rise and walk, are not to be expi
ted. The chains that held my left leg V9
mboat two yards long, and gave me not a
the liberty of walking backwards and 1
wards in a semicircle ; but, being fixed w:
In four inches of the gate, allowed me
creep in, and lie at my full length in
temple.
CHAPTER II.
7%« Emperor of LilHput, attended by aetert
the nobUity, comes to see the Author in his
finement. The Emperor^s person and habii
tcribed. Learned men appointed to teach
Aitthor their language. He gains fatou
his mUd disposition. His pockets tweseara
and his sword and pistols taken from kim^
When I found myself on my feet, I loo
about me^ and must confess I never beliel
a more entertaining prospect. The com
around appeared like a continued garden,
the enclosed fields, which were generally f
feet square, resembled so many beds of fl
ers. These fields were intermingled y
woods of half a stang*, and the tallest tr
^ as I could judge, appeared to be seven
high. I viewed the town on my left hi
* A sUng la a pole •r perch ; sixteen lect and a
for some hours extremely pres- [
^essities of nature ; which ^a,'
bemg ahnost two days since 1 f
irdened myself. I was under f
IS between urgency and shame,
lient 1 could think on,t was to
louse, which I accordingly did •
je gate after me, I went as fa^
r my chain would suffer, and
body of tliat uneasy load. But
ly tune I was ever guilty of bo
ction ; for which I cannot but
I reader wUI g^ve some allow-
has maturely and impartiaUy ■
2ase, and the distress I was in.
my constant practice was, as f
to perform that business in
nill extent of my chain ; and
taken every morning before
that the offensive matter ?
d off in wheelbarrows, by two
ted for that purpose. I would
\
so OULUVBR's TRA*p.fp
the nolge and aatonUhiiir .^, at an end, I camd
teeing me rise and w^.^ having occasion lor
•ed. The chabit *J^or was already dcsccu-
abont twoyMdal'^and advancing on horse-
the Uber^ i#VVhich had like to have cost
^^ " j* ^ * ^^^e beast, though very well
^L^T ^^Kif/t^^^y''Duscd to snch a sight,
^ " ^^^ Kl^^Qtitd as if a mountain moved be-
•** >'''/^^fl^ed up on his hinder feet : bnt
j^^jL^y who is an excellent horseman,
fiff$^tj till his attendants ran in, and
f^^ t > ridle, while his majesty had time to
JfjLgMt* When he alighted, he snrveycd
jH^amA with great admiration ; bnt kept
^fioiA the length of my chain. He ordered
^ cooks and butlers, who were already pre-
jygfcd, to give me victuals and drink, which
Ibey pushed for\vard in a sort of vehicles upon
wheels, till I could reach tiieni. 1 took these
vehicles, and soon emptied them all ; twenty
of them were filled with meat, and ten witli
liquor ; each of the former afforded me two or
three good mouthfuls ; and I emptied the li-
quor ^ ten vessels, which was contained in
earthen vials, into one vehicle, drinking it off
at a draught; and so I did with the rest.
The empress, and young princes of the bl < ro < l
of both sexes, attended by many ladies, sat
at some distance in their chairs ; but upon the
accident that happened to the emperor*s horse,
they alighted, and came near his person,
which 1 am now going to describe. He is
taller, by almost tlie breadth of my nail, than
Hn\ of his court ; v?\uc\i aXowc \s v^vi*i\3i^v v^
ong and msMiiluie, with an Am-
arched nose, hU complexion
tenance erect, bis body and
'tioned,aU his motions irace.
rtment m^estic. He was
'^ twenty-eight years
old, of which he had
-J in great feUdty, and
j^»nous For the better ^„ve.
Iiolding him, I lay on my side " w
ds off: however, I have had him
™f* • " .■»y,»«^d, and therefore
ceived in the description. His
iry plain and simple, and tlie
between the Asiatic and Eur«^
had on h,g head a light helmet
'f''.'»,'?'jewels, and a plume on
d lumself, if I should happen to
It was ahnost three inches lonir •
«bbard were gold enriched wiu,'
'!..? " *'?»- " " ri " . but very
**•• «CW« I,
34 GULLIVERS TRAVELS.
courtiers were all most magnificently clad; so
that the spot they stood upon seemed to re-
semble a petticoat spread on the ground, em-
broidered with figures of gold and silver.
His imperial majesty spoke often to me, and
I returned answers : but neither of us ooold
understand a syllable. There were several
of his priests and lawyers present (as I con-
jectured by their habits), who were com-
manded to address themselves to me ; and I
spoke to them in as many languages as I had
the least smattering of, which were high and
low Dutch, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian,
and Lingua Franca, but all to no purpose.
After about two hours the court retired, and
I was left with a strong guard, to prevent the
impeitinence, and probably the malice of the
rabble, who were very impatient to crowd
aboot me as near as they durst; and some of
them had the impudence to shoot their arrows
at me, as I sat on the ground by the door of
my house, whereof one very narrowly misled
my left eye. But the colonel ordered six of
the ringleaders to be seized, and thought no
punishment so proper as to deliver them
bound into my hands ; which some of his sol-
diers accordingly did, pushing them forwards
with the butt-ends pf their pikes into my
reach. I took them all in my right hand, put
five of them into my coat pocket, and as to
the sixth, I made a countenance as if I woald
eat him alive. The poor man squalled terri-
bly, and the colonel and his officers were m
much pain, especiai\y w\\eii\X\e,^ voc^n vci^xsi^^
Muc : out I soon put tlicm out of
ooking mildly, and immediately
strings he was bound with, I set
)n the ground, and away he ran.
c rest in the same manner, taking
y one out of my pocket; and I
ith the soldiers and people were
hted at this mark of my clemency,
represented very much to my
.t court.
night I got with some difficulty
ise, where I lay on the ground,
ed to do so about a fortnight;
h time, the emperor gave orders
I prepared for me. Six hundred
common measure were brought
and worked up in my house ; a
fifty of their beds, sewn toge-
p the breadth and length ; smd
four double; which, however,
ery indifferently from the hard-
oor, that was of smooth stone.
computation, they provided me
ankp.tit. »nA «« » *
30 Gulliver's travels.
must nave ensued, if his imperial majesty had
not provided, by several proclamatious and
orders of state, against this inconveniency.
He directed, Uiat those who had already
beheld me should return home, and not pre-
sume to come within fifty yards of my house,
without licence from the court ; whereby the
secretaries of state got considerable fees.
In the mean time the emperor held fre-
quent councils, to debate what course should
be taken with me; and I was afterwards
assured, by a particular friend, a person of
great quality, who was as much in the secret
as any, that the court was under many dif-
ficulties concerning me. They apprehended
my breaking loose , that my diet would be
very expensive, and might cause a famine.
Sometimes they determined to starve me, or
at least to shoot me in the face and hands
with poisoned arrows, which would soon
dispath me ; but again they considered, that
the stench of so large a carcass might produce
a plague in the metropolis, and probably
spread through the whole kingdom. In the
midst of these consultations, several officers
of the army went to the door of the great
council-chamber, and two of them being ad-
mitted, gave an account of my behaviour to
the six criminals above-mentioned; which
made so fiivourable an impression in the
breait of his majesty, and the whole board,
in my behalf, that an imperial commission was
issued out, obUgjing tXv t)lsie NiS^a^|j & %)'wba
liaadred yards round tkie dtj^Xo ^^ > aw\« Va.
^ — .J ouct^pj ana
It for ray sustenance; together
rtionable quantity of bread, and
ler liquors ; for the due payment
\ majesty gave assignments upon
for this prince lives chiefly upon
ssnes ; seldom, except upon great
iung any subsidies upon his sub-
re bound to attend him in his
ir own expense. An establish-
o made of six hundred persons
onestics, who had board-wages
leir maintenance, and tents built
y conreniently on each side of
was hkewise ordered, that three
irs should make me a suit of
he fimhion of the country : that
esty's greatest sdiolars should
o instruct me in their language i
at the emperor's horses, and
lobility and troops of guards,
aently exercised in my sight, to
selves to me. All these orders
in execution; and in abonf
.- ji
38 Gulliver's travels.
*■ that tills must be a work of time, not to be
thought OD without the advice of his council,
and that first I must lumos kelmin peuo
deftnar Ion emposo;'that is, sweara peaoi
with him and his kingdom. However, thati
fthould be used with all kindness. And hb
advised me to'acquire, by my patience and
discreet behaviour, the good opinion of him-
self and his subjects.'He desired'I would
not take it ill, if he gave orders to certain
proper officers to search me ; for probably I
might carry about me several weapons, which
must needs be dangerous things, if they
answered the bulk of so prodigious a perMm.'
I said,'His majesty should be satisfied; for
I was ready to strip myself, and turn np my
pockets before him.'This I delivered, part
in words, and part in signs. He replied,
^that, by the laws of the kingdom, I must be
•earched by two of his officers ; that he knew
this could not be done without my consent
and assistance ; and he had so good an opinion
of my generosity and justice, as to trust their
persons in my hands: that whatever they
took from me, should be returned when I
left the country, or paid for at the rate which
I would set upon them.'I took up the two
officers in my hands, put them first into my
coat-pockets, and then into every other pocket
about me, except my two fobs, and another
secret podcet, which I had no mind should be
k^ifurched, wherein I had some little necessa-
ries that were of no consequence to any but
wj^seK Jn one of my {o\ > & lElki^i^ N«%:k %.
or gold in a pnne. These geDtlemen,
igpen, ink, and paper, about tliem, made
Kact inventory of every thing they saw ;
nrhen they had done, desired I would set
. down, that they might deliver it to the
;ror. This inventory I afterwards trans-
into English, and is word for word as
vs:
mprimiSf In the right coat-pocket of the
: man-mountain (for so I interpret the
s quinbus flegtrin), after tiip strictest
h, we found only one greac piece of coarse
large enough to be a foot-cloth for your
ty's chief room of state. In the left
;t we saw a huge silver diest, with a
of the same metal, which we, the seardi-
vere not able to lift. We desired it
I be opened, and one of ns stepping into
nd himself up to the mid leg in a sort of
lome part whereof flying up to our faces,
both a-sneezing for several times toge-
In his right waistcoat-pocket we found
iigious bundle of white thin substances.
«\nA J\»r*»« *._-*»-
40 oulliver's travels.
not always trouble Iiim witli questions, beci
we found it a great difficulty to make
understand us. In tlie large pocket, on
right side of his middle cover (so I trans
the word ranfvAoy by which tliey meant
breeches), we saw a hollow pillow of i
about the length of a man, fastened t
strong piece of timber larger than the pil
and upon one side of the pillar, were 1
pieces of iron sticking out, cut into stn
figures, which we know not what to mak <
In the left pocket, another engine of the i
kind. In the smaller pocket on the right i
were several round ilat pieces of white
red metal, of different bulk; some of the wl
which seemed to be silver, were so large
heavy, that my comrade and I could ha
lift them. In tlie left pocket were two b
pillars irregularly shaped: we could
without difficulty, reach the top of then
we stood at tlie top of his pocket. On
them was covered, and seemed alLof a pi
but at the upper end of the other there
peared a white round substance, about t
ihe bigness of our heads. Within eac
these was enclosed a prodigious plate of st
which, by our orders, we obliged him to s
OS, because wo apprehended they migh
dangerous engines. He took them out of 1
cases, and told us, that in his own countr
practice was to shave his beard witli on
these, and cut his meat with the other. Tl
were two pockets which we could not en
Uieae be calicd his fobs ; tUc^ ^cti^^ Viivk\
A VOYAGE TO LILUPUT^ 41
flits cat oot into the top ot ■ his middle coTer,
bat sqaeezed dose by tbe pressore of his belly.
Oat of the right fob hung a great silver chaiBy
with a wonderful kind of engine at the bottom.
We directed him to draw out whatever was
at the end of that diain ; which appeared to
be a globe, half silver, and half of some trans-
parent metal ; for, on the transparent side,
we saw certain strange figures circularly
drawn, and thought we couki touch them, till
we found our fingers stopped by that lucid
fcubstance. He put this engine to our ears,-
which made an incessant noise, like that of a
water-mill: and we conjecture it is either
some unknown animal, or the god that he'
worships ; but we are more inclined to the
latter opinion, because he assured us (if we
nnderstand him right, for he expressed hinN
self very imperfectly) that he seldom did any
thing without consulting it. He called it his
oracle, and said it pointed out the time- for
every action of his life.* From the left fdb'
he took oot a net almost large enough for a
fisherman, but contrived to open and shut like
a purse, and served him for the samd use : we
found therein several massy pieces of yellow
metal, which, if they be real gold, must be of
immense value.
* Having thus, in obedience to your majes-
ty's commands, diligently searched all his
* Perhaps the author intended to expo^ the proba-
ble fallacy of opinions derived from tbe rAlatioD* of
traveller*, by showing how little troth need to be uiiv
nnderttood to iua):e falseliood apeciouc. — II.
41 cuLUTSR a thavbu.
pocketi, we obicrveil a girdle about hi
made of the hide of tome prodigiouH i
from whicli, on the left side, huug a n
the length of five men ; and on the r
bag or pooch divided ioto two ceUi, e*
capable of holding three of yoor mi
Mlbjecta. In one of these cell* wen i
gU > bei, or balls, of a most pooderon*
about tbe bignesa of our heads, and n
a atrong hand to lift them: the oHi
cimtwned a heap of certain black grai:
of no great bulk or weight, for we coal
above fifty of them in the palms of our
'Thii U an exact inventory of wl
fonnd abont the body of (he man-moi
who nicd ui with great dvihty, and d
peet to yonr miyesty's cobuqIsuod.
and Bcaled on the fonrdi day of tbe <
ninth moon of yonr m^ity'i auapicioni
'Cfc/Wm Freloci, Main Frib
Vhen thU inveiitory was re > id ovef
emperor, he directed me, although 1
gentle temu, to deliver up the several
cnlan. He first called for my admitar,
I took out, acabbard and iL. In thi
lime he ordered three thonnand of hiac
troops (who then attended him) to ni
me at a distance, with their bows and
jnst ready todiadiarge; bntldidnoK
it, for mine eyes were wholly fixed uj
majesty. He then desired me to dr.
•dmitar, which, although it had got soi
by the sea water, was, in most parts, e
iug bngbt. I did so, and immedi^V'V^
^x, wcoi , anu tne reflcc-
sd their eyes, as I waved the scimi-
fro Id my hand. His majesty, who
t magnanimous prince,* was less
ban I could expect : he ordered me
it into the scabbard, and cast it on
id as gently as I could, about six
the end of my chain. The next
demanded was one of the hollow
-s; by which he meant my pocket
I drew it out, and at his desire, as
conldy expressed to him the use of
larging it only with powder, which,
Mcness of my pouch, happened to
tting in the sea (an inconvenience
ich all prudent mariners take spe-
o provide,) I first cautioned the
> t to be afi^d, and then I let it off
The astonishment here was much
u at the ught of the scimitar.
ell down as if they had been struck
even the emperor, although he
round, could not recover himself
me. I delivered ii»* »»'»*»• —
(1 GULUven's
tbo smallest spark, apd blow op his impend
palace inEo Uii- air. I likewise delivered up
ray wBtdi, wUich the e
riouB to see, blJ cammanded two of hia tallest
yeomen of the guards to bear it on a pole
upon their alioulders, a» draymen in England
do a barrel of ale. He was amazed at the I
coDtiuual noise it made, and tbe motion ofthe
minute-hand, triiiclj lie could easily diKem;
for their sight is much more acute than onn;
he Bitkcd the opinions ol'bis learned men
about it, whicli were various and remote, u
the reader may well imagine without m;
repeating) although indeed I cou'd not tery
perfectly understand tfaem. I then gave up
my ulver and copper money, my parse with
nine large pieces of gold, and some smaller
ones; my knife and raior, my rvtmb and sil-
ver snuff-box, my handkerdiief and Jonml-
book. My sdmitar, i^ntols, and poncb, were
conveyed in carriages to his majesty's storei;
bat the rest of my goods were returned me.
I had, as 1 before observed, one private
pocket, wliich escaped their search, wbeitin
tiiere was a pair of spectacle! (whidi I vna^
times Qse for the weakness of mine eyes) a
pocket penpective, aiid some other Httl« con-
veniences; which, being of no coruequenee to
th: emperor, I did not think myself bonftfft
honour to discover, and I apprebAiiled tbey
might be lost or epoiled, If I veDtond then
out of my possession.
erts the Emperor, and his nobi'
res, in a very uncomimm manner.
i« of the Court of LilUput de-
? Author has his liberty granted
\ain conditions.
and good behaviour had f^ne < l
mperor and his court, and in-
! army and people iu general,
I conceive hopes of getting my
ort time. I took all possible
.tivate this favourable disposi-
tives came, by dcgreen, to be
ive of any danger iium me. I
aes lie down, and let five or
ince on my head; and at last
iris would venture to come and
id seek in my hair. I had now
> rogress in understanding and
auguage. The emperor had a
46 gulliter's tratels
ments, and high favour at court. They are
trained in this art from their youth, and are
not always of noble birth, or liberal educav
tion. When a great office is vacant, either
by death or disgrace (which often happens,)
five or six of those candidates petition the
emperor to entertain his majesty and the
court with a dance on the rope ; and whoever
jumps the highest, without falling, succeeds
in the office. Very often the chief ministers
themselves are commanded to show their
skill, and to convince the emperor that they
have not lost their faculty. Flimnap, the
treasurer, is allowed to cut a caper on the
straight rope, at least an inch higher than any
other lord in the whole empire. I have seen
him do the summerset* several times together,
upon a trencher fixed on a rope which is no
thicker than a common packthread in England.
My friend Reldresal, principal secretary for
private affairs, is, in my opinion, if I am not
partial, the second after/the treasurer; the
rest of the great officers are much upon a
par.'
These diversions are often attended with
fatal accidents, whereof great numbers are on
record.'1 myself have seen two or three
candidates break a limb. But the danger is
much greater, when the ministers themselvi^
are conunanded to show th^ir dexterity ! for,
by contending to excel themselves and their
• Summerset or summersault, a gumboJ of a tamb-
ler, in which he springs op, turns beels uv«r head is
the air, and comes dowa npon his feet. — OriginaL
I
A VOYAOK TO LILLIPUT. 47
IbllowSy they strain so far that there is hardly
one of them who has not received a fall, and
some of them two or three. I was assared,
thaty a year or two before my arrival, Flimnap
woold iniallibly have broke his neck, if one of
the king*i cushions, that accidentally lay on
the ground, had not weakened the force of
hb hdl.
There is likewise another diversion, which
is only shown before the emperor and em-
press, and first minister, upon particnlar
occasions. The emperor lays on the table,
three fine silken threads of six [inches kmg;
one is blue, the other red, and the third green.
These threads are proposed as prizes for those
persons whom the emperor has a mind to dis-
tinguish by a peculiar mark of his fi & vour.
The ceremony is performed in his majesty's
great chamber of state, where the candidates
are to undergo a trial of dexterity, very dif-
ferent from the former, and such as I have
not observed the least resemblance of in any
other country of the new or old world. The
emperor holds a stick in his hands, both ends
parallel to the horizon, while the candidates
advancing, one by one, sometimes leap over
the stick, sometimes creep under it, backward
and forw^ard, several times, according as the
stick is advanced or depressed. Sometimes
the emperor iiolds* one end of the stick, and
his first minister the other; sometimes the
minister has it entirely to himself. Whoever
performs his part with most agility, and holds
out the longest in leaping and creepuigy it
48
rewarded with the blue -mlodred silk ; tbeced {
is given to the next and tlie green to tile (bird,
which tliE;^ all wear girt twice round abott
tlie middle; and you see few great pereons
about tiiL9 court wbo arc oat adorned with one
of these girdle*.
The liorses of the aiiny, and those of the |
royal slablen, having betn daily led beiore
me, were no longer idiy, but woald come ap
to my very feet vitbont starting. Hie riden
wonid leap them over my hand, as I held it
■n the grooad ; and one of the emperor*!
huntsmen, npon a large courser, bxdi mj fbot^
shoe and all; which was iude^ a prodigioni
leap. I had the good fortune to di*ert Am
emperor one day niter a very extraordiniiy
manner. I desired he wonld order semal
sticks of two feet tiigli, and thethickneMofn
ordinary cane, to be bronght me ; whercnpon
nil majesty commanded the master of hll
woods to give directions accordingly; and Hie
nei^t morning six woodmen arrived with u
many carriages, drawn by eight boraes to each.
I took nine of these sticks, and fixing tbem
firmly in the gronnd in a quadrangular fignie,
two i'cet and a half square. I took fonr otlW
sticks, and tied them parallel at each cotner
about two feet from ibe ground; dien I fts-
tened my handkerchief to the nine slidnUilt.
stood erect; and extended it on all sides, UD
it was tight as the top of a dnun ; and te
fonr parallel sticks, rising abont five iodiCl
hi^er than the handkercliief, served m
ledge* oa each ude. Wben Ibid. %i & £te &
eittrea tne emperor to let a
t horse, twcnty-fonr in niim-
izercise upon this plain. Hi <
ed of the proposal, and I took
by one, in my hands, ready
med, with the proper officers
m. As soon as they got into
ded into two parties, perform-
thes, discharged blant arrows^
ds, fled and pursued, attacked
d io short discovered the best
le I ever beheld. The paral-
1 them and their horses from
stage ; and the emperor was
d, that he ordered this enter-
^peated several day, and once
e lifted up and give the word
id with great difficulty per-
i empiess herself to let me
close chair vntbin two yards
n she was able to take a full
e performance. It was my
t no ill accident happened in
60 GULLITER's TRAYELt.
ever, I wonld not trust to the strength of it
any iiaore in such dangerous enterprises.
- About two or three days before I was set
at liberty, as I was entertaining the ooart
with this kind of feats, there arrived an ex-
press ^o inform his majesty, that some of his
subjects, riding near the place where I was
6rst taken up, had seen a great black sub-
stance lying on the ground, very oddly shaped^
extending its edges round, as wide as his
majesty's bedchamber, and rising up in the
middle as high as a man; that it was no
living creature, as they at first apprehended,
for it lay on the grass without motion ; and
some of them had walked round it several
times ; that, by mounting upon each other's
shoulders, they had got to the top, which
was flat and even, and, stamping upon it,
they found that it was hollow within; that
they humbly conceived it might be some-
thing belonging to the man-mountain ; and if
his majesty pleased, they would undertake
to bring it with only five horses. I presently
knew what they meant, and was glad at heart
to receive this intelligence. It seems, upon
my first reaching the shore after our ship-
wreck, I was in such confusion, that before I
came to the place where 1 went to sleep, my
hat, which I had fastened with a string to
my head while I was rowing, and had stuck
on all the time I was swimming, fell off after
•I came to land ; the string, as I conjecture,
bceaking by some accident, which I never
observed, bat thought my hat had been lost
uiajKBty to
lers it might be brought to me ns soon
ible, describing to him the use and the
of it : and the next day the waggoners
with it, but not in a very good con-
they had bored two holes in the brim^
an inch and half of the edge, and
d two hooks in the holes ; these hooks
ed by a long cord to the harness, and
f hat was dragged along for above haif
;lish mile; but, the ground in that
'being extremely smooth and levely it
d less damage than I expected,
days after this adventure, the em-
laving ordered that part of his army
loaiters in and about his metropolis,
readiness, took a fancy of diverting
in a very singnlar manner. He de-
fould stand like a Colossus, with my
far asunder as I conveniently could.
I commanded his general (who was
qf»erienced leader, and a great patron
to draw up the troops in close order,
di them under me; the foot K«
S3 GtlLUVEBS TBAVBLS.
fcaa the tiulb, my breeches were al that time
in to ill a comlitioD, that they affordEd saoie
opportonities for laughlcr aiut adniiratioa.
1 had sent to many memorjals anil pcli-
tioiu for ny liberty, that hii m^ea^ kl
length mentioiied the autter, fint in the
cabinet, aad then in a full cooncil ; where H
mi oppoied by Done, except Skyreib Bid'
pdam, «ho wM pleuetl, without any prOTO-
eUiou, to be my moital enemy. But it wtu
carried againat him by the wbole baard,,aD < l
confirmed by the emperor. That nuniiter
wai gatbttt or Bdminl of the realm, vciy
mnchin his master's coDfidence, and apenen
well versed In affairs, but of a nonise « > d
■onr complexion. However, be w«b at length
persuaded to ctmiply ; bat prerailed that the
artidea and conditioiu upon which I ihoald
be set free, and to which I niiit swear, ihoold
be dnWD op by himself. These artides
were brought to me by Skyreih Bolgolam in
person, attended by two under-secietBriis,
and leversl persona of distinction. AA«
they were read, 1 was demartded to iwesur
to Uie performance of than \ first in ttie man-
ner of my own conntiy, and afterwardi m
the method prescribed by thur law > ; wludi
was, to hold my right foot in my left band,
and to place dw middle finger of i^ ri^t
hand OB the crown of my bead,andniythDmb
OB the tip of my right ear. Bat became the
reader may be caiioas to have bcbc idea ol
the s^le and nanner of ezprvsaion peealar
to t & at people, aaweUaita^iK > w < kitn < Didn
.- «u%, wuoie instrnmenty
for wordy as near as I was able, which
; offer to the public.
tlbasto Momarem Evalmc Gardilo Shcfin
UUy Gue, most mighty emperor of
ut, delight and terror of the universe,
i dominions extend five thousand hluit-
(about twelve miles in circumf < ^rence)
e extremities of the globe ; monarch of
onarchs, taller than the sons of men;
i feet press down to the centre, and
'. head strikes against the sun ; at whose
he princes of the earth shake tlieir
; pleasant as the spring, comforable aa
mmer, fruitful as autumn, dreadful as
. His most sublime majesty proposes
man-mountain, lately arrived at oui
il dominions, the following articles,
by a solemn oath, he shall be obliged
onn.
The man-moontain shall not depart
ir dominions, without our licence under
at seal.
He shall not presume tn #»a*«« j~*-
64 CVUItBB TBATBU.
boilte* of any of our loviii; tn^eell, tM
horse*, or eanUees, nor Uke an; of on
■altjects into Us hiixU withont tbdr awa
'BA, If an cxpTCH reqnirei ulTKurdinirf
^patdi, the man-moimtBin iliall be ol^gcd
to cany, in hii pocket, the mewenger and
Iwne a aiz dayt'jaaraey, once \m enij
moon, and Tetnni the aaid meMengerbaiifS
ao required) aafe to onr imperial presence.
'eUi, He shall be our ally afaiost onr eno-
inies in the Island of Bletoscn*, and do Ui
ntmost to destroy their fleet, whidl is now
prepHTinK to inTsde u.
'7tb, That the said raan-tMnntaln sball, it
Ms time of leiinre, be aiding and assisting to
onr workmen, in helping to raise certain great
stones, towards coTeiiog the wall of ttie piin-
dpal paik, and other «ar royal bnlldings.
'Bth, That the said man-mountain sball, la
Iwo moons'time, deliver in an enact snrrey
of the drcimiferencc of oar dominions, by a
tompatatiaD of his own paces ronnd the coast
'Lastly, That, upon his solemn oath ta
obierre all the abore articles, the said man-
monntain shall have a daily allowance of
of meat and drink soffident for the rapport
of 1724 of onr rabjects, with free access to
onr royal person, and other metks of oar
tavoar. Given at onr palace at Belfaborac,
iloD rf BUfiuat, lit
t Ja^tfoM MFrmiict.
1 h ■i* " -
d snbscribcd to these articles
erfulness and content, altliout^ii
were not so honourable as I
}hed ; which proceeded wholly
ce of Skyrcsh Bolgolam, tlie
whereupon my chains were
alocked, and I was at full li-
mperor himself, in person, did
r to be by at the whole cere-
le my asknowlcdi^ents by
self at his majesty's feet : but
. me to rise; and after many
ssions, which, to avoid tlic
lity, I shall not repeat, he
\ hoped I should prove a use-
l well deserve all the favours
conferred upon me, or might
e.'
lay please to observe, that, in
)f the recovery of my liberty,
)nlates to allow me a quantity
ink sufficient for the support
66 GULLIYER^S TRAVELS.
necessary to support that nnmber of L
tians. By which the reader may conce
idea of the mgenuity of the people, as i
the prudent and exact economy of so g
prince.
CHAPTER IV.
MUdendOf the metropolis of lAUiput, 4t9^
together with the Emperor^a palace,
rereation between the Author and a pr
secretary y conceminf: the affairs of tl
pire. The Author's offers toserce the E\
in his wars.
Thb first request I made, after I had ob
my liberty, was, that I might have lice
see Mildendo, the metropolis; whic
emperor easily granted me, but with a t
charge to do no hurt either to the inhal
or their houses. The people had noti <
proclamation, of my design to visit the
The wall, which compassed it, is two fe
a half high, and at least eleven inches
so that a coach and horses may be drive
safely round it ; and it is flanked with
towers at ten feet distance. I steppei
the great western gate, and passed verj
ly and sideling through the two pri
streets only in my short waistcoat, for i
damaging the rooft and eaves of the'.
with the skirts of my coat. \Ni«3iiu
ongh the orders were very strict,
pie should keep in their houses,
peril. The garret windows and
es were so crowded with specta-
thought in all my travels I had
ore populous place. The city is
are, each side of tlie wall being
feet long. The two great streets,
ross and divide it into four qnar*
feet wide. The lanes and alie^-s,
1 not enter, but only viewed them
re from twelve to eighteen inches,
capable of holding five hundred
Is : the houses are from three to
the shops and markets well
Df's palace is in the centre of the
e two great streets meet. It Is
wall of two feet high, and twcn-
ice from the buildings. I had
cB Gulliver's travels.
without infiiiite damage to the pile, th
the walls were strongly built of he¥m s
and foor indies thick. At the same tim
emperor had a great desire that I shooU
the magnificence of his palace ; but this 1
not able to do till three days after, wt
spent in cutting down with my knife soi
the largest trees in the royal pari^, ab
hundred yards distance from the dty.
these trees I made two stools, each ]
three feet high, and strong enough to
my weight. The people having receive
tice a second time, I went again tliroug
city to the palace with my two stools 1
hands. When I came to the side of the
court, I stood upon one stool, and too
other in my hand ; this I lifted over the
and gently set it down on the space bet
the first and second court, which was
feet wide. I tilien stepped over the bu
very conveniently from one stool to the <
and drew up the first after me with a h <
btick. By this contrivance I got into t
most court; and, lying down upon my s
applied my face to the windows of the n
stories, which were left open on purpose
discovered the most splendid apartment
can be imagined. There I saw the en
and the young princes, in their several
ings, with their chief attendants about
Her imperial majesty was pleased to
veiy gradously upon me, and gave me <
Ae window her hand to kiss.
Bat I ihall not an^d^^tA ^ < & t«bA^
lescnptions of this kind, becaiue I
tiem for a greater work, which is now
!ady for the press ; containing a ge-
cription of this empire, from its first
through a long series of princes;
articaiar account of their wars and
laws, learning, and religion; their
d animals; their peculiar manners
ms, with other matters very curioos
1 ; my chief design at present being
late such events and transactions as
to the public or to myself during a
of about nine months in that empire.
> ming, about a fortnight after I had
ny liberty, Reldresal, principal se-
9 they stile him) for private affairs,
ly house attended only by one ser-
e ordered his coach to wait at a
and desired I would give him an
lience; which I readily consented
30unt of his quality and personal
well as of the many good offices he
ne during my solicitations at court.
OC aVLLITBtt's TRATBU.
mighty eviU ; a violent faction at hanie, hi
tlie duller of an ioTasion, b; a moit polM
eoemy, from abroad. At to the fint, jo
are to nnderatand, that for above sevent
moons pagt there have been two » tiugglia
parties in tliis empire, under the names (
Trameck^an and Slametkian,'from theUg
and Inw heelB of their shoes, by which the
distinguish themselves. It is alleged, indeei
that the high heels are most Hj^eeable toot
andciit constitution ; but, however thia bi
his mnjesty has determined to make use Old
of low heels in the administration of the ff
vernment, and ail offices in the gift of tt
crown, as you cannot but observe ; and pa
ticnlarly that his majesty's imperial beels ■■
lower at least liy a drurr than any of h
court: drurr is amcasure about the fourteeni
part of an inch. The animosities betwet
these two parties run so high, that they iri
neither eat, nor drinii, nor talk witli Car
other. We compote tlie Trameekian, <
high heels, to exceed us in number ; but Ik
power is wholly on our side. We apprehen
his imperial highness, the heir to the crtiwl
to have some tendency towards the high beeli
at least we can plainly discover that one <
fais beels is larger tban the other, whidi gin
• Hltk-ckireh aiHl loiK^Iiareb, et vbig iihI far
At nci J aceUtiitai diffirtxe btiwitn num Kiul n
eirlreincly conlempllbk ; t-j jptcut^tipf dffer^mc
. 9 •*« ore cnreatened
rasion from the island of BlefuscOy
he other great empire of the nni-
ost as large and powerful as this of
y. For as to what we have beard
I, that there are other kingdoms
in the world inhabited by homafi
as large as yourself, our philoso-
in much doubt, and would rather
that you dropped from the moon,
he stars ; because it is certain, that
mortals of your bulk would in a
destroy all the fruits and cattle of
's dominions : besides, our histories
sand moons make no mention of
egions than the two great empires
ind Blefuscn. Whioh two mighty
s, as I was going to tell you, been
a most obstinate war for six-and-
s past. It began upon the fol-
uon : it is allowed on all hands,
aitive way of breaking eggs, be-
them, was upon the larger end ;
mt msjesty's grandfath**..
.U'l
oa cuLuvBR'arn
one emperor kHt hii life, and RMOer Hi
crown. Theie civil ccmunotioni men m»
■tantly fomented by the moaardu of Uc-
fuKu; uid when they were qaelled, Ike
exiles always fled for refuge to that ei:^lK.
It ia computed that eleven thouaand penou
have at several timea saffered death, nOiet
than submit to break their eggs at the smiUa
end. Many hundred large volomei hin
been published upon this controvetry: bit
the hooka of the Big-endiaiu have beenloai
forbidden, and the whole party rendered
incapable by law of holding employmmti.
During the course of theae troubles, the em-
perors of Blefuscu did frequently eipoitnliU
by their ambassadon, accuung di of makiij
a achism in religion, by offending against i
fimdameatal doctrine of our great prophe
Lnstrog, in the fifty-fourth diapter of lb
BInndecral, which is their Alcoran. Tlu
however is thought to be ■ mere strain npoi
the text; for the words are theae: that al
true believers break their eggs at the cou
TGuient end; and which is the conveluea
end, seems, in my humble opinion, to be lei
to every man's conadenc^ or at leaat in th
power of the chief magistrate to determhu
Now, the Big-endian exiles have found >
much credit in the emperor of BMhica'
court, and so much private Mdrtanee an
encouragement from their party here ptkMH
that a bloody war has been canted tm hi
'tween the two empires for i
thirty thonsand of our best sea-
iiers; and the damage received
ny is reckoned to be somewhat
ours. However, they have now
lumerous fleet, and are just pre-
ake a descent upon us ; and his
esty, placing great confidence in
ind strength, has commanded me
tocoont of his affairs before you.'
the secretary to present my hum-
be emperor ; and to let him know,
ght it would not become me, who
gner, to interfere with parties;
tady, with the hazard of my life,
s person and state against all in- \
I
CHAPTER V.
by an extraordinary stratagem^
n invasion. A high title of honour
id upon him. Ambassadors arrive
Emoeror of Blefuxeu. and aw /m*
] > urteJ odI.v b.v a cfaanncl of ewht hondrtd
yardi wide. I bad Dot yet seen it, and apou
this ootice of BU intended invasion, I avoided
^ > pearing od that side of the coast, for tear
of being discovered b; Bome of the emmfi
itaips, who bad receiveJ no intelligence i^
me 1 all ioterconrae between the two empirel
having been strictly forbidden during flte
war, DpoD pain of death, and an embargi)
laid by our emppTor apon all vesseU whalM-
ever. I coDimanicated to his majeity a pro-
ject I had formed, of seizing the eoemj't
whole lleet; which, as our scouts assured at,
lay at anchor in the harbour, ready to sail
with the tirst fair wind. I coaanlted the
most experienced seamen upon the depth rf
the channel, which they had often plumbed;
who told me, that in the middle at hieh-water
it was seventy glumghlfft deep, which la
about six feet of Kuropcan measure ; and the
rest of it fifty gtumgUiffs at most. I wailiBd
towards the north-east coast, over againit
Blefuscu; where, lying down behind Hhiliocli,
I took out my small perspective glass, and
viewed the enemy's fleet Pt anchor, conusting
of about fifty men of war, and a great num-
ber of transports : I then came back to my
house, and gave orders (for wliich I had a
warrant) for a great quantity of the strongeit
cubic and bars of iron. The cable waa about
as thick as packthread, and the bars of the
lengdi and dze of a knittlng-needie. 1
trebled the cable to make it stronger, andfot
the Mune rcasoD I twi & led ttoce oi < dae'aM
it back to the north-east
off my coat, shoes, aud
to the sea, in my leatliem
1 hour before high water,
haste I could, and swam
t thirty yards, till I felt
at the fleet in less than
enemy was so frightened
, that they leaped out of
mi to shore, where there
iian thirty thousand souls:
iing, and, (listening a hook
row of each, I tied all the
e end. While I was thus
emy discharged several
any of which stuck in my
nd, beside the excessive
anch disturbance in my
st apprehension was for
I should have inikllibly
suddenly thought of an
:, among otlier little ne-
: spectacles in a private
I
I .!
i
1. •■
60 0ULUVER*8 TRAVELS.
hooks, and, taking the knot in wj hiii,
began to pull ; but not a ship would itiTi ill
they were all too fast held by their anchoiii
so that the boldest part of my enterpriae
remained. I therefore let go the cord, ind
leaving the hooks fixed to the ships, I reso-
lutely cut with my knife the cables that fii»-
tened the anchors, receiving mbout two baa-
dred shots in my face and hands ; then I tpok
np the knotted end of the cables, to wUch
my hooks were tied, and with great etie
drew fifty of the enemy's largest men of wv
after me.
The Blefuscudians, who had not the leait
imagination of what I intended, were at fint
confounded with astonishment. They had
seen me cut the cables, and thought my de*
sign was only to let the ships run adrift, or
fall foul on each other : but when they per-
ceived the whole fleet moving in order, and
saw me pulling at the end, they set up sodi
a scream of grief and despair as it is ahnoit
impossible to describe or conceive. When I
had got out of danger, I stopped awhile to
pick out the arrows that stuck in my hands
and face ; and rubbed on some of the same
ointment that was given me at my first arrival,
as I have formerly mentioned. I then took
off my spectacles, and waiting about an hour,
till the tide was a little fallen, I waded
through the middle with my cargo, and ar-
rived safe at the royal port of lilliput.
The emperor and his whole court stood on
tbe Bbore, expecting th^ u«\xe o£ \^ fgceal
iney saw tho ships move for-
irge half-raoon, but could not dis*
lio was up to my breast in water,
vanced to the middle of the chan-
ere yet more in pain, because I
^ater to my neck. The emperor
ne to be drowned, and that the
et was approaching in a hostile
t he was soon eased of his fears;
nel growing shallower every step
une in a short time within bear-
ding np the end of the cable, by
3et was fastened, I cried in a load
; live the most puissant king of
Phis great prince received me at
vith all possible encomioms, and
I nardac upon the spot, which is
itle of honour among them.
ty desired I would take some
mity of bringing all the rest of
sliips into his ports. And so
3 is the ambition of princes, that
) thuik of nothing!: less than re-
e» Gulliver's travels.
slavery;* and, when the matter was debated
in council, tiie wisest part of the ministry
were of my opinion.
This open bold declaration of mine was so
opposite to the schemes and politics of his
imperial majesty, that he could never forgive
me. He mentioned it in a very artful manner
at conndl, where I was told that some of the
wisest appeared at least, by their silence, to
be of my opinion ; but others, who were my
secret enemies, could not forbear some ex-
pressLons which by a side-wind reflected on
me; and from this time began an intrigue
between his majesty, and a junto of ministers,
malidoosly bent against me, which br«ke out
ki less than two months, and had like to have
ended in my utter destruction. Of so Uttlr
weight are the greatest services to princes,
when put into the balance with a refusal U*
gratify their passions.
About three weeks after this exploit, tiliere
arrived a solenm embassy from Blefascu, vrith
humble offers of a peace; which was soon
eonduded, upon conditions very advantageous
to our emperor, wherewith I shall not trouble
the reader. There were six ambassadors,
with a train of about five hundred persons :
and their entry was very magnificent, suitable
to the grandeur of their master, and the im-
portance of their business. When their treaty
was finished, wherein I did them several good
offices by the credit I now had, or at least
appeared to have, at court, their excellencies,
who were privately told how much I had
t«.mauy iiiaae me a visit In form,
rith many compliments npon my
generosity, invited me to that
le emperor their master's name,
ne to show them some proofs of
s strength, of which they had
ly wonders; wherein I readily
, bnt shall not trouble the read-
urticalars.
1 for some time entertained their
to their infinite satisfaction and
esired they would do me the
sent my most humble respects
tr their master, the renown of
had so justly tilled the whole
niration, and whose royal pcr-
to attend, before I returned to
cry. Accordingly, the next
honour to see our emperor, I
neral licence to wait on the
onarch, which he was pleased
I could perceive, in a very
ut could not guess the reason,
isner from « — -
TO OtrUJTKK'* TRATIU.
iwtioB priding itself upon the uitiq'
■nd enerfj of tbeir otrn tongw
avowed coatempt of tbat of theii
yet Bar emperor, lUniling upoo th
hehmd got by tlie leizore of ttieir fl
then to delirer tfaeir credentiaU,
their ipeech, in the IJIliputimii ten
It matt bt confewed, tliat fron
ktercoorae of trade ind comioer
both Tealmi, from the continual
exiles which is mutual amon^f thei
the cnstotn, in each empire, to
young nobilitj and richer gentry t
In order to polish themselves bj
world, and understanding men an
there are few persons of distinct
diants, or seamen, who dwell in t
parts, bnl what can hold conveni
toDfuei ; as I found some weeks
I went to pay ray respects to the
BlefiiBca, which, in the midst of |
tones, through the malice of n
proved a very faappj adventure
fhaU relate in its proper place.
Hie reader may remember, tl
slgaed those articles upon which
■ij Uberty, there were some wUc
opon account of their being t«o ■
tter could any thing but an eitre:
hare fiirced me to submit. Bat
iiarAte of flie highest ranic in'
Mdi offices were looked upon i
dlgnlQr, and the emperor (to do
mmnr once menttonei ttwia Xn m
majesty, at least as I tlien thought
nal service. I was alarmed at
ith the cries of many hundred peo-
door; by which, being suddenly
was in some kind of terror. I
ord hurglum repeated incessantly :
he emperor's court, making their
;h the crowd, entreated me to
liately to the palace, where her
jesty's apartment was on fire, by
ness of a maid of honour, who feU
: she was readuig a romance. I
instant ; and orders being given
way before me, and it being like-
shine night, I made a shift to get
I without trampling on any of the
ouHd they had already applied
tie wails of the apartment, and
)rovided with buckets^ but tiie
t some distance. These budgets
thft «i« < » rt^ •»'*•- — •*•* "'''
ra
delicioai wine called glimigrim (tbe Bieftu-
cudians call it fiuiuc, but ours is eite«med
the b«(ter sort,) whicfa ia very dinrelic. B;
tbe luckiest chance in the wurld, I had tut
ditchariied myself of any port of it. The hot
1 had now contracted by coining very nesrlbe
BaiDCa, and by labouring to quench diem,
made the wine begin to operate by urinei
which I voided in sucbaquantity, and applied
BO well to the proper places, that in three
minati^s the lire was wholly extinguished, and
the rest of that noble pUe, which had cost so
many ages in erecting, preserved irom ds-
it wa.4 now day'liglit, and I returned to
my bouse without wiutin» to congratuiaU
witb tbe emperor ; becanae, altbougb 1 had
done a very eminent piece of aervice, yet 1
could not tell bow Ins miyesty niight resent
the manner by which I had perTonnedit: fat,
by the fundamental laws of the realm, Itii
capital in any person, of what quality aoeret,
to make water within tbe precincts -of the
palace. But 1 was a little comforted by a
message from his majesty,'that be woold
give orders to tbe grand justidaiy for paashlg
my pardon in form;'which, however, I could
not obtain; and I was privately UBsnred, that
the empress, conceiving the greatest idihw-
rence of what I bad done, removed to the
moat distant side of the coort, firmly rewired
that those buildings should never be repaired
Ar her use; and,in ttaepieMMKeof Yicid^iA
eaoMeaU, could notfotbeai < < omaiT < neB^.
CHAPTER IL
itants of Lilliput ; their learning,
cuiiomi ; tke manner of educating
Iren, Tke Author^s wuy 9f Hiring
mtry. His vindication ^ « ^m*
\
K .
\
1 intend to leave the description
e to a particular treatise, yet, ia
16, I am content to gratify the
;r witii some general ideas. As
size of tlie natives is somewhat
:hes high, so there i» an exact
all other animals, as well as
rees: for instance, the tallest
en are between foor and five |
bt, the sheep an inch and a half,
their geese about the bigness of V •
nd so the several graidations !^ •
in yon come to the smallest, g. S
Ight, were almost invisible ; bat
thu lopi whereof I muld bnt jait reidi wU
my list clenched. The othec vegeuble*w
in the same propartioo; bnt this I leant
the reader's iuiaipDatioD.
I (hall Bay but little at present of thd
learning, which, tor many B|;ea, hai floniiihcc
ip all it« br«Dche > unang them : bat tbei:
manner uf writiug is very pecniiar, being ntl
titer from the kit to the light, like the Eva
peans ; our from the right to the left, like [bi
ArahiauB ; nor from up to down, like lb
Chinese ; but aslant, from one comer of ik
pKper to the otiier, like ladies in England.
'i1iey bury their dead witli their head
directly do'.vnward, becauie they hold an opi
Dion, that in eleven thonsand moons they an
all M rise again ; in which period tlic cut
(which they conceive to be flat) will tor
upside down, and by this means they shall,!
their resurrection, be found ready standin
(m their feet. The ieamed among them CM
less the absordi^r of this doctrine; bnt th
practice still continaM, in compUaoce to tli
vnlgir.
There are some laws md eiutom* In tU
empire very pecntiar; and If tbey were k
to directly contrary to those of my own det
aiuntry, I should be tempted to my a little i
dieir jnstiGcation. It is only to be wlihe
tbey were a* well executed. The first
shall mention, relates to informei*. A
Grimes against the state, are punished bei
wjtb the ntmort severity *, hut, if the v^rta
■ooiued m akes hU hmoceuce fVunX^ to «n*
*M.FM I,
75
dy the accuser is immediately put
Inions death ; and out of his goods
e ioDocent person is quadruply
1 for the loss of his time, for the
nderwent, for the hardship of hii
it, and for all the charges he has
making his defence ; or, if that
dent, it is largely supplied by the
.e emperor also confers on him
mark of his favour, and procla-
de of his innocence through the
upon fraud as a greater crime
ad tlierefore seldom fail to pu-
Icath ; for they allege, that care
, Mrith a very common under-
f preserve a man's goods from
honesty has no fence agninst
ing; and since it is necessary
old be a perpetual intercourse
selling, and dealing upon cre-
.ud is permitted and connived
w to punish it. < *»«'• —'
T6 GULLIVJ
coounon answer, that different nationi bad
different custoins ; for, I confess, 1 nu
heartily Hfihamed.*
Altliougli wc ngaaliy call reward and po-
aisiiment tlie two hinges apoa wliicb all
government tarns, yet I could never obsene
Ihia maxim to be pnt in practice by any m-
tion, except that of Lilliput. Whoever cii
there bring aolticieDt prooT, that he bw tttkdj
observed the lawi of hii coDotry for wvea^-
three moona, has a daim to certain prtvilegei
according to his quality or condition of'Sk,
with a proportionable snm of money oat of ■
Aind appropriated for that om : Ue likewiM
aeqoirei the title otituUpaB, or legal, wtnd
b added to hla name, but doea not deKcnl b
U* posteri^. And the*e p«aple tbooght i
a prodi^ns defect of policy among ni, wbei
I told them that oar laws were aiforced obIi
by penalties, witlioat any mentian of reward
It is npoD this account that the image of Jni
tice, in their conrti of judicature, li tbimei
Witb six eyes, two before, a* many beUi > d
and on each side one, la signiiy circmnapec
tioD ; with a bag of gold open In ber ri^
hand, and a iwiiTd iheatbed in her left, t
•bew (be ij more dispowd to reward than t
punish.
In choosing persona (at all enploymeBti
the have more regard to good morals than t
great abilities; for, ^nice fovemnHnt I
htHub
.n« Viii

ion or other ; and that Pro-
tnded to make the manage-
fairs a mystery to be com-
y a few persons of bublime
bere seldom are three bom
ley suppose truth, justice,
the like, to be in every
practice of which virtues, *
ience and a good intention,
man for the service of his
vhere a course of study is >
hey tliought the want of
so far from being supplied
;vments of the mind, that
id never be put into such
IS those of persons so quali-
liat the mistakes committed
virtuous disposition, would
fatal consequence to the
e practices of a man, whose
n to be corrupt, and who
8 to manage, to multiply,
rnptions.
■ ]
• i
• ■ .i
76 OUIXITIR'S TRATBLt.
nal instltn'tioiig, and not the uMMit aaoMim
oorroptions, into whidi liiese people are ftUoi
by the degenerate nature of man. For, asts
that infamous practice of aoqoiring great cah
ployments by dancing on the ropes, «r badges'
of favour and dist & ction by leaping orer
sticks and creej^ng under them, tiie reader
is to obserYc, that they were first introdaeed
by the grandfather of the emperor nowfeigB-
iog, and grew to the present height by tiie
graidual increase of party and faction.
Ingratitude is among them a capital ertae,
as we read it to liave been in some otter
countries : for they reason thus ; that whoefo
makes ill returns to liis benefactor, must needs
be a common enemy to the rest of manUndi
from whom he has received no obligatioai
and tilierefore soch a man is not fit to live.
Their notions relating to the duties of par-
rents and children, differ extremely from oorfc
For, since the conjunction of male and fenale
b founded upon tiie great law of nature, ia
order to propagate and continue tlie spedes,
the lilliputians will needs have it, that men
and women are joined together, like olter
anunals, and by the motives of ooncupisoence;
and that their tenderness towards tbeiryong
proceeds from tiie like natural pffndple: finr
wMch reason, they will never allow tint a
diild is under any obligation to his firther for
begetting him, or to his mother for bringing
him into the world ; which, considering the
miseries of human life, was neither a benefit
ia itself, nor intended so b^ Yd & v*s«a\a >'^
u Upon these, vnd the lice
tir opinion ii, that parents ute
others to be tmsted with the
heir own children ; and there-
in every town pubUc nnrseries,
3nt8, except cottagers and la-
> liged to send their infants of
»e reared and educated, when
the age of twenty moons, at
ly are supposed to have some
lodMty. These schools are of
suited to different quahties,
3S. They have certain pro-
iled in preparing children for
»n of life as befits the rank of
and their own capadties, as
tions. I shall first say some-
ale nurseries, and then of the
s for males of noble or eminent
ided with grave and learned
their several deputies. The
i of the children are plain and
•tlendants, wbo are aged proportioniblj ti
win at Atty, pcTt'orm only tho moit uuiuiil
office*. They ve never Buffered to coDvine
tritli (ervanU, bul go together in (mallei m
greater amnbcrs to take their diveruaiu, lid
always in the presence of a professor, or Mc
«f tall deputies; ^thereby tbey avoid tbw
«arly bad impresuoiu of folly and vice, tc
whicb our children aie subject. Their pa-
rents are suffered to see them only twke ■
jear ) the visit is to laat bat an hour ; tbey in
allowed to kiss tbe child at meeting and put
lug; but a professor, who always standi'b]
on those occasions, will not suffer them S
whisper, or use any fondling expreisioni, tl
bring any presents of toys, sweetmeats, ■■ <
thelUne.
Tbe pension from each family fi > r tho «)»
cation end entertainment of a child, opa
failnre of due payment, is levied by the «■
peror's officers.
The nurseries for cfaildren of ordinary gn
tlemen, merchants, traders, and bandicrafb
are managed proportioDably after the un
manner; only those designed for trades ui
put out appren^ces at eleven yean oU
whereas those of persons of quality contiani
ill their exen^s till fifteen, which answw
to twenty-oue with ua: but the confioemen
is gradually lessened for the last three yean
In the female nurseries, the young girls
qnality are educated much like the males
fudy tbey are dressed b^ orderly servanu o
tbeirowD sex; but always \a4i«fT*wuw,i
or deputy, till they come to dress
which is at five years old. And
d that these nurses ever presume
the girls with frightful or foolish
Ae common follies practised by
lids among us, they are publicly
rice about the city, imprisoned for
banished for life to tiie most de»
»f the country. Thus the young
> are as much ashamed of being
1 fools, as the men, and despise
ornaments, beyond decency and
neither did I perceive any dif-
eir education made by their dif-
X, only tiliat the exerdses of the
not altogether so robust; and
les were given them relating to
and a smaller compass of leam-
led them: for their maxim is,
H > ple of quality, a wife should
easonable and agreeable oom«
e she cannot always be young.
» are twelve ve»»«'*'''- • *
The meaner families who have cMdrenat
these nursprie!!!, arc obliged, beside tbeir in-
nnal pension, nliidi t« > i low as possible, tn
retnrii to tite iteuard of the nursery a irnill
monthly shire of tlieir gcllinga, to be » por-
tion for tiie child ; and therefore all pirenti'
are limited in their expenses by the law. For
the Ullipntiaiia think nothing can be more
anjnst, than for people, in mbierviaMe Id
their own appetites, to bring children into the
iTOrld, and Irave the burthen of tnppMtfaig
tiiem on the public As to peraoni of qndity,
Uiey give lecnrily to appropriate a cerlita
•am ftr each chUd, mitable (o their condtliw;
and these fimd* are alwayi manaKed mth
(ood biubandry and themott exact jaatke.'
Tbe cottager! and labomren keep tlidr
duUren at home, tiieir bnaneu bdcf only ta
till and cultivate the eartii, and tfaer^ire
flieir edncation is of little eonseqoenee to tie
pnblic : bnt the old and diseased among diem,
are supported by hospitals ; for begging is a
trade unknown in this empire.
Atid here It may, perhaps, dirert Ae'cn-
rioos reader, to give seme account of my do-
meifics, and my,manner of living in diia eooa-
try, during a residence of nine looothi and
Alrteeit days. Having a head medianlcally
turned, and being likewise fbrcwl by neees-
*lty, I had made for hiyself a table and chair
COnTeitient enough, out of the largest trees in
tte royal park. Two hundred sempstresses
irere employed to indLe toe dAiU, • & & ^w^b
& rmv bed aiidtab\e.a)Vof Ok VB^mSH^*^
ey coald get; which, however,
d to quilt together in several
ickest was some degrees finer
leir linen is usually three in-
threc feet make a piece. The
)k my measure as I lay on the
iding at my neck, and another
nrith a strong cord extended,
> y the end, while a third mea-
I of the cord with a mle of an
en they measured my right
red no more ; for by a mathe-
ition, that twice round the
ound the wrist, and so on to
le waist, and by the help of
ich I displayed on the groimd
\ pattern, tiiey fitted me ex-
ndred tailors were employed
aer to make me clothes ; but
r contrivance for taking my
«led down, and they raised
e ground to my neck ; upon
f them mounted, and let fall
, , , _-»!
^ OULLIYBR's TRAVU.I.
my house, where they ind their families lived,
and prepared me two dishes a-piece. I took
up twenty waiters in my liand, and placed
them on the table : a hundred more attended
below on the ground, some with dishes of
meaty and some with barrels of wine and
other liquors slung on their shoulders; all
which the waiters above drew up, as I want-
ed, in a very ingenious manner by certain
cords, as we draw the bucket up a well in
Europe. A dish of their meat was a good
mouthful, and a barrel of their liquor a rea»
sonable draught. Their mutton yields to onra,
but their beef is excellent. I have had a
surloin so large, that I have been forced to
make three bits of it ; but this is rare. My
servants were astonished to see me eat it,
bones and all, as in our country we do the leg
of a lark. Their geese and turkeys I usoally
ate at a mouthful, and I confess they far ex-
ceed ours. Of their smaller fowl I could
take up twenty or thirty at the end of my
knife.
One day his imperial miyesty, being in-
formed of my way of living, desired'that
hiiQself and his royal consort, with the young
princes of the blood of both sexes, might have
the happiness,'as he was pleased to call it,
'of dining with me.* They came accordingly,
and I placed them in chairs of state, upon my
table, just over against me, with their guards
about them. Flunnap, the lord high trea-
surer, attended there likewise with his white
^iaffi ausd I observed he ofteu Uwked on
., but ate more than asoal, in
iear country, as well as to fill
idmiratioD. I have soine'pri-
» believe, that this visit from
e Flmmap an opportunity of
Bees to his master. That mi-
ays been my secret enemy,
ardly caressed me more than
he moroseness of his nature.
to the emperor * the low con-
;asary ; that he was forced to
at a great discount; that ex-
}uld not circulate under nine
fr par; that I had cost his
I million and a half of sprugt
;old coin, about the bigness of
upon the whole, that it would
I the emperor to take the first
dismissing me.'
Liged to vindicate the reputa^
ent lady, who was an innocent
^account. The treasurer took
ealous uf his wife, from the
80 CULLlVBR'l TRAVEU.
ever witfaont three more in the ctwdi, «bo
HEre nsually lier sister and young dsnghler,
and some particular acquain lance : hut tlili
-was commoD to many other ladies of the
cnnrt: and I still appeal to my lervanla
roiiiid, whether they il any time saw a coacli
at my door, without knowiu); what person!
were In it. On thoie occanlons, when a wr-
lant had giren me notice, iny custom wu t >
go immediately to the door; and, aiiter pajing
my respects, to take up the coach and two
hi > n(es very c & refiilly, in my hands (for, if
tiiere were six horses, the postillion alwiji
unharnessed four), and placed them on a
table, where I had fixed a moveable riia
quite round, of five inches high, to preveat
accidents; and I have often had four coaches
and horses at once on my table, full of com-
pany, while I sat in my chair, leaning my
lace towards them ; and when I was engaged
with one set, the coachmen wonid gently
drive the others round my table. I have
passed many an afternoon very agreeably lo
these conversations. But I defy the Irea-
sarer, or bis two infoimen (I will name flien,
and let them make the bestof it)ChistriI and
Dnulo, to prove that any person ever cane
to me incogttito, except the secretary Rel-
dresal, wbo was sect by express command ol
bis imperial majesty, as I have before related.
I should not have dwelt > o long upon thu
particular, if it had not been a ptrint wherein
the repatation of a gte«t AaA^ u w'bkuV'
hononr to be a nardacy which
imselt is not; for all the world
'" < > °'y a glumglum, a title
degree, as that of a marquis
England ; yet I allow he pre-
ght of his post These false
nich I aflterwards came to the
3y an accident not proper to
the treasurer show his lady
in ill countenance, and me a
iiough he was at last unde-
onciled to her, yet I lost all
I, and found my interest de-
ith the emperor liimself, who
> much governed by that fit-
lAPTER VII.
\g informed of a design to ac-
tbem, in lo reoHKe a gooiid;
tfaoDgbt, by vciy different ni
in Europe.
When I wtujwt preparing to p^M;at >
tenduice on the emperor of Btefiiicn, k coy-
■idcntble penoa M cotut (to whom I Iwd
been ler; serviceable, at a time when be f*j
under the higheit diapleaiare of hit imperial
mi^eity) came to my Imiih priiately at night,
in a cloae chair, and, wilfaont lending hii
name, deiired admittance. The cfaaiimcD
were diamiiied ; I put the chair, with lui
lordihip in it, into my coat pocket : maA, pt-
Ing orderi to a tnutf gerraiit, to aay I wai
indisposed and gone to sleep, I Fastened the
door of my house, placed the chair on tiie
table, according to my osnal custom, and sat
down bj it. After the common BtUntatioiis
were over, observing bis lordship's counte-
nance full of concern, and inquiring into the
reason, he desired'I would hear him with
patienee, in a matter that highly concerned
my honour and my life.'His spee < A was to
the following effect, for I took notes of it as
soon as be left me.
'You are to know,'said he,'fliat tCTeral
comnuttees of conndlbaTe been lately caUed,
In the most private mBOoer, on your aceoont ; .
and it is but two days since hii majesty came
to a full resolution.
'You are Tery sensible diat Bkjreah Bot-
gidim (falbel, or Ugh ftdrnlidL') ^nsXmca^fwa
nartMl eaemT. ■ImosteieidiMJi.TOn axnti^.
__ .«.wnMM X ioiow not; bnt hb ha-
icreased since yonr great success
lefuscu, by which his glory as admi-
:h obscured. This lord, in conjunc-
Flimnap the high-treasurer, whose
gainst vou is notorious on account of
Limtoc tlie general, Lalcon the
lin, and Balmuff the grand justicia-
prepared articles of impeachment
}u, for treason and other capital
eface made me so impatient, being
of my own merits and innocence,
is going to interrupt him ; when be
me to be silent, and thus proceeded.
'gratitude for the favours you have
I procured information of the whole
;s, and a copy of the articles;
venture my head for your service.
> F IMPEACHMENT Ar.Ai~«'
00 GUIXIVBR*S TRAVELS.
imperial consort, did mafidoosly, traitorously,
and devilishlyy by discharge of his arine, put
oat the said fire kindled in the said apart«
meot, lying and being within the precincts of
of the said royal palace, against the statute in
that case provided, etc. against the duty, etc.
Article II.
'That the said Quinbus Flestrin, having
brought the imperial fleet of Blefuscu into
the royal port, and being afterwards com-
manded by his imperial majesty to seize all
the other ships of the said empire of Blefuscu,
and reduce tliat empire to a province, to be
governed by a viceroy from hence, and to
destroy and put to death, not only all the
Big-endian exiles, but likewise all the people
of that empire who would not immediately
forsake the Big-endian heresy ; he, the said
Flestrin, like a false traitor against his most
auspicious, serene, imperial majesty, did pe-
tition to be excused from the said service,
upon pretence of unwillingness to force the
consciences, or destroy the liberties and lives
of an innocent people.*
Articlb ni.
'That, whereas certain ambassadors arrived
from the court of Blefuscu, to sue for peace
* A lawyer thinlu himself hojieft, if he does the l»esf
li« can for his client; and a statesman, if he promotes
the interest of his eoantry ; but the Dean here incnl-
catct a higher notion of right and wrongj and oblige-
Aroor |» a lugtr covflMutty.— il

se traitor, aid, abet, comfort,
e said ambassadors, althouf^h
to be servants to a prince'ffho
open enemy to his imperial
Q an open war against his said
Article IV.
id Qninbus Flestrin, contrary
a ^tfafol subject, is now pre-
e a voyage to the coort and
iscn, for which he has received
nee from his imperial majesty ;
3ar of the said licence, does
litoronsly intend to take the
d thereby to aid, comfort, and
ror of Blefuscn, so lately an
open war with his imperial
id.
ome other articles; but these
portant, of which I have read
thonsand men, arnieil with poisoned htdwi,
to ataoot you on the face and hands. Some
of your servants were to hue priyate orden
to atrew a poisonong jaice on your slurts and
(beets, nhicb wonld > Don make yon tear yom
own 0esb, and die in the Dtmoat torture. The
general came into the same opinion ; so that
for a loDg time there was a majority againil
you; but his majesty resolving, if poHsible, to
ipare your life, at laet brought off the cham-
berlain.
'Upon this Incident, Reldresal, prinrlpal
secretary for private affairs, who alwajra
approved himself your true friend, wai com-
manded by the emperor to deliver his opimoa,
wliich he accordingly did ; and therein joatl-
fied the good tbongbta yon have of him. Hs
allowed your crimes to be Rreat, bnt that still
there was room for mercy, tlie moit commend-
able virtue in a prince, and for wliicli his
majesty was bo justly celebrated. He said,
the friendship between you and him was to
well known to the world, that perbaps Hie
most honourable board might think him giar-
tial : however. In obedience to the conmnand
he had received, he would freely offer bis
■entiments. That if his majesty. In conaider-
atton of your senrices, and pursuant to Us
own mercifiil disposition, would pleaie to
spare yonr life, and only give orders to put
out both your eyes, he humbly conceived,
that by this expedient justice might in some
mrasurc be satislied, BndaUtiv«woi\ & w > i > M
bonour to be his counsellors,
your eyes would be no in.pe-
)odily strength, by which yoa
useful to his m^csty: that
addition to courage, by con-
from us: that the fear yoa
2S, was the greatest difficulty
T the enemy's 6ect; and it
snt for you to see by the eyes
, since the greatest princes do
ed was received with tiie ut-
ation by the whole board,
dmiral could not preserve hit
ing up in fury, said, he won-
secretary durst presume to
a for preserving the life of a
e services you had performed
le reasons of state, the great
your crimes; that you, who
nguish the fire by discharge of
isgesty's apartment (which he
1 horror,) might at another
in¥i/1o4-i/\n K«r 4Y1A oQvwiA moona
04 guluver's travels.
* The treasurer was of the same opiidoa*
he showed to what straits his majesty's reve-
nue was reduced, by the charge of maintaiu*
ingyou, which would soon grow insupportable:
that the secretary's expedient of puttmg out
your eyes, was so far from being a remedy
•gainst this evil, that it would probably in-
crease it, as is manifest from the common
practice of blinding some kind of fowls, after
which they fed the faster, and grew the
sooner fat ; that his sacred majesty and the
council, who are your judges, were, in their
own consciences, fully convinced of your guilt,
which was a sufficient argument to condemn
you to death, without the formal proofs re-
quired by the strict letter of the law.*
* But his imperial majesty, fully determined
against capital punishment, was graciously
pleased to say, that since the cooncil thought
the loss of your eyes too easy a censure, some
other way may be inflicted hereafter. And
your friend tiie secretary, humbly desiring to
be heard again, in answer to what tiie trea-
surer had objected, concerning the great
charge his majesty was at in maintaining yon,
* There is sometbing so odiossin whutever It wrong,
that even those whom it does not snbJAct to ponislimcntt
endeavour to colour it with an appearance of Vigbt;
bntlhe attempt is always nnsucceestal, and only betrays,
a ronscionsuess of deformity by showinf a Oesire to
hide it. Thus the JLiUiputian conrt pretended a right
to dispense with the strict letter of the Law to pat
Oalliver to death, though by the strict leUer of the law
only be could be convicted of a ct\me \ \Vi«\»vaw!yM»
of tie itatute not belnt; to Mffer l\»« pai»c« \as:b«K Vk\A
borni than pined apon.- > H*
excellency, who had the sole
;lie emperor's revenue, might
; against that evil, by gradually
r establishment j by i\-hich, for
ient food, you Diill grow weak
lose your appetite, and consume
'js ; neither would the stench of
be tlieu so dangerous, when it
e more than half duninished;
'\y upon your death five or six
is majesty's subjects might, iu
days, cut your flesh from your
away by cart-loads, and bury
rts to prevent infection, leaving
1 a monument of admiration to
e great friendship of the secre-
e affair was compromised. It
ujoined, that the project of
'degrees should be kept a se-
sentence of putting out your
red on the books; none dit-
t Bolgolam the admiral, who.
96 GULUTERS* RAVELS.
condemned to the loss of your eyes, yhAch
his majesty does not question yon will grate-
folly and hnmbly sabmit to ; and twenty of
fais majesty's surgeons will attend, in order to
see the operation well performed, by dis-
diarging very sharp pointed arrows into the
balls of your eyes, as you lie on the ground.
I leave to your prudence what measures
you will take ; and to avoid suspicion, I nmst
immediately return in as private a manner
as I came.'
His Lordship did so, and I remained alone,
nnder many doubts and perplexities of mind.
It was a custom introduced by tlds prince
and his ministry (very different, as I have
been assured, from the practice of former
times), that after the court had decreed any
cruel execution, either to gratify the monarch's
resentment, or the malice of a favourite, the
emperor always made a speech to his whole
council, expressing his great lenity and ten-
derness, as qualities known and confessed by
all the world. This speech was immediately
published throughout the kingdom ; nor did
any thing terrify the people so much, as tiiose
encomiums on his majesty's mercy ; becaase
it was observed, that the more these pndf es
were enlarged and insisted on, the more inhn-
man was the punishment, and the sufferer
more innocent. Yet as to myself, I most
confess, having never been designed for a
courtier, either by my birtili or education, I
was so ill a judge of things, that I could not
discover ^e lenity and favour of this sen-
conceived it (perhaps erroneoosly)
! > e rigorous than gentle. I some-
iight of standing my trial ; for, al-
could not deny the facts aUcged
;ral articles, yet I hoped tiiey Would
K)me extenuation. But having In
srused many state trials, which I
»rved to terminate as tlie judges
it to direct, I dnrst not rely on so
a decision, in so critical a juncture,
•t such powerful enemies. Once I
ly bent upon resistance : for, while
ty, the whole strength of that em-
hardly subdue me, and I might
stones pelt the metropolis to
I soon rejected tiiat project with
emembering the oath I had made
ror, the favours I received from
e high title of nardac he confer-
Neither had I so soon learned
of courtiers, to persuade myself,
sty's present severities acquittpH
tfv n1 ■ tfw«» ^ 4W» «
Q8
easy a paaishment. But harried on bySie
predpitaocy of yontli, and bHving hu impC'
rial majFiity's licence to pay my attendBUX
npon tlie emperor of Blefuscn, I took lliii op-
portunity, before the Uuee days were elspsed, i
to Bend a letter to my friend the secretary, I
Bignifyiag my reaolutioo of setting out tLit |
morning for Bteftucu, poreuant to the leave
I bad got; and, without waiting for an ui-
swer, I went to that aide of tlie island nhere
our licet lay. 1 seized a kurge aiaa of lur,
tied a cable to the prow, and, lining op the
andiors, I stripped myself, put my doAa
(tt^ether with my coverlet, whicli I eanied
tinder my arm) into the Tcssel, aiid drawing
it after me, between wading and iwiDumng
arrived at the port of Blefuicn, where the
the people had long expected me : they lent
me two guides to direct me to the capital at],
which is of the same name. I held tiiem in
my hands, till I came within two hundred
yards of the gate, and desired tliem'lo ug-
nify my arrival to one of the secretuiet, and
let him know, I there waited hli In^iMty'l
cotDmand.'I bad an answer in abont an
hour,'that liis majes^, attended bj the n^sl
family, and great officers c^ the omrt, was
Doming out to receive me.'I wIvatKed a
hundred yards. The «mperwand hit train
alighted from ihdr borses, the enprcn hh]
ladies from tbeir coaches, and 1 did not per-
ceive they were in a fnght m* ooncem. I lay
on the ground to klu lui maje & tj'a and the
empress's hands. lto\d bia ma.juA.';,'bi!i\
oordiiig to my promise, and with
f the emperor my master, to have
seeing so mighty a monarch, and
my service in my power, consist-
'duty to my own prince ;* not
I word of my disgrace, becaose I
x > no regular information of it^
ppose myself wholy ignorant of
ign ; neither coold I reasonably
the emperor would discoTer the
[ was out of his power ; wherdn^
ran appeared I was deceived.
trouble the reader with the par-
t of my reception at tins court,
itable to the generosity of so
; nor of the difficulties I was
a house and bed, being forced
'ound, wrapped up in^ my co-
HAPTER Vin.
, T.
too GULUTBR*! TRATBLS.
boat, which I snppoted mSght by some toi-
pest have been driven from a ship : where-
upon I returned immediately towards the
dty, and desired his imperial majesty to lend
me twenty of the tallest vessels he had left,
after the loss of his fleet, and three tiionsand
men, under the command of his vice-admiral.
This fleet sailed round, while I went bade flu;
shortest way to the coast, where I first dis-
covered tiie boat. I fonnd the tide had
driven it still nearer. The seamen were all
provided vrith cordage, whidi I had before-
hand twisted to a sufficient strength. When
the ships came np, I stripped myself, and
waded till I came within a hundred yards of
the boat, after which I was fbrced to swim
till I got up to it. The seamen threw me the
end of the cord, whidi I fastened to a hole
in the fore-part of the boat, and the other
end to a man of war ; but I found all my la-
hour to little purpose ; for, being out of my
depth, I was not able to work.- In this ne-
cessity I was forced to svrim behind, and
push tiie boat forward, as oflen as I could,
with one of my hands ; and tiie tide favonr-
ing me, I advanced so far tiiat I could just
hold up my chin and feel the ground. I rested
two or three minutes, and then gave tiie boat
another shove, and so on, till the sea was no
higher than my arm pits ; and now the most
laborious part being over, I took out my other
cables, which were stowed in one of the ships,
and fiistened tliem first to the bo«k.t, v & d th«a
to nine otthe vessels whVGh aUendedisft \ ^
we arrived within forty
and waiting till the tide •
y to the boat, and by tlie
housand men, with ropes
le a shift to turn it on its
it was but little damaged.
ble the reader with the
der, by the help of certain
t me ten days making, to
e royal port of Bleftiscu,
worse of people appeared
11 of wonder at tiie sight
;8sel. I told the emperor
le had thrown this boat in
! to some place whence I
ny native country; and
orders for getting ma-
)gether with his licence
\er some kind exposta*
ed to grant.
'onder, in all this time,
f any express relating to
to the court of Blefnscn.

iOS GULLIVERS TRATBLt.
at oar conrt, and woald return in a few dqfi
wben the ceremony was ended. Bat he wi
at last in pain at my long absence ; and afte
consulting with the treasurer and the rest <
that cabsd, a person of quality was dlspatche
with the copy or the articles against m
This envoy had instructions to represent t
the monarch of Blefuscu, * the great lenity i
his master, who was content to punish me i
further than with the loss of mine eyes ; tb
I had fled from justice ; and if I did not n
turn in two hours, I should be depriyed <
my title of nardac, and declared a traito
The envoy further added,'that in order 1
maintain the peace and amity between bo(
empires, his master expected that his broth <
of Blefdscu would give orders to have o
sent back to lilliput, bound hand and fi»o
to be punished as a traitor.'
The emperor of Blefuscu, having take
three days to consult, returned an answi
consisting of many civilities and excuses. B
said,'that as for sending me bound, his bn
ther knew it was impossible ; that althou^
had deprived him of his fleet, yet he owe
great obligations to me for many good ofBoi
I had done him in making the peace. Tha
however, both their m^iesties would soon I
made easy ; for I had found a prodigious ve
sel on the diore, able to carry me ol the wen
which he had given orders to fit up, with n
own assistance and direction ; and he hopei
in a few weeks, both empires would be fyet
from so insuppoTtaible aikiafi»ss\^t«iiRfeC
M.W Auuiuurcii or isietiucii re*
me all tbat had passed ; offering
i same time (but under the strict-
ience) his gracious protection, if
continue in his service ; wherein
I believed him sincere, yet I re-
!ver more to put any confidence in
- ministers, where I could possibly
and therefore with all due acknow-
i for his favourable intentions, I
igged to be excused. I told him,
e fortune, whether good or evil, had
/essel in my way, I was resolved to
yself on the ocean, rather than be
•n of difference between two socb
marchs.'Neither did I find the
t all displeased ; and I discovered
A accident, that he was very glad
> lutiou, and so were most of his
onsiderations moved me to hasten
ire somewhat sooner than I intend-
ch the court, hnpatient to have me
readily contribati»d. FS*'« *•- " •
IM'StILLIVBa'l
of three IiDtidred caws, for greasing i
and other nsca. 1 was at incredible
catting dawn some of the largest timb
for oars and masts, wherein I was, 1:
much ai^ted by his mtgesty'a Blii[
ten, who helped me in smoothing thi
I had done the rough work.
(d abont a maatfa, when all was p
I lent to receive lus m^jesty'i co
and to take my leave. The emp
royal family came out of the palw
down on my face to kiss his bond,
very gmdoosly gave me : so did the
and yonng princes of the biood. H
ly presented me with fifty purses of
dred tpragt a-piece, together with h
at fall length, which I pnt inunedia
one of my gloves, to keep it from be
The ceremonies at my departure
iiany to tioubie the reader with at !
I stored the boat with the cara
hundred osen, and tliree hundred sb
jread and drink proportionable, ani
meat ready dressed aa foiir hundi
conld provide. I took witii me aix i
two balls alive, with as many ewes i
intending to carry them into my own
and propagate the breed ; and to fi
on board, I had a good bundle of hi
bag of com. I wonld gladly have
doien of the natives, but this was a
emperor would by no means peri
beddes a diligent search into my po <
ai^ietty engaged my honomi'wA
AV«f
nbjects, although with their
desire.*
'cparcd all tilings as well as
t sail on the twenty-fourth
r 1701, at six in the mom-
had gone about four leagneB
1, the wind being at soudi* - i
eYening, I descried a sroaU. , i
■ a league to the north-west. I
xd, and cast anchor on the
sland, which seemed to be
hen took some refreshment,
38t. I slept well, and as I
t six hours, for I found the
hours after I awaked. It
I ate my breakfast before
and heavmg anchor, the
*able, I steered the same
Dne the day before, where-
y my pocket compass. My
each, if possible, one of
. I had reason to believe
t of Van Dieman's Lan'i
ooeipGCled hope of once more eeeing .
belaveil country, and the tlear pledges 1 left
in it. Tbc sbtp Blackened her sails, and I
came np with ber Ijetween five and six in Oa
evening, September SQ; but my heart leap-
ed within me to see her English colours. I |
pBt my cows and sheep into my coat-pocttt,
and f;ot on board with all my little Qugo of |
provieiuns. The vessel was an English mer-
chantman, returning from Japan bj the
North uud Soulli teas ; the captain, Mr. John
Biddel of Deptford, a very civU man, and ai
excelleat sailor. We were now In the Isti-
tsde of 30 degreei wrath; there were alMHit
fifty men in the sliip; and bere I me: u > old
comrade of mine, one Peter Williams, who
gave me a good character to tbe captain,
ndi gentleman treated me vrith kindneis,
ud desired I would let Mm know what place
I came from last, and whither I was Iraond ;
which I did in a few words, bot he thooghtl
was raving, and that the dangers I had ondet-
went* had disturbed my head ; whereupon I
took my black cattle and sheep ont oiF my
pocket, which, after great agtoi^liment,
clearly convinced himof myve'rad^. IHien
diowed him the gold given me by the empe-
ror of Blefuscn, together with Ui miyesty's
picture at fnll length, and M«ne odier rarities
of that country. I gave him two pnrses of
'twohaudred ipruffi each, and protMsed, when
■'I kid BBderncnt,'ti not EacUA ; II ilnalil km
n England, to make a present of
sheep big with young,
t tronbie the reader with a parti-
it of tills voyage, which was very
for» the most part. We arrived
IS on tlie 13th of April, 1702. I ,
le misfortune, that the rata on'l'\
d away one of my sheep ; I fonud ,- )
I a hole, picked clean from the .]
rest of my cattle I got safe ashore,
1 a grazing in a bowling-green at
where the fineness of the grass j
*eed very heartily, though I had
'.d the contrary : neither could I ] "
e preserved them in so long a i;^
lie captain had not allowed me
best biscuit, which rubbed to'*
mingled with water, was their
I. , The short time I continued
I made a considerable profit by \i
attle to many persons of quality hi .:
and before I began my second 1: .;
i them for six hundred pounds.
1
f ■'■
„^A. « /•
108 Gulliver's travels.
witli mc, part in money and part in goods, in
hopes to improve my fortunes. My eldest
uncle Joim had left me an estate in land,
near Epping, of about thirty poimds a year ;
and I had a long lease of the Black Bull in
Fetter-Lane, which yielded me as mudi more;
80 that I was not in any danger of leaving my
iamily upon the parish. My son Johnny
named so after his uncle, was at tlie gram-
mar-school, and a towardly child. My daugh-
ter Betty (who is now well married, and has
children) was then at her needlework. I
took leave of my wife, and boy and girl, witii
tearb on both sides, and went on board the
Adventure, a mercliant-ship of three hundred
tons, bound for Surat, Captain John Nicho-
las, of Liverpool, conmiander. But my
aecount of this voyage must be referred to
the lecond part of my traveli
GE TO BROBDINGNAG.
PART II,
CHAPTER I.
orm described; the tang boat sent U
Iter; the Author goes with it to discover
try» Be is te/t on shore, is seized bw
he natives, and carried to a farmer's
His reception^ with several accidents
'tpened there. fA description of ike
bcen^ condemned, by nature and
> active and restless Iif«»;^ in two
ter my return, I again left my na-
^10 GULLIVER^ TRikTBLS.
We then set sail, and had a good voyage ti &
we passed the Straits of Madagascar; bst
having got northward of that island, and to
about five degrees south latitude, the winds,
which in those seas are observed to blow a
constant equal gale between the north and
west, from the beginning of December to the
beginning of May, on the 10th of April began
to blow with much greater yiolence, and more
westerly than usual, continuing so for twenty
days together : during which tune, we were
driven a little to the east of the Mohioca
Islands, and about three degrees northward
of the line, as our captam found by an obser-
vation he took the 2d of May, at which time
the ¥rind ceased, and it was a perfect cahn,
whereat I was not a little rejoiced. Bat he,
being a man well experienced in the naviga-
tion of those seas, bid us all prepare agauist a
storm, which accordingly happened the day
followmg: for the southern wind, called the
southern monsoon, began to set in.
Finding it was like to overblow, we took
in our sprit-sail, and stood by to hand the
fore-sail ; but, making foul weatiier, we looked
the guns were all fast, and handed the mizea.
The ship lay very broad off, so we thought it
better spooning before the sea, than trying
or hulling. We reefed the fore-sail and set
him, and hauled aft the fore-sheet ; the helm
was hard a- weather. The ship wore bravely.
We belayed the fore down-haul ; but the sail
was split, and we hanUd doviu t^^ ^^d.^ «ud
got the aaH into the sYw^ > aM\iB & )Q > iai^^^
'^ge and dangerous. We
the laniard of tlie whip-staff
" «n at the helm. Welo^'
added before the sea ver4
^w that tte top-mast, ^
n tte Storm was over, we
I* * *e °^en. main-top.
5-top-saU. Our coarse wis
he w.nd was at sonth-west
oard tacks aboard, we ^t
bn.cesandufts;;eLn„
nd hauled forward by the
'■ " < • •«n'ed them tieht
, and hauled over the miien
|,^a^ kept her full and by
™, which was followed by
t-south-west, we were «.■•.
. J
lis DDLLITER ( TRATILI.
On tfie lOth day of Jane, 170), a bo; h
the top-mast diKovercil land. On tbe ITtt,
we came in fall view of a ^BtulBiid,orcai-
tinent (for we knew not whether)i on Ik
south side whereof was a small neck of Uw
jutting ont into the aea, and a creek too Ad
low to hold a ihip of above one hundred inoi
We cast anchor witMo a leagne of tbii crcA
and our captain lent a dozen of his men wd
armed in tbe long-boat, with Tesaele for witel
if Hoy eonld be fonud. I deeired hisleatet
go with thein,t]iatl might lee tbe conn try, (•
make what discoveriea I could. When w
came to land, we saw no riter or spring, w
any ^gn of inhabitants. Oar men therelbi
wandered on the shore to find ont some & «
water near the sea, and I walked alone abM
a mile on the other side, where I obsem
the country all barren and rocky. I nv
began to be weary, and seeing Dottiing I
entertain my curosity, I retnrned gently dow
tnwarda the creek; and the sea being AUI i
my view, I saw our men already got into tt
boat, and rowing for life to the ship. I m
going to holla afler them, although it ha
been to little purpose, when I observed
hnge creatnre waUdDg after tbem in the mi
as fast as he cooldi he waded not mot
deeper than his knees, and took prodigioi
strides : bnt our men had the start of him ha
a leagne, and, the sea thereabonta being fti
of «hHrp-painted rocks, tbe monster was m
« & le b > overtake the boat. Ttte I -wu aftK
irarda told, for I dmal wA »^'S to «* " i
. ...J JL uM9% weoty and then cliipbed
ep hUl, which gave me some prospect
ountry. I found it fully cultivated ;
t which fii*8t surprised me was the
f the grass, which, in those groundi
med to be kept for hay, was aboat
feet high.
into a high road, for so I took it to
gh it served to the inhabitants only
-path throogh a field of barley. Here
1 on for some time, but could see lit-
ther side, it being now near harvest,
com rising at least forty feet. I was
walking to the end of this field, which
»d in with a hedge of at least one
and twenty feet high, and the trees
tliat J could make no computation of
Itude. There was a stile to pass
field into the next. It had four
1 a stone to cross over when yon
the uppermost. It was impossible
climb this stile, because every step
et high, and the upper stone aboat
114 gulliybr'b traybls.
bim at tiie top of Hie stHe lookiog back nito
the next field on the right hand, and hetfd
Um call in a voiGe many degrees looder than
a speaking- tmmpet; bnt the noise was so
high in the air, that at first I certainly thooght
it was thunder. Whereapon seyen monsten,
like himself, came towards him with reaping-
hooks in their hands, each hook aboot the
largeness of six scythes. These people were
not so well dad as the first, whose seryanti
or labourers they seemed to be ; for, npon
some words he spoke, they went to reap the
com in the field where I lay. I kept firon
them at as great a distance as I conM, bit
was forced to moye with extreme difi & calty,
for the stalks of the com were sometimes not
above a foot distant, so that I could hardly
squeeze my body betwixt them. Howeyer I
made a shift to go forward, till I came to a part
of the field where the corn had been laid by
the rain and wind. Here it was impossible fiur
me to advance a step : for the stalks were so in-
terwoven, that I could not creep through, and
the beards of the fallen ears so strong and
pointed, that they pierced through my clothes
into my flesh. At the same time I heard the
reapers not above a hundred yards behind
me. Being quite dispirited with toil, and
wholly overcome by grief and despair, I lay
down between two ridges, and heartily wish-
ed I might there end my days. I bemoaned
my desolate widow and fatherless children.
I lamented my own folly and wilfulness, in
MUempting a second No^^a^e, v^i^vjaiax ^^^
Jikingof Lilliput, whose inhabitauts
on me as the greatest prodigy that
tared in the world; where I was
raw an imperial fleet iu my hand,
rm those other actions, which will
;d for ever in the chronicles of that
rhile posterity shall hardly believe
longh attested by millions. I re-
lat a mortification it mnst prove to
)ear as inconsiderable in this nation,
gle Lilliputian would be among on.
I conceived was to be the least of
tunes ; for, as human creatures are
to be more savage and cruel in
1 to their bulk, what could I expect
: a morsel in the mouth of the first
!se enormous barbarians that should
> seize me? Undoubtedly philoso-
in the right, when they tell us fiiat
. great or httle otherwise than by
n. It might have pleased fortmie,
it the Lilliputians find some nation,
i people were as diminutive with
116 GCLLIYER** TRAVELS.
apprehend that with the next step I ihould
be squashed to death under his foot, or cut
In two with his reaping-hook. And therefore,
when he was again about to move, I scream-
ed as loud as fear could make me : whereupon
the huge creature trod short, and, looking
round about under him for some time, at last
espied me as I lay on the ground. He con-
•idered awhile^ with the caution of one who
endeavours to lay hold on a small dangerous
animal in such a manner that it shall not be
able either to scratch or bite him, as I myself
have sometimes done witli a weasel in £a-
gland. At length he ventured to take rae
behind, by the middle, between his fore-finger
and thumb, and brought me within three
yards of his eyes, that hs might behold my
shape more perfectly. I guessed his meaning^
and my good fortune gave me so much pre-
sence of mind, that I resolved not to struggle
in the least as he held me in the air above
sixty feet from the ground, although he griev-
ously pinched my sides, for fear I should slip
through his fingers. All I ventured was to
raise mine eyes towards the sun, and place
my hands together in a supplicating posture,
and to speak some words in an humble me-
lancholy tone, suitable to the condition I then
was in: for I apprehended every moment
that he would dash me against the ground,
as we usually do any little hateful ammal,
which we have a mind to destroy.* But my
* Oar inattm^oB to t\i« feVVelt^ of tt«R«iHvc IwiD^
aoerelv bcciuM Uiey we ua«\i, V« ^t« twct^i^i v &
voice and gestures, and bc-
m we, as a curiosity, much
car mc pronounce articulate
ic could not undtM'Stanil tlicm.
le I was not able to tbrbcar
adding tearK, and turning niy
r sides ; letting him know, as
, how cruelly I was hurt by
his thumb and finger. He
hend my meaning ; for, lift-
t of his coat, he put mc gent-
imediately ran along witli mc
ho was a substantial farmer,
erson I had first seen in the
iving (as I suppose by their
ich an account of me as his
ive him, took a piece of a
out the size of a walking-
vith lifted up tlie lappets of
it seems he tliought to bo
Bering that nature had given
ny hairs aside to take a bet-
118 OULLIYBR^S TRAVELS.
all fours, but I got immediately op, and
walked slowly backward and forward, to let
those people see I had no intent to nm awty.
They all sat down in a circle about me, the
better to observe my motions. I pnll^ off
my hat, and made a low bow towards the
fairmer. I fell on my knees, and lifted ap mj
bauds and eyes, and spoke several words m
load as I could : I took a purse of gold < Mt
of my pocket, and humbly presented ittp
him. He received it on the palm of his hand,
then applied it close to his eye to see whit
it was, and afterwards turned it several times
vnth the point of a pin (which he took out of
his sleeve,) but could make nothing of it
Whereupon I made a sign that he shoold
place his hand on the ground. I then took
the purse, and, opening it, poured all the
gold into his palm. There were six Spanish
pieces of four pistoles each, beside twenty
or thirty smaller coins. I saw him wet the
tip of his little finger upon his tongue, and
and take up one of my largest pieces, and
then another ; but he seemed to be wholly
Ignorant what they were. He made me a
sign to put them again into my purse, and
the purse again into my pocket, which, afker
offering it to him several times, I thought it
best to do.
The farmer, by this time, was convinced I
must be a rational creature. He spoke often
to me ; but the sound of his voice pierced my
ears lU^e that of a wateT-nuW^ ^«1\a & nrw^
were articulate cnou^. \ asiarw^c^^w^Voni
He then sent his servants to
and taking bis handkerchief out
& ei, he doubled and spread it on
ad, which he placed flat on the
h the palm upward, making me a
p into it, as I could easily do, for
.bove a foot in thickness. I thought
to obey, and, for fear of iallingy
* at full length upon the handker-
the remainder of which he lapped
be head for further security, and
ner carried me home to his house.
»]led his wife, and showed me to
le screamed and ran back, as wo-
gland do at the sight of a toad or
However, when she had awhile
haviour, and how well I observed
ler husband made, she was soop
and by degrees grew extremely
e.
)ont twelve at noon, and a servant
dinner. It was only one snbstan-
'meat (fit for the plain conditioD
120 CULLfTSR'8 TRAYBLS.
edficc, for fear of falling. The wi^ minced t
bit of meat, then crumbled some bread on a
trencher, and placed it before me. I made
her a low bow, took out my knife and fork,
and fell to eat, which gave them exceeding
delight. The mistress sent her maid for t
onali dram cnp, which held aboat two gal*
lonSy and filled it with drink ; I took up the
Tessel with much difficulty in botii hands, and
in a most respectful manner drank to her
ladyship's healdi, expressing the words as loud
as I could in English, which made the com-
pany laugh so heartily, that I was abnost
deafened with the noise. This liqoor tasted
like a small cider and was not unpleasant
Then the master made me a dgn to come ta
his trencher side; but as I walked on the
table, being in great surprise all the time, as
the indulgent reader will easily conceive and
excuse, I happened to stumble against a
crust, and fell flat on my face, but received
no hurt. I got up immediately, and observhig
the good people to be in much concern, I took
my hat (whidi I held under my am^ out oC
good manners), and waving it over my head,
made three huzzas, to show I had got no mis-
chief by my fall. But advancing forward
towards my master (as I shall henceforth
call him), his youngest son who sat next to
him, an arch boy of about ten years old, took
me up by the legs, and held me so high in
the air, that I trembled every limb : but his
father snatched me from him, and at the
Muna time gave Inm «Qc^a.\»ox.QA. tbftUft

)m tiie table. Bat being afraid the
it owe me a spite, and well remem-
ow mischievous all children among
illy are to sparrows, rabbits, young
md puppy-dogs, I fell on my knees,
Ling to the boy, made my master to
ad, as well as I could, that I ^e-
son might be pardoned. The father
, and the lad took his seat agaiOf
m I went to him, and kissed his hand,
'master took, and made him stroke
^ with it.
midst of dinner, my mistress's fa-
it leaped into her lap. I heard a
Ind me like that of a dozen stocking-
at work ; and turning my head, I
proceeded from the purring of tiiat
?ho seemed to be three times larger
X, as I computed by the view of her
one of her paws, while her mistress
ing and stroking her: The iierce-
Is creature's countenance altogether
)ed me ; though I stood at the fur-
I2S OULUVER*S TRAVELS.
before a fierce anunaly is a certain way ti
Hiake it panae or attack yoa, so I resolved
in this dangerous jimcturey to show no man
ner of concern. I walked witli intrepidit
^ye or six times before the very head of tb
cat, and came within half a yard of her
whereupon she drew herself back, as if sh
were more afraid of me : I had less appn
hension concerning the dogs, whereof thre
or four came into the room as it is usual i
farmers'houses ; one of which was a masdf
equal in bulk to four elephants, and a grej
hound, somewhat taller than the mastiff, bic
not so large.
When dinner was almost done, the nan
came in with a child of a year old in her arm
who immediately spied me, and began
squall that you might have heard from Loi
don-Bridge to Chelsea, after the usual oratoi
of infants, to get me for a plaything. H
mother, out of pure indulgence, took me u|
and put me towards the child, who present!
seized me by the middle, and got me into h
mouth, where I roared so loud tiiat the urchi
was flighted, and let me drop, and I should u
fallibly have broke my neck, iif the mother ha
not held her apron under me. The nurse, 1
quiet her babe made use of a rattle, which wi
a kind of hollow vessel filled with great atom
and fastened by a cable to the diild'a waist
but all in vain ; so that she was forced to app]
the last remedy by giving it suck. I nnt
confess no object ever disgusted me so moc
JM liie si^t of hei moii«txwia\st«uX«'^riV & ii3a
id coloar. It stood prominent six
coald not be less dian sixteen in
ence. Tlie nipple was about half
ss of my head, and the hne both of
the dug, 80 varied with spots, pirn-
freckles, that nothing could appear
seons : for I had a near sight of her,
I down, the more conveniently to
^ and I standing on the table. This
reflect upon the fair skins of our Eng*
s, who appear so beautifiil to us,
luse they are of our own size, and
tcts not to be seen but through a
ig glass ; where we find by experi-
t tiie smoothest and whitest skins
h, and coarse, and ill-coloured,
tmber when I was at lilliput, the
»ns of those diminutive people ap-
• me the fairest in the world ; and
pon this subject with a person of
liere, who was an intimate friend of
said that my face appeared nmch
1 smoother when he looked on me
124 OULLITBR's TBATBU.
say for myself, that I am as fair as most of
my sex and country, and very little son-borot
by all my travels. On the other side, dis-
coursing of the ladies in that emperor's court,
he used to tell me,'one had ft-eckles, another
too wide a mouth, a third too large a nose;'
nothing of which I was able to distinguish.
I confess this reflection was obvions enough;
which, however, I could not forbear, lest the
reader might think those vast creatures were
actually deformed : for I must do them the
justice to say, they are a comely race of peo-
ple ; and particularly the features of my
master's countenance, although he were but
a farmer, when I beheld hun from the height of
sixty feet, appeared very well proportioned.
When dinner was done, my master went
out to his labourers, and, as I could discovei
by his voice and gesture, gave his wife a
strict charge to take care of me. I was very
much tired, and disposed to sleep, which my
mistress perceiving she put me on her own
bed, and covered me with a dean white
handkerchief, but larger and coarser than
She main-sail of a man ot war.
I slept about two hours, and dreamt I was
at home with my wife and children, which
aggravated my sorrows when I awaked* and
found myself alone in a vast room, between
two and three hundred feet wide, and above
two hundred'high, lying in a bed twenty
* This ooghl to have been * ;iwokc/ the preterit of
the verb neuter, not'uwaked/ tide pT«tovv\,u€ Uic verb
setive.-'S.
taral necessities required me to get
L durst not presume to call ; and it'I
rould have been in vain, witli such
as mine, at so great a distance as
; room where I lay to the kitchen
le family kept*. While I was under
rcumstances, two rats crept up the
f and ran smelling backwards and
8 on the bed. One of them came up
to my face, whereupon I rose in a
EUid drew out my hanger, to defend
These horrible animals had the
8 to attack me on both sides, and one
held his fore feet at my collar ; but
16 good fortune to rip up Iiis belly,
he could do me any mischief. He
m at my feet ; and the other, seeing
! of his comrade, made his escape, but
lioat one good wound on the back,
gave him as he fled, and made the
in trickling from him. After this ex-
walked gently to and fro on the bed,
> ver my breath and loss of spirits.
-J»
n inch ; bat it went
Mj^'i* " ^ to drag the carcase off
» ^i^^S^et wme life, but with a stronj
ii^Ln the neck, I tliorougbly dit-
f^^Mtter my mUtrew came into the room,
'l^lDK me all bloody, ran and took me
^ ter bind. I pointed to the dead lat,
if^ and making other dgos to show I
^M not hart ; whereat she was c^tremeljr
Mfolccd, calling the maid to take up tlie dead
l < itiritb a pair of tonga, and throw itoutof Ihc
trindoir. Then xhc »ct me on a table, where
I showed her my hanger all bloody, and
wipuig it on the lappet of my coat, returned
il to tfae icabbard. I waa pressed to do
more than one tliinf; wbich anotlicr could uot
do for me, and therefore cndeavoorcd to
make my mistress understand, that I desired
to lie set down on the floor ; which after she
liad done, my bashfulneas would not suffer me
to express myself farther, than by painting
to the door, and bowing several times. Tlie
good woman, with much diJScull^, at Inst pvr-
ceived what I would be at, and taking me
Dp in her hand, walked into the garden,
where she act me down. I went ou one »Me
about- two hundred yards, and beckoning lo
her not to look or to follow nie, I hid myself
between two leaves of sorrel, and there ilis-
chargcd the nccesuties of nature.
I liope Uie gentle reader will excuse mo
'ill'divcltiug un thc & c and U\c1iJLef«i'acL < iiaM,
agination, and apply them to tlie beue-
public as well as private life, which
f sole design in presenting this, and
iccounts of my travels, to the world;
a I have been chiefly studious of truth,
t affecting any ornaments of learning
yle. But the whole scene of this voy-
ie so strong an impression on my mind,
o deeply fixed in my memory, that in
ting it to paper I did not omit one nu-
tircnmstance : however, upon a strict
I blotted out several passages of less
t which were in my first copy, for fear
g censured as tedious and trifling,
f travellers are often, perhaps not
justice, accused.
CHAPTER II.
ftum 9f the Farmer^s Daughter, The
T carried to a market-town, and ih*i»
IS8 CULUVKR'S TItAVELS.
agaiiiil night: the cradle wan put into aemnU
drawer of a cubinel, and Uie dmner plircd
Ihi* v/tLi my bed all tlie time 1 staid tiitii
Uioie people, tbuugli aiadu mure cuuveuEeiil
by degrees, as I began to leara their lin-
guage and mike my wants known. Hiit
young girl was > o handy, tliat after I had
once 01 twice pulled off my clothes before
her, ^e was able to dress and undress me,
Uiough I never gave lier that trouhle wbei
she wonid let me do either myself She
made me seven gliirts. and some other linen,
of as fine cloth as could be got, which indeed
was coarser thnn sackclotli; and tbchc sbe
constantly washed for me with lier own liindi.
She was likewise my school- mislresE, to teach
me tbe laoguage: when I pointed to ■ny
thing, she told me (be Dime of it in her own
tongue, so that in a few days I was able tc
call for whatever I had a mind to. She was
very good-natured, and not above forty-feel
high, being little for her age. Sbe gave me
the name of Grildriy, which the family (oiik
up, and afterwards the whole kingdom. The
word imporis what the Latins call noHtmcii-
lut, the Italians homimcrUtuin, and the
English manniiiH. To'her I rliiefiy owe
my presorvation in that country : we nf ver
parted while I was there; I called her my
Glumdalclitch, or little nurse ; and should be
gnjlty of great ingraiitude, if I omitted this
honourable mention of her care and affection
lowRFib me, < fftdcli 1 be«Tt^ ^rtA ^ttej in
g « ^mmmtvxxuLy Diit uobappy instni«
> f her disgrace, as I have too much
to tear.
3W began to be known and talked of in
ghbonrhood, that my master had found
ige animal iu the field, about the big-
* a splacnuckf but exactly slia) > ed in
)art like a human crreature ; which it
e imitated in all its actions ; seemed
k in a little language of its own, had
'learned several words of theirs, went
pon two legs, was tame and gentle,
»me when it was called, do whatever
lid, had the finest limbs in the world,
tomplexion fairer than a nobleman's
r of three years old. Another far-
10 lived hard by, and was a particular
f my master, came on a visit on pur-
enquire into the truth of this story. I
lediately produced, and placed upon
where I walked as I was commanded,
hanger, put it up again, made my
e to my master's guest, asked him in
laniniu^c how hp #ii''" "'*
.1 1
tlO GttLLITIK*! TKITIIJ,
ennugfa to be angry and od
He bad the cbiracter of a great nuMri and,
to my miilbrtnDe, he well deserved it, by Ike
cursed adticehe gave my master, to ^owm
u a Bight apon a market-day in the neil
town, which was half an hoar's riding, aboat
two-and-twenty miles from our hoose. I
guessed there was some mlsctuef contriviag,
when I obserred my master and his lrie»d
whispering long together, amnetimes poindng
■t me ; and my feaia made me fiuu^ that I
overlieard and nnderstood some of their
words. But the next morning Olmudakfitdi,
my little nnrse, told me the whtde matter,
wliich she had canningly [ucked out from het
motfaer. The poor girl laid me on her bosoe:,
and fell a weeping witii shame and grief. She
apprehended some mischief woald liappen to
me from nide vulgar fallts, who might squeeie
me to death, or break one of my limbs by
talcing me in their hands. She bad alM ob-
aerred how modest I was in my nature, how
nicely I regarded my honour, and wbit an
Indtf^ty I shouEd coaceive it, to be espOMd
lor money a« a pablic spectacle, to Am meanast
of the people. She sidd, her papa and snuM
had promised that Grildrig shauld be hettj
but now she foond they meant to terre her
ai they did last year, wh$n they pretended
to giie her a lamb, and yet, as soon as it wit
At, sold it to a bntcher. For nqr own par^
I may truly affirm, that I was let* eonenned
tlian my nurse. I hftd a strong hope, wbicb
D'fer left me, & Kt I dunMi tn« Avj immw^
* »,
J i aoa as to the i^ominy of being
abont for a monster, I considered
to be a perfect stranger in the country,
at such a misfortune could never be
1 upon me as a reproach, if ever I
return to England ; since the king of
Britain himseli', in my condition^ most
idergone the same distress.
naster, pursuant to the advice of his
carried me in a box the next nuirket-
he neighbouring town, and took along
a his Uttie daughter, my nurse, upon
behind him. The box was close on
ie, with a little door for me to go in
and a few gimlet holes to let in air.
had been so carefiil as to put the
her baby's bed into it, for me to lie
. However, I was terribly shaken
omposed in this journey, though it
t of half an hour : for the horse went
ty feet at every step, and trotted so
: the agitation was equal to the rising
ig of a ship in a great storm, but
1^3 GLLLITBB'I IRATBU.
EiiKle, not so bif M K iplmemiek (an animal
ill that country very finely shaped, about aii
feet long,) and in every part of tbe body re-
sembling a hmDan creature, conld speak k-
veral nords, and perform » hnndred divert-
ing tricka.
I WM placed upon a table in the lai^it
room of tlie inn, which might be near Oree
bandred feet aqnare. My little nnrie ttoni
on a low stool close to the table, to take rare
of me, and direct what I shonld do. Hy
master, to avoid a crowd, woold suffer only
thirty people at a time to see me. I walked
aliout on the table ai the girl commanded:
she asked me qnestiona, as far as she knew
Diy nnderstanding of the language reached,
Bad I answered them as load as I could. I
tamed abont several times to tbe company,
paid my humble reipects, said theif ictrt vel-
come, and nsed some odier speeches I bad
been tinght. i took np a thimble filled with
Jlqnor, which GImndalcUtch had given me for
« cap, and drank tAelr health, I drew oqI my
banger, and flaorished with it after the man-
ner of fencers in England. My nurse gave
me a part of a straw, wUch I exercised as a
pike, having leamt the art In my yodUl. ~ I
was that day shown to twelve sets of com-
pany, and as often forced to act over again
the same fopperies, till I was half dead with
weariness and vexation; for Umse who had
seen me made inch wonderfiil repcrts. Oat
tAe people were readj to ^nedt ditwn'te«
y none, and to prevent danger,
e set round the table at such a
to put me out of every body's
:ver, an unlucky school-boy aim-
ant directly at my head, which
y missed me ; otherwise it came
I violence, that it would have in-
ked ont my brains, for it Mras
;e as a small pmnpion ; but I had
on to see the young rogue well
tamed out of the room,
gave public notice that he wonid
n the next market-day ; and in
3 he prepared a more convenient
i, which he had reason enough
u so tired with my first journey,
rtaining company for eight honrs
I could hardly stand upon my
a word. It was at least three
recovered my strength; and
tiave no rest at home, all the
entlemen from a hundred miles
of my fame, came to see mA
1B4 odluybr'stsatuj.
My master, findiiig how pro6table I wai
likely to be, resolved to carry me to the moit
considerable cities of the kingdom. Having
therefore provided himself with all things ne-
cessary for a long joomey, and settled bis
affairs at home, he took leave of his vrife,and
opon the 17th of Angnst, 170S, about two
months after my arri^, we set oat for the
metropolis, situate near the middle of that
empire, and about three thousand miles'dis-
tance from our house. My master made his
daughter Glumdalditch ride behind him. She
carried me on her lap, in a box tied about
her waist. The girl had lined it on all sides
with the softest cloth she could get, well
quilted underneath, furnished it witfi her
baby's bed, provided me with linen and otter
necessaries, and made every thing as con-
venient as she could. We had no other com-
pany but a boy of the house, who rode after
OS with the luggage.
My master's design was to show me In all
the towns by the way, and to step out of the
road, for fifty or a hundred miles, to any vfl-
lage or person of qualitjr's house, where he
might expect custom. We made easy jour-
neys, of not above seven or eight score miles
a-day : for Glumdalditch, on purpose to spare
me, complained she was tired with the trot-
ting of the horse. She often took me out of
my box, at my own desire, to give me air, and
show me the country, but always held me fast
by a leading-string. We passed over five or
six rivers, many deg;cee« bxo^A^x «bA ^ < «^t
»w •uuui as tbe Thames at
D-bridge. We were ten weeks in onr
^, as I was shown in eighteen large
besides many villages^ and private
s.
the 26tU day of October we arrived at
:tropoiis, called in their language JLor-
tidf or Pride of the Universe. M >
- took a lodging in the principal street
city, not far from the royal palace, and
t bills in the usual form, containing an
description of my person and parts.
ed a large room between three and
mdred feet wide. He provided a
\xty feet in diameter, upon whkh I
let my part, and pallisadoed it round
et from tbe edge, and as many high,
nt my falling over. I was shown ten
•day, to the wonder and satisfaction
eople. I could now speak the lan-
olerably well, and perfectly nnder-
ery word that was spoken to me.
1 had learnt their alphabet, and
ke a shift to exni»i»» « - —'■-
ISf CDLLIf BR's TRATBLS.
CHAPTER in.
The Author sent far to court. The Queen hmfn
him of his masttr the Farmer^ and presenU
him to the King, He disputes with his ma-
jesty's great scholars. An apartment at anai
provided for the Author, He is in high favour
with the Queen. He stands up for the honour
of his own country. His quarrels with tike
Queen's dwarf.
The frequent labours I underwent etery
day, made, in a few weeks, a very consider-
able change in my health : the more my mas-
ter got by me, the more insatiable he grew.
I had quite lost my stomach, and was almost
reduced to a skeleton. The farmer observed
it, and concluding I must soon die, resolved
to make as good a hand of me as he ooold.
While he was thus reasoning and resolving
with himself, a sardraly or gentleman-usher,
came from court, commanding my master to
carry me immediately thither for the diver-
sion of the queen and her ladies. Some of
the latter had already been to see me, and
reported strange things of my bean^, be-
haviour, and good sense. Uer Buyesty, and
those who attended her were beyond laea-
sure delighted with my demeanour. I fell on
my knees, and begged the honour of kiSsiBg
her imperial foot; but this gracious pripeeM
held out her little finger towards me, afiw I
was Be*'OP the tab\e, YfVu.Oi \ csuVvmiKd in
J questions about my country and
;h I answered as distinctly, and
vords as I could. She asked,
»uld be content to live at court?'
vn to the board of the table, and
^ered * that I was my master's
t I were at my own disposal, I
roud to devote my life to her
vice.'She then asked my mas-
r he was willing to sell me at a
He, who apprehended I could
onth, was ready enough to part
demanded a thousand pieces of
wrere ordered him on the spot
eing about the bigness of eight
lores; but aUowing for the pro^
things between that country and
the high price of gold among
rdly so great a sum as a thou-
would be in England. I then
een, < since I was now her ma-
humble creature and vassal, I
favour, that Glumdalclitch. wlm
188 GVLL1VBH*S TR4YEL8.
bidding me farewell, and saying he had left
me in a good service ; to which I replied not
a word, only making him a slight bow.
The queen observed my coldniss; and,
when tlie farmer was gone out of the apart*
ment, asked me the reason. I made bold to
tell her m^esty,'that I owed no other obli-
gation to my late master, than his not dashing
oat the brains of a poor harmless creature,
foand by chance in his fields ; which obligation
IF as amply recompensed, by the gain he bad
made in showing me through half the kingdom,
and the price he had now sold me for. That
the life I had since led, was laborious enongh
to kill an animal of ten times my strengtii.
That my health was much impaired, by the
continual drudgery of entertaining the rabble
every hour of the day ; and that, if my master
liad not thought my life in danger, her ma-
jesty would not have got so cheap a bargam.
But as I was out of all fear of being ill treated,
nnder the protection of so great and good aa
empress, the ornament of nature, the darling
of the world, the delight of her subjects, the
phoenix of the creation ; so, I hoped my late
master's apprehensions would appear to be
groundless ; for I already found my spirits
revive, by the influence of her most august
presence.^
This was the sum of my speech, delivered
with great improprieties and hesitation. The
latter part was altogether framed in the style
peculiar to that people, whereof I learned
some phrases from GVumd^c^^XAVk) niV^Sa «he
was carrying me to cowvt.
^ ^ ^..sfwrauKC lOT IHy
eness in speaking, was, however, sur-
it so much wit and good sense in so
ivc an animal. She took mc in her
nd, and carried me to the king, who
n retired to his cabinet. His majesty,
e of much gravity and austere coun-
, not well observing my shape at first
sked the queen after a cold manner
mg it was since she grew fond of a
ck ? for such it seems he took me to
[ lay apon my breast in her majesty's
ind. Bat this princess, who has an
leal of wit and humour, set me gently
iet opon the scrutoire, and command-
gire his majesty an account of myself,
did in a very few words : and Glnm-
, who attended at tlie cabinet door,
d not endure I should be out of her
ng admitted, confirmed all that had
om my arrival at her father's house.
Qg, although he be as learned a per-
y in his dominions, had been educa-
stndy of philosophv. and n»f*;^ " » — »-
140 CULLiyBR* & TRAYELS.
came into his kingdom^ bot tiionght it a stoiy
concerted between Glumdalditch and her
father, who had taught me a set of words to
make me sell at a better price. Upon tUi
. fanagination, he put several other questions to
me, and still received rational answers: no
otherwise defective, dian by a foreign accent,
and an imperfect knowledge in the language,
vnth some rustic phrases which I had learned
at the farmer's'house, and did not suit the
polite style of a court.
His miyesty sent for three great scholars,
who were then in the weekly waiting, accord-
ing to the custom in that country. These
gentlemen, after they had awhile examined
my shape with much nicety, were of different
. opinions concerning me. They all agreed
^at I could not be produced according to the
regular laws of nature, because I was not
framed with a capacity of preserving my life,
either by swiftness, or dimbing of trees, or
digging holes in the earth. They observed
by my teeth, which they viewed with great
exactness, that I was a carnivorous animal ;
yet most quadrupeds being an overmatch for
me, and field mice, with some others, too
nimble, th€y could not imagine how I should
be able to support myself, unless I fed upon
snails and other insects, which they offered,
by many learned arguments, to evince that I
could not possiby do.* One of these virtuosi
* By this rca^niiiK the author probably intended to
riiHeafe the pride of \\\o«« plv\\Q«ov^«T«, -vibA liave
tboufi^t fit to arridgn tbc > K\*Aotft vi ^xcNv»\-iis»Vft.^^
be perfect and fiidihed ; and that I
(1 several years, as it was manifest
'beard, the stamps wliereof they
isoovered tlirough a magnifying-glass.
void not allow me to be a dwarf, be-
•y littleness was beycmd all degrees
HwUpa; for Hie queen's fiiTonrite
litf MMllest ever knoiwB In tint U^g-
II aear tfabrty feet high. Aftaramtih
liMBj eottdaded rniinfanoi^y, tiMt I
tf r^fhtm icakaikt wUdi ia intar-
Ktmlly huuM maiwrm; a detetataM-
MB^y agreenble to the modem pldlaao-
Barapey whose pn^encnv, ^sdafadi|(
evMhm of oecolt canses, whereby
knrera of Aristotle endeaToored ta
iisfniae their ignoranee, have hirented
(ndefftal aolatioii of all difficalfleiy to
peakaMe advancement of hoBMmknwr
r 1^ dediive eoadukniy I entseated
cisd a word or two. I applied a^ficlf
^ and Mfwed Ui nutfeity, < *atl
14S GULUVER*! TRAVni.
qaence, I might be as able to defead myidf,
and to find sustenance, as any of his nu^jei-
ty's subjects could do here ; which I took for
a full answer to those gentlemen's argnmeBts/
To this they only repUed with a smile of con-
tempt, saying, * that the burner had instnieted
me very well in my lesson*.'The king, wlio
had a much better understanding, dismiiang
his learned men, sent for the farmer, who by
good fortune was not yet gone oat of town.
Having therefore first examined him prirate-
ly, and then confronted him with me and the
young girl, his majesty began to think what
we told him might possibly be true. He de-
sired the queen to order that a particnUr
care should be taken of me; and was of
opinion that Olumdalclitch should still con-
tinoe in her office of tending me, becaose he
obsenred we had a great affection for each
other. A convenient apartment was pro-
Tided for her at court; she had a sort of
governess appointed to take care of her
education, a maid to dress her, and two other
servants for menial offices; but ike care of
«ne vras wholly appropriated to herself. The
queen conunandeid her own cabinet-maker to
contrive a box, that might serve me for a bed-
chamber, after the model that Gfaundalditch
and I should agree upon. This man was a
most ingenious artbt, and aceordlng to vy
• Thii ntire If levdled agaiiiit all who r«)tdt OMM
Itels for which they caiwoc prnfoetty mcmiM, BcCwkh-
■Uadlnc th« abMrdlty of retectfaig th« liiltliminj Iqr
If in three weeks finished for me a
chamber of sixteen feet square, and
iigh, with sash windows, a door, and
ets, like a London bed-chamber. The
hat made the ceiling, was to be lifted
lown by two hinges to put in a bed
imished by her majesty*s npholsterer,
HumdalcUtch took oat every day to
e it with her own hands, and letting
at nighty lodged np the roof over me.
rorkman, who was famoos for little
!8, undertook to make me two cfaairSy
" ks and frames, of a substance not
'ory,.and two tables, with a cabinet
f things in. The room was quilted
es, as well as the fLoCir and the ceil-
event any accident from the care-
f those who carried me, and to break
of a jolt, when I went in a coach.
a lodiL for my door, to prevent rats
from coming in. The smith, after
tempts, made the smallest that e? er
among them, for I have known a
!.»
144 gulliybr'i travblb.
The queen became so food of my ca mpmy ,
that she could not dine withoat me. I had
a table placed upon the same at ^rhkh her
majesty ate, just at her elbow, and a diair to
sit on. Glumdalclitch stood on a stool on
the floor near my table, to assist and take
care of me. I had an entire set of silver
dishes and plates, and other necessaries,
which, in proportion to those of the queen,
were not much bigger than what I have seen
in a London toy-shop, for the furniture of a
baby-house : these my little nurse kept in her
pocket in a silver box, and gave me at meaU
us I wanted them, always cleaning them her'
self. No person dined with the qneen but
the princesses'royal, the eldest sixteen years
old, and the younger at that time thirteen
and a month. Her majesty used to pnt a bit
of meat upon one of my dishes, out of which I
carved for myself, f(nd her diversion was to
see me eat in miniature ; for the qneea (who-
had indeed but a weak stomadi) took op, at
one mouthful, as much as a dozen EagUsh
farmers could eat at a meal, which to me was
for some time a very naoseons sight*. She
* Among oth«r dreadful aad diignirthig intfes irbMr
custom has rendered familiar, are thoie wuch ariit
from eatlaf; animal food : he who haa ever tamed wift
abhorrence fk-om the skeleton of a beast whieh has beea
picked whole by birds or vermin, must coafeiB that
habit unljr could have enabled him to endure the dght
of the mangled bones and flesh of a dei^ careaaa wUch
every day cover his table ; and he who refleeta on 0w
aomber of Jlvei that have \ > e«n ULCT\^ect & ta vuMSiAVti
owa, abould inquire hy what tbe account ^aaXmna W^
iuued, aad whether hUUf«lsl»t«w»» V < »V > «^^««»**^*
.- , .MMmvugu II. were nine
I large as that of a fiill-grown turkey ;
a bit of bread in her mouth, as big as
2lve-penny loaves. She drank out of
1 cup, above a hogshead at a draught,
ivcs were twice as long as a scythe,
ight upon the handle. The spoons,
ad other instruments, were all in the
-oportion. I remember when Glum-
i carried me, out of curiosity, to see
the tables at court, where ten or a
if those enormous knives and foriu
fced up together, I thought I had never
beheld so terrible a sight,
the custom, that every Wednesday
as I have observed, is their sabbath)
I and queen, vnth the royal issue of
:es, dine together in the apartment of
iity, to whom I was now become a
irourite ; and at these times, my little
d table were placed at his left hand,
le of the salt-sellars. This prince took
re in conversing with me, inquiring
manners, religion, laws, eovemment.
14G Gulliver's travbu.
after I had been a little too copious in talking
of my own beloved country', of oar trade and
wars by sea and land, of oar schisms in reli-
gion, and parties in the state ; the prejadices
of his education prevailed so tar, that he
could not forbear taking me up in his rif^t
hand, and stroking me gently with the other,
after a hearty fit of laughing, asked me,
whether I was a whig or tory? Then taming
to his first minister, who waited behind him
with a white staff, near as tall as the mam-
mast of the Royal Sovereign, he observed'bow
contemptible a thing was human grandeur,
which could be mimicked by such diminutive
insects us I : and yet,'says he, ^ I dare engage
these creatures have their titles and distinc-
tions of honour ; they contrive little nests and
burrows, that they call houses and cities;
they mal^e a figure in dress and equipage;
they love, they fight, they dispute, they
cheat, they betray.'And thus he continned
on, while my colour came and went several
times, with indignation, to hear our noble
conntiy, the mistress of aits and arms, the
scourge of France^ the arbitrcss of Europe,
the seat of virtue, piety, honour, and tnith,
the pride and envy of *he world, so con-
temptuously treated.
But as I was not in a condition to reseat
injuries, so upon mature thoughts I began to
doubt whether I was injured or bo*. For,
• * Wbfftlier I waa iiijared or no.'— Tliii Tal|ar Mil
DM^V? > n > 9il <'< " l mode uf < ;xpTeuto« hM hcoooM «'
luiivHB^li bat, inttead of* ao,* Om paociMte^ nsie
ed every object upon which I cast mine
) be of proportionable magnitude, the
I had at first conceived from their bulk
pect was so far worn off, that if I had
eheld a company of EngUsh lords and
in their finei7 and birth-day clothes,
tlieir several parts in the most courtly
r of strutting, and bowing, and prating;
the truth, I should have been strongly
id to laugh as much at them, as the
nd his grandees did at me. Neither*
[, could I forbear smiling at myself,
the queen used to place me upon her
owards a looking-glass, by which both
rsons appeared before me in full view
er; and there could be nothing more
ens than the comparison; so that I
began to imagine myself dwindled
degrees below my usual size,
hing angered and mortified me so much
148 Gulliver's travels.
was standing on some table talking with the
lords or ladies of the court, and he seldom
failed of a smart word or two upon my iittU'
nets; against which I could only revenge my-
self by calling him brother, challenging him
to wrestle, and such repartees as are usually
in the mouths of court pages. One day, at
dinner, this malicious little cub was so netded
with something I had said to him, that, raising
himself upon the frame of her majesty's chair,
he took me up by the middle, as I was sitting
down, not thinking any harm, and let me
drop into a large diver bowl of cream, and
then ran away as fast as he could. I fell
over head and ears, and if I had not been a
good swimmer, it might have gone very hard
with me; for Glumdalclitch in that instant
falippened to be at the other end of the room,
and the queen was in such a fright, that she
wanted presence of mind to assist me. But
my little nurse ran to my relief, and took me
out, after I had swallowed above a quart of
cream. I was put to bed : however, I received
no other damage than the loss of a suit of
elothes, which was utterly spoiled. The dwarf
was soundly whipped, and as a farther punish-
ment, forced to drink up the bowl of cream
into which he had thrown me : neither was he
e^r restored to favour ; for soon after the
queen bestowed him on a lady of high quality,
80 that I saw hun no more, to my very great
satisfaction ; for I could not tell to what ex-
tremity such a malicious urchin might have
Gamed his resentment.
; queen a laughing, altliousch at
le she was hearttlv vexed, and
mmediatoiy cashiered him, if I
;o iirenerous as to intercede. Her
taken a marrow-bone upon her
.fter knocking out the marrow,
Dne again in the dish erect, as
e ; the dwarf watching his op-
le Giuradalchitch was gone to
!, mounted the stool that she
ke care of me at meals, took
hands, and squeezing my legs
ged them into the marrow-bone
?t, where I stuck for some time,
jr}* ridiculous figure. I believe
minute before any one knar
me of me ; for I thought it be-
out. But, as princes seldom
hot, my legs were not scalded,
Qgs and breeches in a sad con-
warf, at my entreaty, had no
tnt than a sound whipping,
tently rallied by the ouppn
IM OOLLlVBRt TB4VBU.
tiMir loatiuome excremait or spawn bdibd,
which to me was very visible, thoo^ not t»
tiie natives of that country, whose lar^e op-
tics where not so acate as mine, in viewing
smaller objects. Sometimes they would fix
«pon my nose or forehead, where they stung
me to the quick, smelling very offensively ;
and I could easily trace that viscous matter,
which, our naturalists tell us, enables those
creatures to walk with their feet upwards
upon a ceiling. I had much ado to defend
myself against these detestable animals, and
could not forbear starting when they came on
my face. It was the common practice of the
dwarf to catch a number of these insects hi
his hand, as schoolboys do among as, and let
them out suddenly under my nose», on pur-
pose to frighten me, and divert the queen.
My remedy was to cut them in pieces with
my knife, as they flew in the air, wherein my
dexterity was much admired.
I remember, one morning, when Glumdal-
clitch had set me in a box upon a window,
as she usually did in fair days to give me air
(for I durst not venture to let the box be hung
on a nail out of the window, as we do with
cages in England), after I had lifted up one
of my sashes and sat down at my table to eat
a piece of sweet cake for my breakfast, above
twenty wasps, allured by the smell, came
flying into the room humming louder than the
drones of as many bagpipes. Some of them
•eixed my cake and carried it piece-meal
away j others flew alboul m > ) Vi < & ^«iMl€iiae^
tou uic vuurage lo rue ana draw my
md attack them in the air. I dis-
four of them, but the rest got away,
presently shut my window. These
vere as large as partridges : I took
stings, found them an inch and a
;, and as sharp as needles. I care-
!served them all ; and having staee
lem, with some other curiosities, in
)arts of Europe, apon my return to
I gave three of them to Gresham
and kept the fourth for myself.
chapti:r IV.
trtf described, A proposal for corred'
demtnaps. The king's palace, und
:count of the metropolis. The Author*s
f travelling. The chief temple dts-
ntend to give the reader a short de#
153 00LLlVlttl*8 TftAVBtt.
domintons reaches about six thousand m
in length, and from tliree to five in bread
whence I cannot but conclade, that oar |
graphers of £nrope are in a great error,
supposing nothing but sea between Ja
and California; for it was ever my opin
that there must be a balance of wti
counterpoise the great continent of Tarti
and therefore they ought to correct theirs
and charts, by joining this vast tract dt \
to the north-west parts of America, whe
I shall be ready to lend them my assista
The kingdom is a peninsula, terminate
the north-east by a ricSge of mountains tli
miles high, which are altogether impassa
by reason of the volcanoes upon the ti
neither do the most learned know what
of mortals inhabit beyond those mounti
or whether tliey be inhabited at all. On
three other sides, it is bounded by the oc
There is not one sea-port in the whole k
dom ; and those parts of the coasts into w
the rivers issue, are so full of pointed ro
and the sea generally so rough, tliat thei
no venturing with the smallest of Uieir bo
so that these people are wholly excln
from any commerce with the rest of
world. But the large rivers arc full of i
sels, and abound with excellent fish ; for t
seldom get any from the sea, because
sea-fish are of the same size with thoM
Europe, and consequently not worth cml
ing ; whereby it is manifest, that natorCj
tbe prodaction of plants and VkXQBia2ta & ^
of which I leave the reasons
incd by philosophers. How-
then they take a whale tliat
e dashed against the rocks,
imon people feed on heartily,
have known so large^tliat a man
ury one upon his shoulders; !
, for cariosity, they are brought {
'Lorbmlgmd: I saw one of
h at the king's table, which
rity, but I did not observe he
fori think, indeed, the bigness
although I h^ve seen one
T in Greenland.
is well inhabited, for it con-
dties, near a hundred walled
reat number of villages. To
us reader, it may be sufficient
rbrulgmd. This city stands
) equal parts, on each side the
) through. It contains above
houses, and about six hun-
nhabitants. It is in length
IS4 cuixievr's tsavbm.
but a beap of building, about ki
Touad ; the chief rooms are genei
hnndred and forty feet high, and t
long in proportion, A couch waa *
OlamdaJdilch and me, wherein berj
freqaently took ber out to see the
go amaag the shops ; and I wai i
Ote party, carried in my box ; aitb
girl, at my own deiire, would oftei
out, aad hold me in her hand, tha
more conveniently view the boua«
people, as we passed aJong the ll
reckoned our coach to be about a
Vestminster'hall, but not ultogethei
kowe ver, I cannot be very exact. Oi
goTemesB ordered our coaclmiantoi
Tcral shops, where the beggan,
their opportunity, crowded to flieali
£Oach, and gave me the moat borrib!
ele that ever a European eye beheli
vu a woman with a cancer in he
■welled to a monstrous uze, full
in two or diree of which 1 conid
ally crept, and covered my who!
There was a fellow with a wen In
larger than Gve wool-packs ; and
•ridi u couple of wooden legs, eai
twenty feet hi^. Bottbe most hat
of all, was the lice crawhng on thel
1 could see distinctly thelbnbsoft
■nfai with my naked eye, much be
those of an European louse throng
cq > e, and their anonta with which dii
Ifkcfwine.^ They were 4e 6iA \
ents, which I uulackily left behind me
lip, although, indeed, the sight was so
, tliat it perfectly turned my stomach.
le tlie large box in which I was usually
the queen ordered a smaller one to
i for me, of about twelve feet square^
high, for the convenience of travel-
icause the other was somewhat too
■ Glumdalciitch's lap, and cnmbersome
ach ; it was made by the same artist,
directed in the whole contrivance.
velling-doset was an exact sqaare,
indow in the middle of three of the
and each window was latticed with
\ on the outside, to prevent accidents
onmeys. On the fourth side, which
Indow, two strong staples were fixed,
which the person that carried me,
ad a mind to be on horseback, put
•n belt, and buckled it about his
liis was always the office of some
sty servant, in whom I could oon-
ther 1 attended the king and queen

..'"'',•;, > w

;.»«•

^rf " " - "
iiW
*« "
s famous tower wants in
made up in beauty and
walls are near a hundred
hewn stone, whereof each
it square, and adorned on
les of gods and emperors,
;er than the life, placed in
les. I measured a little
fallen down from one of
d lay unperceived among
found it exactly four feet
;th. OlumdalcHtch wrap- ); ; <
indkerchief; and carried i''
(et, to keep among other'^ >
[ the girl was very fond, as
e usually are.'
chen is, indeed, a noble i.
at top, and about six hun- | ■
The great oven la not so I |
, as the cupola at St. PauFs : 1 ?
e latter on purpose, after |-^-
if I should describe the V,?
e prodidous nots and kct- t
168 gullitbr's travels.
> nto the language of Brobdingnag * (wMcU u
the general name of that kingdom), and
transmitted thither, the king and his people
would have reason to complain that I had
done them an injury, by a false and dimio -
tive representation.
His majesty seldom keeps above six hnn-
.dred horses in his stables : they are generally
fi om fifty-four to sixty feet high. But, whea
he goes abroad on solemn days, he is attended,
for state by a militia guard of five hundred
horse, which, indeed, I thought was the
most splendid sight that could be ever be-
held, till I saw part of his army in battalia,
whereof I shall find another occasion to
speak.
CHAPTER V
Several adventwrsM thai happened to the Auikor,
The execuHon of • > criminal. The Authot
^ shows his skU.s in nadgaHon*
I SHOULD have lived happy enough in that
country, if my littleness had not exposed me
to several ridiculous and troublesome acci-
de^ ; some of which I shall venture to relate.
Glumdalclitch often carried me into the gar-
dens of the court in my smaller box, and
would sometimes take me out of it, and hold
me in her hand, or set me down to walk. I
remember, before the dwarf left tiie qaeen.
►»e together, near some dwarf apple
must needs show my wit, by a .silly
between him and the trees, whicli
to hold in tlieir language as it does
\V hereupon, the malicious rogue,
; his opportunity, when I was walk-
r one of them, shook it directly over
, by which a dozen apples, each of
ir as large as a Bristol barrel, came
about my ears ; one of them hit me
back as I chanced to stoop, and
me down flat on my face; bat I
no other hurt, and the dwarf was
1 at my desire, because I had given
)cation.
er day, Glumdalclltch left me on a
rass-plot Co divert myself, while she
.t some distance with her governess,
ean time, tliere suddenly fell such a
lower of hail, that I was immediately
rce of it, struck to the ground : and
was down, the hailstones gave me
i\ bangs all over the body, as if I
160 Gulliver's TRAvtfLt.
eighteen hundred times as large as one in
Europe ; which I can assert upon cxperkDce,
having been so curious* to weigh and measure
them.
But a more dangerons accident happened
to me in the same garden, when my little
nurse, believing she had put me in a secure
place (which I often entreated her to do, tiiat
I might enjoy my own thoughts), and lutving
left my box at home, to avoid the trouble of
carrying it, went to another part of the gar-
den with her governess and some ladies of
her acquaintance. While she was absent,
and out of hearing, a small white spaniel that
belonged to one of the chief gardeners, haviag
got by accident into the garden, happened to
range near the place where I lay : the dog,
following the scent, came directly'up, and
taking me in his mouth, ran straight to his
master wagging his tail, and set me gentiyoa
the ground. By good fortune he had been
so well taught, that I was carried between
his teeth without the least hurt, or even
tearing my clothes. But the poor gardener,
who knew me well, and had a great kindness
for me, was in a terrible fright : he gently
took me up in both his hands, and asked me
how I did ; but I was so amazed and out oi
breath, that I could not speak a word. In a
few minutes I came to myself, and he carried
me safe to my little nurse, who, by this time,
had returned to the place where she left me^
• The particle,'as,'is here improperly omitted ; ft
9bould ht, BO corions < us* to vi«\g)i, & c%— ^
— MVb
Mtiawer when she called. She
trimanded the gardener uii ac-
dog. But the thin^ was hushed
er known at court, tor the girl
f the qaeen*8 anger; and truly,
, I thought it would not be tor
in, that such a story should go
CDt absolutely determined Glnm-
• er to trust me abroad for the
f her sight. I had been long
( resolution, and therefore con-
her some little unlucky adven-
ppened in tliose times when I
uyself. Once a kite, hovering
in, made a stoop at me, and if
olntcly drawn my hanger, and
thick espalier, he would have
)d me away in liis talons. A no-
ting to the top of a fresh mole-
my neck in the hole, through
aal had cast up the eartli, and
;, not worth remembering, to
or spoiling mv cloth« > » ^'"
t68 6UIXITBR*8 TRAVELS.
worms and other food, with as -mnch indif-
fereDce and secority as if no creature at all
were near them. I remember, a tfarash had
the confidence to snatch out of my hand, with
his bill, a piece of cake that Glumdalclitch
had just given me for my breakfast. When
I attempted to catdi any of these birds, they
would boldly turn agidost me, endeavouring
to peck my fingers, which I durst not venture
within their reach ; and then tiiey would hop
back unconcerned, to hunt for worms or
snails, as they did before. But one day, I
took a thick cudgel, and threw it with all my
strength so luckity, at a linnet, that I knocked
him down, and seizing him by the neck vrith
both my hands, ran with him in triumph to
my nurse. However, the bird, who had only
been stunned, recovering himself, gave me so
many boxes with hb wings, on both sides of
my head and body, though I held him at arm's
length, and was out of the reach of his claws,
that I was twenty times thinking to let him
go. But I was soon relieved by one of our
seriants, who wrung off the bird's neck, and
I had him next day for dinner, by the queen's
command. This Unnet, as near as I can re*
member, seemed to be somewhat larger than
an English swan.
The maids of honour often invited Glum-
dalclitch to their apartments, and desired she
would bring me along with her, on purpose
to have the pleasure of seeing and touching
me. They would often strip me naked from
top to toe, and lay me at f < ^ \«yi^ Va ^ < t\s
....^ A nutt mncli disgnstud;
say tlie truth, a very ortt'iisivi*
from their skins; wliioh I do not
iutend, to the disadvantage of
lent ladies, for whom 1 have all
respect ; but I conceive that my
more acute in proportion to my
nd tliat those illustrious persons
re disagreeable to tlicir lovers, or
r, than people of the same quality
n England And, after all, I found
1 smell was much more support-
irhen they used peiiimics, under
ediatcly swooned away. I can-
tiat an intimate friend of mine in
I the freedom in a warm day,
used a good deal of exercise, to
. strong smell about me, altliough
faulty that way as most of my
ppose his faculty'of smelling was
regard to me, as mine was to
•eople. Upon this point, I can-
loing justice to the queen my
Glomdalclitch my nurse, whn-o
104 GULLIYER^S TRAVELS.
tJieir naked bodies, which I am sure to me
was very tar troin being a teniptiug sight, or
from giving me any other emotion than those
of horror and disgast : tlieir skins appeared
so coarse and uneven, so variously coloured,
when I saw them near, with a mole here and
there as broad as a trencher, and hairs hang-
ing from it thicker than packthreads, to say
nothing farther concerning the rest of their
persons. Neither did they at all scruple,
while I was by, to discharge what tliey bad
drank, to the quantity of at least two hogs-
heads, in a vessel that held above three tuns.
The handsomest among these maids of honour,
a pleasant frolicksome girl of sixteen, would
sometimes set me astride upon one of her
nipples, with many other tricks, wherein the
reader vrill excuse me for not beirfg over
particular. But I was so nkuch displeased,
that I entreated Glumdalclitch to contrive
some excuse for not seeing that young lady
any more.
One day, a young gentleman, who was
nephew to my nurse's governess, came and
pressed them both to see an execution. It
was of a man, who had murdered one of that
gentlemen's intimate acquaintance. Glum-
dalclitch was prevailed on to be of the com-
pany, very .much against her inclination, for
she was naturally tender-hearted : and as fur
myself, altliough I abhorred such kind of
spectacles, yet my curiosity tempted nic to
see somcthint; that I thought to be extrnordl-
nary, llic malefactor w?a i\^c^ \aci ^ tSar^lM
%Mi uD at one blow, with a
bout forty feet long. The veins
!s spouted up such a prodigious
blood, and so high in the air, that
jet d*eau at Versailles was not
the time it lasted : and the head,
I on the scaffold floor, gave such a
t made me start, although I were
f an English mile distant.
en, who often used to hear me
sea-voyages, and took all oocaF
rert me when I was melancholy,
hether I understood how to han-
or an oar, and whether a little
owing might not be convenient for
answered, that I understood both
or although my proper employ-
ien to be surgeon or doctor to the
'u, upon a pinch I was forced to
common mariner. But I coold
this could be done in their coun-
e smallest wherry was equal to
an of war among us ; and such
)uld maim* " * %»/» " »•'
166 gulltbr'i travbls/
EaropeaiM. When it was finiBhed, tiie qn
was so delif^hted, that she ran with it
her lap to the king, who ordered it to
put into a dstem fUll of water, with mc
it, by way of trial ; where I coald not n
age my two sculls, or little oars, for ¥raF!
room. But the queen had before contri
another project. She ordered the joinei
make a wooden trough of three hundred i
long, fifty broad, and eight deep ; which
ing well pitched, to prevent leaking,
placed on the floor, along the wall, in
outer room of ihe palace. It had a cock i
the bottom to let out the water, when it
gan to grow stale ; and two servants en
easily fill it in half an hour. Here I
ten used to row for my own diversion
well as that of the queen and her ladies,'
thought themselves well entertained witii
siill and agility. Sometimes I would pul
my sail, and then my business was onl]
steer, while *he ladies gave me a gale ^
their fans ; and, when they were weary, »
of their pages would blow my sail form
with their breath, while I showed my arl
steering starboard or larboard as I plea
When I had done, Glumdalclitch always <
''ried back my boat into her closet, and h
I it on a nail to dry.
In this exercise I once met an accid(
which had like to have cost me my life ;
one of the pages having put my boat into
trough, the governess who attended Oil
daJcktch ?ery offi,^QiisVf Wileduift \k < ^\a \S
lingers, and should intallibly
own forty I'eot, uj)on the floor,
kit-st chauce in the world, I had
i\)vd by a corking-pin that stuck
. oniun's stomacher ; the head of
ed between my shirt and the
my breeches, and thas I was
middle in the air, till Glumdal-
mv relict*.
me, one of tlie scr^'ants, whose
.0 fill my trough every third day
ater, was so careless* to let a
t perceiving it) slip out of his
)g lay concealed till I was pat
but then, seeing a resting-place,
nd made it lean so much on one
as forced to balance it with all
tlie other, to prevent overtum-
le frog was got in, it hopped
e length of the boat, and then
backward and forward, danb-
d clothes with its odious slime.
of its features made it appear
108 CDLUTmB TMATKU.
Olmndalclitch had locked me np in herdotet,
while she went somewliere npcn buiness, or
a vinit. The weather betng Teiy warm, the
closet- window was left opeD, as well as the
windows and the door of my bigger box, ii
whidi I usually livedy because of its largeness
and conveniency. As I sat quietly meditit-
ing at my table, I heard something bounce in
at tlic closet window, and skip about firoii
one side to the other : whereat, although I
was much alarmed, yet I ventured to look
out, but not stirring from my seat ; and tfaea
1 saw this frolicksome animal frisking and
leaping up and down, till at last he came to
my box, which he seemed to view with great
pleasure and curiosity, peeping in at the door
and every window. I retreated to the far-
ther corner of my room, or box ; but the mon-
key looking in at every side, put me into such
a friglit, tliat I wanted presence of mind to
conceal myself under the bed, as I mi|^t
rnHily have done. After some time spent in
pt'cpinjc, grinning, and chattering, he at last
enpied me ; and reaching one of his paws in
at (he door, as a cat does when she plays
with a mouse, although I often shifted place
to avoid* him, he at length seized the lappet
of my coat (which being made of that coun-
try silk, was very thick and strong), and
«lragged mo out. He took me up in Us right
fore-foot and held me as a nurse does a child
she is Koing to suckle, just as I have seen
llie same sort of creature do with a kitten m
l^unpt; and when 1 QlSmdtOKSbrauiJb & te
rOTAOB TO BRObDINOlfAO. 10i
me so hard, that I tiioogh it mort
submit. I have good reason to
lat he took me for a yOung one of
> ectes, by his often stroking my fiioe
iy with his other paw. In these
he was interrupted by a noise at
•door, as if somebody were opening
upon he suddenly leaped np to the
It which he had come in, and thence
leads and gutters, walking upon
, and holding me in the fourth, till
sred up to a roof that was next to
leard Glumdalclitch give a shriek
ment he was carrying me out. The
was almost distracted : tiiat qiiar-
! palace was all in an uproar ; the
ran for ladders : the monkey was
nndreds in the court, sitting upon
of a building, holding me like a
ne of his fore-paws, and feeding me
otiier, by craming into my month
nals he had squeezed out of the bag
ide of lus chaps, and patting me
ould not eat; whereat many of the
slow could not forbear laughing;
lo I think they justly ought to be
or, without question, the sight was
enough to every body but myself,
he people threw np stones, hoping
the monkey down; but this was
rbidden, or else very probably, my
1 been dashed out.
tiers were now applied, and mounted
I men ; which the monkey observingi
Q
170 GULLIVER*8 TRAVELS.
and finding himself almost encompassed, Dot
being able to make speed enough with his
three legs, let me drop on a ridge tile, and
made his escape. Here I sat for some timej
five hundred yards from the ground, expect-
ing every moment to be blown down by the
wind, or to fall by my own giddiness, and
come tumbling over and over tirom the ridge
to the caves : but an honest lad, one of my
nurse's footmen, climbed up, and putting me
into his breeches-pocket, brought me dowa
safe.
I was almost choked with the filthy staff
the monkey had crammed down my throat:
but my dear little nurse picked it out of my
mouth with a small needle, and then I fell a-
vomiting, which gave me much relief. Yet
I was so weak and bruised in'the sides with
the squeezes given me by this odious ammal,
that I was forced to keep my bed a fortnight
The king, queen, and all the court, sent every
day to inquire aifter my health ; and her ma-
jesty made me several visits during my sick-
ness. The monkey was killed, and an order
made, that no such animal should be kept
about the palace.
When I attended the king after my reco-
very, to return hun thanks for his favours, he
was pleased to rally me a good deal upon this
adventure. He asked me,'what my thoogfats
and speculations were, while I lay in tiie
monkey's paw ; how I liked the victuals he
gave me ; Ms manner of feeding ; and whether
the fresh air on theToof Vi^i^'asvcBAd.^
stomach/ He deftVx^d 1q v«.ftNi, ^^iJVoX^
A VOTAGB TO tiROBDINGNAO. 171
Would have done upon such an occasion ill
my own country.'I told his majesty,'that
in Europe we had no monkeys except such as
were brought for curiosities from other places,
and so small, that I could deal with a dozen
of them together, if they presumed to attack
me. And as for that monstrous animal, with
whom I was so lately engaged (it was indeed
as large as an elephant,) ii'my fears had suf-
fered me to think so far, as to make use of
my hanger (looking fiercely, and clapping my
hand upon the hilt, as I spoke) when be poked
his paw into my chamber, perhaps I should
have given him such a wound, as would have
made him glad to withdraw it, witli more
haste than he put it in.* This 1 delivered in
a firm tone, like a person who was jealous
lest his courage should be called in question.
However, my speech produced nothing else
beside a loud laughter, which all the respect
due to his majesty from those about him could
not make them contain. This made me re-
flect, how vain an attempt it is for a man to
endeavour to do himself honour among those
who are out of all degree of equality or com-
parison with him. And yet I have seen the
moral of my own behaviour very frequent in
England since my return ; where a little con-
temptible varlet, without the least title to
birth, person, wit, or common sense, shall
presume to look with importance, and put
himself upon a foot with the greatest persons
of the kingdom.
I was every day furnishing the court with
some ridiculous story; and Oliuad'aikXvXjeXi^'Q^.-
179 gulliter's tratils.
thongh 8he loved me to excess, yet was ntk
•noogh to inform the qaeen, whenever I oon-
mitted any folly that she tfaongfat would be
diverting to her majesty. The girl, who had
been out of order, was carried by her go-
verness to take the air about an hour's dis-
tance, or thirty miles from town. They
alighted out of the coach near a small foot-
path in a field, and Glnmdalclitch setting
down my travelling box, I went out of it to
walk. There was a cow-dung in the path,
and I must need try my activity by attemp-
ing to leap over it. I took a run, but unfor-
tunately jumped short, and found myself just
in the middle, up to my knees. I waded
through with some difficulty, and one of the
footmen wiped me as clean as he conld with
his handkerchief, for I was filthily bemired ;
and my nurse confined me to my box, till we
returned home ; where the queen was soon in-
formed of what had passed, and the footmen
spread it about the court; so that all the
mirth for some days was at my expense.
CHAPTER VI.
Several contrivances of the Author, to plemse thi
King and Queen, He shows his skiU in nut-
sic. The King inquires into the state of
England, which the Author relates to kirn.
The King's observations thereon,
I USED to attend the VAyi^*« Vcn^^ < iiijQe or
twice a week, and Viad o^teu «e^VL Ynss^ ^yA < ^
wice as long as an ordinary scythe.
esty, according to the custom of the
was only shaved twice a-week. I
availed on the barber to give me some
;uds or lather, out of which I picked
fifty of the strongest stumps of air. I
k a piece of fine wood, and cut it like
of a comb, making several holes jin
lal distances with as small a needle
Id get from Glumdalclitch. I fixed
itomps so artificially, scraping and
hem with my knife toward the points,
lade a very tolerable comb; which
^asonable supply, my own being so
(ken in the teeth, that it was almost
neither did I know any artist in that
o nice and exacts as would undertake
me another.
lis puts me in mind of an amusement,
[ spent many of my leisure hours. I
le queen's woman to save for me the
of her majesty's hair, whereof in
)t a good quantity; and consulting
174 CUI.LITBKS THiVELS. j
I mailp a ) > rc > .ent of them to het majeilf ;
who kept tiiiria ill her cabinet, and lued ta
■how llicin for curiontiM, as ipdced die) I
wen tlie wonder of every one tbM beheM
Ihea. The queen wonld have had me ut
■pOD one of theie chnira, but I abwhitdy
refused lo obey her, protesting I would n-
tfaer die a thonsand deaths, thao place a < tii-
hoDonrable part of my body on those predmii
faain, that ooce adorned her majesty's head,
Of these hairs (as I had always a mecbaoical
genios) I likewise made a neat little parse,
aboat five feet loop, willi her majesty's name
deciphered in gold letters, which I gave lo
Olumdalclitch by the queen's consent. To
My the truth, it was more for show than aie,
being not of strength to bear the weight nf
the larger coins, and Uierefore she Lept ■»-
thing in it but some httle toys that girls aie
The king, who delighted in mnsie, had fre-
qnent concerts at court, to which I was aome-
times carried, and set in my box on a table
to hear thein ; bat the noise was so great that
I could haidly distinguish the tones. I am
confident that all the drams and tnuopets of
a royal army, beating and sounding together
jnst at your ears, could pot eqnal it. Hj
practice was to have my box removed fnwi
the place where the performers lat, ai far as
1 eonld, then to shut the doors and windows
of it, and draw tlie window cnrtajna; after
wUdi 1 found their mniic not diiagrecabls.
J had leatncd in my ] < » & to ^kv] «'& ^dk
A YOYA6E TO BROBDIHTgNAG. Iti
Upon the spinet* Glnmdalclitch kept one in
her chamber, and a master attended twice
H-week to teach her : I called it a spinet, be-
cause it somewhat resembled that instrument,
and was played upon in the same manner.
A fancy came into my head, that I would
entertain the king and queen with an English
tune upon this instrument. But this appeared
extremely difficult : for the spinet was near
sixty feet long, each key being almost a foot
wide, so that witli my arms extended I could
not reach to above five keys, and to press
tuvm down required a good smart stroke with
my fist, which would be too great a labour,
tLd 4,0 no purpose. The method I contrived
was this : I prepared two round sticks, about
the bigness of common cudgels ; they were
tiiicker at one end than the other, and I co-
Tered the thicker ends with pieces of a
mouse's skin, that by rapping on them I
might neither damage the tops of the keys
nor interrupt the sound. Before the spinet
a bench was placed, about four feet below
the keys, and I was put upon the bench. I
ran sideling upon it, that way and this, as
fast as I could, banging the proper keys with
my two sticks, and made a shift to play a Jig,
to the satisfiiction of both their majesties ; but
it was the most violent exercise I ever under-
went; and yet I could not strike above six-
teen keys, nor consequently play the bast
and treble together, as other artists do ; which
Was a great disadvantage to my performance.
The king, who, as I before observed, ¥i'«a
176 OVIXITIR*! mA% BLf.
a prince of excellent anderatandingy woiU
frequently order that I shoald be broogbt m
my box, and set upon the table in his dotet:
he would then command me to bring one of
my chairs out of the box, and sit down withifi
three yards'distance upon the top of the
cabinet, which brought me almost to a level
with his face. In this manner I had seyeni
conversations with him. I one day took the
freedom to tell his majesty, that the contempt
he discovered towards Europe, and the rest
of the world, did not seem answerable to
those excellent qualities of mind that he was
master of; that reason did not extend itself
with the bulk of the body ; on the contrary,
we observed in our country, that the tallest
persons were usually the least provided vritb
it : that among other animals, bees and ants
had the reputation of more industry, art and
sagacity, than many of the larger kinds ; and
that, as inconsiderable as he took me to be, I
hoped I might live to do his majesty some
signal service.'The king heard me with
attention, and began to conceive a much bet-
ter opinion of me than he had ever before.
He desired I would give him as exact an ac-
count of the government of England as I
possibly could; because, as fond as pruces
connnonly are of their own customs (for so
he conjectured of other monarchs by my for-
mer discourses), he should be glad to hear of
any thing that might deserve imitation.'
. Imagine with thyself, courteous reader,
him often I then w\^c^ lioi t!i:v« Vskiisqa ^
ar native country, in a style equal to
its and felicity.
:gan my discourse by informing his
fT, that our doiniuions consisted of two
, which composed three mighty king-
mder one sovereign, beside our plan-
in America. I dwelt long upon the
'of our soil, and the temperature of
late. I then spoke at large upon the
ition of an English parliament ; partly
ip of an illustrious body, called the
f peers ; persons of the noblest blood,
the most ancient and ample patrimo-
'. described that extraordinary care
taken of their education in arts and
) qualify them for being counsellors
lie king and kingdom ; to have a share
gislature ; to be members in the high-
t of judicature, whence there can be
d ; and to be champions always ready
lefence of their prince and country,
valour, conduct, and fidelity-. That
re the ornament and bulwark of the
178 Ct;LLIV£R*8 TRAVELS.
sought out throagh the lahole nation, by the
prince and bis wisest coansellors, among
such of the priesthood as were most deaen*
edly distinguished by the sanctity of their
lives, and the depth of their emdition ; who
were indeed the spiritual fathers of the clergy
and the people.
That the other part of the parliament con-
sisted of an assembly, called the house of
commons, who were all principal gentlemen,
freely picked and culled oat by 3ie people
themselves, for their great abilities and loTe
of their country, to represent the wisdom of
the whole nation. And that these two bo*
dies made up the most august assembly in
Europe ; to whom, in coiyunction with the
prince, the whole legislature b conunitted.
I then descended to the courts of justice ;
over which the judges, those venerable sages
and interpreters of the law, presided, for
determining the disputed rights and proper-
ties of men, as well as for the punishment of
vice and protectior of innocence. I men-
tioned the prudent management of our trea-
sury; the valour and adiievements of onr
forces, by sea and land. I computed the
number of our people, by reckoning how many
millions there might be of each religions
sect, or political party among us. I did not
omit even our sports and pastimes, or any
other particular which I thought might re-
dound to the honour of my country. And I
finished all with a brief historical account
ofaffiedrs and events in EA^Vaiii^ iw «Smq1i.
hundred yeara past.
aadicnces, each of several Iionrs ; and
king iieard the whole witli great atten-
frcqacutly taking notes ot* what I spoke,
ell as inemoraudums of what questions
itended to ask me.
iien I had p < it an end to these long dis-
ses, his majesty, in a sixth audience,
ultiug his notes, proposed many doubts,
ies, and ol^ections, apon every article.
isked, * what methods were used to col-
e the minds and bodies of our young
ity, and in what kind of business they
noiily spent the first and teachable part
icir lives? What course was taken to
ly that assembly, when any noble family
me extinct? What qualifications were
isaiy in those who are to be created new
: whether the humour of the prince, a
of money to a court lady, or a design of
gtheniug a party opposite to the public in-
t,e ver happened to be the motives m those
Dcements? What share of knowledge
: lords had in the laws of their country,
lin'Of #ho«r /»a*mA K«» !* -'»■ •»- *- •■ •
(80 Gulliver's travels.
compilers with the tunes, while they W6
common priests ; or slavish prostitute cha;
lains to some nobleman, whose opinions tbi
continued servilely to follow, after they we
admitted into that assembly ?
He then desired to know, ^ what arts we
practised in electing those whom I call
commoners : whether a stranger, witli a stro
purse, might not influence the vulgar votf
to choose hira before their own Isuidlord,
the most considerable gentleman in theneig
bourhood ? How it came to pass, that peq
were so violently bent upon getting into t
assembly, which I allowed to be a gn
trouble and expense, often to the ruin
their families, without any salary or pensk
because this appeared such an exalted stn
of virtue and public spirit, that his mtjei
seemed to doubt it might possibly not be
ways sincere?* And he desired to kno
'whether such zealous gentlemen could lu
any views of refunding themselves for 1
charges and trouble they were at by sac
ficing the public good to the designs ol
weak and vicious prince, in conjunction w
a corrupted ministry ? He multiplied his qn
tions, and sifted me thoroughly upon evi
part of this head, proposing numberless :
quiries and objections, which I think it i
prudent or convenient to repeat.
Upon what I said in relation to our coa
of justice, his majesty desired to be satisfi
in several points ; and tbialN«« & Wttex ml
to do haviDg been fonnetVy oiVmo & t roioiii^^
.^..^ij, wmcn was decreed
costs. He asked,'what time
spent in detennining between
)ng, and what degree ot* expense f
locates and orators had liberty
causes manifestly known to bo
tious, or oppressive? Whether
gion or politics, were observed
weight in the scale of justice ?
ie pleading orators were persons
he general knowledge of equity,
▼incial, national, and other lo-
Whether they or their judges
in penning those laws, which
the liberty of interpreting, and -;
at their pleasure? Whether
', at different times, pleaded
it the same cause, and dted
rove contrary opinions ? Whe-
arich or a poor corporation ?
eceived any pecuniary reward
T delivering their opinions?
ly, whether they were ever
abers in the low^r «o*»-*- •
-I
i;
;
i82 GULLIVBR*8 TRAVELS.
deceived in hU calculations. Bat,ifwhttl
told him were true, he was still at a loss hov
a kingdom could run out Of its estate, like i
private person.'He asked me,'who were
our creditors ; and where we found money to
pay thcLj V He wondered to hear me talk of
such cliargeable and expensive wars; tiitt
certainly we must be a quarrelsome people,
or live among very bad neighbours, antf toat
our generals must needs be richer than oat
kings.* He asked,'what business we had
out of our own islands, unless upon the score of
trade, or treaty, or to defend the coasts mih
oor fleets Above all, he was amazed to hear
me talk of a mercenary standing army, in the
midst of peace and among a free people. He
said, ^ if we were governed by our consent, in
the persons of our representatives, he ooold
not imagine of whom we were afraid, or
against whom we were to iijght; and would
hear my opinion, whether a private man'*
house might not be better defended by him-
self, his children, and family, than by half a
dozen rascals, picked up at a venture in the
streets for small wages, who might get a hun-
dred limes more by cutting their throats?
He laughed at my'odd kind of aritfametie,'
as he was pleased to call it, < in reckoning
the numbers of ouj( people by a oompntatioc
drawn from the several sects among us, it
religion and politics.'He said, * he knew
no reason why those, who entertain opiniona
prejudical to the public, should be obliged to
fibange, )r should not b« < i\iU%«d t^ conceal
A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG. 18S
hem. A.nd as it was tyranny in any goyem-
nent to reqoire tlie first, so it was weakness
lot to enforce the second : for a man may be
allowed to keep poisons in liis closet, but not
to vend them about for cordials.'
He observed, ^that among the diversions
of our nobility and gentry, I had mentioned
gaming : he desired to know at what age this
entertainment was usually taken up, and
when it was laid down ; how much of their
time it employed: whether it ever went so
high as to affect their fortunes ; whether
mean vicious people, by their dexterity in
that art, might not arrive at great riches, and
sometimes keep our very nobles independance
as well as habituate them to vile companions ;
wholly take them from the improvement of
their minds, and force them, by the losses
they received,* to learn and practise that
infamous dexterity upon others.
He was perfectly astonished with the his-
torical account I gave him of our affairs
during the last century ; protesting it was
only a heap of conspiracies, rebcliions, mur-
ders, massacres, revolutions, banishments, the
very worst effects that avarice, Action, hypo-
crisy, perfidioHsness, cruelty, ragn, madness,
hatred, envy, lust, malice, and ambiticn,
could produce.
His majesty, in another audience, was a?,
tlie pains to recapitulate the sum of all I had
spoken; compared the questions he made
• Rerelvlnt « lo^»i »■ certainly not n goo«l exprcv
uon: it §hould bf,'the loues they snsUlaed.'~S.
184 gullivbr's tratbls.
with the answers I had given; then taking
sne into his hands, and stroking me gently,
delivered himself in these words, whick I
•hall never forget, nor the manner he spoke
them in :'My little friend Grildrig, yon have
made a most admirable panegyric upon your
country ; you have clearly proved, that igno-
norance, idleness, and vice, are the proper
ingredients for qualifying a legislator; that
laws are best explained, interpreted, and ap-
plied, by those wiiose interest and abilities Ue
in perverting, confounding, and eluding them.
I observe among yon some lines of an institu-
tion, which in its original might have been
tolerable, but these half erased, and the rest
wholly blurred and blotted by cormptions.
It does not appear, from all you have said,
how any one perfection is required toward
the procurement of any one station among
you; much less, that men are ennobled on
account of their virtue; that priests arc
advanced for their piety or learning ; soldiers,
for their conduct or valour ; judges, for their
integrity; senators, for tiie love of their
country; or counsellors for their wisdom. As
for yourself,'continued the king, < who have
spent the greatest part of your life in travel-
ling, I am well disposed to hope you may
hitherto have escaped many vices of your
country. But by what I have gathered from
your own relation, and the answers I have
with much pains wringed* and extorted from
* latltad of''wrioged'it ibonld ha ire been'wmng.'*^
A VOYAGE TO BROBDIIIGNAG. 186
yOQ, I cannot bat conclude the bulk of your
natives to be the most pemidons race of little
odioas vermin that nature ever suffered to
crawl upon the surface of the earth-
CHAPTER IV.
The Author's love of his country. He makee a
proposal of much advantage to the Kingy
which is r^ected. The King's great ignorance
in poliiics. The learning of that country very
imperfect and confined. The laws, and mt/t-
tary affairs, and parties in the state.
Nothing but an extreme love of truth could
have hindered me from concealing this part of
my story. It was in vain to discover my
resentments, which were always turned into
ridicule; and I was forced to rest with pa-
tience, while my noble and beloved country
was so injuriously treated. I am as heartily
sorry as any of my readers can possibly be,
that such an occasion was given : but this
prince happened to be so curious and inqui-
sitive upon every particular, that it could not
consist either with gratitude or good manners,
to refuse giving him what satisfaction I was
able. Yet thus much I may be allowed to
say in my vindication, that I artfblly eluded
many of his questions, and gave to every
point a more favourable turn, by many de-
grees, tlian the strictness of truth would allow.
186 guixivbr's travisls
For I have always borne that laudable parti-
ality to my own countiy, which DioDyttw
HaUcarnafisensis, with go much justice, recom-
mends to an historian: I woald bide the
frailties and deformities of my political mo-
ther, and place her viiPtues and beauties in the
most advantageous light. This was my sin-
cere endeavour in those many discourses I
had with that monarch, although it unfortu-
nately failed of success.
But great allowances should be given to a
king, who lives wholly secluded from the rest
of the world, and must therefore be altogether
nnaoquainted with the manners and customs
that most prevail in other nations : the want
of which knowledge will ever produce many
prejudices, and a certain narrowness of think-
ing, from which we, and the politer countries
of Europe, are wholly exempted. And it
would be hard indeed, if so remote a prince's
notions of virtues and vice were to be offered
as a standard for all mankind.
To confirm what I have now said, and fur-
ther to show the miserable effects of a con-
fined education, I shall here insert a passage,
which will hardly obtain belief. In hopes to
ingratiate myself further into his nuijesty's
favour, I told him of < an invention, discover-
ed between three and four hundred years ago,
to make a certain powder, into a heap of
which, the smallest spark of fire falling, would
kindle the whole in a moment, although it
were as big as a mountain, and make it all %
«p in the air together, mth auoUe and agjl-
.....Mucu uiio a nol-
le of brass or iron, according to its
, would drive a ball of iron or lead,
:h violence and speed, as nothing was
sustain its force. That the largest
lis discharged, would not only destroy
anks of an army at once, but batter
ngest walls to the ground , sink down
ith a thousand men in each, to tbe
: > f the sea; and when linked logetiier
lin, would cut through masts and rig-
ride hundreds of bodies in the middle,
all waste before them. That we
t this powder into large hollow balls
and discharged them by an engine
le city we were besieging, which
> up the pavements, tear the houses
, burst and throw splinters on every
hing out the brains of all who came
lat I knew the ingredients very well,
re cheap and common ; I understood
sr of compounding them, and could
workmen how to make those tubes,
roportionable to all other thincm ■»
188 Gulliver's travels.
of acknowlod^ement, in turn for so mivf
marks tliat 1 liad received, of his royal favour
and protcctiuu/
The king was struck with horror at tiie
description I had given of tho^e terrible
engines, and tlie proposal I had made.'He
was amazed, how so impotent and grovelliDi;
an insect as I (these were his expressions)
* could entertain such inhuman ideas, and iu
so familiar a manner, as to appear wholly
unmoved at all scenes of blood and desolation,
which I had painted, as the common effects oif
those destructive machines ; w hereof,'he said,
* some evil genius, enemy to mankind, mast
have been the first contriver. As for him-
self, he protested, that although few things
delighted him so much as new discoveries in
art or in nature, yet he would rather lose halt'
his kingdom, than be privy to such a secret;
which he commanded me, as I valued my life,
never to mention any more.'
A strange effect of narrow principles and
views ! that a prince possessed of every qaa-
Uty which procures veneration, love, and
esteem ; of strong parts, great wisdom, and
profound learning, endowed with admirable
taleiits, and almost adored by his suiijects,
should, from a nice unnecessaiy scruple,
whereof in Europe we can have no conception,
let slip an opportunity put into his bauds that
would have made him absolute master of the
lives, the liberties, and tlie fortunes of his
people. Neither do I say this, witli the least
intention to detr;!LCl from tVi^ tiwec} \\x\» & % < ^
A VOTAOB TO BR0BDIN6NAG. 19i
that excellent luog, whose diaracter, I am
sensible, ¥riUy on this account, be very much
lessened in the opinion of an English reader :
but I take this defect among them to hare
risen from their ignorance, by not having hi-
therto ^reduced politics into a science, as the
more acute wits of Europe have done. For,
I remember very well, in a discourse one day
with the king, when I happened to say, * there
were several thousand books among us written
upon the art of government,'it gave him (di-
rectly contrary to my intention) a very mean
opinion of our understandings. He professed
both to abominate and despise all mystery,
refinement, and intrigue, either in a prince
or a minister. He could not tell what 1
meant by secrets of state, where an enemy,
or some rival nation, were not in the case.
He confined the knowledge of governing with-
in very narrow bounds, to common sense and
reason, to justice and lenity, to the speedy
determination of civil and criminal causes;
with some other obvious topics, which are not
worth considering. And he gave it for his
opinion,'that whoever could make two ears
of com, or two blades of grass to grow upon
a spot of ground, where only one grew before,
would deserve better of mankind, and do
more essential service to his country, than
the whole race of politicians put togedier.'
The learning of this people is very defec-
tive; consisting only in morality, history,
poetry, and mathematics, wherein they must
be allowed to excel. But the last of these U
190 G77LLIVBR's traybls.
wholly applied to what may be luefiil ia life,
to the improvemcDt of a^cnlture, and aU
mechanical arts ; so that among as, it wonkl
be little esteemed. And as to ideas, entities,
abstractions, and transcendentals, I could
never drive the least conception* into their
heads.
No law of that country mast exceed in
words the iiamber of letters in their alphabet,
which consists only of two and twenty. Bnt
indeed few of them extend even to that lengtli.
They are expressed in the most plain and
simple terms, wherein those people are not
mercurial enough to discover above one inter-
pretation : and to write a comment upon any
law, is a capital crime. As to the decision of
civil causes, or proceedings against criminals,
their precedents are so few, that tliey have
little reason to boast of any extraordinary
skill in either.
They have had the art of printing, as well
as the Chinese, time out of mind : bat their
libraries arc not very large ; for that of the
king, which is reckoned the largest, does not
amount to above a thousand volumes, placed
in a gallery of twelve hundred feet long,
whence I had liberty to borrow what books
I pleased. The queen's joiner had contrived
in one of Glumdalclitch's rooms, a kind of
wooden machine iive-and-twenty feet high,
formed like a standing ladder ; the steps were
each fifty feet long : it was indeed a movea-
* It Bhonld be,'I could n«v«T delve tk« l«ut con*
repCion'of ihem,* iuVo iheU Yie»,A»?— %•
A VOTAOB TO BROBDINGNA6. 101
1e pair of stairs, the lowest end place^jit
en feet distance from tlie wall of the cham-
ber. The book I had a mind to read, was
mt up leaning against the wall: I first
Dounted to the upper step of the ladder, and
nrning my face towards the book, began at
he top of the page, and so walldng to the
ight and left about eiglit or ten paces, ac-
u > rding to the length of the lines, till I had
gotten a little below the leTel of mine eyes,
ind then descending gradually till I came to
the bottom t after which I mounted again,
ind began the other page in the same man-
ner, and so turned over the leaf, which I
soold easily do with both my hands, for it
vas as thick and stiff as a pasteboard, and in
he largest foUos not above eighteen or twen-
f feet long.
Their style is clear, masculine, and smooth.
It not florid ; for they avoid nothing more
an multiplying unnecessary words, or using
lions expressions. I have perused many
tl^ir books, especially those in history and
rality. Among the rest, I was much di-
ted with a little old treatise, which always
in Glumdalclitch's bedchamber, and be-
;ed to her governess, a grave elderly gen-
Oman, who dealt in writings of morality
devotion. The book treats of the weak-
of human kind, and is in little esteem,
)t among the women and the vulgar,
ever, I was curious to see what an an-
of that country could say upon such a
*X, This writer ^ent through all the
JM 6ULLIVER*fl TRAVBLS.
usual topics of European moralists, slii
^liow diminative, contemptible, and he
an animal was man in his own natnre
imable to defend himself from inclemi
of the air, or the fury of wild beasti
ranch he was excelled by one creata
stren^h, by another in speed, by a tl
foresight, by a fourth in indnstiy/ He a
* that nature was degenerated in these
declining ages of the world, and conli
produce only small abortive birdis, in
parison of tliose in ancient times/ H <
'it was very reasonable to tlilnk, nol
that the species of men were originaUy
larger, but also that there must hare
giants in former ages ; which, as it is asi
by history and tradition, so it has beei
firmed by huge bones and skulls, cai
dug up in several parts of the kingdoa
exceeding the common dwindled race •!
in our days/ He argued,'that the rerj
of nature absolutely required we should
been made, in the beginning, of a siie
large and robust ; not so liable to destn
from every little accident, of a tile i
from a house, or a stone cast from the
of a boy, or being drowned in a little In
From this way of reasoning, the author
several more applications, useful in the
duct of life, but needless here to repeat,
my own part, I could not avoid rediectlni
universally this talent was spread, of dra
lectures in morality, or indeed ratiier in
of discontent and repunn^, from ^« < v >
A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNA6. !•!
we rake witii nature. And I believe, npcn
a strict inquiry, those quarrels might be
shown as ill-grounded among us as they are
among that people.*
As to their military affairs, they boast that
the king's army consists of a hundred and
seventy-six thousand foot, and thirty-two
tiiousand horse: if that may be called an
army, which is made up of tradesmen in the
several cities, and farmers in the country,
whose commanders are only the nobility and
gentry, without pay or reward. They are
indeed perfect enough in their exercises, and
under very good discipline, wherein I saw no
great merit ; for how should it be otherwise^
where every farmer is under tlie conunand of
his own landlord, and every citizen under
that of the principal men in his own city,
diosen after the manner of Venice, by ballot ?
I have often seen*the militia of Lorbrulgrud
drawn out to exercise, in a great field near
fte city of twenty miles square. They were
hi all not above twenty-five thousand foot,
and six thousand horse ; but it was impossible
fcr me to compute their number, considering
the space of ground they took up. A cava-
ier, mounted on a large steed, might be about
iiiety feet high. I have seen this whole
* The author's zeal to justify Providence has before
en remarked ; and these qaarreis with natnre, or in
icr words with God, conid not have btsen mure for*
ly reproved than by showing that tbe complaints
•n which they are founded wonldbe eqaally specioos
mg beings of such astonishing yaperiority (tf stature
strength.-i-H.
8.'.
104 Gulliver's travel*.
body of horse, upon a word of coDunand,
draw their swords at once^ and brandish
them in the air. Imagination can figure
nothing so grand, so surprising, and so as-
tonishing ! it looked as if ten thousand flasiies
of lightning were darting at the same time
from every quarter of the sky.
I was curious to know how this prince, to
whose dominions there is no access from
any other country, came to think of ar-
mies, or to teach his people the practice of
military discipline. But I was soon informed,
both by conversation and reading their his-
tories ; for, in tlie conrse of many ages, they
have been troubled with the same disease to
which the whole race of mankind is subject;
the nobility often contending for power, the
people for liberty, and the king for absolute
dominion. All which, however happily t^m^
pered by the laws of that kingdom, have been
sometimes violated by each of the three par-
ties, and have more than once occasioned
civil wars ; the last whereof was happily put
an end to, by this prince's grandfather, in a
general composition ; and the militia, then
settled with conunon consent, has been ever
since kept in the strictest duty.
OYAGB TO BROBDIHGNAG. 195
CHAPTEB VIII.
and Queen make a progrese to the
8. The Author attends them^ The
in which he leavts the country
irticularly related. He returns ta
irays a strong impalse that I shoald
recover my liberty, though it was
e to coiyecture by what means, or
any project with the least hope of
g. The ship in which I sailed, was
ever known to be driven within
that coast, and the king had given
ers,'that if at any time another ap-
: should be taken ashore, ayd with
w and passengers brought in a tum-
rbrulgrud/ He was strongly bent
a woman of my own size, by whom
> ropagate the breed : but I think I
ther have died than undergone the
> f leaving a posterity to be kept in
e tame canary-birds, and perhaps,
lold about the kingdom, to persons
fj for curiosities. I was indeed
rith much kindness : I was the fa-
a great king and queen, and the
'the whole court ; but it was upon
t as ill became the dignity of human-
could never forget those domestic
had left behind me. I wanted to
1^ people^ with whom I could con^
196 GULLITER't TRAVBLt.
verse a pon even terms, and walk about tfat |
streets and fields withoot being afraid of
being trod to death like a frog or ayomig
poppy. But my deliverance came soooei
than I expected, and iu a manner not very
common ; the vrhole story and drcumstances
of vrhich I shall faithfully relate.
I had now been two years in this comitry;
and about the beginning of the third. Glum-
dalclitch and I attended the king and qoeen,
in a progress to the south coast of the king-
dom. I was carried, as usual, in my travel-
ing-box, which as I have already described,
was a very convenient closet, of twelve feet
wide. And I had ordered a hammock to be
fixed, by silken ropes from the four comers
at the top, to break the jolts, when a servant
carried- me before him on horseback, as I
sometimes desired ; and would often sleep
in my hammock, while we were upon the
road. On the roof of my closet, not directly
over the middle of the hammock, I ordered
the joiner to cut out a hole of a foot square,
to give me air in hot weather, as I slept ;
which hole I shut at pleasure vrith a board
that drew backward and forward through a
groove.
When we came to our journey's end, the king
thought proper to pass a few diqrs at a palace
he has near Flanflosnic, a city within eighteen
English miles of the sea-side. Gtomdafclitch
and I were much fatigued : I had gotten a
small cold, but the poor girl was so ill as to
be ooBfined ta her cVkamibev , \\o\m|^^^a w^
4 VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNA6. T97
the ocean, which mast be the only scene of
my escape, if ever it should happen. I pre-
tended to be worse than I really v as, and
desired leave to take the fresh air of the
sea, with a page, whom I was very fcmd of,
and who had sometimes been tiusted with-
me. I shall never forget with what unwil-
lingness Glumdalclitch consented, nor the
strict charge she gave the page to be careful
of me, bursting at the same time into a flood
of tears, as if she had some foreboding of
what was to happen. The boy took me out:
in my box, about half an hour*s walk from
the palace, towards the rocks on the sea-shore.
I ordered him to set me down, and lifting up
one of my sashes, cast many a wistful melan-
choly look towards the sea. I found myself
not very well, and told the page that I had
a mind to take a uap in my hammock, which
I hoped would do me good. I got in, and the
boy shut the window close down, to keep out
the cold. I soon fell asleep, and all I can
conjecture is, while I slept, the page, tliink-
ing no danger could happen, went among the
rocks to look for birds'eggs, having before
observed him from my window searching
about, and picking up one or two in the
clefts. Be that as it will, I found myself
suddenly awaked with a violent pull upon
the ring, which was fastend at the top of my
box for the conveniency of carriage. I felt
my box raised very high in the air, and then
borne forward with prodigious speed. The
first jolt had like to have shaken m§L out of
198 GULLIVBA's TRAVSLt.
my hammock, but afterward tiie motion was
ea)y enough. I called oat several times, as
loud as I could raise my voice, bat all to no
porpose. I looked towards my windows,
and could see nothing but the cloads and sky.
I heard a noise just over my head, like the
clapping of wings, and then began to per-
ceive the wofol condition I was in; that
some eagle had got the ring of my box in his
beak, with an intent to let it fall on a rock,
like a tortoise in a shelly and then pick out
my body, and devour it: for the sagacity and
smell of this bird enables him to discover his
quarry at a great distance, though better con-
cealed than I could be vnthin a two-inch
board.
In a little time I observed tbe nobe and
flutter of wings to increase very fast and my
box was tossed up and down, like a sign in a
windy day. I heard several bangs or buffets,
as I thought, given to the eagle (for such I
am certain it must have been that held the
ring of my box in his beak), and then, all on
a sudden, felt myself falling perpendicularly
down, for above a minute, but with sucti
incredible swiftness, that I almost lost my
breath. My fall was stopped by a terriUe
squash, that sounded louder to my ears than
the cataract of Niagara* ; after which^ I was
* This cataract if produced by the fall of a conflax
of water (formed of the four vast lakea of Canady) from
a roclcy precipice, the perpendicatar teleht i^ wUch i»
one hundred and thirty-seven feet; and Iitaiil to havt
hcco heard fifteen leagma.-- II.
A VOYAGE TO BROBOINGNAG. 1(H)
qoite in the dark for another minute, and
then my box began to rise 80 high, that I
could see light from the tops of the windows.
I now perceived I was fsdlen into the sea.
My box, by the weight of my body, the goods
tiiat were in, and the broad plates of iron
fixed for strength at the four comers of the
top and bottom, floated about ^ve feet deep
in water. I did then, and do now suppose,
that tiie eagle which flew away with my box
was pursued by two or three others, and
forced to let me drop, while he defended
himself against tiie rest, who hoped to share
in the prey. The plates of iron fastened at
the bottom of the box (for those were the
strongest) preserved the balance while it fell,
and hindered it from being broken on the
•nrfaoe of the water. Every joint of it was
well grooved ; and the door did not move on
hinges, but up and down like a sash, which
kept my closet so tight that very little water
came in. I got with much difficulty out of
my hammock, having first ventured to draw
biick the slip-board on the roof already men-
tioned, contrived on purpose to let in air, for
want of which I found myself almost stifled.
How often did I then wish myself with my
dear Gtnmdalclitch, from whom one single hour
liad so for divided me ! And I may say with
tmtiiy that in the midst of my own misfor-
tunes I could not forbear lamenting my poor
nurse, tiie grief she would suffer for my loss,
the displeasure of the queen, and the ruin of
barfortnne. Periiaps'aany travellers have
i
2UU GULLIVER'S TRAVELS.
not been under greater difficulties and distress
than I was at this juncture, expecting every
nyment to see my box dashed to pieces, or at
least overset by the first violent blast, or
rising ivave. A breach in one single pane of
glass virould have been immediate death : nor
could any thing have preserved the virindows,
bat the strong lattice wires placed on the
ontside, against accidents in travelling. I
saw the water ooze in at several crannies,
althongh the leaks were not considerable, and
I endeavoured to stop them as well as I could.
I was not able to lift up the roof of my closet,
which otherwise I certamly should have done,
and sat on the top of it ; where I might at
least preserve myself some hours longer, than
by being shut up (as I may call it) in the hold.
Or if I escaped these dangers for a day or
two, what could I expect, but a miserable
death of cold and hunger ? I was four hours
under tiiese circumstances, expecting, and
indeed wishing, every moment to be my last.
I have already told the reader that there
were two strong staples fixed upon that side
of my box which had no window, and into
which the servant, who used to carry me on
horseback, would put a leathern belt, and
buckle it about his waist. Being in this dis-
consolate state, I heard, or at least thought t
heard, some kind of grating noise on that
side of my box where the staples were fixed ;
and soon after I began to fancy that the box
was pulled or towed along tlie sea; for I now
and then felt a sort of tugging, which made
k TOTAGB TO BROBDIMGNAG. SOI
ives rise near the tops of my wiudowsy
g me almost in tlie darl^. This ga?e me
aint hopes of relief, althougli I was not
> imagine how it coiUd be brought about,
tared to unscrew one of my chairs,
were always fastened to the floor ; and
I made a hard shift to screw it down
directly under the slipping board that
lately opened, I mounted on the chair,
iitting my mouth as near as I could to
tie, I called for help in a loud voice, and
the languages I understood. I then
ed my handkerchief to a stick I nsnally
d, and, thrusting it up the hole, waved
inX times in the air, that if any boat or
rere near, the seamen might coiyecture
unhappy mortal to be shut up in the
mnd no effect from all I could do, but
y perceived my closet to be moved
; and in the space of an hour, or better,
ide of the box where the staples were,
lad no windows, struck against some-
that was hard. I apprehended it to be
c, and found myself tossed more than
I plainly heard a noise upon the cover
closet, like that of a cable, and the gra-
f it as it passed tiirough the ring. I
bund myself hoisted up, by degrees, at
three feet higher than I was before,
enpon I again thrust up my stick and
erchief, calling for help till I was almost
i. In return, to which, I hoaixi a great
rejpeated three times, giving me such
\
902 GULLITER's TRATEL8.
transports of joy, as are not to be conceived
but by those who feel them. I now heard a
trampling over my head, and somebody calling
through the hole with a loud voice in the
English tongue,'If there be any body below,
let them speak/ I answered,'I was an
Englishman, drawn by ill fortnne into the
greatest calamity that ever any creature un-
derwent, and begged, by all that was moving,
to be delivered out of the dungeon I was in/
Tlie voice replied, *I was safe, for my box
was fastened to their ship ; and the carpenter
should immediately come and saw a hole in
the cover, large enough to pull me out.'I
answered,'that was needless, and would
take up too much time; for there was do
more to be done, but let one of the crew put
his fmger into the ring, and take the box ont
of the sea into the ship, and so into the cap-
tain's cabin.* Some of them, upon hearing
me talk so wildly, thought I was mad ; others
laughed ; for indeed it never came into my
head, that I was now got among people of
my own stature and strength. The carpenter
came, and in a few minutes sawed a passage
about four feet square, then let down a small
ladder, upon which I mounted, and thence
I
* There are several little incidents which show the
author to have had a deep knowledge of human n^ttnre;
and I think this is one. Although the principal advan-
tages enumerated by Gulliver in the iweginning of this
chapter, ofminglini; again among his countrymen, de-
pended on their being of the same sire with hiraself^yet
this is forgotten in his ardour tu be delivered : aod b« ic
afterwRrd betray t^ \nto ihe uim« «\i«at^\\^ ,\y^ VlVw ia^I
fo preserve hU fainUnre.'— U.
A VOYAGB TO BROBDINGNA6.
aken into, the ship in a very weak coo*
I.
c sailors were in amazement, and aiked
thousand questions, which I had no in«
ion to answer. I was equally con*
led at the sight of so many pigmies, for
I took them to be, after having so long
tomed mine eyes to the monstrous oh*
I had left. But the captain, Mr. Tho-
Wilcocks, an honest worthy Shropshire
observing I was ready to faint, took me
liis cabin, gave me a cordial to comfort
ind made me turn in upon his own bed,
ing me to take a little rest, of which I had
need. Before I went to sleep, I gave
o understand that I had some valuable
tare in my box, too good to be lost; a
hammock, a handsome field-bed, two
s, a table, and a cabinet; that my closet
rang on all sides, or rather quilt€^d, with
md cotton : that if he would let one ot
;rew bring my closet iuto his cabin, I
d open it there before him, and show
ay goods. The captain, hearing me otter
absurdities, concluded I was raving;
ver (I suppose to pacify me) he promi-
give order as I desired, and going upon
, sent some of his men down into my
t, whence (as I afterwards found) they
up all my goods, and stripped off the
ng; but the chairs, cabinet, and bed-
, being screwed to the floor, were much
iged by the ignorance of the seamen,
tore them up by force. Thfiu they
\
304 GULUVEU'S TRAVELS.
knocked off some of the boards for the use of
the ship, and when they had got all they had
a miad tor, let the hull drop into the sea,
which, by reason of many breaches made in
the bottom and sides, sank to rights. Aid,
indeed, I was glad not to have been- a spec-
tator of the havock they made ; becanse I am
confident it would have sensibly touched me,
by bringing former passages into my mind,
which I would rather have forget.
I slept some hours, but perpetually dis-
tnrbed with dreams of the place I had left,
and the dangersi had escapsd.However,. upon
waking, I found myself much recovered. It
was now about eight o'clock at night, and the
captain ordered supper immediately, think-
ing I had already fasted too long. He enter-
tained me with great kindness, observing me
not to look wildly, or talk inconsistently ; and,
when we were left alone, desired I would
give him a relation of my travels, and by what
accident I came to be set adrift, in that mon-
strous wooden chest. He said'that about
twelve o'clodE at noon, as he was looking
through his glass, he spied it at a distance,
and thought it was a sail, which he had a
mind to make, being not much out of his
course, in hopes of buying some biscuit, his
own beginning to fall short. That upon
coming nearer, and finding his error, he sent
out his long-boat to discover what it was;
that his men came back in a fright, swearing
that they had seen a swunming house. That
he ianghed atthdr € < %, «a^^«nX\usBa^\si
A VOYAGE TO BROBDIMOHAG. 905
tbe boat, ordering his men to take a strong
cable along with them. That the weather
being calm^ he rowed ronnd me seyeral timety
observed my windows and wire lattices that
defended them. That he discovered two sta^
pies upon one side, which was all of boards,
without any passage for light. He then com-
manded his men to row up to that side, and
fastening a cable to one of the staples, order-
ed them to tow my chest, as they called it,
toward the sliip. When it was there, he gave
directions to fasten another cable to the ring
fixed in the cover, and to raise up my chest
with pulleys, which all the sailors were not
able to do above two or three feet. He said
they saw my stick and handkerchief thrust
out of the hole, and concluded that some
unhappy man must be shut up in the cavity.'
I asked, * whetlier he or the crew had seen
any prodigious birds in the air, about the
time he first discovered me.'To which be
answered,'that discoursing this matter with
the sailors while I was asleep, one of them
said, he had observed three eagles flying
towards the north, but remarked nothing of
their being larger than the usual size : which
1 suppose must be imputed to tbe great height
they were at; and he could not guess the
reason of my question. I then asked the
captain, < how far he reckoned we might be-
from land? He said,'by the best compnta^
tion he could make, we were at least a hun-
dred leagues.'I assured him,'that he must
be mittaken by almost h^df, for Ihad aot^
2 T
\
206. GULLIVER'S TRAVBLS.
the country whence I came above two hoin
before I dropped into the sea.'Wherevpon
he began again to tliink that my bmiii wis
disturbed, of which he gi^ve me a hiot, and
advised me to go to bed in a cabin he Ind
provided. I assured him,'I was well
refreshed with his good entertaimnent aid
company, and as much in my senses as ever I
was in my life. He then grew serious, and
desired to ask me freely,'whether I were
not troubled in my mind by the consdoosoess
of some enormous crime, for which I wu
punished at the command of some prince, by
exposing me in that dyest ; as great criBnnak,
in other countries, have been forced to seaia
a leaky vessel, without provisions: for al-
tliough he should be sorry to have taken lo
ill a man into his ship, yet he would engage
his word to set me safe ashore, in the first
port where we arrived.'He added,'tiiat
his suspicions were much increased by some
very absurd speeches I had delivered at first
to his sailors, and afterwards to himself, in
relation to my closet or chesty as well as by
my odd looks and behaviour, while I was at
supper.
I begged his patience to hear me tell my
story, which I faithfully did, from the last
time I left England, to the moment he first
discovered me. And as truth always forces
its way into rational minds, so this honest
worthy gentleman, who had some tincture of
learning, and very good sense, was immedi-
ateJy convinced of mj c«n4ouc %sv^N^sva & i:)«
A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG. 207
Bat, farther to confirm all I had said, I en-
treated him to give order that my cabinet
should be brought, of which I had the key in
my pocket ; for he had already informed me
how the seamen disposed of my closet. I
opened it in his own presence, and showed
him the small collection of rarities I made in
the country from which I had been so strange-
ly delivered. There was the comb I had
contrived out of the stumps of the king's
beard, and another uf the same materials, but
fixed in a paring of her majesty's thumb-nail,
which served for the back. There was a
collection of needles and pins, from a foot to
half a yard long; four wasp stings, like join-
ers'tacks ; some combings of the queen's hair ;
a gold ring, which one day she made me a
present of in a most obliging manner, taking
it from her little finger, and throwing it over
my head like a collar. I desired the captain
would please to accept this ring in return for
his civilities; which he absolutely refused. I
showed him a com that I had cut ofi^, with
my own hand, from a maid of honour's toe ; it
was about the bigness of a Kentish pippin,
and grown so hard, that when I returned to
England, I got it hollowed into a cup, and
set in silver. Lastly, I desired him to see
the breeches I had then on, which were made
of a mouse's skin.
I could force nothing on him but a foot-
man's tooth, which I observed him to examine
with great curiosity, and found he had a fancy
for it. He received it with abundance of
1
808 OULLIVBR*8 TKAVBLt.
tlianks, more than such a trifle coold deserve.
It was drawn by an unskilfiil surgeon, id a
mistake, from one of Glmndalditch's meSf
who was afflicted wi^ the tooth-ach, bat it
was as sound as any in his head. I got it
cleaned, and put it into my eabhiet. It
was about a foot long, and l < mr Inches in
diameter.
The captain was very well satisfied witii
this plain relation I had given him, and said,
* he hoped, when we returned to England, I
would oblige tiie worid by putting It on paper,
and making it public'My answer was,'that
I thought we were overstocked with books sf
travels : that nothing could now pass nlM
was noi extraordinary; wherein I doubted
some authors less consulted truth, than tiieir
own vanity, or interest, or the diveraioo sf
ignorant readers ; that my story could ooBtsia
little beside common events, witiiout those
ornamental descriptions of strange plants,
trees, birds, and other animals; or of the
barbarous customs and idolatry of savage
people, with which most writers abonnd.
However, I thanked him for his good opinioB,
and promised to take the matter into my
thoughts.'
He said ^he wondered at one thing very
mudi, whidi was, to hear me speak so loud,*
asking me'whether the king or queen of that
country were thick of hearing? I told him,
'it was what I had been used to for above
two years past, and that I admired as much
9t the voices of lum fua^ Vi\s Ta«a)N9 > ^Q ««vmA4
YA6I TO BftOBDINGMAG. SOO
» whisper, and yet I coold hear
loagh. Bat, when I spoke m that
as like a man tallung in the streets,
loking ont from the top of a stee-
irhen I was placed on a table, or
person's hand/ I told him I had
erved another thing, tiiat when I
o the ship, and the sailors stood
e, I tiiought they were the most
aptible creatures I had eyer be-
indeed, while I was in that
Qtry, I could never endure to look
ter mine eyes had been accustom-
prodigious objects, because the
gave me so despicable a conceit
The captain said,'that while we
> per, he observed me to look at
with a sort of wonder, and that
med hardly able to contain my
hich he knew not well how to
iputed it to some disorder in my
nswered, 4t was very true; and
how I could forbear, when I saw
: the size of a silver threepence, a
hardly a mouthful, a cup not so
-shell ;'and so I went on, describ-
: of his household-stuff and pro-
r the same manner. For, although
ad ordered a little equipage of all
isary for me, while I was in her
my ideas were wholly taken up
[ saw on every side of me, and I
ly own littleness, as people do at
aults. The captain understood
210 Gulliver's travels.
my raillery very well, and merrily replied
with the old English proverb,'that he doubt-
ed mine eyes were bigger than my belly, foi
he did not observe my stomach so good, al-
though I had fasted all day ;* and, continuing
in his mirth, protested ^ he would have gladly
given a hundred pounds, to have seen my
chest in the eagle's bill, and afterwards in its
fall from so great a height into the sea; whidi
would certainly have been a most astonishing
object, worthy to have the description of it
transmitted to future ages*/ and the com-
parison of Phaeton was so obvious, that he
could not forbear applying it, although I did
not much admire the conceit.
The captain having been at Tonquin, was,
in his return to England, driven north-east-
ward to the latitude of 44 degrees, and lon-
gitude of 143. But meeting a trade-wind
two days after I came on. board him, we
sailed southward a long time, and coasting
New Holland, kept our course west-south-
west, and then south-south-west, till we dou-
bled the Cape of Good Hope. Our voyage
was very prosperous, but I shall not trouble
the reader with a journal of it. The captain
called in at one or two ports, and sent in his
long-boat for provisions and fresh water ; but
I never went out of the ship, till we came
into the Downs, which was on the third day
of June, 1706, about nine months^ after my
escape. I offered to leave my goods in se-
curity for payment of my freight; but the
captain protested he would not receive one
A VOlTAGB TO SROBl^nNmAG. til
ing. We took ft Idiicl leave of eanh
-, and I made hiin pronfise he wookl
: to see me at my hdase in RedriC I
1 a horse aod guide for five killings,
h I borrowed of the cftptldii.
s I was on the roady\ < ^9erving Iher ttttie-
of the honses, tiie ^brbesy the catde, and
»eople, I begant6'l!!]ftnkih;^elfin LnUpnt.
^ afraid of traiifpfiffg^ ^very traveller
!t, and often called aloiid to have thetti
1 out of the way, so that I had like to
gotten one or two broken heads for my
rtinence.
hen I came to my own house, for which
18 forced to inquire, one of the servants
hng the door, I bent down to go in, (like
we under a gate,) for fear of striking my
.. My wife ran out to embrace me, but
oped lower than her knees, thinking she
1 otherwise never be able to reach my
ji. My daughter kneeled to ask my
ing, but I could not see her till she arose,
ig been so long used to stand with my
and eyes erect to above sixty feet ; and
I went to take her up with one hand by
raist. I looked down upon my servants,
9ne or two friends who were in the house,
tiiey had been pigmies and I a giant. I
my wife,'she had been too thrifty, for I
1 she had starved herself and herdaugh-
9 nothing.* In short, I behaved myself
uaccountably, that they were all of the
dn's opinion when he first saw me, and
oded I had lost my wits. This I men-
1
2\% QULLIYBR*8 TRAVELS
tion as an instance of the great power of habit
and prejudice.
In a little time I and my family and friendi
came to a right understanding : bat my wife
protested ^I should never go to sea any
more ;* altiioagfa my evil destiny so ordered,
that she had not power to hinder me, as the
reader may know hereafter. In the men
time, I here conclude the teeood part of mj
nnfortonate voyages.
A
VOYAGE
TO LAPUTA, BALNIBARBI, LUOGNAGG,
GLUBBDUBDRIB, AND JAPAN.*
PART III.
CHAPTER I.
Tike Author sets out on his third voyage, la
taken by-fnrates. The malice of a Dutch'
man. His avrical at an island. He is re*
ceived into Laputa.
I HAD not been at home above ten days,
when captam William Robinson, a Cornish
man, commander of the Hopewell, a stoat
ship of three hundred tons, came to my house.
I had formerly been surgeon of another sliip,
where he was master and a fourth part owner,
* Dr. Swift Mens to baTe borrowed uveral hinfa.
In bis Voyage to Lapata, from a novel writteu by the
learned Dr. Francis Godwin, bi > hop of Llandaff, iMlled
'Man ill tbe Moon, or a Disconrss of a Voyage thlt^,
by Domingo Ooo sales, 1638/ Svo. Tbis philoAopbic
romance, wbich baa been several times printed, sbuws
that Bisbop Godwin bad a creative ;enia > . His * iiun-
das luanlroatofl/ whieb contains in*tractions (o convey
secret Inteliigeoce, ia very scarce. He died in April
214 Gulliver's travels.
in a voyage to the Levant. He had always
treated me more like a brother, tiian an fai'
ferior officer; and hearing of my arrifal,
made me a visit, as I apprehended only oot
ci friendship, for nothing passed more than
what is usual after long absencea* Bntie-
peating his visits often, expressing his joy to
find me in good healtii, a^ing,'whether I
were now settled for life,'adding, * that he
intended a voyage to the East Indies in two
months,* at last he plainly invited me, though
witii some apologies, to be surgeon of the
ship ;'tiiat I should have another surgeon
under me, beside our two mates ; that my
salary shoiUd be double to the usuat pay ; and
that having experienced my knowledge in
sea-affairs to be at least equal to his, he
would enter into any engagement to follow
my advice, as much as if I had shared m the
command.'
He said so many other obliging things, and
I knew him to be so honest a man, that I
could not reject his proposal ; the thirst I had
of seeing the world, notwithstanding my past
misfortunes, continuing as violent as ever.
The only difficulty that remained, was to per-
suade my wife, whose consent however I at
last obtained, by the prospect of advantage
she proposed to her children.
We set out the 6th of August, 1706, and
arrived at Fort St. George the 11th of April,
1707. We staid there three weeks to refresh
our crew, many of whom wer^ «kk. From
tbeace we went toToucjoan, -wXie-T^^^^^^
A VOYAGE TO LAPCTA, & C. 215
tain resolved to continue some time, because
many of the goods he intended to buy, were
not ready, nor could he expect to be dispatched
in several months. Therefore, in hopes to
defray some of the charges he must be at, he
bought a sloop, loaded it with several sorts of
goods, wherewith the Tonquinese usually
trade to the neighbouring islands, and putting
fourteen men on board, whereof three were
of the country, he appointed me master of
.he sloop, and gave me power to traffic, while
lie transacted his affairs at Tonquin.
We had not sailed above three days, when
a great storm arising, we were driven five
days to the north-north-east, and then to the
east : after which we had fair weather, but
ttill with a pretty strong gale from the west.
Upon the tenth day we were chased by two
pirates, who soon overtook us ; for my sloop
was so deep laden, that she sailed very slow,
neither were we in a condition to defend our-
selves.
We were boarded about the same time by'
both the pirates, who entered furiously at the
liead of their men ; but finding us all prostrate
upon our faces (for so I gave order,) they
]jnioned us with strong ropes, and setting a
guard upon us, went to search tiie sloop.
I observed among them a Dutchman, who
seemed to be of some anthotity, though he
was not commander of either ship. He knew
ni by our countenances to be Englishmen,
and jabbering to us in his own language,
swore we should be tied back to Vni^ixA
!
21G GULLIVER*! TRAVELS.
thrown into the sea. I spoke DatcSi tolen-
biy well ; I told him who we were, and beg >
ged hun, in consideration of our being Chib-
tians and Protestants of neighbouring conntries
kk strict alliance, that he wonld move the
eaptains to take some pity on ns. TUt
inflamed his rage ; he repeated his threatn.
ings, and turning to his companions, spoke
with great vehemence in the Japanese lin-
gaage, as I suppose, often using the word
Ckrutianos,
The largest of the two pirate ships wis
oommanded by a Japanese captain, wbo
spoke a little Dutch, but very imperfectly.
He came up tome, and after several qnestioiis,
which I answered in great humility, he said,
'.we should not die.'I made the captain a
very low bow, and then, turning to the Dutch-
man, said,'I was sorry to find more mercy
in a Heatiien, than in a brother Christiaa.'
But I had soon reason to repent those fbo^
words: for that malicious reprobate, baring
often endeavoured in vain to persuiide both
the captains that I might be thrown into the
sea (which they wonfal not yield to, after the
promise made me that I slioald not die,) how-
ever prevailed so far, as to have a punishment
inflicted on me, worse, in all human appear-
ance, than death itself. My men were sent
by an equal division into both the pirate ships,
and my sloop new manned. As to myself,
it was determined that I should be set adrift
in a small canoe, withpaddiV«a vtii'dL «lvq^'«3i4
four days* provisions \ w^\di^a8t, > i!Ki«^v^«BAft^
A. YOTAOE~TO LAPUTA, & e. S17
)tain was so kind to doable oot of his own
res, and would pennit no man to search
i. I got down into the canoe, while the
itchman, standing upon the deck, loaded
{ with aU the corses and Injorions terms his
ignage conld afford.
About an hour before we saw the pirates,
had taken an observation, and found we
»re in the latitude of 46 N. and longitude
18S. When I was at some distance from
B pirates, I discovered, by my pocket-glass,
ireral islands on the south-east. I set up
r sail, the wind being fair, with a design to
ftch the nearest of those islands, which I
ide a shift to do, in about three hours. It
IS all rodcy: however I got many birds'
gs ; and striking fire, I kindled some heath
d dry sea-weed, by which I roasted my
gs. I ate no other supper, being resolved
spare my provisions as much as I could.
Mssed the night under the shelter of a rock,
ewing some heatii under me, and slept
etty well.
The next day I sailed to another island,
d thence to a third and fourth, sometimes
ng my sail, and sometimes my paddles.
It, not to trouble the reader with a par-
alar account of my distresses, let it suffice.
It on the fifth day, I arrived at the last
ftnd in my sight, wlidch lay south-south'east
the former.
This island was at a greater distance than
xpeeted, and I did not reach it in less than
» boon. I encompassed it almost ronndi
1
218 GULLIVER'S TRAVELS.
before 1 could tind a convenient place to land
in ; wiiich vrna a. small creek, about tiiree
times the wideness of my canoe. I foud
tiie island to be all rocky, only a little inter-
mingled with tufts of grass, and sweet smell-
ing herbs. I took out my small provistom,
and after having refreshed myself, I secured
the remainder in a cave, whereof there were
great numbers ; I gathered plenty of eggi
upon the rocks, and got a quantity of dry sea-
weed, and patched grass, which I designed
to kindle the next day, and roast my eggs as
well as I could, for I had about me my fliity
steel, match, and burning-glass. I lay all
night in the cave where I had lodged my pro-
visions. My bed was the same dry grass and
sea-weed which I intended for fuel. I slept
very little, for the disquiets of my mind pre-
vailed over my weariness, and kept me awake.
I considered how impossible it was to preserve
my life in so desolate a place, and how mis-
erable my end mast be : yet found myself so
listless and desponding, that I had not the
heart to rise ; and before I could get spirits
enough to creep out of my cave, the day was
far advanced. I walked awhile among the
rocks : the sky was perfectly clear, and the
sun so hot, that I was forced to turn my face
from it : when all on a sudden it became ob-
scure, as I thought, in a manner very differ-
ent from what happens by the interposition
of a cloud. I turned back, and perceived a
vast opaque body between me and the sun
moving forwards to > N«s^% \)[v^ \ & \«Sk!l\ v\
A VOYAGE TX > LAPUTA, & C, 219
feemed to be about two miles high, and hid
the snn six or seven minutes ; but I did not
observe the air to be much colder, or the sky
more darkened, than if I had stood under the
shade of a mountain. As it approached
nearer over the place where I was, it ap-
peared to be a firm substance the bottom
flat, smooth, and shining very bright, from
the reflection of the sea below. I stood upon
a height of about two hundred yards from
the shore, and saw this vast body descending
almost to a parallel with me, at less tiian an
English mile distance. I took out my pocket
perspective and could pl & iLly discover num-
bers of people moving up and down the sides
of it, which appeared to be slooping ; but
what those people were doing I was not able
to distinguish.
The natural love of life gave me some in-
ward motion of joy^ and I was ready to en-
tertain a hope tiiat this adventure might,
some way or otiier, help to deliver me from
tiie desolate place and condition I was in.
But at the same time the reader can hardly
conceive my astonishment, to behold an island
in the air, inhabited by men, who were able
(as it should seem) to raise or sink, or put it
Into progressive motion, as they pleased.
But not being at that time in a disposition to
philosophise upon this phenomenon, I rather
chose to observe what course tlie island would
take, because it seemed for a while to stand
stilh Yet soon after, it advanced nciirer,
and I could see the sides of it encompassed
220 oullivbr's travbls.
with several gradations of galleries, and stein,-
at certain intervals, to descend from one to
the other. In the lowest gallary, I behdd
some people fishing with long angling rodi,
and others looking on. I waved my cap (ftr
my hat was long since worn ont) aiMimy
hfuidkerchief toward ^e island; and upon
its nearer approach, I called and shootedwitii
tiie utmost strength of my vmce ; and then
looking -dreomspectly, I beheld a crowd
gather to that side which was most in ny
view. I foond by their pointing toward me
and to each other tiiat they i^ainly discovered
me, although they made no retnm to my
shonting. But I coold see fbor or Awt men
fanning in great haste^ up tiie stairs, to the
top of the island, who then disappeared. I
happened rightly to coigectnre, tiiat these
were sent for oiders, to aonie person in so-
thority, upon this occasion.
The number of people inereaied, and, hi
less than half an hoor, the island was moTed
and raised in sach a manner, that the lowest
gallery appeared in a parallel of less than a
hundred yards'distance from tiie height
where I stood. I then put mj^self in the
most supplicating postures, and spoke in tiie
humblest accent, but received no answer.
Those who stood nearest over-against me,
seemed to be persons of distinction, as I sup-
posed by their habit. They conferred earn-
estly with each otiier, looking often upon me.
At length one of them called out in a dear,
poUte, smooth dialect, uoXiss^^VsL^ooa & dLtA
▲ rOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 221
tbe Ibdian : and I therefore returned an an-
swer in that language, hoping at least that
the cadence might be more agreeable to his
ears. Although neither of us understood
the other, yet my meaning was easily known,
for the people saw the distress I was in.
They made signs for me to come down from
the rock, and go towards the shore, which I
accordingly did ; and the flying Island being
raised to a convenient height, the verge di-
xeetly over me, a chain was let down from
the lowest gallery, with a seat fastend to the
bottom, to which I fixed myself, and veas
drawn up by pulleys.
CHAPTER II.
The humours and dispositions of the Laputians
described. An account of their learning. Of
the King and his court. The Authors're-
ception there. The inhabitants subject to
fear and disquietudes. An account of the
women.
At my alighting, I was surrounded with a
crowd of people, but those who stood nearest
seemed to be of better quality. Tliey beheld
me with all the marks and circumstances of
wonder, neither indeed was I much in their
debt ; having never till then seen a race of
mortals so singular in their shapes, habits,
and countenances. Their heads were all
222 GULLIVER*8 TRAVELS.
recIiBed, either to the right, or the left ; one
of their eyes turned inward, and the other di-
rectly up to the zenith*. Their outward gar-
ments were adorned with the figures of suns,
moons, and stars ; interwoven with those of
fiddles, flutes, harps, trumpets, guitars, harp-
sichords, and many other instruments of mu-
sic, unknown to us in Europe. I observed,
here and there, many in the habit of servants,
with a blown bladder, fastened like a flail to
tiie end of a stick, which they carried in their
hands. In each bladder was a small quan-
tity of dried peas, or little pebble:;!^ as I was
Jtfterwards informed. With these bladders,
they now and then flapped the mouths and
ears of those who stood near them, of which
practice I could not then conceive the meaning.
It seems the minds of these people are so
taken up with intense speculations, that they
neither can speak, nor attend to the discourses
of others, without being roused by some
external action upon the organs of speech
loid hearing : for which reason, those persons
who are able to aflbrd it always keep a
flapper (the original is climenole) in their
family, as one of their domestics ; nor ever
walk abroad, or make visits, without him.
And the business of this officer is, when two,
three, or more persons are in company, gently
to strike with his bladder the mouth of him
m
* By this description tlie anlhor intended to ridicule
tlio & e who firaste life in specnlatives cieuces, tlie ptiwcra
of whose minds are as absurdly employed as the eyes
of the Lapatians.— H.
A VOYAG£ TO LAPUTA, & C. 223
who is to Speak, and the right ear of hun or
them to whom the speaker addresses him-
self. This flapper is likewise employed
diligently to attend his master in his walks,
and upon occasion to give him a soft flap on
his eyes ; because he is always so wrapped
up in cogitation, that he is in manifest danger
of falling down every predpice, and bouncing
his head against every post; and in the
streets, of justling others, or being justled
himself into the kennel.
It was necessary to give the reader this
information, without which he would be at
the same loss with me to understand th«
proceedings of these people, as they conduct-
ed me up the stairs to the top of tiie island,
and from thence to the royal palace. While
we were ascending, they forgot several times
what they were about, and left me to myself^
till their memories were again roused by
their flappers: for they appeared altogether
unmoved by the sight of my foreign habit and
< M > untenance, and by the shouts of the vulgar
whose thoughts and minds were more disen-
gaged.
At last we entered the palace, and pro-
ceeded into the chamber of presence, where
I «aw tiie king seated on his throne, attended
on each side by persons of prime quality.
Before the throney was a large table filled
with globes and spheres, and mathematical
instruments of all kinds. His majesty took
not the least notice of us, although our en-
trance was not without sufficient noise, by
the conconnc ol all penaaa bek
court. But lie HUB then deep i.
uid we atteoded at letut aD ho
could solve it. There stood by
«u)e, a yaiuif; page with fiapa in
and when Ihey saw lie was at li
fliem gently Btracli his montb, I
bis tight ear ; at which he star
•waiied an the sudden, and lool
me and the company I was ii
the occasion of oar coming, whi
been informed before. He spoke
whereupon immediately ■ yonog
flap came np to my ~jde, and
gently on the tigbt ear ; but I m
well as I could, that I had no
SDch an instnuneDt; which, as
found, gave his m^esty, and the
« very mean opinion of my u
The king, as far as I could conji
me seTeral questions, and 1 addi
to bim In all the languages I ha <
was found I could neither nndei
nnderstood, I was conducted bi
an Bportment in his palace (this
dittiagnished above all his prei
his haspiulily to strangers), wh
vanta were appointed to attei
dinner was broaght, and four pe
lity, whom I remembered to ha
near the king's person, did me I
dine with me. Webadtwocon.
diBbci each. In the first coarse
(hotUder of mntton cnt into w
TAGB TO LAPUTA, SCC,
iece of beef into a rhomboldety
ig into a cycliod. The second
wo ducks trussed up in the form
Jisages and puddings resembling
antboys, and a breast of veal in
a harp. The servants cut our
ones, cylinders, parallelograms^
)ther mathematical figures,
were at dinner, I made bold to
» of several things in their Ian-
hose noble persons, by the assis-
ir flappers, delighted to give me
ping to raise my admiratipu of
liilities, if I could be brought to
ti them. I was soon able to call
nd drink, or whatever else I
ler my company withdrew, and a
tent to me by the king*s order,
a flapper. He brought with
:, and paper, and three or four
; me to understand by signs, that
to teach me the language. We
bur hours, in which time I wrote
it number of words in columns,
nslations over-agaiust them. I
le a shift to learn several short
Dr my tutor would order one of
to fetch something, to turn about,
w, to sit, 6r to stand, or walk.
Then I took down the sentence
He showed me also, in one of
le figures of the sun, moon, and
iac^ the tropics, and polar circles,
I
220 GULLIVER*S TRAVELS
together with the denominations'of many
planes and solids. He gave me the names
and descriptions of all the musical instrainents,
and the general terms of art in playing on
each of them. After he had left me, I placed
all my words, with their interpretations, in
alphabetical order. And thus, in a few days,
by tlie help of a very faithful memory, I got
some insight into their language.
The word, which I interpret the flying
or floatiug island, is in the original Laputa,
whereof I could never learn the true etymo-
logy. Lap in the old obsolete language,
signifies high ; and untuhy a governor ; from
which they say, by corruption, was derived
Laputa, from Lapuntuh, But I do not ap-
prove of this derivation, which seems to be a
little strained. I ventured to offer to the
learned among them a conjecture of my own.
that Laputa was quasi lap mited; lap, signi-
fying properly, the dancing of the sun-beams
in the sea, and outed, a wing ; which,, bow-
ever, I shall not obtrude, but submit to the
judicious reader.
Those to whom the king had entrusted mc,
observing how ill I was clad, ordered a tailor
to come next morning, and take measure for
a suit of clothes. This operator did bis office
after a different manner f¥om those of his
trade in Europe. He first took my altitude
by a quadrant, and then, with rule and com-
passes, described the dimensions and outlines
of my whole body, all of which he entered
upon paper; and in six days brought my
A TOTAGS TO LAPUTA/ & C,
lefl very ill made, and quite ont < yf shape,
appeniug to mistake a figure in the caka-
n. Bot my comfort was, that I observed
. accidents very frequent, and little
irded.
> nring my confinement for want of clothes ,
by an indisposition that held me some
B longer, I much enlarged my dictionary ;
when I went next to court, was able to
erstand many things the king spoke, and
return him some kind of answers. His
esty had given orders, that the island
uld move north-east and by east, to the
deal point over Lagado, the metropolis of
whole kingdom below, upon the firm
th. It was about ninety leagues distant,
I our voyage lasted four days and a half,
tu not in the least sensible of the progres-
5 motion made in the air by the island.
the second morning, about eleven o'clock,
king himself in person, attended by his
> ility, courtiers, and officers, having pre-
■ed all their musical instruments, played on
m for three hours without intermisdon, so
.t I was qmte stunned with the noise ; nel-
T could I possibly guess the meaning, till
tntor informed me. He said,'that the
> ple of their island had their ears adapted
hear the music of their spheres, which al-
ys played at certain periods, and the conrt
m now prepared to bear their part, in what-
er instrument they most excelled.'
In onr journey towards Lagado, the capital
ffhhmao^ty ordered that the island ihovid

228 CULLIVER*8 TRATELS.
fctop over certain tovms and Yillftges, from
whence he might receive the petitions of his
subjects. And to this purpose, several pick-
threads were let down, with small weights at
the bottom. On these packthreads the peo-
ple strung their petitions, which mounted up
directly, like the scraps of paper fastened \rf
school boys at the end ef the string that holdi
their kite. Sometimes we received wine and
victuals from below, which were drawn op by
pulleys.
The knowledge I had in mathematict, pert
me great assistance in acquiring their phra-
seology, which much depended upon that
science, and music ; and in the latter I was
not unskilled. Their ideas are perpetually
conversant in lines and figures. If tbey
would, for example, praise the beauty of a
woman, or any other animal, they describe
it by rhcMnbs, circles, parallelograms, ellipses,
and other geometrical terms, or by words (d
art drawn from music, needless here to re-
peat. I observed in the king's kitchen all
sorts of mathematical and musical instnmieatB,
after the figures of which they cut up the joints
that were served to his majesty's table.
Their houses are very ill bnilt, the walls
bevil, w ithout one right angle in any apart-
ment : and tins defect arises from the con-
tempt they bear to practical geometry, wfaioh
they despise as vulgar and mechanic : those
instructions they give being too refined fiur
th6 intellects of their workmen, which occa-
ikHU perpetual miBtakes* Xii4 iltbiViiidL they
A YOTAOB TO LAFUTA^ ScC,
Bxtenms emnigh upon a piece t»f paper,
s management of the role, the pendl,
he divider, yet in the common actions
> ehavioar of life, I have not seen a more
y, awkward, and nnhandy people, nor
w and perplexed in their conceptoins
all other subjects, except those of ma-
atics and music. They are very had
ners, and vehemently given to oppo-
., unless when they happen to be of the
opinion, which is seldom theur case*
ination, fancy, and invention, they are
iy strangers to, nor have any words in
language, by which those ideas can
xpressed ; the whole compass of theii
^ts and mind being shut up within the
Torementioned sciences.
Mt of them, and especially those who
in the astronomical part, have great
injudicial astrology, although they are
ned to own it publicly. But what I
y admired, and thought altogether un-
mtable, was the strong disposition I
*ved in them towards news and politics,
staally inquiring into public affidrs, giv-
lieir judgments in matters of state, and
ooately disputing every inch of a party
oo. I have indeed observed the same
dtion among most of the mathematicians
re known in Europe, altliough I could
r discover the least analogy between
wo sciences; unless those people snp-
, that becanse the smallest circle has as
f degrees as the largest^ therefore the
I
9S0 GULLTVBR'b TRAVSLt.
regulation and management of tiie worid re-
quire no more abilities than the handling and
turning of a globe : but I rather take this
quality to spring from a very common infir-
mity of human nature, inclining us to be
most curious and conceited in matters where
we have least concern, and for which we are
least adapted by study or nature.
These people are under continual dis-
quietudes, never enjoying a minutes* peace
of mind; and tlieir disturbances proceed
from causes which very little affect the rest
of mortals. Their apprehensions arise from
several changes they dread in the celestial
bodies : for instance, that the earth, by the
continual approaches of the sim towards it,
must, in course of time, be absorbed, or
swallowed up ; that the face of tlie sun, will,
by degrees, be encrusted with its own efflu-
via, and give no more light to the world ;
that the earth very narrowly escaped a bmih
from the tail of the last comet, which wooU
have infalUbly reduced it to ashes ; and tht
the next, which they have calculated forow
and-thirty years hence, will probably dc
troy us. For, if in its perihelion, it shof
approach within a certain degree of the f
(as by their calculations they have reasoi
dread) it will receive a degree of heat
thousand times more intense than that of
hot glowing iron ; and, in its absence
the sun, carrying a blazing tail ten huv
thousand and fourteen miles long ; thj
whicbi if the earth ihould paM at the dli
4 VOTAOB TO LAFUTAy ScC, SSI
e himdred tiioiisaiid miles from tiie m-
y or main body of the comet, it mast
passage be set on fire, and reduced to
I : tliat the snn, daily spending its raya
Hit any nutriment to supply them, will
it be wholly consumed and annihilated ;
II must be attended with the destructioB
lis earth, and of'all the planets that re-
> their light from it.*
ley are so perpetually alarmed with the
ehensions of the8e,and the like impending
;ers, that they can neither sleep quietly
eir beds, nor have any relish for the corn-
pleasures and amusements of life. When
meet an acquaintance in the mqming,
irst question is about the sun's health,
he looked at his setting and rising, and
what hopes they have to avoid the stroke
te approadiing comet. This conversation
are apt to run into the same temper
boys discover in delighting to hear ter-
t stories of spirits and hobgoblins which
greedily listen to, and dare not go to
for fear.
lie women of the island have abundance
ivadty; they contemn their husbands,
are extremely fond of strangers ; where-
bere is always a considerable number
I the continent below, attending at court
it npon affairs of the several towns and
oratioiiSy or their own particular occa-
ill thcM wtre mppo^oM of penoni emhieBt la
tiBM for msihcmaticsl knowlcage.— H
2Sa gulliver'b travels.
sions, but are madi despised^ because they
want the same endowments. Among tbeie,
the ladies choose their gallants : bat the yei-
ation is, that they act with too mnch ease
and security; for the husband is always so
rapt in speculation, that the mistress sad
lover may proceed to the greatest fandttaritiei
^before his fiice, if he be bat provided witb
paper alid implements, and without his ilap-
per at his side.
The wives and daughters lament their ooo-
fiaement to the island, although I think it
the most delicious spot of ground in tlie
world ; and although Hiey live here in tbe
greatest plenty and magnificence, and are
allowed to do whatever they please, they
long to sec the world, and take the diversioBs
of Uie metropolis, whidi they are not allowed
to do without a particular licence from the
king ; and this is not easy to be obtained,
because the people of quality have found, by
by frequent experience, how hard it is to
persuade their women to return fhim below.
I was told, that a great court lady, who had
several children,-— is married to the prime
minister, the richest subject in the kingdom,
a very graceful person, extremely fond of her,
and lives in the finest palace of the island, —
Went down to Lagado on the pretence of
health, there hid herself for several months,
till the king sent a warrant to search for her;
and she was found in an obscure eating-house
all in rags, having pawned Ler clothes to main-
tain au old deformed footman, who beat her
A VOYAGS TO LAPCTAy & e. SS^'
every day, and in whose company she was
taken, ninch against her will. And although
her hnsband received her with all possible
kindness, and without the least reproach,
she soon after contrived to steal down again,
witli all her jewels to the same gallant, and
lias not been heard of since.
This may perhaps pass with the reader ra-
ther for an European or English story, than
for one of a country so remote. But he may
please to consider,that the caprices of woman-
i kind are not limited by any climate or nation,
! and that they are much more uniform than
can be easily imagined.
I In about a month's time, I had made a to-
P lerable proficiency in their language, and was
I able to answer most of the king's questions,
» when I had tlie honour to attend him. His
f migesty discovered not the least curiosity to
f inqoire into the laws, government, history,
relig^n or manners of the countries wliere T.
had been ; but confined his questions to the
state of mathematics, and received the ac-
oonnt I gave him with great contempt an(
indifierence, though often roused by his flap
per, OB each aide.
8S4 oulutbr's travels.
CHAPTER III.
A phenomenon solved by modem phUoeopkif ad
& ttronomy. The LapuHtmt^ great in^nee-
ments in the latter. The King's method ^
ewppreseing insurrectunu,
I DBSiRBD leaye of iMa prince to see the
curiosities of the island, which he was gradous-
ly pleased to grant, and ordered my tutor to
attend me. I chiefly wanted to know, to
what cause in art or in nature it owed its
several motions, whereof I will now give a
philosophical account to the reader.
The flying or floating Island b exactly cir-
cular, its diameter 7837 yards, or about four
miles and a half, and consequentiy contauu
ten thousand acres. It is tiiree hundred yards
thick. The bottom, or under suriaoe, which
appears to those who yiew it below, is one
even regular plate of adamant, shooting up
to the height of about two hundred yards.
Above it lie the several minerals in their usual
order, and over all is a coat of rich mould, ten
or twelve feet deep. The declivity of the
upper surface, from the circumference to the
centre, is the natural cause why all the dews
and rains, which fall upon the island, are
conveyed in small rivulets toward the middle,
where they are emptied into four large basins,
each of about half a mile in circuit, and two
hundred yards ^tantfTQai the centre. From
\
A VOYAAB TO LAroTA, AC. Hi
K buiiu tile water ii uintiQaally exhaled
Jie aan in the daytime, which effeclaoUy
venti their overflowing. Besides, as it U
[he power oftbe monarch to raise the island
ave the region of cloads and vapours, he
n prevent the tailing ofdews and nun whcn-
er he pleases. For the highest clouds cu-
lt rise above two miles, as uatondists agree,
t least they were never known to do so in
hat country.
At the centre of the island there is a chasm
(boat fifty, yards in diameter, whence the
Mtronomers descend into a large dome, which
i* therefore tei\f.i Jiandona gtgnole, or the
utronomer's cave, situated at the depth of a
hundred yards beneath the upper sarface of
the adamant. In tliis cave are twenty lamps
continually burning, which, from the reflec-
tiou of the adamant, cast a strong light into
every port. The place is stored vrlth great
variety of sextants, quadrants, telescopes,
Utrolabes, and other astronomical instru-
ments. But the greatest curiosity, upon
whlctl the fate of the island depends, is a
loadstone of a prodigious size, in shape resem-
bling a weaver's shuttle. It is in length six
yards, and in the thickest part at least three
yard* over. This magnet is sustained by a
Teij •tronf axle of adamant passini; through
its middle, upon which it plays, and is poised
■o exactly that the weakest hand can turn it.
It is hooped round with a hollow cylinder of
adamant, four feet deep, as many thick, and
twelve yaids in diameter, placed horizon tally,
aod aupported by eight adainanti:
aix yardB liigh. Id the middle ol
■ide, there U ■ groove twelve
in wbidithcextreDihiesol'theaxI
and turned ronnd aa there ia occi
The stooe caonut be reDMred 1
by any ibrce, because the hoo)
are one continDed piece witli 1
adamant irluch coDBtitutet the b
Uland.
By meani of thia loadstone,
made to rise and fall, and mo
place to another. For, with n
part of the earth over « hich
preudes, the atone ia endaed
udea with an attractive power
other with a repnliive. Upon
magnet erect, with its attractini
the earHi, the island descends ;
repelling extremity pointa dow
Isliuid monnta direct^ upwards
portion of the stone ia obUqae,
the island is > o too: for in this
forces always act in lines parallf
By Ois oblique motion, the I
veyed to different parts of tl
dominions. To explain the n
progresa, let A B repreaant i
cross (he dominions of BBlnibarl
e d represent the loadstone, of i
the repelling cad, and t the at
Ibe island being over C: let i
placed in position c d, widi its i
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 237
downwards; then the island will be driven
upwards obliquely towards D, When it is
arrived at / > , let the stone be turned upon
its axle, till its attracting end points towards
Ey and then the island will be carried ob-
liquely towards E; where, if the stone be
again turned upon its axle till it stands in the
position E F, with its repelling point down*
wards, the island will rise obliquely towards
Fy where, by directing the attracting end
towards G, tiie island may be carried to Gj
and from G to H, by turning the stone so as
to make its repelling extremity point directly
downward. And thus, by changing the sitna-
tion of the stone, as often as there is occasion,
the island is made to rise and fall by turns in
an oblique direction, and by those alternate
risings and fallings (the obliquity being not
considerable) is conveyed frdm one part of
the dominions to the other.
But it must be observed, that this island
cannot move beyond the extent of the domi-
nioivf below, nor can it rise above the height
of four miles. For which the astronomer*
(who have written large systems concerning
the stone) assign the following reason : that
the magnetic virtue does not extend beyond
the distance of four miles, and that the miner-
al, which acts upon the stone in the bowels
of the eartii, and in the sea about six leagues
distant ixom the shore, is not diffused through
the whole globe, but tenmnated with the
limits of the lung's dominions; and it was
easy, from the great advantage of such a 8a«f
tS8 OULUYERS TRAVELS.
perior sitnatioD, for a prince to bring under
his obedience whatever country lay within
the attraction of that magnet.
When the stone is put parallel to the plane
cf tiie horizon, the island stands still ; for in
that case the extremities of it, being at eqasl
distance from the earth, act with equal force,
the one in drawing downwards, the other in
pushing upwards, and consequently no motion
can ensue.
This loadstone is under the care of certain
astronomers, who, from time to time, give it
such positions as the monarch directs. They
spend the greatest part of their lives in oIk*
serving the celestial bodies, which they do by
the assistance of glasses, far excelling ours in
goodness. For, although their largest tele-
scopes do not exceed three feet, they magnify
much more than those of a hundred with us,
and show the stars with greater clearness.
This advantage has enabled them to extend
their discoveries much further than our astro-
nomers in Europe; for they have male a
catalogue of ten thousand fixed stars, where-
as the largest of ours do not contain above
one third part of that number. They have
likewise discovered two lesser stars, or satel-
lites, which revolve about Mars ; whereof the
innermost is distant from the centre of the
primary planet exactly three of his diameters
and the outermost, five ; the former revolves
Ui the space of ten hours, and the latter in
twenty-one and a half; so that the square^
of their periodical times are very near in th«
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 9S0
same proportion with the cubes of their dis-
tance, from the centre of Mars ; which evi-
dently shows them to be governed by the
same law of gravitation that influences the
other heavenly bodies.
They have observed ninety-three different
comets, and settled their periods with great
exactness. If this be true (and they affirm
it with great confidence) it is much to be
wished, that their observations were made
public, whereby the theory of comets, which
at present is very lame and defective, might
be brought to the same perfection with other
parts of astronomy.
The king would be the most absolute prince
in the universe, if he could but prevail on a
ministry to join with him ; but these having
their estates below on the continent, and
considering that the office of a favourite has
a very uncertain tenure, would never consent
to the enslaving of their country.
If any town should engage in rebellion or
mntiny, fall into violent factions, or refuse to
pay the usual tribute, the king has two me-
thods of reducing them to obedience. The
first and the mildest course is, by keeping
the island hovering over such a town, and
the lands about it, whereby he can deprive
them of the benefit of the sun and the rain,
and consequently afflict the inhabitants with
deartii and diseases : and if the crime deserve
it, they are at the same time pelted from
above with great stones, against whidi they
have no defence bat by creevin^ mtA tKAtosrw
840 GULLIVER'S TRATBL8
or caves, while the roofs of their houses are
beaten to pieces. Bat if they still contiiiiii
obstinate, or offer to raise insurrections, he
proceeds to the last remedy, by letting the
island drop directly upon their heads, vhidi
makes an universal destruction both of houet
and men. However, this is an extremity \»
which the prince is seldom driven, neither
indeed is he willing to put it in execution ;
Dor dare his ministers advise him to an action,
which, as it would render them odious to the
people, so it would be a great damage to
their own estates, which lie all below ; £n
the island is the kliig*s demesne.
But there is still indeed a more weighty
reason, why the kings of this country have
been always averse from executing so terrible
an action, unless upon the utmost necessity.
For, if the town intended to be destroyed
should have in it any tall rocks, as it general^
falls out in the larger cities, a situation pixi-
bably chosen at first with a view to prevent
such a catastrophe ; or if it abound in high
spires, or pillars of stone, a sudden foil might
endanger the bottom or under surface of the
island, which, although it consist, as I have
said, of one entire adamant, two hundred
yards thick, might happen to crack by too
great a shock, or burst by approaching too near
the fires from the houses below, as the backsy
both of iron and stone, will often do in oar
chmneys.'Of all this the people are well i^p-
prised and understand how fai^to eaxr^ their
f, where tli«k ^est^oicvtov^sx^^a^
h«^^e king, not''*t«ve tUe taU«a ; W'
tbe queen, tiU »»« » i'
342 GI7LLIVBR*S TRAVELS,
On the other side, after having seen aU
the coriosities of the island, I was very de*
Sirous to leave it, being heartily weary of
those people. They were indeed excellent in
two sciences for which I have great esteem, ind
wherein I am not unversed ; but at the sine
time, so abstracted and involved in specolt-
tion, that I never met with such disagreeabit
companions. I conversed only with women,
tradesmen, flappers, and court-pages, dnriag
two months of my abode there ; by which, at
last, I rendered myself extremely contempt*
ible ; yet these were the only people from
whom I coald ever receive a reasonable
answer.
I had obtained y by hard study, a good de
gree of knowledge in their language : I was
weary of being confined to an island, where
I received so little countenance, and resolved
to leave it with the first opportunity.
There was a great lord at court, nearly re-
ated to the king, and for that reason alone,
used with respect. He was, universally
reckoned the most ignorant and stupid person
among them. He had performed many emi-
nent services for the crown, had great natural
and acquired parts, adorned with iategrity
and honour ; but so ill an ear for mtmc, that
his detracters reported, * he had been often
known to beat time in the wrong place;'
neither could his tuitors, without extreme
difficulty, teach him to demonstrate the most
easy proposition in the mathematics. He
was pleased to «\ioi«m^m%3GC!siBM5uki^fa^
A TOY 4GB TO LAPUTA, & C. 243^
▼oar, often did me the honour of a visit, de« •*
sired to be informed in the affairs of Europe,'^'
the laws and customs, the manners and learn-
ing of the several countries where I had
travelled. He listened to me with great at-
tention, and made very wise observations on
all I spoke. He had two flappers attending
him for state, but never made use of them,
except at court and in visits of ceremony ;
and would always command them to witii-
draw, when we were alone together.
I entreated this illustrious person, to in-
tercede in my behalf with his majesty, for
leave to depart; which he accordingly did, as
he was pleased to tell me, with regret : for
indeed he had made me several offers very
advantageous, which however I refused, wi^
expressions of the highest acknowledgment.
On the 16th of February I took leave of
his majesty and the court. The king made
me a present to the value of about two hun-
dred pounds English, and my protector his
kinsman as much more, together with a letter
of recommendation to a friend of his in La-
gado, the metropolis : the island being then
hovering over a mountain about two miles
from it, I was let down from the lowest gal-
lery in* the same manner as I had been taken
up.
The continent as far as it is subject to the
monarch of the flying island, passes under
the general name of Balnibarbi; and the
metropolis, as I said before, is called Lagado,
I felt some Uttle satisfaction in finding my-
244 GULLIVER*S TRAVBLS.
self on firm groond. I walked to the dtt
without any concern, being clad like one oif
the natives, and sufficiently instructed to coa-
verse with them. I soon found out the per-
son's house to whom I was recommended,
presented my letter from his friend the graa-
dee in the island, and was received witk
much kindness. This great lord, whose naaie
was Munodi, ordered me an apartment ii
his own house, where I continued during my
stay, and was entertained in a most hos-
pitable manner.
The next morning after my arrival, he took
me in his chariot to see the town, which is
about half the bigness of London ; but the
houses very strangely built, and most of then
out of repair. The people in the streets
walked fast, looked wild, their eyes fixed,
and were generally in rags. We passed
through one of the town gates, and went
about three miles into the country, where I
saw many labourers working with several
sorts of tools in the ground, but was not
able to conjecture what they were about;
neither did I observe any expectation either
of corn or grass, alt^pngh the soil appeared
to be excellent. I could not forbear admir-
ing at these odd appearances, both in town
and country ; and I made bold to desire my
conductor, that he would be pleased to ex-
plain to me, what could be meant by so many
busy heads, hands, and faces, both in the
streets and the fields, because I did not dis-
cover any good «:ffttCtsX\i«^^TQ4vdc^4\VMt»
; contTuy, I DCTer knew a aoU M dd-
y cnlUTated, houaei so ill ramtriTed
) roiaotu, or a people whose connte-
:i and habit eiprcBSed so much miMtrj
lis lord MnDodi hbs a person of the first
, and had been some years goi emor of
ado; bnt, by a cabal of ministers, was
liarged for insofficieDcy. However, the
f treated him with tenderness, as a well-
■ning man, bnt of a low contemptible on*
rfltanding.
When I gave that free cenmrfr of the
vntiy and Its inbabitants, he.made no fhr-
ler answer than by telling me,'that I had
ot been lu^ rnongh among them to form a
lament; and that the different nationi of
le world bad different customs ;'with other
MMMm topics to the same purpose. Bnt,
lien we returned to his palace, he asked me
how I liked the building ; what absardities
obserred, and what qaarrel I had with the
reM or looks of bis domestics.* This he
dght safely do ; became every thing aboat
Im was magnificent, regular, and polite. I
luwered,'that his excellency's pmdence,
oality, and fortune, had exempted him from
lose defects which folly and beggary had
rodnced in others.'He said,'if I woold go
iA Um to bis conntry-boose, about twenty
liles distant, where his estate lay, there
xmld be more leisure for this kind of can-
snalion.'I told his excellency'that I was
atlrely at his disposal ;'and accordingly we
^t oat next mernliig,
246 GUI4«ITBR*S TRAVELS.
During onr journey he made me obsenre
tlie. several methods used by farmers iamap
naging their lands, which to me were whoUy
onaccoimtable ; for, except in some very few
places, I could not discover one ear of eon,
or blade of grass. But, in three boors'tra*
velimg, the scene was wholly altered ; we
came into a most beaatifiil country: for-
mers'houses, at small distances, neatiy
built; the fields enclosed, containuig vine-
yards, corn-grounds, and meadows. Ndtfaer
do I remember to have seen a more delight-
ful prospect. His excellency observed my
countenance to clear up ; he told me with a
sigh, * that there his estate began, and would
continue the same, till we should come to hii
house : that his countrymen ridiculed and
despised him, for managing his aflfairs no
better, and for setting so ill an example to
the kingdom ; which, however, was followed
by very few, such as were old, and wilfiil,
and weak like himself.'
We came at length to the house, which
was indeed a noble structure, built according
to the best rules of ancient architecture.
The fountains^ gardens, walks, avenues, and
groves, were all disposed with exact judg-
ment and taste. I gave due praises to every
thing I saw, whereof his excellency took not
the least notice till after supper ; when, there
being no third companion, be told me with a
very melancholy air < that he doubted he must
throw down his houses in town and country,
to rebuild them after the present mode ; des-
A TOYAGE TO LAPUTA, SiC. 247
troy idl his plantations, and cast others faito
Klidi a form as modem usage reqaired, and
give the'same directions to all his tenants,
unless he would sabmit to incur the censure
of pride, singularity, affectation, ignorai^cey
caprice, and perhaps increase his mtyesty^g
displeasure ; that the admiration I appeared
to be under would cease or diminish, when
he had informed me of some particulars which
probably I never heard of at court ; the peor
pie there being too much taken up in tiieir
own speculations, to have regard to what
passed here below.'
The sum of his discourse was to this effect;
* that about forty years ago, certain persons
went up to Laputa, either upon business or
diversion, and, after ^we months* continuance,
came back with a very littie smattering in
mathematics, but full of volatile spirits ac-
quired in that airy region : that these per-
sons, upon their return, began to dislike the
managment of every tiling below, and fell
Into schemes of putting all arts, sciences, lan-
guages, and mechanics, upon a new foot. To
this end, they procured a royal patent for
erecting an academy of projectors in Laga-
do; and the humour prevailed so strongly
among the people, that there is not a town
Df any consequence in the kingdom without
toch an academy. In these colleges the pro-
essors contrive new rules and methods of
griculture and building, and new instru-
lents and tools for all trades and manufae-
res ; whereby, as they undertake, one man
S48 oulliter's travels.
shall do the work of ten ; a palace may be
built in a week, of materials so dorable as to
last for ever without repairing. All fruits of
the earth shall come to maturity at whatever
season we think fit to choose, and increase a
hundred fold more than they do at preteat;
with innumerable other happy propoeab.
The only inconvenience is, that none of these
projects are yet brought to perfection ; ni
in the mean time, the whole country Bet
miserably waste, the houses in ruins, and the
people without food or clothes. By all whid^
instead of being discouraged, they are fiH^
times more violently bent upon prosecutiag
their schemes, driven equally on by hope awl
despair: that as for himself, being not of n
enterprising spirit, he was content to go ob
in the old forms, to live in the houses his
ancestors had built, and act as they did, ia
every part of life, without innovation : that
some few other persons of quality and gentiy
had done the same, but were looked on with
an eye of contempt and ill-will, as enemies to
art, ignorant, and ill common-wealth's men,
preferring their own ease and sloth before
the general improvement of their country/
His lordship added,'that he would not, by
any further particulars, prevent the pleasure
I should certainly take in viewing the grand
academy, whither he was resolved I should
go.'He only desired me to observe a ruined
building, upon the side of a mountain about
three miles distant, of which he gave me this
account : ^ that be bad a Ner^ convenient mill
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 240
rithiu half a mile of his house, turned by a
iirrent from a large river, and saificient f«r
is own family, as well as a great namber oi
IB tenants ; that about seven years ago, a
hib of those projectors came to him with
roposals to destroy this mill, and build
notfaer on the side of that moontaiuy on the
}ng ridge whereof a long canal must be cut,
or a repository of water to be conveyed up
y pipes and engines to supply the mill ; be-
anse the ¥rind and air upon a height agitated
lie water, and thereby made it fitter for mo-
ion; and because the water, descending
own a declivity, would turn the mill with
alf the current of a river, whose course is
lore upon a level/ He said, < that being
lien not very well with the court, and pressed
y many of his friends, he complied vnth the
roposal; and after employing a hundred
len for two years, the work miscarried, the
rojectors went off, laying the blame entirely
pon him, railing at him ever since, and pnt-
ing others upon the same experiment, with
qoal assurance of success, as well as equal
isappointment.*
In a few days we came back to town ; and
is excellency, considering the bad charac-
sr he had in the academy, would not go with
le himself, but recommended me to a friend
f his to boar me company thither. My
»rd was pleased to represent me as a great
dmirer of projects, and a person of much
iriosity and easy belief; which, indeed, was
ot without truth ; for I had myself been a
> rt of ^projector in my younger ds^s.
\
S60 gvluter's travels.'
CHAPTER V.
The Anihor permiHed U tee tite grtrndttemmi
pf Lagado, The meademif Imrgeiif deteribei.
The artt wherein Ikepnfeeeors emph^ tibe*'
eehes.
This academy is not an entire sin^e bnildbg,
but a continoation of seyeral houses on botii
'sides of a street, which growing waste, wu
purchased and applied to that nae.
I was received very kindly by the warden,
and went for many days to the academy.
Every room has in it one or more projectors;
and I believe I conld not be in fewer dian
five hundred rooms.
The first man I saw was of a meagre
aspect, with sooty hands and face, his bur
and beard long, ragged, and unged in several
places. His dot^es, shirt, and skin, were
all of the same colour. He had been eight
years upon a project for extracting sun-beams
out of cucumbers, which were to be put in
phials hermetically sealed, and let out to
warm the ur in raw inclement summers. He
told me, he did not doubt, that, in ^ght yean
more, he should be able to supply the go-
vernor's gardens with sunshine, at a reason-
able rate ; but he complained that his stock
was low, and entreated me'to give him
something as an encouragement to ingenuity,
especially since this had been a very dear
feaaon for cuciiin)[ > en'lioaA.^ I^Sm % small
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 251
present for my lord had furnished me with
money on purpose, because he knew tfadr
practice of begging from all who go to see
them.
I went into another chamber, but was
ready to hasten back, being almost overcome
with a horrible stink. My conductor pressed
me forward, conjuring me in a whisper ^ to
give no offence, which would be highly re-
sented ;'and therefore I durst not so much as
stop my nose. The projector of this cell was
the most andent student of the academy ; his
face and beard were of a pale yellow ; his
hands and clothes daubed over with ifilth.
When I was presented to him, he gave me a
close embrace; a compliment I could well
liave excused. His employment from his
first coming into the academy, was an opera-
tion to reduce human excrement to its original
food,. by separating the several parts, remoT*
iug the tincture whidi it receives from the
gall, making the odour exhale, and scumnung
off the saliva. He had a weekly allowance,
from the society, of a vessel filled with human
ordure, about the bigness of a Bristol barrel.
I saw another at work to calcine ice into
gunpowder ; who likewise showed me a treap
tise he had written concerning the malle-
ability of fire, which he intended to publish.
There was a most ingenious architect,
who had contrived a new method for build-
ing houses, by beginning at the roof, and
working downward to the foundation ; which
he justified to me, by tiie like practice oi
252 GULtiVBR 9 TRAVELS.
those two prudent insects, the bee and tlie
spider.
There was a man born blind, who had
several apprentices in his own oonditioii:
their employment was to mix colows for
painters, which their master tanght theaa to
distingu'ish by feeling and nnelling. It was
indeed my misfortune to find them at that
time not very perfect in their lessons, and the
'professor himself happened to be generaBj
mistaken. This artist is much encouraged
and esteemed by the whf^e fraternity.
In another apartment, I was highly pleased
with a projector who had found a device ef
ploughing the gr < miid with hogs, to save the
charges of ploughs, cattle, and labour. The
method is this : in an acre of ground you bury,
at six inches'distance and eif^t deep, a
quantity of ac«ms, dates, chesnats, and odier
mast or vegetables, whereof tiieae animaib
are fondest; then you drive six hundred or
more of them into the field, where, in a few
days, they will root up the whole ground fa
search of their feed, and make it fit for sow-
ing, at the same time manuring it with their
dung : it is true, upon experiment, tiiey fbund-
tbe charge and trouble very great, and they
had little or no crop. However it is not
doubted, that this invention may be capable
of great improvement.
I went into another room, where the walls
and ceiling were all hung round with cob-
webs, except a narrow passage for the artist
ta go in and out. A.t m^ ealraaM^) > a & «i)SAA >
JL TOVAOS TO LAP17TA, SlC SM
I to flKy'not to distwb hb webt.'Ho
Ited'tho fatal mistake the worid had
so long in, of nsing silk-worms, while
ad such plenty of domestic insects who
tely excelled the former, because they
rstood how to weave, as well as spin/
he proposed fhrther,'that by empk^ii^
srs, the charge of dyeing silks shonld be
ly saved ;'whereof I was fully convinced,
I he showed me a vast number < ^ flies
l > eautifully coloured, wherewith he fed
)iders, assuring us'that the webs would
a tincture from them; and as he had
of all hoes, he hoped to fit every body's
', as soon as he could find proper food
le flies, of certain gums, oils, and other
ions matter, to give a strength and con*
ice to the threads.'
ere was an astronomer, who had nnder-
I to place a sun-dial upon the great
lercock on the town-house, by acyusting
nnual and diurnal motions of the earth
on, so as to answer and coincide with all
eatal tamings of the wind,
ras complaining of a small fit of the colic,
which my conductor led me into a room
i a great physician resided, who was
IS for curing that disease, by contrary
lions from the same instrument. He
. large pair of bellows, with a long slen-
loade of ivory : this he conveyed eight
I op the anus, and drawing in the wind,
brmed he could make the guts as lank as
d bhidder. But when the disease was
t
S54 < }ULLITBR'8 travbli,
more stobbom and violent, he let in Un
nozzle while the bellows were fnll of wild,
which he discharged into the body of the
patient ; then withdrew the instrument to
replenish it, clapping his thumb strongly
against the orifice of the fundament; and
this being repeated three or four times, the
adventitious wind would rush out, bringing
tlie noxious along with it (like water put inta
a pump), and the patient recovered. I saw
him try both experiments upon a dog, but
could not discern any eftect ifrom the former.
After the latter the animal was ready U
burst, and made so violent a discharge ai
was very offensive to me and my companion*
The dog died on the spot, and we left the
doctor endeavouring to recover him, by the
same operation.
T visited many otlier apartments, but shaQ
not trouble my reader ¥rith all the curiositiet
I observed, being studious of brevity.
I had hitherto seen only one side of thf
academy, the other being appropriated to th*
advancers of speculative learning, of whom
shall say something, when I have mention'
one illustrious person more, who is call
among them'the universal artist.'He t
us * he had been thirty years employing
thoughts for the improvement of human'
He Iiad two large rooms full of wond
curiosities, and fifty men at work. /
were condensing air into a dry tangibh
stance, by extracting the nitre, and J
the aqoeons or fUu^ p2kx^ < d« & \«v
rOTACB TO LAPUTl, & C. SM
ening maTbli?, for jhIIowi and piiu
others prtrit'yinK tlie hoofi of ■
se, to preserve them froai founder'
I crcat ilu!l < ^9 ; tlie lirsl, to > ow land
iff, wliercin Le giBrmed tlic true
virtue to be contained, as he demon-
by sevevai eiiperim^nDi, nbich I was
ilful enough to eomprclieud. The
fas, by a curtain composition of gnnu,
lis, and vegetables, outwardly ajiplied,
> vcnt the Rrowtli of wool upon two
; lambs i and tie hoped, in a reatoDable
to propagate the breed of naked sheep,
'er the kingdom.
e crossed a walk to the other part of the
my, where, as I Iihvg already said, the
Mora in speculative leuruing resided,
e firit professor I saw, wai in a very
room, with forty pu|'iU about him.
'salntHtioD, observing me to lotdt earn-
iipon a frame, which took up t!ic gient-
m of botli the length and hrcaUUi of the
, he «aid'Perhaps 1 might wonder to
Im employed in a project for improving;
ilatlve knowledge, by ptactkal and me-
cal operations. But (he world would
be sensible of its usetntne-ss ; and hi^
red himself, that a more noble exalted
jht never sprang In any other man's bead.
y one knew how laborinus the uiaal me-
1* of attaining lo arts and sciences ;
can, by his contrivauce. the most igno-
pcrMu, at « xuwioiinble ctaatge, and
SM GULLIVKR* TRAVBLS
with a Utde bodily laboar, Hii|^t write
books in philosophy, poedry, politics, hnn,
mathematics, and theology, without the least
assistance from genius or study.'He then
led me to the frame, about the sides whereof
all his pupils stood in ranks. It was twenty
feet square, placed in the middle of the nMWi,
The superficies was composed of several biti
of wood, about the bigness of a die, but some
larger tiian others. They were all linked
together by slender wires. These bits of
wood were covered, on every square, with
paper pasted on them ; and on ^ese papen
were written all the words of their language,
in their several moods, tenses, and deden*
•ions ; but without any order. The professor
then desired me * to observe ; for he wm
going to set his engine at work/ The papilS)
at his command, took each of them hold of
an iron handle, whereof there were forty
fixed round the edges of the frame ; and
giving them a sudden turn, the whole dis-
position of the words was entirely changed.
He then commanded six-and*thirty of the
lads, to read the several lines softly, as they
appeared upon the frame ; and where they
found three or four words together that ought
make part of a sentence, they dictated to the
four remaining boys, who were scribes. This
work was repeated three or four times ; and
at every turn, the engine was so contrived,
that the words shifted into new places, as
the square bits of wood moved upside down.
Six houTB a day Ui« ^ouni^ «»XNA«vX%NR^e
X VOYAGE TQ LAPUTA, & C. 257
mployed in this labour ; aud the professoi
showed me several volumes in large foiio,
already collected, of broken sentences, whicli
he intended to piece together, and out of
those rich materials, to give the world a com-
plete body of all arts and sdences ; which,
however, might be still improved aad much
expedited, if the public would raise a Hind
for making and employing five hundred such
frames in Lagado, and oblige the managers
to contribute in common their several col-
lections.
He assured me ^ that this invention had
employed all his thoughts from his youth ;
that he had emptied the whole vocabulary
into his frame, and made the strictest compu-
tation of the general proportion tliere is in
books between the numbers of particles,
nouns, and verbs, and other parts of speech,*
I made my humblest acknowledgment to
this illustrious person, for his great communi-
cativeness ; and promised, Mf ever I had the
good fortune to return to my native country,
that I would do him justice, as the sole in-
ventor of this wonderful machine ;'the form
- and contrivance of which I desired leave to
delineate on paper.
I however told him,'although it were the
custom of our learned in Europe to steal iu-
. ventions from each other, who had thereby
at least this advantage, that it became a con-
troversy which was the right owner ; yet I
would take such caution, that he should have
the honour entire, vir^thout a rival.'
S58 GULLITBR*! TRATBU.
We next went to the school of langmgei,
wliere three professors sat In oonsnlUtkiB
npon improving that of their own ooontiy.
The first project was, to shorten discoorw,
by catttng polysyllables into one, and leafiig
out verbs and participles ; becaose, in realityj
all things imaginable are bnt nouns.
The other project was, a scheme finr en-
tirely abolishing all words whatsoever ; and
this was nrged as a great advantage in point
of health, as well as brevity. For it is pUdo,
that every word we speak is, in some degree,
a diminution of our hmgs by corrosion ; and
consequently contributes to the shortening of
our lives. An expedient was fhere^Mre of-
fered,'that since words are eoly names for
tilings, it would be more convenient for all
men to carry about them such things as were
necessary to express a particular bnsineM
they are to discourse on.'And this inventkm
would certainly have taken place, to the great
ease as well as health of the subject, ^the
women, in conjunction with the vulgar and il-
literate, had not threatened to raise a rebel-
lion unless they might be allowed the liberty
to speak with their tongues, after the manner
of their forefathers ; such constant irrecon-
dleable enemies to science are the common
people. However many of the most learned
and wise adhere to the new scheme of ex-
pressing themselves by things; which has
only this inconveniencf^ attending it, that if a
man*s business be very great, and ik various
kinds^ he must be obliged, in proportion, to
A TOTAOB TO LAPDTA, SlC, Mt
a greater bondle of tilings iipoo his
unless he can afford one or two strong
ts to attend him. I have often beheld
those sages almost sinking nnder the
< ^ their packs, like pedlars among us;
rhen they met in the street, would
rn their loads, open their sacks, and
nversation for an hour together ; then
their implements, help each other to
their burthens, and take their leaves,
for short conversations, a man may
implements in his pockets, and nnder
s, enough to supply him ; and in his
he cannot be at a loss. Therefore the
liere the company meet who practice
, is fulhof all things, ready at hand,
Le to furnish matter for tliis kind of
il converse.
tfaer great advantage proposed by thh
»n was, that it would serve as a uni-
language, to be understood in < «IIci-
uations, whose goods and utensils are
ly of the same kind, or nearly resem-
that their uses might easily be corn-
led. And thus ambassadors would
ified to treat with foreign princes, or
rs of state, to whose tongues they
:ter strangers.
i at the mathematical school, where
ster taught his pupils after a method
imaginable to us in Europe. The
ion, and demonstration, were fairly
on a thin wafer, with ink composed
»halic tincture. This, the student was
4
}
to swallow upon a fasting stomach, and for
three days t'oiluwing eat nothiug but bread
and water. As the wafer digested, the tincr
cure mounted to his brain, bearing the pio >
position along with it. But the success hai
not hitherto been answerable, partly by soou
error in the quantum or composition, and part-
ly by the perverseness of lads, to whom thii
bolos is so nauseous, that they generally steal
aside, and discharge it upwards, before it can
operate; neither have they been yet per-
suaded to use so long an abstinence, as tiie
prescription requires.
CHAPTER VI.
A farther aeemmt ef the aeudewnf. Tki An-
ikoT propo$e8 some itmprocetnents, udud^
. are honourably received.
In the school of political projectors, I was
but ill entertained ; the professors appearing,
in my judgment, wholly out of their senses ;
which is a scene that never fails to make me
melancholy. These imhappy people were pro-
posing schemes for persuadiuir monarchs to
choose favouiites upon the score of their
wisdom, capacity, and virtue ; of teaching
ministers to consult the public good ; of re-
warding merit great abilities, and eminent
services ; of instructing princes to know their
true interest, by placing it on the same foua*
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, SiC, 961
ition with that of their people ; of chooting
»r employmeots, persons qaalified to exer-
ae them ; with many other wild impossible
tiimenis, that never entered before into the
emit of man to conceive ; and confirmed in
le the old observation, ^ that there is nothing
extravagant and irrational, which smbo
Idlosophers have not maintained for truth.'
But, however, I shall so far do justice to
bis part of the academy, as to acknowledge
hat all of them were not so visionary. There
ras a most ingenious doctor, who seemed to
e perfectly versed in the whole nature and
ystem of government. This illustrious per-
on had very usefully employed his studies,
1 finding out effectual remedies for all dis-
ases and corruptions, to which the several
inds of public adminbtration are subject^ by
be vices or infirmities of those who govern,
s well as by the licentiousness of those who
re to obey. For instance; whereas all
rriters and reasoners have agreed, that there
I a strict universal resemblance between the
latural and the political body ; can there be
ny thing more evident, than that the health of
oth must be preserved, and the diseases
nred, by the same prescriptions ? It is al-
)wed, that senates and great councils are
ften troubled with redundant, ebullient, and
ther peccant humours ; with many diseases
f the head, and more < ^ the heart ; with
trong convulsions, with grievous contractions
f the nerves and sinews in both hands, but
spedally the right ; with spleen, flatus, ver-
20S Gulliver's travels.
tigos, and deliriums ; iwith scrofulous tmnoiin,
full of fetid purulent matter; with 8«r
frotliy nictations ; with canine appetites, and
crudeness of digestion, beside many otiiezi
needless to mention. This doctor therefon
proposed,'that upon the meeting of the se-
nate, certain physicians should attend at flie
three first days of their sitting, and at tbe
dose of each day's debate feci the pulses o£
every seuator ; after which, having maturely
considered and consulted upon the nature ci
the several maladies, and the methods of core,
they should on the fourth day return to the
senate house, attended by their appothecaritii
stored with proper medicines ; and before
the members sat, administer to each of tiiem
lenitives, aperients, abstersives, corrosive^
restringents, palliatives, laxatives, cephalal-
gics, icterics, apophlegmatics, acoustics, n
their several cases required ; and, according
as these medicines should operate, repeat,
alter, or omit them, at the next meeting.
This project could not be of any great ex-
pense to the public ; and might in my poor
opinion, be of much use for the dispatch of
business, in those countries where senates
have any share in the legislative power ; be-
get unanimity, shorten debates, open a few
mouths which are now closed, and close many
more which are now open ; curb the petulancy
of the young, and correct the positiveness
of the old ; rouse the stupid, and damp tlie
pert.
Again : because it is a general complaint j
rtOK TO LAIiUTA, Ac. SOS
iritei of princ«« are troilbled
d weak memories; the Mma
ed,'thatHhoerer attended m
after haviD; told his buuDew,
tt brevit; aod in the plainest
at big departure, give the *aid
ak bj tbe nose, or a kick on
tread on liis corns, or log iiint
nch bis arm blxck and blae, to
:fnIiieB8-, and at evec? IcTce
e same ojicratioD, till the bu-
ne, or absolutely refused.'
directed,'that cverj senator
nncil of a nation, al^r he had
opinion aud argued in the de-
> nld be obliged to gire liii vote
ry ; because if that were done,
aid iafallibly tenninate in the
bbc.'
ei In a itiUe are Tiolent, he
ieifiil contriTRnce to reconcile
etbod is this: ;oa take a ban-
'eachparty; yon dispose them
■Dch wliose heads are nearest
D let two nice operators saw
t of each conple at the same
I manner, Hiat the brain may
tded. Let the oci^pats, tho*
TChanged, applying each to tli«
pposite partj'Oian. It seem*
, work tiiat reqnireH some ex-
he professor assured ns,'tiiat
termuly per & nned, the cnra
\
M4 OUIXITSB't TRATSU.
wooki he infklUble/ For Iw u^aed Am*
< that the two half brains beinf; l«lt to debate
the matter between themselves within the
space of one skull, woold soon come to a good
understanding ; and produce that moderatioB,
as well as regularity of thinking so much t»
be wished for in the heads of those, who
imagine they come into the world tii$ to
watch and govern its motion : and as to the
difference of brains, in quantity or qualitj,
among those who are directors in factioay'
the doctor assured us, from his own know-
ledge, that ^ it was a perfect trifle/
I heard a very warm debate between two
professors, about the most rommodious awl
effectual ways and means of raising moaey,
without grieving the subject* The first aif-
firmed, .'the jnstest method wonld be^ to lay
a certain tax upon vices and foUy ; and the
sum fixed upon every man* to be rated, after
the fairest manner, by a jury of his nei|^-
hours.'The second was of an opinhw di-
rectly contrary ;'to tax those qualities of
body and mind, for which men chiefly value
themselves ; the rate to be more or less as-
cording to the degrees of exceUiDg ; the de-
cision whereof should be left entirely to tfaear
own breast/ The highest tax was upon men
who are the greatest favourites of the other
sex, and the assessments, according to the
number and nature of the favours they have
received ; for which they are allow'ed to be
their own vouchers. Wit, valour, andpo-
I; were likewise yro|KMied to be largely
A VOTAOK TO LAPOTA, & e. MS
taud, and collected in fbe Mm« muwr,
by eroy pcnon'i pring hit own word for
tbe qoantmn of what he poueued. But
at to hoDonr, joitice, wiadom, and (earn-
ing, the; shoiild not be tuedat ill; becasM
be; are qnalificatioiu of so ungolar a kind,
that no man will either allow them in hii
■eighboor or jalae them in hinuelf.
Tbe women were proposed to be taxed
•ceordbig to thur beaaty and iklll in dreu-
tnf, wherein the; had the game privilEge
wiUi the men, ta be determined tiy tlieir
own jndgmeot. Bnt conitancy, efaaiti^,
good icnie, and good oabire, were not rat«d,
becanae tfaey WMild not buu the chai^ of
coll«oting.
Ta keep senaton in the interelt of tlte
etown, it was proposed tliat the members
dionld nMe tar employments ; eTo; man
first takmg an oath, and giring security, that
he would Tote for the eoort, whether he won
m not ; aftfr which, the iosen had. In their
t & m, Oe liberty of raffling npon die next vh-
eanc;. " nms, hope and expectatloB woald
be kept all*a ; none wonld camplain of bro-
, but impute their ■■ ■ -
Another profcsur showed me a large paper
of instriKUims tar discorering plM* ud con-
aplrades agaiast the goTemment. He ad-
266 golliter's TRATELS.
eating; upon which side they lay in bed|
with which hand they wiped their poaterion;
take a strict view of the excrements, and,
from the colour, the odoor, the taste, the
consistence, the cmdeness, or maturi^ of
digestion, form a judgment of their thoaghts
and designs ; because men are never so se-
rious, tlioughtful, and intent, as when they
are at stool, which he foond by experience:
for, in 8uch conjunctures, when he used,
merely as a trial, to consider which was the
best way of murdering the king, his ordure
would have a tincture of green : but quite
different, when he thought only of raising an
insurrection, or burning the metropolis.
The whole discourse was written with great
acuteness, containing many observations,
both curious and .useful for politiciains ; bat,
as I conceived, not altogether complete. This
I ventured to tell the author, and offered, if
he pleased, to supply him with some addi-
tions. He received my proposition with more
compliance than is usual among writers, es-
pecially those of the projecting species ; pro-
fessing < he would be glad to receive farther
information.'
I told him, * that in the kingdom of Tribnia,
by the natives called Langden, where I had
sojourned some time in my travels, the bulk
of the people consist in a manner wholly of
discoverers, witnesses, informers, accusers,
prosecutors, evidences, swearers, together
with their several subservient and subaltern
instruments, all under the oolonrs, the
L YdYAGfi TO LA^UtA, & C. 267
tondoct, and the pay of minivters of state,
and their deputies. The plots, in that
kingdom, are usually the workmanship of
those persons who desire to raise their own
characters of profound politicians ; to restord
new vigour to a crazy administration ; to stifle
or divert general discontents ; to fill their
coffers with forfeitures ; and raise or sink the
opinion of public credit, as either shall best
answer their private advantage. It is first
agreed and settled among them, what sus-
pected persons shall be accused of a plot :
then, effectual care is taken to secure all
their letters and papers, and put the owners
in chains. These papers are delivered to a
set of artists, very dexterous in finding out
the mysterious meanings of words, syllables,
and letters : for instance, they can discover
a close stool, to signify a privy-council ; a
flock of geese, a senate ; a lame dog,* an
invader ; the plague, a standing army ; a
buzaard, a prime minister ; the gout, a high
priest; a gibbet, a secretary of state; a
chamber-pot, a committee of grandees ; a
sieve, a court lady ; a broom, a revolution ; a
mouse trap, an employment; a bottomless
pit, a treasury ; a sink, a court ; a cap and
bells, a & Touiite ; a broken reed, a court of
justice ; an empty tun, a general ; a running
sore, the administration.
* When this method ^s, tfaev have two
• Sec the proceeding! agahist Dr. Atterbory, Bishop
of Rocheeftr, In the State XrUls, vol. vi.— H.
268 OUUArVBRS TRAVELS.
Others more effectaal, whidi the learned
among them call acrostics and anagrams.
First, they can decipher all initial letters
into political meanings. Thas iV, shall sig-
nify a plot ; B, a regiment of horse ; L, i
fleet at sea: or, secondly, by transposing tiie
letters of the alphabet in any suspected pa*
per, they can lay open the deepest designs
of a discontented party. So, for example, tf
I should say, in a letter to a friend, * Ow
brother Tom has just got the piles,'a skitfU
decipherer would discover, that the same let-
ters which compose that sentence, may be
analysed into the following words,'Reast,—
a plot is brought home — ^The tour.'And
this is the anagrammatic method.'
*f'- The professor made me great acknowledg-
meuts for communicating these obserradoni,
and promised to make honourable mention of
i^ft in his treatise.
I saw nothing in this country that eoold
invite me to a longer continuance, and begaa
to think of returning home to JBnglaBd,
CHAPTER VIL
Tk$ Author Umoet Idtgado, arrivet at MaldaM-
da. No ship ready. . He takes a short mw-
age to GUtbbdubdribs^^His reception by the
governor.
The continent, of which this khigchmi'Is a
part, extends lUelE^^a & lViwt^x^wMniv^XA.*
A TOTA6B TO L4PUTA, & C. 269
EeTe, entwitdy to tnai tmkbumrn tract < % "
America westward of California; and north,
to the pacific ocean, which is not above a
hundred and fifty miles from Lagado ; where
there is a good port, and moch commerce
with the great island of Luggnagg, situated
to the north-west about 29 degrees north
latitude, and 140 longitude. This island ot
Luggnagg stands south-eastward of Japan,
about a hundred leagues distant. There is a
strict alliance between the Japanese emperor
and the king of Luggnagg ; which affords
frequent opportunities of sailing from one
island to the other. I determined therefore
to direct ipy course this way, in order to my
return to Europe. I hired two mules, with
a guide, to show me the way, and carry my
small baggage. I took leave of my. noble
protector, who had shown me so much favour,
and made me a generous present at my de-
parture.
My journey was without any accident or
adventure worth relating. When I arrived
at the port of Maldonada (for so it is called)
there was no ship in the harbour bound for
Luggnagg, nor likely to be in some time. The
town is about as large as Portsmouth. I
soon fell into some acquaintance, and was
▼ery hospitably received. A gentleman of
distinction said to me,'that since the ships
bound for Luggnagg could not be ready in
less than a month, it might be no disagreeable
amusement for me to take a trip to tlie little
island of. Glubbdubdrib, about five leagues
270 GULLTTBtt^ TRATXLS.
off to the sonth-west/ He offered himself
and a friend to accompany me, and that I
should be provided with a maR conveaieat
bark for the voyage.
Glabbdubdrib, as nearly as I can Interpret
the word, signifies the l^tauMl €f sereaerers or
magicians. It is about one third as large n
the Isle of Wight, and extremely frnitfnl : it
is governed by tlie head < »f a certain tribe,
who are all magicians. . This tribe marries
only among each other, and the eldest in
succession is prince or governor. He has a
noble palace, and a park of about three tfaon-
sand acres, surrounded by a wall of hewn
stone twenty feet high. In this park are
several small enclosures for cattle, com, and
gardening.
The governor and Ms ftmlly are served
and attended by domestics of a kind some-
what unusual. By his skill In necromaocy,
he has a power of calling whom he pleases
from the dead, and commanding liieir service
for twenty-four hours, but no longer; nor
ean he call the same persons up agaia in less
than three months, except upon very extra-
ordinary occasions.
When we arrived at the island, which was
about eleven in the morning, one of the gen^
tlemen who accompanied me went to the go-
vernor, and desired admittance for a stranger,
who came on purpose to have the honour of
attending on his highness. This was imme-
diately granted, and we all three entered the
gate of the palace between VROTcrn^^i ^gans^'^'>
i and dr«wed after a very antic Diut-
uid Kmiethiiig in tb^ coonteDuicu that
a my fle^ creep witti n hoTTOt I caimot
:cM. We paucd throogh Kveral apart-
iti, between urvaiits of the nma Hwt,
ked on each tide ai before, till ne came to
dumber of pretence; where, after three
tfbund obclMDcei, and a few geutrtl qnei-
ni, we were pennitted to ut on tliree
(oU, near 0ie loweit step of hU bi^neu'i
rone. Heandentood thelangoageofBal-
Jwrbi, altboo^ it wai different from that
f tbii uluid. He de^red me to give him
Mnc aceonnt of my travela ; and, to let me
lee that I ihonld be treated withont cere ■
nony, be dinuiiMd all bit ■ttendantt witii a
xm of bis finger ; at whidi, to my great b > -
rinons in a dreim when we awake on a
ndden. I could not recover niyaelf in aoise
lime till the governor aisured me. * diat I
ihovld receive no hurt.'and obierving my
n*«canipanDioiu to be nnderno concern, wba
lad been often entertainod in the tame man-
■er, I began to take coarage, and related to
ii» U^ineM a abort history of my aever^
idvenOMU ; yet not widioat wme henutian,
ind fteqnendy looking behind me to the
llace where I had uen tboie domeitic tpec-
m. I had the honaar to dine with the go-
remor, wiiere a new let of ^loatt lerved ap
die meat, and waited at table. I now ob-
lerrcd myMlf to be leu tenlfied than I bad
'.oea in the momiag. I stayed till nnset,
279 gullivsr's travels^.
but hambly desired his highness to excuse me
for not accepting his invitation of lodging in
the palace. My two friends and I lay at i
private house in the town adjoining, which is
the capital of this little island ; and the next
morning we retamed to pay our duty to the
governor, as he was pleased to command us.
After this manner we continued in the
island for ten days, most part of every day
with the governor, and at night in our lodging.
I soon grew so familiarized to the sight of
spirits, that after the third or fourth time they
gave me no emotion at all ; or, if I had any
apprehensions left, my curiosity prevailed
over them. For his highness the governor
ordered me'to call up whatever persons I
would choose to name, and in whatever nnm-
bers, among all the dead from the beginning
uf the world to the present time, and com-
ftiand them to answer any questions I tdionld
think fit to ask ; with this condition, tiiat my
questions must be confined within the com-
pass of the times they lived in. And one
thing I might depend upon, that they would
certainly tell me the truth, for lying was t
talent of no use in the lower world/
I made my humble acknowledgments to his
highness for so great a favour. We were in
a chamber, from whence there was a fair
prospect into the park. And because my
first inclination was to be entertained with
scenes of pomp and magnificence, I desired
to see Alexander the Great at the head of
his army, just a£t£t \h & WvU^ oC AjcUcla;
A TOTAOK TO LAPDT«, & C. ST3
wUeh apon ■ isotioD of the gorenua't finger,
immeAately ■ppeared in a large field, under
tke windinr where we itood. Alexander
wai called np into the room ; it was with
great diffical^ that I Dnderstood bi > Oreek*,
■Bd had bnt little of mj own. He amired
tac iip«M hi > huaonr'tbat be wai not p < H-
■oned, bat died of a bad ferer bj eacsuive
ixinkin%f.'
Next, I taw Hannibal paaiiag ttie Alpa,
irtio told Be * be had not a drop of vinegar
Inhis'iXHpt-'
I MW Caiar and Pompej at the bead of
Oieir tiw^, jnit ready to engage. I mw
Oie fbnuer, b > M) lait great triumph. I de-
■ired that the aenate of Rome might appear
before He, In one large chamber, and nmodem
274 Gulliver's travbls
representative in counter view, in another.
The first seemed to be an assembly of hercx^
and demi-gods ; the other, a knot of pedhun,
pickpockets, highwaymen, and bullies.
The governor, at my request, gave the siga
for Caesar and Brutus to advance towards ns,
I was struck with a profound veneration at
the sight of Brutus, and could easily discover
the most consummate virtue, the greatest
intrepidity and firmness of mind, the truest
love of his country, and general benevolence
of mankind, in every lineament of his counte-
nance. I observed, with much pleasure, that
these two persons were in good intelligence
with each other ; and Caesar freely confessed
to me, * that the greatest actions of his own
life were not equal, by many degrees, to the .
glory of taking it away.'I had the honour
to have much conversation with Brutus ; and
was told,'that his ancestor Junius, Socrates,
Epaminondas, Cato the younger,* Sir Thomas
More, and hiniself, were perpetually together ;
a sextumvirate, to which all the ages of the
world cannot add a seventh.
It would be tedious to trouble the reader
with relating what vast numbers of illustrious
persons were called up, to gratify that insati-
able desire I had to see the world in every
* I am in some doubt whether Cato the censor can
fiirly claim a rank among so choice a group of f hosts.
'" Orrery. This note of bis lordship is an enc'bininm on
the jadgment of onr author, who knew that Cato tb«
censor and Cato the younger were very different per
sons, and for good reason preferre < | the iatter^i^U*
lofantiquity placed before me. IdOeDr
line eyes with bebolding tbe deitroyert
ranU and luuipers, and tbe reitoren ef
ty to oppreaied andiDJoted natioiu. Bnt
impouible to expresa the aatufactiail I
iived in niy own mind, after racb a man-
', M to make it a suitable entertainment to
CHAPTER VIII.
Hatido b deiire to lee those ancient* who
were most renowned for wit and tenming. I
set apart one day on purpose. I proposed
that Homeraud Aristotle might appear at the
head of all their commeatators ; but these
were so nnmeroTis, tliat soioe hundreds were
forced to attend in the court, and ontward
rooms of die palace. I knew, and could dig.
tiDguish tiiose two heroes, at first sight, not
only from the crowd, bat from eich other.
Homer was the taller and comelier person of
the two, walked »ery erect for one of his age,
and liis eyes were the most quick and pierce-
big I BTer beheld. Aristotle stooped mnch,
and made use of a staff. His ^sage was
meagre, his hair lank and tlilo, and his voice
ImUow.* I loail discovered that botii uf them
* TU > dfUriptioD ■( AilHolli li Sill, ud, la a (*w
wurA, npiuuu (lie tint uUon or fall woiki. Bj
}
276 GULLnrt &'s travels.
were perfect strangers to the rest of the i
pany, and had never seen or heard of tfam
before ; and I had a whisper from a ^HMt
who shall be nameless, * that these commea-
tators always kept hi the most distant qaar*
ters from their principals^ in the lower woiU,
through a consciousness of shame and guiH,
because they had so horribly misrepresented
the meaning of those authors to posterity.'
I introduced Didymas and Enstathins to
Homer, and prevailed on him to treat them
better than perhaps they deserved, for he sood
found they wanted a genius to enter hito the
spirit of a poet. But Aristotle was out of
all patience with the acconnt I gave him of
Scotus and Ramus, as I presented them to
him ; and he asked them, * whether the rest
of the tribe were as great dances as theia-
selvesf
I then desired the governor to call op
Descartes and Gassendi, with whom I pre-
vailed to explain their systems to Aristotle.
This great philosopher freely acknowledged
his own mistakes in natural philosophy, be-
cause he proceeded in many things upon con-
jecture, as all men must do ; and he founds
not having the immortal spirit of Homer, he wm iint*
ble tu keep hb body erect ; iind his staff, which feeblj
sapported him. Hire his commentators, made this detect
more conspicuous. H« wanted not some nseful qoali-
tiea, bnt these real ornaments ^ XWe his liair, were thin
and nnp^aceful.— Orrery. In this the noble coramea-
titor seems to be mistalcen, for it cannot be l > elieTed
that Aristotle's real ornaments, however few* were
HHgrace/itL-^Vi,
A yOTAGE TO LAPUTA, & C.. STT
t Gassendi, who had made the dd^iffaie of
euros as palatable as he cooldy and the
lices of Descartes were eqnally to be
loded. He predicted the same fate to
actioD, whereof the present learned are
li zealous asserters. He said, * that new
tems of natare were but new fashions,
ich would vary in every age; and even
se, who pretend to demonstrate them from
thematical principles, would flourish but a
rt period of time, and be out of vogue
en that was determined.'
[ spent five days in conversing with many
ers of the ancient learned. I saw most
the first Roman emperors. I prevailed on
1 governor to call up Heliogabalus's cooks to
iss us a dinner, but they could not show us
ch of their skill, for want of materials. A.
ot of Agesilaus made us a dish of Spartan
»th, but I was not able to get down a
ond spoonful.
rhe two gentlemen, who conducted me to
) island, were pressed by their private
airs to return in three days, which I em-
ijed in seeing some of the modem dead,
lohad made the greatest figure, for two
three hundred years past, ui our own and
ler countries of Europe ; and having been
Fays a great admirer of old illnstrions fami-
I, I desired the governor would call up a
len or two of kings, with their ancestors in
ler for eight or nine generations. But my
^pointment was grievous and unexpected.
r, instead of a long train with roj^ dia«
2 Bb
\
278 gitlliver's travels.
dcm^, I saw in one family two fiddlers, three
spruce courtiers, and an Italian prelate. In
another, a barber, an abbot, and two canli-
nais. I have too great a veneration for
crowned lieads, to dwell any longer on so nice
a subject. But as to counts, marquisses,
dukes, carls, and the like, I was hot so icni-
pulous. And I confess, it was not wiffaoat
some pleasure, that I found myself able to
trace the particular features, by which cer*
tain families are distinguished, up to their
originals. I could plainly discover wheiice
one family derives a long chin ; why a second
has abounded with knaves for two genera-
tions, and fools for two more; why a third
happened to be crack-brained, and a fourth
to be sharpers ; whence it came, what Poly-
dore Virgil says of a certain great house, Nee
vir fortis, nee fcemina casta ; how cruelty,
falsehood, and cowardice, grew to be charac-
teristics, by which certain families are distin-
guished as much as by their coats of arms;
who first brought the pox into a noble house,
which has lineally descended in scrofulous
tumours to their posterity. Neither could I
wonder at all this, when I saw such an inter-
ruption of lineages, by pages, lackeys, valets,
coackmen, gamesters, fiddlers, players, cap-
tains, and pickpockets.
I was chiefly disgusted with modem history.
For having strictly examined all the persons
of greatest name in the courts of princes, for
a hundred years past, I fonnd how the world
liad been mi & led b^ v^^^^^^^ writers, to
A TOYAGB TO LAPUTA, & C.. 279
aicribe the greatest exploits in war, to cow-
ards; the wisest counsel, to fools; sincerity,
to flatterers ; Roman virtue, to betrayers of
their country ; piety, to atheists ; chastity, to
sodomites; truth, to informers: how many
innocent and excellent persons had been con-
demned to death or banishment, by the
practising of great ministers upon the corrup-
tion of judges, and the malice of factions :
bow many villains had been exalted to the
highest places of trust, power, dignity, and
profit: how great a share in the motions and
events of courts, councils, and senates, might
be challenged by bawds, whores, pimps,
parasites, and buffoons. How low an opinion
I had of human wisdom and integrity, when
I was truly informed of the springs and mo-
tives of great enterprises and revolutions in
the world, and of the contemptible accidents
to which tiiey owed their success !
Here I discovered the roguery and igno-
rance of those who pretend to write anec-
dotes, or secret history ; who send so many
kings to their graves with a cup of poison ;
will repeat the discourse between a prince
and chief minister, where no witness was by ;
unlock the tlionghts and cabinets of ambas-
sadors and secretaries of state ; and have the
perpetual misfortune to be mistaken. Here
I discovered the true causes of many great
events that have surprised the world ; how a
whore can govern the back-stairs, the back-
stairs a council, and the council a senate. A
feneral confessed, in my presence,'that he
1
280 GULLIVER'S TRATBL8.
got a victory purely by the force of cowardioe
and ill conduct,'and an admiral^'that, for
want of proper intelligence, he beat the
enemy, to whom he intended to betray te
fleet.'Three kings protested to me, * tlitt
in their whole reigns they never did onee
prefer any person of merit, unless by mistake,
or treachery of some minister in whom they
confided : neither would they do it if they
were to live again :'and they showed, mtk
great strengtli of reason,'that the royal
throne could not be supported without csr-
mption, because that positive, confident,
restiff temper, which virtue infiued into a
man, was a perpetual clog to public business/
I had the curiosity to inquire in a particuhur
manner, by what methods great numbers had
procured to themselves high titles of honoar,
and prodigious estates ; and I confined my
Inquiry to a very modem period : however,
without grating upon present times, because
I would be sure to give no ofience even to
foreigners ; for I hope the reader need not be
told, that I do not in the least intend my
own country, in what I say upon this occasion.
A great number of persons concerned were
called up ; and, upon a very slight examina-
tion, discovered such a scene of infamy, that
I cannot reflect upon it without some serious-
ness. Perjury, oppression, subornation, fraud,
pandarism, and the like infirmities, were
among the most excusable arts they had to
mention ; and for these I gave, as it was rea-
aoliable, great aWowanot. B^'wVvi & il some
A VOYAGE TO LAPIJTA, & C. 281
confessed they owed their greatnesA and
wealth to sodomy, or incest; others, to the
prostituting of their own wives and daugliters;
others, to the betraying of their country, or
their prince ; some, to poisoning ; more, to thct
perverting of justice, in order to destroy the.
innocent : I hope I may be pardoned, if these,
discoveries inclined me a little to abate ck.
that profound veneration, which I am na«
turally apt to pay to persons of high rank,
who ought to be treated with the utmost
respect due to their sublime dignity, by at
their inferiors.
I had often read of some great servicet
done to princes and states, and desired to see
the persons by whom those services were
performed. Upon inquiry I was told,'that
their names were to be found on no record,
except a few of them, whom history has re-
presented as the vilest of rogues and traitors.
As to the rest, I had never once heard of
them. They sill appeared with dejected
looks, and in the meanest habit; most of them
telling me,'they died in poverty and dis-
grace, and the rest on a scaffold or a gibbet/
Among others, there was one person,
whose case appeared a little singular. He
had a youth about eighteen years old stand-
ing by his side. He told me * he had for
many years been commander of a ship ; and
in the sea-fight at Actium had the good for-
tune to break through the enemy's great line
of battle, sink three of their capital ships,
and take a fourth^ which was tbe sole cause
Gulliver's travels.
of Aotony't flight, and of the victory that
ensued ; that the youth'standing by him, Ui
only SCO, was killed in the action/ He ad4ed,
'that upon the confidence of some merit, the
war bemg at an end, he went to Rome, sad
aoficited at the coort of Angastns to he pie-
leiTed to a greater ship, whose commander
had been killed ; but without any regard to
hhi pretensions, it was given to a boy wh»
had never seen the sea, the aon of libertina,
who waited on one of the emperor's bhs-
tresses. Returning back to his own vessel,
he was charged with neglect of duty, and tbe
idiip given to a favourite page of Publicols,
the vice*admiral ; whereupon he retired to
a poor farm at a great distance from Rome,
and there ended his life.'I was so cnriois
to know the truth of this story, that I desired
Agrippa might be called, who was admiral ia
that fight. He appeared, and confirmed the
whole account ; but with much more advan-
tage to the captain, whose modesty had ei-
tenuttted or concealed a great part of his merit.
I was surprised to fiiad corruptioB grown
so high and so quick in that empire, bylhe
force of luxury so lately introduced ; which
made me less wonder at many parallel cases
in other countries, where vices of all kinds
have reigned so much longer, and where the
Vhole praise, as well as pillage, has been en-
grossed by the chief commander, who perhaps
had the least title to either.
As every person called np made exactly
the same appearaace he had done in the
A YOTAGB TO LAPUTA, & C. 283
ymMp it gave me melancholy reflections to
obtenrey how mach the race of homan kind
was degenerated among as, within these
hnndred years past; faow the pox, under all
its consequences and denominations, had
altered eveiy lineament of an English coun-
tenance; shortened the size of bodies, un-
braced the nerves, relaxed the sinews and
moscleSy introduced a sallow complexion, and
rendered the flesh loose and rancid. • ^« .
I descended so low, as to desire some
English yeomen of the old stamp might be
smnmoned to appear ; once so famous for the
simplicity of their manners, diet, and dress ;
for justice in their dealings ; for their true
spirit of liberty ; for their valour, and love of
their country. Neither could I be wholly
unmoved, after comparing the living with
the dead, when I considered how all tliese
pure native virtues were prostituted for a
piece of money by their grandchildren ; who,
in selling their votes and managing at elec*
tions, have acquired every vice and cornip.
tion that can possibly be learned in a court.
CHAPTER IX.
The AMor rehtrtu to Maldonada* Sails to
the kingdom of Luggnagg, The A uthor con •
fined. He it sent fir to court. The manner
9if his admittanee* The King's great lenity
to his sul^ects*
The day of our departure being come, I took
leave of his hi^Umess, the governor of Glubb-
S84 Gulliver's travels.
dobdrib, and retomed with my two oom
panioDS to Maldonada, where, after a fort
night's waiting, a ship was ready to sail fo
Loggnagg. The two gentlemen, and son
others, were so generous and kind as to (hi
nish me with provisions, and see me on bom
I was a month in this voyage. We had oi
violent storm, and were under a necessity «
steering westward to get into the trade-win
which holds for above sixty leagues. On ti
21st of April, 1708, we sailed into the riT <
of Clumegnig, which is a seaport town, at tl
south east point of Luggnagg. We cast ai
chor within a league of the town, and mti
a signal for a pilot. Two of them came (
board in less than half an hour, by whom i
were guided between certain shoab and rod[
which are very dangerous in the passage,
a large basiu, where a fleet may ride in safei
within a cable's length of the town- wall.
Some of our sailors, whether out of tread
ery or inadvertence, had informed the pilo
* that I was a stranger, and a great traveller
whereof these gave notice to a custom-hom
officer, by whom I was examined very strict
upon my landing. This officer spoke to n
ill the language of Balnibarbi, which, by tl
force of much commerce, is generally unde
stood in that town, especially by seamen ax
tiiose employed in the customs. I gave hii
a short account of some particulars, and mad
my story as plausible and consistent as I could
but I thought it necessary to disguise m
country, viud caWm'^'s^A^ ».\\vA\axv^Q.\ \ V^^^^juai
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA, & C. 285
liy intentions were for Japan, and I knew
the Dutch were the only Europeans permitted
to enter into that kingdom. I therefore toid
the officer,'that having been shipwrecked
on the coast of Balnibarbi, and cast on a rock,
I was received np into Lapnta, or th€ flying
island (of n^hich he had often heard,) and was
now endeavouring to get to Japan, whence I
nright find a convenience of returning to my
own coantry.'The officer fedd,'I must be
confined till he conld receive orders from
court, fbr which he would write immediately,
and hoped to receive an ahswer in a fortnight.'
I was carried to a convenient lodging, with'a
sentry placed at the door; however, I had
the liberty of a large garden, and was treated
with humanity enough, being maintained all
the time at the king's charge. I was invited
by several persons, chiefly out of curiosity,
because it was reported that I cafne flrom
countries very remote, erf which they had
never heard.
I hired a young man, who came ifi the same
ship, to be an interpteter ; he was a native of
liUggnagg, but had fived some years at Mai-
donada, and was a perfect master of both
languages. By his assistance, I was able (o
hold a conversation with those who came to
visit me ; but this eonsisted only of their ques-
tions, and my answers.
The dispatch came ^oin court afrant tile
time we expected. It contained a warfant
for conducting me and jty retinue to Trml'
dragdubhf or TriUtrosfdrik (fb^ It is prOncMin-
286 Gulliver's travels.
ced both ways as near as I can remember,)
by a party of ten horse. All my retinae vas
that poor lad for an interpreter, whom I per-
suaded into my service, and, at my bumble
request, we had each of us a mule to ride oo.
A messenger was dispatched half a day's
journey before us, to give the king notice of
my approach ; and to desire, *• that his majesty
would please to appoint a day and hour, when
it would be his gracious pleasure that I might
have the honour to lick the dust before his
footstool/ This is the court style, and I foond
it to be more than matter of form : for, upon
my admittance two days after my arrival, I
was commanded to crawl upon my belly, and
lick the floor as I advanced ; but, on account
of my being a stranger, care was taken to
have it made so clean, that the dust was not
offensive. However, this was a peculiar
grace, not allowed to any but persons of the
highest rank, when they desire an admittance.
Nay, sometimes the floor is strewed with
dust on purpose, when the person to be ad-
mitted happens to have powerful enemies at
court ; and I have seen a great lord with his
mouth so crammed, that when he had crept
to the proper distance from the throne, he
was not able to speak a word. Neither is
there any remedy; because it is capital for
those, who receive an audience, to spit or
wipe their mouths in his majesty's presence.
There is indeed another custom, which I can-
not altogether approve of: when the king
has a mind to put any of his nobles to death
pie.. " " -'°g. p«.. •'■° "'l, " i.» > " ••';■
the poo'P^ do M > 00 » " " > *^
S.tl.e " » "''° „,1,..I1»''
S88 OULLIYBK - 1RATEL8.
by the laws of the land, for all persons ad-
mitted to the king's presence. It any be
rendered into English thus :'May your celes-
tial mi^esty outlive the ewa, eleven moons
and a half!'To this the king retnmed some
answer, which, although I could not nnder-
•tand, yet I replied as I had been directed:
Flute drin yalerick dwuldom prattrad mtr-
ptuhy which properly signifies,'My tongue is
in the moutii of my fiiend ;'and by this ex.
pression was meant, tiiat I desired leave to
bring jny interpreter ; whereupon the yoong
man,^|^ea(ly mentioned, was accordingly in-
troduced ; fay whose intervention I answered
as many questions as his majesty could pot
iai above an hour. I spoke in the Balnibar-
bian tongue, and my interpreter delivered my
meaning in that of Luggnagg.
The king was mudi delighted vrith my
company, and ordered his hliffmarklub, or
high-chamberlain, to l^ > p < ^t a lodging in the
court for me and my interpreter; witii a daily
allowance for my table, and a large purse of
gold for my conunon expenses.
I stayed three months in this conn^, out
of perfect obedience to his miyesty; who was
pleased highly to favour me, and made me
very honourable offers. But I thought it
more consistent with prudence and justice to
pass the remainder of my days vnth my wifti
and family.
A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA^ ScC. 289
CHAPTER X.
The Luggnaggians commended, A partitvlar
description of the Struldbmgif with mani
conversatimu between the Autker and wme
eminent persone vpon that iul^ect.
The Luggnaggiaus are a polite and generons
people; and although they are not without
some share of that pride which is peculiar to
all Eastern countries, yet they show tfaem-
seWes courteous to strangers, espedaUy such
who are countenanced by the c|t^tU ^ kad
many acquaintance, and among pertons-of Hie
best fashion ; and being always attended by
my interpreter, the conversation we had wai^
not disagreeable.
One day, in much good company, I was
asked by a person of quality,'whether I had
seen any of tdeii jftrvldbrugs, or immortals f
I said, *I had not;'and desired he would
explain to me 4vhat he meant by such an ap-
pellation, applied to a mortal creature. He
told me'that sometimes, though very rarely,
a child happened to be bom in a family, with
a red circular spot in the forehead, directly
over the left eyebrow, which was an infallible
mark that it should never die. The spot,'as
he described it,'was about the compass of a
silver three-pence, but in the course of time
grew larger, and changed its colour ; for at
twelve years old it became green, so conti-
nued tiU five-and-twenty, then turned to a
3 cc
SQO guluybr's travkij.
d«cp blae: at five-and-forty it grew coal
black, and as large as an English shiliing;
but never admitted any farther alteratioB/
He said,'these births were so rare, that he
did not believe there could be above eleven
hundred strMbrugSy of botii sexes, in the
whole kingdom ; of which he computed about
fifty in the metropolis, and among the rest, t
vouug girl bom about three years ago : that
these productions were not peculiar to any
family, but a mere effect of chance ; and the
children of the struidbrugs themselves were
equally mortal with the rest of the people/
I freely own myself to have been strock
with inexpressible delight, npon hearing tfau
account: and the person who gave it ne
happening to understand the Bahiibarbiaa
language, which I spoke very well, I ooohl
not forbear breaking out hito expressions,
perhaps a little too extravagant. I cried oot,
as in a rapture,'Happy nation, where every
child has at least a chance lor being immortal !
Happy people, who enjoy so many living ex-
amples of ancient virtue, and have masters
'ready to instruct them in tiie wisdom of all
former ages ! but happiest, beyond all com-
parison, are those excellent strtddbrtufs, who,
being bom exempt from that universal cala-
mity of human nature, have their minds free
and disengaged, without the weight and de-
pression of spirits caused by the continual^
apprehensions of death.'I discovered^y
admiration, that I had not observed any of
lliese iUustrioui pet^oiiift al co«iX.\ ^^ > iiv«^
A TOT AG B ro LAPVTAj & e. Wi
|X > t OB the forehead being so'remarkable ^
istinctiony that I could not have easily over "
Doked it: and it was impossible that his
aiyesty, a most jadidons prince, shoold not
»rovide liimself with a good nnniber of such
rise and able ooonsellors. Yet perhaps the
irtoe of those reverend sages was too strict
or the cormpt and libertine manners of a
»nrt: and we often find by experience, that
roung men are too opinionated and volatile,
» be guided by the sober dictates of their
ieniors. However, since the king was pleased
to allow me access to his royal person, I was
resolved, upon the very first occasion, to de«
liver my opinion to him on this matter freely
ind at large, by the help of my interpreter;
and whether he would please to take my ad-
vice or not, yet in one tUng I was determined,
that his majesty having firequently offered me
in establishment in & i8 country, I would,
with great thankfulness, accept the favour,
■nd pass my life here in the conversation of
those superior beings the strvltUnnfft, if they
would please to admit me.'
The gentleman to whom I addressed my
discourse, because (as I have already observed)
he spoke the language of Balnibarbi, said to
me, with a sort of a smile which usually arises
from pity to the ignorant, * that he was glad
of any occasion to keep me among them, and
desired my permission to explain to the com-
pany what I had spoke/ He did so, and
they talked together for some time in their
Offu language^ whereof I understood not a
[
aVLUVEIl'fl TRATBLS.
ayUable, neither could I observe by their
eoimtenancesy what impression my discourse
had made on them. After a short silence,
the same person told me,'that his friends and
mine (so he thought fit to express himself)
were very much pleased with the jndidoos
, remarks 1 had made on the great happiness
and advantages of immortal life, and they
were desirous to know, in a particular man«
iner, what scheme of living I should have
formed to myself, if it had fallen to my lot
to have been bom a Hrtddhrug.'
I answered, *■ it was easy to be eloquent on
•o copious and delightful a subject, especial^
to me, who had been often apt to amnse my-
self with visions of what I should do, if I were
« king, a general, or a great lord : and upon
.tidt very case, I had frequently nm over the
whole system how I should employ-myself,
and pass the time, if I were sure to live for
ever.
'That, if it had been my good fortune to
come into the world a strtUdbruff, as soon as
I could discover my own happiness, by under-
standing the difference between life and
death, I would first resolve, by all arts and
methods whatsoever, to procure myself riches :
in the pursuit of which, by thrift and manage-
ment, I might reasonably expect, in about
two hundred years, to be the wealthiest man
In the kingdom. In the second place, I
would, from my earliest youth, apply myself
to the study of arts and sciences, by which I
should arrive in time to excel all others ia
t
I
A TOTAai TO JJLPVTAf iiC 29^
lemiiig. Lastly, I woold carefully record
every action and erent of consequence, tliat
happened in the poblic, impartially draw the
characters of the several successions of princes
and great ministers of state, with my own
observations on every point. I would exactly
set down the several changes in customs,
language, fashions of dress, diet, and diver-
sions; by all which acquirements, I should
be a living treasure of knowledge and wisdom,
and certainly become the oracle of the
nation.
'I would never marry after tiireescore,
but live in a hospitable manner, yet still on
the saving side. I would entertain myself in
forming and directing the minds of hopeful
young men, by convindng them, from my own
remembrance, experience, and observation,
fortified by numerous examples, of the use-
fulness of virtue in public and private Ufe.
But my choice and constant companions
should be a set of my own immortal brother-
hood ; among whom, I would elect a dozen
from tile most ancient, down to my own con-
temporaries. Where any of these wanted
fortunes, I would provide them with convenf-
ent lodges round my own estate, and have
some of them always at my table; onQr
mingling a few of the most valuable among
you mortals, whom length of time would har-
den me to lose with little or no reluctance,
and treat your posterity after the same man-
ner ; just as a man diverts himself with the
taumid anocessioa of piolLS and tulips in his
204 gullivbr's trav & ls.
garden, without regretting the loss of tee
which witiiered the preceding year.
< These Btrvldbrugs and I wooid mataaUy
communicate our olMeryations and memonah,
through the course of time ; remark tiie Mfe-
rai gradations by wliich corruption steals into
the world, and oppose it in every step, by
giving perpetual warning and instnictioii to
mankind; which, added to the strong in*
tiuence of our own example, would probably
prevent that continual degeneracy of human
nature, so justly complained of in all ages.
'Add to this, the pleasure of seeug the
vaiious revolutions of states and empires; the
changes in the lower and upper world; an-
dent cities in ruins, and obscure villages be-
come the seats of kings ; famous rivers lessen-
ing into shallow brooks; the ocean leaving
one coast dry, and overwhelming another;
the discovery of many countries yet unknown;
barbarity overruuning the politest nations,
and tlie most barbarous become civilized. I
should then see the discovery of the longitode,
the perpetual motion, the universal medidne,
and many other great inventions, brought to
the utmost perfection.
'What wonderful discoveries should we
make in astronomy, by outliving and confirm-
ing our own predictions; by observing the
progress and returns of comets, vdth the
changes of motion in the sun, moon, and
•tars!'
I enlarged upon many other topics, which
the natural deaire oi eiid\ft%^ VkSe, «sA ^nSokW
A VOYAGK TO LAPUl A, & C. 295
nary happiness, could easily furnish nic witli.
AV hen I had ended, and the sum of uiy dis-
course had been interpreted, as before, to the
rest of the company, there was a good deal
of talk among them in the language of the
.conntry, not without some laughter at my
expense. At last the same gentleman who
had been my interpreter, said,'he was de-
sired by the rest to set me right in a few
mistakes, which I had fallen into through
the common imbecility of human nature, and
npon that allowance was less answerable for
them. That this breed of struldbnigs was
■ peculiar to their country, for there were no
such people either in Balnibarbi or Japan,
where he had the honour to be ambassador
from his majesty, and found tlie natives in
both those kingdoms very hard to believe that
the ^t was possible : and it appeared from
my astonishment when he first mentioned the
matter to me, that I received it as a thing
wholly new, and scarcely to be credited.
That in the two kingdoms above-mentioned,
where during his residence he had conversed
very much, he observed long life to be the
universal desire and wish of mankind. That
whoever had one foot in the grave was sure
to hold back the other as strongly as he could.
That the oldest had still hopes of living one
day longer, and looked on death as tlie great-
est evil, from which nature always prompted
him to retreat. Only in this island of Lugg-
Dagg the appetite for living was not so eager,
from the continual example of the struld'
hrmps before their eyes.
SQ6 OOLUTtH'k TttATILS.
* That thf) system of living oontriTed liy mty
wts nnreasonable and unjast; I > ecan8e it
•opposed a perpetnty of yooth, liealth, aad
Tifour, which no man could be so footish to
hope, however extravagant he may t > e ia Its
wishes.* That the question therelore was not,
whether a man would choose to be alwayiii
the prime of youth, attended with prospcritf
and health ; but now be would pass a per-
petual life, umler all the usual disadvanta^
which old age brings along with it; Ibril-
tiiongh few men will avow their desireirf
being immortal, upon such hard condititi
yet in the two kingdoms before mewtisfd,
of Balnibarbi and Japan, he observed tkit
every man desired to put off death aoaeliBe
longer, let it approach ever so Inte : ani he
rarely heard of any man who died wilEa^,
except he were incited by the extreanly if
grief or torture. And he appealed ts Be,
whether in those countries I had Ua i el toi,
as well as my own. I had not observed Ar
same general disposition.*!
• To tUt it mvf poMibly be objeded, tliHt th» f
pcUUy of y > Hrtb, bnltk, aod rigomT, woald be kr
piodicy tliaH tbe prtpctaitj of life ia « body mhJKi
fj^MtiuMl (W^ay, aad mifbt therefore be b»pc«l wM
j(rrairr exiravafraacc of foiiy ; bat LLe irmiauiK
(xprrsord to that of a being to mhi.B immor
Iboach ncrt perpKaal yootb « a* faiLilUr. and ia t
tbe «i»b (tf perpefaal yoath oaly woold baw
extravafaat, becaaae ibat oaly appeared froa.fi
be impoasible. — H.
t If h be Mtd. tbat aIxboa|r^ tbe folly of < lairf
to be proluoffrd oadcr tbe diaadraBtacfs of «
is bere Sat-iy exposed ; yet tbe daire oi terr«a
ciortaHtr. aptta lernn «■ vbicb aloae ia tbe >
A VOYAOB TO LAPUTA, SiC, 201
After this prefiuse, he gave me a particular
aoooont of the struldbrugi among them. He
•aid,'they commonly acted like mortals till
about thirty years old ; after which, by de-
grees, they grew melancholy and d^ected,
increasing in both till they came to fourscore*
This he learned from their own confession :
for otherwise, there not being above two or
three of that species bom in an age, they
they were too few to form a general observa*
tion by. When they came to fourscore years,
which is reckoned the extremity of living in
this country, they had not only all the follies
and infinnities of other old men, but many
more which arose firom the dreadful prospect
of never dying. They were not only opinion*
ative, peevish, covetous, morose, vain, talk-
ative ; but incapable of friendship, and dead
to all natural affection, which never descend-
ed below their grandchildren. Envy, and
impotent desires are their prevailing passions.
But those objects against which tiieir envy
seems principally directed, are the vices of
dilngt it is pottible, an exemption from di»ea«e, acci.
dent, and decay, is tacitly allowed. It may be an.
■wered, that at we grow old by Imperceptible degrees,
so for the moat part we grow old without repining;
and every man is ready to profess himself willing to
die, when be > hall be overtaken by the decrepitude of
age in some mture period : yet when every other eye
sees that this period is arrivetl, he is 5tili tenacious of
life, and murmurs at the condition upon which he re-
ceived his ezbtence. To reconcile old age therefore to
the thoughts of a dissolution, appears to be all that
was necessary in a moral writer for practical pur*
foies.— II.
906 acjixiysR*t travbij.
the yonnger sort, and the deaths of the old.
By reflecting on the fbnnery they find them-
selves cut off from all possibility of pleasure;
and whenever they see a faneral, they lament
and repine that others are gone to a iiarbear
of rest, to wtiich they themselves never ess
hope to arrive. They have no remembraaee
of any tiling, hot what they learned and ob-
served in their yooth and middle-age, and
even that is very imperfect; and for the
truth or particulars of any fact, it is safer to
depend on common tradition, than upon their
best recollections. The least miserable
among them, appear to be those who tara to
dotage, and entirely lose their memories;
these meet with more pity and assistance;
because they want many bad qualities whidt
abound in others.
* If a gtrvidbruff happen to many one of
his own kind, the marriage is dissolved of
course, by the courtesy of the kingdom, ai
soon as the younger of the two come to be
fourscore ; for the law thinks it a reasonable
indulgence, that those who are condemned,
without any fault of their own, to a perpetnal
continuance in the world, should not have
their misery doubled by the load of a wife.
^ As soon as they have completed the term
of eighty years, they are looked on as dead
in law ; their heirs immediately, succeed to
their estates ; only a small pittance is re-^
served for their support ; and the poor ones
are maintained at the public charge. After
tbatperiody they areYieV^ Vdc8lv9Sq\« f]»^ % & $
A %'OVAOE TO LAPUTA, & e. 909
employment of tnut or profit; theyeamiot
porehase Umcb, or take leases; ueither are
they allowed to be witnesses in any canse,
either civil or criminal, not even for the de-
cision of meers and bounds.
^ At ninety they loose their teeth and hair;
they have at that age no distinction of taste,
but eat and drink whatever they can get,
without relish or appetite. The diseases they
were'subject to still continue, without in-
creasing or diminishing. In talking, they
ibrget- tfie common appellation of things, and
the names of persons, even of those who are
th^ nearest friends and relations. Far the
same reason, they never can amnse them-
selves with reading, because their memory
will not serve to carry them from the begin-
ning of a sentence to the end ; and by this
defect, they are deprived of the only enter-
tainmenty whereof they might otherwise be
capable.
The language of tiiis country being always
npon the flux, the stnddbrugs of one age do
not understand those of another ; neither are
they able, after two hundred years, to hold
any conversation (farther than by a few ge-
neral words) with their neighbours the mor-
tals ; and thus they lie under the disadvantage
of living like foreigners in their own country.'
This was the account giving me of die
stTuldhrug$y as near as I can remember. I
afterwards saw five or six of difierent ages,
the youngest not above two hundred years
My who were brought to me at several times
MO gullivbr'b travbu.
by some of my friends ; but altboof^ tiiey
were told,'that I was a great traveller, and
had seen all the world,'they had not the leut
curiusity to ask me a question ; only desired
* I would give them slumskudMshj or a token
of remembrance ;'which is a modest way of
begging, to avoid the law, that strictly for-
bids it, because they are provided for by the
public, although indeed with a very scanty
allowance.
They are despised and hated by all sorts of
people. When one of them is bom, it is
reckoned ominous, and their birth is recorded
vei-y particularly : so that you may know their
age by consulting the register, which, how-
ever, has not been kept above a thousand
years past, or at least has been destroyed by
time or public disturbances. But the nsoal
way of computing how old they are, is by
asking them what kings or great persons the^
can remember, and then consulting history
for infallibly the last prince in their mind d'
not begin his reign after they were fonrscc
years old.
TheyVere the most mortifying sight I e
beheld ; and the women more horr
than tlie men. Beside the usual deform'
»
in extreme old age, they acquired an
ditional ghastliness, in proportion to
number of years, which is not to be descr
and among half a dozen, I soon distingr
which was the eldest, although there w
above a century or two between them.
Tlie reader wiU ca & W^ Vj^W^n^ tha
A VOYAGE TO LAPDTA, & C. 801
> vliat I had heard and seen, my keen appetite
tor perpetuity of life was much abated. I
1 grew heartily ashamed of the pleasing vi-
sions I had formed ; and thought no tyrant
could invent a death, into which I would not
mn with pleasure, from such a life. The
king heard of all that had passed between
me and my friends upon this occasion, and
rallied me very pleasantly ; wishing I could
send a couple of struldhrugs to my own
country, to arm our people against the fear
of death ;* but this, it seems, is forbidden by
the fundamental laws of the kingdom, or else
I should have been well content with the
trouble and expense of transporting them.
I could not but agree, that the laws of this
kingdom relative to the $truldhrugs were
founded upon th^ strongest reasons, and sucL
as any other country would be under the ne-
cessity of enacting, in the like circumstances
Otherwise, as avarice is the necessaiy con
sequent of old age, those inunortals would u
time become proprietors of the whole nation j
and engross tiie civil power, which^fbr want
of abilities to manage, mus''end in thu nitr
of the public.
" " ^ Fexbaps i^ may not be whoJIy nsele«i to remark,
riuit the itghl of a struldbrug yould no otberwis arm
^hose eainjt the fear of death, who have no hope
l»eyond itt than a man is nrmed against the fear of
creaking his limbs, who jumps ooC of n window when
ph home is an ire.— H«
Dd
^^% GULLIVBR*S TRAV EfS.
7»
CHAPTER XI/
Tit Author leavet Luggnaggy amd atais to Jo.
|NM. From thence he retuma m m Dttfh
Mp to Awuterdtm^j and fram Awuterdem to
Engkmd.
I THOUGHT this aocoont of tiie stmMhmgs
might be some entertauunent to the reader,
because it seems to be a little oat of the com*
mon way ; at least I did not remember t»
have met the like in any book of trayels that
has oome to my hands: and if I am deceived,
my excuse nmst be, that it is neoessaiy iue
travellers who describe the same ooontry, very
often to agree in dwelling on tiie same par-
tlcolars, without deserving the oeasore of
having borrowed or transcribed firooi those
who wrote before them.
There is indeed a perpetnal oommeroe be-
tween this kingdom uid the great empire of
Japan : and it is very probable, that the Ja-
panese authors may have given some account
of the struldbrtufs ; but my stay in Japan
was so short, and I was so entirely a strangei
to the language, that I was not qualified to
make any inquiries. But I hope the Dutch,
upon this notice, vrill be curious and able
enough to supply my defects.
His majesty haviug often pressed me to
accept some emplo3rment in his court, and
finding me absolutely detennined to return
to my native countxy , ii% & v^ea^d to i^ve me
A rOTMl TO LAVOTA,'Ac MS
eeace to depart; and boMMirediBewllli
ttr of reeMnmeadatkai, nnder hU own
, to the emperor of Japan. He UkewUe
!Dted me vitli four faondred and fbrtj'
large piecei of gold (this nation deHght-
iB e*en munben), and a red diamond,
h I wld in Engluid far tieren hundred
At.
the atk of Ma;, 1709, I tooli a Mlcmn
i of hi« n^jettif, and all my MeudB.
prince was > o gradom as to order a
d to conduct me to Qluigaeoitald, whidi
rojal port to tlie louthweit part of tlie
■d. In ^ d«7« I (band a vewel ready
irrj me to Japan, Knd spent fifteen iayt
be voyage. We landed at a small port-
1 called Xamoschi, litoated on the south*
part of Japan ; the ton, Ues on die
twa poial, where there is a narrow strtit
i^ northward into a long arm of the sea,
1 & e north-west part of whldi, Yedo the
repoUs stands. At landing I showed tha
OM-honse officers my letter fVom the king
ofgnagK to h < > imperial majesty, ney
w the seal perfectly well; it was ai brood
he palm of my hand. He Impreisfoi
,'A king lifting up a lame bc^ar ftom
eartii.'The magistrates of the towD,
ting of my letter, received me as a pnb-
tinUter; they provided me wifb orrtagn
terrants, and bore my diai^es to YmIo,
«c I was adndtted to an andieDee, and
Tared my letter, which was opened wttli
1
't04 GULLIVSR'i TRATIIiS.
peror by aa interpretery who then gsat mt
notice, by his m^iesty's order, * that I ahosU
tignify my request, and whatever it were, it
. ihould be granted, for the sake of his royal
brother of Laggnagg.'This interpreter was
a person employed to transact affairs witii
the Hollanders : he soon coiyectnred, by Wf
countenance, that I was a European, and
therefore repeated his majesty's commands
in Low Dutch, which he spoke perfectly well.
I answered, as I had before determined,
^ that I was a Dutch merchant, shipwrecked
in a very remote country, whence I had
travelled by sea and land to Luggnagg, and
then took shipping for Japan ; where I knew
my countrymen often traded, aiid with some
of these I hoped to get an opportunity of
returning into Europe : I therefore most hum-
bly entreated his royal favour, to give order
that I should be conducted in safety to Naii-
gasac/ To this I added another petitioB,
^ that for the sake of my patron the king of
•Luggnagg, his miyesty would condescend to
excuse my performing the ceremony imposed
on my countrymen, of trampling upon the
crucifix ; because I had been thrown into this
kingdom by my misfortunes, without any in-
tention of trading/ When this latter pe-
tition was interpreted to the emperor, he
seemed a little surprised ; and said, *• he be-
lieved I was the first of my countrymen who
ever made any scruple in this point ; and that
he began to doubt, whether I was a real Hoi-
Jaiideri or aot i but iiiUi^t «us\}ected I must
A V0YA6B TO LAPUTA, & C. 305
be a Christian. However, for the reasons 1
had offered, but chiefly to gratify the king of
Luggnagg by an uncommon mark of his favour,
he MToald comply witb the singularity of my
hmnoar; but the affair most be managed
with dexterity, and his officers should be
connuuMled to let nepass, as it were by for-
getfalness ; fbr he assured me, that if the
secret should be discovered by my country-
meii the Dutch, they would cut my throat in
the voyage/ I returned my thanks, by the
hiterpreter, for so unusual a favour; and
some troops being at that time on their march
to Nangasae, the commanding officer bad
orders to convey me safe thither, with par-
iieolar Instmctions about the business of the
cmcifiza
On tlM Mh day of June 1700, 1 arrived at
Nangasac, after a very long and troublesome
}oomey. I soon fell into the company of
■OBM dutch sailors belonging to the Amboyna
of Aaisterdam, a stout ship of 450 tons. I
had Uved long in Holland, pursuing my stu-
dies at Leyden, and I spoke Dutch well.
The seamen soon knew whence I came last :
they were curious to enquire into my voyages
and eonrse of Kfe. I made up a story as
short and probable as I could, but concealed
the greatest part. I knew many persons in
Holland ; I was able to invent names for my
parents, whom I pretended to be obscoie
people in the province of Gnelderland. I
would have given the captain (one Theodoras
Vangrult) what he pleased to ask for my
I
306 Gulliver's travels.
voyage to Holland ; but nnderstanding I wu
a sargeon, he was contented to take half the
nsnal rate, on condition that I would serve
him in the way of my calling. . Before we
took shipping, I was often asked by some of
the crew,'whether I had performed the
ceremony above mentioned?'I evaded the
question by general answers; ^that I had
satisfied the emperor and court in all par-
ticulars.'However, a malicious rogae of a
skipper went to an officer, and pointing to
mc, told him,'I had not yet trampled on the
crucifix;* but the other, who had received
instructions to let me pass, gave the rascal
twenty strokes on the shoulders with a bam-
boo ; after which I was no more troubled with
kuch questions.
Nothing happened worth mentioning ia
this voyage. We sailed vndi a l^Eur vrind to
the Cape of Oood Hope, where we staid only
to take in fresh water. On the 10th of
April, 1710, we arrived safe at Amsterdam,
having lost only three men by uckness in the
voyage, and a fourth, who ifell irom the fore-
mast into the sea, not far from the coast of
Guinea. From Amsterdam I soon after set
sail for Elngland, in a smalli vessel belonging
to that city.
On the 16th of April we put in at the
Downs. I landed next inoming, and saw
once more my native conatry, afler an ab-
sence of €ive years and six months complete.
I went straight to Redriff, where I arrived
the same day at two Vn i\ic^ «£t & Tii < (MTv^ «A & d
/blind my wife and fann!^ Vk^ ^g^MA\v«a\ > ^.
A VOYAGE
TO THE
COUNTRY OP THE HOUYHNHNMS.
PART IV.
CHAPTER I.
The Author sets out as CaptcoM of a ship. His
men conspire against himy confine him a long
time to his cabin, and set him on shore in an
unknown land. He travels up into the coun'
try. The Yahoos, a strange sort of animal,
described. The Author meets two Houyhnhnms,
I CONTIHUED at home witli my wife and
children abont five months, in a very happy
condition, if I could have learned the lesson
of knowing when I was well. I left my poor
wife big with child, and accepted an advan-
tageous offer made me to be ctptain of tlte
Adventure, a stout merchantman of 350 tons:
for I understood navigation well, and being
grown weary of a surgeon's employment at
sea, whichy however, I could exercise upon
occasion, I took a skilful young man of tiiat
caffing, one Robert Purefoy, into my ship.
We set saU from Portsmouth, upon the 7tb
808 CrLLlVBR's TRAVELS.
day of September, 1710 ; on the 14thy we met
with Captain Pocock, of Bristol, at Tenerlffe,
who was going to the bay of Campechy to cat
logwood. On the lOth, he was parted from
ns by a storm ; I heard since my retam, that
his ship foundered, and none escaped but
one cabin-boy. He was an honest man, and
a good sailor, but a little too positive in his
own opinions, which was the cause of his de-
struction, as it hsis been of several others : for
if he had followed my advice, he might have
been safe at home with hb family at this
time, as well as myself.
I had several men died in my ship oi
calentures, so that I was forced to get re-
cmits out of Barbadoes and the Leeward
Islands, where I touched, by the direction uf
tiie merchants who employed me; which I
had soon too much cause to repent: for I
found afterwards, that most of them had
been buccaneers.* I had fifty hands on
board ; and my orders were, that I should
trade vrith the Indians in the South Sea, and
make what discoveries I could. These rogues,
whom I had picked up, debauched my other
men, and they all formed a conspiracy to
seize the ship, and secure me ; which tliey did
one morning, rushing into my cabin, and
binding me hand and foot, threatening to
throw me overboard, if I offered to stir. I
told\them,'I was their prisoner, and would
submit.'This they made me swear to do,
* €;ei tain piratea, that tofeited the West Indies, were
#0 caUed.— U.
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUTRERNMS. 800
and then they unbound me, only fiutening
4me of my legs with a chain, hear my bed,
and placed a sentry at my door with his piece
-charged, who was commanded to shoot me
dead, if I attempted my liberty. They sent
me down yictmUs and drink, and to < d( the
government of the ship to themselves. Their
design was to torn pirates, and plunder the
Spaniards, which they could not do till they
got more men. But first they resolved to
-sell the goods in the ship, and then go to
Madagascar for recruits, several among them
having died since my confinement. They
sailed many weeks, and traded vrith the
Indians ; but I knew not what coarse they
'took, being kept a close prisoner in my cabin,
and expecting nothing less than to be mur-
dered, as they often threatened me.
Upon the 9th day of May, 1711, one James
Welch came down into my cabin, and said
* he had orders from the captain to set me
ashore.'I expostulated with him, but in
vain; neither would he so much as tell mc
-who their new captain was. Tliey forced
me into the long-boat, letting me put on my
best suit a( clothes, which were as good & s
new, and take a small bundle of linen, but
no arms, except my hanger; and tlicy were
so civil as not to search my pockets, into
whidi I conveyed what money I had, with
some other little necessaries. They rowed
aboot a leagae, and then set me down on a
strand. I deared tiiem to tell me what
oooatry it was. They all swore,'that they
SIO oulutbr's tratbu.
kjiew no more than myself;'bot said,'that
the captain (as they called him) was resohed,
■Iter they had sold the lading, to get rid flf
me in the first place where they oonld dU-
cover land.'They poshed off immediately,
•dvising me to make haste for fear of l > eiig
overtaken by the tide^ and so bade me fiue-
welL
In this desolate condition I adtibeed fiir-
ward, and soon got upon firm groond, where
I sat down on a bank to rest myadf, and oob-
sider what I had best do. When I was a
little refireshed, I went np into the ooontry,
resolving to detiver myself to the first safages
I should meet, and porchase my life firan
them by some bracelets, glass rings, and other
toys, which sailors usually provide themselves
with in those voyages, and whereof I had
some about me. llie land was divided by
long rows of trees, not regularly planted, bot
naturally growing; there was great plenty of
grass, and several fields of oats. I walked
very circumspectly, for fear of being sur-
prised, or suddenly shot with an arrow firoii
behind, or on either side. I fell into a beatea
road, where I saw many tracks of human
feet, and some of cows, but most of horsei.
At last I beheld several animals in a fidd,
and one or two of the same kind sitting in
trees. Their shape was very singular and
deformed, which a little disoompoMd me, so
that I lay down behind a tfaidLet to observe
them better. Some oi them coming forward
near fbe place wtkeie \ Vk^, ^b^« lOMt an
A VOTAOI TO TBB HOUTHlfHlflll. SU
opportniilty of dUtiBctly marking their form
Their heads and breasts were covered with a
thick hair, some fiizled, and others lank ; they
^ad beards like goats, and a long ridge of
hair down their backs, and the fore parts of
.their legs and feet; bat the rest of their
bodies was bare, so that I might see their
skins, which were of a brown buff colour.
They had no tails, nor any hair at all on their
buttocks, except about the anus; which, I
presume, nature had placed there to defend
them, as they sat on the ground ; for this pos-
ture they used, as well as lying down, and
often stood on their hind feet. They climbed
.Idgh trees as nimbly as a squirrel, for tiiey
hi^ strong extended daws before and behind,
terminating in sharp points, and hooked.
They would often spring, and bound, and
leap, with prodigious a^ity. The females
were not so large as the males ; they had long
lank hair on £eir head, but none on their
faces, nor any thing more tiian a sort of down
on the rest of their bodies, except about tlie
«iiic# and pudenda. The dugs hung between
their fore-feet, and often reached almost to
tiie ground as they walked. The hair of
both sexes was of several colours, brown,
red, black, and yellow. Upon the whole, I
Bever beheld, in all my travels, so disagree-
able an animal, or one against which I na-
turally eonceiv^ so strong an antipathy ; so
tiiat tiiinking I had seen enough, ftdl of con-
tempt and aversion, I got up, and pursued
flie beaten road, bc^lDg it might dhrect me to
1
313 OVLLI VSR's TRAVELS.
the cabin of some Indian. I had not got far,
when I met one of these creatures fiiU in my
way, and coming np directly to me. Tiie
ugly monster, when he saw me, distorted
several ways every feature of his visage, and
stared, as at an object he had never seen be-
fore ; then approaching nearer, lifled up his
fore-paw, whether oat of curiosity or mischief
I could not tell ; but I drew my hanger, and
gave him a good blow with the flat side of it,
for I durst not strike with the edge, fearing
the inhabitants might be provoked against me,
if they should come to know that I had killed
or maimed any of their cattle. When the
beast felt the smart, he drew back, and roar-
ed so loud, that a herd of at least forty cane
•flocking about me from the next field, howl-
ing and making odious faces ; but I ran to the
body of a tree, and leaning my badL against
It, kept them off by waving my hanger.
Several of this cursed brood, getting hold of
the branches behind, leaping up into the tree,
whence they began to discharge their excre-
ments on my head : however, I escaped pret-
ty well by sticking close to the stem of the
tree, bnt was almost stifled with the filth,
wliich fell about me on every side.
In the midst of this distress, I observed
them all to run away on a sudden as fast as
they could ; at which I ventured to leave the
tree, and pursue the road, wondering what it
was fliat could put them into this fright. Bnt
looking on my left hand, I saw a horse, walk-
ing softly in the field; ^vhkh my persecutois
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYIINHNMS. 313
having sooner discovered, was the cause of
their flight. ,The horse started a little, when
he came near me, but soon recovering himself
looked full in my face with manifest tokens of
wonder. He viewed my hands and feet,
walking roond me several times. I woald
have pnrsaed my jonmey, bat he placed him-
self directly m the way, yet looking with
very mild aspect, never offering the least
violence. We stood gazing at each other for
some time; at last I took the boldness to
reach my hand towards his neck witii a design
to stroke it, using the common style and whis-
tle of jod^eys, when they are going to handle
a strange horse. But tiiis animal seemed to
receive my civilities with disdain, shook his
head, and bent his brows, softly raising up
his right fore-foot to remove my hand. Then
he neighed three or four times, but in so dif-
ferent a cadence, tiiat I almost began to think
he was speaking to himself, in some lan^age
of his own.
While he and I were thus employed, ano-
ther horse came up ; who applying himself
iirst in a very formal manner, tiiey gently
struck each other's right hoof before, neigh-
ing several times by turns, and varying the
sound, which seemed to be almost articulate.
They went some paces off, as if it were to con-
fer together, walking side by side, backward
and forward, like persons deliberating upon
some affair of weight, but often turning their
eyes towards me, as it were to watch tiiat I
might Dot escape. I was amazed to see such
E C
914 GUIXITER's TRATBLt.
actions and behaTonr in brute beasts; and con-
cluded with myself, that if the inhabitants of
this country were endued with a proportioo-
able degree of reason, they must needs be the
wisest people upon earth. This thought gave
me so much comfort, that I resolved to go
forward, until I could discover some house or
village, or meet with any of the natives,
leaving the two horses to discourse together
as they pleased. But the first, who was a
dapple gray, observing me to stiud off, neigh-
ed after me in so expressive a tone, that I
fancied myself to understand what he meant;
whereupon I turned back, and came near to
him to expect his far^Jier commands ; bnt con-
cealing my fear as much as I conld; for I
began to be in some pain how this adventure
might terminate ; and the reader will easily
believe I did not much like my presejit situa-
tion.
The two horses came up dose to me, look-
ing with great earnestness upon my fiice and
hands. The gray steed rubbed my hat all
round with his right fore-hoof, and discom-
posed it so much, that I was forced to a4inst
h better by taking it off, and settling it again ;
whereat, both he and his companion (who
was a brown bay) appeared to be much sur-
prised ; the latter felt the lappet of my coat,
and finding it to hang loose about me, they
both looked with new signs of wonder. He
stroked my right hand, seeming to admire the
softness and colour; but he squeezed it so
hard between his hoof and his pattern, that I
4 TOTAOI TO TBI BOVTRNHNMI. MS
forced to roar; after wliieli thef both
ched me with all possible tenderness.
ey were under great perplexity about my
oes and stockings, which they felt very
ten, neighing to each other, and using va-
ious gestures, not unlike those of a philoso-
iher, when he would attempt to soWe some
new and difficult phenomenon.
Upon the whole, the behaviour of these
anfanals was so orderly and rational, so acute
and judicious, that I at last concluded tliey
must needs be magicians, who had thus me-
tamorphosed themselves upon some design
and seeing a stranger in the way, resolved to
divert themselves with him; or, perhaps,
were really amaied at the sight of a man so
very different in haUt, feature, and complex-
ion, from those who might probably live in so
-emote a climate. Upon the strength of tiiis
reasoning, I ventured to address them iu the
fbllowing manner: * Gentlemen, If you be con-
jurors, as I have good cause to believe, yon
can uderstand any language; tlierefore I
make bold to let your worships know that I
am a poor distressed Englishman, driven by
hie misfortunes upon your coast; and I en-
treat one of you to let me ride upon his back,
as if he were a real horse, to some house or
village where I can be relieved. In return
of which fkvonr, I will make you a present of
this knife and bracelet;'taldng tliem out of
my pocket. The two creatures stood silent
while I spoke, seeming to listen with great
Alttfitioii; and when I had ended, they
316 Gulliver's fratfls.
neighed frequently towards each other, as if
they were engaged in serious conversation.
I plainly observed that their language ezp
pressed the passions very well, and the words
taight, with Uttle pains, be resolved into an
alphabet more easily than the Chinese.
I could frequently distinguish the word
Yahoo, which was repeated by each of them
several times : and although it was impossible
for me to conjecture what it meant, yet while
the two horses were busy in conversation, I
endeavoured to practice this word upon my
tongue; and as soon as they were silent, I
boldly pronounced Yahoo in a loud voice,
imitating at the same time, as near as I oonld,
the neighing of a horse ; at which they were
both visibly sni prised ; and the gray repeated
the same word twice, as if he meant to teach
me the right accent; wherein I spoke after
him as well as I could, and found myself per-
ceivably to improve every time, though very
far from any degree of perfection. Then the
bay tried me with a second word, much bar-
der to be pronounced ; but reducing it to the
English orthography, may be spelt thus,
Mouyhnhnm. I did not succeed in this so
so well as in the former; but after two or
three farther trials, I had better fortune ; and
they both appeared amazed at my capacity.
After some further discourse,.whicli I then
conjectured mi^t relate to me, the two
friends took their leaves, with the same com-
pliment of striking each other's hoof; and the
gray made me signs that I should walk before
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUTHNUJIM8. 817
him ; wherein I thooght it prudent to comply^
till I could find a better director. When I
offered to slacken my pace, he would cry
hhuun hhuun: I guessed his meaning, and
gave him to understand, as well as I could,
'that I was weary, and not -ible to walk fast-
er ;* upon which ha would stand awhile to let
me rest.
CHAPTER 11.
7^ Author eimducted by a Houyhnhnm to kio
house. The house described. The Author's
reception. The food of the Houyhnhnms,
The Author in distress for want of meat. Is
at Uut relieved. His manner of feeding tn
this country.
Having travelled about three miles, we came
to a long kind of building, made of timber
stuck in the ground, and wattled across ; the
roof was low, and covered with straw. I
now began to be a little comforted ; and took
out some toys, which travellers usually carry
for presents to the savage Indians of America,
and other parts, in hopes the people of the
house would be thereby encouraged to receive
me kindly. The horse made me a sign to go
in first ; it was a large room with a smooth
clay floor, and a rack and manger, extending
the whole length on one side. There were
three nagi and two mares, not eating, but
S18 Gulliver's travels.
some of them sitting down upon tiieir hams,
which I very much wondered at ; but won-
dered more to see the rest employed in do-
mestic business ; these seemed but ordinary
cattle ; however, this confirmed my first
opiuion, that a people who could so far civil-
ise brute animals, must needs excel in wisdom
all the nations of the world. The gray came
in just after, and thereby prevented any ill
treatment which the others might have given
me. He neighed to them several times in a
style of authority, and received answers.
Beyond this room there were three others,
reaching the length of the housf, to which
you passed through three doors, opposite to
each other in the manner of a vista ; we went
through the second room towards the third.
Here the gray walked in first, beckoning me
to attend : I waited in the second room, and
got ready my presents for the master and
mistress of the house : they were two knives,
three bracelets of false pearls, a small look-
ing-glass, and a bead necklace. The horse
neighed three or four times, and I waited to
hear some answers in a human voice, but I
heard no other returns than in the same di-
alect, only one or two a little shriller than
his. I began to think that this house must
belong to some person of great note among
'them, because there appeared so much cere-
mony before I could gain'admittance. But,
that a man of quality should be served all by
horses, was beyond my comprehension; I
feared my brain was disturbed by my suf-
A VO« ACE TO THE IIOU V li N HNMS. 319
ferlngs aiid misfortunes : 1 roused myself,
and looked about rae in the room where I
was left alone ; this was furnished like the
first, only after a more elegant manner. I
robbed my eyes often, but the same objects
•till oocured. I pinched my arms and sides
to awake myself, hoping I might be in a
dream. I tiien absolutely concluded, that
all these appearances could be nothing else
but necromancy and magic. But I had no
time to pursue these reflections ; for the gray
horse came to the door, and made me a sign
to follow hun into the third room, where I
saw a vei^ comely mare, together with a
colt and foal, sitting on their haunches upon
mats of straw, not unartfully made, and per-
fectly neat and clean.
Hie mare soon after my entrance rose from
.her mat, and coming up clo.^'e, after having
nicely observed my hands and face, gave nie
a most contemptuous look ; and turning to
the horse I heard the word Yahoo often re-
peated betwixt them ; the meaning of which
word I could not then comprehend, altliough
it was the first I had learned to pronounce ;
but I was soon better Informed, to my ever-
lasting mortification ; for the horse, beckoning
to me with his head, and repeating tlie
Khuun, hhuun, as he did upon the road,
which I understood was to attend him, led
me out into a kind of court, where was
another building, at some distance from the
house. Here we eutered, and I saw three of
those detestable creatures, which I first met
after my landini;, feeding upon root9,'aBd Aft
flesh of some animals, which I afterwtrdi
found to be that of asses and dogs, and ast
and then a cow, dead by accident or diseaw.
They were all tied by the neck with itroag
withes fastened to a beam ; they held thev
food between the claws of their fore feet, ui
tore it with their teeth.
The master horse ordered a sorrel nag, one
of his servants, to untie the lai^j^t of these
animals, and take him into tiie yard. The
beast and I were brought dose together, aud
by our countenances diligently compaied
both by master and servant, who tiiereapoi
repeated several times the word Yakoo. My
horror and astonishment are not to be des-
cribed, when I observed, in this abomintble
animal, a perfect human figure : the iaoe of
it indeed was flat and broad, the nose de-
pressed, the lips large, and the mouth wide;
but these differences are common to all sa-
vage nations, where the lineaments of tiie
countenance are distorted, by the natives
suffering tiieir infants to lie grovelling on the
earth, or by carrying them on tiieir backs,
nuzzling vrith their face against the mothers'
shoulders. The fore-feet of the Yahoo dif-
fered from my hands in nothing else but the
length of the nails, the coarseness and brown-
ness of the palms, and the hairiness on the
backs. There was the same resemblance
between our feet, with the same differences ;
which I knew very well, though the horses
did not, becans^ o^ tk^ ^ < o«, < & va.4 ^VKkiu)^;
A VOYAGE TO THE HOU YIINIINMS. 321
the same in every part of our bodies except
as to hairiness and colour, which I have al-
ready described.
The great difficulty tiiat seemed to stick
with the two horses, was to see the rest of
my body so different from that of a Yahoo^
for which I was obliged to my clothes, whereof
they had no conception. The sorrel nag of-
fered me a root, which he held (after their
manner, as we shall describe in its proper
place) between his hoof and pastern : I took
it in my hand, s!nd, having smelt it, returned
it to Jiitu again as civilly as I could. He
brought out of the Yahoos kennel a piece of
ass's flesh, but it smelt so offensively that I
turned from it with loathing : he then threw
it to the YahoOf by whom it was greedily
devoured. He afterwards showed me a wisp
of hay, and a fetlock full of oats ; but I shook
my head to signify that neither of these were
food for me. And indeed I now apprehended
that I must absolutely starve, if I did not get
to some of my own species ; for as to those
filthy Yahoos, although there were few greater
lovers of mankind at that time than myself,
yet I confess I never saw any sensitive being
so detestable on all accounts ; and the more
I came near them tiie more hateful they grew,
while I stayed in that country. This the
master horse observed by my behaviour,
and therefore sent the Yahoo back to his
kennel. He tiien put his fore-hoof to his
month, at which I was much surprised, al-
though he did it with ease, and witL a motion
\
SS3 G0LLITBR*8 TRAVfiU.
that appeared perfectly natural ; and maite
other signs, to know what I would eat ; biitl
could not return him such an answer as lie
was able to apprehend ; and if he had ofider-
stood me, I did not see how it was posnUe
to contrhre any way fiH* finding my self nooridir
ment. While we were thus engaged, I ob-
served a cow passing by, whereupon I pdnted
to her, and expressed a desire to go andnilk
her. This had its effect ; for he led me bad
into the house, and ordered a mare-senrsat
to open a room, where a gooifl store of milk
lay in earthen and wooden vessels, after a
Tory orderly and cleanly manner. She gave
me a large bowlfhll, of which I drank very
heartily, and found myself well refreshed.
About noon, I saw coming towards the
house a kind of Tehide drawn like a sledge
by four Yahoos. There was in it an cM
steed, who seemed to be of quality; he
alighted with his hind-feet forward, having
by accident got a hurt In his left fore-foot
He came to d & ne with our horse, who received
him vrith great civility. They dined in the
best room, and had oats boiled in mift for the
second coiu'se, vrhich the old horse eat warm,
but die rest cold. Their mangers were
placed circular in the middle of the room, and
divided into several partitions, round which
they sat on their haunches, upon bosses of
straw. In the middle was a large rack, with
angles answering to every partition of the
manger ; so that each horse and mare eat
tiieir owu Viay, and t^^ vira vAahL « < «a!l &
_A TOT AS I TO THK HODTBHRHMI. US
d wSSk, wifli mndi deceiKy and regolirity.
ae behavior of the yoaag colt uid foal aj > -
nred very modest, and diat of th* master
od mistieu extremely cheerful and com-
jlaiiant to their gaeit. The gray ordered
ne to itand by him ; and much dlKoone
paxed between bim and Us friend eoncemiiig
DM, at I foDOd by the itnnger's ofleD look-
ing on me, and the trequeat repetitioD of the
ward VsAotf.
I happened to wear my glovei, whidi the
Baiter gray obicning, teemed perplexed,
dlKovering dgni of wonder irtut I had done
to ny fbre-lcet : be pot Us hoof three or fimr
tiniM to tbcm, at if he wonld dgnify, dut I
■boold reduce ttem to their farmer shBpe,
whklil preiently iM, pnlliog off both my
^met, and ptitfing Oiem into my pocket.
nil oecuioned hrther talk, and I law the
company wai pleated witii niy behaviour,
whereof I toon fbnnd the good cffecti. I
wat ordered to tpeak the few wordi I under-
(toad ; and while Ihey were at dinner, die
'matter tanght me die Dame* for oatt, milk,
fire, water, and tome olben which I ooold
rea£ly pronoanee after tdm, baving from my
yondi a great fadH^ in lesiidng languagei.
When dinner wai done, the nuter horse
took me atide, and by ^gnt and words made
me nndentand the concern be was in that I
had nothing to eat. Oati In thdr tongue are
railed jUntmA. Thia word I pronounced two
or three dmei; for althon^ I had refined
them at fint, yet, upon eecond thoughts, I
321 Gulliver's travels.
considered that I conld contrive to make of
them a kind of bread, which might be suffi-
cient, ^'ith milk, to keep me alive, till I could
make my escape to somf% other coantry, and
to creatures of my own spedes. The hone
immediately ordered a white mare servant of
his family to bring me a good quantity of oati
in a sort of wooden tray. These I heated
before the fire, as well as I coold, and robbed
them till the husks came off, whidi I made'a
shifl to winnow from the grain : I ground and
beat them between two stones, then took
water, and made them Into a paste or cake,
which I toasted at the fire, and eat warm
with milk. It was at first a very insipid diet,
though common enough in many parts of Eu-
rope, but grew tolerable by time ; and lutving
been often reduced to hard fare in my fife,
this was not the first experiment I had made
how easily nature is satisfied. And I cannot
but observe, that I never had one hour's sick-
ness while I stayed in this island. It is true,
I sometimes made a shift to catch a rabbit,
or bird, by springes made of Yahoo* s hairs;
and I often gathered wholesome herbs, which
I boiled, and eat as salads with my bread ;
and now and then, for a rarity, I made a little
butter, and drank the whey. I was at first
at a great loss for salt, but custom soon recon-
ciled me to the want of it ; and I am confident,
that the frequent use of salt among us is an
effect of luxury, and was first introduced only
as a provocative to drink, ex.ce\it where it is
necessary for preservmi£fVe%\vm\oTk^N«^%3^^,
A tutftOBTOTHB BOUVaHKHMS, IS5
In placet remote from great maiket*; tar
E obterre DO tnimal to be fond ofitbutmui,
ad u to myielf, when I left this coanlry, it
ma B great while before I csnld endure tbe
astc of it in any thing that I eat.
Thi* ii enongh to my upon the anbject of
ny diet, wherewith other travellerB fill tfa^
booki, ai if the reader* were personally coD'
cemed whetherwefare well orill. However,
It wai necesaary to mentiDn this matter, lest
the world ■hoald tbink it imposiible that I
conld find sastenimce for three yean in met
m country, and among indi inhabitants.
Wheu it grew towards eveniDg, the master
hone ordered a place for me to lodge in ; it
KM hot six yards from the iionie, and sepa-
rated from the stable of the Yahooi. Here
I got some straw, and covering myielf with
tay own clothes, slept very sonnd. But I was
in a short timebetter accommodated, as the
reader shall know hereafter, when I come to
treatnwrepartlcnlBrlyaboutmywayofliying.
CHAPTER m.
nt Amtlttr ituditi la leant tkt Uaigvagi. 7^
Ht^knham, kit mustn-, owisti in teiuhing
Um, ne Imguage dtteribtd. Sertnl Hany-
kikww of quality comtmt i^nrietity to tie
tit AiUhiir, Ht gitf Ut wtattir a liort ae-
( Author, Ht gitf Ut m
tofhi
326 GULLIVER*S TRAVELS.
henceforth call him,) and his children, and
every servant of his house, were desirous to
teach me ; for they looked upon it as a prodi-
gy, that a brute animal should discover such
marks of a rational creature. I pointed to
every thing, and inquired the name of it,
which I wrote down in my journal-book when
I was alone, and corrected my bad accent,
by desiring those of the family to pronounce
it often. In this employment, a sorrel nag,
one of the under-servants, was very ready to
assist me.
In speaking, they pronounced through tiie
nose and tiiroat, and their language iq[ > proach-
es nearest to the High-Dutch, or German, of
any I know in Europe; but is mudi more
graceful and significant. The emperor Charles
V. made almost the same observation, when
he said,'that if he were to speak to his horse,
it should be in High-Dutch.'The curiosity
and impatience of my master were so great,
that he spent many hours of his leisure to in-
struct me. He was convinced (as he after-
" wards told me) tiiat I must be a Yahoo ; but
my teachableness, civility, and cleanliness,
astonished him ; which were qualities altoge-
ther opposite to those animals.* He was
most perplexed about my clothes, reasoning
sometimes with himself, whether they were a
part of my body ; for I never pulled them off
*'Qaalities opposite to auimtls.'ii a strange mode
of expression; it should be —'which were qaxlities
altogether opposite to sneh as belonged to tfaMe anl«
luals/— S.
i'-
A VOYAGE TO THE IIOUYHNHXMS. 327
till the family were asleojs and got them on
before they waked in the murning. My mas-
ter was caj^er to learn * whence I came ; how
I acfiuircd those appearances of reason, which
I discovered iu all my actions ; and to know
my story from my own mouth/ which he hoped
he should soon do, by the great proficiency I
made in learning and pronouncing their words
and sentences.'To help my memory, I form,
ed all I learned into the English alphabet,
and writ the words down, with the transla-
tiou!«. This last, after some time, I ventured
to do in my master's presence. It cost me
ninch tronble to explain to him what I was
doing ; for the inhabitants have not the least
Idea of books or literature.
In about ten weeks time, I was able to un-
derstand most of his questions ; and in three
months, oould give him some tolerable answers.
He was extremely curious to know ^from
what part of tiie country I came, and how I
was taught to imitate a rational creature ;
because the Yahoos (whom he saw I exactly
resembled iu my head, hands, and face, tliat
were only visible,*) with some appearance of
cimning, and tlie strongest disposition to mis-
diicf, were observed to be the most unteacli-
able of all brutes.'I answered,'that I came
over tiie sea from a far place, with many
others of my own kind, in a great hollow ves-
sel made of the bodies of trees : that my
♦'ThM were oJily visible*— an »n\VA^on% v " ^^**^** " ^
9bouhl 6e.— « M-iiich oiily were ^VwbW, fttc..^*^
I
SS8 oullitba's travels.
companions forced me to land on this coast,
and then left me to shift for myself.* It wai
with some difficulty^ and by the help of mmy
signs, that I broaglit him to understand me.
He replied, * that I moat needs be nustaken,
or that I said the thing which was not;* fiir
they have no word in their language to ex-
press lying or falsehood. ^ He knew it wii
impossible that there could be a country be-
yond the sea, or that a parcel of brutes could
move a wooden vessel whither they pleased
upon water. He was sure no Houyhnhnm
hUve could make such a vessel, nor would
trust Yahoos to manage it.
The word JEfovyAnAnm, in their tongue,
signifies a horse, and, in its etymology, the
perfection of nature. I told my master,
'that I was at a loss for expression, but would
improve as fast as I could ; and hoped, iu a
short time, I should be able to tell him won-
ders.'He was pleased to- direct his own
mare, his colt, and foal, and the servants of
the family, to take all opportunities of in-
structing me ; and every day, fur two or three
hours, he was at the same pains himself: se-
veral horses and mares of quality iu tlie
neighbourhood, came often to our house, upon
the re|M > rt spread of ^ a wonderful Yahoo,
that could speak like a Hauyhnhnm, and
seemed, in his words and actions, to discover
some glimmerings of reason/ These delighted
to converse with me : they put many ques-
tions, and received such answers as I was
ftble to retnsn* B^ a^ Viiit^^ ^n^sNsu^V
A VOYAGE TO THE H0UYHNHNM8. MQ
ide SO great a progress, that, in ^^e months
im my arrival, I miderstood whatever was
oken, and could express myself tolerably
The Houyhnhnms, who came to visit my
uter out of a design of seeing and talking
th me, could hardly believe me to be. a
;ht Yahoo, because my body had a different
vering from others of my kind. They were
tonished to observe me without the usual
ir or skiu, except on my head, face, and
nds; but I discovered that secret to my
ister upon an accident which happened
out a fortnight before.
I have already told the reader, that every
g;ht, when the family were goue to bed, it
IS my custom to strip, and cover myself
til my clothes: it happened one morning
rly, that my master sent for me by the
rrel nag, who was his valet ; when he came
was fast asleep, my clothes fallen off on
e side, and my shirt above my waist. I
raked at ttie noise he made, and observed
n to deliver his message in some disorder ;
tcr which he went to my master, and in a
eat fright gave him a very confused account
what he had seen : this I presently dis-
vered ; for, going as soon as I was dressed
pay my attendance upon his honour, he
ked me *■ tlie meaning of what his servant
d reported, that I was not the same thing
len I slept, as I appeared to be at other
nes ; that his valet assured him, some part
me w & s white, some yellow, at least not S4 >
life, aud some brown.
SSO 6ULLIVER*8 TRAVELS.
I had hitherto concealed the secret of my
dress, in order to distinguish. myself, as mnch
as possible, fnmi that cursed race of Yahoos;
but now I found it in vain to do so any longer;
Besides, I considered that my clothes and
shoes would soon wear out, which already
were in a declining condition, and must be
supplied by some contri?ance from the hides
of YaluMs, or other brutes; whereby the
whole secret would be known. I therefore
told my master, * that in the country whence
I came, those of my kind always covered
their bodies with the hairs of certain animals
prepared by art, as well for decency as to
ayoid the inclemencies of air, both hot and
cold ; of which, as to my person, I would giro
him immediate conviction, if he pleased to
command me : only desiring his excuse, if I
did not expose those parts that nature taught
ns to conceal.'He said,'my discourse was
all very strange, but especially the last part;
for he could not understand, why nature
should teach - ns to conceal what nature had
given ; that neither himself nor family were
ashamed of any parts of their bodies ; but,
however, I might do as I pleased.'Where-
upon I first unbuttoned my coat, and pidled
it off. I did the same with my waistcoat. I
drew off my shoes, stockings, and breeches.
I let my shirt down to my waist, and drew
up the bottom, fastening it like a n^le about
my middle, to hide my nakedness.
My master observed the wh < rie perform-
ance with great signs of curiosity and admins
A VOVAGB TO THE HOUYHNHNM8. 331
tioo. He took np all my clothes io his pas-
terOy one piece after another, and examined
them diligently; he then stroked my bod/
very gently, and looked round me several
times; after which, he said, it was plain I
mast be a perfect Yahoo ; bnt that I differed
very much from the rest of my species, in the
sofbiess, whiteness, and smoothness of my
skin ; my want of hair in several parts of my
body ; the shape and shortness of my claws
behind and before; and my affectation of
walking continually on my two hinder feet.
He desired to see no more; and gave me
leave to put on my clothes again, for I was
shuddering with the cold.
I expressed my uneasiness at his giving me
so often the appellation of a Yahoo, an odious
animal, for which I had so utter a hatred and
contempt: I begged he would forbear apply-
ing that word to me, and make the same
order in his family and among bis friends
whom he suffered to see me. I requested
likewise, ^ that the secret of my having a false
covering to my body, might be known to none
but himself, at least as long as my present
clothing should last; for, as to what die sorrel
nag, his valet, had observed, his honour might
command him to conceal it.
All this my master very graciously con-
sented to, and thus the secret was kept till my
clothes began to wear out, which I was forced
to supply by several contrivances tliat shall
hereaiter be mentioned. In tlie mean time,
he denred ^I would go on with m^ utmost
ass Gulliver's travels.
diligence to learn their langaage, because lie
was more astonished at my capacity for speech
and reason, than at the figure of my body,
whether it were covered or not;'adding,
* that he waited with some impatience to hear
the wonders which I promised to tell him/
Thenceforward he doubled the pains he
had been at to instract me : he brought me
into all company, and made them treat me
with civility ;'because/ as he told them
privately,'this would put me into good ha-
mour, and make me more diverting/
Every day, when I waited on him, beside
the trouble he was at in teaching, he would
ask me several questions concerning myself,
which I answered as well as I could ; and by
these means he had already received some
general ideas, though very imperfect. It
would be tedious to relate the several steps
by which I advanced to a more regular coa-
versation ; but the first account I gave of my-
self in any order and length was to this purpose.
'That I came from a very far country, as I
already bad attempted to tell him, with about
fifty more of my own species ; that we tra-
velled upon the seas in a great hollow vessel
made of wood, and larger than his honour's
house. I described the ship to him in tiie
best terms I could, and explained, by the
help of my handkerchief displayed, how it
was driven forward by the wind. That upon
a quarrel among us, I was set on shore on
this coast, where I walked forward, without
knowing whither^ till he delivered me from
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYHNHNMS. 333
the persecution of those execrable Yahoos*
He asked me, *• Mrho made the ship, aiid how
it was possible that the Houyhnhnms of my
country would leave it to the mauagement of
brutes?* My answer wa^^'that I durst pro-
ceed DO further in my relation, unless he
would give me his word and honour that he
would not be offended ; and then I would tell
him the wonders I had so often promised.'
He agreed ; and I went on by assuring him,
that Uie ship was made by creatures like my-
self; who, in all the countries I had trayelled,
as well as in my own, were the only govern-
ing rational animals ; and that upon my arrival
hither,* I was as much astonished to see the
Houyhnhnms act like rational beings, as he,
or his friends, could be, in finding some marks
of reason in a creature he was pleased to call
a Yahoo; to which I owned my resemblance
in every part, but could not account for their
degenerate and brutal nature.'I said far-
ther, ^ that if good fortune ever restored me
to my native country, to relate my travels
hither, as I resolved to do, every body would
believe, that I said the thing that was not,
that I invented the story out of my own
head ; and (vnth all possible respect to him-
self, his family, and friends, and under his
promise of not being offended) our country-
men would hardly think it probable that a
Houyhnhnm sliould be the presiding crea-
ture of a nation, and a Yahoo the brute.'
• It ahoald be—'ap« > B my arrival 4ere,'not'ai rival
billicr/ wUcli U not £iisliBli.*8.
884 Gulliver's travels.
CHAPTER IV.
Hie Houyhnhnm's notion of truth and faia^
hood. The Author's discourse disapproted
by his master. The Author gives a more
particular account of himself y ar^ the acci-
dents of his voyage.
My master heard me with great appearances
of uneasiness in his countenance ; because
doubting, or not believing, are so little known
in this country, that the inhabitants cannot
tell how to behave themselves under such
circumstances : and I remember, in frequent
discourses with my master concerning the na-
ture of manhood in other parts of the world,
having occasion to talk of lying and false re-
presentation, it was with much difficulty that
he comprehended what I meant, although he
had otherwise a most acute judgment. For
be argued thus :'that the use of speech was
to make us understand one another, and to
receive information of facts ; now, if any one
said the thing which was not, these ends were
defeated, because I cannot properly be said
to understand him ; and I am so far from re-
ceiving information, that he leaves me worse
than in ignorance, for I am led to believe a
thing black, when it is white, and short, when
it is long/ And these were all the notions
he had concerning that faculty of lying, so
perfectly well understood, and so universally
practised, among human creatures.
JL \OTA6E TO THB ROUTHNHNM8. SS5
To return from this digression. When I
asserted that the Yahoos were the only go-
verning animals in my country, which my
master said was altogether past his concep-
tion, be desired to know, *■ whether we had
Houyhnhnnu among us, and what was their
employment ? I told him, * we had great num-
bers ; that in summer they grazed in the
fields, and in winter were kept in houses with
hay and oats, where Yahoo servants were
employed to rub tiieir skins smooth, comb
their manes, pick their feet, serve them with
food and make their beds/ *■ I understand
you well,'said my master : Mt is now very
plain, from all you have spoken, that what-
ever share of reason the Yahoos pretended
to, the Houyhnhnms are your masters; I
heartily wish our Yahoos would be so tract-
able.'I begged'his honour would please to
excase me from proceeding any further, be-
cause I was very certain that the account he
expected from me would be highly displeas-
ing/ But he insisted in commanding* me to
let him Imow the best and the worst. I told
'he should be obeyed/ I owned *• that the
Houyhnhnms among us, whom we called
horses, were the most generous and comely
animal we had ; that they excelled in strength
and swiftness ; and when they belonged to
persons of quality, were employed in travel-
ling, racing, or drawing chariots ; they were
treated with much kindness and care, tiU
*'Iniiited in conunAndiqg* ii not £iif liih i it
Kbould be,'jpenltted in eommandlng,'& €#— S.
J35 ocluvbr's tka vbu.
they fell into diseases, or became tfbmitiered
in the feet : but then they were sold, nd
used to all kind of drudgery till they died;
atter which their skins were stripped, and
sold for what they were worth, nd Uieir
bodies left to be deroured by dogs and biids
of prey. Bat the common race of horses M
not so good fortune, being kept by fttmeis
and carriers, and other mean pe^le,wlio
put them to greater labour, and f^ them
worse.'I described, as weU as I could, ov
way of riding ; the shape and use of a bridle,
a saddle, a spur, and a whip ; of harness
and wheels. I added, ^that we iasteaed
plates of a certain hard snbstanee cidled imn,
at the bottom of their feet, to preserre their
hoofs from being broken by the stony ways,
on which we often traTelled.'
My master, after some expressioas ef
great indignation, wondered * how we dtred
to venture upon a Houyhnhnm's back ; fat
he was sure, that the weakest servant in his
house would be able to shake off the strongest
Yahoo ; or by lying down and rolling on his
back, squeeze the brute to death.'I an-
swered,'that our horses were trained up,
from three or four years old, to the several
uses we intended them for; that if any of
them proved intolerably vicious, they were
employed for carriages ; that they were se*
verely beaten, while they were jFonng, fat
any mischievous tricks : tLat the males, de-
signed for the common use of riding or draught,
Were gei^nlk^ caatx%Xj & 4 ^Smmx v < h^ ^^ < vsa.
A TOTASk TO mi HOVYatiRRNa. SS7
after tbcir Mrtb, to take down their ipiritu,
■ad make them more tame and gentle ; that
tbey were indeed sendble of rewanlB and
pnnuhmeDtB ; bnt bi > honoiir would pleue to
cDDiider, that Aej had not the leait dnctare
of reaMD, anjr more tban the YtJkeoi In thli
It pnt me to the pains of rnioy drcnm'
loentloni, to gire nrf master a right idea of
what I tp < ikt ; for their langnage does oot
aboand in Tariety of words, because their
want! and paitions are fewer dian among as.
Bat it ii impossible to express his noble re-
MDtment at oar savage treatment of the
Mouyktitmm net ; particniariy after I had
•zpnined the manner and nie of castrating
honas among us, to hinder them from propa-
gnting their kind, and to render them more
MrvUie, He said,'if It were possible there
conld be anj eonnliy where Yakoot alone
were eadned with rea«on, Ihey certainly must
be tha goreraing animal ; becanse reason
ia tfane wOl always prevail against brutal
■tn^a. Bat, coiMtdering the frame of odt
bedet, and especially of ndoe, be thought
a* ot« > tare of eqnid boUi wu so Ul-contrived
fiw aaipleylag that peaEou in the commoD
«Aoes of life ; whereepon be desired to know
'whether those among whom 1 lived resem-
bled me or the yaAooj of his conntry.'I aj-
■■red bhn, that I was as well shaped ai most
•f my age ; bat the younger, and the females
wore aradi moie soft and tender, and the
aUniofdielatteTgenerally aa white umilk.'
S38 Gulliver's travels.
He said, *■ I diiTered indeed from other YA'
hoos, being much more cleanly, and not
altogether so deformed ; but, in point of real
a < i vantage, he thought I differed for the
worse : that my nails were of no use either
to my fore or hinder feet ; as to my fore feet,
he could not properly call them by that name,
for he'never observed me to'walk upon them ;
that they were too soft to* bear the ground ;
t)iat I generally went with th^m uncovered ;
neither was the covering I sometimfes wore
on them of the same shape, or so strong as
that on my feet behind : that I could not
walk with any security, for if either of my
hinder feet slipped, I mnsttinevitably fall/
■He then began to find fault with other parts
of my body :'the flatness of my face, the
prominence of my nose, mine eyes placed
directly in front, so that I could not look on
either side, without turnuig my head : that I
was not able to feed myself, without liftirg
one of my fore-feet to my mouth ; and there-
fore nature had placed those joints to answer
that necessity. He knew not what could be
the use of those several clefts and divisions
in my feet behind ; that; these were too soft
to bear the hardness and sharpness of stones,
without a covering made from the skin of
some other brute; that my whole body
wanted a fence against heat and cold, whficfa
I was forced to put on and off every day,
with tediousness and trouble : and lastly,
that he observed every animal in this country
naturally to abhor the Yahoos, whom tht
A VOYAOS < rO THE HOUTHNHNMS. 8S9
reaker avoided, and the stronger drore from
hem. So that, sapposug as to have the
pft of reason, he could not see how it were
Mssible to cure that natural antipathy, which
> very creature discovered against us; nor
:onseqnently how we could tame and render
them serviceable. However, he would,'as
be said,'debate the matter no farther, be-
cause he was more desirous to know my own
story, the country where I was bom, and the
several actions and events of my life, before I
came hither.'
I assured him'how extremely desirous I
was that he should be satisfied in every point ;
but I doubted nmch, whether it would be
possible for m^^to explain myself on several
subjects whereof his honour could have no
conception ; because I saw nothing in his coun-
try to which h 4C0uld resemble them : ■ that
however, I would do my best, and strive to
express myself by similitudes, humbly desiring
his assistance when I wanted proper words ;'
which he was pleased to promise me.
. I said'my birth was of honest parents, in'
an Island called England ; which was remote
from his country, as many day's journey as
the strongest of his honour's servants could
travel in the annual course of the sun : that I
nras bred a surgeon, whose trade it is to cure
HTOunds and hurts in the body, gotten by ac-
ddent or violence; that my country was
governed by a female man whom we called
|ueen ; that I left it to get riches, whereby I
■ight ma*p*^ " mysielf and family, when I
340 6ULUTKR*S TRAVELS.
should retuni ; that, ia my Uut Toyaf^, I wai
commander of the ship, and bad aboat fifty
Yahoos under me, many of which died at sea,
and I was forced to supply them by others
picked out from several nations ; that oar ship
was twice in danger of being soak, the first
time by a great storm, and the second by
striking against a rock.^ Here my master
interposed, by asking me,'how I could per-
suade strangers, out of different countries, to
venture with me, after the losses I had SU'
stained, and the hazards I had ran.'I said,
'they were fellows of desperate fortunes,
forced to fly from tiie places of their birth ob
account of their poverty or their crimes.
Some were undone by la¥rsalts; others spent
911 they had in drinking, whoring, and gaming;
others fled for treason; many for murder,
theft, poisomng, robbery, peijory, forgery,
coining false money, for conunitting rapes,
or sodomy ; for flying from their ookmrs, or
deserting to the enemy; and most of them
had broken prison ; none of these durst re <
(urn to their native countries, for fear of
being hanged, or of starving in a jail ; and
therefore they were under the necessity of
seeking a livelihood in other places/
During this discourse, my master was
pleased to interrupt me several times. I had
made use of many circumlocutions in describ-
ing to him the nature of the several crimes for
which most of our crew had been forced to
fly their country. Tliis labour took up seve-
re days'convenatioU) Vk^^w^ \oa viaa able to
Bompreheiid me. H« was wlioll; at a Imt to
knot* what coold be the nse or Tifceesity of
pTBCtisiDg those vicei. To clear ap wbich, 1
mdeavanied to pve lome ideas of the desire
of power and riches ; of tbe terrible effects of
hut, intemperance, malice, and eniy. Atl
this i was forced to define and describe by
pQttiag cases, and making sappoutioDi. After
wbich, lilte one wboie imagination was struck
with something uever Been or beard of befora,
be wonld lift up his eyes with amazement and
Inygiuition. Power, govenunent, war, law,
ponishment, and a thousand other things, had
no terms, wherein that language could express
Ihem; which made tlie difficulty almost insu-
perable, to give my master any conception of
what I meant. But being of an excellent
underslaiiiliDg, much improved by contempla-
tion and couverse, he at last arrived at a
competent knowledge of what bumaD natare,
Id our parts of the world, is capable to per-
form; and desired I would |{i«e him some
IHUticnlor account of Uiat land which we call
Europe, but eipectally of my own connlry.
CHAPTER V.
JJu Anther, at hit muttr't CDmmnnili, vtformt
him qf lie stole of England. Thi auaet of
usr mnon; tKt princti^ Eurapt, The
Author btgiiu to txplain Iht Engiuh cotiili-
342 gulliveh's travels.
witii my master^ containB a smnmary of the
mott material points, which were discoiined
at several times tor above two years; his
houour often desiring fiiller satisfaction, as I
fiuther improved in the Hauyhnknm tongue.
I laid before him, as well as I coold, the
whole state of Europe ; I discoursed of trade
and manufiictares, of arts and sciences ; and
the answers I gave to all the questlens he
made, as they arose upon several sabjects,
were a fand of conversation not to be ex-
hausted. But I shall here only set down the
substance of what passed between us con-
cerning my own country, reducing it in order
as well as I can, without any regard to time
or other circumstances, while I strictly adhere
to truth. My only concern is, that I shall
liardly be able to do justice to my master's
arguments and expressions, which most needs
suifer by my want of capacity, as well as by
a translation into our barbarous English.
In obedience therefore to his honour's com-
mands, I related to him the revolution under
the Prince of Orange; the long war. with
France, entered into by the said prince, and
renewed by his successor, the present queen;
wherein the greatest powers of Christendom
were engaged, and which still continued : I
computed at his request, ^that about a mil-
lion of Yahoos might have been killed in the
whole progress of it ; and perhaps a hundred
or more cities taken, and five times as many
ships burnt or sunk.'
He asked me, * what were the usual causes
A VOYAGE TO THE HOU YHNHNMS. 343
or motives that made one country go to wai
wiih another V I answered, ^ they were in-
nimierable ; bat I should only mention a few
of the chief. Sometimes the ambition of
princes, who never think they have land or
people enoogh to govera ; sometimes the eor-
mption of mLusten, who engage their master
in a war, in order to stifle or divert the cli^
monr of the subjects against their evil admi-
nistration. Difference in opinions has cost
many millions of lives ; for instance, whether
flesh be bread, or bread be flesh ; whether
the juice of a certain berry be blood or wine,*
whether wtustling be a vice or a virtue ;t
whether it be better to luss a post, or throw
it into the fire',t what is the best colour for
a coat, whether black, white, red, or gray ;
and whether it should be long or short, nar-
row or wide, dirty or clean, with many more.^
Neither are any wars so forious and bloody,
or of so long a continuance, as those ooc»p
sioned by difference in opinion, especially if
it be in things indifferent.
^ Sometimes the quarrel between two
princes is to decide which of them shall dis*
possess a third of tus dominions, where nei-
ther of them pretend to any right: sometimes
one prince quarrels with another, lor fear the
other should quarrel with him: sometimes a
war is entered upon, because the enemy is
• TniiiMlMtantiatioB.— . t Charch Biuie.— H.
t KiMlng a cr < Mk
\ rh« coUmf and vaka of taerad T«ttmeatt, aad
dittereut orders of pvpbh fcclctiaitici.
344 GULLIVBR*fl TRAVELS.
too strong ; and sometimes, because he is too
weak: sometimes cor neighbonrs want the
tilings which we have, or have tiie thiiif;!
which we want, and we both fight, till they
take ours, or give ni theirs. It is a very jus-
tifiable cause of a war, to invade a oooatry
after the people have been wasted by famuie,
destroyed by pestilence, or embroiled by
factions among themselves. It b justifiable
to enter into war against our nearest ally,
when one of his towns lies convenient for as,
or a territory of land, that woold render cor
dominions round and compact. If a prince
sends forces into a nation, where the people
are poor and. ignorant, he may lawfully pat
half of them to death, and make slaves of the
rest, in order to civUise and reduce them
from their barbarous vray of living. It is a
very kingly, honourable, and firequent prac-
tice, when one prince desires the assistance
of another, to secure him against an invasioa,
Ihat the assistant, when he has driven oat
the invader, should seiie on the dominions
himself, and kill, imprison, or banish, the
prince he came to relieve. Alliance by blood,
or marriage, is a frequent cause of war be-
tween princes; and the nearer the kindred
is, the greater their disposition to quarrel:
poor nations are hungry, and rich nations are
proud : and pride and hunger will ever be at
variance. For these reasons, the trade of a
soldier is held the most honourable of all
others ; because a soldier is a Yahoo hired to
)uX\y in cold bloody as many of his own species,

A VOYAGE TO THE UOUTUNUNM8. S45
who hare nerer ofiended him^ m poMibly he
i of beggairly prinoM
ia Europey not Me to make war by them-
seWef, who hire oat their troopa to richer
natiopi, for so much a clay to each man; of
which tiiey keep three-fourths to themselTes,
and it is the best part of their maintenance;
inch are those in many northern parts of
Enrope/
* What yon iiave told me/ said my master,
* upon the subject of war, does indeed discorei-
most admiraLly the effects of that reason yon
pretend to: bowerery it is happy that the
shame is greater than the danger; and that
nature has left you utterly incapable of doing
much mischief. For, your mouths lying flat
with your ftces, you can hardly bite each
otlier to any purpose, unless by consent.
Then as to the claws upon your feet before
and behind, they are so short and tender,
that one of our Yahoos would drive a dozen
of yours before him. And therefore, in re-
counting the numbers of those who have been
killed in battle, I cannot but think you have
said the thing which is not.'
I could not forbear shaking ray head, and
smiling a little at his ignorance. And being
no stranger to the art of war, I gave him a
description of cannons, cnlverins, muskets,
carabines, pistols, bullets, powder, swords,
bayonets, battles, sieges, retreats, attacks,
undermines, countermines, bombardments,
sea-6ghts, ships sunk with a thousand men,
U-:g gullivek's travels.
twenty thousand killed on each side, dying
groans, limbs flying in the air, smoke, noise,
oontufion, trampling to death under horses'
feet, tlight, pursuit, yictory; fields strewed
witli carcases, left for food to dogs and wolves,
and birds of prey; plundering, stripping,
ravisliing, burning, and destroying. And to
set forth the valour of my own dear country-
men, I assured him, ^thatl.had seen tiicm
blow up a hundred enemies at once iiva siege,
^d as many in a ship ; and beheld the dead
bodies drop down in pieces from the cloadf,
to the great diversion of the spectators.'*
I was going on to more particnlars, when
my master conunanded me silence. He said,
* whoever understood the nature of the Ya-
hooty might easily believe it possible for so
^ * It would perhaps be impouible* by the moit la-
boarvd argument, or forcible eloqaence, to »how tbe
absurd iojaatice and horrid craelty of war lo effectnallyt
as by thii simple exhibition of them in a new light:
urtth war, inclading every apeclea of inlqaiiy and every
.art of deatraction» we become familiar, by degrees*
nnder specioas terms, which are seldom examined,
becanse they are Fearned at to af e in which the mind
implicitly receives and retains whatever is impretsed :
thus il happens, that when one man murders another
to gratify bis lost, we shudder ; but when one man mar*
dcrs a milliou to grati^ his vanity, we approve and we
admire, we envy and we applaud. If, when this and
the preceding pages are read, we discover with astonish-
meut, that when the same events have occurred in hiiiory
we felt no emotion, and acqaiesced in wars which we
could not but Icuow to have been commenced for such
'cansev, and carried on by such means; let not him be
censured for too much debaaing bia species, who has
contribtttpd to their felicity and preservation, by
stripping off the veil of custom and prejudice, and
holding np in their native dcfovmitY the vicea by which
. Ihey become wrelcbeid, au^ \U« «xxa > > | ^ > iiue^ Vemt^ -«s«.
deMro > «d.— H.
1 VOVAeKTOTIIR BOmBKnNBIt. UT
e an animftl to be capable of CTcry action
had named, if their strength and canning
jnalled their malice. Bat W my discouite
ad increased his abliorreDce of the wlude
peciet, 10 he fonnd it gave him a diitorbince
D bii nund, to wbicli he woi wholly a itraa-
(ei before. He thoogfat bis ean, being used
to inch abominable words, might, hy degrees,
adroit them wilb less deteatatiDn : that al-
thongh he hated the Yakoot of this conatiy,
yet he no more blamed them for their odions
qnnlitieB, than he did a gunayh (a bird of
prey) for its cruelty, or a eharp stone for cut-
ting his hoof. But, when acreatnre preteod-
Ing to reason conld be capable of such euoi'-
■bities, he dreaded lest the cormptiou of that
fnculty might be worse than brutality itaelf.
He seemed therefore confident, that, iostead
of reason, we were only pouested of some
quality, fitted to increase our natural Tices;
as the reflection from a troubled stream re-
tams the image of an iU-shapen body, not
only larger bat more distorted.'
He added,'that he had heard too mndi
npon the subject of war, Iwth in this and
some former Jiscoorscs. Iliere was another
ptdiit, wlilch all ttle perplexed him at preMnt.
I had Informed him, that soms.of onr crew
left their country on account t4 being ruined
by law; that I had already explained the
meaning of the word ; bat be was at a lou
how it should come to pass, that the law,
which was Intended for every man's preser-
raUoD, abonU ba ai^ ma£% lidn. llMnftr*
I
t48 OVIXITn't TRATKU.
ht desired to be ftirtfaer satiified what I meant
by law, and the dUpemers thereof, accord-
iDg to the present practice in my own coun-
try: because he tfaoogfat nature and reasoa
were siifl & cient guides for a reasonable ani-
■al, as we pretended to be, in showing «
what we ought to do, and what to avoid.'
I assured his honour, ^tiiat law was a
science, in which I had not moch conversed,
further than by employing adTocates in vain,
upon some injustices that had been done me:
however, I would give turn all the satisfaction
I was able.'
I said,'there was a society of men among
us, bred up from their youth in the art of
proving, by wmrds nmltiplied for tiie purpose,
that white is black, and black is white, accord-
ing as they are paid. To this society all tibe rest
of the people are slaves. For example, if my
neighbour has a mind to my cow, he has a law-
yer to prove that he ought to have my cowfrom
me. I must then hire another to defen < jLiny
right, it being against all rules of law tt^t
any man should be allowed to speak far him-
self. Now, in this case, I, who am the right
ovmer he under two great disadvantages :
first, my lavryer, being practised almost horn
his cradle in defending folsehood, is quite oot
of his dement when he would be an advocate
ftr jnstioe, which is an unnatural office he al-
ways attempts with great awkwardness, if
mat with ill •will. The second disadvantage
ity that ay lawyer must ^ooeed with great
or eli»h«ifnlkWi«%WHaaBad*AL\s«s ^'t
A VOYAAB VO TBB ■OUTHMHIIMS. 840
JvdgM aad aMMwred by hit brethem, as
ooe tlHit would ksiea the praeticeof the Uw.
And tiMrefore I bave but two methods to
preienre my cow. The first is, to gain orer
My adyersaiys lawyer with a doable fte^ who
wUl then betray his client by Insinaating that
he has jastiee on his side. The second way is
ftr my lawyer to make my cause appear as
unjust as he can, by allowing the cow to be-
long to my adversary : and this, if it be skil-
fully done, will certainly bespeak the Ulyow
€if the bench. Now your honour is to know,
that these judges are persons appointed to
decide all controrersies of property, as well
as for the trial of criminals, and picked out
from the most dexterous lawyers, who are
grown old and lasy ; and having been biassed
all their lives against truth and equity, lie
nnder such a fatal necessity of favouring
fraud, perjury, and oppression, that I have
known some of them refuse a large bribe
fitmilhe Side where justice lay, rather than
iiyure the faculty, by doing any thing nn-
becbming their nature or their office.
^ It is a nuudm among these lawyers, that
whatever has been done before, may legally
be done again ; and therefore they take spe-
cial care to record all the decisions f or me ri y
made against common justice, and the general
reason of mankind. These under the name
of 9reeedents, they produce as authorities to
justify the most faiiquitous opinions ; and the
judges never foil of directing accordingly.
< Ja pleadh^. they ttndioaaly avoid enter-
^ Hh
1
SM GULLIVXR's TRATBLft*
iDg into the merits of the cause ; but tra
loud, violent, and tedious, in dwelling upos
all circumstances which are not to the porpoie.
For instance, in the case already mentioaed;
they never desire to know what claim or tide
my adversary has to my cow ; but whetiier
the said cow were red or black ; ber horns
long or short ; whether the field I graze her
in be round or square ; whether she was
milked at home or abroad ; what diseases she
is subject to, and the like ; after which tiiey
consult precedents, adjourn the cause from
time to time, and in ten, twenty, or thirty
years co.me to an issue.
> It is likewise to* be observed, tiiat this
society has a peculiar cant and jargon of their
own, that no other mortal can uuderstSDd,
and wherein all their laws are written, which
they take special care to multiply ; whereby
they have wholly confounded the very essence
of truth and falsehood, of right and wrong ;
so tliat it will take thirty years to decide,
whether the field, left me by my ancestors
for six generations, belongs to me, or to a
stranger three hundred miles off,
* " In the trial of persons accused for crimes
against the state, the method is much more
short and commendable : the judge first sends
to sound the disposition of those in power,
after which he can easily hang or save a cri-
minal strictly preserving all due forms of law/
Here my master interposing, said, *■ it was
a pity, that creatures endowed with such
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYHNHNMS. 35 .
by the description I gave of them, must cer-
tainly be, were Dot rather encouraged to be
instructors of others in wisdom and know-
ledge.'In answer to which I assured his
honoar,'that in all points out of their own
trade, they were usually the most ignorant
and stupid generation among us, the most
despicable in common oonyersation, avowed
enemies to all knowledge and learning, and
equally disposed to pervent the general rea-
son of mankind, in every other siibject of
discourse as in that of their own profession*'
CHAPTER VI.
A eontinuatum of the state of England under
Queen Anne, The character of a first minis-
ter of state in European courts^
My master was yet wholly at a loss to under-
stand what motives could incite this race of
lavryers to perplex, disquiet, and weary
themselves, and engage ui a confederacy of
injustice, merely for the sake of injuring their
fellow-animals ; neither could he comprehend
what I meant in saying, they did it for hire.
Wliereupon I was at much pains to describe
to him the use of money, the materials it was
made of; aad the value of the metals ; * that
when a Yahoo had got a great store of this
precious substance^ he was able to yorchase
S5S eL'LLITSR's TRAYBU.
whatever he had a mind to, the .fioest doth-
kigy the noblest hoases, great tracts of land,
the mdst costly meats and drinks ; and have
his choice of the most beautiful females.
Therefore, since money alone was able to
perform all these feats, our YisAoot thought
they could never have enough of it to spend,
•r to save, as they found themselves inclined,
from their natural bent, either to profusion
or avarice. That the rich man enjoyed the
fruit of the poor man's labour, and the latter
were a thousand to one in proportion to the
former. That the bulk of our people were
forced to live miserably, by labouring every
day for small wages, to make a few live
plentifully.'
I enlarged myself much on these, and many
other particuhtrt to the same purpose ; but
his honour was still to -seek; for he went
npoa a supposition, that all animals had a
title to their share in the productions of the
earth, and especially those who preaded over
^e rest. Therefore he desired I would let
Mra know,'what these costly meats were,
and how any of us happened to want themf
Whereupon I enumerated as many sorts as
eame into my head, with the various metiiods
of dressing them, which could not be done
without sending vessels by sea to every part
4 > f the world, as well for liquors to drink
as for sauces and innumerable other con-
veniences. I assured him * that this whole
globe of earth must ,be at least three times
gooe roond, before one of oar better female
i
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYHNIINMS. 353
Yahoos could get her breakfast^ or a cup to
put it in/ He said ^ that must needs be a
miserable country, which cannot furnish
food for its own inhabitants. But what he
chiefly wondered at was, how such vast
tracts of ground as I described should be
wholly without fresh water, and the people,
pot to the necessity of sending over the sea for
drink.'I replied'that England (the dear
place of my nativity) was computed to pro-
produce three times the quantity . of food
more than its inhabitauts are able to consume,
as well as liquors extracted from grain, or
pressed out of the fruit of certain trees, wfaidi
made excellent drink; and the same pro-
portion in every other convenience of life.
But in order to feed the luxury and intem-
perance of the mal.es, and the vanity of th^
females, we sent away the greatest part of
our necessary things to other countries,
whence, in return we brought the materials
of diseases, folly, and vice, to spend among
ourselves. . Hence it follows of necessity,
that vast numbers of our people are compelled
to seek their livelihood by. begging, robbing,
stealing, cheating, pimping, flattering, su-
borning, forswearing, forging, gaming, lyuig,
fawning, hectoring, votung, scribbling^ star-
gating, poisoning, whoring, canting, libelling,
free-thinking, and the like occupations :*
every one oif which terms I. was at much
pains to make him understand.
*• That wine was not. imported among us
from fortigQ countries, to supvW the want of
i
S54 6ULLIVBR*t TRATBL8.
water or other drioks, but because it was a
sort of liquid, wliich made as inerry by
patting as oat of oar senses, diverted all me-
lancholy thoughts, begat wild extravagant
imaginations in the brain, raised our hopes
and banished our fears, suspended every
aOaoe of reason for a time, and deprived as
of the use of our limbs, fill we fell into a
profound sleep; although it must be con-
fessed, that we always awaked sick and
dispirited; and that the use of this liquor
filled us with diseases, which made our lives
uncomfortable and short.
But beside all this, the bulk of our people
supported themselves by furnishing the ne-
cessities or conveniences of life, to the rich,
and to each other. For instance, when I am
at home, and dressed as I ought to be, I
carry on my body the workmanship of a hun-
dred tradesmen ; the building and furniture
of my house employ as many more, and five
limes the number to adoito my wife.'
I was going on to tell him of another sort
of people, who get thdr Uvelyfaood by attend-
ing the sick, haviiig, upon some occaskms,
informed his honour that many of ny crew
had died of diseases. But, here it was with
the utmost difficulty that I brought Um to
apprehend what I meant. ^ He could easily
conceive, that a Htntyhnhtim fprew weak and
heavy a few ^a^ befctt^ bis deatii, or by
some accident n^f^'t faitft a limb ; but that
nature, who works idl tifings to perfection,
should saStT any paiAs ta breed in pur bodies.
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUVHMUNM8. %5§
ht thonght impossible, and desired to know
the reason of so unaccountable an evil.'
I told him * we fed on a thousand things,
whick operated contrary to each other; that
we eat when we were not hungry, and drank
without the provocation of thirst; that we sat
whole nights drinking strong liqnors, without
eating a bit, which disposed us to sloth, in-
flamed our bodies, and precipitated or pre-
vented digestion. Tliat prostitute female
Yahoot acquired a certain malady, which
bred rottenness in the bones of those who
fell into tlieir embraces : that this, and many
other diseases, were propagated from father
to son ; so that great numbers come into the
world with complicated maladies upon them :
tliat it would be endless to give liim a cata-
logue of all diseases incident to hiunan bodies,
for they would not be fewer than five or six
hundred, spread over every limb and joint —
in short* every part, external and intestine,
having diseases appropriated to itself. To
remedy which, tliere was a sort of people
bred up among us in the profession, or pre-
tence, of curing the sick. And because I
had some skill in the faculty, I would, in
gratitude to his honour, let him know tlie
whole mystery and metibod by vifhich they
proceed.
^ Their fondamental is, that all diseases
■rise from repletion ; whence they conclude,
iSbMt a mat evacuation of the body is neces-
saiy, either through the natural passage or
upwards at the mouth. TbeVc iiviA.V)^ai»3DL < %wk
856 culliver's travels.
is from herbs, minerals, gums, oils, shells,
salts, juices, seaweed, excrements, barks of
trees, serpents, toads, frogs, spiders, dead
men's flesh and bones, birds, beasts, and
fishes, to form a composition, for smell and
taste, the most abominable, naaseous, and
detestable, they can possibly contrive, which
the stomach immediately rejects with loath-
ing, and this they call a vomit ; or else, from
the same store-house, with some other poi-
sonous additions, they command us to take m
at the orifice above or below (just as the
physician then happens to be disposed) a
medicine equally annoying and disgustful to
the bowels; which, relaxing the belly, drives^
down all before it ; and this they call a purge,
or a clyster. For nature (as the physicians
allege) having intended the superior anterior
orifice only for the intromission of solids and
liquids, and the inferior posterior for ejection;
these artists* ingeniously considering, that in
all diseases nature is forced out of her seat,
therefore, to replace her in it, the body must
be treated in a manner directly contrary, by
interchanging the use of each orifice ; forcing
solids and liquids in at the anus, and making
evacuations at the mouth.
^ But, besides real diseases, we are subject
to many that are only imaginary, for which
the physicians have invented imaginary cures;
these have their several names, and so have
the drugs that are proper for them; and
*'Theie arVals,'\\ ^ nominative* without any verb
to # bich it «{«Tft Vi Vbtfi tcmuai^^T < il ^% va & »BRA < -S .
A VOYAGB TO THE UOVYBRHNMf. 167
with these our female Yahoo$ are always
infested.
* One great excellency in this tribe, is their
■kill at prognostics, wherein they seldom fail ;
their predictions in real diseases, when they
rise to any degree of malignity, generally
portending death, which is always in their
power, when recovery is not : and therefore,
npon any unexpected signs of amendment,
after they have pronounced their sentence,
rather than be accused as false prophets,
they know how to approve their sagacity to
■the world by a seasonable dose.
'Tliey are likewise of special ose to lins-
bands and wives who are grown weary of
their mates ; to eldest sons, to great ministers
of state, and often to princes.'
I had formerly, upon occasion, discoursed
with my master npon the nature of govern-
ment in general, and particularly of our own
excellent constitution, deservedly the wonder
and envy of the whole world. But having
here accidentally mentioned a minister of
state, he commanded me some time after to
inform him,'what species of Yahoo I par-
tlcnlariy meant by that appellation.'
I told him,'that a first or cliief minister of
state, who vras tlie person I intended to
describe, was a creature wholly exempt from
Joy and grief, love and hatred, pity and
anger ; at least makes use of no other pas-
sions, bat a violent desire of wealth, power,
and titles; that he applies his word to aM
Mves, except to the indlca^on oC Xs & a h & dA
eULUTBR's TRAVELS.
tkat he never tells a tnith but with'an intent
that yon sboold take it for a lie ; nor a lie,
but with a design that yon should take it for
a truth ; that those he speaks worst of behind
their backs are in the surest way of prefer-
ment ; and whenever he begins to praise yon
to others, or to yourself, you are from thit
day forlorn. The worst mark you can receive
is a promise, especially when it is confirmed
with an oath; after which, every wise man
. retires, and gives over all hopes.
'There are three methods, by which a man
may rise to be chief minister. The first is,
.by knowing how, with prudence, to dispose
.of a wife, a daughter, or a sister ; the second,
by. betraying or undermining hb predecesson
and the third is, by a furious zeal, in public
assemblies, against the corruptions of the
court. But a wise prince would rathet
choose to employ those who practise the last
of these methods ; because such zealots prove
always the most obsequious and subservient
-to the will and passions of their master. That
these ministers, having all employments at
their disposal, preserve themselves in power,
by bribing the majority of a senate or great
council ; and at last, by an expedient, < »lled
an act of indemnity (whereof I described the
nature to him), they secure themselves from
after-reckonings, and retire from the public
laden with the spoils of the nation.
'The palace of a chief minister, is a semi-
nary to breed up others in his own trade : the
pa^esy lacke^fs, and ^rtAr, by .unitatung their
A TOTA6B TO THB HOUmrHVHS. 150
master^ become ministers of ttate in their
several districts, and ieam to excel in the
three principal ingredients, of insolence^
lying, and bribery. Accordingly, they have
a sabaltem coart paid to them by persons of
the best rank ; and sometimes, by the force
of dexterity and impudence, arrive, through
several gradations, to be successors to their
lord.
'He is usually governed by a decayed
wench, or favourite footman, who are the
tunnels through which all graces are conveyed,
and may properly be called, in the last resort,
the governors of the kingdom.'
One day in discourse, my master, having
heard me mention the nobility of my country,
was pleased to make me a compliment which
I could not pretend to deserve : * that he was
sore I most have been bom of some noble
family, because I far exceeded in shape,
colour, and cleanliness, all the Yahoos of hit
nation, although I seemed to fail in strength
and agility, which must be imputed to mj
different way of living from those other
brutes; and besides I was not only endowed
with the feculty of speech, but likewise with
tome rudiments of reason, to a degree that
with all his acquaintance I passed for a pro-
digy.
He made me observe,'tiiat among the
HauykHhnm^f the white, the sorrel, and the
iron-gray^ were not so exactly shaped as tiie
bay, the dapple-gray, and tiie black; nor
ban with equal talents of nmid, ox ^ ck^^jmS^
\
MO •ULLIVBH't TRATKLt.
tD bnproye them; and therefore eootiinied
ftlways in the coaditioa of serraiits, without
ever asinriiig to mmtch oot of their own nee,
wiiich in that oonntry woald be reckoned
monatrons and nnnatund.'
I made hit hoooor my most humble adoiow-
ledgements for the good opinion iie wis'
pleased to conceive of me ; bat assured him
at tiie same time, that my birth was of tke
lower sort, having been born of plain honest
parents, who were just able to give me i
tolerable education : that nobility, among us,
was altogether a different thing from the idea
he had of it ; that oar yoong noblemen are
bred from their childhood in idleness and
luxury; that as soon as years will permit,
they consume their vigour, and contract
odious diseases among levrd females; and
when their fortunes are almost ruined, they
marry some woman of mean birth, disagree-
able person, and unsound coostltntion (merely
for the sake of money,) whom they hate and
despise. That the productions of such mar-
riages are generally scrofulous^ ricketty, or
deformed children; by which means the
Ikmily seldom continues above three genera-
tions, unless the wife takes care to provide a
healthy father, among her neighbours or
domestics, in order to improve and continBe
the breed. That a weak diseased body, a
meagre countenance, and sallow complexion^
are the true marks of noble blood ; and a
iMMlthy robust appeaxtjoo^ \ & «^ ^v^gnnt^^
a mua of qaaHty , that. \)ik & ^ot\9i Q(SD«3ni^»i^^
A TOTAaKTOTHBBo'OYBHBHHI. HI
b1 ftther to have been i gtooa or & coich-
•n. " nie imperfectioiis of hla mlod mn
irallel iriOi thrne of his body, being ■ cara >
nition of spleen, dalneu, ignorance, ctpriM,
miDBlity, and pride.
■Wifliaiit the consent of thli iltnitrioa*
idj, no law can be enacted, repealed, or
.tered: and flieie noblei have likewise the
Kitionof allonr poueiuons, withoat appeal,'
CHAPTER VII.
it AkUut'm great lent ef liit iMixt tauUry.
Hit tmuUr'i obtenaliont npan Iht cotuMh.
(JOH aad odanNMlratiOTi of Eiiglaiti, oi A.
ttribed In/ the Anther, with paraiUl cateimd
armparitetu, BitmatltT't < AttnnMMi*if«»
lie reader maj be dispoied to wonder how
could prsT^ on myaelf to glre lo free n
ipresentation of oiy own apedea, among k
tee of mortala who are already too apt to
mceive the vUeat opinion of homan-kind,
■mm that entire congmity between me and
Kir Yahoot, Bnt I moat freely confeia,
lat the many Tlrtaea of thoae excellent
nadrapeds, placed In oppotite view to hnman
wrnptiona, had an far opened my eyea and
niarged my ondentaodLng, tlMt I begu
> riew ae nctloiw and pairiou of vM
36S OULLIYBR'8 traybu/
ia a very different light, and to think tha
honour of my own kind not worth managing ;
which, besides it was impossible for me to do,
before a person of so acute a judgment as my
master who daily convinced me of a thousand
faults in myself, whereof I had not the least
perception before, and which, with us, would
never be numbered even among human infir*
mities. I had likewise learned, from his
example, an utter detestation of all falsehood
or disguise ; and the truth appeared so
amiable to me, that I determined apon
sacrificing every thing to it.
Let me deal so candidly with the reader
as to confess tiiat there was yet a moch
stronger motive for the freedom I took in my
representation of things. I had not yet
been a year in this country before I contracted
such a love and veneration for the inhabitants,
that I entered on a firm resolution never to
return to human-kind, but to pass tlie rest of
my life among the admirable Houyhnknmt,
■in the contemplation and practice of every
virtue ; where I could have no example or
incitement to vice. But it was decreed by
-fortune, my perpetual enemy, that so great a
felicity should not fall to my share. How-
ever, it is now some comfort to reflect, that
in what I said of my countrymen, I exten-
uated tiieir faults as much as I durst before
so strict an examiner ; and upon every ar-
ticle gave as favourable a turn as the matter
•would bear. For, indeed^ who is there alive
lUnt wiU not Vie swvj}^ \s^ \ai^\»Mk*«BiJb^'V^*
tiality to the v^ace oiYiSAAws^DLl
A VOTAGB TO THE HOUYHNHNMS. 36S
I have related the substance of several
coDversatious I had with my master, during
the greatest part of the time I had the ho-
nour to be m fars service ; but have, indeed,
for brevity sake, omitted much more than is
here set down.
When I had answered all his questions,
and his curiosity seemed to be fully satisfied,
lie sent for me one morning early, and com-
manded me to sit down at some distance (an
honour which he had never before conferred
upon me.) He said,'he had been very se-
riously considering my whole story, as far as
it related both to myself and my country :
that he looked upon ns as a sort of animals,
to whose share, by what accident he could
not conjecture, some small pittance of reason
had fallen, whereof we made no other use,
than by its assistance to aggravate our na-
tural corruptions, and to acquire new ones,
which nature had not given us ; that we dis-
armed ourselves of the few abilities she had
bestowed ; had been very successful in mul-
tiplying our original wants, and seemed to
spend our whole lives in vain endeavours to
supply them by our own inventions. That
as to myself, it was manifest I had neither
the strength nor agility of a common Yahoo ;
tliat I walked infirmly on my hinder feet ;
had found a contrivance to make my claws of
no use or defence, and to remove the hair
from my dun, which was intended as a shelter
from the sini and the'Weather. Lastly, that
I coald neither run with speed, nt > r climb
804 GULLITBRf TKATXLB.
trees like my brethren/ as he caOed thatt,
* tiie Yahoos in his country.
* That our institations of gOYdmmeiit and
law were plainly owing to onr gross defects
in reason, and by consec^nence in Yirtne ; be-
cause reason alone is sufficient to goyem a
rational creature ; which was tiierefbie a
character we had no pretence to challenge,
even from the account I had given of my own
people ; although he manifestly perceived,
that, in order to favour tiiem, I had concealed
many particulars, and often said the thing
whidi was not.
^ He was the more confirmed in this opinion,
because he observed, tiiat as I agreed in
every feature of my body witii other Yakoos,
except where it was to my real disadvantage
in point of strength, speed, and activity, the
shortness of my claws, and some other par-
ticulars where nature had no part ; so from
the representation I had given him of our
lives, our manners, and our actions, |ie found
as near a resemblance in the disposition of
our minds.'He said, ^the YfAoos were
known to hate one another, more than the^
did any different species of animals ; and the
reason usually assigned was, the odiousness
of their own shapes, which all could see in
. the rest, but not in themselves. He had there-
fore begun to tiiink it not unwise in us to
cover our bodies, and by that invention con-
ceal many of onr deformities from each otiier,
^hich would else be hardly supportable.
But he now found he had beea miataken, and
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYHNIINMS. 365
that thii dissensions of those brutes in his
couatry were owing to the same cause with
ours, as I had described them. * For if/ said
he, *■ you throw among five Yahoos as much
food as would be sufficieot for fifty, they will,
instead of eating peaceably, fall togetiier by
•the ears, each single one impatient to have
all to itself: and therefore a servant was
usually employed to stand by while they were
• feeding abroad, and those kept at home were
tied at a distance from each other : that if a
: cow died of age or accident, before a Houy'
hnhnm could secure it for his own Yahoos y
. those in the neighboarhood would come in
herds to seize it, and then would eusne sndi
a battle as I had described, with terrible
wounds made by their claws on both sides,
although they seldom were able to kill one
• another, for want of such convenient instru-
• ments of death as we had invented. At
other times, the like battles have been fought
•between the Yahoos of several neighbour-
. hoods, without any visible cause; those of
one district watching all opportunities to snr.
prise the next, before they are prepared.
But if they find their project has miscarried,
they return home, and, for want of enemies,
engage in what I call a civil war among
themselves.
* That in some fields of his country there
are certain shining stones of several colours,
whereof tiie Yahoos are violently fond ; and
when part of tiiese stones is fixed in the-earth,
as it sometimes happens, they will dig with
I
M0 eUIXIVBR'f ±RA ELS.
their dawft for whole days to get them out;
then carry tiiem away, and hide them by
heaps hi their kennels ; but still looldiig roud
with great cantion, for fear their conuides
ihoiild find out tiieir treasure/ My master
uidy *ht coold never discover tiie reason of
tids mmatnral iq; > petitey or how these stones
ooold be of any use to a Yakao ; but now he
believed it might proceed from the same pria-
dple of avarice which I had ascribed to man-
kind. That he had once^ by way of experi-
ment, privately removed a heap of these
stones from the place where one of his Yahaot
had buried it ; whereupon the sordid animal,
missing his treasure, by hb loud lameating
brought the whole herd to the place, tiiere
miserably howled, then fell to biting and
tearing the rest; began to pine away, woold
neither eat, nor sleep, nor woriL, tiU he or-
dered a senrant privately to convey the stones
into the same hole, and hide them as l > efore;
which, when his Yt^koo had found, he pre-
sently recovered his spirits and good homoiir,
but took good care to remove them to a letter
hiding-place, and has ever since been a very
serviceable brute.*
My master further assured me, whidi I
also observed myself,'that in the fields where
the shining stones abound, the fiercest and
most frequent battles are fought, occasioned
by perpetual inroads of the nejghboari^g
Ynhooi:
He said,'it was common, when two
YtihiOM ^^Moveied vodh a. ^tioue in a field.
1 VOVADITO TBB HallVUMHRKa. MT
■nd were ooatendliig which of theio ihoold
be the pn^rietor, b. third would take the
adTtDtage, > nd carry itaway from them both; "
which my master would needs couteud to havg
•ome lund of reiembluice with onr initx ai
law ; wherein I thongtat it for oar credit not
to Dudeceite Mm ; aiuce the deduon he men-
tioned wu much more equilsble than many
decree* among lu : becanae the plwntiff and
defendant there loat nothing beside the itooe
they contended for: whereas our coorts of
equity woald neier have dismissed the cause,
while either of them had any thing lefl.
My master, continuing his disconne, laid,
'there was nothing that rendered the Yahoot
■lore odious, than their undistiuguishing ap-
petite to devour every thing that came in
aeir way, whether herbs, roots, berries, the
corrupted flesh of animals, or all mingled to-
gether : and it was peculiar hi their temper,
that they were fonder of wliat they cooU get
by rapine or stealth, at a greater distance,
than moch better food provided for them at
home. If their prey held out, they would
eat till they were ready to burst ; after which,
natnre had pointed out to them a certain root
that gave them a general evacuation.
lliere was also another kind of root, very
jidcy, bnt somewhat rare and di£cult to be
fbnnd, which the Yahoo4 sought for with
nHKh eagerness, and would sucic it with great
delight ; It prodaeed in them the same effects
ttat wine has npon us. It wonld make them
wmeliiiNi hug, and tometiiuei tear one ano-
S6R Gulliver's travels.
liier ; they would howl, and grin, and chatter,
and reel, and tumble, and then fall asleep m
the mud.'
I did indeed observe lli^t die YuAoost Were
the only animals in this country subject to
any diseases; which, however, were much
fewer tiian horses have among as, and con-
tracted not by any ill treatment they meet
with, but by the iiastiness and greediness of
that sordid brute. Neither has their lan-
guage any more than a general appellation
for those maladies, which is borrowed from
the name of tiie beast, and called htiea yahoo f
t > r Yahoo's evil; and the cure prescribed is
a mixture of their own dung and urine, for-
cibly put down the Yahoo's throat. This I
have since often known to have been taken
with success, and do here freely recommend
it to my countrymen, for the public good^ as
an admirable specific against all diseases pro-
duced by repletion.
* As to learning, government, arts, manu-
factui'es, and the like,'my master confessed,
*he could find little or no resemblance be-
tween the Yahoos of that country and those
in ours. For he only meant to observe what
parity there was in our natures. He had
heard, indeed, some curious Houyhnhnms
observe, that in most herds there was a sort
of ruling Yahoo (as among us there b gener-
ally some leading or principal stag in a park,)
who was always more deformed in body, and
mischievous in disposition, than any of the
rest. That this leader had usually a ^vourite
A VOYAGE TO THE HOU YllNlINMS. 3G9
as like himself as he could get, whose em-
ployment was to lick his master's feet and
posteriors, and drive the female YaJiotfs to
his kennel ;* for which he was now and then
rewarded with a piece of ass's flesh. This
fiiTonrite is hated bj the whole herd, and
HumSort, to protect liimself, keeps always
near the person of his leader. He usually
cootinoes in office till a worse can be found ;
bnt the Tery moment he is discarded, liis suc-
teasor, at Uie head of all the Yahoos in tliat
district, young and old, male and female,
come in a body,t and discharge their excre-
ments upon him from head to foot. But how
fiur this might be applicable to our courts, and
/aTonrites, and ministers of state, my master
aaid I could best determine/
I durst make no return to tiiis malicious
hislnuation, which debased human under,
standing below the sagacity of a common
hound, who has judgment enough to distin-
gnish and follow tiie cry of the ablest dog in
tiie pack, without being ever mistaken.
My master told me, * there were some qua-
Ktles remarkable in the Yahoos, which he
had not observed me to mention, or at
least very slightly, in the accounts I had given
of humankind.'He said, * those annuals,
* Flattery and pimping. — H.
i Tbli KBtence is altogetber ungraiumatieal :'hfi
f'jcccMor/ it the only nominative to the piaral verb
come ;'it may be thus amended—'but the very mc-
roent he is dUcarded, all the Yahoos lu that district,
yooug and old, male and female, with his sacoessor at
their Dead, couie in a body, dec.'— 8.
S70 GULLIVER*S TRAVELS.
like other brutes, had their fenudes in eoai >
mon ; bat in this they differed, that the she
Ynhoo would admit the males while she wv
pregnant; and that the hes would quarrel
and figlit with tlie females, as fiercely as witk
each other ; both which practices were socii
degrees of infamous brutality, as no other
sensitive creature ever arrived at.
'Another thing he wondered at in the
Yahoos, was their stiange disposition to sas-
tlness and dirt ; whereas tiiere appears to be
a natural love of cleanliness in all other ani-
mals.'As to the two former accusations, I
was glad to let them pass without any reply, be-
cause I had not a word to offer upon them in
defence of my species, which otherwise I cer-
tainly had done from my own incliuatioDS.
But I could have easily vindicated human-
kind from tiie imputation of singularity if^n
the last article, if there had been any swuie
in tiiat country (as unluckily for me there were
not), wliich, although it may be a sweeter
quadruped than a Yahoo, cauuot, I hnmbly
conceive, in justice, pretended to more clean-
liness ; and so his honour himself must have
owned, if he had seen their filthy way of
feeding, and their custom of wallowing and
sleeping in mud.
My master likewise mentioned another qua-
lity, wlKch his servants had discovered in
several Yahoos, and to him was wholly unac-
countable. He said,'a fancy would some-
times take a Yahoo to retire into a comer, to
lie down, and YiOYi\ > asid ^tq^a.^ ^divd v^uru
/
/
If
J qU (hat camp near bim, altb.
: young and fat, wanted neither fboil nor
If, nor Jid the servant imagine what conld
ibiy ail bim. And tlie only remedy tbey
d was, to set him to hard work, after
h be would infallibly come to hhnielf.*
his I was silent out of partiality to my
kind; yet here I could plainly discover
TQe seeds of iplcen, which only Beizea on
aiy, the luxnrions, and the rich; who,'
ty were forced to undergo the same regi-
, I woaid undertake for the cute,
ia honour had further observed,'that •
ie Yahoo would onen stand behind a
. or a bash, to gaze on the yonag male*
ng by, and ihen appear, and hide, using
f antic gestures and grimaces, at which
It was obserred that she l^d a mast
Uve smell; and when any of the males
need, would slowly retire, looking often
, and with a CDunterfeit *how of fear,
tS into some convenient place, where ihe
r the male would follow her.
It other times, it'a female stranger came
ig them, three or four of her own lez
d get about her, and stare, and chatter,
grin, and smell her all over; and then
off witli geitnrea, that seemed to expreu
anpt and disdain.'
ithaps my master might refine a little in
: speculations, which he had drawn ttom
Sr2 Gulliver's travels.
what he ohsenred himself, or had been told
bim by others ; however, I conld oot reflect
withoat some amazement, and uradi sorrow,
that the riidunents of Jewdness, coquetry,
censure, and scandal, snould haye place l»y
instinct in womankind.
I expected every moment that my master
would accuse tiie Yahoos of those unnatural
appetites in both sexes, fM > common among vs.
But Nature, it seems, has not been so expert
a school-mistress ; and these p < ^ter pleasures
are entirely the productions of Art and Rea-
son on our side of the globe.
CHAPTER Vni.
The Author relaies several partieuUars of the
YaJioos. The great virtues tf the HtmjfkiUmwu,
The education and exsraise of th & r ffouth.
Their general assentbly.
As I ought to have understood human nature
much better than I supposed it possible for
my master to do, so it was easy to apply the
character he gave of the Yahoos to n^self
and my countrymen ; and I believed I could-
yet make further discoyeries, from my own
observation. I therefore often begged his
honour to let me go among the herds of Ya-
hoos in the neighbourhood ; to which he al-
ways very gracionsly consentedi beUig per«
A TOYAOB TO THB HOUTRMHirifS. ITS
feetly convinced that the hstred I bore tiiese
brotes woold never snffer me to be oormpted
by them ; and his honour ordered one of his
servants, a strong sorrel nag, very honest and
good-natured, to be my gnard ; without whose
protection I durst not undertake sudi adven-
tures. For I have already told the reader
how. mndi I was pestered by these odioui
animals, upon my first arrival ; and I after*
wards failed very narrowly tiiree or fbnr
times of falling into their dutches, when I
happened to stray at any distance wifliout my
hanger. And I have reason to believe they
had some imagination that I was of th^
own species, which I often assisted myself by
stripping up my sleeves, and showing my
naked arms and breasts in their sight, when
my protector was with me. At which times
tiiey would approach as near as they durst,
and imitate my actions after the ■mnner of
nionke3r8, but ever with great signs of hatred ;
as a tame jad^daw with cap and stockings Is
always persecuted by the wild ones, when he
happens to be got among them.
They are prodigious^ idmble firom tiieir
infancy. However, I once caught a young
male Ik tiiree years old, and endeavoured, by
an marks of tenderness, to make it quiet;
bat the Httie imp fell a squalKng, and scratch-
ing, and biting with sudi violence, that I was
fbrced to let it go; and it was high time, for
a whole troop of old ones came about us at
the noise, but finding the cub was safe (for
mwmy it ran,) and my sorrel nag being by,
2 Kk
374 gullitsb's trateu.
they dant not yentare Dear ns. I observed
the yooog animal's flesh to smell very rank,
and the stink was somewhat between a wea-
sel and a fox, but much more disagreeable.
I forgot another circumstance (and perhaps I
might have the reader's pardon if it were
wholly omitted,) that while I held the odious
vermin in my hands, it voided it filthy excre-
ments of a yellow liquid substance all over
my clothes ; but by good fortune there was a
small brook hard by, where I washed myself
as clean as I could; although I durst not
oome into my master's presence until I were
sufficiently aired.
■ By what I could discover, the Yahoos ap-
pear to be the most unteachable of all ani-
mals : their capacities never reaching higher
than to draw or carry burdens. Yet I am of
opinion, this defect arises chiefly from a per-
verse, restive disposition. For they are
cunning, malicious, treacherous, and reveng-
fal. They are strong and hai'dy, but of a
cowardly spirit, and by consequence insolent,
abject, and cruel. It is observed, that the
red-haired of both sexes are more libidinous
and mischievous than the rest, whom yet they
much exceed in strength and activity.
The Houyhnhnms keep the Yahoos for
present use in huts not far from the house ;
but the rest are sent abroad to certain fields,
where they dig up roots, eat several kinds of
herbs, and search about for carnon, or some-
times catch weasels and luhimuhs (a sort of
wild ntf) which they greedily^ devour. Na-
tare hu Unght them to dig deep botei with
their nail! on the lide of a riiing ground,
whereiu they lie by themielTei; only the
kcnoels of the femnlei are larger, inffident to
hold two or three coba.
They iwim from Uieir inftncy Ulie frofs,
Mid > r« able to continue long under water,
where they often take fiah, which the femalea
carry home to their yoong. And, upoD this
occaiion, I hope the reader will pardon my
reiHting an odd adventure.
Being one day abroad with my protector
the lorrel nag, and the weather exceeding
hot, I entreated bim to let me hatiie in a
liver that wa« near. He cooented, and I
immediately stripped myself stark naked, and
went down softly into the atream. It hap-
pened that a young temale Yahoo, itaDding
behind i bank, saw the whtrie proceeding,
and inflamed by deeire, ai the nag and I
conjectured, came mnniDg with all tpe«d,
and leaped into the water, within five yards
of the place where I bathed. I was never In
my life so terribly frightened. The ntg was
graring at some diilance, not snspcctiBg any
bann. She embraced me after a most Ihl-
lome manner, I roared u loud as I cmld,
■nd Uie nag came gaUoping towards me,
whereupon she qnitted her grasp, with the
ntmoat retnctancy, and leaped npon the op-
podt« bank, where she stood gaiing and
bowUDg III the time I wu potUng on my
lUf WM ■ matter of diT«nion to tav oiMtei
I
tT6 «UUJTBK*S TBATSU.
sad his flunily, as well as of mortificatioD to
myself. For now I could no longer deny
that I was a real Yahoo in every Hmb and
leatnre, siifte the females had a natond pro-
pensity to me, as one of their own spedes;
neither was the hair of tills bmte of a red
colour (which might hare been some excuse
for an appetite a little irregnlar), but black
as a sloe, and her countenance did not make
an appearance altogether so hideons as tbe
rest of her kind ; for I tiiink she ooold not be
above eleven years old.
Having lived three years in this ooontry,
the reader I suppose vdll expect that I shoold,
like other trav^ers, give him some aocoont
of the manners and costoms of its inhabitants,
whidi it was indeed my prindpal study to
learn.
As these noble Houyknhnms are endowed
by nature with a general disposition to all
virtaes, and have no conceptions or ideas of
what is evil in a rational creature ; so tiieir
grand maxim is, to cultivate reason, and to
be wliolly governed by it. Neither is reason
among them a point problematical, as with
us, where men can argue with plausibility on
both sides of the question ; but strikes yoa
with immediate conyiction ; as it must needs
do, where it is not mingled, obscured, or dis-
coloured, by passion and interest. I remem-
ber it was with extreme difficulty that I could
bring my master to understand the meaning
of the word optnton, or how a point could be
disputable: beca.\i & Qtetw > \iXw»:^x^^oiaH\A < «S & ssk
«r deny only where we are certain; and be-
yond oar knowledge we caimot do cither. Ha
that conUoveraiea, wruigliDgs, diapntes, and
po^tiveneai, In false or dubious propositioDB,
are evila nnkoown among the Houghlthnjiu.
In the like manner, when I used to expliiin
(o faim anr several ajiMems of natural philnao-
phy, be would langh,'that a creature pre-
tending to reawu, sbould value itself upon
the knowledge of other people's conjecturei,
and in ttainga where that knowledge, if it
were certain, could be of no oae.'Wherao
be agreed entirely with the lentimenli of
Socrates, as Plato delivers them ; which I
mention as the highest honour I can do that
prince of philosophers. I have often since
rcHected, what destruction such doctrine
would make in the libraries of Europe; nnd
how many paths of fame would be then shut
Dp in the learned world.
Friendship and benevolence are the two
principal virtues among the Houghnhnim ;
and these not confined to particular object*,
but universal to the whole race. For a
atranger fi^tm the remotest part is equally
treated widi the nearest neighbonr; ami
wherever he goes, looks npon hlmielf as at
home. They preserve decency and civility
In the highest degrees, but are altc^elher
Ignorant of ceremony. Tbey have no fond-
Desi for their colts or foals, but the care they
take in educating diem proceeds entirely from
the dictates of reason. And I observed my
muter to show the same affection to his nngh <
178 CULtfVBR S TRAVELS,
boor's issue, that he had for his own. They
will have it that nature teaches them to love
the whole species, and it is reason only that
makes a distinction of persons, where there
b a superior degree of virtue.
When the matron Hauyhnkmrnu have pro-
duced one of each sex, they no k > nger aooom-
pany with tiieir consorts, except they lose one
of tiieir Issue by some casualty, which veiy
seldom happens ; but in such a case they meet
again; or when the like accident be & lb a
person whose wife is past bearing, some other
couple bestow on him one of their own colts,
and then go together again until the mother
is pregnant. This caution is necessary, to
prevent the country from being overbnrthen-
ed with numbers. But the race of inferior
Houyhnhnmt, bred up to be servants, is not
so strictly limited upon this article ; these are
allowed to produce three of each sex, to be
domestics in the noble families.
In their marriages, they are exactly careiol
to choose such colours as will not make any
disagreeable mixture in the breed. Strength
is chiefly valued in the male, and comeliness
in the female; not upon the account of love,
but to preserve the race from degenerating ;
for when a female happens to excel in
strength, a consort is chosen, with regard to
comeOness.
Courtship, love, presents, jointures, settle^
ments, have no place in their thoo^ts ; or
terms whereby to express them in their lan-
guage The ^o\i & % QVK^^ XQfiftX^ vail are
A TOTASK TO THE II«V«tt«IIItXt. ITO
jaiaed, merely b«canM it is Uie determinrntioii
of their pwentj tuid friends: it ii what thejr
•M done eveij diy, and they look upon it ai
ooe of die aeeeasBTy actions of a reasonable
being. Bat the violation of marriage, or any
other nndiastity, was never heard of, and the
married pair pass their liiea with the same
friendsUp and matual benevolence, that they
bear to all olhers of Oie lune spedei who
oome in their way ; without jealousy, tbnd'
Dess, qaarrelling, or discooLent.
In edncating the youth of both sexes, tlieir
netbod is admirable, and highly deserves onr
inutation. These are not saOered to taste a
grain of oats, except upon certain days, till
eighteen years old ; nor millc, bat very rarely i
and Id swnmer tkey graze two hoars in the
morning, and a* iwany in the evening, which
their parent* likewise observe ; but the ser-
vants are not allowed above half that time,
and a great part of their grass is hrongbt
bomc, which they eat at the Tnost conveideiit
honrs, when Uiey can be best spared from
Tempeiuee, Indostry, exercise, and clean-
liDBss, are (be Iuhd* cqaally eiyoined to tbe
young OBca at both sexes: and my master
tfaondit it monstpons in a*, to ^ve die females
a di & rent kind of education from tbe males,
eseept ia tome articles of domestic mani^e-
■leitt) wbtfeby, as be traly observed, one
batf «( onr native* were good for nolhu^ bat
brinitliv (UUren into tbe world : and to trust
tka care of onr diMren to such lueleu
18t CVUlTKS't TBATKU.
he wmdy was yet m yeatc i
Bvt tbe Homykmkmmu tram ap their joalh
te streagtfa, speed, and hardiness, by exeitis-
lag theai in mnning races ap and down steep
hills, and iner hard stony gronsds ; and when
they are ail m a sweat, they are ordered to
leap orer head and ears into a pond or river.
Four times a year the yoath of a certain
district meet to show their pro6ciency in
ronning and leaping, and other feats of
strength and agiilty ; where tiie victor is re-
warded with a song in his or her praise. On
this festival, the servants drive a herd of
Yahoos into the field, laden vith hay, and
oats, and milk, for a repast to the Hauif'
hnhnnu; after which, these brutes i^re imme-
diately driven back again^ for fear of being
noisome to the assembly.
Every fourth year, at the vernal eqnlnox«
there is a representative conndl of the whole
nation, which meets in a plain about twenty
miles from our house, and continues about
five or six days. Here they inquire into the
state and condition of the several districts ;
whether they abound or be deficient in hay
or oats, or cows, or Yahoos ; and wherever
there is any want (which b but seldom) it is
immediately supplied by unanimous consent
and contribution. Here likewise the regula-
tion of children is settled: as for instance, if a
Houyhnhnm has two males, he changes one
of them with another that has two females :
■nd when a child has been lost by any cmuity
A TOTAOE TO THE HOUYHRHNMS. 881
liere the mother is past breeding, it is de-
rmined what family in the district shall
eed another to supply the loss.
CHAPTER IX.
fcrand debate at the general assembly of the
HouyhnhnmSf ami how it was determined.
The learning of the Houyhnhnms, Their
buildings. Their manner of burials, Tlie
defeetvoeness of their language.
MB of these grand assemblies was held \vt
y time, about three months before my de-
irtore, whither my master went as the re-
'esentative of our district. In this council
as resumed their old debate, and indeed
.e only debate that ever happened in their
tontry ; whereof my master, after his return,
we me a particular account.
The question to be debated was,'whether
e Yahoos should be exterminated from the
ce of the earth ?'One of the members for
e affinnitive offered several arguments of
eat strength and weight, alleging,'that as
e Yahoos were the most filthy, noisomcf,
id deformed animal which nature ever pro-
iced, so they were the most restiff and
dodble, misdiievous, and malicious ; they
ould privately sock the teats of the jETincy-
iAiuii#'cows, kill and devour their cats^
imple down tiieir oats and grass, if they
i
982 GVUAYKRS TRATtU.
were not continnally watched, and commit a
thousand other extravagancies/ He took
notice of a general tradition^'that Yahoos
had not been always in their country ; but
that many ages ago, two of these brutes ap-
peared together upon a mountain ; whether
produced by the heat of the sun upon cor-
rupted mud and slime, or from the ooze and
froth of the sea, was never known: that
these Yahoos engendered, and their brood,
in a short time, grew so numerous as to over-
run and infest the whole nation ; that the
Houyhnhnmsj to get rid of this evil, made a
general hunting, and at last enclosed the
whole herd ; and destroying tlie elder, eveiy
ffouyhnhnm kept two young ones in a ken-
nel, and brought them to a degree of tameness,
as an animal, so savage by nature, can be
capable of acquiring ; using them for drangfat
and carriage : that there seemed to be mnch
truth in this tradition, and that those crea-
tures could not be ylnhniamshy (or ahorigmn
of the land), because of the violent hatred
the HouyhnhnmSy as well as all other ani-
mals, bore them, which, although their evil
disposition sufficiently deserved, could never
have arrived at so high a degree, if they had
been aborigines; or else they would have
long since been rooted out : that the inhabi-
tants, taking a fancy to use the service of tlie
Yakoosy had very imprudently neglected to
cultivate the breed of asses, which are a
comely axmnaV, ea & VL^ V«.^v, \xk»c^ tame and
orderly, rnVhooX. asx^ oiS^iissLN^ ^\n!^\ ^o^sfis^
A TOYA6B TO THE HOUYHMHIIMS. 388
eDoagh for labour, although they yield to Uie
other, in agility of body ; and if their braying
be no agreeable sound, it is far preferable to
the horrible bowlings of the Yahoos.
Several others declared their sentiments to
tiie same purpose, when my master proposed
an expedient to the assembly, whereof he had
indeed borrowed the hint from me.'He
approved of the tradition mentioned by the
honourable member who spoke before, and
affirmed, that the two Yahoos said to be
seen first among them, had been driven thi-
ther over the sea ; that coming to land, and
being forsaken by their companions, they
retired to the mountains, and degenerating
by degress, became in process of time much
more savage than those of their own species
in the country whence these two originals
came. The reason of this assertion was, tliat
he had now in hb possession a certain won-
derful Yahoo (meaning myself) which most
of them had heard of, and many of them had
seen. He then related to them how he -first
found me; that my body was all covered
with an artificial composure of the skins and
hairs of other animals : that I spoke in a lan-
guage of my own, and had thoroughly learned
theirs ; that I had related to him the acci-
dents which had brought me thither ; that
when he saw me without my covering, I was
an exact Yahoo in every part, only of a
whiter colour, less hairy, and with shorter
dmws. He added, how I had endeavoured
to penoade faim, that in my own and other
ft84 01|LVTBR*S TRATBU.
omntries, the Ymko^ acted as tfate gttverniagi
rational animal, and held the Homyknhnmi
in aervitode ; that he observed in me all the
qualities of a YakoOy only a little more ci-
vilised by some tincture of reason, which,
however, was in a degree as far inferior tD
the H & ujfJmknm race, as the Yahoos of tlteir
ooontry were to me ; that among other things,
I mentioned a custom we had of castrating
Houyhnhnnu when they were jroong, in
order to render them tame ; that tiie opera-
tion was easy and safe ; that it was no shame
to learn wisdom from brutes, as industry is
taught by the ant, and builduig by the swaU
low (for so I translate the word fyhmmkf
although it be a much larger fowl); that
this invention might be practised upon the
younger Yahoos here, which besides ren-
dering them tractable and fitter for use,
would in an age put an end to Ae whole
species, without destroying life : that in the
mean time the Houyhnhnms should be ex-
horted to cultivate the breed of asses, which
as they are in all respects more valuable
brutes, so they have this advantage, to be fit
for service at five years old, which the others
are not till twelve/
This was all my master thought fit to tell
ine, at that time, of what paued in Uie grand
council. But he was pleased to conceal one
particular, which related personally to myself
whereof I soon felt the unhappy effect, as
the reader will know in its proper place, and
whence I data a & itlie smoceedfaig mirfiirtqim
of my life.
A VOTAOB TO THS HODTHMHHIII. tSC
The Homgftnlmnu lw*e do letten, and
rousequeDtly theii knowledge i« all lra <
ditioml. But there happening few event!
of any moiueut Mnoog a people so well united,
natoraUy disposed to every Tirtae, whollj
goTenled bj'reaion, and cat off from all
cauninercc with other oations ; the faiitorical
part li eaiily preaerred wilhoat bartliening
their memoriei. I have already obserred
diat they are aabject to no diaeatea, and
therefore can have no need of phyiiciani.
However, they have excellent medidnea, contr
poted of herbs, to care acddental bmiaei and
GUti in die pastern or frog of the foot, by
•harp ktonea, as well aa other maima and
barla ia Uie leveral parts of the body.
They ealcnlate the year by the revolatlon
of the san and the moon, bat nse no sabdi.
TltJous into weeks. They are well enongfa
acquainted with the motions of thoae two
Inaiinaries and understand the nalnre of
eclipses ; and this la the utmost progress of
their astronomy.
In poetry, they must be allowed to excel
all odier inortids ; wherein the jostneas oif
their similea, and the ntiDDteneu as well as
exactness of their descriptions, are indeed
Inimitable. Their verses abound veiy much
in both of these, and niually contwn either
•ome exalted notions of friendship and be <
neTdenee, or the praises of those who were
Tictors in races and other bodily exercbet.
Their lHdldlnis,altiiougb very rude and ilmple,
are Mt iBooorenitnt, but well coatxlvcd to
386 GULLITBIt's TRAYKLS
to defend them from all iujmies of coldaDd
heat. They have a kind of tree, which at
ibrty years old loosens in the root, and foils
with the first storm ; it grows very straight,
and being pointed like stakes with a sharp
stone (for the Houyhnknms know not the
use of iron), they stick them erect in the
ground, about ten inches asunder, and then
weave-in oat straw, or sometimes wattles,
between them. The roof is made after the
same manner, and so are the doors.
The Houyhnknms use the hollow part,
between the pastern and the hoof of their
fore-foot, as we do our hands, and this with
greater dexterity than I could at first imagine.
I have seen a white mare of our family thread
a needle (which I lent her on purpose) with
that joint. They milk their cows, reap their
oats, and do all the work which requires
hands, in the same manner. They have a
kind of hard flints, which, by grinding against
other stones, they form into instruments, that
serve instead of wedges, axes, and hammers.
With tools made of these flints, they likewise
cut their hay, and reap their oats, which
there grow naturally in several fields ; .the
Yahoos draw home the sheaves in carriages,
and the servants tread them in certain co-
vered huts, to get out the grain, which is kept
in stores. They make a rude Idnd of earthen
and wooden vessels, and bake the former in
the sun.
If they can avoid casualties, they die only
of old age, and are buried in tiie obscurest
A T0TA6C TO THB HOUYBMRirMS. tST
Bces that can be found, their friends and
lations expressing neitiber joy nor grief at
eir departure ; nor does the dying person
icover the least regret that he is leaving
e world, any more than if he were npon
turning home from a visit to one of his
ighbours. I remember my master having
ce made an appointment vrith a friend and
^ family to come to his house, npon some
air of importance : on the day fixed, the
stress and her two children came very late ;
e made two excuses, first for her husband,
10, as she said, happened that very morning
Ihnuumh, The word is strongly expres-
e in their language, but not easily ren-
red into English ; it signifies, * to retire to
> first mother/ Her excuse for not coming
mer, was, that her husband dying late in
i morning, she was a good while consulting
r servants about a convenient place where
body should be laid ; and I observed, slie
baved herself at our house as cheerfully as
i rest : she died about three months after,
rhey live generally to seventy, or seventy-
e years, very seldom to fourscore : some
eks before their death, they feel a gradual
»y ; but without pain. During this time
sy are much visited by their friends, be-
ise they cannot go abroad with their usual
e and satisfaction. However, about ten
n before their death, which they seldom
in computing, they return the visits that
re been made them by those who are
trest in the neighbourhood, being carried
\
ip a oMiTeoient sledge drmwn by Yahoot ;
wb & di Yehicle they uie, not ODly npon this
oocaiion, but when they grow old, npon kmg
jovneys, or when they are lamed by any
acddeat: and therefore when the dying
Mo'mfhnknnu return those Tisits, they take
m soiemn leave of their friends, as if they
were going to some remote part of the coun-
try, where they designed to pass the rest ol
their lives.
I know not whether it may be worth ob-
sendng, that the Houyhnknnu have no word
in their language to express any thing that
is evil, except what they borrow from the
deformities or ill qualitiei of the Yahoos.
Thus they denote the folly of a servant, an
omis & ion of a child, a stone that cuts their
feet, a continuance of foul or unseasouable
weather, and the lilie, by adding to each the
epithet uf Yahoo, for instance, khnm Yahoo ;
whnaholm Yahoo^ ynlhmndwihlma Yahoo,
and an iil-coutrived house ynholnUmmroklnm
Yahoo,
I could, with great pleasure, enlarge fur-
ther upon t)ie manners and virtues of this
excellent people ; but intending in a short
time to publish a volume by itself, expressly
upon that subject, I refer the reader tliither ;
and, in the mean time, proceed to relate my
own sad catastrophe.'
L VOIAGE TO THX HOliyHHHHIII, 2W
CHAPTER X.
n* JiOkeT'i ecmuma/, and kappif Jj/ic, am»»g
th* Hon^Anhnnj. Hit great imprmemgtt
in rirtue £y conrn-riiv i«/A than. TMr
cmTtTvaiimi. The Author hai notice gict»
him bi/ hii mastrr, that Ac niM dfparf from
the tonnlry. He falls intoatieiMnifoT gri^ ;
but tvhmitt, lie cantriies andjinukes a ca-
noe by the help ^f a fellow-tervant, andpuii
to tea at a tenttiTe.
I BAD settled my little economy to my own
leirfa conteot. My maiter had ordered a
'Oam to be made for me, aiier their manneT,
ibout NX yards from the house : tbe sides
md floors of which 1 plastered with clay, and
Mreredwith rush-mati of my own contriving;
I had beaten hemp, which there grows wild,
md made of it a sort of ticking ; this I filled
vltfa the feathers of several birds I had taken
irith spiinges made of Yalioei'hair, and
'were excellent food. I had worked two
iburs with my linife, the sorrel nag helping
Be in the grosaer and more labonaas part.
(Then my clothes were woin to rags, I made
ii raaUy In olha rewtfli ; t
SM Gulliver's travels.
myself others with the skms of rabbits, and
of a certain beautiful animal, about the same
size, called nnuhnoh, the skin of which is
covered with a fine down. Of these I also
Blade very tolerable stockings. I soled my
shoes with wood, which I cut from a tree,
and fitted to the upper-leather ; and when
this was worn out, I supplied it with the skins
of Yahoos dried in the sun. I otlten got ho-
ney out of hollow trees, which I mingled with
water, or ate with my bread. No man could
more verify the truth of these two maxims,
'That nature is very easily satisfied ;'and
'That necessity is the mother of invention.'
I enjoyed perfect health of body and tran-
quility of mind ; I did not feel the treachery
or inconstancy of a friend, nor the injuries of
a secret or open enemy. I had no occasion
of bribing, flattering, or pimping, to pro-
cure the favour of any great man, or of hb
minion. I wanted no fence against fraud or
oppression : here was neither physician to
destroy my body, nor lawyer to ruin my for-
tune ; no informer to watoh my words and
actions, or forge accusations against me for
hire : here were no gibers, censurers, back-
biters, pickpockets, highwaymen, house-
breakers, attorneys, bawds, buffoons, game-
sters, politidans, wits, splenetics, tedious
talkers, controvertists, ravishers, murderers,
robbers, virtuosos ; no leaders, or followers,
of party and faction ; no enconragers to vice,
by seducement or examples; no dungeon,
Vies, gibbets, whipping-posts, or pillories;
A TOVAOE TO THB ROUVilHHNNI. UI
cheating ihopkeepers or mechmnict ; im
ide, vanity, orifiectatioD; no fops, baUiea,
uokBrds, atroUing nbores, or poiei ; no
nting, lend, cipenure wirei ; no itapid,
oudpcdanti; no importunate, oierbearitig,
larrelsome, niHsy, roaring, empty, conceited ,
itaring aunpanioni; do Bcoiindrela railed
om the daiit apon the merit of their vices,
nobility thrown into it on accoant of theit
rtuei; no lordi, fid dlen, judges, or dancing-
I had Ihe favour of being admitted to ae-
tral HoKyhnhnmi, who came to viiit or
ioe with my master ; where hii honour
racioD^ly suffered me to wait in the roopi,
ad liitea to their discoune. Both he and
ii company would often descend to uk me
aestioni, and receive my answers. I had
bo sometimes the honour of attending my
laster in hii lisita to others, I never pre-
imed to speak, except in answering to a
aeition ; and then I did It with inward
igret, because it was a loss of so much time
ir improving myself: but I was inGoitely
elighted with tiie station of an bumble andi-
ir in such conversations, where nothing
MMd bnt nliBt was naefn], expressed Id the
swest and most significant words : vihere,
* I have already said, die greatest decency
ra* olxerred, without die Jeast degree of
nemony; wtiera no penon spoke without
«lBf pleated himself, and pleasin^hls com-
lanioDs ; wliere diere was do intermption,
mUooiiib**, heat, or difference of sentiment).
1
802 oullitbr's f ravels.
«
They have a notion, that when people are
met togetiier, a short silence does mach im-
prove conversation : this I found to be trae;
for during tiiose little intermissions of talk,
new ideas would arise in their miuds, which
very much enlivened the discourse. Their
subjects are generally on friendship and be-
nevolence, on order and economy ; sometimes
upon the visible operations of nature, or an-
cient traditions ; upon the bounds and limits
of virtue ; upon the unerring rules of reason,
or upon some determinations to be taken at
the next great assembly ; and often upon the
various excellencies of poetry. I may add,
without vanity, that my presence often gave
them sufficient matter for discourse, because
it afforded my master an occasion of letting
his friends into the history of me and my
country, upon which they were all pleased to
descant, in a manner not very advantageons
to humankind : and for that reason I shall
not repeat what they said : only I may be
allowed to observe, that his honour, to my
great admiration, appeared to understand
the nature of Yahoos much better than my-
self. He went through all our vices and fol-
lies, and discovered many, which I had never
mentioned to him, by only supposing what
qualities a Yahoo of their country, with a
small proportion of reason, might be capable
of exerting ; and concluded, with too much
probability,'how vile as well as miserable
such a creature must be.'
J freely confess, \3ci^X ^W Vk^ \\\!(\r, \Kaai«-
A VOYAGE TO THE IIOVYHNHNMS.'t98
Ige I have of any value, w^ acquired by
e lectures I received from my master, and
)m hearing the discourses of him and his
ends ; to which I should be prouder to
ten, than to dictate to the greatest and
sest assembly in Europe. I admired the
-ength, comliness, and speed of the inhabi-
nts ; and such a constellation of virtues, in
ch amiable persons, produced in me the
l^est veneration. At first, indeed, I did
t feel that the natural awe, which Ya-
ot and all other animals bear toward them ;
t it grew upon me by degrees, much sooner
an I imagined, and was mingled with a
ipectful love and gratitude, that they would
adescend to distinguish me from the rest
my species.
When I thought of my family, my friends,
f countrymen, or the human race in gene-
I, I considered them, as they really were,
thoos in shape and disposition, perhaps a
tie more civilised, and qualified with the
It of speech ; but making no other use of
ason, than to improve and multiply tiiose
ies, whereof their brethren in this country
d only the share that nature allotted them,
hen I happened to behold the reflection of
r own form in a lake or fountain, I turned
'ay my face in horror and detestation of
rielf ; and could better endure the sight of
sommon YahoOj Ihfm of my own person
r conversing vnth & e Hauyjki^hnmsy and
(king upon them with delight, I fell to
itate their gait and gesture^ which is now
t94 OULLIT BR'S TR a TBLt.
grown into a habit; and my fiiends oAei
teU me, in a blnnt way, < that I trot like «
horse ;* which however, I take for a great
compliment : neitiier shall I disown, that in
speaiking I am apt to fall into the Yoioe and
manners of the Hou^hnhnmty and hear mj-
•elf ridicoled on that aoconnt« without the
{ the least mortification.
*| In the midst of all this happiness,'and
i when I looked upon myself to be fully settled
for life, my master sent for me one morning
a little earlier tiian his nsoal hour. I observed
by his coontenance tiiat he was in some per-
plexity, and at a loss how to begin what he
had to'speak. After a short silence, he told
me'he did not know how I would take what
he was going to say : that in the last general
assembly, when the affair of the Yahoos was
entered upon, the representatives had taken
offence at his keeping a Yakoo (meaning my-
self) in his family, more like a Houyhnknm
than a brute animal ; that he was known fre-
quently to converse with me, as if he oonU
receive some advantage or pleasure in my
company ; that such a practice was not agree-
able to reason or nature, or a thing ever heard
of before among them ; the assembly did there-
fore exhort him either to employ me like the
rest of my species, or command me to swim
back to the place whence I came : that the
first of these expedients was utterly rejected
by all the Houyhnknms who had ever seen
me at his house or their own ; for they alleged,
that became I had some rudiments of reasoii^
A TOYAGB TO THB HOUTHNHNMS. 805
added to the natural grayity of those animals,
it was to be feared I might be able to seduce
them into the woody and mountainous parts
of the conntry, and bring them in troops by
night to destroy the Houyhnhnnu* cattle, as
being naturally of the ravenous lund, and
averse from labour.
My master added,'that he was daily
pressed by the Houyknhnms of the neigh-
bourhood, to have the assembly's exhortation
executed, which he could not put off muclk
longer. He doubted it would be impossible
for me to swim to another country ; and there-
fore wished I would contrive some sort of ve-
hicle, resembling those I had described to
him, that might carry me on the sea; in which
work I should have the assistance of his own
servants, as well as those of his neighbours.'
He concluded,'that for his own part, he
could have been content to keep me in his
service as long as I lived ; because he found 1
had cured myself of some bad habits and dis-
positions, by endeavouring, as far as my infe-
rior nature was capable, to imitate the Houy^
hnhnms,
I should here observe to the reader, that a
decree of the general assembly in this country,
is expressed by the word hnhloayn, which
signifies an exhortation, as near as I can ren-
der it: for they have no conception how a
rational creatnre can be compelled, but only
advised, or exhorted; because no person can
disobey reason, without giving up his dium to
be a rational creature.
t96 GULLITER's TRAVBLt.
I was struck with the utmost grief and
despair at my master's discourse ; and being
unable to support the agonies I was under, I
leii iuto a swoon at his feet. When I came
to myself, he told me ^that he concluded I
had been dead ;'for these people are subject
to no such imbecilities of nature. I answered
fai a faint voice, * tliat death would have been
too great a happiness : that although I could
not blame the assembly's exhortation, or the
urgency of his friends ; yet, in my weak and
corrupt judgment, I thought it might consist
with reason to have been less rigorous : that
I conld not swim a league, and probably the
nearest land to theirs might be distant above
a hundred : that many materials, necessary
for making a small vessel to carry me off,
were wholly wanting in this country ; which,
however, I would attempt, in obedience and
gratitude to his honour, altiiough I concluded
the thing to be inapossible, and therefore
looked on myself as already devoted to de-
struction : that the certain prospect of an un-
natural death was the least of my evils ; for,
supposing I should escape with life by tome
strange adventure, how could I think with
temper of passing my days among YahooSf
anfl relapsing into my old corruptions, for
want of examples to lea;d and keep me within
the paths of virtue : that I knew too well upon
what solid reasons all the determinati < Mas of
the wise Houyhnhnnu were founded, not to
be shaken by arguments of ndne, a miserable
Yahoo ; and tVi^T^foi^) v^x V^ctAooliiif Iubi
vitb my humble thanks for the otter of his
wrvanls'assistance in making a lessel, and
desiring a reasonable time for bo difficult k
work, 1 tolJhim Inouldenileavour to preserve
. a nrelched being ; and if ever 1 returned to
Eogtand, was not withouthopes of being useful
to m]'own species, by celebrating the praiiei
of the renowned Houyhnhnrnt, and proposing
My master, in a few words, made me a
Tecy gracious reply; allowed me the space of
two montlis to finish my boat; and ordered
the sorrel nag, my fellow-servant (for lo at
this distance I may presume to call him), to
follow my instrucfioQ ; because I told my mas-
ter,'that bis help would be sufficient, and I
knew be bad a tenderness for me.'
In bis company, my first business was to
go to that part of the coast where my rebel-
Uous crew had ordered me to be set on shore.
I got upon a height, and looking on every
side into the sea, landed I saw a small island
toward the north-east: I took oat my pocket
glass, and could then clearly distinguish It
about five leagues ott " , as I computed ; but it
appeared to the sorrel nag to be only a blue
elond : for as he had no conception of any
country beside bis own, so he could not be as
expert in distinguishing remote objects at sea,
ft we who have so much ctaverse'in that
[element.
:M8 gulliter*s travsu/
After I had ducoTered this bhmd, I coil-
■idered no further ; bat resolved it should, if
possible, be the first place of my banishment,
leaving the consequence to fortune.
I returned home^ and consulting witii tiie
sorrel nag, we went into a copse at some dis-
tance, where I ¥ritfa my knife, and he with a
sharp flint fastened very artificially aft^r their
manner to a wooden handle, cut down several
oak wattles, about the thickness^of a walking
staff, and some larger pieces. * But I shall
not trouble the reader with a particular de-
scription of my own mechanics ; let it suffice
to say, that in six weeks'time, with the help
of the sorrel nag, who performed the parts
that required most labour, I finished a sort of
Indian canoe, but much larger, covering it
with the skins of Yahoos^ well stitched toge-
ther with hempen threads of my own making.
My sail was likewise composed of the skins of
the sanse animal; but I made use of the
youngest I could get, the older being too
tough and thick ; and 1 likewise provided my-
self with four paddles. I laid in a stock of
boiled flesh, of rabbits and fowb ; and took
with me two vessels, one filled with milk and
the other with water.
I tried my canoe in a large pond, near my
master's house, and then corrected in it what
was amiss ; stopping all the chinks withTaAoof
tallow, till I found it staunch, and able to
bear me and my freight; and, when it was
as complete as I could possibly make it, I
had it dMLNvn on a caxva^^ ^erj ^\i^ Xs^
A VOTAi»B TO THE UOUYBNUNM8. W^
'ahoos to the sea-side, uuder the condact of
le sorrel nag and another servant.
When all was ready, and the day came for
ly departure, I took ieave of my master and
idy and the whole family, my eyes flowing
ith tears, and my heart quite sunk with
rief. But his honoar, oat of curiosity, and
erhaps (if I may speak it without vanity)
artly out of kindness, was determined to
se me in my canoe ; and got several of liis
eighbonring friends to accompany him. I
ras forced to wait above an hour for the tide,
nd then observing the wind very fortunately
earing toward the island to whicli I intended
D steer my course, I took a second leave of
ly master : bot as I was going to prostrate
lyself to Idss bis hoof, he did me tlie honour
raise it gently to my month. I am not ig-
lorant how much I have been censured for
nentioning this last particular. Detractors
jre pleased to think it improbable, that so
iiustriotts a person should descend to give so
nreat a mark of distinction to a creature so
oferior as I. Neither have I forgotten how
.pt some tTdvellers are to boast of extraordi-
lary favours they have received. But, if
hese censurers were better acquainted with
he noble and courteous disposition of the
^(myhnhnms, they would soon change their
•pinion.
I paid my respects to the rest of the Houy'
mhnmM in his honour's company ; then getting
nto my canoe, I pushed off from shore.
\
400 Gulliver's travels.
CHAPTER XI.
The Author's dangerous toyage. He arrites et
New HoUandy hoping to settle there. Is
wounded with an arrow by one of the nathes.
Is seized and carried by force into a Portu-
guese ship. The great civilities of the cap»
tain. The Author arrites at England,
I BEGAN this desperate voyage on February
15, 1714-15, at nine o'clock in the morning.
The wind was veiy favourable ; hov^ever, I
made use at first only of my paddles ; but
considering I should soon be veeary, and that
the wind might chop about, I ventured to set
up my little sail ; and thus, with the help of
the tide, I went at the rate of a league and a
half an hour, as near as I could guess. My
master and his friends continued on the shore
till I was almost out of sight; and I often
heard the sorrel nag (who always loved me)
crying out, * Hnuyilla nyha majah Yahoo;'
* Take care of thyself, gentle Yahoo,'
My design was, if possible, to discover
some small island uninhabited, yet sufficient
by my labour to furnish me witii the necessa-
ries of life, which I would have thought a
greater happiness, than to be first minister in
the politMt court of Europe ; so horrible was
the idea I conceived of returning to live in
the society, and under the government of
Yahoos. For in such a solitude as I desired,
I could at least enjoy my own thoughts, and
▲ YOYAGB TO THE UOUYUNHNMS. 401
Kflect with delight on the Tirtues of those
liiditable Houyhnhnmsy withont an oppor-
inity of degeuerating into the vices and
orniptions of my own species.
The reader may remember what I related,
rhen my crew conspired against me, and
onfined me to my cabin; how I continued
here several weeks withoot knowing what
oarse we took ; and when I was pat ashore
a the long-boat, how the sailors told me with
»ath8, whether true or false, * that they knew
lot in what part of the world we were.*
iiowever, I did then believe ns to be about
lO degrees southward of the Cape of Good
Hlope, or about 45 degrees southern latitude,
IS I gathered from some general words I
»verheard among them, being I supposed to
he south east in their intended voyage to
Madagascar. And although this were little
)etter than conjecture, yet I resolved to steer
ny course eastward, hoping to reach the
iouth-west coast of New Holland, and per*
laps some such island as I desired lying west
Rrard of it. The wind was inll west, and by
fix in the evening I computed 1 had gone
eastward at least eighteen leagues; when I
tpied a very small island about half a league
iff, which I soon reached. It was not bins;
but a rock, with one creek naturally arclied
by the force of tempests. Here I put in my
sanoe, and climbing a part of the rock, I
could plainly discover land to the east, ex-
tending from south to north. I lay all night
in my canoe; and repeating my voyage early
402 GULLIVER*S TRAVELS.
in the morDing, I arrived in seven hours to
the south-east point of New Holland. This
confirmed me in the opinion I have long en-,
tertaincd, that the maps and charts place thii
country at lea^t three degrees more to the
east than it r«ally is ; which thought I com-
municated many years ago to my worthy
friend, Mr. Herman Moll, and gave him my
reasons for it, although he has rather chosen
to follow other authors.
I Skw no inhabitants in tlie place where I
landed, and being unarmed, I was afraid of
venturing far into the country. I found some
shell-fish on the shore, and ate them raw, not
daring to kindle a fire, for fear of being dis^
covered by the natives. I continued three
days feeding on oysters and limpets, to save
my own provision ; and I fortunately foond
a brook of excellent water, which gave m^
great relief.
On the fourth day, venturing out early a
little too far, I saw twenty or thirty natives
upon a height not above five hundred yards
from me. They were stark naked, men^
women, and children, round a fire, as I could
discover by the smoke. One of them spied
me, and gave notice to the rest ; five of them
advanced toward me, leaving the women and
ciiiUhen at the fire. I made what baste I
could to the shore, and, getting into my canoe,
shoved off: the savages, observing me retreat,
ran after me; and before I could get far
euou^ into the sea, discharged an arrow,
which wounded m^ d^^\i\^ v^vl > ^v^ vQ & & si & «f
A VOYAGK TO THE HOUTHNBNM8. 40S
ly left knee : I shall c^rry the mark to my
taye. I appreheiided the arrow might be
loisoned, and paddling out of the reach of
heir darts'(being a calm day,) I made a shift
suck the wound, and dress it as well as I
ould. «
I was at a loss wbat to do, for I durst not
etum to the same landing-place, but stood
the north, and was forced to paddle ; for
be wind, though very gentle, was against me^
(lowing north-west. As I was looking about
or a secure landing-place, I saw a sail to
he north- north-east, which appearing every
ainute more visible, I was in some doubt
vhether I should wait for them or not; but
it last my detestation of the Yahoo race pre-
vailed ; and turning my canoe, I sailed and
saddled towards the south, and got into the
ame creek whence I set out in the morning,
hoosing rather to ti'ust myself among these
»arbarians, than live with European Yakoos,
'. drew up my canoe as close as I could to the
hore, and hid myself behind a stone by the
ittle brook, which, as I have already said,
ras excellent water.
The ship came within half a league of this
reek, and sent her long-boat with vcsseU
o take in fresh water (for the place, it seems,
vas very well known ;) but I did not observe
t, till the boat was almost on shore ; and it
vas too late to seek another hiding-place,
rfae seamen at their landing observed my
anoe, and rummaging it all over, easily con^
e€tared that the owner could not be far off.
{
404 guLliter*s tratkls.
Four of tfaeniy well armed^ searcaed ererj
craimy and laridfig-holey till at last fhey fomid
oh: flat on my face behind the atone. They
gazed awhile in admiration at ray strange
nocooth dress : my coat made of skins, my
wooden-soled shoes, and my iiirred stockings;
whence, however, they concluded, I was not
a native of the place, who all go naked.] One
of the seamen, in Portuguese, bid me rise,
and asked who I was. I understood thst
language very well, and getting apon my feet,
said,'I was a poor Yahoo banished from the
Houyhnhnmt, and desired they would please
to let me depart.'They admired to hear me
answer them in their own tongue, and saw by
my complexion 1 must be a European; hot
were at a loss to know what I meant by
Yahoos and Houyhnhnnu: and at the same
time fell a laughing at my strange tone in
speaking, which resembled the neighing of a
horse. I trembled'all the while betwixt fear
and hatred. I again desired leave to depart
and was gentiy moving to my canoe : but
they laid hold of me, desiring to know, * what
country I was of? whence I came?* with ma-
ny other questions. I told them'I was bom
in England, whence I came about five years
ago, and then their country and ours wefe at
peace. I therefore hoped they would not
treat me as an enemy, .since I meant them no
harm; but was a poor Yahoo seekiug some
desolate place where to pass the remainder
of his unfortunate life.'
When they began to talk, I thought I never
heRrd or saw any thing mure luuiBtari) ; for it
appeared to Die as monstruoas as If a dog (v
a cow sLuuld tpeak in England, or a Yahao in
HcKyhKhnmland. The honeat PortagoeM
were ec|iia]ly amazed at my itrvoge dreii, and
the odd manner of delivering my norda,
which hwcver they underatood veiy welL
They spoke to nie with great humanity, and
(aid,'they were sure the caplwn would carry
me graiii to Liibon, whence I might return
to my own country; that two of the seamen
would go back to the -«hip, inform the captain
of what they had seen, and receive hiiorden;
1q the mean time, DnleEs I would give mj
Miemu oath not to fly, they would secure me
by force.'I thought it best to comply wiUl
their propotal. They were very curious to
know niy story, but I gave them very littla
salistactiou, and they all conjectured that my
miifortuues had impxired my reason. In tw«
hours the boat, which went luadea with ves-
sels of wnter, returned, with the captaio's
command to feich me on buud. I fell on mj
knees to preserve me. liberty ; but all was la
vaiui and the men, hating tied me with
cords, he;ived me into the boat, whence 1 was
taken into the ehip, and thence into the C8p >
tain's cabin.
His name was Pedro do Meudez; hewaia
very conrteons and generous person. He
entreated ni: to give some account of myself
■nd desired to know what I would eat or
drink; «aid,'I should be osed as well as
HiBtelf;'aiul spoke w manj ohUiJLnitbwfF,
406 odluter's travels.
tiiat I wondered to find sach civilittes from a
Yahoo, However, I remained sUent and sul-
len : I was ready to faint at the very smell of
him and his men. At last I desired some-
thing to eat out of my own canoe ; but he or-
dered me a chicken, and some excellent wine,
and then directed that I should be put to
bed in a very dean cabin. I would not im-
dress myself, but lay on the bed-clothes, and
in half an hour stole out, when I thought the
crew was at dinner, and getting to the side of
tiie sliip, was going to leap into the sea, and
swim for my life, rather than continue among
Yahoos. But one of the seamen preyented
me, and having informed the captain, I was
chained to my cabin.
After dinner, Don Pedro came to me, and
desired to know my reason for so desperate
an attempt; assured me,'he only meant to
do me all the serrice he was able ;'and spoke
so very movingly, that at last I descended to
treat him like an animal which had some little
portion of reason. I gave him a very short
relation of my voyage; of the conspiracy
against me by my own men ; of the country
where they set me on shore, and of my fi?e
years* residence there ; all which he looked
upon as if it were a dream or a vision ; where-
at I took great offence ; for I had quite forgot
the faculty of lying, so peculiar to Yahoos, in
all countries where they preside, and, con5te-
quently, the disposition of suspecting truth in
others of their own species. I asked him,
* whetheT vt waA i^^ c»«v & \sk va his country to
A VOYAGE TO THE HOUYHNHNMS. 40T
say the thing which was not? I assured him,
^ I had almost forgot what he meant by false-
hood, and if I had lived a thousand years in
Uouylmhnmlandy I siiouid never have heard
a lie from the meanest servant ; that I was
altoi^thor indifferent whether he believed me
or not ; bat, however, in retom for his Ik-
TOUTS, I wonld ^ve so much allowance to the
corruption of his nature, as to answer any ob-
jection he might please to make, and then he
might easily discover the truth.*
The captain, a wise man, after many en-
deavours to catch me tripping in some part of
my story, at last began to have a better opi-
nion of my veracity. But he added,'that
since I professed so inviolable an attachment
to truth, I must give him my word and honour
to bear him company in this voyage, without
attempting any thing against my life ; or else
he would continue me a prisoner till we
arrived at Lisbon.* I gave hun the promise
he required ; but at the same time protested,
'that I would suffer the greatest hardships,
rather than return to live among Yahoos.*
Our voyage passed wltliout any considera-
ble accident. In gratitude to the captain, I
sometimes sat with him at his earnest request
and strove to conceal my antipathy against
human kind, although it often broke out;
which he suffered to pass without observation.
But the greatest part of the day I confined
myself to my cabin, to avoid seeing any of the
crew. The captain had often entreated me
to strip myself of my savage dress, and offer*
!
406 guluyer's travels.
ed to lend me the best salt of clothes lie had.
This I would not be prerailed on to accept,
abhorring to cover myself with any thing that
had been on the back of a Yahoo. I only
desired he woold lend me two clean shirti,
which, having been washed since be wore
them, I believed would not so much defile me.
These I changed every second di^, and wash-
ed them myself.
We arrived at Lisbon, Nov. 5, 1715. At
onr landing, the captain forced me to cover
myself with his cloak, to prevent the rabble
from crowding about me. I was conveyed to
his own house ; and at my earnest request he
led me up to the highest room backwards. I
conjured bun'to conceal from all persons
what 1 had told hun of the Honyhnhnm;
because the least hint of such a story would
not only draw numbers of people to see me,
but probably put me in danger of being im-
prisoned, or burnt by the inquisition.^ The
captain pursuaded me to accept a suit of
clothes newly made ; but I would not suffer
the tailor to take my measure : however, Don
Pedro being almost of my size, they fitted me
well enough. He accoutred me with other
necessaries all new, which I aired for twenty
four hours before I would use them.
The captain had no wife, nor above three
servants, none of which were suflfered to at-
tend at meals ; and his whole deportment was
so obliging, added to very good human under-
standing, that I really began to tolerate bis
company . He ^mvxciOl ^o it« \v > ^««k \s«,^ > & ai l
A VOVAQB TO TUB HOtlYHNIIHHS. 409
T«Dtnrci] to look oDtoftlic back window. By
degrees I was bronght iota anotlier loota,
whence I peeped into the street, bat drew
my head back io a fright. In a week'* tune
he seduced me down to the door. I found
my terror gradaally leBsened, bat my hatred
and contempt seemed to encrease. I was at
last bold eoougb to walk the street in Ms com-
pany, but kept my Doae well stopped with
rue, or aomelimes with tabacco.
In ten days, Don Pedro, to whom I had
^TeD some account of my domestic affairs,
put it upon me, as » matter of honour and
conscience,'that 1 aught to return to my na-
tive coontry, and live at home witti my wife
and children.'He told me,'there was an
English ship in the port jo^t ready to sail,
and he wonid famish me with all things ne-
cessary.'It would be tedious to repeat his
argnments, and my contradictions. He said,
it was altogBther impossible to find such a
•olitary island as I desired to live in; but I
might command in my own house, and pus
iny time in a manner as recluse as I pleased.'
I complied at last, finding I eonid not do
better. 1 left Lisbon the 31th day of Novem
ber, in an English merchantmen, bnt who was
Ac master I never inquired. Don Pedro
accompanied me to the ship, and lent me
twenty ponnds. He took kind leave of me,
and embraced me at parting, which I bore as
well B« I conld. Dating this last voyage 1
had no commerce with the master or any of
'his men; bat, pretending I was lick, kept
410 gulliybr's tratels.
dose iiTmy cabin. On the fifth of December
1716, we cast anchor in the Downs, about
nine in the morning, and at three in the after-
noon I got safe to my house at Redriff.
My wife and family received me with great
surprise and joy, because they concluded me
certainly dead; but I must freely confess the
sight of them filled me only with hatred,
disgust, and contempt; and the more, by
reflecting on the near alliance I had to them.
For although, since my unfortunate exile from
the Houyhnhnm country, I had compelled
myself to tolerate the sight of YahooSy and to
converse with Don Pedro de Mendez, yet my
memory and imagination were perpetually
filled with the virtues and ideas of those ex-
alted Houyhnhnnii, And when I began to
consider that, by copulating with one of the
Yahoo species, I had become a. parent of more,
it struck me with the utmost shame, confusion,
and horror.
As soon as I entered the house, my wife
took me in her arms, and kissed me ; at which,
having not been used to the touch of that
odious animal for so many years, I fell into a
swoon for almost an hour. At Uie time I am
writing, it is five years since my last return
to Elngland : during the first year, I could not
endure my wife or children in my presence ;
the very smell of them was intolerable ; much
less could I suffer them to eat in the same
room. To this hour they dare not presume
to touch my bread, or drink out of the same
cup^ neitheT wa.% 1 e^er able to let one of
A VOTAaiTOTHKITODVHHHNX*. 4ll
Aen take me by the hnnd. " Hie 4rat money
I laid oat was to bay two yoang ■taae-boriei,
which I keep in a good aUible; and next to
UleiD, tbe groom is my grealest favoiirite ; for
I feel my ipirits revived by the imell he con-
tracts in the stable. My honea understand
me tolerably well; I converse with them at
least ibnr hours every day. They are atran-
ger < to bridle or saddle; they live in great
mmity with me, and tnendship to each othet .
CHAPTER XII.
Tkt Autkor'i venuity. Hit deiigH ta pttUUh'
ing thit uorft. HU censure 0/ thuie (ratd-
Urt who menefram the trvth. Tht Authiir
clean kiwuclf from aw) iJNUtcr e»dt ia icri'
(iRj-. Ax D^'fcftait tmatfTiit. The method
0/ planliiig toUmiti. His natire country
connmifed. The Tight of the crown to those
emntries ieicribtd by the Author, ii justified.
The difficidty of conqnmitf thtm. Tht An-
tA«r takts hit last lean of tht rtader ; pro.
ftaes hit maniuT of lidng for tht futurtt
ghxs good BdBice, mad cmcludes.
Tavf, gentle reader, I have given Ibee a
ftitlif^ hiitory of my travels for sixteen yeara
■nd above seven months ; wherein I have nut
been so itadioaa of ornament u of trulh. I
coaM, peiiiape, like ofliera, have aitonlahed
ibnt with iliange improbable tales; bat I
nthar cboie to relate plain matter of fvst. In
4lt ouurrsft'j taatus. x
tiM ifanplett mumer and ftyle; ^eent%mj
principal design was to inform, and nol ti
amue thee.
It is easy for as who trayel into remote
countries, wliich are seldom yisited by En-
glishmen or other Europeans, to form dei-
criptions of wonderful animals lK > th at sea
and land. Whereas a traveller's cliief aim
should be to make men wiser and better, and
to improve their minds by the bad, as well »
good example, of what they deliver concern-
iog foreign places.
I could heartily wish a law was enacted,
that every traveller, before ho were permit-
ted to publish his voyages, should be obliged
to make oath before the Lord High Ciuin*
eellor, that all he intended to print was abso-
lutely true to the best of his knowledge ; for
tlicn the world would no longer be deceived,
as it usually is, while some writers, to make
their works pass the better upon'the public,
impose the grossest falsities on the unwajry
reader. I have pursued several books ot
travels with great delight in my younger days ;
but having since gone over most parts of the
globe, and been able to contradict many fabu-
lous accounts from my own observation, it
has given me a great disgust against this part'
of reading, and some indignation to see the
credulity of mankind so impudently abused.:
Therefore,since my acquaintance were pleased
to think my poor endeavours might not b &
unacceptable to my country, I imposed on'
myself as 21 ma^uxa ikfi^^x \AW% > R«cH^^^ < caB^.
i. TovisB TO TBI BDmrBMSffm. 4ii
Ibat I nould atrktly adhere to trntli ; oeitber
indeed can I be ever nader the least templa-
tioD to vary from it, while I retain in mj
tnind tbe lectures and eiaoiple of my noble
master and tbe other illnstiiousHbuyAn/iRni,
of whom 1 had so long the iiononr to be an
hnmble bearer
Ntc ti mtuntm Fortmma Simmem
Finxil, ciMNnt ctian, mendaccynqut iatproba
I know very well, how little repalation Ii
to be got by writiogs, whidi require nelthet
genius nor learning, nor indeed any other
talent except a good memory, or an exact
jonmal. I know likewiEe, that writers of
traTets, like dictionaiy-makers, are sunk ialo
oblivion by the weight and bulk of those wiio
come last, and therefore lie uppermost. Aud
it is highly probable, that such travellers, who
ihall hereafter visit the countries deicribed
In this work of mine, may, by detecting my
erron (if there be any) and adding many
new discoveries of their own, justle me ont
of vogne, and stand in my place, making the
world foi^et that ever I was sa author. Tbia
indeed would be too great a mortificadun, if
1 wrote for fame : but aa my sole iulention
wn* flie public good, I cannot be altogether
disappointed. For who can read of the vir-
tnes I have mentioned In the glorious Hmiy-
hthnltu, without being ashamed of his own
vices irtien he couuders himself as the rea-
soning, governing animal of bis coontry t I
fh«ll »T nothing of those remote nation*
\
414'6ULLIVBIt*9 TlUVBLS
where Yahoos preside; among viuch th«
least cormpted are the SrohdingnagiMiit\
whose wise maxims in morality and goTern*
ment it woold be oar happiness to observe.
Bot I forbear descanting fiurther, and rather
leaYtt the jadicioos reader to his own remarki
and application.
I am not a little pleased, that this work of
mme can possibly meet with no censnren:
for what objections can be made against a
¥rriter, who relates only plain facts, tfaathsp*
pened in soch distant coontries, where ve
nave not the least interest, with respect ei'
ther to trade or negociations ? I have care*
fully avoided ever^ fault, vrith which common
writers of travels are often too justly charged.
Besides, I meddle not the least with any
party, but write without passion, prejudice,
or ill-will against any man, or number of
men, whatsoever. I write for the noblest
end, to fnform and instruct mankind ; over
whom I may, without breach of modesty,
pretend to some superiority, from the advan.
tages I received by conversing so long among
the most accomplished Houyhnhnnu. I write
without any view to profit or praise. I never
5iiffcr a word to pass that may look like re«
fiection, or possibly give the least offence,
even to those who are most ready to tale it.
So that I hope I may with justice pronouuce
myself an author perfectly blameless ; against
whom the tribes of Answerers, Cousiderers,
Observers, Reflectors, Betecters, Reniark < .
^rs^ will never be a^\fe Xo ^\ii^ yh'^Xkx " va
i'j^crcising \licir VaXeuts.
A TOTA6B TO THE HOUYHITHNMS. 415
I confess, it was whispered to me,'that I
was bonnd in daty, as a subject of England,
to have given in a memorial to a secretary of
state at my first coming over ; because, what-
ever lands are discovered by a subject be-
long to the crown.* But I doubt, whether
our conquests, in the countries I treat of,
would be as easy as those of Ferdinando
Cortez over the naked. Americans. The
Lilliputiansy I think, are hardly worth the
charge of a fleet and army to reduce them ;
and I question whether it might be prudent
or safe to attempt the BrohdmgTiagiant ; or
whether an English army would be much at
their ease, with the Flying Island over their
heads. The Houyhnhnna indeed appear
not to be so well prepared for war, a science
to which they are perfect strangers, and es-
pecially against missive weapons. However,
supposing myself to be a minister of state, I
could never give my advice for invading them.
Their prudence, unanimity, unacquaintedness
with fear, and their love of their country,
would amply supply all defects in the military
art. Imagine twenty thousand of them
breaking into the midst of an European army,
confounding the ranks, overturning the car-
riages, battering the warriors'faces into mmn-
my by terrible yerks from their hinder hoofs ;
for they would well deserve the character
given to Augustus, Recalcitrat undiqtu
tutdt. But, instead of proposals for oon«
quering that magnanimous nation, I rather
wish they were in a capacity, or dispositioD,
410 ouu.nrxR*B thaVels.
to send a sufficient nmnber of their inbabi-
tants for civiUsing Europe, by teaching us the
first principles of honour, justice, truth, tem-
perance, public spirit, fortitude, chastity,
friendship, beneYolence, and fidelity. The
names of all which virtues are still retained
among us in most languages, and are to be
met with in modem, as well as ancient an-
thors ; which I am able to assert from my
own small reading.
But I had another reason, which made me
less forward to enlarge his majesty's do-
minions by my discoveries. To say the trutli,
I had conceived a few scruples with relation
to the distributive justice of princes upon
those occasions. For instance, a crew of pi-
rates are driven by a stom they know not
whither ; at length a boy discovers land from
the topmast-; they go on shore to rob and
plunder; they see a harmless people, are
entertained with kindness ; they give the
country a new name ; they take formal pos-
session of it for their kiug; they set up a
rotten plank, or a stone, for a memorial ;
they murder two or three dozen of the Ba-
tives, bring away a couple more, by force,
for a sample ; return home, and get their
pardon. Here commences a new dominion
acquired with the title by divine right* Ships
are sent with the first opportunity ; the na-
tives driven out or destroyed ; their princes
tortured to discover their gold ; a free license
given to all acts of inhumanity and lust, the
the earth reekinf^ vatld \S[i^ V^Vood of its inba-
bitanti ; and tbis execrable crew of butcher*,
eiD])loyeil in m paat an eipediticni, is a mo-
dern colony, seat to convert and dfiliae an
idolatruus lod barbaroua people I
Hot this descripdoQ, 1 confeii, doe* by no'
meaDB affect tbe Britiab nation, wbo may be
an example to the nbole world for their wi*^
doni, care, and jnslice in plantiDg ctdonies:
thrir liberal endowments for tbe advaoceineiit
of religion and learning ; tbur choice of de <
vout and able pastors to propagate Chrisli.
anityi theircaation in stocking their provinces
with people of sober lives and converatloni
from tliis tbe mother kingdom ; their strict
regard to tbe distribution of justice, in sup-
plying tbe civii Bdminiitration throngh all
their colonies with officers of the greatest
abilities, utter strangers to comiptiaii ; and,
to crown all, by sending tbe most vigilsnt and
virtuous gavernora, wbo have no other views
than the happiness of the people over wbom
they preside, and the honour of the king
their master-
But as tbose conntries, winch I have des-
cribed, do not appear to have any deaim of
being conquered and enslaved, nmrdered or
driven out, bycolouies ; nor abound either la
^d, silver, sugar, ot tobacco ; I did hum-
bly conceive, tbey were by no means proper
objects of our > eal, onr valne, or oar interest.
However, if tluwe whom it more concerns,
think St Id be of another opinion, I am read;
to despose, when 1 shall be lawfully called,
tliat no ^iropean did ever visit those conu'
416 CtTLlIYBR's TRATEU*
tries before me. I mean, if tlie inhabitants
ought to be believed, unless a dispute may
arise concerning the two Yahoos^ said to have
been seen many years ago upon a mountain
in Houyhnhnndand.
But, as to the formality of taking possession
in my sovereign's name, it never came once
into my thoughts ; and if it had, yet, as my
affairs then stood, I should perhaps, in point
of prudence and self-preservation, have put
it off to a better opportunity.
Having thus answered the only objection
that can ever be raised against me as a travel-
ler, I here take a finalleave of all my courteous /
readers, and return to enjoy my own specn-
lations in my little garden at Redriff ; to ap-
ply those excellent lessons of virtue, which
I learned among the Hauyhnknms ; to in-
struct the Yahoos, of my own family, as far as
I shall find them docible animals ; to behold
my figure often in a glass, and thus, if pos-
sible, habituate myself by time to tolerate the'
sight ofa human creature; to lament the bm-',
tality of Houyhnhnms, in my own country,
but always treat their persons with respect,
for the sake of my noble master, his family,
his friends, and the whole Houyhnhnm nee, ,
whom these of ours have the honour to re-
semble, in all their lineaments, however their'
intellectuals came to degenerate. ^
I began last week to permit my wife to sit !
at dinner with me, at the furthest end of a
Jong table ; and to answer (but with the nt- I
most brevity " ) the iew q^^%U < Qii» I asked her. •■
I. 41S
it, the smell of a Yahoo ecotiDnlDg very
TeDBive, 1 alwayi keep my Dose well (top-
ed with rue, lavender, or tobacco leave*.
Lod, although it be faard for > man late in
ife to remove old habit*, I am not altogedier
> nt of hopes, ID Mine time. In loffer a neigh-
bonr YaAoo in my company, vritboat (he
apprebensioiu I am yet under of bi* teeth oi
bis claws.
My reconcilement to ttie YalUHt kind in
f eneral might not be hi difficult, if they would
be couteDt with those vices and lolUe* on^,
which nature has entitled them to. I an
not in tlie least provoked at the ai^t of a
lawyer, a pickpocket, acolonel, a fool, a lord,
1 gamester, a poUtician, a whoremonger, a
physician, an evidence, a suborner, an attor-
ley, B traitor, or the like; thi* is all accordiug
iQ the due course of things : bnt when I be-
hold a lump of deformity and diseases, both
in body and rain < l, smitten with pride, it
immediately breaks all the measures of my
patience ; neither shall I be ever able to
comprehend how such an animal, and such a
vice, could tally together. The wise and
virtaoDi Havyhnhmii*, who abound in all
excellencies that can adorn a rational creature,
have no niune far tliis vice in their language ;
which has no terms to express any thing that
is evii, except those whereby they dciciil > e
the detestable qualities of their YtioM;
among which they were not able to diitingmsh
thij of pride, for want of tiwroughly nnder-
ttandJDs bnman nature, u\tita)!iii\ yowlf in
|9f OnLLIYBR*9 TRAVBL9.
otber countries where that ammal presides
Bat ly who had more experience, coald plain-
ly observe some rudiments of it among the
wild Yahoos,
But the HouyknhnmSf who Uve under the
government of reason, are no more proud of
the good qualities they posses, than I sliould
be for not wanting a leg or an arm ; which
no man in his wits would boa & t of, although
he must be miserable without them. I dwell
the longer upon this lubject, from the desire
X have to make the society of an English Ya-
koo by any means not insupportable ; and
therefore I here entreat those, who have
any tincture of this absurd vice, that they
will not presume to come in my sight.
THE END.
.*■

Planiuier and Brewis* Printers, Little Eastchap.
THB NBW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY
RBPBRBNCB DEPARTMENT
his book is vnder no oiroumstaiioes to be
talLen from the Building

tp
'■'■'■■■.■'.■■
■•■■ •^. 5 ■ ■.. - ■, .■_-•■
