






3C . yVt- Wnrv^Ctx/t > -7 .
mm
^H
^^Hl'§;
I ^^S^S^m
1 m
1
B^Q
^^^HHJ
JANE EYRE
»y
OH ARLOT-j li. BRONa\^
I)
V
CHICA.OO:
DONOHUE, HENNEBERRY & CO
407-425 DsARAORN Street
x8oo
^
4885?a5

4
r
• e . . ...
< •
« • •
PRINTED AND aOUN9 BY
DONOHUE d HENNEBERRY
CHICAGO.
10
W. M. THACKERAY, ESQ.
THIS WORK
19 BESPECTFULLT XlirSOBIBED.
B7
THE AUTHOR
^'^
I
1
PREFACE.
A PREFACE to the first edition of''Jane Eyre
juneoeesary, I gave none ; thia second edition deraanda a
few words both of acknowledgment and miBoellaneons
remark,
My thanks are due in three quarters.
To tlie Public, for the indulgent eai- it has inclined'
a plain tale with few pretensions.
To the Press, for the fair iield its honest suffrage
opeued to an obscure aspirant.
To my Publishers, for the aid their taj;t, their enerj
their practical sense and frank liberality have afforded
unknown and unrecommended Author,
The Press and the Public are but vague personifioationa
for me. and I must thank them iu vague terms; but my
Publishers are definite : so are certain generous ci-itica who
have euocuraged me as only large-hearted and high-
minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger;
to them, i. e., to my publishers and the select Reviewers,
I say cordially, Gentlemen, I thank you from my heart.
Having thus acknowledged what I owe those who have
aided and approved me, I turn to another class ; a small
one, 80 far as I know, b*it not, therefore, to be oTerlooked.
I mean the timorous or carping few who doubt the tend-
ency of such books as " Jane Eyre " : in whpae eyes what-
ever is unusual is wrong ; whose eare detect in each protest
jotry— that pai'ent of crime — w\ vasAXi ^
5

PREFACE.
lhai^ regent of God on earth. I would suggest to such
doubters certain obvious distinctions; I would remind
them of certain simple truths.
Conventionality is not morality. Self -righteousness is
not religion. To attack the first is not to assail the last.
To pluck the mask from the face of the Pharisee, is not to
lift an impious hand to the Crown of Thorns.
• These things and deeds are diametrically opposed : they
are as distinct as is vice from virtue. Men too often con
found them : they should not be confounded : appearance
should not be mistaken for truth ; narrow human doc-
trines, that only tend to elate and magnify a few, should
not be substituted for the world-redeeming creed of
Christ. There is — I repeat it — a difference; and it is a
good, and not a bad action to mark broadly and clearly the
line of separation between them.
The world may not like to see these ideas dissevered,
for it has been accustomed to blend them ; finding it con-
venient to make external show pass for sterling worth — ^to
let whitewashed walls vouch for clean shrines. It may
hate him who dares to scrutinize and expose — to rase the
gilding, and show base metal under it — ^to penetrate the
sepulcher, and reveal charnal relics : but hate as it will, it
is indebted to him.
Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he never prophesied
good concerning him, but evil : probably he liked the syco-
phant son of Chenaanah better ; yet might Ahab have
escaped a bloody death, had he but stopped his ears to
flattery and opened them to faithful counsel.
There is a man in our own days whose words are not
framed to tickle delicate ears ; who, to my thinking, comes
before the great ones of society, mlich as the son of Imlah
came before the throned Kings of Judah and Israel ; and
who speaks truth as deep, with a power as prophet-like
and as vital — a mein as dauntless and as daring. Is the
mtjri^t of'^ Vanity Fair " admired in high places ? I om
1»REFACE. 7
not tell ; but I think if some of those among whom he
hurls the Greek fire of his sarcasm, and over whom he
flashes the levinbrand of his denunciation, were to take
his warnings in time — they or their seed might yet escape
a fatal Ramoth-Gilead.
Why have I alluded to this man ? I have alluded to
him, Eeader, because I think I see in him an intellect pro-
founder and more unique than his contemporaries have
yet recognized; because I regard him as the first social
I'egenerator of the day — as the very master of that work
xng corps who would restore to rectitude the warped sys-
vcm of things; because I think no commentator on his
writings has yet found the comparison that suits him, the
terms which rightly characterize his talent. They say he
is like Fielding ; they talk of his wit, humor, comic pow-
ers. He resembles Fielding as an eagle does a vulture :
Fielding could stoop on carrion, but Thackeray never
does. His wit is bright, his humor attractive, but both
bear the same relation to his serious genius that the mere
lambent sheet-lightning playing under the edge of the
summer-cloud does to the electric death-spark hid in its
womb. Finally, I have alluded to Mr. Thackeray because
to him — if he will accept the tribute of a total stranger —
I have dedicated this second edition of " Jane Eyre. "
CUEEEE BELL.
December 21, 1847.
JANE EYRE.
CHAPTER I.
There wes no possibility of taking a walk that day.
We had been wandering, indeed, in the leafless shrubbeij
an hour in the morning; but since dinner (Mrs. Reed,
when there was no company, dined early) the cold i'* " "
wind had brought with it clouds bo somber, and a n
penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now oat,j
the question, _'_
I was glad of it: I never liked long walks, especially on~
uhiUy afternoons; dreadful to me was the coming home in
the raw twilight, with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart
saddened by the chidings of Bessie, the nurse, and hnmbled
by the con'sciooeness of my physical inferiority to Eliza,
John and Georgiana Heed,
The said Eliza, John and Georgiana were now clus-
tered round their mamma in thedvaiving room: she lay
reclined on a sofa b^ the fireside, and witJi her darlings
about her (for the time neither quarreling nor crying),
looked perfectly hapjjy. Me, sJie had dispensed from
joining tae group; saying, " She regretted to he under the
necessity of Keeping me at a distance; but that until she
heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observa-
tion, that I was endeavoring in good earnest to acquire a
more sociable and child-like disposition, a more attractive
and spi'ightly manner — something tighter, franker, more
natural, as it were — she really must exclude me from privi-
leges intended oiily for contented, happy, little children. "
" What does Bessie say I have done? " I asked.
" Jane, I don't like cavilers or questioners: besides,
g.^4A^Lethiiig tfu^^t^-^^iug.ux^ ti^^ \»!tfiVfi1t;^
10
.lASK EYBE.
her eldera iu that manner. Be seated somewhere;
until you can speak pleasantly, remain eilent. "
A small breakfaat-room adjoined the tirawii^-room.
slipped in there. It contained a book-caso; Isoon poa
sessed myself of a volume, taking care that it should b,
one stored with pictures. I mounted into the windoi^
seat: gathering up my feet, I sat erosB-legged like a Turij
and, having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly clo
was Bhrined in double retirement.
Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the i ^
band; to the left were the clear panes of glass, protectin
but not separating mo from the drear November day.
intervals, while turning over the leaves of my boo) ,
studied the aspect of that winter afternoon. Afar,
offered a pale blank of mist and cloud; near, a scene of
wet lawn and storm-beat ahrnb, with ceaseless rain sweep-
ing away wildly before a long and lamentable blast.
I returned to my book — Bewick's " History of British
Birds: " the letter-press thereof I cared little for, gener-
ally speaking; and yet there were certain introductory
§ages tliat, child as I was, I could not pass nuite as a
lank. They were those which treat of the naunts of
sea-fowl; of " the solitary rocks and promontories " by
them only inhabited; of the coast of Norway, studded
with isles from its southern extremity, the LindenesSj i
Naze, to the North Cape —'
" Where tbe Northern Ocean, In vast whirta.
Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the blet,
shores of Lapland, Siberia, Spitzbergen, Nova Zemb^
Iceland, Greenland, with " the vast sweep of the Arott
Zone, and those forlora regions of dreary space— that
reservoir of frost and snow, where firm fields of ice. the
accumulations of centuries of winters, glazed in Alpine
heights above heights, surround the pole, and concenter
the multiplied rigors of extreme cold. " Of these death-
white realms I formed an idea of my own; shadowy, like
ill the half-comprehended notions that float dim through
children's brains, but Ktrangely impressive. The words
in these introductory pages eonnect«a themselves with the
Bucoeeding vignettes, and gave aiRuificanoe to the rock
jing up done in a sea of billow and spray;
broken boat stranded on a desolate coaet ; to the cdd and
ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck
just sinking.
I can not tell what sentiment haunted the quite aoli-
tai'y ohnrch-yard, with its inscribed head-etone ; ite gate,
its two ti'eOB, its low horizon, girdled by a broken wall, and
its newly-piBon crescent, attesting the hour of eventide.
The two ehips becalmed on a toi-pid sea, I believed to be
marine phantoms.
Tho fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I
passed over quickly : it was »n object of terror.
So was the black, horned thing seated aloof on a rock,
surveying a distant crowd surrounding a gallows.
Each picture told a story ; mysterious oft«n to my an-
developed understanding and imperfect feoJiugs, yet ever
profoundly interesting : as interesting as the tales Bessie
BOmetJmea nan'atod on winter evenings, when she chanced
to be in good humor; and when, having brought her
ironing-table to tho uarseiy-hearth, she allowed na to ait
itboot it, and while she got op Mrs. Reed's lace frilU, and
crimped ber night-eap oorders. fed our eager attention
wifh passages of love and adventure taken from old fairy
tale* and older ballads ; or (as at a later period I dis-
covered) from the pages of " Pamela, " and " Henry, Eivrl
of Morcland. "
With Bewick on my knee, I was th«n happy : happy at
leSBt in my way. I feared nothing but interruption, and
that came too soon. The breakfast-room door opened.
" Boh ! Madame Mope ! " cried the voice of J ohu Reed ;
then be paused : lie found the room apparently empty.
" Where the dickens is she ? " he conlinued, " Lizzy!
Georgyl " (calling to hia sisters) " Joan is not here; tall
mamma she is run out into the rain — bad animal I "
. " It is well I drew the curtain, " thought I ; and I wished
fervently he might not discover my hidiiig-plaee; nor
woiilil .fuhn Rppii have found it out himself; lie was not
quick uither of vision or conception ; but Kliza just put
her tioud in at the door, and said at onco ! " She is in tho
window-Bftiit, to be sure. Jack. "
And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea
'■ WTmt
■UEged
do yi
■on want ? " I asked, with awkward i
18
1 ETUF.
answer. " I want you to come heie ; " and seating himself
in an arm-ohair, he intimated by a gestuTG that I was to
approach and stand before him.
John Reed waa a school-boy of fourteen years old ; four
jreftra oider than I, for I waa but ten ; large and stoot for
his age. witli a dingy and unwholesome skm ; thick linea-
ments in a spacious yisage, heavy limbs and large extremi-
ties. He gorged himself habitually at table, which made
liim bilious, and gave him a dim and'^ bleared eye and flabby
cheeks. Ro ought now to have boon at school ; but his
mamma had taken him home for a month or two, " on
MscDunt of his delicate health, " Mr. Miles, the master,
affimed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes
and sweetmeats sent him from home, but the mother's
heai-t turned from an opinion so harsh, and inclined rather
to the more refined idea that John's sallowness waa owing
to over-application and, perhaps, to pining after home.
John had not much affection for his mother and sisters,
and an antipathy to nic. He bullied and punished me;
not l*vo or throe times in the week, nor once or twice in
the QAV, hut continually: every nerve I had feared him,
and every morsel of flesh on my bones shrank when he
came near. There were moments when I was bewildered
by the terror he inspired, because I had no appeal whatever
againsi, eithei'his menaces or his inflictions; the servants
■did not like to oHend their young master by taking my
;iai't afe'aJnst him, and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf on
< he subject : she never saw him strike or heard bim abuse
me, though he did both now and then in her very presence;
more frecfuently, however, behind her back.
Habitually obedient to John. I eame up to his chair:
" Jie spent Bome three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at
me as far bs he oould without damaging the roots : I knew
he would soon strike, and while dreaiding the blow, 1 mused
on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would
presently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion in my
face ; for, ail ut once, without speaking, he struck siid
denly and strongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equi- J
iibrium retired back a step or two from his chair. M
" That is for your impudence in answering mammtta
awhile since, " said he, " and for your sneaking way wM
getting behind curtains, and for the look you hiid in you^fl
eyea two minutes since, vou rat I " M
I AooHstomed lo John ^ed's abuse, I never Jia4 AU j^fl
JANE rVKK.
of replying to it; my care was liow lo endnre the I
whicli would certainly follow the insult.
''What were you doing behiud the curtain ? " he ai
" I wa« readiiig. "
" Show the book. "
I returned to the window and fetched it thence.
" Yoiihave no basinees to take our books; you ar & (_
dependent, mamma says ; you have no money ; your father
left you none ; you ought to beg, and not to live liere with
gentlemen'B children Tike us, and eat the same meals we
do, and wear clothes at our mamma's expense. Now I'I1_
teach you to rummage my book-shelves ; for they (
mine; all. the house belongs to me, or will do in a (
yeara. Go and stand by the door, out of the way of t1
mirror and the windows. "
I did BO, not at first aware what was his intention ; bnt
when I saw him lift and poise the book and stand in act
to hurl it, I instinctively started aside with a cry of
alarm ; not soon enough, however ; the volume was
flung, it hit me, and I fell, striking my head against
the door and cutting it. The cut bled, the pain was
sharp ; my terror had passed its climax ; other feulinga
Kucceeded.
" Wicked and cruel boy ! " I said, " You are like^
murderer — you are like a slave-driver — you are like
Soman emperors ! "
1 had read Goldsmith's " History of Eome, " and had
formed my opinion of Nero, Caligula, etc. Also, I had
drawn parallels in silence, which I never thought thus to
have declared aloud.
" What ! what ! " he cried. " Did she say that to me ?
Dill you hear her, Eliza and Oeorgiana? Won't I tell
mamma ? But first "
Ue ran headlong at me ; I felt him grasp my hair and
my shoulder : he had closed with a desperate thing. I
really saw in him a tyrant : a murderer. I felt a drop or
two of blood from by head trickle down my neck, and
was sensible of somewhat pungent suffering : these sensa-
tions for the time predominated over fear, and I received
him in frantic sort, I don't very well know what I did
nth my hands, but he called me " Rat! rat! " and bel-
< /ei[ out aloud. Aid was near him : Eliza and Georgi-
a had ran for Mrs. Reed, who was gone up stairs; she
{[ii4Mi)« ji,j^6b4aBAOtrtt > Uowed by Bessie and her maid
4
Abbott. We were parted : I heard tlie words,
dear ! What a fury to fly at Muster John ! "
" Did ever anybody see such a picture of pasaion ?
Then Mrs. Reed aubjoined : " Take her away to tM
red-rocn, and lock her in there. " Pour bands wei''
mediately .laid upon me, and I was borne up stairs.
CHAPTEE n.

I HE3ISTBD all the way : a new thing for me,-and a c
cumstance whioh greatly strengthened the bad opinid_
Bessie and Misa Abbot were disposed to entertain of mer "
The fact ia I waa a trifle beaide myaelf, or rather oul of
myself aa the French would say : I waa oonBcious that a
moment's mutiny hud already rendered me liable to
strange penalties, and, like atiy other rebel slave, I felt re-
solved in my desperation, to go all lengths.
" Hold ner arms, Mias Abbot; she^e like a mad cat. "
" For ahame ! for. shame I " cried the lady's raaid.i|
" Wliat shocking conduct, Mias Eyi-e, to strike a yfxinefl
genttenmn, yon rDenef actress's son ! Tour young master. " ■
" Master ! How is he my master? Am I a servant?^!
" No ; you are less than a servant, for you do nothilM^
for your keep. There, ait down and think over yom
wiekedneaa. " f
They had got me by this time into the apartment ind|
cated by Mrs, Eeed, and had thrust me upon a atonl ; ra^
impulse was to rise from it like a spring ; their two pair o
lmn(te arrested me instantly.
" If you don't sit still, yon must be tied down, " a
Beasre. " Miss Abbot, lend me your garters ; she wouM
break mine directly. "
Mias Abbot turned to divest a atout leg of the neccBaall
ligature. Thia preparation for bouda, and the addition^
ignominy it inferred, took a little of the excitement ouSI
Bf me.'
" Don't take them off, " I cried ; ■ "'! will not stir, "
In guarantee whereof I attached myself to my seat by'
my handa.
■'Mind you don't, " said Bessie, and when she had ascer-
tataed that I was really snbeiding, she loosened her hold
.lASB BYHK-
of »i«; tbm ehe aud Miss Abltot stood iritb folded U^^H
looking darkly and doubtfnlly on my face, as incrediiJ^^H
of my sanity. j^^|
" She nerer did bo before, " at last aaid Bessie, tumj^^l
to the Aliignil.'^H
" But it waa nlways in her, " was the reply. " I've bd^H
Missis often my opinion abo.ut the child, and Missis ngnim^t
nith me. She's nn underhand little thing. I never 4^^|
a girl of her age with bo much cover. " ^^H
Bessie answered not; but e're long, addressing me, ^^H
said: ^^M
" You ought to be aware. Miss, that you are ui^^H
obligations to Mrs. Rood: ehe keeps you: if ehe werd^^f
turn you off, you would have to go to tne poor-house. " ^^^|
I had nothing to say to these words: they wero M^l
new to me: my very firat recollections of existence in-
cluded hints or the same kind. This reproach of my de-
jjeudence had become a vague aing-aong in my ear; very
painful and crushing, but only half mtelligible. Miss
Abbot joined in:'* And yon ought not to think yourself
ou an equality with the Misses Reed and Master Reed, be-
nause Missis kindly allows you to be brought up-with
fhem. They will have a gi-eat deal of money, and you will
have none, it is your place to be humble, and to try to
make yourself agreeable to them. "
" \Vhat we tell you is for your good, " added Bessie, in
no harsh voice; you should try to be useful and pleasant;
then, perhaps, you would have a homo here; but if you
become passionate and rude. Missis will send you away, I
am euro.'"
■'Besides, " said Miss Abbot, " God will punish her;
he might strike her dead in the midst of her tantrums,
and then where would she go ^ Come, Bessie, we will
le:.Tc her; I wouldn't have her heart for anything. Say
your prayers. Miss Eyre, when you are by yourself; for if,
you don't repent, something bad might be permitted to
come down the chimney and fetch you away.'
They went, shutting the door, and locldng it " behind
theiu.
Tho red-room was a spare chamber, very seldom slept
in; I might say never, indeed, unless when a chance influx
of visitors, at Gateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn
to account all the accommodation it contained: yet it was
16 JANE EYRE.
A bed sufiported on masBive pillars of malio^ny, hnng
with curtains of deep red damask, stood out like a taber-
nacle in tbe center; the two large windows, with their
blinds always drawn down, were half shrondi'd in featoona
and falU of aimilar drapery; the carpet was red; the
table at the foot of tbe bed'was colored with a crimson
cloth; the walla were a soft fawn color, with a blush of
pink in it; the wardrobe, the toilet-table, the chairs, were
of darkly-polished old mahogany. Out of these deep aur-
rounding ehadee rose high, and glared white,'the piled-
up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a snowy
Marseilles connterpa:ie. Scarcely less prominent was i "
ampio, cushioned easy-chair near the head of (he bed, a1
white, with a foot-stool before it; and looking, as
thought, like a pale throne.
Tliis room was chill, becanse it seldom hud a firo; it
waABilent. bocaiise remote from the nursery and kitchens;
Eoiemn. becatiso it was known to be so seldom entered.
The house-maid alone came here on Satnrdays, to wipo
from the mirrors and the furniture a week's quiet dust; and
Mpb. Reed herself, at fur intervals, visiled it to I'eview the
contents of a certain secret drawer in the wardrobe, where
were atorod divers parchments, her jewel-casket, and a
miniature of her deeeaaed husband; and in those last
woi-ds lies the seCTet of the red-room — the spell which kept
it 60 lonely in spite of its ernndenr.
Mr. Ilted had been dead nine years; it was in thi
chamber he breathed his last; here he lay in state; hon <
his cofliu was home by the undertaker's men; and, sint
that day, a sense of dreary consecration had guarded
from frequei.t intrusion.
My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot hi
left me riveted, was a low ottoman near the marble cliif _
ney-piece; the bed rose before me; to my right hand'
• tliere was the high, dark wardrobe, with subdued, broken
flections varying the gloss of its panels; to my left were
the muffled windows; a great looking-glass between them
repeated the vacant majesty of the bed and room. I was
not quite sure whether they had locked the door; and
when I dared move I got up and went to see. Alas! yes:
no jail was ever more secure. Returning, I had to crosa
before the looking-glass; my fascinated glance involt
tarily explored the depth it revealed. All looked coli
and darker in that visionary hollow thaJi in cwUtyj
ept
I

the strange little fignre there gazing at me, with a v
face and arms BpecKing the gloom, and glittering eyt
fear moving where all else was still, had the effect of a
spirit; I thought it like one of the tiily phautODie, oaii
fairy, half imp, Bessie's evening stories represented aa
looming out of lone, ferny delTa in moora, appearing
before he eyes of belated travelers. I returned to mj "
stool.
Snperstition was with me at that moment; but it
not yet ber hour for complete victory; ray blood was
warm; the mood of the revolted slave was etill bracing
witli its bitter vigor; I had to eteni a rapid rush of rel
spective thought before I quailed to the dismal present.
All John Reed's violent tyrannies, all his siatem'prt
indiflercnce, all his mother's avorsion, all the sorvants'par-
fiallty, tnmed up in my dlstnrbed mind like a dark deposit
in a turbid well. AVhy was I always Buffering, always
browbeaten, always accused, forever'condemned? Why
could I never pleaseP Why was it useless to try to win
anyone'favor? Eliza, who was headstrong and selfish,
was respected. Georgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a
very aarid spite, a captious and iusolent carriage, was
universally indulged. Her beauly, hor pink cheeks a
f olden curls, seemed to give delight to all who looked
er, and to pui-chase indemnity for every fault. John,
one thwarted, much less punished; thongh he twisted thft
necks of the pigeons, killed the little pea-chicks, set the
dogs at the sheep, stripped the hot-house vines of their
fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants in the con-
servatory; he called his mother " old girl, " too; sometimes
reviled her for her dark skin, similar to his own; bluntly
disregarded her wishes; not unfreqnently tore and spoiled
her silk attire; and he was still " her own darling. " I
dared commit no fault: I strove to fulfill every duty; and I
was termed naughty and tiresome, sullen and sneaking,
from morning to noon, and from noon to night.
My head still allied and bled with the blow and fall I
had received; no one had reproved John for wantonly
Rtriking me; and because I had turned against him to
avert further irrational violence, I was loaded with general
opprobrium.
" tJnjuBt! — unjust! " said my reaaon, forced by the
ing stimulus into precocious though transitory
} aa4 wMiTe» p^pw^y yrocBfat ap, inatigwed foe»
18 JANE EYJIE.
strange expedient to achieve escape from insupportable
oppression — ^as running away, or, if that could not be
effected, never eating or drinking more, and letting myself
die.
What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary
afternoon! How all my brain was in tumult, and all my
heart in insurrection! Yet in what darkness, what dense
ignorance, was the mental battle fought! I could not
answer the ceaseless inward question — tohy I thus suffered;
now, at the distance of — I will not say how many years, I
see it clearly.
I was a discord in Gateshead Hall; I was like nobody
there; I had nothing in harmony with Mrs. Reed or her
children, or her chosen vassalage. If they did not love
me, in fact, as little did I love them. They were not
bound to regard with affection a thing that could not sym-
pathize with one among them; a heterogeneous thing,
opposed to them in temperament, in capacity, in propen-
sities; a useless thing, incapable of serving their interest,
or adding to their pleasure; a noxious thing cherishing
the germs of indignation at their treatment, of contelapt.
of their judgment. I know that had I been a sanguine,
brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child —
though equally dependent and friendless — Mrs. Reed woitM
have endured my presence more complacently; her children
would have entertained for me more of the cordiality of
fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less prone to
make me the scape-goat of the nursery.
Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past
four o^clock, and the beclouded afternoon was tending to
drear twilight. I heard the rain still beating continuously
on the staircase window, and the wind howling in the
grove behind the hall; I grew by degrees cold as a stone,
and then my courage sank. My habitual mood of humili-
ation, self-doubt, forlorn depression, fell damp on the
embers of my decaying ire. All said I was wicked, and
perhaps I might be so; what thought had I been but Just
conceiving of starving myself to death! That certainly
was a crime; and was I fit to die? Or was the vault under
the chancel of Gateshead Church an inviting bourne? In
such a vault I had been told did Mr. Reed lie buried; and
led by this thought to recall his idea, I dwelt on it with
gathering dread. I could not remember him; but I knew
that he was my uncle — my mother^s brother — ^that he
ftfld tdfecii tne when a pareullesa iufunt to his houae; e
that in his last momfnts ht > had vequh'ed a proi
Mrs. Reed tliitt shi'would rear aud maiiuain me na
her own children. Mrs. Reed probably tonsidered alio h
kept *hiB promiee, and ap she had, rd-ii-e s«y, as we! "
her nuture would penuft her; but how coiild sh < ! ve
like an interloper not of her race, aud noconneiitcd v
her, after her hnaband's death, by any tieP It tniisl: 1
been most irksome to find herself hound by it hard-wr
pledge to stand in the stead of a parent to a etrange chl
she could not love, and to see an uncongeniel alien perm
nently intruded on her own family group.
A singular notion dawned upon me. I dc^ibl ..
never doubted — that if Mr. Rccd had been alive he woq
hnve treated me kindly; and now. aa I eat lopVing at tl
while beds and overtihadowed walla — occasionally alao tun
iiiga fascinated eye toward the dimly ffleaniing niirr
I began to recall what I had heanl of dead men, troiiblj
in their graves by the violation of their last wifihoa, revia
'fi^ the earth to punish the perjured and aveiigo H
nbjiresaod; and I tnonght Mr. Heed's siiirit, harniMod \
iho wrong§ of his sister's child, might quit its abodes
whether in the church vault, or in the unknown world c
thedeparted — and rise before me in this chamber. I v ^.
my teare and hushed my sobs, fearful lest any sign (
violent grief might waken a prebernataral voice to comfoi
me, or elicit from the gloom some haloed face, bending
over me with strange pity. This idea, consolatory in
theory. I felt would be terrible if realized: with all my
might I endeavored to stifle it — I endeavored to be fin
Shaking my hair from ray eyes, I lifted my head and tri
to look boldly around the dark room: at thits moment
light gleamed'on the wall. Was it, I aaked myself, a i
from the moon penetrating some aperture in the blinoT
Noi moonlight was still, and this stirred; while I gazed, i'
glided up till'ceiling and quivered over my head. 1 cat
ii«w conjecture readUy what this streak of light was, in
likelibooil, It gleam from a lantern, carried by some c
aisi-iiss the lawn: but then, prepared as my mind wae .,
horror, sliaken as my nerves were by agitation, I thoua]
th« ((wift-darf ing beam was a herald of some coming vl
from another world. My heart beat thick, my head l.
hot: iiaonnd filled my ears, which I deemed the I'lishi
i^,A8lH^lbi9£;. iKeatfd near me; I wae oppi

suffocated; endurance broke down; I ruBhed to the A'
and sliook the lock in desperftte effort. Steps came
iiiug along the outer passage; the key turned, Bessie
Abbot entered.
'■MisE Eyre, are you ill? " said Bessie.
" Wbat a. dreadful noiee! it went quite through n
cKClaimed Abbot.
" Take me out! let me go into the nursery! " was
" Wliat forP Arp you hurt? Have you seen s
thing? " again demanded Bessie.
" Oh! I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would
come. " I had now got hold of Bessie's hand, and she did
not snatoh it fi-ora me.
" She hue screamed out on pnrpose, " declared Abbot,
in some disgiist. " And what a scream! If she had been
in great pain one would have excused it, but she only
wanted to bring us all here: I know her naughty tricks.'"
" What is all this? " demanded another voice, peremp-
torily; and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor, tier cap
flying wide, her gown rustling stormily. " Abbot and
Bessie, I believe that I gave orders that Jane Eyre should be
left in the red-room till I came to her myself.
" Miss Jane screamed so loud, ma'am, " pleaded Bessie.
" Let her go, " was tli,- only iinswer, " Loose Bessie's
hand, child; you cannot succeed in getting out by these
means, be assurred. I abhor artifice, particularly in chil-
dren; it is my duty to show you that tricks will not
answer; you will now stay here an hour longer, and it
IB only on condition of perfect submission and stillness
that I'shall liberate you then. "
" Oh aunt, have pity! Forgive me! I can not endure
it — let me be punished some other way! I shall be killed
if "
" Silence! This violence is almost repulsive; " and so,
no doubt, she felt it. I was a precocious actress in her
eyes: she sincerely looked on me as a compound of viru-
lent passions, mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity.
Bessie and Abbott having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impa-
tient of my now frantic anguish, and wild sobs, abruptly
thrust me back and locked me in, without further parley.
I heard her sweeping away; and soon after she was gone,
I suppose I had a specie of fit: unconsciousness closed the
JANE EYRE.
CHAPTER IIL
The neit thing I remember is, waking up witli a feel*
ing as if I had had a frightful uightmare, and seeing before
me a terrible red glare, (.'i-ossed with thitik black bars. I
heard " voices, too, spuaking with a hollow sound, as if muf-
fled by a rush of wind or water: agitation, uncertainty, and
an all-predominating sense of terror confused my facultiea.
Ere long I became aware that some one was handling me;
lifting me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, and
that more tenderly than I had ever been raised or upheld
before. I rested my head against a pillow or an arm, and
felt easy.
In five minutes more, tlie cloud of bewilderment dis-
solved: I knew quite well that I was in my own bed, and
that the red glai'e was the nursery fire. It was night; a
candle burned on the table; Bessie stood at the l > cdfoot
with a basin in her hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair
near mv piliow, leaning over me,
1 felt an inexpressible relief, a soothing conviction of
protection and security, when I knew that there was a
stranger in the room, an individual not belonging to Gates-
head, and not related to Mrs. Heed, Turning from Bessio
(though her presence was far less obnoxious to me than
that of Abbot, for instance, would have been), I scrutin-
ized the face of that gentleman: I knew him; it was Mr.
Lloyd, an apothecary, sometimes called in by Mrs. Reed
when the servants were ailing; for herself and the childro!
she employed a physician.
" Well, who am I ? " he asked.
I pronounced hia name, offering him at the same tii
my hand: he took it, smiling ancT saying, " We shall
very well by-and-by. " Then ho laid me down, and ad-
drufling Bessie, diarged her to be very careful that I was
not disturbed during the night. Having given some fur-
ther directions, and intimated that he should call again
the nest day, he departed; to my grief: I felt so slieltered
a & d befrisQded while he sat in the chair near my i^ofrj
Leea ■
M
I do I
22 JAKX HYM,
and as he closed the door afte^ him, all the room darkened
and my heart again sank: inexpressible sadness weighed it
down.
''Do you feel as if you should sleep, Miss? ^'asked Bes-
sie, rather softly.
Scarcely dared I answer her; for I feared the next sen-
tence might be rough. " I will try.'*
'^ Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything ?'*
^'No, thank you, Bessie, "
^* Then I think I shall go to btjd, for it is past twelve
o'clock, but you may call me if you want anything in the
night. "
Wonderful civility this! It emboldened me to ask a
question.
''Bessie, what is the matter with me? Am I ill ? "
^'You fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying,
you'll be better soon, no doubt. "
Bessie went into the housemaid's apartment, which was
near. I heard her say, ^'Sarah, come an J sleep with me
in the nursery; I daren't for my life be alone with that
poor child to-night; she might die; it's such a strange thing
she should have that fit: I wonder if she saw anything.
Missis was rather too hard. "
Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they
were whispering together for half an hour before they fell
asleep. I caught scraps of their conversation, from which
I was able only too distinctly to infer the main subject
discussed.
''Something passed her, all dressed in white, and van-
ished " — ^^A great black dog behind him " — " Three loud
raps on the chamber door " — *'A light in the churchyard
just over his grave, " etc., etc.
At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out.
For me the watches of that long night passed in ghastly
wakefulness; ear, eye and mind were alike strained by
dread: such dread as children only can feel.
No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this in-
cident of the red-room;, it only gave my nerves a shock,. of
which I feel the reverberation to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed,
to you I owe some fearful pangs of mental sulfering. But
I ought to forgive you, for you knew not what you did:
while rending my heart-strings, you thought you were only
up-rooting my bad propensities.
Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat
JANE ETKE.
wrapped id a shawl by the nursery hearth. I felt phya-
ioally weak and broken down ; bat my worse ailment was
an unutterable wretchedness of mind: a wretcbednesB
which kept drawing from nie silent tears ; no sooner had I
wiped one Siilt drop from my cheek than another followed.
Yet I thought I ought to have been happy, for none of the
Reeda were there, they were all gone out in the lairriuge
with their mamma; Abbot, too, was sewing in another
room, and Bessie, as she moved hither and thither, put-
ting away toys aud arranging drawers, addressed to me
every now and then a word of unwonted kindness. This
state of things should have been to me a paradise of peace,
acouBtomed as I was to a life of ceaseless reprimand and
thankless fagging ; hut, in fact, my racked nerves were
now in such a state that no calm could soothe, and no
pleasure excite them agreeably.
Beasia had been down into the kitchen, and she brought
av with her a tart on a certain brightly painted china
plate, whose bird of para < Use, nestliug in a wreath of con-
voItuU and rose-buds, had been wont to stir iu me a most
enthusiastic sense of admiration ; and which plate I had
often petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order
to uxamiuo it more closely, but had always hitherto been
deemed unworthy of such a privilege. This precious
vessel was now placed on my knee, andl was coriEaUy in-
vited to eiit the circlet of delicate pastry upon it. Vain
tnvorl coming, like most other favors long deferred and
often wished for, too late! I could not eat the tart ; and
the plumage of the bird, the tints of the flowers, seemed
rtmngely faded: I put both plate and tart away. Bessie
asked if I would have a book: the word book acted as »
transient stimulus, and I bp^ged her to fetch " Gulliver's
TniveU " fi-om the library.! This book I had again and
aguin perused with delight. I considered it a naiTative of
facts, and discovered in it a vein of interest deeper than
wluit I found in fairy talcs: for as to the elves, having
sought'them in vain among foxglove leaves and bells,
under mushrooms and beneath the ground-ivy mantling
old wall-nooks. I bad at length made up my mind to the
sad truth, that they were all gone out of England to sopie
eaviige country, wliero the woods were wilder and thicker,
and the population more scant ; whereas. LilUpnt and
Brobdignag
1

S4
JANE I

long voyage, see with injr own eyes the littld fields, houses
and troea, the dimiDutive people, the tiny cows, sheep,
and birds of the one realm; and the cornfields torest-high,
the mighty mastiffs, the monator eats, the tower-like men
and women of the other. Yet when this cherished vol-
ume was now placed in mj hand — when I turned over its
leaves, and sought in its marvelous pictures the viharm I
had, till now, never failed to find — all was eerie and
dreary; the giants were gaunt goblins, the pigmies nial-
evok'it and fearful imps, Gulliver a most desoliite wan-
derer in most dread and dangerous regions. I closed the
book, which I dared no longer peruse, and put it on the
table beside the untaated tart.
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room,
and having washed her h;:udB, she opened a certain little
drawer, full of splendid shreds of silk a
gan making a new be
time she sung; her song
,nd satin, and be-
et for Geoigiana's doll. Mean-

I had often heard the song before, and always witl
lively delight; for Bessie had a sweet voice — at least'
thought so. But now, though hor voice was still sweet,
found in its melody an indiscribablesadnesa. Sometimes,
preoccupied with her work, she sang the refrain very low,
7ery iingeringly; " Along time ago " came out like
saddest cadence of a funeral hymn. She passed into
ither fcsilitd, this time a really doleful one.
a > I
" My feet tier a
LonaiatBe'
e sore, and my lltnbBtbcy arc wear;;
wiU iJj
" Why aia Wiey reud aie so tar and bo [onoly.
ITp wlu^re tlip mours Bpread and gmy ruuks are pIlMJ
Men are hord-heartcd. mid kind impels only
*Vatch o'er the ttepa aC a. iiDor orphan child.
. .. --naaottthoniBht-brPeie is blowing-,
" ■ "'"'1 iicaoimJld;
id bope'^io the poor arphuu cliild.
C-TBtrajr iotho mll^she^ by false llffht* bl.
Stil! vili iDv FHther, with promisn and bU-ffiinK,
'Xa.'^e to hla boBou the poor orphiui ohlld.
J & NB EYRB. 36
Come, Mias Jane, don't cry, " gaid Beasie sb she fin-
ished. She might as well hare " aaid to the fire, " don't
bum! " but how couid she divine the morbid Buffering to
irhioh I was a. prey? In the coarse of the morning, Mr.-
Lloyd came again.
" What, already np! " said he, as ho entered the nurs-
ery. " Well, nurse, how ia she? "
Bessie answered that I was doing very well.
" Tlien she ought to look more cheerful. Come here,-]
Kiss Jane; yonr name is Jane, is it not? "
" Yes, sir, Jane Eyro. "
Well, yon have been crying. Miss Jane Eyre; can yoal
tell me what about? Have you any pain? "
" Ifo, air. "
Oh ! T dave say she is crying because she could not ^
out with Miaaia in the carriage, interposed Bessie.
" Uurely noti why, she is too old for auch pettishuesa. "
I thought 80 too; and my self-esteem being wounded
by the falao charge, I answered promptly, " I never cried
for each a thing in my life: I hate gclng out in the car-
riage. I cry because I am miserable. "
" Oh fie, Misa! " said Bessie. j
The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I waMM
itanding before him; he fixed hia eyea on me very steadilyjS
his eyes were small and gray: not very bright, but I darel
say t should tliink them shrewd now: he liad a harij-
featured yet good-natured looking face. Having consid-
ered me at leisure, he aaid, " What made you ill yes-
terday? " _
She had a fall, " said Bessie, agam putting in her J
word. «
" Fall! why that is likeahaby again! Can't she manages
to walk at her age? She must be eight or nine years old.**'!
" I was knocked down, " was the i'lant explanatiool
jerked out of me by another pang of mortified nnde:''haiM
that did not make me ill, " I added; while Mr. Lloyd "
'helped himself to a pinch of snuff.
As he was returning the box to hia waisf.coat-pocket, a
loud bell rang for the aervants'dinner; he knew what it
was, " That'a for you, nurse. " said he; " you can go
down; III give Mias Jane a lecture till you come back. "
Bessie would rather have staid, but ahe was obliged to
gi, because punctuatity at meals was rigidly enforced at
Ateahead Hall.
m

JANK EYRH.
" The fall did uot make you ill; what did, then? " pnr-
gned Mr. Lloyd, when Bessie wiis goue.
" 1 was ahnt np in a room where there is a ghost till
after dark. "
I eaw Mr. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time.-
" QhoBtl What, yon are a baby, after all! You are afraid
of ghosts? "
" Of Mr. Eeed'B ghoat I am: he died in that room, and
was laid oat there. Neither Bossie nor any one else ivill
go into it at night, if they can help it; and it was cnu-l to
shut ine up alone without a candle — go cruel that I think
I shall never forget it. "
" Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable?
Are you afraid now in daylight? "
" No: but night will come again before long: and be-
sides, I am unhappy, very unhappy, for other things.''
" What other things? Can you tell me some of
them ? "
How much I wished to reply fully to this nueslionl
How diEBcult it was to frame any answer! Ohiklren can
feel, but they can not analyze their feelings; and if the
anfllyais is partially eflfected m thought, they know not how
to espress the result of the process in Words. Fearful,
however, of losing this first and only opportunity of
relieving my grief by imparling it, I, after a disturbed
pause, contrived to frame a meager, though, as far as ilu
went, true response.
" For one thing, I have no father or mother, brotha^
or sisters. "
" Yon have a kind aunt and cousins. "
Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced:
John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me up a
the red-room. "
Mr. Lloyd a second time produced his snuff-box.
" Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful
house? " asked he. " Are you not very thankful to have
such a fine place to live at? "
" It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less
right to be here than a servant. "
" Pooh! yon can't be silly enough to wish to leave snch
ilendid place? "
" If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to
leave it; but 1 can never get away from Gateshead till I
am a woman. "
" Perhaps tou may — wbo knows? Have yon any rel
tions beaideri Sire. Keed? "
" I think not, sir. "
" None bolougioff to your father? "
" I don't know: I asked Aunt Eeed once, and she said
possibly I might have some poor, low relations c & lled
Bji-e, but she koew nothing about thoiii? "
" If you had such, would you like to go to thciii? "
I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still
more BO to chiklryu: lliey have not much idea of iodustri-
oas, working,* roe pcotable poverty; they think of lh(t word
only as connected with ragged clothes, scanty food, lireless
grates, rnde manners, and debasing vices; poverty for me
was synonymous with degradation. ■ ,
" No; I should not like to belong to poor people, " waa^
my reply. I
" Not even if they were kind to yon? " 1
I shook my head: I could not see how poor people had
the moana of being kind; and thou to learn to apeak like
them, to adopt their miinners, to be uneducated, to grow
Op like one of the poor wumen I saw somotimoa nuraing
their chiklran or washing their clothes at the cottage
doors of the village of Gateshead: no, I was not heroic
enough to purchase liberty at the price of caste.
" Bat are your relatives ao very poor? Are they work-
ing people? "
" I can not tell; Aunt Reed aays if I have any, they
must be a beggarly set: I should not like to go a begging.'
" Would you like to go to school? "
Again I reflected: I scareoly knew what school was;
Bessie sometimes spoke of it as a place whore young ladioa
eat in the stocks, wore backboards, and were expected to
be exceedingly genteel and precise: John Reed hated, hit J
Bohool, and abuseil his master, but John Kc^ed's tasted:!
wero no rale for mine, and if Bessie's accoiitita of schoo^J
diBcipiliio (gathered from the young ladies of a family 1
wheru she had lived before coming to Gateshead) were
somewhat appalling, her details of certain accomplish
ments attained by these same young ladies were, I IhougLt,
equally attractive. Slie boasted of beautiful paintings of
landscapes and flowers by them executed; of songs they
eoitld King and pieces thsy could play, of purses thej
could net, of Preach books they could translate; till my
— |ki( waa moved to emulation as I listened. Beside? —
SB JANE TBB.
Bchool would be a complete change: it implied a
jonrne;, an entire Beparatton from Gateshead, an entri
into a new life,
" I should indeed like to go to school, " was the audible
conclusion of my muaiuge.
" Weil, well; who knowa what mar happen? " said Mr.
Lloyd, as he got up: " The child onglit to have change of
air and ecene, " he added, speaking to himself; " nerres
not in a good state. "
Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage
was heard rolling up the gravel-walk.
" la that your mistress, nurse? " usked Mr. Lloyd,
should like to speak to her before I go. "
Bessie invited him to walk into the brcakfast-roomj?
and led the way out. In the interview which followed be-
tween him and Mrs, lieed, I preEume, from after-occur-
rences, that the apothecary ventured to iccommend my
being sent to echool; and the reconimendaliou was no
doubt readily enough adopted; for as Ahhot said, in dis-
cussing the subject with BeBsie when both sat sewing in
tho nursery one night, after I was in bed, and, as they
thought, asleep,'■ Mifsis vias, she dared say, glad enough
to get rid of such a tiresome, ill-conditioned child, who
always looked as if she were watching every body,
Boheming plots underhand. " Abbot, I think, gave
credit for being a Eort of infantine Guy Fawkes.
On that same occasion I learned, for the first tij
from Miss Abbot's coniniuiiicatione to Bessie, that
father had been a poor cleieyman; that my mother
married him against (he wishes of her friends, who con-
sidered the match beneath her; that my giandfidhtT Reed
was so irritated at her disobedience, he cut her off without
a shilling; that after my mother and father had been
married a year, the latter cairght the Ijidius ftver while
visiting among the poor of a large niannfacturing town
where his curacy was situated, and where that disease waa
then prevalent; that my mother took the infection from
him, and both died witliin a month of each other,
BcBsie, when she heard this narrative, sighed and said,
" Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied, too. Abbot. "
" Yee, " responded Abbot, " if she were a nice, pretty
child, one might compassionate her forlomness; bat one
" V can sot care for such a lit^ toad as that. "
ffei » great deal, to be sure, agreed Besaf. " a^
'4
«Dd

EAwe^^

rate, a beauty like Miss Georgiana would bo more moTiujg
in the aame conditiou. "
" Yes, I dote on Miss Georgianal " cried the fervent
Abbot. " Little darling! — with her loug curia and her
blue eyes, and such a sweet color as she has; just as if she
were painted! — Bessie, I could fancy a Welsli rabbit for
supper. "
" So conld I — with a roast onion. Come, we'll j
down. " They went.
CHAPTEfi IV.
Fbou my disconrse with Mr. Lloyd, and from thi
above reported conference between Bessie and Abbot, I
gathered enough of hope to suffice as a motive for wishing
to get well: a change seemed near — I desired and waited
it m silence. It tatried, however : days and weeks
^faBsed: I had regained my normal state of health, but
no new allusion was made to the subject over which 1
brooded. Mrs. Reed surveyed me at times with a severe
eye, but seldom addressed me; since my illuess she had
drawn a more marked line of separation than ever between
me and her own children; appointing me a small closet to
sleep in by myself, condemning me to take my meals
alone, and puas all my time in the nursery, while my
cousins were constantly in the drawing-room. Not a hint,
however, did she drop abont sending me to school: still I
felt an instinctive certainty that slie would not long en-
dure me under the same roof with her; for her glance,
now more than ever, when turned on me, expressed an
insuperable and rooted aversion.
Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to
orders, spoke to me as little as possible: John thrust his
tongue in his rfieek whenever he saw me, and once
attempted chastisement; but as I instantly turned against
him, roused by the same eentimeut of deep ire and des-
perate revolt which had stirred my corruption before, ho
thought it better to desist, and rau ivoisi.mftM.V\.tV\a^wx?
ecratiOBB, and vowing I had burst taa uoBft, \\\s.i " " " *''"'''


lereied at Uiafc prominent feuinre aa liard a blow as n
knuckles could inflict; and when I eaw that either lliat _
my look daunted him, I had the greatist inclination t„
follow np my advantage to puipose; but he was already
with hie mamma. I heard him m a bluhhering tone com-
mence tha talo of how " that nasty Jane Eyre " had flown
at him like a mad eat: he was stopped rather harshly —
" Don't talif to me about her, John: I told you not to go
near her, she la not worthy of notice; I do not ehose that
either yon or your siatcre should aBBOciute with her. "
Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out ti-iddenly,
and without ut all deliberating on my words, " " They are
not fit to associate with me. "
Mrs. Beed was rathci'a stont woman; but on hearing
this strange and andacious declaration, she ran nimbly up
the stair, swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery, and
crushing me down on the edge of my crib, dared me in au
emphatic voice to rise from that place, or utter one ajllable
during Ihe remainder of the day.
" What would Uncle Reed say to ynu if he were alive? "
was my scarcely voluntary demand. I say scarcely ■volun-
tary, for it seemed as if my tongue pronounced words
without my will consenting to their utterance: something
spoke out of me over which I had no control.
" What? " said Mrs. Eeed under her breath; her
nsnally cold, composed gray ejo became troubled with a
look like fear; she took her hand from my arm, and gazed
at me aa if she really did not know whether I were child
or fiend. I was now in for it.
" My Uncle Eeed is in heaven, and can see all you do
and think; and so can papa and mamma: they know how
you flhut me up all day long, and how yon wish me dead,''
Mrs. Eeed soon rallied ner spirits: she shook me most
soundly, she boxed both my eare, and then left me with-
out a word. Begsie supplied the hiatus by a homily of an
hour's length, in which she proved beyond a doubt that I
was the most wicked and abandoned child ever reared
under a roof. I half believed her; for I felt indeed only
M > d feelings surging in my breast.
November, December, and half of January passed
away. Ohriatmas and the New Yeur had been celebrated
at Gateshead with the usual festive cheer; presents haoM
been interchanged, dinners and evening parties |
* " I enjoyment I was, of course, exulw'"
;
share of the gayety consisted in witnPHBing the daily
appflreliog of Eliza and Georgiana, and seeing them de-
scend to the drawing-room, dreaaed out in tliin mualjn
frocks and searlet sashea, with hair elaborately ringleted;
and afterwivrd, in listening to the sound of tbe piano or the
Karp plnyed below, to the passing to and fro of the bnller
and footin;in, to the jingling of glass and china as refresh-
ments wore handed, to the broken hum of eonversation as
the drawing-room doora opened and closed. When tired
of thia occupation, I would retire from tho stair-head to
the solitary and sileat nursery; there, though somewhat
sad, I was not miserable. To speak truth, I had not the
I«a«t wish to go into company, for in company I was very
rarely noticed; and if Boaaie had but been kind and com-
panionable, I should have deemed it a treat to spend the
evoninga quietly with her, instead of passing them under
the formidable eye of Mra. Rued, in a room full of ladies
and gentlemen. Bat B^saie, as soon as she had dressed
her young ladies, used to take herself ojjf to the lively
regions of the kitchen and housekeeper's room, generally
bearing the candle along with her, I then sat with my
doll on ray knee, till the fire got low, glancing round
occasionally to make sure that -lothing worse than myself
haunted tho shadowy room; and when the embera sank to
a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots and
strings as I best might, and sought shelter from cold and
darkness in my crib. To tbia crib I always took my doll;
human beinga mnat love something, and in the dearth of
worthier objects of affection, I contrived to find a pleasure
in loving and cherishing a faded graven image, shabby
KB a miniature scarecrow. It pnizlea me now to remem-
ber with what absurd sincerity I doted on this little toy,
half fancying it alivo and oupable of sensation. I could
not Bleep unless it was folded in my night-gown ; and
when it lay there safe and warm, I was comparativeljr
hajnty, believing it to be happy likewise.
Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure
of tho company, and listened for the sound of Bessie's
step on the stairs: sometimes she would come up in the
interval to seek her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to
bring me something by way of suiiper — a bun or a cheese-
cake — then she would sit on tliu bed while I ate it, and
when t had finished, she would tuck the clothes
me, and twice ehe kissed mo, and aaid, " Good-
'^^ < ^H

33 Jakr eyri;.
Miss Jane. " Wlion thns gentle, Bessie sssmed to me tlio
beat, prettieat, kindest being in the world ; and I wielied
most mtensely tiiat she would always bo so pleasant and
amiable, and never push me about, or scold, or task m«
unraasonably, aa she was too often wont to do. Bessie
Lee must, I think, have been a girl of good natural capac-
ity, for she was smart in all she did, and had a reniark-
ahle knack of narrative ; so, at least, 1 judge from the im-
pression made on me by her nursery tales. She was
pretty, too, if my recollections of her face and person are
correct. I remember her as a slim young woman, with
black hair, dark eyes, verj'nice features, and good, clear
complexion ; but she had a capricious and hasty temper,
and indifferent ideas of principle or jnstice: still, such as
she was, I preferred her to any one else at Gateshead Hall.
It was the fifteenth of January, about nine o'clock in
the morning: Bessie was gone down to breakfast ; my
cousina had not yet been summoned to their mamma;
Eliza wa« putting on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to
go and feed her poultry, an occupation of which she was
fond: and not Jess so of selling the eggs to the house-
keeper and hoai'ding i^) the money sue thus obtained.
She had a turn for traffic, and a marked propensity for
saving ; shown not only in the vending of eggs and ohick-
ens, but also in driving bard bargains with the gardener
about flower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants ; that func-
tionary having orders from Mrs, Keed to buy of his young
lady all the products of her parterre she wislied to sell:
and Eliza would have sold the hair off her head if she
could have made a handsome profit thereby. Aa to her
money, she first secreted it in odd corners, wrapped in a
rag or an old curl-paper ; but some of these hoards hav-
ing been discovered by the house-maid, Eliza, fea^^JI of
one day losing her valued treasure, consented to intrust
it to her motTier, at a usurious rate of interest — fifty or
sixty per cent ; which interest she exacted every quarter,
keeping her accounts in a little book with anxious accu-
racy,
Georgiana sat on a high stool, dressing her hair at th;
glass, and interweaving her curls with artificial floweri:
and faded feathers, of which she had found a store in ;
drawer in the attic. I was making my bed, havinj
received atriet orders from IHessie to get it arranged before
^e returned (for Bessie now frequently employed me
M^l
8ort of usder-nuraery-maid to tidy the room, duat th»
ohaire, etc). Having spread the quilt, and folded my
night-dress, I went to the window-seat to put in order some
picture books and doll's house furniture acattered there ;
an abrupt command fi'om Georgiana to let her playthings
alono (for the tiny chaiTsand mirrors, the fairy plates and
cups wore her property) stopped my proceedinga ; and
then, for lack of other occupation, I fell to breathing on
the froHt-flowers with which the window was fretted, and
thus clearing a space in the glass through which I might
look out on the grounds, where all was still and petrified
under the iiifluenoe of a hard frost.
From this window were visible the porter's lodge and
the carriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of
the silver-white foliage veiling the panes as left room to
l6ok out, I saw the gates thrown open and a carriage roll
through. I watched it ascending the drive with indiffer-
ence : carriages ofte " jCame to Gateshead, but none ever
brought visitors in wnmn I was interested ; it stopped in
front of the hoiiBS, the door-bell rang loudly, the new-
comer was adtuitted. All this being nothing to me, ray
vacant attention soon found livelier attraction in the spec-
tacle of a little hungry robin, which came and chirruped
on tho twigs of the leafless cherry-tree nailed against th«
wall near tne casement. The remains of my breakfast of
bread and milk stood on tho table, and having crumbled
a moraol of roll, I was tugging at the sash to put out the
crumbs on the window-sill, when Bessie came running up
stairs into the nursery.
" Miss Jane, take off your pinafore : what are you do-,
ing there ? lliive you washed your hands and face thif
morning ? " I gave another tug before I answered, for I
wanted f he bird to be secure of its bread ; the sash yielded
I scattered the crumbs, some on the stone eill, some oi
the cherry-tree boagh, then, closing the window, I replii
" No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting. "
" Troublesome, careless child ! and what are vou doing
now ? You look quite red, as if you had been about some
mischief : what were yon opening the window for ? "
I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie
jeemed in too great a hurry to listen to explanations : she
hauled me to the wash-stand, inflicted a merciless, but
happily brief scrub on my face and hands with soap,
water, and a coarse towel ; disciplined my head with ^
he
1
u
JASE ETRE.

bristly bniah, demidod me *f my pinafore, and th«i hai
ryiug me to the top of the Btaira. bid me go down direotlfi
as I was wanted in the breakfjLst-room.
I would have asked who wanted me : I would hart
demanded if Mrs. Reed waa there; but Bessie waeubi
gone, and had closed the nnrsery-door upon me.
slowly descended. Por nearly three months, I had never
been called to Mrs. Reed's presence : restricted so long to
the nursery, the brealdast, dining and drawing rooms
were become for me awful regions, on which it dismayed
me to intrude.
I now stood in the empty ball ; before me was the
breakfast -room door, and I stopped, intimidated and trem-
bling. Wliat a miserable little poltroon had fear, engen-
dered of iinjust piinisbmcut, made of me in those days ! I
feared to return to the nursery, and feared to go forward
to the parlor ; ten minutes 1 stood ii\^ agitated hesitation :
the vehement ringing of the breakfa.ft-room bell decided
me; I must enter.
" Who could want me ? " I aated inwardly, as with botli
hands I turned tlie stiff door-handle which, for a second
or two, resisted my efforts. " What should I see besides
Aunt Eeed in the apartment ? — a man or a woman ? "
The handle turned, the door unclosed, and passing
through and courtesying tow, I looked up at — a black pil-
lar I such at least, appeared to me,^ at first sight, the
straight, narrow, sable-clad shape standing erect on the
rug : tlie grim face at the top was like a carved maek,
placed above the shaft by way of capital.
Mrs. Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside : she
made a signal to me to approach : I did so, and she intro-
duced me to the stony stranger with the words:'^This is
ihe little girl respecting whom I applied to you. "
He, for it was a man, turned his head slowly toward
where I stood, and iiaving examined me with the two
inouisitivG-looking gray eyes which twinkled under a pair
of Duahy brows, said solemnly, and in a basa voice, " Her
aiEe is small : what is her age ? "
" Ten years. "
" So much? " was the doubtful answer: and he pro-
longed his scrutiny for some minutes. Presently I
adoressed me:
lur name, little girl F " t
In uttering these words I looked up : he eoemed to i
ft tall gentleman ; but then I was very little : his feattrf „
were large, and they and all the lines of hie frame w & te
equally harsh and prim.
*'Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child ! "
ImpoBBible to reply to this in the aflBrmative : my little
world held a contrary opinion : 1 was fiilent, Mrs. Eeed
answered for me by an expressiye shake of Ihe head, add-
ing Bonn, " Perhaps the less said on that subject the better,
Mr. Brocklehurst. "
" Sorry indeed to hear it 1 she and I must have some
talk ; and'bending from the pei-pendicular, ho installed
his person in the arm-chair, opposite Mrs. Reed's.'• C'ome
here. " he said.
I atupped acroas the rug ; he placed me square and
straight bofora him. What a. face he hatl, now Ihat it was
almost on a level with mine! what a great nosel and what
a tnnitth! and what large prominent teeth 1
" No eight 80 sad as that of a naughty child, " he began,
" eapecially a naughty little girl. Do you know where the
wiolied go after death ? "
" They go to hell, " was my ready and orthodox answer.
" And what is hell ? Can you teU me that ? "
" A pit full of fire. "
" And should you like to fall into that pit, and to I
bunting there forever ? "
" No, sir. "
" What must yoH do to avoid it ? "
I deliberated a moment ; my answer, when it did ooai
was objectionable : " I must keep in good health and I
die. "
" How can you keep in good health ? Children youtii
than you die daily, I buried a little child of five years oI3
piily a day or two since — a good little child, whose soul i
now in heaven. It is to be feared the same could not t
said of yon were you to be called hence. "
Not being in a condition to remove his doubt, I only c.
my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rng,
and siffhed, wishing myself far enough away.
'• f hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you re-
pent of ever having been the occasion of discomfort to
your excellent benefactress. "
S6 JANE EYKE.
all e«ll Mra. R«cd my benefactress ; if so, a benefactresa |
A disagreeable thing. "
" Do you eay your prayers night aud morning ? " con-
tinued my interrogator.
" Yes, sir. "
" Do yon read your Bible ? "
" Sometimes. "
" With pleasure ? Are you fond of it ? "
" I like Eevelationa, and the book of Daniel, and Gei.
eeia, and Samuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some porta A
of Kings, and Chronieles, and Job and Jonah ? "
" And the Psalms ? I hope you like them ? "
" No, sir, "
" No ? oh, shocking ! I have a little boy, younger than
you, who knows six Psalms by heart : and when you ask
him which he would rather have, a gingerbread -nut to eat,
or a verse of a Psalm to learn, he says :'Oh! the vcreo of
a Psalm! angels sing Psalms,'says he;'I wish to be a
little angel here below ;'he then gets two nuta in recora-T-i
penee for his infant piety. "
" Psalms are not interesting, " I remarked.
" That proves you have a wicked heart ; and you must
pray to God to change it ; to give you a new and clean
one : to take away your heart of stone and give you a heart
of flesh. " 1
I was about to propound a question, touching the maiwa
ner in which that operation of changing my heun was td:J
be performed, when Mrs. Reed interposed, telling me to
ait down; she then proceeded to carry on the conversation
herself.
" Mr, Brocklehurst, I believe I intimated in the letter
which I wrote to you three weeks ago, that this little girl
haa not quite the chai-acter and disposition I could wish :
should yon admit her into Lowood school, I should be glad
if the superintendent and teachere were requested to keep
a strict eye on her, and above all, to guard against her
worst fault, a tendency to deceit. I mention this in your
hearing. Jane, that you may not attempt to impose upon
Mr. llrocklehurst. "
M'ell might I dread, well might I dislilce, Mrs. Heed;
for it was her nature to wound me cruelly: never wna I
happy in her presence ; however carefully 1 obeyed, how-
ever Btrenuouslj I strove to please her, my efforts were atill
repulsed and repaid by such sentences ns the above. Now,
uttered before a Btranger, the aecusation cut me to thsl
heart: I dinily perceived that ahe was alreswly ohliteratiuKil
hope from the new phase of existence which she deatineSJ
mo to enter; I felt, though I could aot have expressed thes
feeling, that aho was sowing aversion and unkiudnesa alonj J
my fnture path; I saw myself transformed under Mr.,1
Brocklehnrst's eye into an artful, noxious child,-and wha^fl
could I do to remedy the injury? ■
" Nothing, indeed, " thought I, as I struggled to repreaf^l
& Bob, and hastily wiped away some tears, the impolen^B
evidences of my anguish. ■
" Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child, " said Mr..B
Brocklehnrst ; " it is akin to falsehood, and all liara will \
have their portion in tlie lake burning with fire and brim-
stone: aha shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reed; I will
apeak to Misa Tumple and the teachers. "
" I slioald wish her to be brought up in a manner suitr
ing her prospects, " continued my benefactress; " to bo J
made nseftd, to be kept humble; as for the vacations, sh^l
will, with your permission, spend them always at Lo*J
wood. " 1
" Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam, " re- j
turned Mr. Brocklehurst. " Humility is a Christian grac^.S
and one peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of Lowoodj^
I, therefore, direct that especial care shall be bestowed on
its onltivation among them, I have studied how best to
mortify in them the worldly sentiment of pride; and, only
the other day, I had a pleasing proof of my success. M^
second daughter, Augusta, went with her mamma to Tisit,
the school, and on her return she cxelained;'Oh, deaifl
papa, how quiet and plain all the girls at Lowood lookllB
with their hair combed behind their ears, and their lon^-^
pinafores, and those little holland pockets outside their
frocks — they are almost like poor people's children! and,'
said she,'they looked at my dress and mamma's, as it
they had never seen a silk gown before.'"
" This is the state of things I quite approve, " returned
Mrs, Bocd; " had I sought all England over I could
scarcely have found a system more exactly fltting a child
hki- Jiiuc Kyre. Conaistency, my dear Mr. BrocklehurBt; ll
advijL-atL'i-i:i)isiBtency in all tilings, " M
'■ Consistency, nnidam, ia the first of Christian dutJesi'l
'it has been observed in every arranffotaetit cownatAfiM
slio establishment of Lowood; p\am Iwre, sict^^w
38 JANE BY££.
tire iinsophtBticated accommodations, hardy and active
habits; such is the order of the day in the house and its
inhabitanta. "
" Quite right, air. I may then deiiend upon this child
"'■ "'.nd f
being jeceived as a pupil at Lowood, and there beuig
'" -■•■■3d in conformity to her position and prospects? "
Mad.^m, you may: she shall be plaeed iu that uiirsory
trained in conformity to her position and prospects? "
may: she shall be placed iu that uiii
of chosen plants — and I trust she will show herself grate'-
ful for the inestimable privilege of her election.''
" 1 will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr. Brockle-
huret; for, 1 assure you I feel ansioua to be relieved of a
responsibility that was becoming too irksome. "
" No doubt, no doubt, madam, and now I wish you
good -morn ing, I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in
the cQUrse of a week or two: my good friend, the Arch-
deacon, will not permit me to leave him sooner. I shall
send Miss Temple notice that she is to expect a new girl,
so that there will be no dif & culty about receiving her,
Oood-by. "
" Good-by, Mr. Brocklehurst, remember me to Mrs. aud
Miss Brocklehurst, and to Augusta aud Thepdoro, and
Master Broughton Brocklehurst.
" I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled
the'Child's Guide'; read it with prayer, especially that
part containing * an account of the awfully sudden death
of Martha , a naughty child addicted to falsehood
and deceit.'"
With these words Mr, Brocklehurst put into my hand
a thin pamphlet aewn in a cover, and having rung for hia
carriage, ho departed.
" Mrs. Heed and I were left alone: some minutes paB=ed
in silence; she was sewing, and I was watching her. Mrs.
Heed might be at that time some six or seven and thirty;
she was a woman of robust frame, square shouldered aud
strong-limbed, not tall, and, though stout, not obese, she
had a somewhat large face, the under jaw being much
developed and very solid; her brow was low, her chin
largo aud prominent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular;
under her light eyebrows glimmered an eye devoid of ruth;
her skin was dark and opaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her
constitution was sound as a bell — illness never came near
her; she was an exact, clever manager, her household and
tenantry were thoroughly under her control; her children,
«ui^ at times defied her authority, aud laughed it tpy
JAWE ETRE.
i presence and port c
ecorti; she dreased well, and had i
culaled to Bet oS handsome attire.
Sitting on n low Btool, a few yards from her arm chair,
I examined her figure, I perused her featureB, In my
hand 1 hald a tract containing the sudden death of the
Ijar: to which narrative my attention had heen pointed as
to an appropriate warning. What had just passed; whft^ I
Mrs. Reed had aaid concerning me to Mr. Bro ckl ehu rBfcjB
the whole tenor of their convereation was recent, raw, Aw9
Btingingin my mind; I had felt every word as acutely aajj
had neard it plainly, and a pasidon of resentment fomeiita^H
now within me. " S
Mrs. Iteod looked up fi-om her work; her eye settled rfflj
mine, her fingers at the same time snspended their nimbl^
movements- ^
" Go out of the room; return to the nurseiT, " was hen
mandate. My look or something else must nave strucp^
her as offensive, for she spoke with extreme, though sup-
pressed irritation. I got up, I went to the door; I came
oack again; I walked to the window, across the room, then
close up to her.
Speak I must; I had been trodden on severely, andj
must turn, but how ? What strength had I to dart rct^jfl
iation at my antagoniatP I gathered my energies anA
launched them in this blunt sentence: " I am not deo«^|
fui; if 1 were, I should say I love i/ou; but I declare I ^t«
Hot love you; I dislike you worst of anybody in the worl^l
except Jonu Reed; and this book about the liar, you mav^
give to your girl, G-eorgiana, for it is she who tells lies, ana
not I. "
Mrs. Heed's hands still lay on her wort inactive: her eye
of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine,
" What more have you to say.'" she asked rather in the
tone in which a person might address an opponent of adult
age tlmn snch as is ordinarily used to a child.
That eye of hers, that voice, stirred every antipathy I
had. Shaking irom head to foot, thrilled with ungovern-
ahlu excitement, I continued: " I am glad you are no relflr |
tion of mine: I will never call you aunt again as long aa I |
livi'. I will never come to sec you when I am grown upj
and if anyone aeks me how I liked you, and how you
treatM inc, I will say the very thought of you makes me
nek, and that you treated me with miserable cruelty. "
^K|4«J3i)w dare ^ou affirm that, Jk.'\(i Eyi'q'! "

" How dare T, Mra. Heed? How dare I? Because it ie
the tnilh. You think I have no feelings, and that I ean
do without one bit of love or kindness; but I cannot live
80! and you have no pity. I shall remember how you
thrust me ba < ;k — roughly and violently thrust me batk —
into the red-room, and locked me up there, to my dying
day; though I waa in agony, though I cried out, wliilc suf-
fering with distress,'Have mercyl Have mercy. Aunt
Heed T'And that punishment you made mo suffer because
your wicked boy struck me— knocked me down for noth-
ing, I will tell ajiy body who asks me questions, this exact
tale. People think you a good woman, hut you are bad;
hard-hearted. You are deceitful! "
Ei'o I had finished this reply, ray sou! began to expand,
to exult, with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph,
I ever felt. It seemed as if an invisible bond had
burst and tliat I had struggled out into unhoped-for liberty.
Not without cause was this sentiment. Mrs. Reed looked,
frightened; her work had slipped from her knee; she
lifting up her hands, rocking lierself to and fro, and t
twiating iiur face as il she would cry.
" Jane, you are under a mistake: what ia the mat((
with jou? Why do yon tremble so violently? Would yj
like to drink some water? "
" No, Mrs. Reed. "
" Is there anything else yon wish for, Jane? I assu]
yon, I desire to be your friend. "
" Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehurst I had a badl
character, a deceitful disposition; and I'll let everybody at!
Lowood know what you are, and what you have done. "
" Jane, you don't understand these things: children
must be corrected for their faults. "
" Deceit is not my fault 1 " I cried out in a savage, hig]
voice,
" But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allol
ftnd now return to the nursery — there's a dear — and i
down a little. "
" I am not your dear; I can not lie down; send mo to
school soon, Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here. "
" I will indeed send her to school soon, " murmured
Mrs, Reed, soHo voce; and gathering up her work she
abruptly quitted the apartment.
I was left there alone^winner of the field. It was
i battle I had fought, and the fii-st Tictwy I

JANE ETRB.
: I stood awhile on the rag. where Mr. Brock-
lehnrat had stood, and I enjoyed my conqueror's solitude.
First, I smiled to myself and felt elate ; hut this fierce
pleasure eubsided in me as fast as did the accelerated
throb of my puisSa. A child can not quarrel with its
elders, aa I had done ; can not give its furiouB feclingti
uncontrolled play, aa I had given mine, without oxpor-
ieuciiig afterward the pang of remorse and the chill of re-
action, A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, de-
vouring, would have heen a meet emblem of my mind when
I accused and menaced Mrs. Reed: the same ridge, black
and blasted after the flames are dead, would have repre-
sented as meetly my subsequent condition, when half an
hour's silence and reflection had shown me the madness of
my conduct, and the dreariness of my hatred and hating
position.
Something of vengeance T had tasted for the first time:
aa aromatic wine, it seemed, on swallowing, wai-m and
racy: its after-flavor, metallic and corroding, gave me a
sensation as if I had been poisoned. Willingly would
1 now have gone and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon ; hut I
knew, partly from experience and partly from instinct,
that was the way to make her repulse nie with double
scorn, thereby re-exoiting every tnrhulont impnlao of my
nature.
I would fain exercise some better faculty than that
of fierce speaking ; fain find nourishment for some leas
fiendish feeling than that of somber indignation. I took
a book — some Arabian tales ; I sat down and endeavored
to read. I could make no sense of the subject ; my own
thoughts swam alwa^ between me and the page I had
uauaflv found fascinating, I opened the glass door in the
breakiast-room: the shrnhbery was quite still: the black
frost reigned, unbroken by sun or brcczo, through the
grounds. I covered my head and arms with the skirt of
my frock, and went out to walk in a part of the plantation
which was quite seqneBtered: but I found no pleasure in .
the silent trees, the falling fircones, the congealed relics 0|
autumn, russet leaves, swept by past winds in heaptf
and now giiRened together. T leaned against a gate, aiU
looked into an empty field where no sheep were feeding
where the short grass was nipped and blanched. It WM
a very gi-ay day: a most opaque sky, " ending on snaw, " j
" " " ■ " "''J,,, flie«c« flakes feU »t intervals, which sett''

43 JAHE EXBIl.
on the hard path and on the hoary lea without melt-
ing. I stood, a wretched child enough, whispering to
myst'lf over and over again, " What shall I do?— what
shall I do? "
All at once I heard a clear voice eall, " Mias Janel when
are you? t.'ome to Junchl "
It was BoBsie, I knew well enough; hut I did not stir^
hor light step came tripping down the path. ;
" You naughty little thing! " she said. " Why doi^
you come when you are called? "
Bessie's presence, compared with the thoughts i
which I had been broorling, suemed choorful; oven though
as usual, sliu waa somewhat cross. The fact is, after my
conflict with and TictoiT over Mrs. Heed, 1 was not dis-
posed to care much for the nnrse-maid'a transitory anget^
and I was disposed to bask in her youthful lightness oP
heart. I just put my two arms round her, and s;iid, " Com^
Bessie! don't scold. "
The action was more frank and fearless than any I was
habituated to indulge in: somehow it pleased her.
" You are a strange child. Miss Jane, " she said, as she
looked down at me: " a little, roving, solitary thing; and ^
you are going to school, I suppose? "
I nodded.
" And won't you be sorry to leave [
" What, does Bessie care for me? She is always ecolSJ
ing nie? "
■ "'Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy, litt
thing. You should he bolder. "
" Wluitl to get more knocks? "
" Nonsense! But you are rather put upon, that's
certain. My mother said, when she came to see me last
week, that she would not like a little one of her own to be.
in your place. Now, come in, and I've some good newi'
for you. "
" I don't think you h
" Child! what do y
you fix on me! AVell! but Missis and the young lac
and Master John are going out to tea this afternoon, and
you shall have tea with nie. I'll ask cook to bake you a
little cake, and then you shall help me to look over your
drawers, for I am soon to pack your trunk. Missis intends
you to leave Gateshead m a day or two, and you shall
ohgosg whrt toys you like to take with you. "
JAKE EYKE. 43
'^ Bessie^ you must promise not to scold me any more
tilllgo/^
^'Well, I will : but mind you are a very good girl, and
don't be afraid of me. Don't start when I chance to speak
rather sharply : it's so provoking. "
^'I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again,
Bessie, because I have got used to you ; and I shall soon
have another set of people to dread. "
^'If you dread them, they'll dislike you. "
" As you do, Bessie ? "
" I don't dislike you. Miss; I believe I am fonder of
you than of all the others. "
" You don't show it. "
" You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way
of talking What makes you so venturesome and hardy ?
" Why, I shall soon be away from you, and besides "
I was going to say something about what had passed
between me and Mrs. Reed ; but on second thoughts I con-
sidered it better to remain silent on that head.
" And so you're glad to leave me ? "
" Not at all, Bessie; indeed, jufft now I am rather
sorry. "
" Just now ! and rather ! How coolly my little lady
says it ! I dare say now if I were to ask you for a kiss you
wouldn't give it to me : you'd say you'd rather not. "
^* I'll kiss you and welcome : bend your head down. "
Bessie stooped ; we mutually embraced, and I followed her
into the house quite comforted. That afternoon lapsed in
peace and harmony ; and in the evening Bessie told me
some of her most enchanting stories, and sang me some of
her sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams of
sunshine.
CHAPTER V.
Five o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the
19th of January, when Bessie brought a candle into my
closet, and found me already up and nearly dressed. I
had risen half an hour before her entrance, and had
washed my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a
half-moon juet setting, whose rays streamed throagh the
narrow window near my crib. 1 was to leave GatesUead
that day by a coach whicli passed the lodge gates at six a. m.
Bessie was the only person yet risen ; she had lit a fire in
the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my break-
fast. Few children can eat when escited with the
thoughts of a journey ; nor could I. Bessie, having
pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled
milk and bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some
biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag; then she
helped me on with my pelisae and bonnet, and, wrapping
heraelf in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we
passed Mrs. Keed'a bedroom, she said, " Will you go in
and bid Missis good-by ? "
" No, Bessie : she came to my crib last night when you.,
were gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb " ^^
in the morning, or my cousins either ; and she told mi
remember that she had always been my best friend, and
speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly, "
" What did yon say. Miss. "
" Nothing: I covered my face with the bed-clothea,
and turned from her to the wall. "
" That was wrong. Miss Jane, "
" It was quite right, Bessie ; youi'Misses has not been
my friend ; she has been my foe, "
" Oh, Miss Jane 1 don't say so ! "
" Good-by to Gateshead [ " cried I, as we passed through
the hall and went out at the front door.
The moon was set, and it was very dark ; Bessie carried a
lantern, whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road
Bodden by a recent thaw. Raw and chill was the winter
morning ; my teeth chattered as I hastened down the drive.
There was a light in the iiorter's lodge ; when we reached
it, we found tlie porter's wife just kmdhng her fire : my
trunk, which had been carried down the evening before,
stood corded at the door. It wanted hut a few minutes of
six, and shortly after that hour had struck the distant roll
of wheels announced the coming coach ; I went to the
door, and watched its lamps approach rapidly through
the gloom.
" Is she going by herself? " asked the porter's wife.
" Yes. "
" And how far is it i "'
" jhtty miles. "

a Hng V
JANE EYRE.
Vl I *
t & aid
[ woiidtir Mrs. Beed i
to trust her BO far alone. "
The coacli drew np ; there it was at the gates wi th its fimr
horsea and its top laden with passengers; the guard und
coachmen loudly urged haste ; my trunk was hoisted up ; I
vraa taken from Bessie's neck, to which I clun^ with kisses.
'* Be sure and take good care of her, " cned she to the
guard, as he lifted me into the inside.
" Ay, ay ! " was the answer ; the door was slapped to, a
voice exclaimed, " All riglit, " and on we drove. Thus was
I severed from Bessie and Gateshead : thus whirled away
to unknown, and as I then deemed, remote and mysterious
regions.
J remember but little of the journey ; I only know that
the day seemed to me of a preternatural length, and that
we appeared to travel over hundreds of miles of road. Wa
passed through several towns, and in one, a very large one,
the coach stopped ; the horses were taken out, and the pas-
sengers alighted to diue. I was carried into an inn, where
ilie guard wanted me to have some dinner ; but as I had no
appetite, he left me in an immense room with a fire-place
at each end, a chandelier pendant from the ceiling, and a
little red gallery high up against the wall filled with mn-
Bical instruments. Here I walked about for a long time,
feeling very strange, and mortally apprehensive of some
one coming in and kidnapping me, for I believed in kid-
nappers, their exploits having frequently figured in Bessie's
fireside chronicles. At last the guard returned^ once more
I was stowed away in the coach, my protector mounted his
own seat, sounded his hollow horn, and away we rattled
over the " stony street " of L .
The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty ; as it
waned into dusk, I began to feel that we were getting very
far indeed from Gateshead : weceased to pass through towns;
the country changed : great gray hills heaved up around
the horizon ; as twilight deepened, we descendetf a valley,
dark with wood, and long after night had overclouded tha
prospect I heard a wild wind rushing among the trees.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep : I
not long slumbered when the sudded cessation of i
awoke me ; the coach door was open, and a person
servant was standing at it : I saw her face and dress by t^
light of the lam^s.
''Is .there a httle girl called Jane Eyre here ? " she asked
46
JAITE ETBE.

I anawered " Yea, " and was then lifted ont ; my trunlc fl
handed down, and the coach instantly drove away.
IwnAstiH with long sitting, and bewildered with t
noise and motion of the couch : gathering my faculties t
looked about me. Rain, wind, and darkueas filled the air ;
nevertheless I dimly discerned a wall before me and a door
open in it ; through this door I passed with my new guide;
ano ehut and locked it behind her. There was now visible
A house or houses — for the building spread afar — with many
windows, and lights burning in some ; we went up a broad
pebbly path, splashing wet, and were admitted at a door j
then the seryant led me through a passage into a r ■ "
with a fire, where she left me alone,
I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze^'
then I looked round ; there was no candle, but the uncer- "
tain light from the hearth showed by intervale, papered
waJle, carpet, cartainsj shiny mahogany furniture : it was
a parlor, not so spacious or splendid as the drawing-room
at Gateahead, bet comfortable enough. I was puzzling
to make out the subject of a picture on the wall, when the
door opened, and an individual carrying a light entered ;
another followed close behind.
The first waa a tall lady with dark hair, dark eyes, and ;
a pale and large forehead ; her figure was partly enveloped
jn a shawl, her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
" The child is very young to be sent alone, " said Bhe,,j
patting her candle down on uie table. She considered ma ,
attentively for a minute or two, then further added : |
" She had hotter be put to bed soon ; she looks tired j,,
are you tired ? " she aaked, placing her hand on my alioul?*
der.
" A little, ma'am. "
" And hungry too, no doubt : let her have some suppe^
before she goes to bed. Miss Miller. Is this the first timo^
you have left your parents to come to school, my littler
girl ? "
I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired *
how long they had been dead ; then how old I was, what
■was my name, whether I could read, write, and sew a
little : then she touched my cheek gently with her fore-
finger, and saying, " She hoped I should he a good child, "
dismissed me along with Miss Miller.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; tha
one who went with mo appeared some years youn^ai *jiil
JASE ETBE.
first impresBed me by her voice, look and air. Mias MiUltP*
was more ordinary; ruddy in complexion, though of u
caro-woni counlonaiice; liurried in gait and action, like
one who had alwivvs u multiplicity of tasks on hand; she
looked, indeed, what I afterward found siie really was, an
under- teacher. Led by her, I passed from compartment
to compartment, from passage to pitssage, of a largo and
irregular building; till emerging from the total and soma-
whftt dreary silence pervatling that portion of the liouee
we had traversed, we came upon the hum of many voices,
and presently entered a wide, long room, witli great deal
tables, two at each end. on each of wliich burned a pmr of
oondles, and seated all round ou benches, a congregation
of girls of every age, from nine or ten to twenty. Seen
by the dim light of the dips, their number to me appeared
oounlless, though not in reality exceeding eighty; they
were uniformly dressed in brown stuff frocks of quaint
fashion and long holland pinafords. It was the hour of
study; they were engaged m conning over their to-mor-
row'a task, and the hum I heard was the combined result
of their whispered repetitions.
Miss Miller signed me to sit on a bench near the
door, then walking up to the top of the long room, she
cried out:
" Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them
away! "
Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going
round, gathered the books and removed them. Miea
Miller again gave the word of command:
" Monitors, fetch the snpper-traysl "
The tall girls went out and retHrned presently, eacli
■bearing a tray, with portions of something, I knew not
what, arranged thereon, and a pitcher .of water and mug
in the middle of each tray. The portions were handod
round; thoso who liked took a draught of the water, the
mug being common to all. When it came to my turn I
drank, for I waa thirsty, but did not touch the food, ejt-
citcmeut and fatigue rendering me incapable of eating: J
now saw, however, that it was a thin, oaten cake, shared
into fragments.
The meal over, prayers were read by Miss Miller, and
the classes filed off, two and two, up stairs. Overpowered
by this time with weariness, I scarcely noticed what sort
itii6 bedroom was; except that, like th« school-

tS JANE ETEE.
room, I saw it was very long. To-night I vos to bo Mw^
Miller's bed-fellow; ehc helped mo to undrese: when liu( i
down 1 glanced at the long rowa of beds, each Of whiti'l
was quii^ly filled with two occupants; in ten minutes thf I
single light was extinguished; amidst silence and conipletf I
darKDosB, I fell asleep. I
The night passed rapidly: I was too tived even icM
dream; I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furionj^
.gnsts, and the ruin fall in torrents, and to be sensibli "
that Miss Miller had taken her place by my side. Whei.
I again unclosed my eyes, a lond hell was ringing: th«'
girls were np and dressing; day liad not yet begun to
dawn, and a rnsb-liglit or two. burned in the room, I too
rose reluctantly; it was bitter cold, and I dressed as well as
I could for Bhivering, and washed when there was a basin
at liberty, wliicli did not occur soon, as there was but one
basin to six girls on the standa down the middle of the
room, A^ain the bell rang; a!! formed in file, two and
two, and m that order descended the stairs and entered
the cold and dimly-lit school-room: here pr^ers were read
by Miss Miller: afterward aha called out, " Form classes! "
A great tumult succeeded for somo minutes, during
which Miaa Miller repeatedly exclaimed, " Silencel " ana
" Order! " When it subsided, I sarf them all draw up
in four semicircles, before four chairs, placed at the four
tables; all held hooka in their hands, and a great book,
like a Bible, lay on each table, before the vacant seat.
A pause of some seconds succeeded, filled up by the low,
vague hum of numbers; Miss Miller walked from class to
olaas, hushing this indefinite sound.
A distant Dell tinkled: immediately three ladies entered
the room, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss
Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair, which was that
nearest the door, and around which the smallest of the
children were assembled: to this inferior class I was
called, and placed at the bottom of it.
Business now began: the day's Collect waa repeated,
then certain texts of Scrptare were said, and to these
Buoceeded a protracted reading of chapters in the Bible,
which lasted an hour. By the time that ejcercise was ter-
minated, day had fully dawned. The indefatigable bell
now sounded for the fourth time: the classes were mar-
shalled and marched into another room to breakfast: !iOW
I was to behold a prospect of getting something to
JASE ETRE.
eat! I was now nearly eiok from inanition, having 1
so little the day before.
The refectory was a groat, low-ceiled, gloomT roomjJ
two long tables smoked [laains of something hot, whlo
however, to my dismay, sent forth iin odor far from inT^
ing. I saw ft universal manifestation of discontent whg
the fumes of the repast met the noslrils of those destiffl
to swallow it: from the van of tlie procession, thej
girls of the first class, i-ose and wliispered words,'"
gnstin^! The porridge is burned again! "
■'SUence! " ejaculated u voice; not that of Miss Mil
but one of the upper teachers, a little and dark pcrsoiw
Bmai-tly dressed, out of anmewhat morose aspect, wild
stalled herself at the top of one table, while a more buS
lady presided at the other. I looked in vain for her IB
fipat Been the night before; she was not visible. Miss "
Miller occupied the foot of the table where I sat, and a
strange, foreign-looking, elderly lady, the French teachOTJJi'
as 4. afterward found, took tho corresponding seat atJ^^
other board, A long graco was said, and a hymn sta
then ft servant brought in some tea for the teacbera,'
the meal began.
BavenouB, and noiv very faint. I devoured a spoonful™
or two of my portion without thinking of its taste; but
tho first edge of hunger blunted. I perceived I had got in
band a nauseous mcas; buraod porridge is almost as bad
(18 rotten potatoes; famine itself sooii sickens over it.
The spoons were moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her
foml and tr^ to swallow it; but in most cases the effort
was soon relinqiiished. Breakfast was over, and none had
breakfasted. Thanks being returned for what we liad not
got. and a second hymn chanted, the refectory was evaou-
atod for tho school-room. I was one of the last to go out,
and ill passing the tables, I saw one teacher take a basin
of the porredge and taste it; she looked at tho others; all
their countenances expressed displeasure, and one of them,
the Btotit one, whispered, " Abominable stuff ! How
shameful ! "
A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began,
during which the school-room was in a glorious tumult;
for that space of time, it seemed to he permitted to talk
loud and more freely, and they used their pririlege. The
whole conversation ran on the breakfast, which one and
*^~'" " " " Poor things! it was the sole conad "
50 JA-NE ETBE.
tion they had. MisB Miller was now the only teacher in
the room: a group of great girls Btanding about her, spoke
with serious and sullen gestures, I heard tho nunte of
Mr. Brocklehurst prononnced by some lips: at which Miss
Miller shook her nead disapprovingly; but she made uo
great effort to check the general wrath: doubtless she
shared in it.
A clock in the Bchool-room struck nine; Miss Miller
left her circle, and standing in the middle of the room,
cried, " Silence! To your seats! "
Discipline prevailed; in five minutes the confused
throng was resolved into order, and comparative silent
qaellM the Babel clamor of tongues. The upper teachel
now punctually resumed their posts: but still, all seeme .
lo wait. Banged on benches down the sides of the room,
the eighty girU sat motionless and erect: a quaint assem-
bla^ they appeared, all with plain locks combed from
their faces, not a curl visible; in brown dresses, made
high and surrounded by a narrow tucker about the throat,
with little pockets of holland (shaped something like a
Highlander's purse) tied in front of their frocks, and des-
tined to serve the purpose of a work-bag, all, too, wearing
woolen stockings and country-made shoes, fastened with
brass buckles. Above twenty of those clad in this costume
were full-grown girls, or i-ather young women; it suited
them ill, and gave an air of oddity even to the prettiest.
I was still looking at them, and also at intervals esam-
ining the teachers — none of whom precisely pleased me;
for the stout one was a little coarse, the dark one not a
little fierce, the foreigner harsh and grotesque, and Miss
Miller, poor thing ! looked purple, weather-beaten, and
overworked— when as my eye wandered from face to face,
the wliole school rose simultaneously, as if moved by u
common spring.
Wliat was the matter? I had heard no order given: I
was puzzled. Ere I had gathered my wits, the classes
were again seated: but as all eyes were now turned to one
point, mine followed the general direction, and encoun-
tered the pei-sonage who had received me last night. She
Btood at the bottom of the long room, on the hearth; for
there was a fire at each end; she surveyed the two rows of
girls silently and gravely. Miss Miller approaching, seemed
to ask her a question, and having received her answer.
?ed ^^
iea*^H
m-
JANE ETEK.
went IJHcfe to her place, and suid, aloud, " Monitor of tffl
first ciass, fetcli me the globes! "
Willie tlie direction was being cxeeuted, tlie Ittdy com
suited moved slowly up the room. I suppose 1 have t
conaiderablc organ of vent > ration, for I rotiiin yet ttf
sense of admiring awe with which myejea traced her 8tep(
Seen now. in broad daylight, she looked tall, fair, aid
sbaiiely; brown eyes, with a benignant light in their iridf
and a fine penciling o( long laahea round, relieved tt
whiteness rif hfir large front; on each of her temples hq
hair, of a very dark brown, was clustered in round curia
according to the fai;hion of those times, when neithd
smooth bands nor long ringiets were in vogue; her dreaf
also in tlie mode of the day, was of purple cloth, relieva
by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet; a gold watq
(vatches were uot bo common then as now) shown at h'
girdle. Let the leader add, to complete the picture, i
fined features, a complexion, if pale, clear, ami a stiitu
air and carriage, and he will have, at least, as clearly i
words can give it, a correct idea of the esterior of Mul
Temple — Maria Temple, as I afterward saw the nam
wi'itten in a prayer-book intrusted to me to carry f
church.
The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this h
having taken her seat before a pair of globes placed on o
of the tables, summoned the first class round her, and eoi
tnenced giving a Iorsou in geography; the lower clasBes
were called by the teachers: repctitmua in history, gram-
mar, etc., went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic
euoeeeded, and musio lessons were given by Miss Temple
to aome of the older girls. The duration of each lesson
was measured by the clock, which at last struck twelve.
The superintendent rose: " I have a word to address ti
the pupils, " said she.
Tlie tnmult of cessation from lessons was already breald
jng forth, but it sank at hor voice. She went on : " YtA
had this morning a breakfast which you could not eafl
JOB must be hungry: I have ordered that a lunch of brea
and cheese shall bo served to all. "
- The teachers looked at her with a sort of surprise,
" It is to be done on my own responsibility, " she added, "
in an explanatory tone to them, and immediately afterward
leftjhe room.
LMd olieoae was pceBeaU; bronglit in and di»-
6% JANE ETRB.
tribated to the high delight and refreBhrnent of the whole
school. The order was now given " To the garden! " Eaeh
put on a coarse straw bonnet, with strings of colored cal-
ico, and a cloak of gray frieze. I was aiuiilarlj'equipped,
and, following the stream, I made my way into the open
air.
The garden was a wide inclosure, surrounded with walls
80 high as to exclude overy glimpse of prospect; a covered
Teranda ran down one side, and broad walks bordered a
middle space divided into scores of little bedsv these beds
were aasigned as gardens for the pupils to cultivate, and
each bed had an owner. When full of flowers they would
doubtless look pretty: bnt now, at the latter end of Janu-
ary, all was wintry blight and brown decay, I shuddered
ae I stood and looked round me; it was an inclement day
for outdoor exercise; not positively rainy, but darkened
by a-driz7,ling yellow fog; all underfoot was still soaking
wet with the floods of yestei'day. The stronger among
the girls ran about and , engaged iu active games, but
sundry pale and thin ones herded together for shelter and
warmth in the veranda; and among these, as the dense
mist penetrated to their shivering frames, I heard fre-
qnently the sound of a hollow cough.
As yet I had spoken to no one, nor did any body seem to
take notice of me; 1 stood lonely enough: but to that feel-
ing of isolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me
much, I leaned against a pillar of the veranda, drew my
gray mantle close about mc, and, trying to forget the cold
which nipped me without, and the unsatisfied hunger
which gnawed me within, delivered myself up to the em-
ployment of watching and thinking. My reflections were
too undefined and fragmentary to merit record; I hardly
vet knew where I was; Gateshead and my past life seemed
floated away to an immeasurable distance; the present was
vague and strange, and of the future I could form no con-
{'ecture. I looked round the convent-like garden, and
hen up at the house; a large building, hmf of which
seemed gray and old, the other half quite new. The new
part, contaiuing the school-room and dormitory, was lit
by muUiont'd and latticed windows, which gave it a church-
liko aspect; a atone tablet over the door bore this inaorip-
tion: ™
JAKE KTKB.
LOWOOD Inhtitl'tion.
w*s heitotIiT a.d.^, by NAnut BBocKLfintRi
r light Rhine before men that they mnj- s
I read these worda over and over again; I felt that aiL
explanation belonged to them, and was unable fully j
penetrate their import. I was still pondering tlie aigbfl
cation of " Institution, " and endeavoring to inxke oufl
connection between tlie first worda and the vorBe of Scr^
nre, when the sound of ii cough close behind me
me turn my head. I eaw a girl sitting on a stone \
near; aha was bent over a book, < m tlio perusal of whic^
she seemed intent; and from where I stood I could see tli
title — it was " Rasselas " ; a name that struck me as strangi
and consequently attractive. In tuniing a leaf, she haVi
pened to look up, and 1 said to her directly, " Is your b
interosting? " I had already formed tlie intention oC i
ing her to lend it to mo some day.
" I like it, " she answered, after a pause of a aeconclj
two, during which she examined rae. "
" What is it about? " I continued. I hardly kni_
where I found the hardihood thus to open a conversatwi
with a stranger; the step was contrary to ray nature tut
habits: but I think her occupation touched a chord of syji
pathy somewhere; for I, too, liked reading, though of ;
frivolous and childish kind; I could not digest or eonipra
head the serioua or substantial.
" You may look at it, " replied the girl, offering me tioTl
book.
I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the
contents were less taking than the title: " Rasselas " looked
dull to my trifling taste; I eawnolhing about fairies, noth-
ing about genii; no bright variety seemed spread over the
closely-printed pages. 1 returned it to her; she received
it qnietl^, and without saying anvthing she was about to
relapse into her former studious mood; again I ventured
to disturb her: " Can you tell rae what the writing on
that stone over that door means? What is Lowood Inati-
totion? "
" This house where you are come to live. "
" And why do they call it Institution? Is it in t
way different from other schools? "

54 JANE EYRE.
" It is partly a charity-school: you and I, and all the
rest of us, are charity-children. 1 suppose you are an
orphan: are not either your father or your mother dead?^^
^^Both died before I can remember. ^^
" Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both
parents, and this is called an institution for educating
orphans.^'
" Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing ?^^
" We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for
each.^^
" Then why do they call us charity-children?^^
" Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and
teaching, and the deficiency is sunplied by subscription.^'
^'Who subscribes ? "
" Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in
this neighborhood and in London. ^^
" Who was N " aomi Brocklehurst?^^
" The lady who built the new part of this house as that
tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs every-
thing here.
" Why?
" Because he is treasurer and manager of the estab-
lishment.^^
" Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who
wears a watch, and who said we were to have some bread
and cheese. ^^
" To Miss Temple? Oh no! I wish it did: she has to
answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she dees. Mr. Brockle-
hurst buys all our food and all our clothes.^'
" Does he live here?^^
" No — two miles off, at a large hall.^'
" Is he a good man? "
" He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of
good.^^
" Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple? "
" Yes.^^
" And what are the other teachers called? "
" The one with the red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she
attends to the work, and cuts out— for we make our own
clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and everything; tlie little
one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; she teaches histoiv
and grammar, and hears the second-class repetitions; aiul
the one who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handker-
chief tied to her side with a yellow ribbon, is Madame
IXTfB ETBE.
Rerrot; she comes from TJale, in France, and tea
Froiich. "
" Do you like the teachers? "
" Well enough. "
" Do yon like tho little black one, and the Mac
? I can not pronouncfl her name as jon d
" Misa Scatcherd ie liasty — jou mast take
offend her; Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of persoi^
■■But Miss Temple is the best — isn't she? "
" Miaa Temple is very good, and very clever:
aboTo the rest, Decuuae she Knows fiir more than they ^
" Have you been long horeP'
■• Two years, "
'■ Are you an orphan? "
" My mother is dead. "
" Are you happy here? "
" You ask ratner too many questions. I have (,_
you anawera enough for the present: now I want to re M
But at the moment tho summons aounded for dinner; ]
all reSntered the house. The odor which now filled the
refectory was scarcely more appetizing than that which had
regaled our nostrils at breakfast: tlie dinner was served J''
two huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose a strong stn
redolent of rancid fat. I found the mess to consist of]
dilTerent potatoes and strange shreds of rusty meat, r
and cooked together. Of this preparation a tolera__
abundant plateful was apportioned to each pupil. I ra
what I could, and wondered within myself whether eve?
day's fare would bo like this.
After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the school-
room: lessons recommenced, and were continned till five
o'clock.
The only marked event of t!ie afternoon was, that I
saw the girl with whom I had conversed in the veranda
diamissed in disgrace b^ Miss Scatcherd from a liistory
class, and sent to stand in the middle of the large school-
rooni. The punishment seemed to me in a high degree
ignominious, especially for so great a girl — she looked
tnirleeu or upward. I expected she would show signs of,
groot distress and shame; but to my surprise she neither
wept nor blushed: comjiosed, though grave, she stood the
centrjii mark of all eyes.'• How can she bear it so quietly
— m firmly? " I asked of myself, " Were I in her place, it
I that I should wish the earth to ogea in^i^
56 JANE ETBE.
swallow me up. She looks as if she were thinking ot
something beyond her punishment — beyond her situation:
of something not round her or before her. I have heard
of day-dreams — is she in a day-dream now? Her eyes are
fixed on the floor, but I am sure they do not see it — her
sight seems turned in, gone down into her heart: she
is looking at what she can remember, I believe; not at
what is really present. I wonder what sort of a girl she is
— whether good or naughty?'^
Soon after five p. m. we had another meal, consisting of
a small mug of coffee, and half a slice of brown bread. I
devoured my bread and drank my coffee with relish; but I
should have been glad of as much more — I was still
hungry. Half an hour^s recreation succeeded, then study:
then the glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prs-yers,
and bed. Such was my first day at Lowood.
CHAPTER VL
The next day commenced as before, getting up and
dressing by rushilffht; but this morning we were obliged
to dispense with the ceremony of washing: the water in
the pitchers was frozen. A change had taken place in
the weather the preceding evening, and a keen northeast
wind, whistling through the crevices of our bedroom win-
dows all night long, had made us shiver in our bed, and
turned the contents of the ewers to ice.
Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bible
reading was over, I felt ready to perish with cold. Break-
fast-time came at last, and tnis morning the porridge was
not burned; the quality was eatable, the quantity small;
how small my portion seemed! I wished it had been
doubled.
In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of
the fourth class, and regular tasks and occupations were
assigned me; hitherto I had only been a spectator of the
proceedings at Lowood, I was now to become an actor
therein. At first, being little accustomed to learn by
heart, the lessons appeared to me both long and difficult:
the frequent change from task to task, too, bewildered
JANE EYBE. 57
me; and I was glad when, about three o'clock in the after-
noon. Miss Smith put into my hands a border of muslin
two yards long, together with needle, thimble, etc., and
sent me to sit in a quiet corner of the school-room, with
directions to hem the same. At that hour most of the
others were sewing likewise; but one class still stood
round Miss Scatcherd's chair reading, and as all was quiet,
the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with
the manner in which each girl acquitted herself, and the
animadversions or commendations of Miss Scatcherd on
the performance. It was English histo.'y: among the
readers I observed, my acquaintance of the veranda: at
the commencement of the lesson, her place had been at
the top of the class, but for some error of pronunciation
or same inattention to stops, she was suddenly sent to the
very bottom. Even in that obscure position. Miss Scatch-
erd contirued to make her an object of constant notice:
she was continually addressing to her such phrases as the
following.
^^ Burns (such, it seems, was her name: the girls here
were called by their surnames, as boys are elsewhere).
Burns, you are standing on the side of your shoe, turn your
toes out immediately.'^''Burns, you poke your chin most
unpleasantly; draw it in.''^'Burns, I insist on your hold-
ing your head up; I will not have you before me in that
attitude, " etc., etc.
A chapter having been read through twice, the books
were closed and the girls examined. The lesson had com-
prised part of the reign of Charles I., and there were
sundry questions about tonnage and poundage, and ship-
money, which most of them appeared unable to answer;
still, everv little difficulty was solved instantly when it
reached Burns; her memory seemed to have retained the
substance of the whole lesson, and she was ready with
answers on every point. I kept expecting that Miss
Scatcherd would praise her attention; but, instead of that,
she suddenly called out:
" You dirty, disagreeable girl! you have never cleaned
your nails this morning ! "
Burns made no answer; I wondered at hei* silence.
" Why, " thought I, " does she not explain that she
could neither clean her nails nor wash her face, as the
water was frozen ? "
My attention was now called off by Miss Smith desiring
68 JANE ETBE.
me to hold a skein of thread: while she was winding it, she
talked with me from time to time, asking whether I had
ever been at school before, whetiier I could mark, Btitok
knit, etc-, ; till she dismisEed me, I could not pursue my o*
gerratlons on Miss Scatcherd's movements. AVhen I i
tnmed to my seat, that lady was just delivering an orda
of which I did not catch the import; but Bums immedl
ately left the class, and, going into the small inner room
where the books were kept, rt'tumcd in half a minute,
currying in her hand a bundle of twigs tied together at one
end. This ominous tool she presented to Miss Scatcherd
with a respectful courtesy.: then she quietly, and without
being told, nnlooaed her pinaforo, and the teacher in-
etantly and sharply inflicted on her neck a dozen strokes
with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear rose to Burn's eye;
and, while I paused from my sewing, because my fingers
quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of unuvailing
and impotent anger, not a feature of her pensive face
altered its ordinary expression.
" Hardened giri! " exclaimed Miss Scatcherd; " nothing
can correct you of your slatternly habits: carry the rod
ftwav. "
Bums obeyed: I looked at lier narrowly as a
from the book-closet; she was just putting back her hai
kerchief into her pocket, and the trace of a tear glistenj
on her thin cheek. j
The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasautei
fraotion of the day at Lowood; the bit of hread,
draught of coffee swallowed at five o'clock, had revi
vitahty, if it had not satisfied hunger; the long restridi
gf the day was slackened; the school-room felt warrf
than in the morning — its fires being allowed to bun
little more brightly to supply, in some measure, the plfl
gf candles, not yet introduced; the niddy gloaming,
licensed uproar, the confusion of many voices, gave oi
welcome sense of liberty.
On the evening of the day on which I liad seen I
Scatcherd flog her pupil. Bums, I wandered as usual
among the forms and tables and laughing groups without
a companion, yet not feeling lonely: when 1 passed t bp
windows, I now and then lifted a bl'ind and looSed oiit;T^
snowed fast, a drift was already forming against the low
■Si putting my ear close to the window, I «juld a^
JAKE EYEE
Viguisli from tho gleeful tumult within the disconsoq
moan uf the wind outside.
ProbHbly, if I had lately left a good home and 1
porents, this would have been the hour when I sliouli
moat keenly have regretted the separation: that wiudB
would then have saddened my heart; this obscure dinoa ]
would have disturbed my peace; as it was, I derived, from
both a strange excitement, and reckless and fcverieh. I
wislied the wind to howl moro wildly, the cloom to deejien
to dajkness, and the confusion to rise to clamor.
Jumping over forms, and creeping under tabloa, I madcL
my way to one of the fire-places; there, kneeling by thl
Wgh wire fender, I found Burns, absorbed, ailent, at'
Btraiited from all round her by the companionship o£j
book, which she read by the dim glare of the embers,
" la it still'Rasaelaa?'" I asked, coming behind T
" Yes, " she said, " and I have just finished it. "
And in five minutes more she shut it up, I was gU
of this. 1
" Now, " thought I, " I can perhaps get her to talk. " J
sat down by her on the floor.
■'What is your name besides Burns? "
'• " Helen. "
■'Do you come along way from here? "
" I Donie from a place farther north; quite on the bJ
dttsof Scotland. "
*'Will you ever go back? "
" I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future. "'
" You must wish to leave Lowood? "
•'No; why should I? I was sent to Lowood to get an
education; and it would be of no use going away until I
have attained that object, "
" But that teacher. Miss Scatcherd, is so cruel to jou? "
" Cruel? Not at all! She is severe: she dislikes my
faults. "
" And if I were in your place I should dislike her; I
Uioiild resist her; if she struck me with that rod, I should
get it from her hand; I should break it under 1
nose. "
'• Probably you would do nothing of the sort; hut if you
did. Mr, Brocklehurst would espel yon from the school;
that would be a great grief to your relations. It is far
butter to endure patiently a smart which nobody feels but i
" " " " • " * ^ — I to commit a hasty action whose evil cotu " ^— *
60 JANE ElfEE.
S.enoeawill estend to all connocted with yoii; and besidi
e Bible bids us return good for evU. "
" But then it seema disgraceful to be flogged, and to t
Bent to stand in the middle of a room full of people;
you are such a great girl: I am far younger than you, ani
I could not bear it. "
" Yet it would he your duty to hear it, if you eould not
avoid it: it is weak and Billy to say you can not hear what
it is your fato to be required to boar, "
I heard her with wonder: I could not compi-olieifd this
doctrine of endurance; and still leas could ijinderstand or
eympathize with tlie forbearance she esffllssed for her
onastiser. Still I felt thai. Helen Burns c^sidered thing
by a light invisible to my eyes. I suspeottd she might w
nght and I wrong; but I would not ponder the matter
deeply; like Felix, I put it off to a more convenient season.
" ¥nu eay you have faults, Helen; what are they? To
me you seem very good. "
" Then learn from me, not to judge by appearances: I
am, as MfSB Satcherd said, slatternly: I seldom put, and
never keep, things in order; I am careless; I forget rules;
1 read whaft I should learn my lessons; I have no method;
and somefiimeB I say, like you, I can not bear to he sub-
jected to systematic arrangements. This is all very pro-
voking to Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual,
and pfi ticular.''
" And cross and cruel, " I added; hut Helen Burns
would not admit my addition: slie kept silence.
" Is Miss Temples as severe to you as Miss Scatcherd ? "
At the utterance of Miss Temple's name, a soft smile
flitted over her grave face.
" Miss Temple is full of goodness: it pains her to be
severe to any one, even to the worst in the school: she sees
my errors, and tells me of them gently; and if I do any-
thing worthy of praise, she gives me my meed liberally.
One strong proof of my wretchedly defective nature is,
that even her expostulations, so mild, so rational, have not
influence to cure me of my faults; and even her praise,
though I value it most highly, can not stimulate me to
continued care and foresight.'*
" This is curious, " said I: " It is bo easy to be careful. "
•''For you I have no doubt it is. I observed you in
your class this morning, and saw you were close]y att entr- " _J
jve: ^our thoughts never seemed to wander wMla 7
L
JANE ETRE.
Miller explained the lesson and qHertioned you. No*]
mine ooiinmially rove away ; when I should be listening ti
MisB Soatcherd, and collecting all she aaya with nssiduityj
often I lose the very sound of her voice : I [all into a ei
of dream. Soraetimes I thiuk I am in Northuinberlandi
and that the noisea I hear round me are^the bubbling of J
little brook whioh runs through Deepdeii. near our honaea
then, when it cornea to my turn to reply, I have to be walq
ened ; and, having heard nothing of wiiat was read for lii'
oning to the yisionary brook, I have no answer ready. "
" Yet, how well yon replied this afternoon. "
" It was mefc chance : the subject on which wo ha(
been reading itrtereated me. This afternoon, instead <
dreaming of Deepden, I was wondering how a man wh.
wished to do right could act ao unjuatly and unwisely a
Charles the Firat aometimes did ; and I thought what |
pity it wag that, with his integrity and conscientioosiiosi
he could see no farther than the prerogativoa of the crowi^
It he liad but been able to look to a distance, and see tT
what they call the spirit of the age waa tending I Still, .
like Charles — I respect him — I pity him, poor murdered
king ! Yes. his enemies were the worst : they shed blooi
they had no right to shed. How dared they kill lira ? " 1
Helen was talking to hereelf now : she had forgotten ]
conid uot very wol! understand her— that I was ignorantj^
or nearly ao, of the subject she discussed. I recallt^ hor
to my leveL
" And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts
wander then ?
" No, certainly, not often; because Miss Temple ha(
generally something to say which ia newer than my owi
reflections: her language is singularly agreeable to md
and the infonnation she communicates is often just what
I wiahed to gain. "
" Well, then, with Miss Temple yon are good F "
" Yes, in a paasive way : I make no ellort : I follow a,
tncliriation guides me. There is no merit in auch goocH
0688. "
" A great deal : yon are good to those who are good ti
yon. It is all T ever desire to be. If people were alwail
kind and obedient to those who are cruel and unjust, the
wicked people would have it all their own way : they would
feol afraid, and so they would uever alter, but would
.iiid worse. When wo are struck, at yfitUovit*
reaaon, we slioulj etrike back again very hard ; I am sure
we should — so hard as to teach the person who struck us
neyer to do so agaiii. "
" YoQwill change your mind, I hope, when you grow
older: as yet you are but a little untaught girl. "
" But I feel this, Helen: Imust dislikv those who,
whatever I do to " pleaee them, persist in disliking me ; I
must resist those who punish me unjustly. It is as natural
as that I should love those who show me affection, or sub-
mit to punishment when I feel it is deserved, "
" Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctrine; but
Christians and civilized nations disown it. "
" How ? I don't understand. "
" It is not violence that best overcomes hate — nor ven-
geance that most certainly heals injury. "
" What then? "
" Head the New Testament, and observe what Christ
says, and how he acts ; make his word your ruk-, and his
conduct jonr esample. "
" What does he say ? "
" Love your enemies; bless them that curse jou ; do
good to them that hate you and despitefnUy use you "
" Then I should love Mrs. Reed, which I cannot do ; I
should bless her son John, which is impossible. "
In her turn, Helen Burns asked me to explain ; and I
proceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, the tale
of my sufferings and resentments. Bitter and truculent
when excited, I spoke as I felt, without reserve or soften-
ing.
Helen heard me patiently to the end ; I expected she
would then make a remark, but she said nothing,
" Well, " I asked impatiently, " is not Mrs, Reed a hard-
hearted, bad woman ?'
" She has been unkind to you, no doubt ; because, you
see, she dislikes your cast ut character, as Miss Scatcherd
does mine: but now minutely you remember all she has
done and said to you I What a singularly deep impressioQ
her injustice seems to have made on your Iieart ! No ill-
Qsage so brands its record on my feelings. Would you not
be happier if you tried to forget her severity, together with
the passionate emotions it excited ? Life appears to me
too short to be spent in nursing animosity, or register
ing wrongs. We are, and must be, one an(l all, bur'
mtix fftufts in this world: but the time will soon
burdened , J
JANE BYRB.
when, I iraet, ve ahall put them off in putting off o
niptible bodies ; wlion debasomeiit and sin will fall frotj
iiB with tliis cumbrous frame of deab, and only tbe Mtai
of the spirit will remain— the iinpalnabJe principle of U
and thought, pure as when it left the Creator to inspiii
the creature : whence it came it will return ; perhaps AgaU
to be communicated to some being higher than man — pe|j|
haps to pass through gradations of glory, from the pad
human soul to brighten to the seraph ! Surely it win
never, on the contrary, be suffered to degenerate fjoia
man to fiend. No ; I eatinot believe that : I hold anotha
creed, which no one ever tanght me, and which I seldon
mention: but iu which I delight, and to which I clin^
for it estends hope lo uU ; it makes Eternity a rest-
mighty home, not a terror and an abyaa. Beeidee, with
this creed. I can bo clearly distinguish between the crimi-
nal and Jiia crime ; I can §o sincerely forgive the first while
I abhor the last ; with this creed revenge never worries my
JMtart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me, injustice
never crushes me too low : I live in calm, looking to the
end. "
Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower i
she finished this sentence. I saw by her look she wishe^
no longer to talk to me, but rather to converse with ha
own thoughts. She was not allowed much time for med3
tation : a monitor, a great rough girl, presently came npa
exclaiming, in a strong Cumberland accent,
" Helen Burns, if you don't go and put your drawer i:
order, and told up your work this minute, I'll tell Mifuj
Scatcherd to come and look at it 1 "
Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed
the monitor without reply as without delay.
CHAPTEE VII.
My firet quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not th(
golden ago either : it comprised an irksome struggle wttHI
liilfSculties in habituating myself to new rules and un-
wputed taskJa, The fear of failure in these points harassed
me worse than the physical hardships of my lot ; though
Ihese were no trifles.
W JANE ETRE.
During January, Febroary, and part of March, the
f'eep snows, and, after their melting, the almost impaas-
aWe roads, prevented our stirring beyond the garden walls,
except to go to church ; but within these limits we had to
pass an hour every day in the open air. Our clothing was
insufficient to protect ua from tlie B > ^vere cold ; we had no
boots ; the snow got into our fihoea, and melted there ; our
unijloved hands became numbed and covered with chil-
blains, OS were our feet; I remember Weil the distracting
irritation I endured from this cause every evening, when
my feet inflamed ; and the torture of thrusting the swelled,
raw, and stifl toea into my shoes in the morning. Then
the scanty supply of food was distressing: with the keen
appetites of growi.ig children, we liad scarcely sufficient
to keep alive a delicate invalid. From this deficiency of
nourishment resulted an abuse, which pressed haidly on
the younger pupils : whenever the famished great girls bad
an opportunity they would eoas or meanace the little ones
out of their portion. Many a time f have shared between
two claimants the precious morsel of brown bread distrib*
n led at tea-time; and after relinquishing to a third half
the contents of my mng of coffee, I have swallowed the
remainder with an accompaniment of secret tears foiced
from me by the exigency of hunger.
Sundays were dreary days in tliat wintry season. We
had to walk two miles to Brocklehridge Church, where our
patron officiated. We set out cold, we arrived at church
colder : during the morning service we became almost
paralyzed. It was too far to return to dinner, and an
allowance of cold meat and bread, in the same penurious
proportion observed in our ordinary meals, was served
round between the services.
At the close of the afternoon service wo returned by an
exposed and hilly road, where the bilter winter wind,
blowing over a range of snowy summits to the north,
almoBt flayed the skin from our faces.
I can remember Miss Temple walking lightly and rap-
idly along our drooping lino, her plaid cloak, which the
frosty wind fluttered, gathered close about her, and en-
couraging us by precept and example, to keep up our
spirits, and march forward, as she said, " like stalwart
eoldiers, " The other teachers, poor things, were genei-ally
themselrcs too much dejected to attempt the task of
eheemng others.
JANK ETIS.
How vo longed for the light and heat of « blamig fin
vheii wo got back! But to the little ones & t leaet, thii
was denied: each hearth io the school-room was ioame-
(iiately Bnrronnded by a double row of gi-eat girU, and
behind thera the younger children crouched in groups,
wrapping their starved arms in their pinaforee.
A litUe solace came at tea-time, in the ehape of a double
ration of bread — a whole, instead of a half, elice — with the
delicious addition of a thin scrape of butter: it was the
hebdomadal treat to wliich we all looked forward from
Sabbath to Sabbath. I generally contrived to reserve
moiety of this bounteous repast for myself; but the
mainder I was invariably obliged to part with.
The Sunday evening waa spent in repeating, by heart,
the Churcli Catechism, and the Sfth, sixth and seventh
chapters of St. Matthew ; and in listening to a long sermon,
read by Miss Sliller, whose irrepressible vawns attested her
weariness. A frequent interlude of tnese performances
was the enactment of the paii of Eotychus oy some half
dozen little girls ; who overpowered with sleepj would fall
down, if not out of the third loft, yet off the fourth form,
and 1m! taken up half dead. The remedy was, to thrust
them forward into the center of tlie school-room, and
oblige them to stand there till the sermon was finished.
Sometimes their feet failed them, and they sank together
in a heap ; they were then propped up with the monitors'^
iiigh stools. _J
I have not vet alluded to the visits of Mr. BroeklehurBt; " "
and indeed that gentleman was from home during the
greater part of the fii'st month after my arrival ; perhaps
prolonging his stay with his friend the archdeacon ; his
absoiiGO was a relief to me. I need not say that I had my
own i-easous for di'eading liia coming: but come he did
at last.
One afternoon (I had then been thi'eo weeks at Lo-
\tood), as I was sitting with a slate in my hand, puzzling
over a sum in long division, my eyes, raised in abstraction
tjj the window, caught sight of a figure just passing ; I rec-
ognized almost instmctively that gaunt outbne ; and when
two minutes after, all the school, teachers included, rose
«n maese, it was not necessary for me to look up in order to
aacertain whoao entrance they thus greeted. A long stride
measured the school-room, and presently beside Miss Tem-
■ , who herself had risen, stood the same hVafik iiu\o.To
om ^^

tm JANE ETBE.
which had frowned on me bo ominously from the hearth,
rug at Gateshead. I now glanced Bideways at this piece of
architecture. Yea, I was right ; it waa Mr. Brocklehurst,
buttoned up in a stnrtout, and looking longer, narrower,
and more rigid than ever.
I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this appa-
rition ; too well I remembered the perfidious hints given by
Mrs. Reed about my disposilion, etc.; the promise pledged
by Mr. BrocklehiiTBt to apprise Miss Temple and the
teachers of my vicloua nature. All along I had been dread-
ing the fulfillment of this promise-—! had been looking out
daily for the " eoming man, " whose information respect-
ing my past life and conversation was to brand mo as a
bad child forever ; now there he waa. He stood at Miss
Temple's aide ; he was speaking low in her ear ; I did not
doubt he was making disclosures of ray villainy ; and 1
watched her eyes with painfnl anxiety, expecting every
moment to see its dark orb turn oit me a glance of repni
nance and contempt. I listened, too ; and as I happc
to be seated quite at the top of tho room, I caught mot
what he said ; its import relieved mo from immediatolfl
prehension.
" I suppose, MiasTeraple, the thread I bought at L
will do ; it struck me that it would be jnst of the qof'
the calico chemise, and I sorted the needli^s
You may tell Miss Smith (hat 1 f^^-
dum of the daming-iieedles, hv.^
sent in next week, and she i: > i
out more than one at a. time ,
more, they are apt to K'■ ■■'
ma'am! I wish the w^ "'
— when I was here 1:-
and -examined the d " i'■
quantity of black host- in ]i wi^ l,-
the size " of the holes iu iIil-ii.'
well mended from tinii- 1» i\a
lie paused.
'■ Your diiw
JiXB ETRl.
some friends at LoTton last Thitreday, and I gave them
leave to put on clean tnckcrs for tho occasion. "
Mr. Brocklehnret nodded.
" Well, for once it may pass; but pleaao not to let tL
oircatnstance oecur too often. And tiioio ia another tliui
triiich fiiirprisod me: I find, in settling fli.ic(mntH with t
UoiisektHiper, that a lunch, coad8ting of bread and i-'lie^
has tW'icB been served out to the girls during the jiaal f <
uight. How is this? I look over the rcgiitstton*, nu,
fiml no auch meal as lunch mentioned. Who ititruJuoe
thia innovation? and b^ what authority? "
" I must ho responsible for the circumBtant^c, sir, " .,
plied Mias Temple;'" the breakfast wob m ill-prepared llit
the pupils could not possibly eat it; and I dared not allot
them to remain fasting till dhiner-tinie. "
" Madam, allow me an instant. You an* awar^ th«t d
plsa ID Itriuging up these girls i», not to Bcrij»:.,ii]
nsbits of luxury and indulgeuce, hut f
liardr. patient, self-denying. Should am
disappoint mont of the appetite occur, sui i
of a m'^jil, ttiL'oo.ifi'.,r liu'over dro-sii..
«R JANE ETRB.
asBiiming also the coldnees and fixity of that materiill
eapecially her mouth, closed as if it would have reqiiiredjj
Bcalptors chiBcl to open it, aud her brow settled gradual^
into petrified severity.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on the hoartL
with his hands behind his back, miijestically surroyod the* "
■whole school. Suddenly his eye gave a blink, as if it had
met something that either dazzled or shocked its pupil;
twniing, he said in more rapid accents than hn hml hitli-
erto used: " Mias Templo, Miss Temple, what — ipJuit ia
that girl with curled hair? Red hair, ma'am, curled —
curled all over? " And extending his cane he pointed to
the awful object, his hand shaking as he did so,
. " It is Julia Severn, " replied Miss Temple, very (jnietl^
■^ " Julia Severn, ma'am! And why has she, or any oth« "
onrled hair? Why, in defiance of every precept and prt'
eiple of this house, does she conform to the woi'ld so operi.
— -)iere in an evangelical, charitable establishment— aa i
wear her hair one mass of curls? "
" Julia's hair curls naturally, " returned Miss Temj^
Btill more quietly.
" Naturally! Yes, but we are not to conform to nature:
I wish these girls to be the children of Grace: and why
that abundance ? I have again and again intimated that I
desire the hair to be arranged closely, modestly, plainly.
Miss Temple, that girl's hair must be cut off entirely; I
'irty^^send a barber to-morrow: and I see others who liave
far too much of the excrescence — that tall girl, tell lier to
turn round. Tell all the fii'st form to rise up and direct
their faces to the wall. "
Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as
if to smooth away the involuntary smiles that curled them;
she gave the order, however, aud when the first class could
take in what was required of them, they obeyed. Leaning
a little back on my bench I could see the looks and grim-
aoes with which they commented on this maneuver: it was
a pity Mr. Brocklehurst could not see them too; ho would
perhups have felt that whatL-ver he might do with the out-
side of the cup and platter, tlio inside was further beyond
his interference than he imagiued.
He scrutinized the I'evei-se of these living medals some
five minutes, then pronounced sentence. These words
fell like the knell of doffitti f'^MSm toy-to(rf».1ttttffftft
cat oS, "
JANE ETBE.
Mias Temple seemed to remonstrate,
" Madam,'he pursuod, " I have a Master to sei
whose kingdom is not of this world: my nusaioa ia to "
mortify in these girls the lusts of the ileah; to teach
them to clothe themselves with shamefacednesa and so-
briety, not with bmided liair and costly apiiarel; and
each of the young persons before us has a string of haip
twisted in plaits which vanity itself might have wovenj'
these, I repeat, ranat be cut ofE; think of the time waste^j
of— "
Mr. Brooklehurst was here interrupted: three other vifW
itors, ladies, uow entered the room, i'hey ought to hftT^
come H little sooner to have hoard his lecture on dress, 6
they were splendidly attired in velvet, silk and furs.
The two younger of the trio (fine girls of sixteen au^^
seventeen) had gray beaver hats, then in fashion, shadeK^^
with ostrich plumes, and from undei'the brim of this gra <'«-
ful head-dress fell a profusion of light tresses, elaborately-
curled; the elder lady was enveloped in a costly veh "
shawl, trimmed with ermine, and sue wore a false front
French curls.
These ladies were deferentially received by Misa Temple,
as Mrs. and the Misses Brooklehurst, and conducted to
seats of hoiior at the top of the room. It seems they had
fiome in the carriage with their reverend relative, and had
been conducting a rummaging scrutiny of the rooms up
stairs, while he transacted business with the housekeeper, ^,
questioned the laundress, and lectured the superintejj^u^i^^^
They uow proceeded to address divers remarks an^
proofs to Miss Smith, who was charged with the gare of
the linen and the inspection of the doi-mitories: but I had
no lime to listen to what they satd; other matters called
off and enchained my attention.
Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr,
Brooklehurst and Miss Temple, I had not, at the same
time, neglected precautions to secure my personal safety;
which I thought would he effected, if I could only elude
observation. To this end, I had set well haelc on the form,
and while seeming to he busy with my sum, had hold
my slulo in such a manner as to conceal my face: I
might have escaped notice, had not my treacherous slate
aomohow happened to slip from my hand, and fallinj
with an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eye ugon
'* )! it was all over now, and, as I stooped to ^ict
70 JANB EYRE,
Up the two fragments of slate, I rallied my forces for the
worst. It came.
" A careless girlP'said Mr. Brocklehurat, and imme-
diately after — " It is the new pupil, I perceiye, " And be-
fore I could draw breath, " I must not forget I liave a
word to say respecting her, " Then aloud: how loud it
seemed to me! " Let the child who broke her alate come
forward! "
Of my own accord I could not have stirred: 1 was par-
alyzed: but the two great girls who sat on each side of rae,
set me on my legs and pushed me toward the dread judge,
and then Mise Temple gently assisted me to his very feet,
and 1 caught her whispered counsel, " Don't be afraid,
Jane, I saw it vss an accident; you shall not be poj
ished. "
The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.
" Another minnte, and she will despise me for a hyi
crite, " thought 1: and an impulse of fury against 1
Brocklehuret and Co. bounded in my pulses at the convi^
tion, I was no Helen Burns. ^1
" Fetch that stool, " said Mr, Brocklehurst, pointing ^^
8 very higli one from which a monitor had just risen; i£
was brought.
" Place the child upon it. "
And I was placed there, by whom I don't know: I
was in no condiiion to note pai-ticulars: I was only
aware that they had hoisted me up to the height of Mr.
Brocklehurst's nose, that he was withiu a yard of mc, and
that a spread of shot orai-ge and purple silk pelisse, and a
cloud flf silvery plumage extended and waved below me,
Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.
" Ladies, " said he, turning to his family; " Miss Tem-
ple, teachers, and children, you all see this girl? "
Of course they did; for I felt their eyes directed like
burning-glaeseB against my scorched skin.
" You see she is yet young; yon observe she possesses
the ordinary form of childhood; God has graciously given
her the shape that he has given to all of us; no signal de-
formity points her out as a marked character. Who would
think that the Evil One had already found a servant and
agent in her? Yet such, I grieve to say, is the case. "
A pause — in which I began to study the palsy of
nerves, and feel that the Rubicon was passed: and that
trial, no longer to be shirfted, must be flrmly sustainedi
luia
and^J
JANE ETBE.
" Mv dear children, " pnrSBed the blaok-niftrhlo clergy-
man, with pathos, " this ib a sad, a melancholy ocoasior'
for it becomes my duty to warn you, that this girl, who njigi
be one of God's own lambs, is a little castaway: not a
member of the true flock, but evidently an interloper and
an alien. Yout must be on your guard against her; you
must flhun her example: if uecessary, avoid her company,
exclnda her from your sports, and shut her out from your
converse. Teachei-s, you must watch her: keep your eves
ou her movemeuts, weigh well her words., scrutinize her
actions, punish her body to save her soul, if, indeed, snch
salvation he possible, for (my tongue falters while I tell it)
this girl: this diild, the native of a Christian land, worse
than many a little heathen who says its prayers to Brahma
and kneels before Juggernaut— this girl IB— a liar. "
Now came a pause of ten minutes: during which " I, bj^
this timo in perfect possession of my wits, observed all thxr
female Brocklebursts produce their pocket-handkerchiefs'
and apply them to their optics, while the elderly lady
swayed herself to and fro, and the two younger ones whis-
pered, " How shocking! "
Mr. Brocklehurst resumed,
" This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious
and charitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state,
reared her as her own daughter, and whose kindness, whose
generosity, the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude bo
Dad. eo dreadful, that at last her eicellent patroness was
obliged to separate her from her own young ones, fearful
leat hor vicious example should contaminate their purity:
she has sent her here to be healed, even as the Jews of old
eent their diseased to the troubled pool of Bethesda; and.
teachei's, superintendent, I beg of you not to allow the
waters to stagnate round her. "
With this BubUme conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst ad-
justed the top button of his surtout, muttered something
to hia family, who rose, bowed to Miss Temple, and then
all the great people sailed in state from the room. Turn-
ing at the door, my judge said, " Let her stand half an
hour longer fm that stool, and let no one speak to her dur-
ing lUe remainder of the day, "
There was 1, then, mounted aloft: I, who had said I
nonld not bear the shame of standing on my natural feet
ta tlie middle of the room, was now exposed to general ,
"'''■ i of infamy. What my sensations w
ight'-™
i

JANE EYRE.
language can describe: but just as they all rose, alifling my
breath ard conati'icting my throat, a girl came up and
passed me: in passing, ane lifted her eyes. What a strange
tight inspired them! What an extraordinary sensation
that my seut through me! How the new feeling bore me
up! It was as if a martyr, a hero, had passed a slave or
victim, and imparted strength in the tranBit. I mastered
the rising hysteria, lifted up my head, and took a firm
stand on the stool. Helen Burns asked some slight ques-
tion about her work of Miss Smith, was chidden for the
triviality o£ the inquiry, returned to her place, and smiled
at me as she again went by. What a smile! I remember
it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fine intel-
lect, of true cotiruge: it lit up her marked lineaments, her
thin face, her sunken gray eye, like a reflection from the
aspeot'of an angel. Yet at that moment Helen Burns
wore on her arm " the untidy badge " ; scarcely an hour ago
I had heard Ijer coudemned by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner
of bread and water on the morrow, because she had blotte'"
an exercise in copying it out. Such is the imperfect i
lire of man! such spots are there on the disk of the cles
est planet; and eyes like Miss Scatcherd's can only b
those minute defects, and are blind to the full brightnes
of the orb.
CHAPTER vnr.
Ere the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school
was dismissed, and all were gone into the refectory to tea.
I now ventured to descend; it was deep dusk; I retired
into a corner and sat down on the floor. The spell by
which I had been so far supported began to di^olve; re-
action took place, and soon, so overwhelming was tlie grief
that seized me, I sank prostrate with my face to the ground.
Now I wept: Helen Burns was not here; nothing sustained
me; left to myself, I abandoned myself, and my tears
watered the boards, I had meant to be so good, and to
do BO much at Lowood: to make so many friends, to earn
respect and win affection. Already I liad made visible
progress; that very morning I had reached the head of mv
class: Miss Miller had praised me warmly; Miss Temple
'" " " " " " - " approbation; she had promised to *■'"''— -

JANE ETKE.
drawing, and to let me learn French, if I continued (
make similar improvement two months longer : and tin
I waa well received by my fellow-pupils ; treated aa a
equal by those of my own age, and not molested by a
now, here I lay agaiu crushed and Irodden on ; and conl
I ever rise more ?
" Never, " I thought; and ardently I wished to die.
WTiile sobbing out this wish in brokeu accL-nta, someone
approached; 1 started up — again Helen Bums was neitr
me ; the fading fires just showed her coming np the lung,
vacant room ; she brought my coffee iind bread.
" Gome, eat something, " she said ; Init I put both away
from me, feeling as if a drop or a crumb would have
choked me in my present condition, .Helen regarded me,
probably with siirpriae : I could not now abate my agita-
tion, though I tried hard ; I continued to weep aloud. She
sat down on the ground near me, embraced her knees with
her arms, and rested her head upon them ; in that attitude^
she remained silent as an Indian. I was the first wh^
spoke : " Helen, why do you stay with a gir! whom every*
body believes to he a liar? "
" Everybody, Jane? Why, there are only eighty peo-
ple who have heard you called bo, and the world contains
buudreda of millionB. "
" But what have I to do with millions ? The eighty I
know despise me. "
" Jane, you are mistaken: probably not o
school either despises or dislikes you ; many, I am surftfl
pity you much. "
" How can they pity me after what Mr, Brocklehurst
eaidP "
" Mr. Brocklehurst is not a god : nor is he even a great
and admired man ; he is little liked here ; he never took
steps to make himself liked. Had he treated you aa an
espbciiit favorite, you would have found enemies declared
or covert, all around you : as it is, the gi'eater number
would offer you sympathy if they dared. Teachers and
fiupila may look coldly on you for a day or two, but friendly
eelinga are concealed in their hearts; and if you perse-
vere in doing well, these feelings will ore long appear bo
much the more evidently for their temporary suppression.
Besides, .Tane " she paused.
" Well, Helen ? " said I, putting my hand into he
■.chafed my fingers gently to warm tkem, an.4 sttut Wi.-Ti

74 JANE BIBB,
" If all the world hated you, and believed yon wiokef
while your own conscience approved you, and abEolved j
from guilt, you would not be without frieuds. "
" No ; I know I should think well of myself ; but thl
is not enough ; if otijers don't love me, I would rather 4,^
t.han live — I cannot bear to be solitary and Iiated, Ilelen^
Look here ; to gain Bome real affection from you, or Miss
Temple, or any other wliom I truly love, I would willingly
Bubmit to have the bone of mv arm broken, or to let a bull
tosB me. or to stand behind a kicking horse, und let it da^h
its hoof at my chest- — ~ "
" Hush, Jane! you think too much of the love of
human beings ; you are too impulsive, too vehement : the
Bovereign hand that created your frame, and put life into
it, has provided you with other resources than your feeble
self, or than creatures feebler than you. Besides this
earth, and besides the race of men, there is an invisible
world and a kingdom of spirits : that world is round us,
for it is overvwhore ; and those spirits watch us, for they
are commissioned to guard us ; and if we wore dying in
pain and shame, if scorn smote us on all sides, and hatred
crushed ub, angels bob our tortures, recognize our inno-
cence (if innocent we be ; as I know you are of this charge
which Mr, Brocklehurst has weakly and pompously re-
peated at second-liand from Mra. Reed ; for I read a siucere
nature in your ardent eyes and on your clear front), and
God waits only the separation of spirit from flesh to crown
ns with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sink
overwhelmed with distress, when life is so soon over,
and death is so certain an entrance to happifiess — to
glory ? "
I was silent : Helen had calmed me ; but in the tran-
quility she imparted there was an alloy of inespreasible
Badness. I felt the impression of woe as she spoke, but I
could not tell whence it came ; and when, having done
BiJcaking, she breathed a little fast and coughed a short
cough, I momentarily forgot my own sorrows to yield to a
vague concern for her.
Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms
round her waist ; she drew me to her and we reposed in
silence. We had not sat long thus when another person
came in. Some heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a
rising wind, had left the moon bare ; and her light,
streaming in through a window near, shone full both c "
JANE EYKK.
OS and on the approaching figure, wliicli we at once rei
niiied as Miae Temple.
" I came oil purpose to fiuil you, Jane Eyre/'said f
" I want yuu hi my room; and as Helen Burns is with yiHlJfl
she may come too. "
We went; following the superintendent's guidance,
had to thread some intricate passages, and mount a stair-
case before we reached her apartment; it contained a goodij
fire, and looked cheerful. Miss Temple told'Helen Bunttfl
to be seated in a low arm-chair on one side of the hearth^j
and Iieraelf taking another, she called me to her side. y
^'la it all over? " she asked, looking down at my faoe;^
" Have you cried your grief away? "
" I am afraid I never shall do that. "
" Why? "
" Because T have been wrongly accused; and you, ma'am,,,]
nod everybody else will now think me wicked, " ^
" We shall think you what you prove yourself to be,
my child. Continue to act as a good girl, and you will 1
satisfy me. "
'• Shall I, Miss Temple? "
" Yon will, " said she, passing her arm round me. " And
now tell me who is the lady whom Mr. Brocklehui'st called
your benefactress? "
" Mrs. Reed, my uncle's wife. My uncle is dead, and
he left me to her care. "
" Did she not, then, adopt you of her own accord? "
" No, ma'am: she was sorry to have to do it; but my J
nude, as I have often heard the servants say, got Iiot |
to promise before he died, that she would always keep*
me. "
" Well, now, Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you,
thai when a criminal is accused, he is always allowed to
apeak in his own defense. You have been charged with
^Isehood; defend yourself to me aa well as yon can. Say
whatever your memory suggests aa true; but add nothing
and exaggerate nothing. "
1 resolved in the depth of my heart, that I would be I
most moderate'— most correct; and, bavin? reflected a feWj
minutes in order to arrange coherently what I had to say,
I told her all the story of my sad childhood. Exhausted
by emotion, my language was more subdued than it gener-
ally was when it developed thatsad theme; and mindful of
Ileluii'a warnings against the indulgence of resentment, I
7«
JANE EYRE,

infused into the narrative far leas of gall and ■wormwood
than ordinary. Thus rostrained and simplified, it soiindMl
more credible: I felt aa I went on that Miss Temple fully
lieiieved me.
In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd aa
having come to see me after the fit; for I never forgot the,
to me, frightful epieodo of the red-room; in detailiug
which, my excitement was sure, in some degree, to break
bounds; for nothing could soften in my recollection the
spasm of agony whicii clutched my heart when Mrs. Reed
apurned my wild supplication for pardon, and locked me a
second time in the dark and haunted chamber.
I had finished: Miss Temple regarded me a few minntes
in silence; she then said: *'l know something of Mr,
Lloyd; I shall write to him; if his reply agrees with jour
statement, you shall be publicly cleared from every impu-
tation: to me, Jane, you are clear now, "
She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where
1 was well contented to stand, for I derived a child's
pleasure from the contemplation of her face, her dress, her
one or two ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered
and shining curls, and beaming dark eyes), she proceeded
to address Helen Burns.
" How are you to-night, Helen? Have you coughed
mnch to-day.^ "
" Not tiuite so much. I think, ma'am.
" And the pain in your chest? "
" It is a little better. "
Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined h\
pulse; then she returned to her own seat: as she resumed
it, I heard her sigh low. She was pensive a few minutes,
theu rousing herself, she said cheerfully, " But you two
are my visitors to-night; I must treat you as such, " She
rang her bell.
" Barbara, " she said to the servant who answered it,
" I have not yet had tea; bring the truy, and place cups
for these two young ladies. "
And a tray was soon brought. How pretty, to my
eyes, did the china cups and bright tea-pot look, placed on
the little round table near the fire! How fragrant was the
steam of the beverage, and the scent of the toastl of
which, however, I, to my dismay (for I was beginning to
be hungry), discerned only a vorj; sniall^ portion, M*
" " " pple discerned it'* " ■- ■'** " -^'^~-^-~-—'-
ea
. < 9
JANS KTM,
ithrinff ft little moro bread and batter? TIibtb is «
pQoiigh tor tliree. "
Barbara went out: she returned aoon. " Matlara, Mn.
Harden aays she has sent np the usual tjuantity. "
Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the housekeeper — a
woman after Mr. Brockle hurst's own heart, made np of
equal parte of whalebone and iron.
" Oh, very well! " returned Sliss Temple; " we must
innke it do, Barbara, I suppose. " And as the girl with-
drew, she added, smiling, " Fortunately, I have it in my
power to supply deficiencies for this once. "
Having invited Helen and me to approach the table,
and placed before each of as a cnp of tea with one delicious
bttt thin morsel of toast, she got up. unlocked a drawer,
and taking from it a parcel wrapped in paper, dlscloBed
presently to our eyes a good-sized seed-cake.
" I meant to give each of you some of this to take with
yon, " said & lie; " but as there is so little toast, you must
have it now, " and she proceeded to cut slices with a
generons hand.
We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia;
and not the least delight of the entertaiument was the
smile of gratification with which our hostess regar'"':.(i us,
as we satisfied our famished appetites on the delicate fare
she liberally supplied. Tea over and the tray removed,
she again summoned us to the fire; we sat one on each
side of her; and now a conversation followed between her
and Helen which it was indeed a privilege to be admitted
to hear.
Miss Temple had always something of serenity in her
air, of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her lan-
guage, which precluded deviation into the ardent, the ex-
cited, the eager: something which chastened the pleasure
of those who looked on her and listened to her, by a con-
trolling sense of awe; and such was my feeling now; bat
as to Helen Burns, I was struck with wonder.
The refreshing meal, the brilliant fire, the presence
and kindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more
than all these, something in her own unique mind, had
roused her powers within her. They woke, they kindled:
first, they glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, which
till this hour I had never seen but pale and bloodlesa " ■
then they shone in the liquid luster of her eyes, which ha
'''i, ^^uiied a beauty more singular than thal^
«
JANE ETRE.
Miaa Temple's — a beanty neither of fine color noi
eyelashes, nor penciled brow, but of meaning, of move?
ment, of radiance. Then her soul sat on lier lips, anff
language flowed, from what source I cannot tell: has I
girl of fourteen a heart large enough, yigoroue enough, t^
hold the swelling springy of pure, full, fervid eloquencej
Such was the characteristic of Helen's discourse on that, I
me, memorable evening; her spirit seemed hastening I
live within a very brief span as much as many live durinj
a protracted existence.
They conversed of things I had never heard of:
nations and times past; of countries far away; of secretfi
of nature discovered or guessed at. They spoke of bookflj
how many they had read! What stores of knowledge thg
possessed! Then they seemed so familiar with Frenci
names and French authors; but my amazement reached
its climax when Miss Temple asked Helen if sne son
times snatched a moment to recall the Latin her fatl
had tauglit her, and taking a book from a shelf, bade 1
read and construe a page of'■ Virgil " ; and Helen obeyed, 1
my organ of veneration expanding at every sounding line, j
She had scarcely finished ere the bell annonnoed bed-time J
no delay could be admitted; Miss Temple embraced \
both, saying, as she drew us to her heart, " God bless yoi
my children! "
Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her £
more reluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to tl,
door; it was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh^
for her she wiped a tear from her cheek, \
On reaching the bedroom, we heard the voice of Misa
Scatcherd: she was examining drawers; she had ji
pn'Jed out Helen Burn's, and when we entered Helen v
greeted with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-mo!Ti_ .
Bie should have half a dozen of untidily-folded article*
pinned to her shoulder.
" My things were indeed in eliamefnl disorder, " muN
mured Helen to me, in a low voice: " I intended to havi
arranged them but I forgot. "
Next morning Miss Scatcherd wrote, in conspicuoui
characters on a piece of paateboard, the word " Slattern,^
and bound it like a phylactery round Helen's large, mild,
intelligent, and benign -looking forehead. She wore it till
evening, patient, unresentful, regarding it as n deserved
punishment. The moment Mies Scatcherd withdrew sttei:
JANI BTRK.
«ftemooa-Bchool, I ran to Helen, tore it off. and thrnat WJ »
into the fire: the fury of which she was incapable had boon
burning in my soul all day, and tears, hot and large, had
continually been scalding my cheek; for tlie spectacle of
her gad resignation gaye me an intolerable pain at the heart.
Abont a week BUOBeqiiently to the incideatB above nar-
rated. Miss Temple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received
Ms auBwer: it appeared that what he said went to corrobor-
ate my account. Misa Temple, haying aeeembled the whole
school, announced that inquiry had neen made into the
charges alleged agaiuat Jane EjTe, and that she was most
happy to be able to pronounce her completely cleared from
every imputation. The teachers then ahook hands with
^e and kissed me, and a murmur of pleasure ran through
the ranks of my companions.
Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour Bet
to work afresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every
diiRcuity: I toiled hard, and my suocesa was proportionate
to my efforts; my memory, not naturally tenacious, im-
proved with practice: exercise sharpened my wits; in a few
weeks I was promoted to a higher class; in less than two
months I was allowed to commence French and drawing.
I learned the first two tenses of the verb elre, and sketched
my first cottage (whose walls, by the way, outrivalled in
slope those of the leaning power of Pisa), on the same
(\tiy. That night, on going to bed, I forgot to prepare
in imagination the Barmecide snpper of hot roast potatoes,
or white bread and new milk, with which I was wont to
amuse my inward cravings; I feasted instead on the spec-
tacle of ideal drawings, which I saw in the dark: all the
work of my own hands: freely penciled houses and trees,
picturi < sG|uc rocks and ruins, Cuyp-likc groups of cattle,
Bweet paintings of butterflies hovering over unblown roses,
of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wrens'nests inclosing,
pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young ivy sprays, X
examined, too, in thought, the possibility of my ever
being able to translate currently a certain little French
story-book which Madam Pierrot had that day shown me;
nor was that pi'obleni solved to my satisfaction ere 1 fell
aweetly asleep.
Well has Solomon said, " Better is a dinner of herba
where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith, "
I would not now have eichanged Lowood with all its
^iOjC Outeshcad and its daily lururiea.
JANE ETSB.
CHAPTER IX.

But the privations, or rather the hardships, of Low«
leHBened. Spring drew on; she was in deed, already com
the frosts of winter had ceased; its snows were melted, iti'
cutting winds ameliorated. My wretched feet, flayed and
Bwollen to lameness by the sharp air of January, began to
heal and subside under the gentlei'breathings of April; the
night* and mornings no longer by their Canadian temper-
ature froze the very blood in our veins; we could now en-
dure the play-hour passed in the garden: sometimes on a
sunny day it began even to be pleasant and genial, and a.
greenness grew over those brown beds, which, fi'esheniu^
amly, suggested the thought that Hope traversed them a
night, and left each morning brighter trtices of her step!
Flowers peeped out among the leaves; snowdrops, crocuses,
pnrple auriculas, and golden-eyed pansies. On Thursday
dftemoons (half holidays) we now took walks, and found
Btill sweeter flowers opening by the wayside, under the
hedges.
r discovered, too, that a great pleasure, an enioymeL-
which the horizon only hounded, lay all outside the hi^_
and spike-guarded walls of our garden: this pleasure con-..
eisted in prospect of noble Bummits girdling a great hill-
hollow, rich in verdure and shadow; in a bright heck, full
of dark stones and sparkling eddies. How different had
this scene looked when I viewed it laid out beneath the
iron aky of winter, stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow !
— when mists as chill as death wandered to the impnise of
east winds along those purple peaks, and rolled down " ine "
and holm till they blended with the frozen fog of the hecKl
I'hat beck itself was then a torrent, turbid and curbless:
it tore asunder the wood, and sent a raving sound through
the air, often thickened with wild rain or whirling sleet;
and for the forist on its banks, i/tat showed only ranks o'
skeletons.
April advanced to May: a bright serene May it was
days of blue skv, placid sunshine, and soft western o
southern gales filled up its duration. And now vegetation
matuj'ed with vigor; Lowood shook loose it« tresses; it be-
CiUiie all green, all flower^j its great elm, ash, and oak
JANE ETSB.
gkeletona were restored to majestic life; -woodland plantq
sprang up profUBeJy in its recesses ; unnumbered Taricttesl
of moss filled its hollows, and made it a etrauge ground- 1
ennsliine out of. the wealth of its wild primrose plants : X|
have eeen their pale gold gleam in overshadowed spots likel
Bcatterings of the sweetest luster. All this I enjoyed ofteiij
and fullv, free, unwatched, and almost alone : for this un-J
wonted liberty and pleasure there was a cause, to whieh i(J
now becomes my task to advert. j
I Have I not described a pleasant site for a dwellingj
when I speak of it as bosomed in hill and wood, and risioM
I from the verge of a stream ? Asaurodly, ploaeant enougM
bat whether healthy or not is another question. ■
That forest dell, where Lowood lay. was the cradle in
fog and fog-bred pestilence ; which, quickening with tl»
qnickeuing spring, crept into the Orphan Asylum, bi^eathej
tyjihuB through its crowded school-room and dormitory
and, ere May arrived ; transformed the seniiuai-y into a«
hospital. 1
Semi -starvation and neglected colds had pre-disposeffl
most of the pupils to rweive infection t forty-five ont i^
the eighty girls lay ill at ouli time. Classes were brokea
op, rules relaxed. The few who continued well were al-
lowed almost unHmited license; becanse the medical at-
I tondant insisted on the necessity of frequent exercise to
keep them in health : and had it been otherwise, no one
had leisure to watch or restrain them. Miss Templi
whole attention was ahsoi-bed bv the patients : she lived
the sick room, never quitting it except to snatch a fei
hours'rest at night. The teachers were fully occupie'
witli packing up and making other necessary preparations
for the departure of those girls who were fortunate enough
to have friends and relations able and willing to remove
them from the seat of contagion. Many, already smitten,
went home only to diu : some died at the school and were
buried quietly and qoickly, the nature of the malady for-
bidding; delay.
While disease h:td thus become an inhabitant of Lo^
wood, and death its freqnent visitor : while there wi
^oom and fear within its walls ; while its rooms and paa-_
sages steamed with hospital smells, the drug and the'
EiBstil striving vainly to overcome the effluvia of mortality,
bat bright May shone imclouded over the bold hills and
IfTOOdland ont of doors. Its garden, too, glowed
it-
t« I
M
ed^^
na'

'ity (
and
wed^^


JiNB ETRE.
with flowers ; hollyliocks liad sprang np tall aa trees, Ulie^
had opened, tulips and roBea were in bloom ; the borders
of the little beds were gay with pink thrift and crimson
doublo-daiaiea ; the sweet briers gave out, morning and
OTening, their scent of spice and apples ; and those fra-
Eant treasures were all useless for most of the inmates of
)wood, except to furnish now and then a handful of
herbs and bloasoma to put in a coffin.
But I. and the rest who continued well, enjoyed fully
the beauties of the scene and season : they let us ramble
in the wood like gypsies, from morning till night : we did
what wo liked, went where we liked : we lived better too.
Mr, Brocklehurst and his family never came near Lowood
now ; household matters were not scmtinized into ; the
cross housekeeper was gone, driven away by the fear of
infection ; her successor, who had been matron at the
Lowton Dispensary, unused to the ways of her new abode,
provided with comparative liberalit^v. Besides, there
were fewer to feed : the sick could eat little : our breakfast-
baains were better filled : when there was no time to pre-
pare a regular dinner, which often happened, she would
give us a large piece of cold pie, or a tliick slice of bread
and cheese, and this we carried away with us to the wood,
where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined
y favorite seat was a smooth and broad atone, rising
white and dry from the very middle of the beck, and only
to be got at by wading through the water ; a feat I ac-
complished barefoot. The stone was just broad enough
to accommodate, comfortably, another girl and me, at that
time my chosen comrade — one Mary Ann Wilson ; a
shrewd, observant personage, whose society I took pleasure
in, partly because she was witty and original, and partly
because she had a manner which set mo at my ease. Some
years older than -I, ahe knew more of the worfd, and could
tell me many things I liked to hear : with her my curios-
ity found gratification : to my faults also she gave ample
indulgence, never imposing curb or rein on anything I
said. She had a turn for narrative, I for analysis ; she
liked to inform, I to question ; so we got on swimmingly
together, deriving much entertainment, if not much im-
provement, from our mutual intercourse.
And where, meantime, was Helen Bums ? Why did I
not spend theae sweet days of liberty with her ? Had 1
?oreotten herP or was I bo worthless as to have groT
of ner pure society? Surely the Mary Ann Wilson i hav(3
meutioned was inferior to my first acquaintance: shecould'l
only tell me amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and
pungent goaaip I chose to indulge in; white, if I have
spoken truth of Helen, she was qualified to give those who
enjoyed the privilege of her converse, a taste of far higher
thuiB:8. ■
True, reader: and I knew and felt this: and though ]
am a defective being, with many faults aud few redeeminj
points, yot I never tired of Helen Burns; nor ever ceasei
to cherish for her a sentiment of attachment, as strongj
tender, and respectful as any that ever animated mj heail^
How could it be otherwise, when Helen, at all tiiLes an^
under all circumstances, evinced for me a quiet aud fftithM
ful friendship, which ill-humor never soured, nor trritai4
tion ever troubled? But Helen was ili at present: fog
some weeks she had been removed from my sight to Q
knew not what room up stairs. She wj not, I was toldJ
in the hospital portion of the houje with the feven
patients; for her complaint was consumption, not typhus^
and by consumption I, in ray ignorance, understood some- j
thing mild, which time a'jd care would be sure to alleviate,
I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or
twice coming down stairs on very warm and sunny after-
noons, and being taken by Misa Temple into the garden;
but, on these occasions, I was not allowed to go and Epealcj|
to hor; I only saw her from the school-room window, andj
then not distinctly; for she was much wrapped up, tmSq
sat at s, distance under the veranda. 1
One evening, in the beginning of June, I had staid out]
very late with Mary Ann in the wood: we had, as usual, I
separated ourselves from the othejs, and luid wandered^
far: so far that we lost our way, and had to ask it at H
lonely cottage, where a man and woman lived who looked
after a herd of half-wild swine that fed on the msiat in the!
wood. Wh«n we got back it was after moonrise: a pony,]
which we knew to be the surgeon's, was standing at the
garden door. Mary Ann remarked that she supposed
some one must be very ill, as Mr, Bates had been sent for
at that time of the evening. She went into the house; I
staid behind a few minutes to plant in my garden a hand-
ful of roots I had dug up in the forest, and which I feared
would wither if I left tham till morning. Tliis done, I
S4
lingered yet a Utile longer: tho llowera smelled bo Bweet at
the dew fell; it was auch a pleaumit evening, so serene, so
warm; the etiU glowing west promiBed so fairly another
fine day ou tlie morrow; the moon rose with such majesty
in tho grave east. I was noting these things and enjoying
them as a child might, when it entered my mind as it had
never done before:
" How sad to be lying now ou a sick-bed, and to be in
danger of dying! This world is pleasant — it would be
dreary to be called from it, and to have to go who knows
where? "
And. then my mind iflade its first earnest effort to com-
prehend what had been infused into it concerning heaven
and hell: and for the first timo it recoiled, baffled; and
for the first time glancing behind, on each side, and before
it, it saw all amuud an uufathomed gulf: it felt the one
point where it stood — tho present; all the i-est was form-
less cloud and vacant depth: and it shuddered at the
thnngiit of tottering, and j > lnnging amidst that chaos.
While pondering this new idea I heard the front door
open; Mr. Bates came out, and with him was a unrse.
After she had seen liim mount his horse and depart, ah»
vas about to close the door, but I ran up to her.
" Kow is Helen Bums? "
" Very poorly, " was the answer.
*'Is it her Jfr. Bates has been to see? "
" Yes. "
" And what does he say about her? "
" He says she'll not bo here long. "
This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, wonl
have only conveyed the notion that she was about to be
removed to Northumberland, to her own home. I should
not have suspected that it meant slie was dying; but I
- knew instantly now: it opened clear on my comprehension
that Helen Burns was numbering her last days in this
world, and that she was going to he taken to tbe region
of spirits, if such region there were. I experienced a
shock of horror, then a strong thrill of grief, then a desire
•—a necessity to see her; and I asked in what room she lay.
" She is in Miss Temple's room, " said the nurse.
" May I go up and speak to her? "
" Ob, no, child! It is not likely; and now it is time
for yon to come in; you'll catch the fever if you stop out
mh6u the devr is Milag. "
fl ha

---•TS'* Burse closed the front door; 1 went in by the si
eiitraaee whii;h lei] to the school-room: I was just in tinl
it was ti'mti o'clock, »nd Miss Miller was cnlliiig the pup]
to go to bed. i
It might he two hours later, probably near elevon, whl
1 — -not having been wblo to full asleep, and deeming/''
the perfect silence of the dormitory, that my companiqj
were all wrapjwd in profound rBjiose — roseaoftly, put o
fro«k over my night-dreas, and, without ahoeB, crept
the apartment, and set oS in quest of Miss Temple b ]
It was quite at the other end of the house; but I knew ij
way, and the tight of tlio unclouded summer moon, ent4
ing here and there at passage windows, enabled i
it without difficulty. An odor of can»phor and bun
vinegar warned me when I came near the fever-room:
I passed its door quickly, fearful lest the nnrse who sat i
all night ehonld hear me. 1 dreaded being discovered aft
Bent rack; for I must see Helen; I must embrace her befq
she died; I must give her one last kiss, exchange with 1
one last word.
Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of tj
hOQee below, and succeeded in opening and shuttiS
without noise two doors, I reached another flight of stea
thosG I mounted, and then just opposite to me was i^
Temple's room. A light shone through the key-hole, an
from under the door; a profound stillness pervaded U
vicinity. Coming near, I found the door slightly ajftr,
probably to admit some fresh air into the close abode of
sickness. Indisposed to hesitate, and full of impatient im-
ptilfios — Boul ana senses quivering with keen throes — I put
it back and looked in. My eye sought Helen, and feared
to Snd death.
Close by Miss Temple's bed, and half covered with its
white curtains, there stood a little crib, I saw the outline
ofa form under the clothes, hut the face was hid by the
hangings: the nurse I had spoken to in tlie garden sat in
an easy chair, asleep; an unsnufEed candle burned dimly on
the table. Miea romple was not to be seen: I knew
afterward that she had boon called to a delirious patient in
the fever-room. 1 advanced, then paused by the crib side:
my liand was on the curtain, and I preferred speaking be-
fore I withdrew it. I still recoiled at the dread of seeingft
corpse,
" "'',^;-i wliispered softly, " are you awake ? "
She stirred herself, put back the curtain, and I saw hs
ffloe, pale, waated. but quite compoaed: she looked so littli
changed that my fear was instantly diBeipatud,
" Cau it be you, Jane? " she asked in her own ;
yoice.
" Oh! " I thought, " she ia not going to die: they are
she could not speak and look so c-alm!y if s'
were, "
I got on to her crib and kissed her: her forcshead was
cold, and her cheek both cold and thin, and bo were her
hand and wrist, but she smiled as of old.
" Why are you come here, Jane? It ia past eleyel
o'clock: I heard it strike some minutes since. " Jl
" I came to see you, Helen: I heard you were very in
and I could not sleep till I had spoktu to you, "'
" You came to bid me good by, then: you are just in.
time probably. "
" Are you going somewhere, Ilelen? Are yon going
home? "
" Yes; to my loug home — my last home. "
" No, no, Ilelen! " I stopped distressed. While
tried to devour my tears, a fit of coughing seized Hl-Iuu; %
did notj however, wake the nurse; when it was o'
lay Bome minutes exhausted, then she whispered,
your little feet are bare, lie down aud cover yourself wifl
my < |Hilt. " r
1 did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled a\ < 3t
to her. After a long silence, she resumed, stil! whispt'
ing.
" 1 am very Iiappy, Jane: and when you hear that 1 am
dead, yon must he sure and not gi-ieve; there is nothing to
grieve about. We all must die one day, and the illnesB
which is removing me is not painful; it is gentle and
gradual: my mind is at rest. I leave no one to regret
me raueh: 1 have only a father, and ho ia lately miinied.
and will not miss me. By dying young 1 shall eseupL'gri-iii
sufferings. I had not qualities or talents to make niv was
very well in the world: 1 should have been continually at
fault. "
" But where are you going to, Helen? Can you f
Do you know? "
" I heliove: I have faith: I am going to God, " -
■ " Where is God ? What is God? "
" ^'ilaker uidyouia, who will oflver dflstid'j! v


ted, I rely implicitly on his power, and con6(
wholly in his goodness: I count the hours till that eventful
one arrives which shall restore me lo him, reveal him to
" You are sure then, Helen, that there is such a i
as heaven; and that our souls can get to it when we n
" I anisure there is a future state; I believe God is g .
I can resign my immortal part to him without any miBgi
ing. God is my father; God is my friend; Ik
laeTieve lie loves me. "
" And shall I see you again, Helen, when I d
" You will come to the same region of happinese: I*
received by the same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt,
dear Jane, "
Again I questioned; but thia time only in thouglil
" Where is that region? Does it exist? "'And I clasp <
my arms closer round Helen; she seemed dearer to i
than ever: I felt as if I could not let her co; I lay wi^
my face hidden on her neck. Presently sno said in tli{
sweetest tone, " How comfortable I am! That last fit of
coughing has tired mo a little: I feel as if 1 could sleep:
but don't leave me, Jano; 1 like to have you near me. "
" Ill stay with you, dear Helen: no one shall take i
away. "
'■ Are yon warm, darling? "
" YeJ'
" Good-night, Jane. "
" Good-night, Helen. "
She kiseod me. and I her; and we both soon slumbered.'
When I awoke it was day: an unusual movement'
roused me; I looked up; I was in somebody's arms; the
nurse held me; she waa carrying mo through the passage
back to the dormitory. I was not reprimanded for leav-
ing my bed; people had something else to tliink about:
no explanation was afforded then to my many questions;
hilt a liay or two afterward I learned that Miss Temple, on
returning to her room at dawn, had found me laid in a
little crib; my face against Helen Burns's shoulder, my
arms around her neekl I was asleep, and Helen was—
dead.
fler grave is in Brocklebridge church-j'ard; fpr £
years after her death it waa only covered by a graa
monnd; but now a gray marble tablet marks the spot, i
ne,. and the word " Keaurgam,
wi^H
a tha'u
It of
leep:
t
?red. ^H

JANE EYKE.
CHAPTER X.

HiTHEETO I have recorded in detail the events of mfl
significant existence: to the first ten years of my lifi .
have given almost aa many chapters. But this ia not feji
be a regular autobiography: I am only bound to invoke
memory where 1 know ber responses will possess some
degree of interest; therefore I now pass a space of eight
years almost in silence; a few lines only are necessary to
keep np the links of connection.
When tlie typhus fever bad fulfilled its mission of de-
Taetfttion at Lowood,it gradually disappeared from thence;
hnt not till its virulence and the number of its victims
had drawn public attention on the school. Inquiry was
made into the origin of the s < !D!irge, and by degrees vari-
ous facts came out which escited jmblic indignation in a
high degree. Tlio unhealthy nature uf the site; the
quantity and quality of the children's food; tlie brackish,
fetid water used in its preparation; the pupils'wretclii'
clothing and accommodation; all those things were ■*'
covered; and the discovery produced a result mortifj
to Mr. Brocklehurst, but beneficial to the institution.
Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in thi
county subscribed largely for the erection of a more con-
venient building in a better situation; new regulationa
were made; improvements in diet and clothing introduced;
the funds of the school were intrusted to the management
of a committee. Mr. Brocklehurst, who, from his wealth
and family connections, could not be overlooked, still re-
tained the post of treasurer; but he was aided in the dis-
charge of his duties by gentlemen of rather ruoi-e enlarged
and sympathizing minds; his office of inspector, too, was
shared by those who knew how to combme reason with
strictness, comfort with economy, compassion with up-
rightness. The school, thns improved, became in time a
truly useful and noble institution. I remained an inmate
of its walls, after its regeneration, for eight years; six aa
pupil, and two as teacher; and in both capacities 1 bear
my testimony (o its vahie and importance.
During tlieee eight years my life was nniform: but not
Unhappy, because it was not inactive. I had the means
JAHE KYnB.
of an excellent education placed within my reacli; a fona
neae for some of my atadies. and a desire to excel in alf
together with a great delight in pleasing my teaclierg
especially such as I loved, urged me on: I availed r ,
fully of the advantaees offered me. In time I rose to b
the first girl of the first class: then I was vested with tid
office of teacher, which I discharged with zeal for tfff
years: but at the end of that time I altfrud.
Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far contiiJ
nod BUi > erintendent of the seminary'to her instruction |
owed the hest part of my acquirements; her friendship aot
society had heen my continual solace: she had stood me il
the stead of a mother, governess, and, latterly, compaol
inn. At this period she married, removed with her hn^
band {a clergyman, an excellent man, almost worthv <
such a wife) to a distant county, and consequently was lo!
to me.
From the day she left I was no longer the aan
her was gone every settled feeling, every association thd
had made Ijowood in acme degree a home to me. I haa
imbibed from her something of lier nature and much of h^
habita: more harmonious thoughts: what seemed bettf
regulated feelings had become the inmatce of my mind.
had given allegience to duty and order: I was quiet, I h
lieved I was content: to the eyes of others, usually even ^
my own, I appeared a disciplined and subdued character
But destiny, in the shape of the Rev. Mr, Nasm}^^
came between me and Miss Temple: I saw her in h^
traveling-dress step into a post-chaise, shortly after thi
marriage ceremony; I watched the chaise mount the hi|l
and disappear beyond its brow; and then retired to i
own room, and there spent in solitude the greatest part Q
the half-holiday granted in honor of the occasion.
I walked about the chamber most of the time. I im-
agined myself only to be regretting my loss, and thinking
how to repair it; but when my reflections were concluded,
and I looted up and found that the afternoon was gone
and evening far advanced, another discovery dawned on
me, namely, that in the interval I had undergone a trans-
forming process; that my mind had put off all it had bor-
rowed of Miss Temple— or rather that she hud taken with
her the s & rene atmosphere I had been breathing in her
vicinity — and that now I was left in my natural element,
'"''^ " to feel the stirring of old emotions. It did

90 JANE BTBE.
not eeem as if a prop were withrawn, but rather ae if a
motive were goue: it was not the j > ower to be traoquil
which had failed me, hut the roasoti for tranquility was no
more. My world had for eoine years been iu Lowood: my
experience had been of its nilea and ayatoms; now 1 re-
membered that the real world was wide, imd that u varied
field of hopes and fears, of sensiitlons and excitementa^
awaited those who had courage to go forth into its expi
to seek real knowledge of life amidst its perils.
I went to my window, opened it, and looked oot. Thi
were the two wings of the building; there was the garderij
there were the skirts of Lowood, there was the hilly hori-
zon. My eye passed all other objects to rest on those
most remote, the blue peaks: it was those I longed to sur-
mount; all within their boundary of rock and heath seemed
prison-ground, exile limits. 1 traced the white road wind-
ing round the base of one mountain, and vanishing in a
gorge between two: how I longed to follow it fartherl I
recmled the time when I had traveled that very road in a
coach; I remembered descending that hill at twilight: an
age seemed to have elapsed since the day which brought
me first to Lowood, tad I had never quitted it since. My
vacations had all been spent at school : Mrs. Reed had never
sent for me to Gateshead; neither she or any of her family
had ever been to visit me. I had had no communication
by letter or message with the outer world: aohoo) rules,
school duties, school habits and notions, and voices, and
faces, and phrases, and costumes, and preferences, and
antipathies: such was what I knew of esisteuce. And now
I felt that it was not enough: I tired of the routine of
eight years in one afternoon, I desired liberty; for liberty
I gasped; for liberty I uttered a prayer; it seemed scattered
on the wind then faintly blowing. I abandoned it and
framed a humbler supplicatiou — for change, stimulus: that
rjtition, too, seemed, swept off into vaguo space; " Then, "
cried half desperate, " grant me at least anew semtudel "
Here a bell ringing the hour of supper, called me dowi
stairs.
I was not free to resume the interrupted chain of
reflections till bed-time: even then a teacher who occiipi_
the same room with me kept mo from the subject to whicl
I had longed to recur, by prolonged effusion of small talk.
How I wished sleep would silence her! It seemed iis if,
could I but go back to the idea which had last entered m^
ienta^^^_
laoBta^H
JASB EYRE,
mind ae I stood at tho window, some inventive suggestioi
would rise for my relief.
Miss Gryce snored at last; ebe was a heavr WelcL.
woman, and till now her habitual nasal strains had nevMf
been regarded by me in any other light than aa a Tuiiaanc^jl
to-niffht I hailed the first deep notes with satiafaction; ffl
was debarraseed of interruption; my half-effaced thought
instantly revived.
" A new aervitudel There is something in that. " I
soliloquized (mentally, bo it understood; I did not talk
nloud). " I know there is. because it does not sound too i
sweet; it is not like such words as liberty, exeitemeiit| > |
enjoyment: delightful sounds truly; but no more thar
sounds for me; and so hollow and Beeting that it is n
waste of time to listen to thera. But Servitude! Th«i(
must be matter of fact. Any one may serve: I havf
served here eight years; now all I want is to serve elsa^
where. Can I not got so much of my own will? Is not ^
the thing feaaible? Yea — yea— the end is not so difficult:
If I had only a brain active enougli to ferret out the
means of attaining it. "
I sat up in bed by way of arousing this sad brain; it
was a diilly night; I covered my shoulders with a shawl;
and then 1 proceeded to think again with all my might.
" What do I want? A new place, in a new house,
among new faces, under new circumstances: I want this
because it is no use wanting anything better. How do
people do to get a new place? They apply to friends, I
suppose: I have no friemlB, There are many others who
have no friends, who must look about for themselves and
be theirown helpers; and what is their resource? "
I could not tell: nothing answered me; I then ordered
my brain to find a response, and quickly. It worked and
worked fjister: I felt the pulses ilirob in my head and
temples, but for neai-ly an hour it worked in chaps, and
no result came of its efforts. Feverish with vain labor, I
got up and took a turn in the room; undrew the curtain,
ucrted a star or two, shivered with cold, and again crept
to bed.
A kind fairy, m my absence, had surely dropped tlie re-
ijiiircd snggi:ation on my pillow; for aa I lay down it came
Huieily and naturally to my mind: " Those who want
-'■-'* — a,^tei::tiBe; you must advertise in. the shire
92 JANE EYEB.
" How? I knew nothing about advertising. "
Roplies rriBei Hniooth «ntl prompt now: " " Yon i
inclose the advertisement and the money to pay for it ui
a cover directed to ihe editor of the Herald; jou luuefc
Eut it, the first opportunity you have, into thv post nt
lOwton; auBwers must bo aadrosfied to J. E. at the post-
oiTioe tliere: you can go and inquire in about a we^^
oftej'you eena your letter, if any are come, and act f
oordiugly. "
This scheme I went over twice, thrice; it was then fl
jested in my mind; I had it in a clear, practical forni;1f
felt satisfied, and fell asleep.
With earliest day I was up: I had my advertisement
written, inclosed, and directed before the bell rang to
rouse the school; it ran thuB:'"
" A young lady accustomed to tuition (had I not h
a teacher for two years?] ia desirous of meeting w "
situation in a private family where the children are u
fourteen {I thought that as I was barely eighteen, it would
not do to undertake tlie guidance of pupils nearer my own
age). She is qualified to teach the usual branches of a
good English education, together with French, Drawing,
and Music (in those days, reader, this now narrow cata-
logue of accomplishments would have been held tolemblj
comprehensive). Address J. E., Post-office, Lowton,
shire. "
This document remained locked in my drawer all day:
after tea, I asked leave of the new superintendent to go to
Lowf.on, in order to perform some small commissions for
myself and one or two of my fellow-teachers; permission
was readily granted: I went. It was a walk of two miles,
and the evening was wet, but tbe days were still long; I
visited a shop or two, slipped the letter into the post-office,
and came back through a heavy rain, with streaming gar-
ments; but with a relieved heart.
The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end
at last, however, like all sublunary things, and once more,
toward tlie close of a pleasant autumn day, I found myself
afoot on the road to Lowton. A picturesque track it was
by the way; lying along the side of the beck and through
the sweetest curves of the dale; but that day I thought more
of the letters that might or miglit not be awaiting me at
tbe little burgh whirher I was bound, than of the charma j
of the lea and water.
JAJ4^E KTBE.
My oBtenaible errand oa this occasion waa to get meaa
ured for a pair of slioea ; so I discharged that Imaioess firel
and when it was done, I stepped acroes tbe clean and'itiie
little street from the shoe-maker's to the poet-offioo ; i
was kept by an old dame, who wore horn spectaclea ou h^
nose, and black tiiittons on her hands.
" Are there uny letters for J. E. ? " I asked.
She peered nt me over her spotitacles, and then i
opened a drawer, and fumbled among its coutenta for I
long time — so long that my hopes began to falter.
last, having held a document before her glasses for ne
five miniitea, she presented it across the counter, accouj
panyiug the act by another inqiiisitiTC and mistrUBtftU
glance — it was for J. E.
••1b there only one? " I demanded.
" There are no more. " said ahe : and I put it in myl
pocket and turned my face homeward: I could not openl
It then ; rules obliged me to be back by eight, and it was ■
already half-past seven.
Various duties awaited me on my arrival: I had to sit
with the girls dnring their hour of study ; then it was my
turn to road prayers ; to see them to bed : afterward I sap-
ped with the other teachers. Even when we finally retired
for the night, the inevitable Miss Gryce was atill my com-
panion: we had only a abort end of candle in our candle-
stick, and I dreaded lest she should talk till it was all J
burned out: fortunately, however, the heavy supper shel
had eiiten produced a soporific effect: she was already anor- I
ing before I had iinianed undressing. There etill r & -J
Riaiiied an inch of candle: I now took out my letter ; thasj
Beal waa an initial P.; I broke it: the contents were briet-J
'■If J, E,, who advertised in the skire Herald ofW
last Tliuraday, possesses the acquirements mentioned ; and]
if she is in a position to give satisfactoiy references a
character and competency, a situation can be otfered hecfl
where there is bat one pupil — a little girl, nnder ten yeanf
of age, and where tiie salary ia thirty pounds per annum,*
J. Ei is requested to send references, name, address, auM
hII parti(!alars to the direction, Mrs. Fairfax, Thornfield,J
near Millcote, shire. "
I oxamined the document long: the writing was old-
fitEhioned and rather uncertain, like that of an elderly
lady. This circumstance was sittisfactory: a private fear
that, in thus acting for myselfj and by my .

9i JAXB ETRE.
own guidance, I ran the risk of setting into some scrape!
and, above all tbinga, I wished the result of my cndeavorB
to he respectable, proper, en reijle. I now felt that an
elderly lady was no bad ingi'edient in the business I had
on hand. Mrs, Fairfax ! 1 saw her in a black gown and
widow's cap— frigid, perhaps, but not uncivil: a model of
elderly English respectability. Thornfield! that, doubt-
lesB, was the name of her house — a neat, orderly spot, I
was sure, though I failed in my eiforts to conceive a cor-
rect pl^n of the premises. Milfcote. shire. I brushed
up my recollections of the map of England ; yes, I saw it,
both the shire and the town. shire was seventy miles
nearer liOndon than the remote county wliere I now re-
sided; that was a recommenda'ion to me. I longed to go
where there was life and mo- ement, Millcote was a large
manufacturing town on the banks of the A : a bnsy
place enough, doubtless: so much the better, it would bt
a complete change at least. Not that my fancy was much
captivated by the idea of long chimneyB and clouds of
smoke — " but, " I argued, " Thornfield will, probably, be
a good way from the town.
Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick
went out.
Next day new steps were to be taken ; my plans conld
no longer be confined to my own breast ; I must impart
them, in order to achieve their success. Having sought
and obtained an audience of the superintendent during
the noontide recreation, I told her I had a prospect of
getting a new stuatiou where the salary would be double
what I now received {for. at Lowood, I only got fifteen
pounds jjcr annum), and requested she would break the
matter for me to Mr. lirocklehurst, or some of the
committee, and ascertain whetlier they would ^lermit
me to mention them as references. She obligingly
consented to act as mediatrix in the matter. The
next day she laid the affair before Mr. Brocklohursl,
who said that Mrs. Reed must bo written to, as she was
my natural guardian. A note was accordingly addressed
to that lady, who rctin-ned for answer, that " I might do
as I pleased: she had long relinquished all interference in
my affairs. " This note went the round of the committee,
and, at last after what appeared to me most tedious delay,
formal leave was given me to better my condition if I
»uld ; and an assurance added that, as I had always fSS^
duoted myeelf well, both as teacher and pupil, at Lowood,
a testimonial of character and capacity, signed by the
inspectors of that institution, should forthwith be fur-_
nisned me.
This testimonial I accordingly received in about ;
month, forwarded a copy of it to Mrs. Fairfax, and gofl
that lady's reply, stating that she was eatiefied, and fisinj'
that day fortnight as the period for my assuming the poi
of governess in hur house.
I now busied myaeU in preparations: the fortnight
jiaaaed rapidly, I had not a very large wardrobe, thoiigtil
it was adequate to my wants; and the last day sufficed tij
pack my trnnk — the same I had brought with m'
years ago from Gateshead,
The bos was corded, the card nailed on. In half an
hour the carrier was to call for it to take it to Lowton,
whither I myself was to repair at an early hour the next
morning to meet the coach, I had brushed my black stuff
travel iii^-dress, prepared my bonnet, gloves, and muff;
songht m all my drawers to see that no article was left be-
hind; and now, having nothing more to do, I sat down and
tried to rest, I could not, though I had been on foot allj
day, I could not now repose an instant — I was too muchr
excited, A phase of my lite was closing to-night, a new
one opening to-morrow: impossible to slumber in the in?
terval; I must watch feverishly while the change was beinj
accomplished,
" Miaa, " said a servant who met me in the lobby, whera
r was wandering like a troubled spirit, *'a person beloip
wishes to see you. "
" The carrier, no doubt, " I thought, and ran dow
stairs without iuquiry, I was passing the hack parlor o.
teachers'sitting-room, the door of which was half openJ
to-go to the kitchen, when some one ran out.
" It's her. I'm sure! — I could have told her anywhere! "
cried the individual wiio stopped my progress and took myi
hand.
I looked. I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed
servant, matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, witS
black hair and eyes, and lively complexion.
" Well, who is it? " she asked, in a voice and with i
amilo I half recognized; " you've not ijuite forgotten r
I think, Miss Jane? "
In another second I was embracing and kissing 1
W JANE ETUE.
Apturously. " Beaeiel Bessie! Bpsaie! " that was all t
aaid; wbereat she half laiiglied, half cried, and we both
weut into the parlor. By the fire Etnod a little fellow of
three years old, in plaid frock and trousers.
'* This is my little boy, " aaid Bessie, directly.
" Then yon are raai-ried, Bessie? "
" Yes: nearly five yeara since, to Kohert Leaven, 1
coalman; and I've a little girl beaidee Bobby there, f
I've christened Jane. "
" And you don't live at Gateshead? "
" I live at the lodge: the old porter has left. "
" Well, and how do they all get on? Tell me eveiy
thing about them, Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby,
come and sit on ray knee, will yon? " but Bobby preferreit
sidling over to hia mother.
" You're not grown so very tall. Miss Jane, nor so very
stout, " continued Mrs. Leaven. " I dare say they've not
kept yon too well at school: Miss fieed is the head tmA
shonlders taller than you are; and Miss Georgiaua ff(a^
make two of you in breadth, "
" Gwrgiana is handsome, I suppose, Bes
" Very, She went up to London last winter with 1
inatnma, and there everybody admired her, and a yjung
lord fell in love with lier: but his relations were against
'the match; and — what do yon think? — he and Mias Oeor-
giana made it np to run away: but they were found out
and stopped. It was Miaa Rfed that found them out: 1
believe she was envious, and now she and her sister lead a
oat-and-dog life together; they are always quarreling. "
" Well, and what of John Heod? "
" Oh, he ia not doing su well as hia mamma conld wish.
He went to college, and bo got — plucked, I think they
call it; and then his uncles wanted him to be a barrister,
and study the law: but be is such a dissipated yonng man,
they will never make much of him, I think. "
" What does he look like?'"
" He is very tall: some people call him a fine-lookinj
young man; but ho has euoh thick lips, "
" And Mrs. Heed? "
" Miesis looks atout and well enough in the face, bat i
think she's not quite easy in lier mind: Mi-. John's conduot
does not please her — he spends a deal of money. "
" Did she send you here, Bessie? "
" No, indeed; but I have long wanted to a
lan, I
ley. " ji

.lANF. EtriB,
when r heard that there had been a letter from yoa, and
that yoQ were going to another part of the country, I
thonght I'd juat set off and get a look at you before yoa
were quite ont of my reach. " "
" 1 am afraid you aredieappoiDtcd in me, BeBBie. " I
this laughing: I perceived that Bessie'e glance, though
expressed regard, did in no shape denote admiration.
" No, MiBr] Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough)
you look like a lady, and it is as much as ever I expected
of you: you were no beauty as a child. "
1 smiled at Bessie's frank answer: I felt that it was cor-
rect, but I confess I was not qnite indifferent to its import;
at eighteen most people wish to please, and the conviotion
that they have not an exterior likely to second that desire
brings anything but gratification.
" I dare say you are clever, though, " continued Besaii
by way of soiace. " What can you do ? Can yon pi ly
the piano ? "
" A little. "
There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened il
and then asked mo to sit down and give her a tv-ne.
played a waltz or two, and she was charmed.
" The Miss Reeds could not play as well 1 " said ahe ex-
nltingly. I always said you would surpass them in learning:
and can yon draw ? "
" That is one of my paintings over the chimney-piece. "
It was a landscape in water-colora, of which I had made a
present to the superintendent, in acknowledgment of her
obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf, and
which she had framed and glazed.
" Well, that is beautiful, Mies Jane! It is as fine a
picture as any Miss Heed's drawing-master could paint, let
alone the young ladies themselves, who uould not
near it: and have you learned French ? "
" Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it. "
" And yon can work on muslin and canvass? "
" Oh, you are qnite a lady. Miss Jane ! I knew you
would be: you will get on. whether yonr relations notice
you or not. There was Bonierhing I wanted to ask you.
Have you hoard any thing from yonr father's kinsfolk, the
Byres ? "
" Never in my li'e. "
Well, yon knuw Missis always said they were popy
1
P
ed I
)r-'
■rt:
ire J
I
n
08 Ji.NE EYltE. ^^^^H
And qnite despicable: and tlay may be poor: but Tbel!«9
they are aa niuoh gentry as the Heeds are ; for one dftJU
nearly Eeven years ago, a Mr. Eyre came to Gateshead anqi
wanted to see you ; Missia eaicl you were at school fifty
miles off ; he seemed bo much disappointed, for he conld
not stay: he was going on u voyage to a foreign country,
and the ship was to sail from London in a day or two. He
looked quite a gentleman, and I helieve he was your fulb^
ei^e brother. " I
" What foreign country was lie going to, Bessie ? " J
" An island thousands of miles off, where they make
wine — the butler did tell nie " 1
" Madeira ? " I suggested, I
" Yes, that is it — that ia the very word. "
" So he went ? "
" Yes ; he did not stay many minutes in the house:
Uissis was very higV with him ; she called him afterward
a "'sneaking iradesmim.'My Robert believes he was a
wine-merchant. "
" Very likely, " I returned; " or perhaps clerk or ageoti
to B wine merchant. " i
Bessie and 1 conversed abont old times an hour long^,
and then she was obliged to leave me: I saw her again for
a few minutes the next morning at r^owton, while I was
waiting for the coach. We parted finally at the door of
the " Brocklehurst Arms " tliere: each went her separata
way; slie set off for the brow of Lowood Fell to meet the
conveyance which was to take her back to Gateshead, I
mounted the vehicle which was to bear me to new duties
and a new life in the unknown environs of Millcote.
CHAPTER XI.
A NEW chapiter in a novel is something like a m
scene in a play: and when I draw up the curtain this time,
reader, yoa must fancy you sre a room in the " George
Inn " at Millcote, with such large-figured paperiug on the
walls as iun rooms have; such a carpet, such'urnitiire,
ench ornaments on the mantle-piece, such prints; inclnd-
ing a portrait of George the Third, and another of the
Prmce of Wales, and a representation of the death ol
le^^^^
wwimm
JANE F.YRB,
Wolfo. All this 18 visible to jon by the light o( an
lamp banging from the oeiljng, and by that of an exi
ieut fire, near which I sit in my cloalt and bonnet;
muS and umbrella He on the table, and I am warnii
away the numbness and oliill contracted by sixteen hour!
exposure to the rawneBs of an October day: I- left Lowton
at funr o'clock a.m., and the Millcote town clock is now
just striking eight.
Ueador, though I look comfortably accommodated, I
am not very tranquil in my mind, I thought when the
coach stopped here there would be some one to meet mt;
I looked ansiously round as I descended the wooden steps
the " boots " placed for my convenience, expecting to bbar
my name pronounced, and to see some description of car-
riage waiting to convey me to Thornfield. Nothing of
the sort was visible; and when I asked a waiter if any one
had been to inquire after a Miss Eyre, I was answered in
the negative: so I had no resource but to request to be
shown into a private room: and bore I am waiting, while
all sorts of doubts and fears are troubling my thoughts.
It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced yoath t'-
feel itself quite alone in the world, cut adrift from everj "
connection, uncertain whether the port to which it is
bound can be reached, and prevented by many impedi-
ments from returning to that it has quitted. The charm
of adventure sweetens that sensation, the glow of pride
warms it; but then the throb of fear disturbs it; ana fear
with m« became predominant, when half an hour elapsed,
and still I was alone. I bethought myself to ring the
bell.
" Is there a place in this neighborhood called Thorn-
field? " I asked of the waiter who answered the summons.
" Thornfield? I don't no ma'am; I'll inquire at the
bar. " He vanished, hut re-appeared instantly: " Is yoi
name Eyre, Mies? "
" Tea. "
" Person here waiting for yon- "
1 jumped up, took my muff and umbrella, and hastened
into the inn-passage: a man was standing by the open
door, and in the lamp-lit street 1 dimly saw a one-horso
conveyance.
" This will be your luggage, 1 suppose? " said the n_
rather abruptly when he saw me, pointing to my troak M
(be pttBSage.
'^
tllD - U
!ne5 fl
ipen
orse
1

.TANK ETRK.
" Yea. " He hoisted it on to the veliicle, whicT
sort of oar, and then I got in: before he shuc me up|fl
aaked him how far it was to Thornfield.
" A matter of six miles, "
" How long ahftll wo bo beforo wo get there? "
" Happen an hour and a, half. "
He laatened the car door, climbed to his own seat out-
side, and we set off. Our progress was leisurely, and gave
me ample time to reflect: I was content to be at lengtr. so
near the end of my journey; and as I leaned back in the
comfortable though not elegant conveyance, I meditated
much at my ease.
■ " I BUppoBB, " thought I, " judging from the plainness
tl the servant and carriage, Mrs. Fairfax is not a very
dashing person: so much tne better; I never lived among
fine people but once, and I was Tery miserable with them.
I wonder if she lives alone except this little girl; if so,
and if she is in any degree amiable, I shall surely be able
to get on with her! I will do my best: it is a pity that
doing one's best does not always answer. At Lowood, in-
deed, 1 took that resolution, kept it, and succeed in picas-
ing; but with Mrs. Reed, I remember my best was always
Bpurued with scorn. I pray God Mrs, Fairfax may not
turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but if she does, I am not
bound to stay with her: let the worst come to the worst, 1
can advertise again. How far are we on our road now, I
wonder? "
I let down the window and looked out: Militate was
behind uh; judging by th, number of its lights, it seemed
K place of consid rabl: magnitude, much larger than Low-
ton, Wa were now, as far as I could see, on a sort of
common; but there were Itouses scattered all over the
district; I felt we were in a liifferent region to Lowood,
more jiopnloue, less picturesque; more stirring, less
romantic.
The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor
let his horse walk all the way, and the hour and a halt
extended, I verily believe, to two hours; at last he turned
in his Beat and said, " You're noan so far fro'Thornfield
DOW, "
Again I looked out: we were passing a church: I eaw
its low broad tower against the sky, and its bell was tolling
a quarter; I saw a narrow galusy of lights, too^ on a hill-
Bido, marking a village or liamlet. About teu minutoa

pair of gates ;
after, the driver got down and opene
passed through, and they clashed lo behind ua. We now
slowly ascended a drive, and camp upon the loug front of
a house: candle-light gleamed XruiT. aue curtuiued bo'-
window; all the rest were dark. Ihe ^mr etoppeil at f
front door; It was opened by a [naid-)tef«aHt; 1 olighl
and went in.
" Will yon walk this way, ma'am? " said the girl; ai
I followed her across a stjuare iiatl with nigh doors
round: she ushered nie into a room whoso doub'o illu
nfttion of fire and candle at lirst dazzled me, contrasting
it did with the darkness to which my eyes had been f
two hours inured; when I could see, however, a-«(l;-y-ai
agreeable picture presented itself to my view. <
A snug, small room; a round table by a cheerful fii
sn arm-chair, high-backed and old-fashioned, wherein
the neatest imaginable little elderly lady, in widow's ci
black silk gown, and snowy mnslin apron; exactly li
what I had fancied Mrs. Fairfax, only less stately
milder looking. She was occupied iu knitting; !i h
cat sat demurely at her feet; nothing, in sJiort, Wiis iv.
ing to complete the t'eau ideal of domoatic comfort.
more re-assuring introduction for a. new governess couR
scarcely he conceived: there was no grandeur to overwhelm,
no etateliness to embarrass; and then, as I entered, the old
lady got up, and promptly and kindly came forward to
meet me.
" How do yon do, mjr dear? I am afraid you have had
a tedious ride ; John drives so slowly : you must be cold,
oome lo the fire. "
" Mrs. Fairfax, I suppose? " said I.
" Yes, you are right: do sit down. "
She conducted me to her own chair, and thi
remove my shawl and untie my bonnet-strings: I begg6(
she would not give herself so much trouble,
" Oh, it is no trouble; I dare say your own bauds are al-
most numbod with cold. Leah, make a li ttle hot negus and
cut a sandwich or two: here are the keys of the storeroom. "
And she produced from her pocket a moat housewifely
bunch of keys, and delivered them to the servant.
" Now, then, draw nearer to the fire, " she coiitini " ■
" You've brought your luggage with you, haven't yon,
dear? "
wa !■
.au

103 JANE EYEE.
" I'll see it carried iuto your room, " she eaid, and In^ 1
tied out.
" She treats me like a viBitor, " thonglil I. " I little
expected euch a reception; I auticipated only coldneati iind
stiffness: this is uot.like wjiat I have heard of the treut-
meut of govertiwBBeB; but I must not exult loo Boon. "
She reliirned'; with her own nanda cleared her knitting
RpparatuB and it book or two from the table, to make roo-n
for the tray " which Leah now brought, aud then herself
handed'uie the refresh men te. I felt nither confnsed at
being the object of more ai.teiition Ihan T had ever before
'eceiVftd, and that, too, shown by my employer a'" ** "
eiipcrior^, but as she did not herself seem (o consider a.
waa-^oing any tiling out of her place, I thought it bett
ftj-take ner civilities ijuietly.
. " Shall I have the jileasiire of teeing Miss Faii-fax iS
'night? " I asked, when I had partaken of what she oSSf'
•me.
" What did yon say, my dear? I am a little deaf, " i
turned the good lady, approaching her ear to my moutE
I repeated the question more distinctly.
" Miss Fairfax? Oh, you mean Miss Varc-ns! Vai
Is the name of yonr future pupil. "
" Indeed! " Then she is not your daughter? "
" No — I have no family. " , ,
I should have followed up my first inquiry, by askil^
in what way Miaa Varens was connected with her; butij
recollected it waa not polite to itsk too many qnestloifi
besides, I was sure to hear ic time. 1
. " I am BO glad, " she continued, as she sat down OJ*
posite me, and took the cat on her knee; " I am so glad
?on are come; it will be quite pleasant living here now
with a companion. To be sure, it is pleasant at any time;
for Thornfield is a fine old hall, rather neglected of late
years perhaps, but still it is a respectable place; yet you
know in winter-time one feels dreary quite alone, in the
best quarters. I say alone — Leah la a nice girl, to be sure,
and tfohu and his wife are very decent people; but then
you see they are only servants, and one can't converse with
them on terms of equality: one must keep them at due
distance, for fear of losing one's authority. I'm sure lust
winter {it was a very severe one, if you recollect, and
when it did not snow. ;t rained and blew), not a creature
bat th9 batcher and postman came to the houM, fio^.r
JAMi ETRR.
November till February; antl I really got quite mcUnchol
with sitting night after night alone; 1 had Leali in to rei'
to me aometimea; but I don't think the poor girl lilti'ii tl
taek mach: ahe felt it oonfiQihg. In spring and siiinmi
one got on better: ennshine and long days make suuli
difference; and then, j'list %t tho commencement of LhS
autumn, little Adeio Varens came and her nuree: a chili
makes a house alive all at once; and now you are herd
shall be quite gay. "
My heart really warmed to the worthy l«dy «a I hi
bar talk: and I drew my chair a little nearer to her, a;
expressed my sincere wian that ahe might find my com]
as agreeable as she anticipated.
" But I'll not keep yon sitting up late to-night,'
she; " it is on the stroke of twelve now, and you havB
been traveling all day: you must feel tired. If von briva
got your feet well warmed, I'll show yon your bedroom.
I've had the room next to mine prepared for von; it ia
only a small apartment, but I thought you would like it
better than one of the large front chambers: to be sure,
they have finer furniture, but they are so dreary and soli-
tary, I never sleep in them myself. "
I thanked her for her considerate cboiac; and
really felt fatigued with my long Journey, exproBseii
readiness to retire. She took her candle, and I followi
her from the room. First she went to ace if tho liall door
was fastened; having tjken the key from the lock, ahe led
the way np stairs. The steps and banisters were of oak;
the ataircaae window was high and laticed; both it and
the long gallery into which the bedroom doors opened,
looked aa if they belonged to a church rather than a
house. A very cbill and Viiult-like air pervaded the stairs
and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas of spacQ and ^ol-u
itnde; and I was glad, when tirially ushered into m||
chamber, to Dnd it of smalt dimensions, and furnished a^
ordinary modern style.
When Mrs, FairE:ix had bidden me a kind good-night, "
and I had fastened my door, gazed leisurely round, and in
some measure eUaeed the eerie impreaaion made by that
wide hall, that dark and apauioua ataircuse, and that lung,
cold gallery, by the livelier aspect of my little room, 1
remembered that after a day of bodily fali'gue and mental
anxiety, I was now at last in safe hiiveu. The inipulso of
gratitude swelled my heart, and I knelt down at the he^
3^H
104 JANB BTEB.
aide, and ottered np thanks where thanks were due;
forgetting, ero I rose, to implore aid on my further path^,^
and the power of meriting the kindness which seemed boj
frankly offered me before it was earned. My couch had
no thorna in it that night; my solitary room no feurs. At
once weary and content, I slept soon and soundly ; when J
awoko it was broad day.
The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as
the Bun shone in between the gay blue chintz window cur-
tainB, showing papered walls and a carpeted floor, so un-
like the bare pianss and stained plaster of Lowood, that
my spirits rose at the view. Externals liave a great effect
on the young: I thought that a fairer era of life was bo-
ginning for me, one that was to have its flowers ^fld pleas-
ures, as well as its thorns and toils. My facultu-^ roused
by the change of scene, the new field offered Jb hope, J
seemed all astir. I can not precisely define whaS^they er« J
pected, but it was something pleasant; not perhaps that
day or that month, hut at an indefinite future period.
I rose; I dressed mysejf with care: obliged to be plain
— for I had no article of l|ttire that was not made with
extreme simplicity— I wnttS.ill by nature solicitous to be
neat. It was not my habit to be disregardful of appear-
ance, or careless of the impression 1 made: on the con-
trary, I ever wished to look as well as I could, and to
please as mnch as my want of I'eauty would permit. I
sometimes regretted tliat I was not handsomer: I somo-
tiuies wished to have rosy cheelf^a straight nose, and
amall cherry mouth; I desired to be tall, stately, and finely
developed in figure; I felt it a misfortune that I was so
" ittle, so pale, and had features so irregular and so marked.
And why had I these aspirations and these regrets? It
would he difflcult to say: I could not then distinctly say
it to myself; yet I had a reason, and a logical, naturu.
reason too. However, when I had brushed my hair veryj
smooth, and put on my black frock— which, Quaker-like " "
as it was, had the merit of fitting to nicety — and adjusted
my clean white tucker, I thought I should do respectably
enough to appear before Mrs. Fairfax; and that my new
Sipil would not at least recoil from me with antipathy,
aving opened my chamber window, and seen that I left
all things straight and neat on t!ie toilet-table, I ventured
forth.
Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended
the eltppery eteps of ouk; then I gained the hall: I halted
there h minute: I looked at some pictures on the w & lla
(one I remember represented a grim miin in a cuirass, and
one a lady with powdered hair and a pearl necklace), at a
bronze lamp pendent from the ceiling, at a great clock
whose case was curiously carved, and ebon black with time
and rubbing. Everytliing appeared vei-y stately and im-
poain^r to me: but then I was so little accustomed to
grandeur. The hall door, which was half of gliiss, stood
open; I stepped over the tiireshold. It was a fine autumn
morning; the early sun shone serenely on embrowned
groves ami still green fields: advancing on to the lawn, I
looked up and surveyed the front of the mansion. It was
three ^vies high; of proportions not vast, though con-
BideraM|i: a gentleman's manor-bouae, not a nobleman's
seat: battlements around the top gave it a picturesque
look. Its gray front stood out well from the background
of a rookery, whoae cawing tenanta were now on the wing:
they flew over the lawn and grounds to alight in a great
meadow, from which these were separated by a sunk
fence, and where an array (^ mighty old thorn-treea,
strong, knotty, and broad a & oaks, at once explained the
etymology of the mansion's deaignation. Farther oflE
were hille: not so lofty aa those round Lowood, nor so
craggy, nor so like barriers of separation from the living
world; but yet quiet and lonely hills enough, and seeming
to embrace ThornGeld with a seclusion I had not expected
to find existent so near the stirring locality of Millcote.
A little hamlet whoae roofs were blent with trees, atrag-
fled up the side of one of these hills; the church of the
istrict stood nearer ThornSeld: its old tower-top looked
over a knoll between the house and gates.
I waa yet enjoying the calm i > ro3pect and pleasant fresh
air, yet liatening with delight to the cawing of the rooka,
yet surveying the wide, hoary front of the hall, and think-
ing what a great place it was for one lonely little dame
like Mra. Fairfax to inhabit, when that lady appeared at
the door.
" What! out already? " said she. " I see you are an
early riaer. " I went np to her, and waa received with an
affable kias and shake of the hand.
" How do yoa like Thornfield? " ahe asked, I told her
'liked it very much.
" «■ •• *^/^ji^ it is a pretty place: but L feat it

106 JANE BTLE.
bo gettfeg out of order, uiilcea Mr. Rochester should ti
it iutu his head to oome aod reside hei'C permtineDtly; o^
at least, visit it rather oftener: great houses and T "
grounds require the presence of the proprietor. "
" Mr. Uochester,'1 exclaimed. " Who is he? "
" The owner of ThornSeld, " abe responded qnietl
" Did you not Igjow he was called Rochester? "
0£ course I AJ not — I had neyer heard of him befoi^
but the old lady seemed to regard his existence as a u m'
versally understood fact, with which evei^body must 0^^
acquainted by instinct.
" I thought, " I continned, " Thornfield helonged to
you. "
" To me? Bless you, child; what an idea! To meF ,
I am only tlie honaekeeper — the managev. To be eureX
am distantly related to the Itochesters by the mothetSJ
aide; or, at least, my husband was: he was a clergymaiyB
incumbeut of Hay— that little village yonder nn the hill —
and that church near the gates was Ins. The present Mr.
Rochester's mothiit ^ " -^ & Fuirfiis, and second cousin to
my husband; but I never presume on the connection — in
fact it IS nothing to me; I consider myself quite in t^ " "
light of an ordinary housekeeper: my employer is alw
civil, and I expect nothing more. "
" And the little girl — my pupil? "
" She is Mr. Ruclicster's ward; he commissioned me to
find a governess for her. He intends to have her bronght
Dp ill shire, I believe. Here she comes, with her
•bonne,'as she calls her nurse. " The enigma then was
explained: this affable and kind little widow was no great
dame, bnt a dependent like myself. I did not like her
the worse for that; on the contniry, I felt better pleased
than ever. The equality between her and me was real;
not the mere result of condescension on her part: so mnch
the better — my position was all the freer.
As I was meditating on this discovery, a little girl, fol-
lowed by her attendant, iiwe running up the lawn, f
looked at my pupil, who did not at first appear to notio|
me: she was quite a child, perhaps seven or eight yean
old, slightly built, with a pale, small -featured faoe, andj
redundancy of hair falling in eurls to lier waist.
" Good-morning, Miss Adele, " said Mrs. Pairfil
" Come and speak to the tady who is to teach you, and 1
" " ik* yon e, clerer woman some day, " She approache!?
" O'cat ]d ma goiivornand'? " said ahe, pointing to
!k:id addrossiiig her nurse; who auBwert'il; " Main ouk^ ■;
tainement. "
" Are tlicy f oreignera ? " I iTiquired, amazed at bc*iii
the French langoiige.
" The nnrae ia a foreigner, and Adrlc vrm biirn on .1
Continent; and, I believi^, never left ititill within
muntba agK, Wlien she first came hero she could bi.,..,
no Engliah; now she caa make shift to talk it Ji little:-
don't understand hor, she mixes it so witli French; Ui
jon will make out herniGaning Tors well, I dare aay. "
Fortunately I had had the advantage of l»eing tangl
French by a French lady; and as I had always aiaak
point of converaing with MadalnQ Pioixot as often !i-
could, and had, besides, during the last seven jeai1
teamed a portion of French hy hoart daily — upplying in'
eelf to take pains with my accent, and imitating as dost
as possible the pronunctatton of my teacher — 1 h
acquired a cer-tain degree of readiness and correctness
the language, and was not likely to be nluch at a loss wil
Mademoiselle Adele. She came and shook hands v
me when she heard that I was her goverueaa; and as I
her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to hor in hi
own tongue: she replied briefly at first, but after we wi
seated at the table, and ahe had examined me sonn
minutes with her large hazel eyea, she suddenly com-
mouced chatting fluently.
" Ah! " cried she, in French, " yon speak my language
as well aa Mr. Rochester does: I can talk to yon a^ I can
to him, and bo can Sophie, She will be glad; nobotlyhore
nnderstands her: Madame Fairfax ia all Engliah. Sophie
U my narse; she came with me over the aea in a great sInV
with a chimney that smoked — how it did smoke! — audi
Was sick, and so wa? Suphio. and ao was Mr. Rtx-heDLer.
Mr. Bochester lay down on a sofa in a pretty room called
tlie saloon, and Sophie and I had little beJa in another
place. I nearly fell out of mi'ie; it waa like a shelf. And
Mademoiselle — what ia your name? "
" Eyre — Jane Eyre. "
" Aire? Bah I lean not say it. Well; ourshipatop]
in the morning before it was quite daylight, at a great (
— a huge city, with very dark iiouses and all amoky; not:
dt Hfc» the pi-etty clean town I came from; and
^'^^^^ " ■''^ied me in his arms over a plant to \^b \m
3t^^H

JOB JAKE ETRK.
and Sophie caiae after, and we all got into & coach, whli
took ns to a beautiful large boose, larger tban this at
fiuer, oallud a hotel. We staid there nearly a week: I and
Sophie used to walk every day in a great green place full
of trees, called the Park; and there were many children
there besides me, and a pond with beautiful birds in itj
that 1 fed with crumbs, "
'* Call yon understand her when she runa on so f astP
asked Mrs. Fairfax. .
I understood her very well, for I hud been accustomed ■'
to the fluent tongue of Madame Pierrot.
" I wish, " continued the good lady, " you would ask
her a question or two about Eer parents: I wonder if she
remembers them? "
" Adele, " I inquired, " with whom did you live when
you were in that pretty clean town you spoke of? "
" I lived long ago with mamma; but she is gone to the
Holy Virgin. Mamma used to teach me to dance and
sing, and to eay verses. A great many gentlemen and
ladies came to see mamma, and I used to dance before
Ihcm, or to sit on their kneesand sing to them: I liked it.
Shall I let you hear me sing now? "
She had finished her breakfast, so I permitted her t«
?ive a specimen of her accomplishments. DeEcending
rom her chair, she cimie and placed herself on my knee;
then, folding her little hands demurely before her, shak-
ing back hcT, curls and lifting her eyes to the ceiling, she
oommenced singing a song from some opera. It was the
strain of a forsaken lady, who, after bewailing the perfidy
of her lover, calls pride to her aid; desires her attendant
to deck her in her brightest jewels and richest robes, and
resolves to meet the false one that night at a ball, and
prove to him, by the gayety of her demeanor, how litl'
bis desertion has affected hei'.
The subject seemed strangely chosen for an infasl
singer; but I suppose the point of the exhibition lay ii
hearing the notes of love and jealousy warbled wjth the
lisp of childhood; and in very bad taste that point was: at
least I thought so,
Adele sang the cazonette tunefully enongh, and with
the naivete of her age. This achieved, she jomped from
3iy knee and said, " Now, Mademoiselle, I will repeat yon
iome poetry. "
Assuming an attitiide, she began La Ligitc des ReUsL
md ^
in ^^
Ida
fit^e de La Fontaine. Sbo Irbcn doclaimml the littlo piew
wAa aa attention to puactaation and emphasis, a ncxi-
bility o£ voice and an appropiatenesa of goatare, vi'-y " " .-
uanal indeed at her age, ana wliich proved she had beeP
carefnily trained.
" Was it your mamma who tanght yon that pieceP " I
asked,
" Yes; and she just used to say it in this way:'Qu'avez
voua done? lui dit nn deces rats; parlezi'She made me
lift my hand — so — to remind me to raise my Toice at the
question. Now shall I dance for you? "
" No, that will do: but after yonr mamma went to the
Holy Virgin, as you say, with whom did you live then? "
" With Madame Frederic and her husband: she toot
care of me, hut she ia nothing related to ma. I think she
is poor, for she had not so fine a houae as mamma. I was
not long there, Mr. Rochester asked me if I would like
to go and live with him in England, and I said yea; for I
inew Mr. Bocheater before I knew Madame Frederic, and
he was alwaya kind to me and gave me pretty dresaes and
toys: but yon see he has not kept his word, for he has
brought me to England, and now he ia gone back again
himself, and 1 never see him. "
After breakfast, AJele and I withdrew to the library;
which room, it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed ahonld
be used as the school-room. Most of the books were
locked up behind glass doors; but there was one book-case
left open, containing every thing that could be needed in
the way of elementary works, and several volumes of light
literature, poetry, biography, travels, a few romances, etc.
I suppose he had considered that theae were all the govern-
ess would require for her private perusal; and, indeed,
they contented mo amply for the present; compared with
the scanty pickings I had now and then been able to glean
at Lowood, they seemed to offer an abundant harvest of
entertainment and information. In this room, too, there
was a cabinet piano, quite new and r-l superior tone; also
an easel for painting, and a pair of globes.
I found my pupil sufficiently docile, though disinclined
'she had not been used to regular occupation ot any
felt it would be injttdiciouB to confine her too
much at Srat; ao, when I had tnlked to her a great deal,
and got her to leam a little, and when the morning ha^i,
" ™ " " id to noon, I allowed her to telvma toV
to apply: s
kind. I I
110 JANB ETBE.
1 then proposed to ooonpy myself till dinner-iimo in doW
ing Bome little sketches for her use.
As I was going np stairs to fetch my port-folio and ] > en >
cila, Mrs. Fairfax called to me: " Yonr morning school-
hours are over now, I Biippose, " said she. She was in a
room the folding-doora of which stood opfn: 1 went in
whea she addressed me. It was a large, stately apartment,
with purple chairs and cartains, a Turkey- carpet, walnnt-
{laneled walls, one vast window rich in staiued-glu^s and a
ofty ceiling, nobly molded. Mrs. Fairfax was dusting
somo Tases of fine purple spar, which stood on a aide- board.
" What a beautiful room! " I exclaimed, as I looked
.Qund; for I had never before seen any half so imposing
" Yes, this is the dining-room. I have just opened thi
window, to let in a little air and ETinshine; for every thini
gets Eo damp in apartments that are seldom inhabited:
the drawing-room yonder feels like a vault. "
She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the win-
dow, and hung like it with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, no\
looped up. Mounting to it by two broad steps and look-
ing through, I thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy plaoe,
BO bright to mv novice eyes appeared the view beyond.
Yet it was merely a very pretty drawing-room, and within
it a boudoir, both spread with white carpets, on which
seemed laid brilliant garlands of flowers; both ceiled with
Bnowy moldings of white grapes and vine-leaves, beneath
which glowed in rich contrast crimson couches and otto-
mans; while the ornaments on the pale Parian mantel-
piece were of sparkling Bohemian glass, ruby red ; and be-
tween the windows large niirrora repeated the general
blending of snow and fire.
" In wliat order yon keep these rooms, Mrs. Fairfax! "
Bftid I. " No dust, no canvas coveringe: except that the
air feels chilly, one would think they were inhabited daily. "
" Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr. Eochester's visits here
are rare, they are always eudden and unexpected; and as I
observed that it put him out to find everything sivatliet*
np, and to have a bustle of arrangement on his arrival, "
thonght it best to keep the rooms in readiness. "
" la Mr. Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man? "
" Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman's tasteL
And habits, and he expects to have things managed in con-
lormity to them. "
''Iwyoa like him? lah-iTcner !ly liked? "

" Ob yee; the family have always been respected faa
Almost all the land in ttiis neighborhood, as far as you C
see, baa belonged to the Rocbesters time out of mind. "
" Well, bnt, learing hia land out of the questioi
yoti like him? Is he liked for himself? "
" I have no uauao to do otherwise than like him; and
I believe ho is considered a jnst and liberal landlord 1
his tenants: but ho, has never lived much amouc tbem.^
" But has he no peculiaritieB? What, in short, is
character ? "
'* Oh ! bia character ie unimpeaehable, I suppose.
rather peculiar, porhapB; he baa traveled a great, i
and seen a groat deal of the world, 1 should think. I i
say he is clever; but I never had mnch ooaversution fl
him. "
" In what way is he pecnliar? "
" I don't know — it ia not easy to describe — nothing
striking, but yon feel it when he apeake to you: you can
not be always sure whether he ia in jest or earnest,
whether he is pleased, or the contrary; yon don't thor-
oughly understand him, in short— at least, I don't: but it
12 of no eon8C(]ence, he is a very good master. "
This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax, of
her employer and mine. There are people who seem to
have no notion of sketching a character, or observing and
describing salient points, either in persons or tilings: the
good lady evidently belonged to this class; my queries
puzzled, but did not draw her out, Mr. Rochester was
Mr. Rochester in her eyes; a gentleman, a landed pro-
Erietor — nothing more: she inquired and searohod no
arther, and evidently wondered at my wish to gain a i
more defluito notion of his identity.
Wbtiu we loft the dining-room, she proposed to show
me over the rest of the house; and I followL-d her np stairs
and down stairs, admiring as I went; for all was well-
arranged and handsome. The large front chambers I
thouglit especially grand; and some of the third stoi^
rooms, though dark and low, were interesting from their
air of antiquity. The furniture once appropriated to l-he
lower apartments bad from time to time been removed
here, as fanbions changed: and ibe imperfect light enter-
ing by their narrow ciisements showed bedsteads of a hun-
dred years old; ohests in oak or walnut, looking, with
^^ . , ^ pn!m branches and cberabB^
JANE EVKI
heads, like types of the Hebrew ark; powb of veneraqj
cLairs, high-oacked and uarrow; stools still more au^
quated, on whosa cushion-tops were yet apparent traces 8t__
liatf-eflaced embroideries, wrought by fingers that for two
generations had been coffin-dust. All these relics gave to
the third atory of Thomfield Hall the aspect of a home of
the past: a shrine of memory. I liked the hnsh, the
floom, the quaintnesa of these retreats in the day; but I
y no means coveted a night's repose on one of those wide
" and heavy beds, shut in, some of them, with doors of oak;
^shaded, others, with wrought old English hangings crusted
• with thick work, portraying efflgiea of strange flowers, and
stranger birds, and strangest human beings — all which
would have looked strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam of
moonlight.
" Do the eervantB sleep in these rooms? " I asked.
" No: they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the
bjusk; no one ever sleeps here: one would almost aay thatj
if there were a ghost in Thornfield Hall, tfiis would b ■ " "'*
haunt. "
" So r thinit; you have no ghost, then? "
" None that I ever heard of, " returned Mrs. Fair
smiline;.
" Nor any traditions of one? no legends or ghoC
fltories Y "
" 1 believe not. And yet it is siiid the Eocbesters hav^
been rather a violent than a quiet race in their time: per-
haps, though, that is the reason they rest tranquilly in
their gi'aves now. "
" Yes —'after life's fitful fever, they sleep well,'
muttered, " Where are you going now, Mrs, Fairfax?^
for she was moving away,
" On to the leads; will you come and see the view from
thence? " I followed still, up a very narrow staircase to
the attics, and thence by a ladder and through a traprdoor
t6 the roof of the hall. I was now on the level with the
crow colony, and could see into their nests. Leaning over
the battlements and looking far down, I surveyed the
grounds laid out Uke a map: the bright and velvet lawn
closely girdling the gray base of the mansion; the field,
* le as a park, dotted with its ancient timber; the wood,
1 and sere, divided by a path visibly overgrown, greener
h moss than the trees were with foliage; the church at
gtbe road, the tranquil hills, im reposing in the
JAKE KfRW.
auEnmn day's bqd; the horizon boiindod by a i)ropiti93(
sky. azure, marbled with pearly white. Noroaturein thi
Ecoue was extraordinary, but nil was pleasing, WLea i
turned from it and repassed the Irap-door, I coald ecarcej
ly see my way down the ladder; the attic seemed black a
a vault compared with that arch of blue air to which I hat
been looking np, and to that eiinlit scene of grove, paBturil
and green hill of which tbe hall was the center, and ovwfl
whicn I had been gazing with delight.
Mis. FuirfaxBtaid behind a Jiioinmit to fasten the tra]t <
door; I, by dint of groping, found the outlet frcm ■
attic, and proceeded to ueacend the uarrow garret stair
case. I lingered in the long passage to which this lAdd
aeparating the front and back rooms of the third etorf^
narrow, low, and dim, with only one little window i
tbe far end, and looking, witli its two rowe of sma
black doora all shut, like a corridor in some Blnebeard'j
oaatle.
While I paced softly on. the last sound I expected to
hear in so still a region, a laugh, strnok my ear. It was &
curious laugh ; distinct, formal, niirtbleas. I stopped: tbe
sound ceased, only for an instant ; it began again, louder:
for at first, thongn distinct, it was very low. It passed off
in a clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in every
lonely chamber ; though it originated but in one, and
I could have pointed out the door whence the accents
issued.
" Mrs. Fairfax I " I called out: for I now heard her de-
scending the great stairs. " Did you hear that loud laugh?
Who is it? "
" Some of the servants, very likely, " she answered^
" perhaps Grace Poole. "
" Did you hear it ? " I again inquired.
" Yes, plainly: I often hear her; she sews in one of
these rooms. Sometimes Leah is with her: they are fre-
quently uoisv together. "
The laugh was repeated in its low, syllabic tone, and -.
terminated in an odd murmur.
*'Grace ! " exclaimed Mrs, Fairfax.
I really did not expect any Gi'ace to answer: for thfl'
laugh was as tragic, ae preternatural a laugh as any I e
beard; and, but that it was high noon, and that no circum-
atanoe of ghostliness accompanied the curious cacbinna-
■ : but that neither scene nor season favored fear, I .
U4 JANB EYES.
should have been BoperBtitionsly afraid. Hovevor, tfae
event showed me I was a fool for entei'taintiig a eense eTcn
of eurpriae.
The door neareat me opoiicd, and a aervant came out —
a, woman between thirty and forty; a set. square-made
figure, rod-haired, and with a haid, plain face: any ap-
parition less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be
Bonceived.
" Too much noise, Grace, " said Mrs. Fairfax. " Re-
member directions ! " Grace courteeied silently and went
in.
" She is a person we have to sew and assiet Leah jn her
house-maid's work, " continued the widow; " not altogether
unobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough.
By-the-by, how have you got on with your new pupil tnis
morning ? "
The conversation, thns turned on Adele, continoed till
we reached the light and cheerful region below. Adele
came running to meet ua in the hall, eielaiming, " Mes-
dames, voua etes servies ! " adding; " j''ai bien faim, moi I "
We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs.
Fairiax'a room.
CHAPTER Xri.
my firet oahB I
The j)romise of a smooth career, which my fl
introduction to Thornfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not
belied on a longer acquaintancs with the place and its in-
mates. Mrs. Fairfax turned out to he what she apjieared,
a placid-tempered, kind-natured woman, of competent
education and average inte!l;^-?nce. My pupil was a lively
child, who had been spoiled and indulged, and therefore
was sometimes wayward; but as she was committed en-
tirely to my care, and no injudicious interference from
any quarter ever thwarted my plans for her improvement,
she soon forgot her little freaks, and became obedient and
teachable. She had no great talentE, no marked traits of
character, no peculiar development of feeling or taste
which raised her one inch above the ordinary level of
^lildhood; but neither had she any deficiency or i'
vhicti savik her below^ it. She made re & Bonable progress,
entertamed for ue a vivacious, thougli perhaps uot very
profouud. affection; aud by her aimplinity, gay prattle,
and efforts to please, inspired roe in rc-tnrn, with a dcgro9'
of attachment safflcieDt to make ns both content'''
other's society.
This par parenlhhe, will he thought cool language by
persona who entertain solemn doctrines about the angelic
nature of children, and the duty of those charged with
fceir education to conceive for thorn an idolatrous devo-
tion; bat I am not writing to flatter parentiil egotism, to
echo cant, or prop up hnmhiig; I am merely telling the
trnth. I felt d conscientious solicitude for Adele's welfa?n
and jirogresB, and a quiet liking to her little self; gust asi
clienehed toward Mrs. Fairfax a thankfulness for her
kindness, aud a pleasure in her society proportionate to
the tranquil regard she had for me, and the moderation of
her mind and character.
Any body may biame me wh» likes, when I add further,
that, now and then, wheu I took a walk by myself in thi!
grounds; when I went down to the gates and looked
through them along the road; or when, BTiile Adelo played
with her nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jellies in the store-
room, I climbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door
of the attic, and having reached the leads, looked out afar
over sequestered field and hill, and along dim sky-line—
that then I longed for a power of vision which might
overpass that limit; which might roach the busy world,
towns, regions lull of lite I had heard of but never seen,
that then I desired more of practical experience than 1
possessed; more of intercourse with my kind, of acquaint-
ance with variety of character, than was hers within my
roiich. I valued what was good in Mrs. Fairfax, and
what was good in Adele; but I believed in the existence of
other and more vivid kinds of goodness, and what 1
believed in I wished to behold.
Who blames meP Many, do doubt; and I shall be
called discontented. I could not help it: the restlessness
vss in my nature; it agitated me to pain sometimes.
Then my sole rtdief was to walk along the corridor of the
third story, backward and forward, safe in the silence and
solitude of tue spot, and allow ray mind's eye to dwell on
whatever bright visions rose before it — and, certainly, thff
were many and gk ^ing; to let my heart be heaved by t*'j
rress, \
very J
»ttte,^^^
?groe^^H
^^
116 JANE ETHE.
exultant movennent, which, while it swelled it in trouble.
ej:n*nided it with life; and, beat ol all, to open my inward
ear to a tale that was never ended — a tale my imagination
created, and narrated coutinuouely: (quickened with all of
mcideut, life, fire, feeliug, that I desired and had not in
my actual existence.
It ia in vaiti to say human beings ought to be aatiafied
with tranquility: they must have action; and they will
make it if they cannot find it. Millions are condemned
to a Btiller doom than mine, and millions are in silent re-
volt against their lot. Nobody knows how many rebelliona
besides political rebellious ferment in the mitssea of life
which people earth. Women are supposed to be very calm
generally: but women feel just as men feel; they need ex-
ercise for their faculties and a field for their eSorts as
much as their brothers do; tbey suffer from too rigid a re-
straint, too absolute a stagnation, precisely as men would
suffer; and it is narrow-minded in their more privileged
fellow -creatures to suy that they ought to confine them-
selves to making puddings and knitting stockings, to
playing on the piano ^nd embroidering bags. It is
thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if ther
seek to do moi-e or learn more than cuHtom has pronounced
necessary for llieir sex.
When thus alone, I not nnfrequently heard Grace
Poole's laugh; the same peal, the same low, slow ha I ha I
which, when first heard, had thrilled me: I heard, too,
p.er eccentric murniura; stranger than her laugh. There
«ere days when she wj a quite silent; but there were others
when 1 could not account for the sounds she made.
Sometimes I saw her: she would come out of her room
with a basin, or a plate, or a tray in her hand, go down to
the kitchen and shortly return, generally (oh, romantic
reader, forgive me for telling the plain truth:) bearing a
pot of porter. Her appearance alwaja acted aa a damper
to the cnrioBity raised by her oral oddities: hard-featnred
and ataid, she had no point to which interest could attach.
I made some attempts to draw her into conversation, but
she seemed a person of few words: a monosyllabic reply
usually cut short every effort of that sort.
The other members of the household, viz., John and
his wife, Leah the house-maid, and Sophie the French
nurse, were ( cent people: but in no respect remarkable:
iritb Soj^o I use . to talk f reuch, and sometimes I aslnifl
JANR ETRE. 11^1
her qnestioiiB about her native conntry; but sbe was not of
a descriptive or narrative tnrn, and generally gave aiich
vapid and coafused answers as were calculated rather to
check than encourage inquiry.
October, Novcmbec, December paaaed away. One after-
noon in January Mra. Fairfax had bogged a Eioliday for
Adele because she liad aoold; and, us Adelaaeeoiided tbft'
request with an ardor that reminded me how precioii^
oocasional holidays had been to me in my own childhoo^i
I accorded it, deeming that I did well in ahowiug pliability^
on the point. It was a fine, calm day, though very cold;
I was tired of sitting still in the library through a whole
long morning: Mrs. Fairfax had just written a letter
which was waiting to be posted, so I put on my bonnet and
cloak and volanteered to carry it to Hay; the distance,
two miles, would be a pleasant afternoon walk. Having
Been Adele comfortably seated in her little chair by Mrs.
Fairfax's fireside, and given her her beat wax-doll (which
I nsnally kept enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) to
play with, and a story-book for change of amusement; and
Having replied to her " Revenez bisntfit ma bonne araiei
ma chere Mdlle. Jeannette, " with a kiss, I set out.
The ground was hard, the air was still, my road wi
lonely; I walked fast till I got warm, and tJien I walk < .
slowly to enjoy and analyze the species of pleasure brood'
ingfor me in thehourandaitaation. It was three o'clock;
the church-bell tolled as I passed under the belfry: the
charm of the hour lay in its approaching dimness, in the
low-gliding and pale-beaming aun, I was a mile from
Thornfield, in, alane noted for wild roses in summer, for
nnts and blackberries in antumn, and even now possessing
a few coral treasures in hips and haws, but whose best
winter delight lay in its utter solitude and leafless repose.
If a breath of air stirred, it made no Bound here; for there
was not a holly, not an evergreen to rustle, and the
stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as still as the
white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of the
path. Far and wide, on each side, there were only fields,
where no cattle now browsed; and the little brown birds,
which stirred occasionally in the hedge, looked like single
raaset leaves that had forgotten to drop.
This lane inclined up hill all the way to Hay: having
*-— " —') middle, I sat down on a stile which led thenee
Batheriu^ my mantle abottt \a & , auiftWiN

118 .USE ETUB
ing my hands in uny muff, I did not feel the oold, though
it froze keenly, as was attested by a sheet of ice covenriK
the causeway, where a tittle brooklet, now congettleJ, Imd
overflowed after a rapid thaw some days since. Prom my
seat I could look down on Thornfield: the gray and battle-
mented ball was the principal object in the vale below me'
ita woods and dark rookery rose against the west. I
lingered till " the son went down among tbe trees, ar^
sank crimson and dear behind them. I then turaed
ward.
On the hill-top above me sat the rising moou; pale yet
as a clond, but brightening momently, she looked over
Hay, which, half lost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from
its few chimneys; it waa yet a mile distant, btit in tbe ab-
solute hush I could hear plainly its thin mm-mura of life.
My ^ar too felt the flow of currents; in what dales and
depths I conid not tell: but there were many hilla beyond
Hay, and donbtiess many becks threading their passes.
That evening cairn bt'trujed alike thetinkli; of the nearest
streams. Ibe eongh of the most remote.
A rude noise broke on these tine ripplings and whisper-
ings, at once so far away and so clear: a positive tramp,
tramp, a metallic clatter, which efiaced the soft wave-
wanderings; as, in a picture, the solid mags of a crag, or
the rough boles of a great oak, drawn in dark and strong
"'6a ihe foreground, efface the aerial distance of azure hill,
Boniiy horizon, and blended clouds, where tint melts into
tint.
The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the
windings of the lane yet hid it, but it approached; I was
just leaving tbe stile; yet, as the path was narrow, 1 sat
still to Idt it go by. In those days I was young, and all
sorts of fancies bright and dark tenanted my mind; the
memories of nursery stories were there, among other rub-
bish; and when they recurred, maturing youth added to
them a vigor and vividness beyond what childhood could
I give. As this horse approached, a.id as T watched for'"
to appear through the dusk, I remembered certain
Bessie's tales, wherein figured a North-of-England spiri
called a " Oytraeb " ; which, in the fui'm of horse, mi
large dog, haunted solitary ways, and somelimea
apon belated travelers, as tbia horse was now oomil
upon me.
It was very near, but not vet in eight; wlicn, jn adi
mer
and^H
JANE KYUS.
tion to the tramj), tramp, I heard a ru«li nnder the hedj
and oluso down by the hazel filems glijed a great
whose black and whiti'color made him a dialinct ol
againat the trees. It was exiwllv oao fiiask of Bet
Gytrash — a lion-like creature witri long hair and a
4ead: it passed me, however, quietiy auough; not eta;
to look up, with istrangB pretercuiiinn eyes, in my face,
I half expected it would, Tho horse followed — a tail atoed,
and on ita back a rider. The man; the haman being,
broke the spell at once. Nothing ever rode the Gytraah;
it was always aloue; and goblios, to my notions,'hough
they might tenant the dimib carcasses of beasts, could
scarce coyet shelter in the commonplace human form.
No Gytrash was this — only a traveler taking the Biiort cut
to Millcote. He passed, and I went on; a few steps, and
I turned; a sliding sound and an exclamation of " What
the deuce is to do now ? " and a clattering tumble, arrested
my attention. Man and horse were down; they had slipped
on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway. The dog camo
bounding back, and seeing hia master in a predicament,
and hearing the horse groiin, barked till lae evening hills
achoed the sound, which was deep in proportion to his
magnitude. He snuffed roaud tho prostrate group, and
then ran ap to me; it was all he conld do — there was no
other help at hand to summon. I obeyed him, and walkod
down to the traveler, by this time struggling himself frej
of his ateed. Hia efforts were so vigorous, I thought he
could not be much hurt; but I asked him the qnestion,
" Are yon injured, air ? "
I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however,
he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him
from replying to mo directly.
*• Can I do anything ? " 1 asked again.
" Yon must just stand on one side, " he answered as he
rose, first to hid knees, and then to his feet, I did; where-
upiiu began a heaving, stamping, clattering process, accom-
panied oy a barking and baying which removed me effect-
ually some yards'distance; but I would not be driven quite
»w ly till I saw the event. This was finally fortunate; the
horse was re-establiehcd, and the dog was silenced with a
" fJown, Pilot I " Tho traveler now, stooping, felt'" "
footund leg. as if trying whether they were sound; api»
pntly Bome thhig ailed them, for he halted to the at
~'^ju8t risen, and sat down.

[uite
; the
i
120 JANE BYRE,
I was in the mood for being useful^ or at loast o£Bcio«^
I think, for 1 now Jrew near him again.
" If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch sorat
one either from Thornfield Hall or from-Hay. "
" Thank you ; I shall do : I have no broken boneB—
( " mly a sprain ; " aud again he stood up and tried his foot,
but the- result extorted an involuntary " Ugh I "
Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon wan
waxing bright : I could sue him plainly. His figure wan
enveloped in a riding-cloak, fur collared, and atee! clasped ;
its details were not apparent, but I traced the general
Sints of middle height, and considerable breadth of cheat.
J had a dark face, with atern foaturea and a heavy brow ;
his eyes and gathered eye-browa looked ireful and thwarted
Just now ; he was past youth, but had not reached middlt.
age; perhaps he might be thirty-five. I felt no fear ot
him, and but little shyness. Had he been a handsome,
heroic -looking young gentleman. I should not have dared Ui
stand thus queetioning him against hia will and offering
my aervicos unasked. I had hardly ever seen a handsome
youth; never in my life spoken to one. I had a theg-
retical reverence and homage for beauty, elegancfi, gal-
lantry, fascination ; hut had I met those qualities incamattr
in masculine shape, I should have known instinctively that
they neither had nor could have sympathy with anything
in me, and should have shunned them as one would fire,
lightning, or anything else that la bright but antipa-
thetic.
If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humored
to me when I addressed him ; if he had put off my offer of
aasiatance gayly and with thanks, I should have gone on
my way and not felt any vocation to renew inquiries; bat
the f r'owii, the I'oughness of the traveler set me at my eaae :
I retained my station when he waived to me to go, and
announced, *■ I cannot think of leaving yon, sir, at so late
an hour in this solitary lane till I see you are fit to mount-
your horse. " "
He looked at me when I aaid this; he had
tumod his oyes in my dii-eotion before.
" 1 should think you ought to be at home voural^
said he, " if you have a home iu this neigh borhSj
Where do you come from ? "
''Prom just below ; and I am not at aJl afraW. of 1
" ^ " ^J^mR it is moonlight: I will run over htff
JAIfE ETRE.
;oa irith pletiBttre, if ;on wish it; indeed, I am going thai
tc post a letter. "
" You live jast below — do you meaTi at that hoaso witi
the battlement " ) ? " pointing to Thornfield Hall, on vbiot
the moon cast n hoary gleam, bringing it out distinct and
[ > ale from the woods, that, by contrast with the waetei^
iky, now seemed one maaa of shadow.
" Yes, sir. "
" Whose house is it ? "
" Mr. Rochester'a. "
" Do yon know Mr. Rochester ? "
" No, i have never seen him. "
" He is not resident, then ? "
" No. "
" Can you tell nie where he is ? "
" I cannot. "
" You are not a servant at the hall, of conrae. Y(
are " He stopped, ran his eye over my dress, which,
Banal was qUite simp'e- a black merino cloak, a black
beaver bonnet: neither of them hallf fine enougli for a
lady's-maid. He seemed puzzled to decide what I was: I
helped him.
" 1 am the governess. "
" Ah, the governessl " he repeated; " deuce take me,
if I had not forgottenl The governess! " and again my
raitu3nt underwent scrutiny. In two miuiites he rose
from the stile: his face expressed puin when he tried t &
move.
" I cannot commission joii to fetch help, " ho said;
*'but yon may help me a little yourself, if you will be so
feind. "
" Yes, sir. "
" You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick? "'
" No. "
" Try to get hold of my horse's bridle and lead him to^
me: you are not afraid? "
I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone,
hot when told to do it, I was diaposed to obey. I put
down my muS on the stile, and went up to the tall steed;
I endeavored to catch the bridle, but it was a spirited
thing, and wonld not let me come near its head: I miide
effort on effort, though iu vaiu; meantime I was mortally
afraid of its trampling forefeet. The traveler waited and
watched for some time, a,ri i*^ las* he laughed.
I
133 JANE ETRB.
" I see, " he said, " the mountain will never be hroaght
to Mohamtned, eoallyoii can do is to aid Molmmined to
go to the mountain; I mnst beg of you to come here, "
I oame. " ExcttBe mo. " hecontimied: " neceeaity com-
pels me to make jou useful. " Hu hiid a heavy hand on
my shoulder, and leaning on me with some etre^g, limped
to hia horBe. Having once canghi the hridle, he mastered
it directly, and sprang to his saddle; grimacing grimly as
lie made the effort, for it wrenched his sprain.
" Now, " said he, releasing his under-lip from a hard
bite, " just hand me my whip; it lies thero under thd-n
hedge. "
fsought it, and fonnd it,
" Thank yon: now make haste with the letter to Hbj
and return as fast as you can. "
A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start am
rear, and then bound away; the dog rushed in his trace ~
^1 three vanished.
I took up my muff and walked ou. The incident hadB
occurred and was gone for me: it was an incident of no
moment, no romance, no interest in a sense; yet it marked
with change one single hour of a monotonous'ife, My
help had been needed and claimed; I had given it: I was
pleased to have done something; trivial, transitory, though
the deed was, it was yet an active thing, and I was weary
of an existence all passive. The new face, too, was like a
new picture introduced to the callery of memory; and it
was dissimilar to all the others nan ei off there: firstly, be-
cause it was masculine; and, secondly, because it wasdark,
strong and stem. I had it still before me when I entered
Hay, and slipped the letter into the post-oflice; F saw it
as I walked fast down hill all the way home. When I
came to the stile, I stopped a minute, looked round and
listened, with an idea that a horse's hoof might ring 0J3
the causeway again, and that a rider in a cloak, andd
Gytrash-like Newfoundland dog, might be again apparei
I saw only the hedge and a pollard willow before me, r
ing np still and straight to meet the moonbeams; I heaj
only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful among ^
trees round Thonificld, a mile distant; and when I glancj
down in the dfrectiou of the murmur, my eyoj tttW " ^^


JANE KXHE. laj J
'ihellall-froDt, caught a light kindling in a window: it r
minded me that I was late, and I hnrried on.
I did not liko ro-enteriug Tbomficld. To pass ita^
threshold was to return to staguatiou; to croaa the silent
hall, to ascend the darkaomo staircase, to seek my own
lonely little room, and then to meet tranquil Mrs. Fairfux,
and Bpend the long winter evening with her, and her only,
was to qnoll wholly the faint esdtement wakened by my
walk, to slip again over my faculties the viewless fetteta 1
of a uniform and too still esistencej of an existence whoW'f
very privilegoB of security and ease I was becoming iihJ
capable of appreciating. What good it would have donejl
mo at that tim» to have beon tossed in the storms of sn J
nncertain straggling life, and to have been taught by " ?
rough and bitter experience to long for the calm amidst ■
which I now repined! Yes, just as much good as it would
do a man tired of sitting still in a " too easy chair " to
take B long walk; and just as natural was the wish to stir,
nuder my oiroamEtances, as it would be under bis.
I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I paced
backward and forward on the pavement: the shutters of
the gloss door were closed; I could not see into the in-
terior; and both my eyes an^ spirit seemed drawn from
the gloomy bouse — from the gray hollow GUed with ray.
less cells, as it appeared to me — to that sky expanded bo
fore me — a blue sea absolved from taint of cloud; the
moon ascending it in solemn march; her orb seeming to
look up as abe left the hill-tops, from behind which she
had come, far and farther below her, and aspired to the
aenith, midnight-dark in its fathomless depth and meas-
nreless distance: and for those trembling stars that fol-
lowed her course; they made my heart tremble, my veil* "
glow when I viewed them. Little things recall ua v
earth: the clock struck in the hall; that suflicedj I
turned from moon and stars, opened a side door and went
in.
The hall was not dark, nor yet was it lit, only by the
high-hnng bronze lamp: a warm glow suffused both it
and the lower steps of the oak staircase. This ruddy
shine issued from the great dining-room, wliose two-leaved
door stood open, tind shuwud a genial Qre in the grate,
glancing on miirble hearth and brass fire-irons, and re-
vealing purple draperies and polished furniture, in the
'i radianoe. It revealed^ too, & group neai
124 JANE ETRB.

tho mantel-piece: 1 had scarcelj- caught it, and
become aware of a cheerful roiugling of voices, among
*hi(lil aeumod to iliBtiogiiiiih the toucs of Adete, wlieii
the ^oor closed.
I haateued to Mra. Fairfax's room; there wns a fii " ?
-here too, but no candle, and no Mra. Faiifax, Instead,
all aloDB, sittiug upriK'it on the rug, and gazing with
gravity at tho blaze, I beheld a great black and white
& iig-baired dog, jnat like the Ovtrash of the lane. It
mis 80 like it that I went forward and said, " Pilot, " and
the thing got np and came to me and snuffed me. I
caressed him, aud he wagged his great tail: but he looked
an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell
whence ho had come. I rang the bell, for I wanted a
candle; and I wanted, too, to get an account of this vis-
itant, Leah entered.'^^
" What dog is this? "
" He came with master. "
" With whom? "
" With master — Mr, Rochester — he is just arrived.**
**Indeedl and is Mrs. Fairfax with him? "
" Yes, aud Miss Adulo; tliey arc in the dining-room,
and John is gone for a surgeon: for master has had
accident; his horse fell, and his ankle is sprained. "
" Did the horse fall in Hay Lane? "
" Yes, coming down hill: it slipped on some ice. "
" Ahl Bring me a caudle, will you, Leah? "
Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fair-
fas, who repeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the
surgeon was come, and was now with Mr. Ilochestor: thei
she hurried out to give orders about tea, and I went n
ataira to take off my things.
OHAPTEE SIU
i
Mr. Rochestek, :t seems, by t..e surgeon's ordera,
went to bed early that niffht; aor did he rise soon next
morning. When he did come down, it was to attend to
business: his agent and some of his tenants were arriTed,
md waiting to speak with him.
Adele and I had now to vaoute the library: it would Ivt,

JANE BYHB.
. Sl^reqoisition S8 a receptioa room for callers. A ft^
was lit ia an apartment op atuira, and there I carried oalrM
books, and arranged it for the fatnre ecliool-roora. 1 dig^f
oerned in the course of the morning that ThornSeld Uall
waft a changed place: no longer silent as a church, it
echoed every hoar or two to a knock at the door or a clbr^
of the bell; steps, too, often traverded the hall, and new
voioea spoke in different keys helew; a rill from the outer
world was flowiog throagh it; it had a master: for my
part, I likod it better.
Adele was not easy to teach that day; aho could not
apply: she kept running to the door and looking over the
banisters to see if she could get a gliuipso of Mr, Roches-
tor; then ahe coined pretexts to go down stairs, in order,
as I shrewdly suspected, to visit the library, where I knew
^0 was not wanted; then, Fhen I got a little augry, and
made her sit still, she conMnued to talk incessantly of
her " ami Monsieur Edouai-d Faiifax de Rochester, " as she
dubbed him (I had not before heard his prenomens), and
to conjecture wbaF presents he had brought her: for it
appears he had intimated the night before, that when hia
luggage came from Millcote, there would be found among
it a little bos in whose contents she had an interest.
" Et cela doit signifier, " said she, " qu'il y aura la de-
dans UQ cadeau pour moi, et peutetre pour voua susst,
mademoiselle. Monsieur a parle de votis: il m'a demand^
le nom de ma gouvernaute, et si elle n'Stait pas nne petite
personne, assez mince et nn peu pile. J'al dit qu'oui: car
o'est Trai, n'est-co pas, mademoiselle? "
I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlor;
the afternoon was wild and snowy, and wc passed it in
the school-room. At dark I allowed Adele to put away
books and work, and to run down stairs; for, from the
comparative silence below, and from the cessation of ap-
peals to the door-bell, I conjectured that Mr. Rochester
was now at liberty. Left alone, I walked to the window,
but nothing was to be seen thence: twilight and snow-
flakes together thickened the air, and hid the very shrubs
on the lawn. I let down the curtain and went back to the
In the clear embers I was tracing a view, not tinlike a
Eictuie I remembered to have seen of the c;',Btle of Ueidel-
erg, on the Rhine, when Mrs. Fairfa.^ came in, breakmg
up by her entrance the fiery mosaic I had been piecing to-
186 JAJTE EYBB.
xetTier, and ecattermg too some heavy unwelcomB thoughtR
that were beginning to tlirong on my solitude.
" Mr. Eociiester would be gliid it yon aud your pupil
would take tea v^-hh bim in the drawing- room this ov
ing, " said she: " lie liat been bo niticli engaged all i
that he could not aak to see you before. "
" When is hia tea-time? " I inqnired.
" Oh, at sis o'clock: he keeps eiirly hours in the o
tr^. You bad better cbunge your frock now; I 9 "
With yon and fasten it. Here is a caudk'. "
" Is it necceeary to change my frock? " ^^
" Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening
when Mr. Rochester ia hcie. "
This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately
however, I repaired to my room, and, with Mrs. Fairfax's
aid, replaced my black atnS dress by one of black silk, the
best a^id the only additional one I bad, except one of light
gray, which, in my Lowood notions of the toilet, I thought
too fine to he worn, except on first-rate occiuione.
" You want a brooch, " said Mrs. Fuirfaz, I liad a sin-
gle little pearl ornament which Miss Temple gave me as a
parting keepsake: I put in on and then we went down atairs.
Unused as I was to strangers, it was rather a trial to appear
thus formally summoned in Mr. RochcBtiT's presence. I
let Mrs. Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and
kept in her shade as we crossed that apartment; and, pass-
ing the arch, whose curtain was row dropped, entered the
elegant recess beyond.
Two wax-oandles stood lighted on the table, and two on
the mantle-piece; basking in the liglit and hvat of a superb
fire lay Pilot — Adele knelt near liim. Half reclined on a
couch appeared Mr. Rouhester, hia foot supported by the
cushion; he was looking at Adele and the dog: the fire
shone full on his face. I know my traveler, with his
broad and jetty eyebrows; hia square forhead, made
equarer by the horizontal sweep of his black hair. I rec-
^nized his decisive nose, more remarkable for charaoter
than beauty; hia full nostrils denoting, I thought, oholer;
his grim mouth, chin and jaw — ^yes, all three were very
rim, and no mistake. His shape, now divested of cloak,
perceived harmonized in squareneaa with his physiog-
nomy: I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic sense
of the term — broad-chested and thin-flauked, though
neither tall nor graceful.
JANE ETKE.
Mr. SocbeBtor must have boen nware of the entrance
Mrs. Fairfax and mjs.'ilf; but it appeared he was not
the mood to notice ub, for he never lifted his head ae
Approached.
" Here is Miss Eyre, sir, " eaid Mrs. Fairfax, in hor qui
way. He bowed, still not taking his eyes from the group "
of the doff and child.
" Let, Miss Eyre bo seated, " said he: and there was
eomething in the forced, stiff bow, in the impatient yet
formal tone, which seemed further to express, " What the
deuce is it to me whether Miss Eyre be there or not P At
this moment I am not disposed to accost her. "
I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of fin-
ished politeness would probably have confused me: I could
not have returned or repaid it by answering grace and
elegance on ray part; but harsh caprice laid me under no
obligation; on ihe contrary, a decent quiescence, under the
freak of manner, gave me the advantage. Besides, the
eccentricity of the proceeding was piquant: I felt interested
to see how he would go on.
He went on as a statue would, that is he neither spoke
nor moved. Mrs. Fairfax aoemed to think it necessary
that some one should be amiable, and she began to tall &
Kindly, as nsnal — and as usual, rather trite — she condole^
with him on the pressure of business he had had all day;
on the annoyance it must have been to him with that pain-
ful sprain: then she commended his patience and persever-
ance in going through with it.
" Madam, I should like some tea, " was the sole rejoin-
der she got. She hastened to ring the bell, and when the
tray came, she proceeded to arrange the cups, spoons, etc.,
wltn assiduous celerity. I and Adele went to the table;
bat the master did not leave his couch.
" Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cnp ? " said Mrs. Frnr-
iax to me; " Adclo might perhaps spill it. "
I did aa reqaested. As he took the cup from my hand,
Adele, thinking the moment propitious for making a re-
quest in my favor, cried out, " N'est-co pas, monsieur,.
qu'il y a uo cadeau pour Mibdemoisclle Eyre, dans votrft;
petit coSre ? "
" Who talks of cadoaiix? " said he, gruffly: " did yoa
expect a present, Misa Eyre ? Are you fond of presentaP "
Bnfl ho searched my face with eyes that I saw were dark^
irate and pigrciqg.

128 JANR ETRB.
" I hardly know, sir; I have little eiperienee of tlii
they are generally thought pleasant things. "
" GBnerally thought P But what do yoii, think ? " ,^
" I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could
five you an aiiawer worthy of your acceptance: a present
as many facea to it, has it not ? and one should eoneider
all before pronouncing an opinion as to its nature. "
" MIbs Eyre, yon are not ao unsophisticated as Adele.
Bhe demands a'cadeau,'clamoroualy the moment she sees
me: you boat about the bush. "
" Because I have lees confidence in my deserts than
Adele has: she can prefer the claim of old acquaintance,
and the right too of custom; for she aaya you have always
been in the habit of giving her playthings; but if I had to
make out a case I should be pnzzled, since I am a stranger)
and have done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledg-
ment.
" Oh, don't fall back on overmodesty! I have esam-
ined Adele, and find you have taken great paina with her:
she ia uot bright, ahe has no talents; yet in a shoil time
she has made much improvement. "
" Sir, you have now given me my'cadeau;'I am
obliged to you: it is the meed teachers most covet; praise
of tucir pupils'progress. "
" Hnnipnl " said Mr. Kocheater, and he took bis tea in
Bllence.
" Come to the Are, " said the master, when the tray was
taken away, aud Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a corner
with her knitting; while Adele was leading me by the
hand round the room, showing me the beautiful hooks and
ornaments on the cousoks and chiflonnieree. Wo obejtd,
as in duty bound; Adele wiintpd to take a seat on my
knee, but she was ordered to anmse herself with Pilot.
" You have been reaident in niy lioase three mouth8?3
" Yes, sir. "
" And yon came from P "
" Prom Lowood schocil. in shire. "
" Ah I a charitable concern. How'ong were
there? "
" Eight years. "
" Bight years! you must be tenacious of life.
thought half the Lime in sucli a place would have tlonc up
any f.onstJtution! No wonder you have rather the look of
mother world. I marveled where you had got that b^^^
JA:M!i EYRB. 139
of face. When you came on me in Hay Lane last niffht,
I thought unaccountably of fairy tales, and had half a
mind to demand whether you had bewitched my horse: I
am not sure yet. Who are your parents?^'
" I have none/^
" Kor ever had, I suppose: do you remember them?^*
^'No/'
''I thought not. And so you were waiting for your
people when you sat on that stile? ^'
" For whom, sir? "
" For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight
evening for them. Did I break through one of your
rings, that you spread that damned ice on the causeway? ^^
I shook my head. " The men in green all forsook
England a hundred years ago, " said I, speaking as seri-
ously as he had done. ** And not even in Hay Lane, or
the fields about it, could you find a trace of them. I
don^t think either summer or harvest, or winter moon, will
ever shine on their revels more. "
" Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and with
raised eyebrows, seemed wondering what sort of talk this
was.
" Well, " resumed Mr. Rochester, " if you dijown par-
ents you must have some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and
aunts? "
• " No; none that I ever saw. "
'^ And your home? "
'^ I have none. "
" Where do your brothers and sisters live? "
" I have no brothers or sisters. "
" Who recommended you to come here? "
" I advertised, and Mrs. Fairfax answered my adver-
tisement. "
" Yes, " said the good lady, who now knew what ground
we were upon, " and I am daily thankful for the choice Prov-
idence led me to make. Miss Eyre has been an invalu-
able companion to me, and a kind and careful teacher to
Adele. "
'^ Don't trouble yourself to give her a character, " re-
turned Mr. Rochester: " eulogiums will not bias me; I
shall judge for myself. She began by felling my horse. "
" Sir?''said Mrs. Fairfax.
" I have to thank her for this sprain. "
The widow looked bewildered.
9
130 JANE EYHE.
" Miss Eyre, have yon ever li?ed in a town? "
" No, sir. "
" Have yon seen mnch society? "
" None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood;
jow the inmates of Thornfield. "
" Have you read much? "
" Only Bueh books as came in my way; and they Kavff'
not been numerons, or very learned.*'
" You have lived the life of a nun: no douht yon are
well drilled in religious forms; — Brock! eliurst, who 1 un-
deretand directs Lowood, is a paieon, is he not? "
" Yea, eir. "
" And you girls probably worshiped him, as a conrc
fuU of religieuses would worship their director? "
" Oh no. "
" You are very cool! Nol What! A novioe :
worship her priest! That sounds blasphemous. "
" I disliked Mr. Brocklehurat; and I was not alune i
the feeling. He is a harsh man; at once iiompoos and
meddling; he cut off our hair; and for economy's sake
bought us bad nefdlcs and thread, with which we could
hardly sew, "
" That was very false economy, " remarked Mrs, Fsij
fax, who now again caught the drift of the dialogue. 3
" And was that the head and front of his offendingP
demanded Mr. Rochester.
" He starved ns when he had the sole superintendence
of the provision department, before the committee was
appointed; and he bored us with long lectures once 6
week, and with eveniog readings from books of his ow "
inditing, about sudden deaths aod judgments, which mni
UB afraid to go to bed. "
" What age were you when yon went to Loivood? "
" About ten, "
" And you staid there eight years: yon are now, thai
eighteen? "
I assented.
" Arithmetic, you see is iisafui; without its aid lehonld
hardly have been able to guess your age. It is a jioint
difficult to fix where the features and countenance are so
much at variance as in your case. And now what did yovs
learn at Lowood? Can you play? "
" A little. "
" Of coarse: that ia the established answer. Oo inWu
'^m
the library — I mean, if you please. (Excuse my tone 4
command: I am used to say'Do this,'and it ia done.
can not alter my customary habits for one new inmat4_
Oo, then, into the library; take a candle with yon; leat|
the door open; sit down to the piano, and play a tuue. " f
I departed, obeying his directions. j
" Euongh! " he called out in a few minutea. " Tijj
play a little, I see, like any other English school-girl;
iiaps rather better than some, but not well. "
I closed the piano, and returned. Jlr. Rochester c
tinned.
" Adele showed me some sketches this morning, wb^j
she said were yours. I don't know whetliiy they wfl
entirely of your doing: probably a master anled jou? "
" No, indeed! " I interjected.
" Ah! that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your port-
folio, if you can vouch for its contents being original; buf.
don't pass yoar word nnlesa you are ceriain; I can rec-„
ognize patchwork. " "
" Then I will say nothing, and you shiill judge for yonj
aelf.air. "
1 brought the port-folio from the hbrary.
" Approach the table, " said he; and I wheeled it to b
couch. Adele and Mrs. Fairfax drew nea " to see I
pictiiivs.
" No crowding, " said Mr. Rochester: " take the draw- "
ings from my hand as I finish with tbem; but don't push
jour faces up to mine. "
He deliberately acrutinized each sketch and painting.
Three he laid aside; the others, when he had examined
them, he swept from him.
" Take them off to the other table Mrs, Fairfax, " said
he, " and look at them with Adele; — yon " (glancing at--
me) " resume yonr seat, and answer my questions. IpS "
ceive these pictures were done by one hand: was that hu
yours P "
" Yes. "
" And when did you find time to do them? They hai
taken much time, and some thought. "
" I did them in the last two vacutions I spent at 1
wood, when I had no other occupation. "
" Where did you get your copies? "
" Out of my nead. "
" That head I see now on your shouidw

132 JANE EYKE,
''Yes, sir.''. .
" Has it otber furniture of the same kind within?'*
''I should think it may have; I should hope — better.'*
He spread the pictures before him, and again surveyed
them alternately.
While he is so occupied, I will tell you, reader, what
they are: and first I must premise that they are nothing
wonderful. The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly oil my
mind. As I saw them with the spiritual eye, before I
attempted to embody them, tliev were striking; but my
hand would not second my fancy, and hi each case it had
wrought out but a pale portnat of the thing I had con-
ceived.
These pictures were in water-colors. The first repre-
sented clouds low and vivid, rolling over a swollen sea: all
the distance was in eclipse; so, too, was the foreground; or,
rather, the nearest billows, for there was no land. One
gleam of light lifted into relief a half submerged mast, on
which sat a cormorant, dark and large, with wings flecked
with foam; its beak held a gold bracelet, set with gems,
that I had touched with as brilliant tints as my palette
could yield, and as glittering distinctness as mypenci'
could impart. Sinking below the bird and mast, a drownc^
corpse glanced through the green water; a fair arm was
the only limb clearly visible, whence the bracelet had
been washed or torn.
The second picture contained for foreground only the
dim jjeak of a hill, with grass and some leaves slanting as
if by a breeze. Beyond and above spread an expanse of
sky, dark blue as at twilight: rising into the sky was a
woman's shape to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk and
soft as I could combine. The dim forehead was crowiiea
with a star; the lineaments below vn ere seen as through the
suffusion of vapor; the eyes shown dark and wild; the
hair streamed shadowy, like a beamless cloud torn by
storm or by electric travail. On the neck lay a pale reflec-
f.ion like moonlight; the Fame faint luster touched the
train of thin clouds from which rose and bowed this vision
of the Evening Star.
The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a
polar winter sky: a muster of northern lights reared their
dim lances, close serried, along the horizon. Throwing
these into distance, rose, in the foreground, a head — a
colossal head^ inclined toward the iceberg, and resting
JANE EYKB.
against it. Two thin hands, joined under the f orchei _
and gupporting it, drew up before the lower featureai
sable veil; a brow quite l)loodloss, wliite as boita, and an
eye hollow and & xm, blank of moaning but for too gltissi-
neis of despair, aluuo was visible. Above the temples,
amidst wreathed turban folds of blaok drapery, vague in
its character and oonsiateucy as cloud, gleameil a ring of
white flame, gemmed with sparkles ot a more lurrii tinge.
This pale crescent was " The likeness of a Kingly Grown; "
what it diademed was " the shape which shape had none. "
" Wei'e you happy when you painted theso pictnres? "
asked Mr. Rochester, presently.
" I Was absorbed, sir: yes, and I was happy. To paint
them, in short, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures
I have ever known. "
" That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your
own account, have been few; but I dare say you did exist
in a kind of artist's dream-land while you blent and
arranged these strange tinU. Did you sit at tbem long
eacli day? "
" I had nothing else to do, because it was the vacation,
and 1 sat at them from morning till noon, and from noon
till night: the length of the midsummer days fiivored my
inclination to apply, "
" And yon felt self-satisfied with the result of ydir
ardent labors? "
" Far from it. I was tormented with the contrast be-
tween my idea and my handiwork: in each case I had
imagined something which I was quite powerless to
realize. "
" Not quite: you have secured the shadow of yonr
thought; but no more, probably. You had notenonghof
the artist's skill and science to give It full being: yet the
drawings are, for a school-girl, peculiar. As to the
thoughts, they are elBsh. These eyes in the Evening Star
yon must have seen in a dream. How could you make
thorn look so clear, and yet not at all brilliant? for the
planet above quells their rays. And what meaning is that
in tbcir solemn depth? And who taught yon to paint
wind. Thare isa high gale in that sky, and on this hill-
top. Where did you see Latmos? For that is Latmoe.
There — put the drawings away! "
I had scarce tied the strings of the port-folio, when,
'ing at his watch, he said abruptly, " lb i & qvu^ tfAyJljJ
JANE ETRE.
vras.t are yoi^ about. Miss Eyre, to l^t Adele sit up bo long,
Take her to bed, "
Adele went to kiss him before quitting the room: he
endured the careBB, bat scarcely seemed to relish it more
than Pilot would have doLe, nor ao much.
" I wish you all good-night, now, " aaid he, making a
movement of the hand toward the door, in token that ho
was tired of our company, and wished to diBmisG as. Mra.
Fairfax folded up her knitting: I took ray port-folio: we
courtesied to him, received a frigid bow in return, and sc
_ withdrew.
'~ " You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculia ,
Mrs. Fairfax, " I observed, when I rejoined her in bei
room, after putting Adeio to bed.
" Well, is he? "
" 1 think so: be ia very changeful and abrupt, "
*'True: no doubt he may appear eo to a etranger, hoi
I am BO accustomed to bis manner, I never thiuK of itl|
and then, if lie has pecnliarities of temper, allowasofr'fl
should be made. "
" Why? "
" Partly because it IB his nature— and we can none of
IS help our nature; and, partly, he has painful thoughts,
no doubt, to harass him, and make his spirits unequal. "
*'What about? "
" Family troubles, for one thing. "
" But he has no family, "
" Not now, but he has had — or, at least, relatives,
lost hiB elder brother a few years since. "
" Hifl elder brother? "
" Yea. The present Mr. Rochester has not been very
long in possession of the property; only about nine years. "
" Nine years ia a tolerable time. Was he so very fond
of hia brother as to be still inconsolable for his loss? "
" Why, no — perhaps not. I believe there were some
mifiunderstandingB between them. Mr. Rowland Roches-
t?r was not quite just to Mr. Edward; and, perhaps, he
prejudiced his father against him. The old pentlenian
was fond of money, and ansious to keep the family estate
together. He did not like to diminish the proiierty by
division, and yet he was anxious that Mr. E'^ward should
have wealth too, to keep up the consequence of the name;
and soon after he was of age, some sieps f ere taken that
were not quite fair, and made a great oeal of misclitel
Old Mr. Rocheatcr and Mr. Rowlund combined to bring
Mr, Edward into what ho considered a painful position,
(or the sake of making his fortune: what the preoise nat-
nre of that position was I never clearly knew, but his
spirit could not brook what he had to suffer in it. He is
not very forgiving; hf broko with his family, and now for
many years ho has led au unsettled kind of life. I don't
think he has over been resident at Thorufield for a fort-
night together, since the death of his brother without a
will left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder
he ehuns the old place. "
" Why should he shun it? "
" Perhaps he thinks it gloomy. "
The answer was evasive— I shotild have li
thing clearer; but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would
not, give me more explicit information of the origin and
nature of Mr. Rochester's trials. She averred they were
a mystery to herself, and that what she knew was chiefly
from conjecture. It was evident, indeed, that she wished
me to drop the subject, which I did accordingly.
J
CHAPTER XIV.
4
For several subsequent days I saw little of Mr. Roches-
ter. In the mornings he seemed much engaged with buai-
nesa, and, in the afternoon, gentlemen from Millcote oi
tlie neighborhood called, and sometimes staid to dine with
him. When his sprain was well enough to admit of liorse
exercise, he rode out a good deal; probably to return these
visits, as ho generally did not come back till late at night.
During this interval, even Adele was seldom sent for to
his presence, and all my acquaintance with him waa con-
fined to an occasional rcncontor in the hall, in the stairs,
or in the guUery, when he would sometimes pass me haugh-
tily and coldly, just acknowledging my presence by a dis-
tant nod or a coolglanco, and sometimes bow and smile with
gentleman -liko almbility. His changes of mood did not
offend me. because t saw that I had nothing to do with
their alternation; the ebb and flow depended on cauaea.
*■ " ■* " ^'jiected with me.
136 JANE EYBK
Oue day he had had compaaj to dinner, and had sent
for my port-folio; in order, doubtlese, to exhibit ita con-
tents: tlie gentlemen went away eiirly, to atteud a puhlic
meeting at MiUcote, as Mrs. Fairfax informed me; but the
night being wet and inclement, Mr. ItoulLealer did not
acoompany them. Soon after they were gone, he rang the
bell: a measago came that I and Adelo were to go down
Btaire, I hritshed Allele's hair and made her neut, and
haring aacovtained that I was myself in my nsual Quaker
trim, where there was nothing to retouch — all being too
close and plain, braided locks included, to admit of dis-
arrangement — we descended, Adele wondering whether the
peiit coffre was at length come; for, owing to some mis-
take, its arrival had hitherto been delayed. She was
gratified: there it stood, a little carton, on the table when
we entered the dining-room. She appeared to know it by
instinct.
" Ma boitel ma boJtel " exclaimed she, running to-
ward it.
" Yes — there is yonr'boite'at last: take it into a
corner, you genuine daughter of Paris, and amuse yourself
with disemboweling it, " said the deep and rather sarcastic
Toice of Mr, Rochester, proceeding from the depths of an
immense eaay-chair at the fireside. " And mind, " he contin-
ued, " don't bother me with any details of the anatomical
process, or any notice i}f the condition of the entrails: let'
yonr operation be conducted in silence: tiens-toi lrati.-4
qnille, enfant; comprenda-tn? " J
Adele seemed scarcely to need the warning; she had
already retired to a sofa with her treasure, and was busy
nntying the cord whJoh secured the lid. Having removed
this impediment, and lifted certain silvery envelopes of
tissue-paper, she merely exclaimed, " Oh ciel! Que c'est
tean! and then remained absorbed in ecstactic contem-
plation.
" Is Miss Eyre thereP " now demanded the master, half
rising from his seat to !ook round to the door, near which \
I still stood. ■
" Ah! well; come forward: bo seated here, " He dreiu
a chair near his own. " I iim not fond of the prattle ca
children, " bo continued; " for, old haohelor as I am, t
have no pleasant associations connected with their liapJ
It would be intolerable to me to pass a whole eveninr*
tUe- & -t6te with a brat, Don't draw that chair fartt

JANE EVaB.
MiaB Eyre; sit down exactly where I placed it — if yoa
please, that is. Confound tneae civilitiefi! I oontiuually
forget them. Nor do I particularly affect aimple-minded
old ladies. By-the-by, I must have mine in mind; it
won't do to neglect her; she is a Fairfax, or wed to one;
and blood la said to be thiokor than water. "
He rang and disputched an invitation to Mrs. Fairfax,
who soon arrived, Ijnitting busket in hand.
'■ Good-eveniug, madftm; I sent to yon for a charitable
purpose: I have forbidden Adele to t;ilk to me about her
presents, and she is bursting with repletion; havo the
goodness to serve her as auditreas and iuterlocutrice: it
will be one of the most benevolent acts you ever pot-
formed. "
Adele, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs. Fairfax, than she
summoned her to the aofa, and there quickly filled her lap
with the porcelain, the ivory, the waxen contents of her
" boite; " pouring out, meantime, explanations and rapt-
ures in such broken English as slie was mistress of.
" Now I have performed the part of a good host, " pur-
sued Mr, Buchester, " put my guests into the way of
amusing each other, I ought to be at liberty to attend to
my own pleasure. Miss Eyre, draw your chair still a little
farther forward: you are yet too far back; I can not see
you withont disturbing my position in this comfortable
chair, which I have no mind to do, "
I did as I was bid, thougb I would much rather have
remained somewhat in the shade: but Mr. Rochester had
bach a direct way of giving ordersj, it eesmod a matter of
course to obey him promptly.
We were, as I have said, in the dining-room: the
luster which had been lit for dinner filled the room with a
festal breadth of light; the large fire was all red and clear;
the purple curtains hung rich and amplu before the lofty
window and loftier arch; everything was still, save the
anbdued chat of Adele (she dared not apeak loud), and,
filling up each pause, the beating of winter rain against
the panes.
Mr. Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair,
looked diileront to what I had spen him look ! > efor6; not
quite 80 stern — much less gloomy. There was a smile on
his lios. and his eyes sparkled, whether with wine or not,
I am not sure; hut I think it very probable. He was, io
''in his after-dinner mood; more ei^aaded ifl^H

138 JAMB EYBB.
genial, and also more self-indulgent than the frigid ani
rigid temper of the nioi'iiirg: still he looked preciousl;,
grim cDBhioning hie iiii.Bslve head against the swelling
Back of hiB chair, aud ivcciving the lignt of the Hre on hia
sranite-hewQ features, aud in his great, dark eyes; for he
Bad great, dark eyes, and very fine eyes, too— not without
a certain change in their depths sometitnea, whidh, if it
WOB not softness, reminded yon, at lea^t, of that feeling.
He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had
lieen looking the same length of time at him, when, turn-
ing suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on his physiog-
BQiay.
" Yon examine me. Miss Eyre, " said he: " df yon think
me handsome? "
I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to this ques*
tioQ by something coaventionully vague aud polite; bntr^
the answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I wufi
_ aware: " No, sir. "
*'Ah! By my word! there is something singular about
you, " said he: " you have the air of a little nonnette; quaint,
Sniet, grave, and simple, as you sit with your hands be-
ore you, and your eyes generally bent on the carpet {ex-
cept, by-the-by, when they are directed piercingly to ray
face; as just now, for instance); and when one asks you a
question, or makes a remark to which you are obliged to
reply, jou rap out a round rejoinder, which, if not blunt,
is at least brusque. What do you mean by it? "
" Sir, I was too plain: 1 beg your pardon. I ought to
have replied that it was not easy to give an impromptu
answer to a question about appearances; that tastes differ;
that beauty is of little consequence, or'something of that
sort, "
" You ought to have replied no such thing. Beauty of
little consequence, indeed! And ao, under, pretense of
softening the previous outrage, of stroking and soothing
mo into placidity, you stick a sly penknife under my ear!
Go on: what fanit do you find with me, pray? I suppose
I have all my limba and all my features like any other
man? "
" Mr. Rochester, allow me to diaown my first answe^
1 inte.nded no pointed repartee: it was only a blunder. " " *
" Just BO, 1 think so: and you shall be answerable'
it. Criticise me: does my lorenead not pleaee you? "
^— ^ lifted up the sable wuves of hair which lay hori
1
other
Ewe r. I
1
JANE ETRE.
tally oyer his brow, and showed a solid enough mass of
tellectual or^ns. but an abrupt deficiency where
Buavo sign of oonevoloncL > Bboiild nave risen.
" Now. ma'ajn. am I fool ? "
" Far from it. air. YiUi would perhaps, think me rnde
if I inmiired in return whether you are a phiiauthropist ? "
'■ Tnere asain I Another stick of the penknife, when
she pretended to pat ray liead : and that la because I said
I did not like the society of children and old women (low
bo it spoken !}. No,'young lady, I am not a general phi-
lantliropist ; but I bear a coneeienui! ; " and lie )iointed to
the prominences which are said to indicate that faculty,
and which, fortunately for him, were aufHeiently eonapicu-
oita ; giving, indeed, a marked breadth to the ujiper jiart
of his head: " and, besides, I once had a kind of rnde ten-
derness of heart. When I was as old as yon, I was a feel-
ing fellow enough ; partial to the nnfledged, unfostered.
and uuhu'ky; but Fortune has knocked me about since:
she haa even kneaded me with knuckles ; and now I flatter
myself I am hard and tough as an India-rubber ball : ner-
vious, though, through a ohink or two still, and with
sentiment point in the middle of the lump. Yes : di
that leave hope for me ? "
" Hope of what, sir? "
" Of my final re-transformation from India rubl
back to flesli. "
" Decidedly he has had too much wine, " I thought;
and I did not know what answer to make to his (|ueer
question ; how could I tell whether he was capable of being
re-transformed ?
" You look very much puzzled, Misa Eyre ; and though
yoii are not pretty auy more than I am handsome, yet a
nuzzled air becomes you ; besides, it is convenient, for it
KOeps those searching eyes of jours away from my physiog-
nomy, and busies them with the worsted flowers of the
rug : so puzzle on. Yonng lady, I am disposed to be gre-
garious and commanicative to-night. "
With this announcement he rose from his chair, aiy "
stood, leaning his arm on the marble mantel-piece: in
that attitude his shape was eeen plainly as well as his face ;
his unusual breadth of chest, disproportionate almost to
his length of limb. I am sure moat people would have
thought Iiim an ugly man ; yet there was so much un-
conaeioua prida in his port ; so mnoh ease in hia demeanor:
IplE^H
i

140 JANE EYRE,
ench a look of complete indifference to his own external
ajipeaninuti ; eo liuughty a reliance on the power of other
quulitiea, intrinsic or adventitions, to utone for the lack
of mere personal attract ivenea a, that, in looking at hinif
one inevitably shared tlie indifference, and, even in a blind,
imperfect sense, put fnith in tbe confidence.
" I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative
to-night, " he repeated; " and that is why I sent for yon; J
the fire and tlio chandelier were not sufficient company fori
me; nor would Pilot have been, for none of these caa.^
talk. Adele is a degree bettej-, but still far below the <
mark; Mrs. Fairfax ditto; yon, I am persnaded, can suit
me if you will: you puzzled me the firat evening I invited
you down here. I have almost forgotten you since: other
ideas bave driven youra from my bead; but to-night I am
resolved to be at case; to diamiaa what importunes, and j
recall what pleases. It would please me now to draw you 1
out — to learn more of you — therefore sjieak. " ■
iTLsteinl of speaking, I smiled; and not a very complsjJ
cunt i > r submissive smile either. ■
" Spciik, "'he urged. H
" What about, sir ? " ^^
" Whatever you like. I leave both the choice of But^|
ject and the manucr of treating it entirely to yourself. " jH
Accordingly I sat and said nothing: " If he expei^H
me to talk for the mere avke of talking and sliowing ofi^M
he will find he has adilreased himself to the wrong peraon,'*^
I thought. V
" You are dumb. Miss Eyre. " n
I was dumb still. He bent his head a little toward me,
and with a single hasty glance seemed to dive into my eyes,
" Stubborn? " he said, " and annoyed. Ah, it is con-
sisttnt. I put my request in an absurd, almost insolent
form. Miss Eyre, I beg your pardon. The fact is, once
for all, I don't wish to treat you like an inferior: thatifti
{correcting himself), I claim only such superiority as mu^l
result from twenty years'difference in age and a century'all
advance in experience. This is legitimate, et j'y tiens, aA i
Adele would say; and it is by virtue of this superiority J
and this alone that I desire you to have the goodness taj
talk to me a little now, and divert my thoughts, which ^w
galled with dwelling on one point — cankering as a rus^H
nail. " |H
He had deigned an explanation; almost an apology:^!
did not feel iitaeuai) > le to bis oondc^ceiiEioii, and wonMlm^
Bcem GO.
" * I am willing to amuse yoii if I can. sir: qaito wjlliug;
but I csu not introduce a, topic, because how do I ktu»H
what vilt iiitoreBt you? Aak me questions, and I wiUj^H
my be^t to answer them. " 2^1
" Then, In the first place, do you agree with me tha & J
have u ri^lit to be a little maatorfiil. abruiit; perhaps ex-
uctiiig, sometimes, on the groiiims I atatea; iianitily, that
I am old enough to be your father, and that I have bat-
tled through a varied experieuced with many me^J^j
many nations, and roamed over half the globe, whil^^^H
jisve ItTod quietly with one set of peoplein one hoiisq^^H
" Do as you please, air. " ^^^|
" That is no answer; or rather it ia a very irriti^^^|
because a very evasive, one; reply clearly, " ^^^|
" I don't think, air, you have a right to oomman^^^H
merely because you are older than T. or because yon ^^^|
Been more of the world than 1 have; your claim to eupere?
ority depends on the use you have made of your time and
experience. "
" Humphl Promptly spoken. But I won't allow that,
seeing that it would never suit my case; as I have made
an indifferent, not to say a bad, use of both advantages,
licaviiig superiority out of the question, then, you must
still agree to receive my ordei-s now and then; without be-
ing piqued or hurt by the tone of command — will you? "
I smiled: I thought to myself Mr. Uochesterij* peculiar
— he seems to forget that he pays me £30 per annum for
receiving his orders,
" The smile is very well, " said he, catching instantly
the passing expression; " bnt speak, too, "
" I was thinking, fir. that very few masters would
trouble themselves to inquire whether or not their paid
subordinates were piqued or hurt by their orders. "
" Paid subordinates! Wliat, are yon my paid subor-
dinate, are you? Oh, yes, I had forgotten the salaryt
Well then, on that mercenary ground, will yon agree to
let me hector a little. "
" No, sir, not on that ground: but, on the ground that
you did forget it, and that you care whether or not a
dependent is comfortable in his dependency, I agree
• t,i)y. "
t to Aiiyeaae with: a groat maacy, ■
i43 rANE EYKE.
conventional fonns and phrnees, without thinking that ffl
omission ariaes from insolgiict'? " 1
" I am £ure, air, I slioiild nover mistake informality fq
insolence, one I rattier like, the other nothing free-bom
would submit to, even for a salary. "
" Hnmbug! Most things free-born will submit to any
thimg for a salary; therefore, keep to youi'self, and don t
▼enttire on generalities of which you are intensely igno»J
Tint. However, I mentally shake hands with yon tor yottJT
answer, de^ite its inaccuracy; ai d as much for the manJ
ner in which it was aaid, aa for the siibstance of the-'
speech: the manner was frank and sincere: one does not
often aee snch a manner: no, on tlie contrary, affectation,
OP coldness, or stupid, coarse- minded misapprehension of
one's meaning are the usual rewards of candor. Not three
in three thousand raw school-girl governesses would have
answered me as you have just done. But I don't mean to
flatter you: if you are east in a different mold to the
majority, it is no merit of yonrs: Nature did it. And
then, after all, I go too fast in my conclusions: for what
I yet know, yon may be no bettor than the rest; you may
have intolerable defects to connter-balance your few good
points. "
" And so may you, " I thought. My eye met hie as the
idea crossed my mind: he seemed to read the glance,
answering as if its import had been spoken as well as
imagined.
" Ves, yes, you are right, " said he; " I have plenty of
faults of my own: I know it, and I don't wish to palliate
them, I assure you. God wot I need not be too severe
about others; I nave a past existence, a series of deeds, a
color of life to contemplate within my own breast, which
might well call my sneers and censures from my neigh-
bors to myself. I started, or rather (for, like other de-
faulters, I like to lay half the blame on ill fortune and
adverse circumstances) was thrust on to a wrong tack at
the age of one-and-twenty, and have never recovered the
right course since: bnt I might have been very different;
I might have heen as good as you — wiser, almost as stain-
lesH. I envy yon your peace of mind, your clean con-
science, your unpolluted memory. Little girl, a memory
without blot or contamination must be an exquisite
treasure — an inexhaustible source of puse refreshment: ia
it not r
" How wue yonr memory when you were eighteen, sir? "
" AI! right then: limpid, Biiliibrious:'no gaah of bilge^
water htd turned it to fetid puddle. I was your equal at
eighteen — quite your equal. Nature meant me to be. on
the whole, a, good man, MisB Eyre; one of the better kind;
and yon see I am not so. " ou wonlii say you don't see it:
at least I flatter myself I rt'tid as much m your eye (be-
ware, by-the-by, what you express with that organ, I am
quick at interpreting ha language). Then take my word
for it, lam not a villain: you are not to suppose that —
not to attribute to me any such b(id eminence; but, owing,
I verily believe, rather to circumBtanceH than to my natural
hont, i am a trite, commonplace sinuer, hackneyed in all
the poor petty disBipationa with which the rich and worth-
leas try to put on life. Do you wonder that I avow thia
to you? Know, that in the course of your future life, yon
will often find yourself elected tlio involuntary confidante
of your acqnamtances'secrets: people will instinctively
find out, a? I have done, that it is not your forte to tell o(
yourself, but to listen while others talk of themselves;
they will feel, too, that you listen with no malevolent
acorn of their indiscretion, but with a kind of innate sym
[)athy; not the leas comforting imd encouraging becaueo
t ia very unobtrusive in its manifestations. "
" How do you know? — how can you guess all this, sir? "
" Iknow it well; therefore I proceed almost as freely
as if I were writing my thoughts in a diary. Yon would
say, I should have been superior to c i re um stances; so I
should— ^o I ahonld; but you see I was not. When fate
wronged me, I had not the wisdom to remain cool: I
turned desperate; then I degenerated. Now, when any
vicious simpleton excites my disgust by his paltry ribaldry,
I can not flatter myself that I am better than he: 1 am
forced to confess that he aad I are on a level. 1 wish t
had stood firm — God knows I do! Dread remorse when
you are tempted to err, Misa Eyre: remorse ia t!ia poison
of life. "
■'Itepentaoce is aaid to be its cure, sir. "
" It 18 not its cure. Reformation may be its cure; and
I could reform — I have strength yet for that — it— but
where is the nse of thinking or it, hampered, burdened,
cursed as lam? Besides, since happiness is irrevocably
dmied. me, I have ^ right to get pleasure out of life: aufl
'Ait, cost what it may. "

144 JANE EYRE.
**Then you will degenerate still more, sir/*
" Possibly: yet why should I, if I can get sweat, fresh
uleasure? And I may get ii, as sweet and fresh as the wild
noney the bee gathers on the moor/*
" It will sting — it will taste bitter, sir. "
*'How do you know? — you never tried it. How very
serious — how very solemn 3 on look: and you are as igno-
rant of the matter as this cameo head''(taking one from
the mantel-piece).'^ You have no right to preach to me,
you neophyte, that have not i)assed the porch of life, and
are absolutely unacquainted with its mysteries. "
" I only remind you of your own words, sir: you said
error brought remorse, and you pronounced remorse the
poison of existence. "
*^ And who talks of error now? I scarcely think the
notion that flitted across my brain was an error. I be-
lieve it was an inspiration rather than a temptation: it
waa very genial, very soothing — I know that. Hero it
comes again! It is no .devil, I assure you; or if it be, it has
put on the robes of an angel of light. I think I must ad-
mit so fair a guest when it asks entrance to my heart, "
" Distrust it, sir; it is not a true angeh "
" Once more, how do you know? By what instinct do
you pretend to distinguish between a fallen seraph of the
abyss and a messenger from the eternal throne — between a
guide and a seducer? "
" I judge by your countenance, sir; which was troubled:
when you said the suggestion had returned upon you. I
feel sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it. "
" Kot at all — it bears the most gracious message in the
world: for the rest, you are not my conscience- keeper, so
don't make yourself uneasy. Here, come in, bonny wan-
derer! "
He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any
eye but his own; then, folding his arms, which he had
half extended, on his chest, he seemed to inclose in their
embrace the invisible being.
^^Now, " he continued, again addressing me, *^I have
received the pilgrim — a disguised deity, as I verily believe.
Already it has done me good: my heart was a sort of char-
nel; it will now be a shrine. "
*^To speak truth, sir, I don't understand you at all: I
caiF not keep up the conversation, because it has got out of
iny 4epth. Only one thing I know: you said you were
JANE KVttE. 141
not as good as you tshoiild like to be. and ttmt yon ;
gretted your own imperfection : — one thing I can compi
heud : you intimated that to have a suihed memory ti.
a perpetual bane. It Beema to me tliat if you tried har^_
you would in time find it possiblp to bocome what yoft
yourself would approve ; and that if from this day you be
gan with resolution to correct vour thoughts and aottoni
you would in a few years have laid up a new and staiukfl
store of recoilectionB, to which yon might revert wifil
pleasure. "
'• Justly thought ; rightly said, Mies Eyre ; and at tbj
moment I am paving hell with energy. "
" Sir? "
" I am laying down good intentioue, which I belw
durable as flint. Certainly, my aBsociatea and purstri
shall be other than they have been, "
" And better ? "
" And better — so much better as pure ore is than tat
dross. Yon seem to doubt me; I don't doubt myself: I
know what my aim is, what my motives are ; and at this
moment I pai^s a law, unalterable as that of tlie Medes and
Persians, tnat both are right, "
'■ " They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute lo
legalize tnem, "
" They are. Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a
new statute: unheard-of combinations of circumstance
demand nnheard-of rules, "
" That sounds a dangerous maxim, sir ; because o
B6C at once that it is liable to abuse. "
" Sententious sage ! so it is : but I swear by my house
hold gods not to abuse it. "
" Yon are human and fallible. "
" I am : so are yon — wh:it then ? "
" The human and fallible should not arrogate a ,.-,,.„
with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely in
trusted, "
" What power ? "
" That of saying of any strange, unsanctioned line of
action,'Let it bo right,'"
"'Let it be right'—the very words : you have pro-
nounced them, "
•'May it be right then. " I said as I rose, deeming it nso-
lesB to continue a discourse which was all darkness to me :
and Iwsides, eenwble that ths character of my interlocutog j

140 JANE BYRB.
was beyond my penetration; at least, beyond its j
reach; aud feeling the uncertainty, the vugne i
inBacnrity, which accompanies a conviction of i;
" Where are you going ? "
" To put Adele to bed: it is past her bed-time. "
" You are afraid of me, because I talk like a Sphina
" Tour language is enigmatical, sir; hut though 1 1
Wwildered, I am certainly not afraid. "
" You are afraid — your self-love dreads a blunder. "
" L', that sense I do feel appreheneive — I have no V
to tall ponsense. "
" 1; you did, it would be in such a grave, quiet manner,
I shoul \ naietake it for sense. Do you never laugh, Misa
Eyic'? Don't trouble yourself to answer — I see you laugh
rarel. , but you can laugh very merrily: believe me, yjiu
are not nattirally austere, any more than I am naturally
vioiona. The Lowood conBtraint sHll elinp to you some-
what; controlling yonr features, muffling your voice and
rostrioting your limbs; and you fear in the presence of a
man and a brother — or father, or master or what yon will
■^to smile too gaily, speak too freely, or move too quickly;
but, in time, I think you will learn to be natural with me,
as I find it imposaible to be conventional with you; and
then your looks and movementB will have more vivacibr
and variety than they dare offer now. I see at intervals
the glance of a curious sort of bird through the close-set
bars of a cage; a vivid, restless, resolute captive is there;
were it b. - free, it would soar cloud-high. You are still
bent on go.ng ? "
" It ha struck nine, sir. "
" Nevei mind — wait a minute: Adele la not ready logo
to bed yet. My position. Miss Eyre, with my back to the
fire, asd my face to the room, favors observation. While
. talking to you, I have also occasionally watched Adele (I
have my own ti'asons for thinkine; her a curious study-^
" easons that I may, nay, that I shall impart to you some
lay); she pulled out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a
.ittle pink silk frock; rapture lit her face as she unfolded
t; coquetry lans .n her blood, blends with the brains, and
^eftBons the marrow of her bones.'II faut que ie I'essaie,'
■ii -ed she;'et & I'inatant m6me !'and she rushed out
the room. She is now with Sophie, undergoing a roWl
process: in a few minutes she will re-enter; aud I \aa,
trliat / aball see — a miniature of Celine Varans, asBhe -^
I
.TASE BTBB,
to appear on the boards at the rising of : hut nevarj
mind that. However, uiy ti^nderest feelings are ubuat tofl
receive a slioclt: such is my iiresentmont; aUy, now, to soq]
whether it will be realized. " I
Ero long. Adelo's little foot was heard tripping acroM'1
the hatl. abe entGrod, transformed as her gtiardum haS'^
predicted. A dress of rose-colored satin, very short, aniJ'
as full in the skirt as it could be gathered, replaced the
brown frock she had previously worn ; a wreath of rose-
buds liirolud her forehead; her feet were dressed in silk
stockings and small white satin sandals. i
" £at-ce que mn lobe va bien ? " cried she, boiindinel
foward ; " et rues 8oa " lier3? et mas has? Tcnez, je oroix q^O^I
je vaia d:inser ! "'jB
And spreading out her dress she chass^ed acrosa tbfSl
room ; till, having reached Mr. Rochester, she wheeledW
lightly around before bim on tiptoe, then dropped on one']
knee at his feet, exclaimiDg: • I
" Monsieur, je vous remeroio nillle fois de Yotre bont6|^l
then rising, she added, " G'est comme cehi que mamaitfl
faisait, n'est-ee paa, monaianr ? " H
" Pre-cise-ly ! " was the answer; " and'comme oela,*
she oh armed my English gold oat of my British
breeches pocket. I have been green, too. Miss Byre— ay,
grasa-green : not a more vernal tint freshens you now than
once freshened mc. My spring is gone, however : but it
has left me that French floweret on my hands ; which, in
some moods, I would fain be rid of. Not valuing now the
root whence it sprang : having found that it was of a sort
whioh nothing nut gold-dust could manure, I have bat
half a liking to the bloss.m : especially when it looks so
artificial as just now. I keep it rather on the Roman Cath-
olic principle of espiating numerous sins, great or small,
by one good work. I'll explain some day. Good-night. "
CHAPTER XV.
Mr. Rochester did, on a fnture occasion, explain it.
It was one afternoon, when he chanced to meet me and
Adele in the groun^ls ; and while she played with Pilot
ttud hor shuttlecock, he asked me to walk up and dowD »
Jong beach avenue within sight of her.

148 .I4KB BTRE.
He then said that she was the daughter of a French*
opera-dttuoer, Ci^line Varens, toward whom he iiad once
cherished what he called a " grande paasion. " Xhls passion
Celine had.professed to returti wth even BUperior ardor.
He thought himself her idol ; ugly as he waa : he believed,
as he said, that she preferred hia " t & illed'athlgte " to the
elegance of the Apollo Belvidere.
" And, Miss Ejre, so much was I flattered by this
f reference of the Gallic Sylph for her British gnome, that
installed her in a hotel ; gave her a complete establish-
ment of servants, a carriage, cashmeres, diamonds, den-
telles, etc. In ehoxt, I began the proceaa of ruining
myself in the received etyie, like any other spooney. I
had not, it seems, the originality io chalk out a new road
to shame and destruction, bat trod the old track with
stupid exactness not to deviate an inch from the beaten
center. I had — as I deeerved to have — the fate of all
other spooneys. Happening to call one evening when
C61ine did not espect Die, I found her oiit ; but it was a
warm night, and I was tired of strolling through Paris, bo
I sat down in her bondoir ; happy to breathe the air conee-
crated eo lately by her presence. No — I exaggerate ; I
never thought there was any consecrating virtue aboat
her : it was rather a sort of pastille perfume she had left,
a Ecent of musk and amber, than an odor of sanctity. I
was just beginning to stifle with the fumes of conservatory
flowers and sprinkled essence, when 1 bethought myseff
to open the window and step out on to the balcony. It
was moonlight anu gas-light besides, and very still and
serene. The balcony was furnished with a, chair or two; I
Bat down, took out a cigar — I will take one now, if you
will excuse me, "
Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and
lighting of a cigar; having placed it to his lips and
breathed a trail of Havana incense on the freezmg and
Bunlesa air, he went on:
" I likeJ bonbons, too, in those days. Miss Eyre, and I
was croquant — overlook the barbarism — croqitavt choc-
olate comStB, and smoking alternately, watching mean-
time the equipages that rolled along the fashionable
streets toward the neighboring opera-house, when in an
elegant close carriage drawn by a beautiful pair of Eng-
lish horses, and distinctly seen in the brilliant city night,
Irecogn'Md the'voiture'I had given Celine. She n " "'
JA»B KYBE. 1'
fntDming: of course my heart thumped with imp & tienoa
against the iron rails I leaued upou. The carriaga
stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door; my flame
(that is the very word for an openi inamorta) nllghted:
though muffled in a cloalt — an iiunecessary incanibranco
by-the-by, on so warm a June evening — I knew her in-
stantly by her little foot, seen peeping from the Ekirt ot
her dress, as she skipped from the carriage step. Bend-
ing over the balcony, I was about to murmur, * Moii
ange* — in a tone.cjf course, which should be audible to
the ear of love alone — when a figure jumped from the
carriage after ber; cloaked also; but that was a spurred
heel i^ich had rung on the pavement, and that was a
hatted bead trhioh dow passed under the arched porie-
oochere of the hotel.
" You never felt jealousy, did you, MJse Eyre? Of
course not: I need not ask your because yeu never felt
love. You have both sentiments yet to experience: your
soul sleeps; the shock is yet to be given which shall
waken it. You think all existence lapses in as quiet a
flow as that in which your youth has hitherto slid away.
Floating on with closed eyes and muffled ears, you neither
see thfl rocks bristling not far off in the bed of the floo-i,
nor hear the breakers boil at their base. But I tell you—
and you may mark my words — you will come some day to
a craggy pass of the channel, where the whole of life'e
stream will be broken up into whirl and tumult, foam
and noise: either you will be dashed to atoms on crag
points, or lifted up and borne on by some master wave
into a caUner current — as I am now.
" I like this day: I like that sky of stee); I like the
sternness and stillness of the world under this frost. I
like Thornfield; it» antiquity; its retirement; its old
'crow-trees and thorn-trees; its gray facade, and lines of
dark windows redecting that metal welkin: and yet how
long have I abhorred the very thought of it; shunned it
like a great plague-house. How I do still abhor "
He ground his teeth, and was silent: he arrested his
step, and struck his boot against the hard ground. Some
listed thought seemed to have him in itd grip; and to hold
uim so tightly that he could not advance.
Wo were ascending (he avenue when he thus paused;
ttie hall was before us. Lifting his eye to its huttlements,
''^99 1. illaio such as I never saw before o
1
me ^^M
■A:
JAXB byrb.
aince. Fain, ehame. Ire — iroj)atien«e, die^st, deterti^
tiou — eeemt^d ntomentarily to doM h qoir^rtng cun & ict it
the large pnpil dilatiDg under his etion eri-braw. Wild
vitb the wreetle which shonld be paramotiDl; bat another
feeling rose and trinmphed; Fomelhing hard and conical;
Eelf-wilted and reeolirte; it Eettied his paision and petrified
bis counfenance: he vent on: " Daring the moment I was
ailc-Dt, Miea -Evre, I was arranging a point with mv deBtiny.
She stood there, by that bfech-lmnk — a hag ifke one of
thoso who appeared to Slacbeth on th^ heath of Forres.
'Yott like Thoinfield?'she Eaid, lifting her finger; and
then ehc wrote in the air a memento, which ran in Inrid
heiroglyphica all along the house-front, between thenpper
and lower row of windows.'Like it if yon canl''LiVe
it if yon darel'
"'Iwill tike it,'said I.'I dare like it;'and " (ht
enbjpincd moodily) " I wilt keep my word: Iwill break
obstacles to happi'neps, to goodnese — yes, goodncBs: I wish
to be a better man than 1 Lave been; thau I am — m Job's
leviathan broke the spear, the dart, and the habergeon,
liindrances which others count as iron and brass, I wiU
esteem hot straw and rotten wood. "
Adele here ran before him with her eh'j^ttlecoc^
" Awayl " he cried harshly; " keep at a iistasc*, child, or
go in to Sophie! " Contintiing then to parsue bis walk in
silence, I ventared to recall him to the point whence he
had abruptly diverged: " Did jon leave the balcony, sir,''
I asked, " when Mdlie. Varens entered? "
I almost expected a rebuff for this hardly well-timeA
question: but, on the contrary, waking out of this scowl-
ing alKtraction, ho turned his eyes toward me, and thr
shade seemed to clear ofl his brow, " Oh, I had forgotten
C61ine ! Well, to resume. When I saw my ctiarnier thus
come in accompanied by a citvalier, I seemed to boar a
hiss, and the green snake of jealousy, rising on undulating
coils from the moonlit balcony, glided within my waist-
coat, and ate its way in two minutes to my heart's core.
Strange! " he exclaimed, suddenly starting again from the
point. " Strange that I should choose you for llio confi-
dante of all this, young lady; passing strange that yon
should listen to me quietly, as if it were the most usual
thing in the world for a man like me to tel! storiea of his
opera- mistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl tike joul
But the last aingulari* " asuwuia tji^ firrtf nti T inlirmJlfill
JANR BY KB.
once before: yon. with your gravitj, considerateneea, aad |
caation were mads to be the recipient of secretB. 1^''
1 know what sort, of a mind I have placed in communica-'
tiou with my own; I know it ia one not liable to take in-.
fection: it ia a peculiar mind; it is a unit^ueone. Happily 1
I do not mean to harm it: but, if I did, it would not take "
harm from me. The more you and I converse, the better;
for while I cannot blight you, yon may refresh me. " Af-
ter this digression he proceeded: " I remained in the bal-
cony.'They came to her boudoir, no doubt,'thought I;
'let me prepare an ambnah.'So, putting my hand in
through the open window, I drew the curtain over it. leav-
ing only an opening through which I could take observa-
tions; then I closed the casement, all but a chink juet
wide enough to furnish an outlet to the lovers'whisjiered
vows: then I stole back to my chair; and, as I resumed it,
the pair came in. My eye was quickly at the upcrLnre.
Celine's chamber-maid entered, lit a lamp, left it on the
table, and withdrew. The couple were thus revealed to
me clearly : both removed their cloaks, and there was'the
Varens'shining in satin and j'owela — my gifts, of course —
and there was her companion in an officer's uniform; and
I knew him for a young ron6 of a vicomte — a brainlesB
sod vicious youth whom I had sometimes met in society,
and bad never thought of hating because I despised him
80 absolutely. On recognizing him, the fang of the snake,
jealousy, was instantly broken; becanse at the same mo-
ment my love for C^iue sank under an extinguisher. A
wcHnau who eould betray mo for such a rival was not worth
contending for: she deserved only scorn; less, however,
than I, who had been her dupe.
*'They began to talk; their conversation eased me
completely: frivolous, mercenary, heartless, and senseless,
it was ratber calculated to weary than enrage a listener.
A card of mine lay on the table; this being perceived,
brought my name under discussion. Neither of them
poeacBsed energy or wit to belabor me soundly; but they
insulted me as coarsely as they could in their little way:
especially W.line; who even waxed rather brilliant on my
tersonul defects — deformities she termed them. Now it
" been her custom to launch out into fervid admiration
site called my'beauty m^le:'wherein she differed
'1^ irom you, who told me point-blank, at the

162 JANE EYHB.
lat your ageBt " I
second interview, that yon did not ihink i
The contrast struck me at the time, and- "
Adde here came running up aguin,
" MonsiGur, John has just been to say that y
has called, and wishes to see you. "
" Ahl in that case I must abridge. Opening the win-
do™, I walked in u^wn them; liberated Celine from my
protection; gave her notice to vacate her hotel; offered
her a pnrse for immediate exigencies; disregarded screams,
hysterics, prayers, protestations, convulsiona; made an ap-
pointment with the vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de
Boulogne. Next morning I had the pleasure of encoun-
tering I:! ■ left a bullet in one of his poor etiolated arms,
feebie as .. n-ingof achickeninthE < pip,and then thought
I ha < ! done with the whole crew. But nniuckily, the Va-
rsna, six months before, had given me this filette Adele,
who she affirmed was my daughter; and perhaps she may
be, though I see no proors of such grim palornity written
in her countenance. Pilot is more like mo than she-
Some years after I had broken wi^i the mother, she aban-
donen her child and ran away io Italy with a musician or
singer, I acknowledged no natural claim on Adele's part
to be supported by me; nor do I now acknowledge any,
for 1 am not her father; but hearing that she was quite
destitute, 1 e'en took the poor thing out of the slimu and
mud of Paris, and transplanted it here, to grow up clean
in the wholesome soil of an English country garden. Mrs.
Fairfax found you to train it; but now you know that it
is the illegitimate offspring of a Frenoli ojicra-girl, yoj
will perhaps think differently of your post and prolegfi.
Yon will be coming to me Eomo day with notice that you
have found another place — that yon beg me to look out
for a new governess, etc. — eh? "
" No. Adele is not answerable for either hor mother's
faults or yours. I have a regard for her, and now that I
know she is, in a sense, parentleas — forsaken by her mother
and disowned by you, sir — I shall cling closer to her than
before. How could I possibly prefer the spoiled pet of a
wealthy family, who would hate her governess as a
nuisance, to a lonely little orphan, who leans toward her
as a friend? "
" Oh, that is the light in which you view it! Well, I
Dinst go in now; and you too: it darkens. "
But I staid out a few minutes longer with Adela.^
JANE EYRE. 151
Pilot — ran a race with her, and played n game of battle-
aora aTid shuttlecock. When we went in, and I had
removed her bonnet and coat, I took her on my knee;
kept her there an hour, aUowing her to prattle ss she
liked, not rebuking even some little freedoms and trivial-
ities into which she was npt to stray when much noticed;
tind which betrayed in her a superficiality of character,'
herited probably from her mother, hardly congenial to
English mind. Still she had her merits; and I was di,
need to appreciate all that was good in her to the utmosL
ought in her countenanoe and feutaros a likeness to Mr.
Rochester, but found none — no trail:, no turn of espres-
Bion announced relationahip. It wus a pity: if she could
but have been proved to resemble him, he would have
thought more of ner.
It was not till after I had withdrawn to my own chamber
for the night that 1 reviewed steadily the tale Mr. Jloches-
tsr had told me. As he had said, there was probabjj^
nothing at all extraordinary in the substance of the nan ~
tivo itself — A wealthy Engiishman's passion for a IVn
dancer, and lier treachery to him, were everyday m^ttni
enough, no doubt, in society — but there was eomethinj
decidedly strange in the paroxysm of emotion which hac
suddenly seized him, when he was in the act of expressing
the present coutentment of hia mood, and hia newly-
revived pleasure in the old hall and its environs. I
meditated wonderingly on this incident; but gradnally
qaitting it. as I found it for the present inexplicable, I
turned to the consideration of my master's nuinner to my-
self. The coufideuce he had thought fit to repose in me
seemed a tribute to my discretion. I regarded and
accepted it as such. Hia deportment had now for some
weeks been more uniform toward mo than at the first.'
never seemed in his way; he did not taku Qts of chlllii
bnutcnr; when he met me unexpectedly, the encoiintf
eeemed welcome — he had always a word and aometiraes ^
smile for me; when summoned by formal invitation to his'
presence, I was honored by a cordiality of reception that
made me feel I really possessed the power to amuse him,
and that these evening conferences were songbt as much
for his pleasure as for my benefit.
1, indeed, talked comparatively little; but I heard him
talk with relish. It was his nature to be communicative —
be liked to open to a mind unacquainted with the world.
P
'™
ng
1,-
fly-
,nd
me ,
m
o4 JANE ETBE.
glimpses of its ^enes and ways (I do not mean its oocrnpt
scenes and wicked ways, but such as derived their interest
from the great scale on which they were acted, tfiie atrange
novelty by which they were characterized); and I had a
keen delight in receiving the new ideas he offered, in
imagining the new pictures he portrayed, and following
him in thought through the new regions he dieclosed,
never startled or troubled by one noxious allusion.
The ease of bis manner froed me from painful restraint;
Jig friendly frankness, as correct aa cordial, with which
le treated me, drew me to him. I felt at times as if be
jiere my relation, rather than my master; yet he was im-
perious sometimes still; bnt I did not mind that; I saw it
was his way. So happy, so gratified did I become with
Ihis new interest added to life, that I ceased to pine after
kindred. My thin crescent-destiny seemed to enlarge;
the blanks of existence were filled np; my bodily health
improved; I gathered flesh and strength.
And was Mr. Rochester now ugli? in my eyesP No,
reader. Gratitude and many at^sociacions, all pleasurable
and genial, made his face the object I best liked to see;
his presence in a room was more cheering than the bright-
est fire. Yet I had not forgotten his faults — indeed, I
oonld not, for he brought them frequently before me. He
was proud, sardonic, harsh to inferiority of every descrip-
tion. In my secret soul I knew that his great kindness to
me was balanced by unjust severity to many others. He
was moody, too — unaccountably so. I more than once,
when sent for to read to him, found him sitting in hia
dbrary alone, with his head beul on his folded arms; and,
when ho looked up, a morose, almost a malignant scowl,
blackened his features. But I believed that his moodi-
ness, his harshness, and his former faults of morality (I
say former, for now he seemed corrected of them) had
their source in some cruel cross of fate. [ believed he was
naturally a man of better tendencies, higher principles,
and purer taste than such as circumstances bad developed,
education instilled, or destiny encouraged. I thought
there were excellent materials in him; though for the
r resent they hung together somewhat spoiled and tangled.
cannot deny that I grieved for his grief, whatever that
was, and would have given much to assuage it.
Though I had now extinguished my candle and was
laid down in bed, I conld not sleep for thinking of J
look vben he paused in the avenue, ana told how hia dee-
tiny had riaea up before him, sBd dared him to be happy
at Thorn & eld.
" WhynotP " ! asked myself. " W'uaf. alienates him
froin the house? Will he leave it again BOf»-? Mrs. Fair-
fax said he seldom staid here longer than a fortnight at a
time, and he has now been resident eight weeks. If he
does go, the change will be doleful. Suppose be shonld be
absent spring, summer, and autumn: how joylossauushine
and fine days will seem! "
I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this
musing; at any rate, I started wide awake on hearing a
vague murmur, peculiar and lugubrious, which sounded, I
thought, just above me. I wished I had kept my candle
burning: the night was drearily dark; my spirits were de-
pressed. I rose and sat np in bed, listening. The sound
was hushed.
I tried again to sleep; but my heart beat anxiously: my
inward tranquility was broken. The clock, far down in
the hall, stmok two. Just then it seemed my chaml'sr
door was touched; as if fingers had swept the panels in
gi'oping away along the dark gallery outside, I said,
" Who is there? " Nothing answered. I was chilled with
fear.
All at once I remembered that it might be Pilot: who
when the kitchen door chanced to be left open, not unfre-
quentiy found his way up to the threahhold of Mr. Koch-
ester's chamber: I had seen him lying there myself, in the
mornings. The idea calmed me somewhat: I lay down.
Silence composes the nerves; and as an unbroken hush
now reigned again through the whole house, I began to
feel the return of sltimbor. But it ■^.■as not fated that I
should sleep that night, A di-osai hadscarcelyapproached
my ear, when it fled affrighted, scared by a marrow-freez-
ing incident enough.
This was a demoniac laugh — low, suppressed, and deep
— uttered, as it seemed, at the very key-hole of mj cham-
ber door. The head of my bed was near the door, and I
thought at first the goblin-laugher stood as my bedside —
or rather, crouched by my pillow: but I rose, looked
around, and could see nothing; while, as I still gazed, the
unnatural sound was reiterated: and I know itcame from
behind the panels. My first impulse was to rise and fasten
the bolt: my nest, again to cry out, " Who is there? "
^ " ^^M
JANE BTBB.
Somethiiig gurgled and moaned. Ere long, steps re-
trefited np the gallery toward the third-story stairciise: a
3oor had lately been made to shut in that staircase: I
^eard it open and close, and all was still.
" Was that Grace Poole? and is she poBsessed with a
lievil? " thonght I. Impossible now to remain longer by
myself: I must go to Mrs. Fairfax. I hurried on my froct
^nd a shawl; I withdrew the bolt, and opened the door
with a trembling h»nd. There was a candle burning just
outside, left on the matting in the gallery. I was sur-
prised at the circumstance: but still more was I amazed
to perceive the air quite dim, as if filled with smoke; and,
while looking to the right hand and left, to find whence
these blue wreaths issued, I became further aware of a
strong smell of burning.
Something creaked; it was a door ajar; and that door
wae Mr. Rochester's, and the smoke rushed in a cloud
from thence. I thought no more of Mrs. Fairfax; I
thouglit no more of Grace Poole or the laugh: in an in-
stant I wns within the chamber. Tongues of flame darted
round the bed; the curtains were on lire. In the midst of
blaze and vapor, Sir. Rochester lay sti'etched motionless,
in deep sleep.
*'VVakel wake! " I cried — I shook him, hut he only
murmured and turned: the smoke had stupelied him.
Not a moment could be lost: the very sheets were kin-
dling. I rushed to his basin and ewer; fortnnately, one
was wide and the other deep, and both were filled with
water. I heaved them up, deluged the bed and its occu-
pant, flew back to my own room, brought my own wftter-
jug. baptized theconch afresh, and, by God's aid, succeeded
in extinguishing the flumes which were devouriug it.
The nias of the quenched element, the breakage of a
pitcher which I flung from my hand when I had emptied
it, and, above all, the splash of the shower-bath 1 had
liberally bestowed, roused Mr. Eoohester at last. Though
it was now dark, I knew he was awake; because I heard
him fulmiuattug strange anathemas at finding himself
lying in a pool of water.
" Is there a flood? " he cried.
" No, sir, " I answered; " but there has been a fire: get
npj do, you are quenched now; I will fetch you a candle. "
" In the name of all the elves in Christendom, is that
J^oe Eyrei* " he demanded. " What have yon done
me, witch. soroereHa? Who is in the room besides yot
Have you jilotted to drown me? "
" I will fetch yon a candle, sir; and, in Heaven's nam .
get up. Somebody has plotted something; you can not
too soon find out who and what it is. "
" Theru — I am up now; but at your peril you fetoh a
(handle yet: wait two minutee till I get into some dry gar-
monts, if any dry there be — yea, here is my dressing gown.
Now mnl "
I did run; I brought the candle which still remained io
the gallery. He took it from my hand, held it up, and
surveyed the bed, all blaokened and scorched, the cjieets
drenched, the carpet round swimming in water.
" What is it? and who did it? " he asked.
I briefiy related to him what had transpired: thi
strange langh I had heard in the gallery: the step ascend
ing to the third story; the amoko — the smell of fire whici
had conducted me to his room; in what state I had founi
matters there, and how I had deluged him with all thy
water I could lay hands on.
He listened rery gravely; hi face, as I wont on, ei
pressed more concern than astonishment; he did not im
mediately speak when I had concluded.
*'Shall I call Mrs. Fairfax? " I asked.
" Mrs. Fairfax? No: what the deuco would yon oaJl
her for? What can she do? Let her sleep unmolested. "
" Then I wiU fetch Leah, and wakeJohnand his wife.'-
" Not at all; just be still. You have a shawl on? if yo\
are not warm enough, you may take my cloak yonder;
wrap it about you, and sit down in the arm-c'.jair: there—
I will put it on. Now place your feet on the stool, to keei,
them out of the wet. I am going to leave you a few min-
utes. I shall take the candle. Remain where you arft
till I return; be as still as a mouse. I must pay a visif
to the third story. Don't move, remember, or call any one. "
He went: I watched the light withdraw. He paised
up the gallery very softly, unclosed the staircase door with
as little noise as possible, shut it after him, and the last
ray ranished. I was left in total darkness. I listened foi
some noise, but heard nothing. A very long time elapsed.
I grew weary; it was cold in spito of the cloak; and then 1
did not see the use of staying, as I wus not to rouse the
house.'was on the point of risking Mr. Rochester's dis-
pleasu.ti oy disobeying his orders, when the light onu

158 JANE EYHE.
more gleamed dimly on the gallery-wall, and I lienrd hw
onshod feet tread tlie matting. " I hope it is he, " thought
I, " and not something worse, "
He re-entered, pale and very gloomy. " I have found
it all out, " said he, " setting his candle down on tha
washstaitd; " it is as I thought, "
" How, sir? "
He made no reply, but stood with hie arms folded,
looking on the ground. At the end of a few minutes he
inquired in rather a peculiar tone: " I forget whether you
said jou saw anything when yon opened your chalnl
door, "
" No, sir, only the Ciindlestick on the ground.
" But you heard an odd laugh? You have heard tl
laugh before, I should think, or something like it? "
" Yes, sir; there is a woman who sews heri, called
Grace Poole — she laughs in that way. She is a dngnltir
person. "
" Just so. Grace Poole — you have guessed it. She is,
as you say, singular — very. Wt-ll, I shall reflect on the
BUDJect. Meantime, I am glad that you are the only per-
son, besides myself, acquainted with the precise details of
to-night's incident. You are no talking fool: say nothing
about it. I will account for this state of affairs (pointing
to the bed): and now return to your own room. I shall
do very well on the sofa in the library for the rest of the
night. It is near four; in two hours the servants will
be up. "
" Good-night, then, sir, " said I depurting.
He seemed surprised — very inconsistently so, as he had
jnat told me to go.
" WhatI " he exclaimed, " are you quilting me already:
and in that way? "
" Y'ou said I might go, sir, "
" But not without taking leave; not without a word or
two of acknowledgment and good-will: not, in short, in
that brief, dry fashion. Why, you have saved my lifol
snatched me from a horrible and excrnciatingdeath! —
yon walk past mo as if we were mutual strangert)! Atli
shake hands. "
He held out his hand: I gave him mine: hetookitti
in one. then in both his own.
" You have saved my life: I have a pleasure in owing
— T immense a deh... 1 can not say more. Not!'~~
s he
you
tbJH
JANE ETRB.
itr
e^se that has being would liave been tolerable to me in tho
charaoter of creditor for siith an obligation : bnt yon : it i >
'liffereut — I feel your benefits no burden, Jane. "
HepttUBed; gazed at me: words almosi; visible tremblei?
en litB lips, bnt his voice was cliecked.
" Good-night again, sir. There is no debt, benellt
burden, obligation, in the case. "
" I Itnew, " he continued, " j'ou wonld do me good in
some way, at some time; I saw it in your eyes when I first
beheld you: their expresaion and smile did not " — (again
he stopped) — " did not " — (he proceeded hastily) " atrilie
delight to my very inmftat heart eo for nothing. People
talk of natural sympathies; I have heard of good
genii: there are grains of truth in the wildest fable. My
ohcnshed preserver, good-night! "
Strange energy was in his voice, strange fire in his look.
" I am glud I happened to be awake, " I said; and then
I was going,
" What! you mil go? "
" I am cold, sir. "
" Cold? Yes — and standing in a pool! Go, then,
Jane; go! " But he still retained my hand, and I could
not free it. I bethought myself of an es:pedient,
" I think 1 hear Mrs. Faixfax move, sir, " said I.
" Well, leave me. " He relaxed hia fingers and I was
gone.
I regained my coueh, hut never thought of sleep. Tia
morning dawned, I was tossed on a tmoyant but unquiet-!
sea where billows of trouble rolled under surges of
joy, I thought sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a
shore, sweet as the hills of Uctilaii: and now and then a
freshening gale wakened hj hope, bore my spirit triumph-
antly toward the bourne; hut I could not reach it, even
in fancy — a counteracting breeze blew off land, and con-
tinually drove me back. Seuse would resist delirium,
judgment would warn passion. Too feverish to rest, i
rose as soon as day dawned. ~
;
CHAPTER XVI.
I BOTH wished and feared to see Mr. Rochester on t6e
day which followed this sleepless iiiglit. I wanti:d to hear
his voice again, yot feared to meet his e^e. Dnring tho
early pavt of the morning, I miimentanly expected his
coming. lie was not in the freq-ient habit of entering
the school-room; hut he did step la for a few minutes
sometimes, and I had tho impression that he wiie sure to
visit it that day.
But the morning passed just as usual. Nothing hap-
pened to interrupt the quiet course of Adele's studies;
only, soon after hreakfast, I heard some hustle in the
ncigiiborhood of Mr. Rochester's chamher. Mi's. Fairfax's
Toioe, and Leah's, and the cook's — that is, John's wife —
and even John's own gruff tones. There were exelam*-
tioTis of, " What a mercy master was not burned in his
bed! " " It is always dangerous to keep a candle lit at
night " " "'How providential that he had presence of
mind to think of the water-jugl " " I wonder he waked
nobody! " " It. is to he hoped he will not take cold with
sleeping on the library sofa, " etc.
" Fo much confabulation succeeded a sound of scrubbing
and setting to rights; and when I passed the room, in
going down stairs to dinner, I saw through the open door
Uiat all was again restored to complete order— only the
bed waa stripped of its hangings. Leah stood up in the
window-seat, rubbing the panes of glass dimniL-d with
^moke. I was about to address her, for I wished to know
what account had been given of the afEalr: hut, on ad-
Tanoing, I saw a second person in the chamber — a woman
sitting on a chair by the oedside, and sewing rings to new
curtains. That woman was no other than Grace Poole.
There she sat, staid and taciturn-looking, as usual, in
her brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handker-
chief, and cap. ^e was intent on her work, in which hor
whole thoughts seemed absorbed. On her hard foreheadt
and in her commonplace features, was nothing either ('
the paleness or desperation one would have expected f
see marking the countenance of a woman who had i
tempted murder, and yhoae intended viotim had foJliB
aer last nigiit to ner lair, and (as I believed) charge .
her with liio crime she wi§heii to perpetrato. I w^
amaiiecl — confounded. Slie looked np. wliile I bUII gaa
st her: no start, nn increase or failure of color hetrayoj
emotion, oonscioiieneaa of guilt, or fear of detection-.
She said, " Good-morning. Mi^s, " iii her nstial phlcgmatio
ftnd brief mannur; and taking up another ring u
tape, went on with her sowing.
" I will put her to some test, " thought Z. " Such ab-
aoliite impenetrability is past eomprehenaion. "
" Good-moruing, Grace, " I said. " Has anything ^_
pencd here? I thought I heard the eervaute all talkiiijt
together awhile ago. "
" Only master had been reading in his bed last nighty
He fell asleep with his candle lit, and tho curtains eot Ml
fire; but, fortunately, he awoke before the bed clotlies o^
tho wood-work caught, and contrived to quench the flamed
with the water in the ewer, "
" A strange affair! " I said, in a low voice; then, look-
ing at her fixedly, " Did Mr. Rochester wake nobody?
Did no one hear him move? "
She again raised her oyea to me; and this time tlierB J
was Fomething of consciousneBS in their expression.'*'
seemed to examine we warily; then she answered, " Tht
serTunts sleep so far off, yon know. Miss, tliey would not
be likely to hear. Mrs. Fairfax's room and yours are thj "
nearest to masters; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heari
nothing: when people got elderly, tliey often sleep heavy.^
She paused, and then added, with a sort of assumed ii^
difference, but still in a marked and significant too{^
" But you are young, Miss, aud I should say a lighCT
sleeper. Perhaps jou nta^ have heard a noise? " " ^
" I did, " said I, dropping my voice, eo that Leah, who
was still polishing the panes, could not hear me, " and at
first I thought it was Pilot; but Pilot cannot laugh, and
I am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one. "
She took a new needleful of thread, waxed it carefully,
threaded hor needle with a steady hand, and then observed,
with perfect composure. " It is hardly likely master would
laagh, I should think, Miss, when he was in such danger:
yon must have been dreaming. "
" I was not dreaming. " I said, with some warmth, for
her brazen coolness provoked me. Again she looked at
me, and with the same scrutinizing and conacions eye.
182 JAJTE ETRB.
" Have yon told mafitor that you heard a laagh? " fllie
iuqaired.
" I have uot had the opportunity of speaking to him
this morning. "
" Yon did not think of .opening your door and looking
out into the gallery? " she further aaked.
She appeared to be crosB-queationing me — attempting
to draw from mo information nnawares. The idea struck
me that if ehe discovered 1 knew or suspected her eniit,
she would he playing off some of her malignant pranm
ni6. I ihougnt it advisable to be on my guard.
" On the contrary, " said I, " I bolted my door, "
" Tlien you are not in the habit of bolting your i
every night before you get into bed? "'
" Fiend! ahe wants to know my habits, that she mrtf "'"
lay hur plana accordingly! " Indignation again prevailed
over prudence; I replied sharply, " Hitherto I have often
omitted to fasten the bolt: I did not think it necessary.
I was not aware any danger or annoyance was to be
dreaded at ThornEeld Hall; but in future (iind I laid
marked stress on the words) I shall take good care to
make all secure before I venture to lie down. "
" It will be wise so to do, " was her answer. " This
neighborhood is as quiet as any I know, and I never heard
of the hall being attempted by robbers since it wiia a
bonse, though there are hundreds of pounds'worth of
plate in the plate-closet, as is well known. And you see,
for aueh alarge house, there are very few servants, because
master has never lived here mncfa, and when he does
come, being a bachelor, he needs little waiting on; but I
always think it best to err on the safe side; a door is soon
f^tened, and it ia as well to have a drawn bolt between
one and any mischief that may be about. A deal of
people, Miss, are for trusting all to Providence; but I say
Providence will not dispense with the means, though be
often blesses them when they are used discreetly, " And
here she closed her harangue; a lon^ one for her, and
tittered with the demureness of a Quakeress.
I still stood absolutely dumfounded at what appeared
to me her mtraculons self-poeaeBsion and most inscrutable
hypocrisy, when the cook entered.
" Mrs. Poole, " said she, addressing Grace, " the serr-
aata'dinner will soon be ready. Will yon come downP "
JANE KfRE.
" No. Jnst put my pint of porter and bit of pudi]id
on a tr^y, and HI carry it up stairs. "
" Yoii'U haye some meat? "
" Just a morsel, and a taste of cheese, that's all. "
" And the eago? "
" Never mind it at present. I shall be coming down
before tea-time. I'll make if. myself. "
TLe coolc here turned to me, saying that Mrs. FairC|
was waiting for me: so I departed, I
I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax's account of the cnrtrf
conflagration during dinner, bo much was I occupied t
Snazling my braius orer tho i^nigniatical character j
■race Poole, and still more in pondering the problem i
hor position at Thornfield; in questioning why she hfl
not been given into custody that moruiug. or, at the v
least, dismissed from her master's service. He 1
almost as much as declared hiB conviction nf her criminal
ity last night: what mysterious cause withheld him frt^
accusing her? Why had he enjoined me, too, to s
It was strange — a bold, vindictive, and haughty gentlem
seemed Bomehow in the power of one of the meanest (
his dependents; so much in her power, that even wheff
she lifted her hand agjiinst his life, he dared not openly
charge her with the attempt, much less punish her for it.
Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have
been tempted to think that tenderer feelings than pru-
dence or fear iuflaenced Mr, Rochester in her behalf; but,
hard-favored and matronly as she was, tlie idea could not
be admitted. " Yet, " ! reflected, " she has been youuE
once; her youth would be contemporary with her master'^
Mrs. Fairfax told mo once she had lived here many yeaif
I don't think she can ever have been pretty; but, f
anght I know, she may possess originality and strength
character to compensate for the want of personal advat|
tages, Mf. Rochester is an amateur of the decided aid
eccentric — Grace is eccentric at leaat. What if a lormal
caprice (a freak very possible to a nature so sudden ana
headstrong as his) has delivered him into her power, and
she now exercises over his actions a secret indnence, the
result of his own indiscretion, which he cannot aliake off,
and dare not disregard? " But, having reached this point
of conjecture, Mrs. Poole's square, flat fl^ure, and un-
comelf , dry, even coarse face, reouri-ed so distinctly to my
mind'i eye, th^^Lil^UC^HJ^iliBlipossiblel m.^ ea >
164 JANE EYBE.
position cannot be correct. Yst, " aoggested the t
voice which talks to ua in our own iicarts, " t/ou are nQ||
beautiful either, and perhajia Mr. Uocliester approtCB yof
— at any rate, joii hiive often felt as if ho dm; and liw
night — remember hiB words; remember liia look; remem
bep his voice! "
I well remembered all — language, glance and tone'
seemed at the moment vividly renewed. I was now in tho
Bchool-room. Adele was drawing. I hunt over her and
directed her pencil. She looked up with a Bort of start.
*■ Qii'avez-vous, niademoiaella? " said she; " Voa doigtsj
tremhieut comme la fouillo, et vos joiies sont rouges: mai^n
rouges comme dea censes! " J^
" I am hot, AJelc, with stooping! " She wont o^
sketching, I went on thinking. 4
I hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion*
had been conceiving respecting Grace Poole: it disgustoi
me. I compared myself with Iter, and found wo were''
different. BesBie Leaven had said I was quite a lady; and
she spoke truth: I was a lady. And now 1 looked much
better than 1 did when Bessie saw me: 1 had more color
and more flesh; more life, more vivacity; because I had
brighter hopes and keener enjoynientB.
" Evening approaches, " said I, as I looked toward the
window. " 1 have never heard Mr. Roehester'a voice or
step in thiL'house to-day; but surely I shall see him before
ni^t: I feared the meeting in thu morning: now I desire
it, becuDse expcetnlion has been so long baffled that it is
grown impatient. "
When dusk actually closed, and when Adele left me to
go and play iti the nursery with Sophie, I did most keenly
desire it. 1 listened for the bell to ring below; I listened
for Leah coming up with a message; I fancied sometimes']
I heard Mr. Eochester'e own tread, and I turned to thU "
door, expecting it to open and admit him. The door i
mained shut: darkness only came in through the window
Still it was not late: ho often sent for nio at seven aiK
eight o'clock, and it was yet bnt six. Surely 1 should not
be wliolly disappointed to-night, when 1 had so maun
things to eaj to him! 1 wanted again to introduce tb(
Bubject of Grace Poole, and to hear what he would answei
I wanted to ask him plainly if he really believed it wi
she who had made last night's hideous nttempi; and if a
whj he kept her wickedness a secret. It little mattert

JANB EYEE.
16^1
whether my cariosity irrttatod him; I knew the pleasure
of yexing and soothing him by turns; it was one I chiefly
delighted in, and a sure instinct always prevented me from
going too far: beyond the verge of provocation I never
Tenlured; on the extreme brink I liked well to try my
skill. Retaining every minute form of respect, every pro-
priety of my station, I conld still meet him in argument
without fear or nnoasy restraint: this suited both him ar'^
me,
A tread creaked on the stairs at last; Leah made hex;
appearance, but it was only to intimate that tea was ready
in Mrs. Fairfax's room. Thither I repaired, glad at least
to go down staii's. Cor that brought me, I imagined, nearer
to Mr. Eochester'a presence.
" You must want yonr tea, " said the good lady, as 1
joined her, " you ate so littto at dinner. I am afraid, "
she continned, " you are not well to-day, you look flushed
and feverish.* "
" Oh quite welll I never felt better. "
" Then yon mnat prove it by evincing a good appetil .
will you fill the tea-pot while I knit off this needle?
Having completed her task, she rose to draw down the
blind which she had hitherto kept up, by way, I suppose,
of making the moat of daylight: though dusk was now
faat deepening into total obacurjty.
" It is fair to-night, " said she, as she looked throngh
the panes, " though not starlight; Mr. Rochester baa, on
the whole, had a favorable day for his joiinioy. "
■'Journey! — la Mr. Rochester gone anywhere? I did
not know he was out. "
" Oh, he set off the moment he had breakfaatedl He is
gone to the Leas, Mr. Eahton's place, ten raites on the
other side Millcote ; I believe there is qnite a piirtj assem-i
bled there — Lord Ingram, Sir George Lynn, Colonel Dentiil
and others. " " J
" Do yon expect him back to-nigbt ? "
" No — nor to-morrow either ; I should think he is very
likely to stay a week op more. When tliese fine, fashion-
able people get together, they are so surrounded by ele-
gance and gayety, so well provided with all that can
please and entertain, they are in no hurry to separate.
Giiutlemen, especially, are often in request on stich.occa-
aioosiand Mr, Rochester is so talented and so lively
j_ -..I..!- 11.-* ^.believe he is a general fatotita — %^i
itJ^I

166 JAME EFBE.
ladies are vary fond of him — thongh you would not think
hia appearance calcalated to recommend him particularly
in their eyes ; but 1 suppose his acquiremeutB and abilitie "
Earhaps bis wealth and good blood, make amends for ui
ttle fault of look. "
" Are there ladies at the Leas? "
" There are Mrs, EBhton and her three daughters — vei,
elegant young ladies, indeed ; and there are the Honorable
Blanche and Mary Ingram — moet beautiful women, 1 sup-
pose : indeed, I have seen Blanche, sis or seven years
since, when she was a girl of eighteen. She came here to a
Christmas ball and party Mr. Rochester gave. You should
have seen the dining-room that day^ — how richly it was
decorated, how brilliantly lit up ! I should think there
were fifty ladies and gentlemen present — all of the first
county families ; and Miss Ingram was considered the
belle of the evening. "
" You saw her, joa say, Mrs. Fairfax; what was she
like ? " 1
** Yes, I saw her. The dining-room doors were throwtt,*
open, and, as it was Christmas-time, the servants were al-'
lowed to assemble in the hall, to hear some of the ladies
sing and play. Mr. Rochester would have me to come in,
and I sat down in a quiet comer and watched tliem. I
never saw a more splendid scene: the ladies were magnifi-
cently dressed; most of them— at least most of the younger
ones— looked handsome, but Miss Ingram was certainly
the queen, "
" And what was she like ? "
" Tall, fine bnst, sloping shoulders, long, graceful neck;
olive complexion, dark and clear ; noble features ; eyes
rather like Mr. Rochester's, large and black, and as brill-
iant as her jewels. And then she had such a fine head of
hair, raven-black, and so becomingly arranged; a crown of
thick plaits behind, and in front the longest, the gloseieat
curls I ever saw. She was dressed in pure white, an amber-
colored scarf was passed over her shoulders and across
her breast, tied at the side, and descending in long, fringed
ends below her knee. She wore an amber-colored flower,
too, in her hair: it contrasted well with the jetty mass
her eorls. "
" She waa greatly admired, of conrse ? "
" Yes, indeed, and not only for her beauty, but for ._
[ipliBbmeats. She waa one of the ladiea who sang ;
ged
ver,
i
JANB ETEE.
1671
r gentleman aocompanied her on the piano. She and
Rochester sang a duet. "
" Mr. KochesterP I was not aware he could sing. "
" Oh ! he haa a fine bass voice, and an excellent tasta
for music. "
" And Misa Ingram, what sort of a voice had she? "
" A very rich and powerful oue— shn sang delightfuliy
— it was a treat to listen to ht-r ; anil she played afterward.
I am no judge of music, but Mr. Rochester is, and I heard
him eay her execution was remarkably good. "
" And this beautiful and accomplished lady is uot yet
married P "
" It appears not : I fancy neither she nor her sister have
very large fortunes. Old Lord Ingram's estates were chieiiy
entailed, and the eldest son came in for everything almost. "
" But I wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has
taken a fancy to her : Mr. Rochester, for instance. He is
rich, is he not P "
" Oh, yes. But you see there is a considerable differ-
ence in age : Mr. Rochester is nearly forty ; she is bnft
twenty-live. "
" What of thatP More uneqnal matches are mode
every day. "
" True: yet I should scarcely fancy Mr, Rochester
would entertain an idea of the sort. But you cut nothing;
you have scarcely tasted since you began tea. "
" No; I am too thirsty to eat. Will you let me have
another cup? "
I was about again to revert to the probability of a union
between Mr. Rochester and the beautiful Blanche; but
Adele came in, and the conversation was turned into an-
other channel.
When once more alone, I reviewed the information I
hud got; looked into my heart, examined its thoughts and
feelings, and endeavored to bring back with a strict hand
such as had been straying through imagination's bound-
iesa and trackless waste, into the safe fold of common sense.
Arraigned at my own bar. Memory having given her
evidence of the hopes, wishes, sentiments I had been
cherisliing since last night — of the general state of mind
in which I had indulged for nearly a fortnight past;
Reason having come forward and told in her own quiet
a plain, unvarnished tale, showing how I had re-
'" real, and rabidly devoured the id%a.\\— \


168
JAKE EYRE.

□ounced judgment tc thia effect: That a groator lV*ol than
Jane Eyre had never breathed the breatu of lite; that a
more fantastic idiot had never surfeited herself on aweet
lies, and Bwalloned poieon as if it were nectar.
*'you, " I said, " a favorite with Mr, Rochester? 1'
gifted with the power of pleasing him? Vou of i
tance to him in any way? Go! your folly sickene me.
And you have derived pleasi# om occasional tokeus of
preference — eijuivoca'tokens, shown by a gentleman of
family, and a man of the world, to a dependent and a
novice. How dared you? Poor stupid dupe! Coold not
even self-interest make you wiser? You repeated to your-
self this morning the brief scene of last night? Cover
yon r f (tec iind be ashamedl He said something inpraiee
of your oyea, did he? Blind pnppy! Open their bleared
lids and look on your own accursed senselessness! It does
good to no woman to be flattered by her superior, who can
not possibly intend to marry her; and it is madneaa in all
women to let a secret love kindle within them, which, if
tinreturned and unknown, must devour the life that feeds
it; and, if discovered and responded to, must lead ignit-
/a/wMd-like, into miry wilds, whence there is no extrication.
" Listen, then, Jane Eyre, to your sentence: to-mor-
row place tlie glass before you, and draw in chalk yonr
own picture, faithfully; without softening one defect;
omit no harsh line, smooth uway no displeasing irregu-
larity; write under it,'Portrait of a GovernesH, dii
nected, poor, and plain.'^
" Afterward, take a piece of smooth ivory — ^yon havB'
one prepared in your drawing-box; take your palette, mix
your freshest, finest, clearest tints; choose your most deli
cate camel-hair pencils; delineate carefully the loveliest
face you can imagine; paint it in your softest shades and
sweetest hues; according to the description given by Mrs,
F.tirfax of Blanche Ingram; rememberthe raven ringlets,
the Oriental eye; — what! you revert to Mr, Rochester as a
modell Order! No snivel! — no sentiment! — no regret!
I will endure only sense and resolution. Recall the august
yet harmonious lineanionts, the Grecian neck and bust:
let the round and dazzling arm be visible, and the delicate
band; omit neither diamond ring nor gold bracelet; por-
tray faithfully the attire, aerial lace and gi-'^teuing satin,
graceful scarf and golden rose: call ii'Blanche, a
"'"'ilied lady of rank.'

vH
, a fatnre, you ahoaM chance to fancy Mr.
Rochester thinks well of you, take ont these two pictures
and compare them: say,'Mr. Rttch ester might probably
wiu that nohle lady's love, if he chose to strive for it; ia it
likely he would waste a sorious thought ou this indigent
and insignificant pleheian? "'
" I'll do it, " I resolved: aud having framed thia deter-,
mination, I grew calm, and fell asleep.
I kept my word. An honr or two sufficed to sketch my
own portrait in crayons; and in leas than a fortnight I had
completed an ivory miniature of an imaginary Blanche
Ingram. It looked a lovely face enough, and when com-
pared with the real head in chalk, the contrast was as'
great as self-control could desire. I derived benefit from
the task: it had kept my head and hands employed, and
had given force and fixedness to the new impreseiona I
wished to stamp indelibly on my heart.
Ere long, I had reason to congratulate myself on the
course of wholesome discipline to which I had thus forced
my feelings to submit: thanks to it, I was able to meet
suoBBquent occarrences with a decent calm; which, had
they fonnd me unprepared, I should probably have
unequal to maintain, even externally.
CHAPTER XVII.
had I
1
A WEEK paased, and no newa arrived of Mr. Rocheaten
ten days, and still he did not come. Mrs. Fairfax said
she should not be surprised if he were to go elraight from
the I < en8 to London, and thence to the Continent, and
not »how his face again at Thornfield for a year to come:
he had not aofrequently quitted it in a manner quite as
abrupt and unexpected. When I heard thia I was begin-
ning to feel a strange chill and failing at the heart. I
was actually permitting myself to experience a sickening
senee of disappointment: but rallying my wits, and reoot
lecting my principles, I at once called my sensations to
order; aud it was wonderful how I got over the tempo-
rary bluudor — how I clearud up the mistake of supposing
"'■, Rochester's movements a matter in which I had an^
170 JANE EYEK.
caaae to take & vital interest. Not that I hambled mjself
by a slavisli notion of inferiority; on the contrary, I jnst
said, " You have nothing to do with the master of Thorn-
field, further than to receive the salary he gives you for
teaching his protege, and to be grateful for such respect-
ful and kind treatment ae,if you do your duty, yon nave
a right to expect at hie hands. Be sure that is the only
tie he seriously acknowledges between you and him : so don t
make him the object of yonr fine feelings, your raptures,
agonies, and so forth. He is not of your order: keep to
your caste, and be too self-respecting to lavish the love of'
the whole heart, soul, and strength, where such a gift is
■not wanted and would be despised. "
I went on with my day's bnsiness tranq^nilly, but ever
and anon vague suggestions kept wandering across my
brain of reasons why I should quit Tfaoriifield; and I kept
involuntarily framing advertisements and pondering COD-
jeotures about new situations; these thoughts I did not
think it necessary to check; they might germinate ami
bear fruit if they coold.
Mr. Rochester had been absent upward of a fortnight,
when the post brought Mrs, Fairfax a letter.
" It is from the master, " said she, as she looked at the
direction. " Now I suppose we shall know whether we
are to expect his return or not, "
And while she broke the seal and perused the docu-
ment, I went on taking nty cofFee (we were at breakfast):
it was hot, and I attributed to that circnnistauoe a fiery
glow which suddenly rose to ray face. Why my hand
shook, and why I involuntarily spilled half the contents
of my cup into my saucer, I did not choose to consider.
" Well, I sometimes think we are too quiet; but we run
a chance of being busy enough now; for a little while, at
least, " said Mrs. Fairfax, still holding the note before her
spectacles.
Ere I permitted myself to request an explanation, I
tied the string of Adele's pinafore, which happened to be
loose: having helped her also to another bnn, and refilled
her mug with milk, I said, nonchalantly: " Mr. Rochester
Is not likely to return soon, I suppose? "
" Indeed, he is — in three days, he says: that will be
next Thursday; and not alone either. I don't know how
many of the fine people at the Leas are coming with him:
',«rads directions for all the best bedrooms to bo prfr.
I
i^«»)ds I
wL.

JANE BTKE.
pared: and the library and drawiDg-roome are to be cleaned
ont; and I am to get more kitchen hande from the George
Inn, at Millcote, nnd from wherever else I can; and tha
ladies will bring their maids and the gentlemen their
valets; so we snail have a full honse of it. " And Mra.
Fairfax swallowed her breakfast and liaatened away to
commence operations.
The tliree days were, as she had fcretold, bnsy enough.
I had thought all the rooma at Thorufieid beaiitifally clean
and well arranged,'.-.at it appears I wits mistaken. Three
women were got to help; and such scrubbing, such brush-
ing, SKch washing of paint and heating of carpets, such
taking down aiid p uttiiig np of pictures, such polishing of-
mirrors and lusters, such lighting of flres in bedrooms,
ench airing of sheets and feather-beds on hearths, 1 never
beheld, either before or since, Adele ran quite wild in the
midst of it: the preparations for company, and the pros-
pect of their arrival, seemed to throw her inlo ecstasies.
She would have Sophie to look over all her " toilets, " aa
she called frocks; to fnrbisli up any that were " passfies, "
and to air and arrange the new. For herself, she did noth-
ing hnt caper abont in the front chambers, jump on and
off the bedsteads, and lie on the mattresses and piled-up
bolsters and pillows before the enormous fires roaring in
the chimneys. From school duties she was exonerated:
Mrs, Fairfax had pressed me into her service, and I was all
day in the store-room, helping (or hindering) her and the
cook; learning to make custards and cheese cakes and
French pastry, to truss game and garaish dessert-dishea.
The party were expected to arrive on Thursday after-
noon, in time for dinner at sis. During the intervening
period I had no time to nurse chimeras; and I believe I
was aa active and gay as any body — Adele excep'^ed. Still,
now and then, I received a damping check to my cheer-
fulness; and was, in spite of myself, thrown back on the
region of donbts and portents, and dark conjeotorea.
This was when I chanced to see the third-story staircase
door (which of late had always been kept locked) open
slowly and give passage to the form of Qi-ace Poole in
prim cap, white apron »nd handkerchief: when I watched
tier glide along the gallery, her quiet iroaa mumea jn a
liat slipper; when I saw her look into the bustling, topsy-
nedrooms — just say a word, perhaps, to tlie char-
~ ~*)QDt the proper way to polish a grate, or clean a_
n
173 JANE EYRK.
marble mantel-piece, or take stains from papered walla,
and then pass on, Slie would thus descend to the kitchen
once a day, eat lier dinner, smoke a moderate pipe on the
liearth, aud go back, carrying her pot of porter with her,
for her private Bolaoe, in her own gloomy, upper haunt.
Only one honr in the twenty-four did Bhe paea with her
fcllow-servanta below; all the rest of her time was spent in
some low-ceiled, oaken chamber of the third story; there
she sat and sewed— and probably langhed drearily to her-
self — as companionl^ss as a prisoner in his dungeon.
The strangest thing of all was that not a soul in the
house except me noticed her habits, or seemed to marrel
at them; no one discassed _her position or employment;
no one pitied her solitude or isolation. I once, indeed,
overheard part of a dialogue between Leah and one of the
char-women, of which Orace formed the subject. Leah
hhd been saying something I had not caught, and the
char-woman remarked, " She gets good wages, I gueas? "
" Yes, " said Leah; " I wish I had as good; not that
mine are to complain of^there'a no stinginess at Thorn-
field; bnt they're not one-fifth of the sum Mrs. Poole re-
ceives. And she is laying by: she goes every quarter to
the hank at Milleote. I should not wonder but she has
saved enough to keep her independent if she liked to leave;
but I suppose she's got need to the place; and then she's
not forty yet, and strong and able for anything. It is too
soon for her to give up business. "
" She is a good hand, I dare say, " said the char-woman.
" Ahl she understands what she has to do — nobody
better, " rejoined Leah, significantly; " and it is not every
one could fill her shoes; not for all the money she gets. "
" That it is notl " was the reply. " I wonder whether
master "
The char-woman was going on; bnt here Leah turned
and perceived me, and she instantly gave her companion
a nudge.
" Doesn't she know? " I heard the woman whisper.
Leah shook her head, and the conversation was, of
course, dropped. All I had gathered from it amounted
tn this— that there was a mystery at Thornfield; and that
irom participation in that mystery I was purposely ex-,
eluded.
Thursday came: all work had been completed the pi
ions evening; carpets were laid down, bed-haugings U
1
JANB RYBB.
tofvnerl, radiant wliite coimrcrpanEs spread, toilAt-tsblet
arrangeil, furuiture rabbed, flowers piled in viises: l > oth
cli & mbnrs and B:i!oon8 looked aa /reah and bHght as liande
could niiike them, The hall, too, wax scoured; and the
greiit carved clock, as well as the eteps :md bujiUters of
[ho 8ttiirc(i£e, were polished to the brightneaa of glass; in
thn diuing-room the sideboard fiiishcd resplendent with
[date; in the drawing-room and boudoir vases of exotica
muoiued on all sides.
Afternoon arrived: Mrs, Fairfax assumed her beat blaok
satin gown, her gloves, and iiar gold watch; for it wae her
part to receive the company — to conduct the ladies to
their room's, etc. Adeie, too, would be dressed: though I
Uionght that she had little chance of being introdnced to
(.he party that day, at least. However, to please her, I
nllowed Sophie to apparel her in one of her short, full
uiuslin frocks. For myself, I had no need to make iiny
(thange; I should not be called upon to quit my eanctatn
(if the school-room; for a sanctum it was now become to
me — " a very pleasant refuge in time of trouble. "
It had been a mild, serene spring day: one of'those
days which, toward the end of March or the beginning of
April, rise shining over the earth as heralds of summer.
\t was drawing to an end now; but the evening waa even
warm, and I sat at work in the school-room with tho win-
low open.
" It gets late, " said Mrs. Fairfax, entering in rustling
state. " 1 am glad I ordered dinner an honr after the
time Mr. Rochester mentioned; for it is past sis now. I
have sent John down to the gates to soe if there is any
thing on the road: one can aee a long way from thence in
the direction of Millcote. " She went to the window.
'Well, John " (leaning out),
" was the answer. " They'll
" Here he isl " said she.
" any news? "
" They're coming, ma'ai
be here in ten minutes, "
Adele flew to the window. I followed; taking care to
stand on one side, so that, screened by the curtain, I conld
see without being seen.
The ton minutes John had given seemed very long, but
at last wheels were heard; four equestrians galloped np
the drive, and after them came two open carriagos. Flat-
tering veils and waving pinnies filled the vehicles; two of
w^ers were young, dashing-looking gentle "
174
JANE EYRE.
third was Mr. RochcBter. on hia black horse, Mtsrotfl
Pilot hounding before bim: at his side rode a lady, and h
and she were the first of the party. Her purple ridin]
hahit almoat swept the ground, her veil streamed long c
the breeze; mingling with its transparent folds, and gleam-
ing through them, sbone rich raven ringlets.
" Miss Iiigrflm! " exclaimeci Mra. Fairfax, and away she
hurried to ber post below.
The calTBcade, following the sweep of tbe drive, quickly
turned tbe angle of the house, and I lost sight of it,
Adele now petitioned to go down; but I took her on my
knee and gave her to understand that she must not on any
account think of venturing in sight of the ladies, either
now or at any other time, unless expressly sent for; thr^t
Mr. Rochester would bo very angry, etc. " Some natural
tears she shed " on being told this; but as I began to look
very grave, she consented at last to wipe them.
A joyous stir was now audible in the hall: gentlomen'a
deep tones and ladies'silvery accents blent harmoniously
together, and distinguisbuble above all, though not loud,
was the sonorous voice of tbe master of Thornfield Hall,
welcoming his fair and gallant guests under its roof^
Then light steps ascended tbe stairs; and there was a triu
ping through the gallery, and soft cheerful laughs, ana
opening and cioaing doors, and, for a time, a hush. r
" Elles cbangent de toilette?, " said Adele; who, Hsteffi
ing attentively, had followed every movement; and a'
sighed.
" Chez maman, " said she, " quand il y avait dn mond(§_
je le snivais nartont, au salon ct A leurs chambres; souvent
]e regardais lee femmes de chambre coiifor et habiller lee
dames, et c'fHait si amusant: comme cela on apprend. "
" Don't you feel hungry, Adele? "
" Mais oui, mademoiselle: voila cinq on six henres qnji
Dons n'avons poa mang£. "'
" Well now, while the ladies are In their rooms, * wi9
venture down and get yon something to eat. "'
And issuing from my asylum with precaution, I sought
a back-fitairs which conducted directly to the kitchen. All
in that region was fire and commotion; tbe soup and fish
were in the last stage of projection, and the cook hung
over her crncibles in a frame of mind and body threaten-
ing spontaneous combustion. In the servants'ball two
ooaohmen and three gentlemen's gentlemen stood or sat
I tbe fire; the Abigails, I suppose, were up si
with their mistresses: the ti < -w eervunts that had 1
hired from Millcote were bustting :ibo!it everjwhi
Threading thia chaos, 1 at last reochod the iarder; Uiei
took poaseasion of a cold chicken, a roll of bread, soi
tarts, a plate or two, and a knife and fork: with
booty I made a hasty retreat. I had regained the «al]i
and was just shutting the hick-door beliiod me, when
aoceleratfid hutn warned me that the ladies were about to
issue from their chambers. I could not procDod to the
echool-room without passing some of their doors, an4_
mnning the risk of being surprised with my
iialage; so I stood still at this end, which, being windi
less, was dark: quite dark now, for the sun waa aet
twilight gathering.
Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants
after another; each came out gayly and airily, with dress
that gleamed lustrous through tlio dusk. For a moment
they stood grouped together at the other extremity of the
gallery, conversing in a key of sweet subdued vivacity;
they then decended the staircase almost as noiselessly as s
bright mist rolls down a bill. Their collective appearanoe
had left on mo an impression of high-born elegance, bhi^ "
as I bad never before received.
I found Adele peeping through tlio school-room di
which she held ajar, " What beautiful ladies !'_
in English. " Oh, I wish I might go to thom ! Do you
think Mr. Rochester will send for us by-and-by, after
dinner ? "
" Vo, indeed, I don't; Mr. Rochester has somethii
elee to think about. Never mind the hidies to-nig]
perhaps you will see them to-morrow: here is yi
dinner ? "
She was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts aervi
to divert her attention for a time. It was well I secured
thia forage; or both she, I, aud Sophie, to whom I con-
veyed a share of our repast would havo run a chance of
getting no dinner at all- every one down stiiii-s wua too
much engaged to think oi us. The dessert was not carried
out till after nine; and at ten footmen were still running
to and fro with trays and roflee-cups. I allowed Adele to
sit up much later than usual; for she declared she could
not poBBibly go to sleep while the doors kent opening aud
''if^i^V^M^ ytM^iii hustliug & tfvyi\,. JJesides, ahe
the
an4 M
i
ress
lent
the
;ity;
y as a
iranoe-^H
M
)d^H|
you /I
after
Lhin^^^A
176
JANE EYRE.
aJded, a massage might poEsibly oftme from Mr. RocheBtw
when she was umiresEeil; " lI alorB quel iloniniago ! "
I told her stories as long as eha would listen to them;
and then for « change I took her out into the gallery. Th» ■■
hall lam]t was now lit, and it amnsed her to Tooli oTtr t "
haluetradc and watch the servants passing liackward an^
forward. When the evening was far advanced, a sound oT
music issued from the drawing-room, whithor the piano had
been removed. Ade!e and I sat down on the top step oJ
the stairs to listen. Presently a voice hlent with the ricbfl
tones of the instrument; it was a lady who sang, and very
sweet her notes were. The bo!o over, a duet followed, and
then a glee: a joyous couTcrsalional murmur filled up the
intei-vftls, I listened long: sntidenly I discovored that my
ear was wholiy intent on analyzing the mingled sounds,! ,
and trying to discriminate amidst the coii/usion of acceats
those of Mr. Bochester; and when it caught them, whiol^
it iioon diii, it found a further task in framing the tona^
rendered by distance inarticiilate. into words.
The dock struck eleven. Hooked at Adele, whose heR._
iieaned against ni^ shoulder; her eyes were waxing hcavy^
Bu I took her op in mv arms and carried her oSl to bed, im
was near one before the gentlemen and ladies fought tbei;^
cliambers. 1
The next day was as fine as its predecesBor: it wafl iB*3
voted by the pJUltj to an excursion to some sight in th
neighborhood. They set out early in ihe forenoon, Bom
on horseback, the rest in carriages; I witnessed both tf „
departure and the return. Misa Ingram, aa before, w^
the only lady equestrian; and, as before, Mr. Bochestib'
galloped at her side; the two rode a litUe apart ftom tbt,
rest. I pointed out thi.i drcunristanoe to Mrs. Fnirfas, wtlij^
was standing at the window with me.
" You said it was not Ukely they should think of being
married, said I, " bat you see Mr. Eochestor evidently
prefers her to any of the other ladies. "
" Yes; I dare say: no doubt he admires her, "
" And she him, " I added; " look iiow she leans her
he^d toward him bs'1 she were conversing confidentially;
I wish I could see h«r face; I have never had a glimpse of
it yet. "
" You will see her this evening, " answered Mrs. Fair-
:^x. " J happened to remark to Mr. Rochester how much
9 Wishea t9 be introduced to the ladies, and he said.
" Oh, let Iior come into the dmwing-room after dinner j
and request Mlaa Eyre to accompany lier. "
" Yea — he said that from mere politeness: I need not
go, J am sure, " I anaweied.
" Well, lobaerved to him that as you were unused to
company, I did not think you would like appearing before
BO gay a party — all strangers — and he replied, in his quic'-
way,'Nonsensel If she objects, tell her it is my particut
widh; and if she resists, say I shall come and fetch her ^
case of contumacy. "
" I will not give him that trouble, " I anawered,
will go, if no better mtiy be: but I don't like it, Shti
you be there, Mrs. Fairfas? "
" No; I pleaded off, and he admitted my plea.
tall you how to manage so as to avoid the cmbarrasament "
of making a forma! entrance, which is the moat disagreea-
Ua part of the business. You must go into the drawing-
room while it is empty, before the laditia leave Lhe dinner-
table; chooae your seat in any quiet nook yon like; you
need not stay long after the gentlemen come in, unless
yon please: jnst let Mr. Rochester see yon are there, and
then slip away — nobody will notice you. "
" Wilt these people remain ioDg, do yon think? "
" Perhaps two or three weeks; certainly not more.
After the Easter recess. Sir George Lynn, who was lately
elected member for Millcote, will have to go up to town
and take his seat; I dare say Mr. Rochester will accom-
pany him: it aurprises me that he has already made so
protracted a stay at Thorniield.
It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour
approach when I was to repair with my charge to the
drawing-room. Adele had been in a state of ecstasy all
day, after hearing she was to be presented to the ladies in
the evening; and it was not till Sophie commenced the
operation of dressing her that she sobered down. Then
the importance of the process quickly steadied her; and
by the time she had her curls arranged in well- smoothed,
drooping, clusters, her pink satin frock pnt on, her long
sash tied, and her lace mittens adjusted, she looked as
frave as any judge. No need to warn her not to disarrange
or attire: when siie was dressed, she sat demurely down
in her little chair, taking care previously to lift up the
satin skirt for fear she should crease it, and assured me
ehe would not stir thence till I was ready. This I quick]
178 JAKE ETKB.
was; my best dress (the Bilrer-gray one, purchased for MIbb
Temple a wedding, and never worn since) was soon put oa;
my hair wa? soou smoothed; my sole ornament, the pearl
brooch, soon aaflumed. We descended.
Fortunately there was Another entrance to the draw-
ing-room than that through the saloou where they wore
all seated at dinner. We found the iipurtmeiit vacant, »
large Are burning silently on the marble hearth, and wax*
candles shining in brignt solitude, umidst the exquii " *
flowers witii which the fables were adorned. The orimi
curtain hung before the arch : slight as wjis the separatioo
this drapery formed from the party in the adjoining
saloon, they spoke in so low a key that not ling of their
conversation couid be distingnislied beyond a soothing
murmur.
Adele, who appeart^ to be still under the influence of
a most solemnizing impression, sat down, witliout a word,
on the footstool 1 pointed out to her. 1 retired to a win-
dow-seat, and, taking a book from a table near, endeavoi'
to read. Adele brought her stool to mj feet; erelong
touched my knee.
" What is it, Adele? "
*'EBt-ce que je ue puis pas prendre une seule de cea
flours magnifiques, mademoiselle? Seulement pour com-
pleter ma toilette. "
" You think too much of your'toilette,'Adele, but you
may have a flower. " And 1 took a rose from a vase and
fastened it to her sash. She sighed a sigh of ineffable
satisfaction, as if her cup of happiness were now full. I
turned my face away to conceal a smile I could not sup-
press; there was something ludicrous as well as painful in
the little Parislenne's earnest and innate devotion to
matters of dress.
A soft Bonnd of rising now became audible; the curtain
was swept back from the arch; throi;gh it appeared the
dining-room, with its lit luster pouring down light on the
tilver and glass of a magnificent dessert -service covering a
*ong table; a band of ladies stood in the opening; they ~
tered, and the curtain fell behind them.
There were but eight, yet, somehow as they flocked
they gave the impression of a much larger number, Soi
of them were very tall, many were dressed in white, and all
had a sweeping amplitude of array that seemed to magnify
tlteir persona as a mist magnifies the moon. I mw:
t, a.
tioD ^H

coartcsied to them; one or two bcvnt their heads in retai
the olhera only stared at me,
They dispersed about the room, reminding me by
iightiieas and biioyauoy of their movements, of a flock
wTiite plumy birds. Some of them threw themBBlvea in
half-rccliiiiiig positions on the sofas and ottomans, soi
bent over the tables and examined the flowera and bool
the rest gathered in n group ronnd the Are — all talked ii
low but clear tone which seemed habitual to them.
knew their names afterward, and may as well meoUl
them now. «
First, there was Mrs. Eshton and two of her daughti
Shu had evidently been a handsome woman, and waa
preserved etill. Of imr danghtcra, the eldest. Amy, _
rather little; niti've, and child-lifie in face and manner, an(
piquant in form: her white mnslin dress and bine sash
became her woll. The second, Louisa, was taller and
more elegant in Bgure, with a very pretty face, of that
order the French term " minois chiffonnS:''both sisters
were fair as lilies.
Lady Lynn was a largo and stout jieraonage of about
forty, very erect, very han{:;hty- look trig, richly dressed'~
a satin robe of changeful shacn: her dark hair shono gh
ily under the ehade of an azars plume, and witliJn the
olet of a band of gems.
Mrs. Colonel Dent wa , less showy, but I thonght moJ
lady-like. She had a slight figure, a paFe, gentle face, and
fair hair. Her black satin drosc, her scarf of rich foreign
lace, and her pearl ornaments, pleased me better than tlie
rainbow radiance of the titleil dunic.
But the three most distinguished — partly, perhaps, be-
cause the tallest figures of tlio band —','ero the Dowager
Lady Ingram and her daughters, Blanche and Mary.
Thuy were all three of the loftii;at stature of woman. Tiio
dowager might he between t'ort.y and fifty; her shape wbb
still fine; her hair (by candlo-light at least) still black; her
teeth, too, were Btill apparently perfect. Most jit'oplo
would have termed her a erjlondil woman of her stge: and
BO she waa, no d'3n!-t^ phyaioally .rpeaking; h'At then there
was an ■jsjireBsion of almost ihsiipport.ible hanghtiucss in
her bearing and eountenanco. She had Roman features
and a double chin, disappearing into a throat like a pillar:
these featufea appea red to mo not only inflated and dark-
1 with pride; and the chin waa
1
ckof'
> oul: ^_,

r
180 JANE EYRE.
tained by the eanie principle, in a position of almost j,,_
teruatural erectness. 8he had, likewise, a fierce and a hanl
eye: it reminded me of Mrs. Reed's; she mouthed her
words in Bpeaking; her voice was deep, its inflections very
pompous, very dogmatical — very intoJexable, in short. A
crimson velvet rooe, and a shawl turban of some gold-
wronght Indian fabric, invested her (I suppose she thought)
with a truly imperial dignity.
Blanche and Mary were of equal stature — straight and
tall as poplars, Mary was too slim for her height; but
Blanche was molded like a Dian, I regarded her, of
course, with special interest. First, I wished to aee
whether her appearance accorded with Mrs. Fairfax's
description; secondly, whether it at all resembled the
fancy miniature I had painted of her; and thirdly — it will
out! — whether it was such as 1 should fancy likely tosnit
Mr. llochester's taste.
As far as porsou went, she answered point for point,
both to my picture and Mrs. Fairfax's despription. The
noble bust, the sloping shonldera, the graceful neck, the
dark eyes and black ringlets were all there — but her face?
Her face was like her mother's; a youthful, unfurrowed
likeness: the same low brow, the same high features, the
same pride. It was not, however, so saturnine a pride:
she laughed continually; her laugh was satirical, and so
was the habitual expression of her arched and haughty
lip.
Genius is said to be self-conscions: I cannot tell whether
Miss Ingram was a genius, but she was self-conscious—
remarkably self-conscious indeed. She entered into a dis-
course on botany with the gentle Mrs. Dent. It seems
Mrs. Dent had not studied that science: though, as she
said, she liked flowers, " especially wild ones; " Misa Ingrun
had, and she ran over its vocabulary with an air. I pre-
sently preceived she was (what is vernacularly termed)
trailing/ Mrs. Dent; that is, playing on her ignorance; liei "
trail might bo clever, but it was decided^ not good-
natured. She played; her execution was brilliant; she
sang; her voice was fine; she talked French apart to her
mamma; and she talked it well, with Suency and with a
good accent.
Mary had a milder and more open countenance than
Blanche; softer features too, and a akin some shades fairer
(MisB Ingram was dark as a Spaniard), bat Mary v
JANl^ EYRE.
1
eient in life; her face lacked expression, her eyes lui
she had Dothin^ to say, and having once taken her
remained Sxed like a etatae in its niche. The eisters
both attired in apotleaa white.
And did T now think Miss Ingram HQch a choice as Mr.
Rochester would be likely to make? I eoald not tell — I
did not know his taate in female beauty. If he liked the
majestic, she was tlio very type of majesty: then she wiis
accomplished, sprightly. Most gentlemen woald admire
her, I thoaght; and that he did admire her, I already
seemed to haraobtained proof: to remove the last shade
of doubt, it rcmainod but to see them tosether.
Tou are not to suppose, reader, that Adela has all this
time been sitting, motionless, on the stool at my feet: no;
when the ladies entered, she rose, advanced to meet them,
made a stately revereuca, and said with a gravity, " Bon
jour, m.esdames. "
And Mias Ingram had looked down at her with a mock-
ing air, and exclaimed, " Oh, what a littly puppet! " .
Lady Lynn had remarked, " It is Mr. Rochester's ward,
I suppose — the little French girl he was speaking of. "
Mrs, Dent had kiudly taken her hand, and given her
kiss. Amy and Louisa Eshton had cried out simnlti
ously,
" What a love of a child! "
And then they had called her to a sofa, where
sat, ensconced between them, chattering alternately in
French and broken English: absorbing not only the
vonng ladies'attention, but that of Mrs, Eshton and Lady
Lynn, and getting spoiled to her heart's content.
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen
summoned. I sit in the shade— if any shade there be in
this brilliantly-lit apartment; the window-curtain half
hides me. Again the arch yawns: they come. The col-
lective appearance of the gentlemen, like that of the ladies,
is very imposing: thoy are all costumed in black: most of
them are tall, some young. Henry and Proderick Lynn
are very dashing sparks, indeed; and Oolonel Dent la a
fine soldierly man, Mr, Eshton, the magistrate of the
district, is °;entleman-Iike: his hair is quite white, his
eyebrows and whiskers BtJll dark, which gives him some-
thing of the appoarjiiice of a " p( > re uoblo de tli6!itre. "
Jjord Ingram, like his sisters, is very tali; like them,
-1— v- .- iiftn^aonie: but he shares Mary's apathetic and
ItaiU^H
6 no^^^
■'" in
the
ady
arai^H
ioi^^l
tiatf H
ool- I
r
183 JAK " . ; TRE.
listless look: he seems to have more length of limb than
vivaoity of blood or tigor of bruin.
And where is Mr. HoeheEter?
He comes in last. 1 am not looking at the arch, jet I
see him enter. I try to concentrate my attention on those
netting-needles, oil the meshes of the purse I am forming
— I wish to think only of the work I have in mj hunde, to
see only the silver beads and silk threads that lie in my
lap; wherens, I distinctly behold his fi^ire, tind I inevi-
tably recall the moment when I last saw it: ]UBt after I bad
rendered him, what he deemed an tseential seivice — and
be, holding my hand, and looking down on my face, sur-
veyed me wili; cjes that revealed a heart fnll and eager to
overflow; ill whose emotions 1 had a piirt. How near bad
I approached him at that moment! What had occiirred
since, calcnlated to change his and my relative positions?
Yet now, bow distant, how far cstriinged we wcrel So
far estranged, that I did not expect him to come and
spoak to me. I did n(t wonder, when, without looking
at me, he took a scat at the other side of the rcoin and be-
gan conversing with Eome of the ladies.
No sooner did I see that his attention was rivetid oi.
them, and that 1 might gaze without being obset ved, thai,
my eyes were drawn involuntary to his fiice: I conld nrt
keep their lids under control; they would rise, and thu
iride wciild fix on him. I looked, and had an acnte plens-
nre in looking — a precious, yet poignant pleasure; pure
gold, with a steely point of agony: a pleasure like what
the thirst- perishing miin might feel who knows the well
to which he has crept is poisoned, yet stoops and drinks
divine draughts nevertheless.
Most tme is it that " beauty is in the eye of the gazer. "
My master's colorless, olive face, square, massive brow,
broad and jetty eyebrows, deep eyes, strong features, firm,
grim mouth — all energy, decision, will — were not boauti-
ful, according to nile; but they wore more than beautiful
to me: tney were full of an interest, an influence that quit c
mastored me — that took my feelings from my own jjowcc
and fettered them in his. I had not iukndcd to lovchim:
the reader knows I had wrought iiard to extirjiule from my
soul the germs of lovo there detected; and now, at the
first renewed view of liim, they spontaneously revived,
green and strong ! He made me love him without looking
at me.
JANE EYRE, 1$3-|
I oompared him with his guests. What was the gallant^
grace of the LynuB, the languid elegance of Lord iBgraia;
— even the military distinction of Colonel Dent, con*
traated with his look of native pith and genuine power.
I had no sympathy with their appearance, theii
EKpreaaion; yet I could imagine that most obfierrerB would
call them attractive, handsome, imposing; while they
would pronounce Mr. Rochester at once harsh-featurea,
and melancholy-looking. I saw them smile, laugh-
nothing; the light of the candles had us much soul in itacf^
their smile; the tinkle of the bell ae much significance as
their langh. I saw Mr. Rochester smile: his stera
features softened; his eje grew both brilliant and gentle,
its ray both searching and sweet. He waa talking, at the
moment, to Louisa and Amy Eahton. I wondered to see
thorn receire with oalm that look which seemed to me eo
■penetrating; I expected their eyes to fall, their color to
rise under it; yet I was glad when I found they were in no
aanse moved, " He is not to them what he is to me, " I
thought, " he is not of their kind. I believe he is of
mine; lam sure ho is — I feel akin to him — I understand
the language of his countenance and movements; though
rank and wealth sever oa widely, I have something in m-
hratn and heart, in my blood and nerves, that asaimilatf
me mentally to him. Did I aay, a few days since, that
had nothing to do with him but to receive my salary at his
hands? Did I forbid myself to think of him in any other
J " jht than of a pay-maater? Blasphemy againat nature'
rery good, true, vigorous feeling I have, gathers impul-
aively round him. I know I must conceal my sentiments;
1 must smother hope; I must remember that he can not
oare muoh for mo. For when I say that I am of his kind,
I do not mean that I have his force of influence, and his
epell to attract; I mean only that I have certain tastes and,
feelings in common with him. I must then repeat con-;
tinually that we are forever aunderod; and yet while 1'
breathe and think, I must love him. "
Coffee is handed. The ladies, since the gentlemen
tored, have become lively as larks; conversation waxes
brisk and merry. Colonel Dent and Mr. Eahton argue on
Editics; their wives listen. The two proud dowagers,
ady Lynn and Lady Ingram, confabulate together. Sir
Qeorgc — whom, hy-the-by, I havo forgotten to deacribe —
big- and yery fresh-lookijig country gentleman.
of
Dd
gh^^
lis ^^^^
ler n
rel
.1-'
i; I
'I
y
184 JAME EYKE.
standa bofore their sofa, coffee-ctip in liaud, and occa-
sionally piitB in ;i word. Mr, Frederick Lynn bus taiien a
aeat beside Mary Ingrantj aod is allowing her the engrav-
ings of a splendid volume; eha looks, smdea now and then,
but apparently says little. The tall and phlogmatio Lord
Ingram leans with'folded arms on the chaJr-bjick ul the
litUc and lively Amy Bsliton; she glances up at him, und
chattcrB like a wren: she likes bim better than she does
Mr. Kochesier. Honry Lynn has taken posEessioii of no
ottoman at the feet of Louisa; Adele shares it with bim:
he is trying to talk French with her, and Louisa laughs at
his blunders. With whom will Blanche Ingram pair?
8be is standing alone at the table, bendir.g gracefnlly OTCf
an album. She seems waiting to be sought; but she will
not wait too long: she herself sdeets a mate.
Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshtons, stands on
the hearth as solitary as ebe stands by the table ; she con-
fronts him, taking her station on the opposite side of the
mantel -piece.
" Mr. Rochester, I tliought you were not fond of
dren ? "
" Nor am I. "
" Then, what induced you to take charge of sai
little doll as that ? " (pointing to Adele. ) " Where did!
jiok her up ? "
" I did not pick her np, she was left on my hands.'
" You should have sent her to school. "
'* I could not afford it; schools are so dear. "
" Why, I suppose you have a governess forber; I saw
a person with her just now— is she gone ? Ob, no ! there
ahe is still behind, the window-curtain. Yon pay her, of
course. I should think it quite as expensive — more so, for
you have them both to keep in addition. "
I feared— or should I say, hoped — the allusion to me
would make Mr. Rochester glance my way ; and 1 invol-
untarily shrank further into the shade; but he nevei'turned
his eyes.
" I have not considered the subject, " said he indjj
ently, looking slraight before him.
" No — you men never do consider economy and com
sense. You should hear mamma on the chapter of govern
esses. Mary and I have had, I sboold think, a dozen at
least in our day : half of tJieni detestable and the
ridiculous, and all inoubi — were they not, mamma? "
con-
f the
]
" Did you speak, luy own ? "
Tho young lady thus cliiimed as the dowager^a special
property reiterated lier qiieatioii with an explanation.
" My dearest, don't mention governesses ; the word
makes me ner?oiis. I have suffered a martyrdom from their
incompetency and caprice; I thnnk Heaven I have uow
doue with them i "
Mrs, Deat here bent over to tho pious lady, and whis-
pered something in her ear; I suppose, from the answer
elicited, it was a reminder that one of the atiathematised
race was present. ■
" Tant pis ! " said her ladyship, " - hope it may do herJ
good. " Then in a lower tone, but still loud enough for meM
to hear, " 1 noticed her; I am a judge of phyBiognomy*J
and in hera I see all the faults of Ikt class. " I
" What are they, madam? " inquired Mr. Boobestei'f
aloud.
" I will tell you in your private ear, " replied she, wag-1
ging her turban three times with portentous significancy.
" But my curiosity will be past its appotite; it craves
food now. "
" Ask Blanche; she ia nearer you than I, "
" Oh, don't refer him to me, mamma ! I have just one
word to say of the whole tribe; they are a nuisance. Not
that I ever suffered much from them; 1 took oare to turn
the tables. What tricks Theodore and I used to play on
our Miss Wilsons, and Mrs. Greys, and Madame Jouberts 1
Mary was always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit-
The best fun was with Madame Joubert. Miss Wilson was
a poor sickly thing, lachrymosfi and low-spirited: not'p
worth the trouble of vanquishing, in short; and Mrs, Grejj
was coarse and insensiblo: no blow took effect on her.
poor Madame Joubert 1 I see her yet in her raging pas-
sions, when we had driven her to extremities — spilled our
tea, crumbled our bread and butter, tossed our books up to
the ceiling, and played a charivari with the rnler and desk,
tho fender and fire-irons. Theodore, do you remember .
those merry days ? "
" Yaas, to be sure I do, " drawled Lord Ingrai
the poor old stick -aed to cry out,'Oh, you villaingl
childs r and then we sermonized her ou the presumption
of attempting to teach ^uch clever blades as we were, when
she was herself so ignorant.''
" We did; and Tedo, you know I helped yon in proa*
r
186 JAKE ETRB.
ecutiog (or persecuting) your tutor, whey-faced Mr. Vining
— the parson in the ,'p, as we iiaed to call him. He and
MUs Wilson took the liberty of falling in love with each
other — at least Tedo and I thought so; we aurprieed sun-
dry tender glances and sigha which we interpreted aa
tokeDB of'la belle passion,'and I promise you the pnblio
Boon had the benefit of our discovery; we emploved it as a
eort of lever to hoist our dead-weights from the honse.
Dear mamma, there, as soon as she got an inkling of the
bHsioeas, found out that it was of an immoral tendency.
Did you not, my lady-mother ? "
" Certainly, my best. And I was quite right, depend
on that: tliere are » thousand reasons why liaisons between
llovernesses and tutors should never bo tolerated a moment
in any well-regulated house; firstly "
" Ob, gracious, mamma! Spare us the enumeration!
Au reate, we all know them: danger of bad example to
innocence of childhood — distractions and consequent
neglect of duty on the part of the attached — motual alli-
ance and reliance; confidence thence resulting — insolence
accompanying — mutiny and general Mow-up, Am I right,
Baroness Ingram, of Ingram Park? "
" My lily-flower, you arc right now, as always, "
" Then no more need be said; change the subject.'
Amy r:hton, not hearing or not heeding this dicti ,
joined in wi5h her soft, infantine tone: " Louisa and
used to quiz our governess, too; but she was euch a good
creature, she would boar anything; nothing put her oat.
She was never cross with u. ; was ehe, Louisa? "
" No. n ver; we mig^it d'^ vbat we pleased — ransack
her desk and her work-bus, and tnm her drawers inside
oat; and she was so goo.-natured, she would give us any-
thing we asked for. "
" I suppose now, " said Miss Ingram, curling her lips
Barcastically, " we shall have an abstract of the memoirs
of all the governeasos extant; in order to avert such a visi-
tation, T again move the introduction of a new topic. Mr.
Rochester, do yon second my motion? "
" Madam, I support you on this point as on every
other, "
" Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward.
Signer Eduardo, are you in voice to-night?''
" Donna Bianca, if you command it, I will ho. "
" Then, signor, I lay on jou my sovereign bel
ight,
iid^^
JAXE ETBR
Inrbisli tip yonr Inngs and other vocat organs, ae the; mil
be wantea on my royal seryice. "
" Who wonldnot be the Rizzio of ao diyhie a Mary? "
A fig for Rizzio! " cried she, tossing her head with
fc*l its curls, aa she moywl to the piano. " It ia my opin-
jbn the fiddler Bayid must have teen an insipid sort of
fellow; I like black Botbwell better. To my mind a man
Ja nothing witliont a spice of the devil iu him; and history
■Quy eay what it will of James Hepburn, but I haye a no-
tion he was jnat the sort of wild, fierce bandit hero whom
I conld haye consented to gift with my hand, "
" Gentlemen, you hear! Now which of you most re-
lembles Both well? " cried Mr, Hochester.
I should say tho preference lies with von, " responded
Colonel Dent.
On my honor, I am much obliged ia joa, " was the
reply.
Misa Ineram, who had now seated herself with proud
grace at the piano, spreading out her snowy robes in
queenly amplitude, commancoa a brilliant prelude; talk-
ing meantime. She appeared to he on her high horse to-
night; both her words and aer air aeenuid intended to ex-
cite not only the admiration, but the amazement of her
Baditors; she was evidently bent on striking them as some-
" thiDg very dashing and daring indeed.
" Oh, I aril so sick of the young men of the presunt
■dayl " exclaimed she, rattling away at the'astrument.
" Poor, punuy things, not fit to stir a step beyond papa's
park-gates: nor to go even bo far without mamma's per-
mission and guardianship! Grcaturiig so absorbed in care
about their pratty faces and their whino hands, and their
smalt feet; as if a man had anythiuf to do with beautyl
As if loveliness were not the special prerogative of woman
—her legitimate appanage and herita;^e! I grant an ugly
woman is a blot on the fair face of oniation; but as to the
'entlemen, let them be solicitous to possess only strength
,nd valor: let their motto be — Hunt, shoot and fight; the
rest ia not worth a fillip. Such shoi Id be my device were
I a man. "
'Whenever I raarry, " she continued after a pause
ivhich none interrupted, "'I am resoi /ed my husband shall
Hot be S rival, but a foil to mo. i will siiSer no compati-
the throne; I shall exact an uudividi:d homage;
j^^ not b« ebai'^ botwoeu me and the shape
4
I
188 JANE EVRB.
he Bees ia hia mirror. Mr. Kochester, now sing, and I
will play for yon, "
" I am all obedience, " was the response.
" Here then ia a Cursair-Bong. Know that I dote oa
Oorsaira; and for that reason, sing it ■ con spirito.'"
" GommiindB from Miaa Ingram's lipa would pnt spirit
into a mug of milk and water. "
■'Take care, then: if yon don't please me, I will shame
you by showing how such things should be done. "
" That ia o^ering a premium on incapacity; I shall
now endeavor to fail. "
■ "'Oardez-To en bieni If you err willfully, I shall
devise a proportiovtate punishment. "
" Misa Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in
her power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal enfinr^ "
ance. "
" Ha! explain! " commanded the lady,
" Pardon me, madam; no need of explanation;
own fine aense must inform you that one of your froi,
would be a enffioieut substitute for capital punishment*
" Sing! " said she, and again touching the piano, i
commenced an accompaniment in spirited style.
" Now is my time to slip away, " thought I; biitj
tones that then severed the air arrested me. Mrs. Fair!
had said Mr. Rochester poseeesed a fine voice; be did-.
mellow, powerful bass, into which he threw his own feet
ing, hia own force; finding a way throngh the ear to the
heart, and there waking sensation strangely. I waited till
the last deep and full vibration had eapired — till the tide
of talk, checked an instant, bad resumed its flow; I then
quitted my sheltered corner and made my exit by the side
door, which was fortunately near. Thence a narrow pas-
sage led into the hall; in croEsing it, I perceived my
eandal was loose; I stopped to tie it, kneeling down for
that purpose on the mat at the foot of the staircaso. I
heard the dining-room door nnclose; a gentleman came
out; rising hastily, I stood face to face with him;
Mr, Rochester.
" How do you do? " he asked.
" I am very well, sir. " _
" Why did you not come and speak to me in the
room ? "
I thonght I might have retorted the question on him
who put it; but I would not take that freedom. 1 f~

I did not wish to distnrb jon, as you eeemej
Bir. "
'^Vllat have yoa been doing during my absenoe? "
" Nothing ])articular; teaching Adele aa usual. "
" Aud getting a good deal palor than you were — as I
V 9.1 first Bight, What is the matter? "
" Notliing at all, sir. "
" Did you take any cold that night yon half drowned
me? "
" Not the least. "
" Betum to the drawing-room; yon are deserting to <
«ar]y, "
" I am tired, eir. "
He looked at mo for a minute. _
" And a little depressed, " he said. " What about? Tell
me. "
" Nothing — nothing, sir. I am not depressed. "
" But 1 aflirni that you are: so much depressed that a
few more words would bring tears to your eyes — indeed,
they are there now, shining and swimming; and a bead
has slipped from the lash and falbn on to the flag. If I
bad time, and was not in mortal dread of some prating
prig of a servant passing, I would know what all this
means. Well, to-night I excuse you; but understand that
so long as my visitors stay, I expect you to appear in the
drawing-room every evening; it is my wish; don't neglect
it. Now go, and send Sophie for Adele. Good-night,
my " He stopped, bit his lip, and abruptly left me.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Mebht days were these at Thorofield Hall; and bna'
days too: how different from the first three months 01
stillness, monotony, and solitudo I had passed beneath its
roof I All sad feelings seemed now driven from the bouse,
all gloomy associations forgotten: there was life everywhere,
movement all day long. You could not now traverse the
gallery, once so hushed, nor enter the front chamber, once
60 tenantlces, without encountering a smart lady's maid,
" " ^ dand; valet.
I

JAKE ETBB.
The kitchen, the butler's pantry, the senrants'hall, ttb
entrance hall, were equullj alivo; and the Ealoons were
only h.'ft void and still, when the blue eky and halcyon
sunshine of the genial spring weather ealled their nccii-
punta out into the grounds. Even when that weather
WHH broken, and continuous ruin set in for same clays, no
damp secmud cast over enjoyment; indoor amusomenta
only became more lively and varied, in consequence of the
stop pnt to outdoor gayety.
I wondered what they were going to do the first even-
ing « change of entertninmont was proposed; they epoke
of " playing charades, " but in my ignorance I did not
understand the term. The et-rvanta were culled in, the
dining-room tables wheeled away, the lights otherwise dis-
posed, the rhiiirs placed in a semicircle opposite the arch.
While Mr. Rochester and the other gentlemen directed
these alterations, the ladies were rimning up and down
stairs ringing for their maids. Mrs. Fairfax was sum-
moned to give information respecting the resources of the
house in sTiawla, dresses, draperies of any kind ; and cer-
tain wardrobes of the third story were ranBitcked, and their
contents, in the shape of brocaded and hooped petticoats,
satin eacques, black modes, lace lappets, etc., were bronght
down in armfuls by the Abigails; then a. seleetion was
made, and such things as were chosen were carried to tho
boudoir within the drawing-room.
Meantime, Mr, Itocliester had again summoned the
ladies aronnd him, and wati selecting certain of their num-
ber to be of his party. " Miss Ingram is mine, of course, "
said he; afterward he named the two Misses Eshtoi.s, and
Mrs. Dent. He lookt'd at me, I happened to he near him,
as I had been fastening tlie clasp of Mrs. Dent's bracelet,
which had got loose.
" Will you play? "'he asked. I shook my head. He
did not insist, which I rather feared he would have done;
he allowed me to return quietly to my nsual seat.
He and his aids now withdrew behind the curtain; the
other party, which wae headed by Colonel Dent, sat down
on the crescent of chairs. One of the gentlemen, Mr.
Eahton, observing me, seemed to propose that I should bo
asked to join them; but Lady Ingain instantly negatived
the notion.
" No, " I heard her say: " she looks too stupid for any
me ofthei-** " ■ "
JANE E?ItE.
Ere long, a boll tingled, and the cnrtain flrew B,
l^rtliin the arch, the bulky figure of Sir George Lyni
ffbnm Mr. Uodiester had likewise chosen, was seen ( "
veloped in a white elieet; before him, on s, table, lay
a large book: and »t his s^ide stood Amy Eshton, dr
in Mr. Rochester's cloak, and holding a book in her hand
Somebody, unseen, rang the bell merrily; then ArJir
(who had inaiated on boiiig one of her guardian's part^
bounded forward, scattered round her the caiitenu off
basket of Howers sho carried on her arm. Then appear^
the magnifieent figni-e of Miss Ingram, clad in white, a loM
veil on her head, and a wreath of roses round her broil
by her side walked Mr. RocheatGr. and together thev draa
near the table. They knelt, while Mrs, Dent and " LonM
Eshton, dresBod also in white, took np their stations behiii
, tbem. A ceremony followed, in dumb show, in which 3
vas easy to recognize the pantomime of a marriage, f
its termination Colonel Dent and hia party consulted 3
whispers for two miniitoa, then the colonel called o^
" Bride! " Mi-. Eocheater bowed, and the cnrtarn fell.
A considerable interval elapsed before it again r
Ita second rising displayed a more elaborately prepai
scene than the last. The drawing room, as I have bef(
observed, was raised two steps above the dining-room,
on the to|) of the upper step, placed a yard or two ba(
within the room, appeared a large marble hosin, which
recoenized as an ornament of the conservatory — where it
nsnaily stood, surrounded by exotica, and tenanted by gold
fish — iind whence it must have been transported with
trouble, on aceonnt of its size and weight.
Seated on the carpet, by the side of this basin, waj
Mr. Rochester, costumed m shawls, with a turban c
head. His dark eyes and swarth skin and Paynim featu
atiitcd the costume exactly: ho looked the very model
an Eastern emir; an agent or a victim of (he bowstring.
Presently adynnoed into view Miss Ingram. She, too. was
attired in Oriental fashion: a crimson scarf tied sash-like
round tho waist; an embroidered handkerchief knotted
about tho temples; her beautifully-molded arms bare, one
of them upraised in tho act of supporting a pitcher, poised
iliftcefnlly on her head. Both her cast of form and feature.
Her complexion and her general air, suggested the idea of
aome Israel itish princprss of the petriarcTial days; and such
™^^^^ " ~ " " gjihe character she intended to represent.
gold
iome^^ll
;ur(^I^H
!l of 1

V* l!)3 JAKK RTRB.
H " ^ Sbe approached the biisin, and bent orer it ae it
■ her pitirher; she iigaln lifted it to her bead. The pei
H age on the well-brink now seemed to accoat her; to b
W Bonie retjiiost— " She hasted, let down her pitcher on her
r hand, and ^are him to driuk. " From the bosom of his
I robe lie then produced u caaket, opened it aiiil showed
I magnificent bracelels and ear-ringB: she acted astoiiiBh-
I ment and admiration; kneeling be laid tlie treasnrc at her
I feet; incredulity and ilelightwere espreeeed by her looks
L and gestures; tne stranger faetened tlie braceleta on her
armB, and the rings in her cars. It was EHezerand fie-j
becca; the camela only were wanting.
The divining- party again laid their heads together;
parently they could not agree about the word or syllal
this scene illnstrated. Colonel Dent, their spokeeme
demanded *'the tableau of the whole; " wherenpon thi
curtain again descended.
On its third riding, only a portion of the drawing-room
was disclosed, the rest being concealed by a screen, hung
with some sort of dark and coarse drapery. The marble
baain was remoyed; in its place stood a deal table and a
kitchen chair; these objects were visible by a veir dim
light proceeding from a horn lantern, the wax-candlee be-
ing all extinguished.
Amidst this sordid scene sat a man with his clenclitd
hands resting on his knees, and his eyes bent on the
ground. I knew Mr. Rochester; though the begrimed
face, the disordered dress {hia coat hanging loose from
one arm, na if it had been almoBt torn from his buck in a
scuffle), the desperate and scowling countenance, the
rongh, brialling hair might well have disguised him. As
he moved, a chain clanked; to hia wrists were attached
fetters.
" Bridewell! " exclaimed Colonfl Dent, and the charade
was solved.
A Bufticient interval having elapsed for the performers
to resume their ordinary coBtnnie, they re-entered the din-
ing-room. Mr. Eochester led in Mias Ingram; she was
complimenting him on his acting.
" Do you know, " said she, " that, of the three obarac-
ters, I liked you in the last best? Ob, had you but lived
• few years earlier, what a gallant gentleman-highwayman
you would have made! "
" Is all the soot washed from my face?** he ask
ing it toward her.
" Alas, yea; the mote's the pity! Nothing could
more becoming to your complexion- than that ruffian's
rouge. "
" Yon would like a hero of the road, then? "
" An Engliah hero of the roiid would be the next bet
thing to au Italian bandit; and that could only he ai
paaaed by a Levantine pirate. " _
" Weil, whatever I am, remember you are my wife; wS^
were married an hour since, in the presence of all these
witnesses. " She giggled, and her color rose,
" Now, Pent, continued Mr, Rochester, " it is yonr
turn. " And as the other party withdrew, he and his band
took the vacated seats. Miss Ingram placed hei-self at h^P
lender's right hand, the other diviners filled the chairs oS
cjoli side of him and her. I did not now watch the actoi^^
I no longer waited with interest for the curtain to riaej "
my attention was absorbed by the spectators; my eyes,
orewhile fixed on the arch, were now irresistibly attracted
to the semi-circle of chairs. What charade Colonel Dent
and his party played, what word they chose, how they a
Quitted themselves, I no longer remember; but I still s
the consulUition which followed each scene: I see Md
Roeheater turn to Miss Ingram, and Miss Ingram to himj.
I see her incline her head toward him, till the jetty cnrls
almost touch hi§ shoulder and wave against his cheek; I
hear their mutuid ivbisperings; I recall their interchanged
glances; and something even of the feeling roused by thq
Bpactacle i-etiu'ns in memory at this moment.
I have told yon, reader, that I had learned to love 1
Rochester; I could not unlove him now, merely becana
found that he had ceased to notice me — because I might "
pass hours in his presence and he would never once turn
uia eyca in my direction — because I saw all his attentions
apjiroiiriated by a great lady, who scorned to touch me
with the hem of her robes as she passed; who, if ever her
dark and imperious eye fell on me by chance, would with-
draw it instantly as from an object too mean to merit
observation. I could not nnlovo him, because I felt sure
he wonld soon marry this very lady — because I read daily
iu liB!'a prond secunty in his intentions i-eepecting her—
boeause 1 witnessed hourly in him a style of courtship
whirli. if cnreless and cboosing rather to be sought than ta_
104 JASE ErKE.
svek, was yet, in he very carelessness, captivating, and In
its very pride, irresistible.
There was notliing to cool or biinisli love in tliese cir-
cumstances; thoiigli -mach to create despair. Much too.
you will think, reader, to engender jealousy, if it woman in
my position could presume to be jealous of a woman in
MiBs Ingram's. But I was not joalous. or very mroly; tlie
nature of the pain I suffered could not be explained by
that word. Mias Ingram was a mark beneath jealousy:
she was too inferior to exoite the feeling. Pardon lav
seemiug paradox; I mean wliat I say. .She was ver^v
eliiiwy, hut eho was not genuine: she had a fine person,
many lirilliant attaiunionts; but her mind was poor, her
heart Imrrim by tuiturc; nothing bloomed spontaueously on
that soil; no unforced natural fruit delighted hy its fresh-
ness, fthu was not good; she was not original: she used
to repeat sounding phrases from books: she never offered,
nor liad, an opinion of be own. She advocated a btjj'i
tone (if sentiment; but she did not know the seii^nt iim- ..I
Bympathy and pity; tenderness and truth were lu^: v] L, i
'Poo often she betrayed this, by the undue vent , < 1^ .;:;i " :..
a spitoful antipathy she had conceived against litilo A-lch-:
pushing her away with some contumelious epithet if she
happened to approach her: Bometimes ordering her from
Lhe room, and always treating her with ooldnesa and acri-
mony. Otljer eyes besides mine watched these manifesta-
tions of character — watched tliem olosely, keenly, alirewdly.
Yes: tlie future bridegroom, Mr. Rocheater himself, ex-
ercised over his intended a ceaseless surveillance: and it
WAS fi-om this sagacity— this guardeducsB of hia — this
perfect clear consciousness of his fair one's defects — thi.o
obvious abscnoo of passion in his sentiments toward her,
that my ever-torturing pain arose.
'R was going to marry her, for ftimily, perhftpe
.asoiis; because her rank and connections suited
lie had not given her his love, and that het
!|ualili('aliijn8 were ill adapted to win from him that treas-,
nro. Tills was the point— this was where tlie nerve was
touched and teased — this was where the fever was sustained
and fed: k/ < /^ roxM not charm hivi.
!r she had managed the victory at once, and he had
VioJdcd and sincerely laid hia heart at her feet. I should
liave covered my face, turned to the wall, and (iignratively)
^ — di^^o than. If MiSB Ingi-am had been a good f- "
i;*;'
JANE EYRE.
noble woman, endowed with force, ferror, kindnGse, seni
I ehoulcl have had one vital slniggle with two tigerf
jealousy and despair: then, my heart torn out and de-
voured, I Bhonld have admired her — acknowledged her
excellence, and been quiet for the rest of my days: and
the more absolute her superiority, tho deeper would havo
heen my admiration — the more truly tranquil my quies-
cence. But as matters really Btoot]. to watch Miss Ingram's
ptforta at faaoinatiiig Mr, Rochester: to witness their
repeated failure — herself nnconseious that t!ii > y did fail;
vainly fannying that each sliaEt launched, hit'the iniu-k,
and infatuatedly pluming herself on success, when lii'
pridi! and self-complacency repelled further and furtl
what she wished to allure— to witness Ihis, was to be
once under ceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint.
Becanae when she failed I saw liow she might have huo-
pijt'dcd. Arrows that continually glanced off from Mr.
Rofliesler'a breast and fell harmless at. his feet might, I
knew, if shot by a sorer hand, have r|iiivered keen in hj
prgiid heart — have called love into liis stern eye an
nesa into his sardonic face; or, better still, withooi
wettiKius a silent conmiest might have Wen won.
■■Why can not slie influence him more when she
privileged to draw so near to hinii'" I asked myselfii
" Surely she con not truly like him, or not WVv him wi''
true affection. If she did she need not coin hor smilea
lavishly, flash her glances so unremittingly, manufftctui
airs BO elaborate, graces so multitudinous. It seems I
me that she might, by merely sitting quietly by his sldi
saying little and looking less, get " nigher nts heart,
have seen in his face a far different ox^preasion from t
which hardens it ngw while she is so vivaciously nx?eoKtii^
him; but then i^- came of itseSf, it was not elicited hr*
nioretricioua acts and calculated maneuvers: and oiu'!i;irl
but to accept it- -to answer what he asked without [irIi.'h-
sion, to addres!- him when needful without grimiu'r — ;iiid
jt increased nud grew kinder and more genial, ami " ;ii iiu d
BU8 like a fcatering sunbeam. IIow will she ni^iiui-i'u <
ploaae him'*'hen they aro married? I do not lliink ^-Ir'
will managr it; and yet it might be managed, :
might. I'.'orily Iwlieve, bo the very happiest wounui tbc!_
sun ahinPd on, "
I have not yet said any thing condemnatory of Mpj
]
196 JANE EYRE,
tione. It surprised me when I first discovered that such
was his intention; I had thought him a man unlikely to be
iafluenced by motives so commonplace in his choice of a
wife; but the longer I considered the position, educati < H;~
etc., of the parties the less I felt juBtifled in judgiijg ■ "
blaming either him or Miss Ingram for acting in confoP
ity to ideas and principles instilled into them, doubtlcaar,'
from their childhood. All their class held these princi-
ples; I supposed, then, they had reasons for holding them
guoh aa I could not fathom. It seemed to me that, were
I a gcutlomau like him, I would take to my bosom only
Bucb H wife as I could love; but the very obviousness of
the advantages to the husband's own happiness, offered
by this plan, convinf^ed me that there must be argnmcnts
ngamst its general adoption of which I was quite ignorant;
otherwise I felt sure all the world would act as I wished
to act.
But in other points, as well as this, I was growing very
lenient to my master: I was forgetting all his faults, for
which I had once kept a sharp look-out. It had formerly
been my endeavor to study all sides of his character; to
take the bad with the good; and from the just weighing
of botb to form au equitable judgment. Now I saw no
bad. The sarcasm that had repelled, the harshness that
had startled me once were only like keen condiments in a
choice dish: their presence was pungent, but tlieir absence
would be felt as comparatively insipid. And as for the
vugnc something — was it a sinister or a sorrowful, a de-
signiiic or a desponding expression?— that opened upon a
careful observer, now and then, in his eye, and closed
a^in bcfoi-o one could fathom the strange depth partially
djBclosod; thiit something which used to make me fear ana
shrink, as if I liml been wandering among volcano-looking
hills, and hud suddenly felt the ground quiver and seen it
gape; that sometliing I at intervals beheld still, and with
throbbing heart, but not with palsied nerves, Instead of
wishing to ahun I longed only to dare— to divine it; andij
thought Miss Ingram happv, because one day she migtf
look into an abyss at her leisure, explore its secrets,
analyze their nature.
Moiintinu', wliile I thought only of my master and his
fnlinv bridf— s:nv only lliem, lieai'd only their discourse,
and fiiiif^idered only i.]mr itiovcniiinl.fi of importance — the
'^J^JJiS psi'ty were occupied wiih their own separate i
JANE EYHE.
terests and pleaeiires. The ladiea Lynn and Ingram cm
tinned to consort in solemn conference, where thej nodilecL
their two turbans at each other and held up thoir tout
bands in confronting gestures of surprise, or mystery, or
hori'or, according to the theme on which the gossip ran,
like a pair of magnified piippets. Mild Mrs. I5ent talked
with good-natured Mrs. Eshtou, and the two sometini8it|]
beetowed a courteous word or a smile on me. Sir Oeor«
Lynn, Colonel Dent and Mr. Eshton discussed politic!
or country affaii-s, or justice business, Lord IngraiL
flirted with Amy Eshton; Louisa played and aang to anS
with one of the Mesars. Lynn and Slary Ingram listenflj "
languidly to the gallant speeches of the other, Sometinm
ail, as with one consent, suspended their by-play to ob- -
serve and listen to the principal actors : for, after all, Mr.
Rochester and— because closely connected with liim — Miss
Ingram were the life and soul of the party. If he was
. ftlMent from the room an hour a perceptible duUncsB
seemed to etcai over the spirits of his guests, and hia re-
entrance wiis sure to give a frosh impulse to the vivacity
of conversation.
The want of his animating influence appeared to hfj
neculiarly felt one day that he had been summoned t^f
Millcots ou business, and was not likely to return till latoj
Tho afternoon was wet; a walk the party had proposed t^
take to SOB a gypsy camp, lately pitched on a common bfc
yond Hay, -vvus consequently deferred. Some of thegeii?
tlemen were gone to the stables ; the younger ones, to*
getlior with the younger ladies, were playing billiai'da m *
the billiavd-rooni. The dowagers Ingram and Lynn
sought sohice in a ouiet game at cards. Blanche Ingram,
after having repelled by supercilious taciturnity, aorae
efforts of Airs. Dent and Mrs. Eshton to draw her into
conversation, had first murmured over some sentimental
tune and airs on the piano, and then, having fetched a
novel fi'om the library, had flung hcrsoLf in haughty list-
lessness on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by the spell of
fiction, the tedious hours of absence. The room and the
house were silent; only now and then the merriment of
billiard- pi uy era was heard from above.
It WHS verging on dusk, and the clock had already given
naming'of tlic hour to dress for dinner, when little Adele,
wJiD Jcnelt by me in the drawing-room window-seat, ex-
"'" " pBd, " Voili Monsieur Rochester, t^ui revieuV., "

I I iq^i
19S JAN£ EI & E.
I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forward from _
eofa ; the others, too, looked up from their aeveral ooca]
tions; for at the same time a crunching of wheels, am
eplaahlng tramp of horse-lioof hecame audible on the
grave!, A post-chaiae was approaching.
'■ What can possess him to come home in that al_^
said Miss Ingram. " He rodo Mesrour (the black horse),
did ho not, when he wont out? and Pilot was with him —
what has he done with the animals? ■ "'
Aa Bhe eaid thia, she approached her tall ijereoii and
ample garments so neai- the window, that I was obliged fo
bend back almost to the breaking of my spine; m her
engorncss she did not observe me at first, but wljcn slit
(IM, i^hu curled her lip and moved to another caeement.
TItL- |nisl-Lh:iLBe stopped, the driver raug the door-bell, arid
ft gL'Titliinjin alighted, attired in traveling garb; but it
WHS not Mr. Rochester; it was a tall, fashionable-looking
man, a stranger.
" Provoking! " exclaimed Miss Ingram : " you tiresome
monkey! " (apostrophizing Adele,)''who perched you up
in tho window to give false intelligence? " and she cast qj
me an angry glance, as if I were in fault.
> Some parleying was audible in the hall, and soon
new-comer entered. He bowed to Lady Ingram, aa d(
ing her the eldest lady present.
'■ It appears I come at an Inopportune time, madam, "
eaid he; " when my friend, Mr. Eochester, is from home;
hnt I arrive from a very long journey, and I think I may
presume so far on old and intimate acquaintance as to in-
sUli myself here till he returns. "
His luimner was polite ; his accent, in speaking, struck
me i\s being somewhat unusual — not precisely foreign, but
still imt altogether English ; his age might be about Mr.
Kochcsicr's— between thirty and forty; his complexion
was siiAguhirly sallow: otherwise he was a fine-looking
man, ;tC lirst sight eapecially. On closer examination,
you ik'tuctcd something in " his face that displeased, or
rather, that failed to please. His features wei-e regular,
. Init too relaxed; his eye was large and well cut, but the
life looking out of it was a tame, vacant life — at least'
thought.
The sound of the dresaiug-bell dispersed the
It was not till after dinner that I saw him agaui ; ho
geemoO yrijtc at his e-ase, But I liked his physiogm
II up
.st OU^^
^gular,
ut the
JANE EYKE.
even leSB tlian before; it gtruck me aa being, at the gamlffl
time, unsettled and itmnimate. His eje wondered, lUidjS
had no meaniiig in its wandering-; this gave him an od & m
look, such as 1 never remember to Imve seen. For ^tl
handfiome and not an anamiable-loolcing man, he repelledil
me exceedingly; there was no power in that amootb-J
skin face, of » full oval shape; no firmness i
aquiline nose, and email cherry mouth; there
thought iu the low, even foreliead; no couunaud in that
blank, brown eye.
As I sat in my usnul nook, and looked at him, with the
light of the girandoles on the mantcl-pioec beaming full
over him — for he occupied an arm chair, drawn close tO
the fire, and kept shrinking still nearer, as if he were
cold — I compared him with Jlr, Rochester. I think (with
deference be it spokenj the contrast could not be much
greater between a aleelt gander and a fierce falcon: be-
tween a meek slieep and a rough-coated keen-eyed dog, ,
its guardian. ,j
He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old friend. A',1
cnrious friendship theirs must have been: a pointed illuBi j
tration. indeed, of the old adage that " estremea meet. "
Two or three of the gentlemen sat near him, and I
caught at times scraps oi their conversation across the
room. At first I could not make much sense of what I
li card; for the discourse of Louisa Ksh ton and Mary In-
gram, who sat nearer to mu, confused the fi-agmontary
aentunces that reached me at intervals. These last were
discussing the stranger: they both called him a " beautiful
man. " Louisa said he was " a love of a creature, " and sbi
" adored him: " and Mary instanced his " pretty litt
mouth and nice nose, " as her ideal of the charming.
" And what a sweet-tempered forehead lie has ! "
Iflnisa — " so smooth — none of those frowning irregularitiea
I dislike eo much; and such a placid eye and smilel "'
And tlien to my groat relief, Mr. Henry Lj-nn summonedE/l
them to Ihe other side of the room, to settle some poin^
about the deferred excursioa to Hay Common.'
I was now able to concentrate my attention on tin
group by tlie fire, and I presently gathered that the ueifS
comer was called Mr. Mason: then I learned that he was j
but just arrived in England, anil thtit he camo from eoi
hot country: which was the reason, doubtless, his face n
so sallow, and that he sat so near tlie hearth, and wore a ■
r

300 JANE EYRE.
Burtont in the house. Presently the words Jai
EingBtoD, Spanish Town, indicated the West InilieB .
his residence; and it was with no little sui-prise I gutl
ered, ere long, that he had there first seen and become
acquainted with Mr. Rochester. He spoke of his friend's
diBlIke of the burning heats, the hurricanes, and rainy
sensone of that region. I knew Mr. Rochester had been
a traveler: Mrs. Fairfax had said so; bnt I thought the
continent of Europe hud bounded his wanderings: till now
I had never heard a hint given of visits to more distant
ehores.
I was pondering these things, wlien an incident, and
somewhat unexpected one, broke the thread of my musing
Mr. Mason, shivering as some one chanced to open fl
door, asked for more coal to bo put on the fire, which had
burned out its flame, though its mass of cinder still shone
hot and red. The footman who brought the coal, in going
out, stopped near Mr. Eshton's chair, and said something
to him in a low voice, of wliieh I heard only the words,
" old woman " — " quite troublesome. "
" Tell lier slic shall he put in the stocks if she does not
take herself off, " replied the magistrate.
" No — atopl " interrupted Colonel Dent. " Don't send
her away Eshtou: we might turn the thing to account,-
better consult the ladies. " And speaking tuoud, he con-
tinued, " Ladies, you talk of going to Hay Common to
visit the gipsy camp; Sam, here, says that one of the old
Mother Bunches is in the servant's hall at this moment,
and insists upon being bmught in before'the quality,'
to tell them their fortunes. Would yon like to see her? "
" Surely, colonel, " cried Lady Ingram, " yon would
not encourage such a low imposter. Dismiss her, by all
means, at ouco! "
" But I can not persuade her to go away, my lady,
said the footman; nor can any of the servants: Mil
Fairfax is with her just now, entreating her to be goaj
but she has taken a chair in the chimney-comer, and eMj
nothing shall stir her from it till she gets leave to come 3
here. "
" What does she want? " asked Mrs. Eshton.
"'To tell the gentry their fortunes,'she says, ma's
and she swears she must and wili do it, "
" What is she like? " inquired the Misses Eshton J
breath.
" A shockingly agly old creature. Miss ; almost as
as a crock. " _ _
" Why, ehe'e a real sorceress \ " cried Frederick Lyntt.'
" Let ns nave her in, of course. "
" To be sure, " rejoined his brother; " it would be a
thonaand pities to throw away such a chance of fun. "
" My dear boys, what are you thinking about? " e;
claimed Mrs. Lynn,
" I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistBB
proceeding. " chimed in the Dowager Ingram.
" Indeed, mamma, but you can — and will, " pi-ononncc
the haughty voice of Blanche, as she turned round on the
piano-stool ; where until now she had sat silent, apparently
examining sundry sheets of moeic. " I have a cunosity to
hear my fortune told : therefore, Sam, order the beldame
forwartl. "
" My darling Blanche ! recollect "
" I do — I recollect all you can suggest ; and I must haVB
my will — quick, Sara I "
" Yes, yes, yes! " cried all the juveniles, both ladies
and gentlemen. " Let her come—it will be excellent
sport! "
The footman still lingered. " She looks such a roi
one, " said he,
" Go ! " ejaculated Miss Ingram, and the man went.
Excitement instantly seized the whole party : a running'
fire of raillery and jests was proceeding when Sara re-
tnmed.
" She won't come now, " said he. " She says its not
her mission to appear before the * vulgar herd'(them's
her words). I must show her into a room hy herself, and
then those who wish to consult her must go to her one by
one. "
" You see now, my queenly Blanche, " began Lady In-
gram, " she encroaches. Be advised, my angel girl—.
and "
" Show her into the library, of course, " cut in the
" angel girl. " " It is not my mission to listen to her be-
fore the vnlgar hei-d either : 1 mean to have her all to my-
eelt. Is there a fire in the library ? "
" Yes, ma'am ; but she looks such a tinkler. "'
" Cease tiiat chatter, blockhead I and do my bidding.
Again Sam vanished : and mystery, animation, e:
-*: *_ «_i] g(,„ QQgg more,
'i^M
303 JANE EYKE.
" She's ready now, " said thB footman, as he reappes
" Slie wiahea to know who will be her firat visitor.'
" 1 think I had better jurt look in upon lier before ai
ot the ladies go, " said Colonel Dent.
" Tell her, Sam, a gentleman is coining, "
Sam went, and returned.
" She eays, sir, that she'll have no gentlemen; they
need not trouble themselves to come near her : nor, " he
added, with difficulty sappressing a titter, " any ladies
either, except the young and siugle. "'
" By Jovo, she has taste ! " esclaimed Henry Lynn,
Mias Ingram rose solemnly: " I go first, " ehe aaid,
a tone which might have befitted the leader of a fori
liope mounting a breach in the van of hie men.
■'Oh, my best t oh, my dearest! pause — reflect, " was
her mamma's cry ; but slie swept past her ia stately
silence, passed through the door which Colonel Dent held
open, and we heard her enter the library.
A comparative silence ensued. Lady Ingram thought
it " le caa " to wring her hands : which she did accordingly.
Mias Mary declared she felt, for her part, she never dared
venture. Aniy and Louisa Esliton tittered under their
breath, and looked a little frightened.
The minutes passed very slowly ; fifteen were counted
before the library door again opened. Miss Ingram re-
turned to ITS through the arch.
Would she laugh ? Would she take it as a joke ? All
eyes met her with a glance of eager curiosity, aud she met
all eyes with one of rebuff and coldness : she looked ueithet,.
flurried nor merry ; she walked stiffly to her seat and ^--*^
it in silence.
" Well, Blanche ? " said Lord Ingrain.
" What did she say, sister ? " asked Mai-y.
" What did you tninfc ? How do you feel ? Is sne a
- real fortune-teller ? " demanded the Misses Eshton.
" Now, now, good people, " returned Miss Ingram,
" don't press upon me. Really your organs of wonder and
credulity are easily escited : you seem, oy the importance
you all — my good mamma included — ascribe to this matter
—absolutely to believe we have a genuine witch in the
house, who is in close alliance with the old gentleman. 1
have seen a gypsy vagabond ; she has practiceil in hack-
neyed fashion the science of palmistry, and told me wliat
" Bjih people usually tell. My whim is gratified ; and noWj

JAXE EYRE.
I think Mr. Eslitoii will do well to put the hag in
stocks to-morrow morning, as he Ihreateiied. "
Jliss Ingram look a book, leaned back in her ch,
and 80 declined further converaation. I watched hur
nearly half an hour : during sU that time she never tur,
a page, and her face grew momently darker, more dissatj
fied, and more Bourly expressive of disappointment. 8L,
had obviously not beard anytliing to her adyantiige ; and
it eeenied to me, from her prolonged fit of gloom and
taciturnity, that she herself, notwithstanding herprofesscd
inditlerenco, attached undue importance to whatever rova--'
lations had been made to her.
Meantime, Mary Ingram, Amy and Louisa Esliton, di
dared they dared not go alone ; and yet they all wialiud (,
go. A negotiation was opened through t^o medium oj
the ambae^or, Sam ; and after much pacing two and fro,
till, I think, the said Sam's calves must have ached with
tbo exercise, permission was at last, with great ditiitjulty,
extorted from the rigorous sibyl for the three to wait upon
her in a hody.
Their vinit was not bo still as Misa Ingram's had been
we heard hysterical giggling and little shrieks proceeding
from the library; and at the end of about twenty minuf "
they burst the door open, aud came running across
hall, as if they were h^f scared out of their wits.
" I'm snre she is something not rightl " they cried,
and all. " She told us such thingel She knows alt al
ns! " aud they sank breathless into the various seats
gentlemen hastened to bring them.
Pressed for farther explanation, they declared she had
told them of things they had said and done when they were
mere children; described the books and ornaments they
had in their boudoirs at home; keepsakes that different
relations had presented to them. They affirmed that she
had even divined their thoughts, and had whispered in the
ear of each the name of the person she liked beat in the
world, and informed them of what they most wished for.
Hero the gentlemen interposed with earnest petitions to
be fui'ther enlightened on these two last named points; but
they got only blushes, ejaculations, tremors and titters, in
return for their importunity. The matrons, meantime,
offei-ed vinaigrettes and wielded fans; and again and again
reiterated the expression of their concern that their warn-
t 1 -—^y been taken in time; and the elder gentlemen -
jeen:
M
S04
JANE EYEB.
lauglied, and the younger urged their Bervices on the agi-
tated fair ones.
In the midst of the tnmult, and while my eyea and ears
wore fully engaged in the scene before me, I heai-d a hem
close at my elbow: I turned and saw Sam.
" If yoti please, Misa, the gypsy declares that there is
another young siugfe lady iu the room who has not been
to her yet, and she sweara she will not go till she has seen
all. I thought it must be you: there is no one else for it.
What shall I tell her? "
" Oh, I will go, by all means, " I answered; and I was
glad of the unexpected opportunity to gratify my mueh-
Gxcitcd curiosity. I slipped out of the room, unobserved
by auy eye — for the company were gathered in one mass
about the trembling trio jnat returned— aud I closed the
door quietly behind me.
" If you like. Miss/'said Sam.'• I'll wait in the hall for
you; and if she frightens yon, just call, and I'll come in, "
'"'No, Sam, return, to the kitchen; I am not in the
least afraid, " Nor was I; but I was a good deal interested
and excited.
CHAPTER XIX.
The libraiy looked tranquil enough as I entered it, ai
the sibyl — if sibyl she were, was seated snugly enough in
an Qasy-cLair at the chimney corner. She had on a red
cloak and a black bonnet; or rather, a broad-brim ed gypsy
hat, tied down with a striped handkerchief under her chin.
An extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bend-
ing ovei'the fire, and seemed reading in a little black book,
like It prayer-book, by the light of the blaze: she mnt-
tei " ed the words to herself, as moat old women do. while
Bhe read; she did not desist immediately on my entrance:
it appeared she wished to fiuish a paragraph.
I stood on the rug and wanned my hands, which were
rather cold, with sitting at a distance from the drawing-
I fire. I felt now as composed as ever I did in my life:
IQ^^I
there was nothing, indeed, in tlio gypsy's appearance to
'" ■ " "''''She shot her book and £owly loukaf'"
, trouble one's calm.
ap : her tiat-brim partly shaded her face, yet I could a
jia she miaed it, thut it was a strange one. It looked all
brown and black : elf-locks briatled out from beneath a
white baud which passed under her chin, and came half
over her cUeeka or rather jaws ; her eyes oonfroiited me
lit uiiL-e, with a bold and direct gaze.
" Well, and jou want your fortune told ? " ahe said in
a voice as decided as her glance, as harsh as her features.
" I don't care about it, mother ; you may pleaee your-
self ; but I ought to warn you, I have no faith. "
" Its like your impudence to sayiio; X expected i^
vou ; I heard it in your step as you crossed the thia
liold, " ■
" Did you ? You've a quick ear, "
" I have ; and a quick eye, and a quick brain. "
" You need them all in your trade. "
" I do; especially when I've cuatomera like yon to c
with. Why don't you tremble ? "
" I'm not cold. "
" Why don't you turn pale ? "
" I am not sick. "
" Why don't you consult my art ? "
" I'm not silly. "
The old crone'-'nichered " a laugh under her bonnet
and bandage : ahe then drew out a short black pipe, and
lighting it began to smoke. Having indulged awhile in
this sedative, she raised her bent nody, took the pipe
from lier lips, and while gazing steadily at the fire, said
very deliberately, " You are cold; you are sick; and you
are silly, "
" Prove it, " I rejoined.
" I will ; in few words. Yon are cold, bscause you are
alone : no contact strilies the fire from you that Is in you.
You are sick : because tins best of feelings, the bigliest
and the sweetest given to man, keeps far away from you.
You are siUy, because, suffer as you may, you will not
beckon it to approach ; nor will you stir one step to meet
it where it waits you, "
She again put her short, black pipe to her lips, and re-
newed her smoking with vigor.
" You might say all that to almost auy one who, you
knew, lived as a solitary dependent in a great house. "
" I might say it to almost any one ; but would it be true
" In my circumstances. "
" Yes ; just so, in your circumstances : but find mo s
other precisely jilaced as jou are. "
" It would be easy to find you thoUEanda, "
" You could scarcely find me one, If you knew it, yw
are peculiai-ly situated ; very neai- happineaa ; yos ; witalfl
reacii uf it. The muteriala are all prepared; there c "
wunts u movement to combini! them. Chance laid thw
soinewhat apart ; let them be once approached, and blis
results. "
" I dori't understand enigmas. I never could guess 4
riddle in my lifo. "
" If yon wish me to speak more plainly, show me yoi
palm. "
" And I must cross it with silver, I suppose ? "
" To be sure. "
I gave her aahilliug : she put it into an old 9tocking-fo«
which she took out of her pocket, and having tied i
round and returned it., she told me to hold out my hand.
1 dill. She approached " her face to tlie palm, and pored
over it without touching it.
" It is two fine, " she said. " I can make nothing ot
HHch a hand as that; almost without lines: 1 " " • -'*
Is in a palm ? Destiny is not written there. "
" I believe yon, " said I.
'• No, " she continued, " It is in the face ; on the I
head, about the eyes, in the eyes themselves, in the 1
of the month. Kneel, and lift up your head. "
'•Ah I now you are coming to reality, " I Bald ,
obeved her, " I shall begin to put some faith in you j
entiy. "
I knelt within half a yai'd of her. She stirred the t
so that a vipple of light broke fi'oni the disturbed i
the glare, however, as she sat, only threw her face itiU
deeper shadow : mine, it illumined.
" I wonder with what feelings yoncametometo-n ^
ahe said, when she had examined me awhile. " I wondttg
what thoughts nre busy in vour heart during all the hm
you sit in yonder room with the fine people flitting I'
you like shapes in a magic lantern : jnst as little e^
thetic communion passmg between you and them, a
they were resUly mere shadows of hiiman forms i "
the actual substance. "
" X feel tired often, sleepy Hometimea; ^p)it»
" Then yon have some secret hope to buoy you up aiifl'
please yon with whispers of the futnrp ? "
" Not I. The utmost I hope ia, lo siivo money enough
frat of my earnings to set np a school some diiy m a little
house rented by myself. "
" A mean nutriment for the Bpirit to exist on: ami ait-
ting in that window-seat (you see I know youv habits) "
" You have learned them from the servants. "
" Ah ! yoQ think yourself sharp. Well — perhaps I
have: to speak the truth, I have an acquaintance with one.
of them — Mrs. Poole "
I started to my feet when I heard the name.
" You have— have you? " thought I; " there is diabl
in the business after all, then! "
" Don't be alarmed, " continued the strange Veil.^^
" she's a safe hand, is Mra. Poole: close and quiet: anyone'
may repose confidence in her. But, as I was saying: sit-
ting in that window-seat, do yon think of nothing but your
future scho»I? Have you no present interest in any of the
company who occupy the sofas and chairs before you ? Ia
there not one face you study ? One figure whose move-
ments you follow with, at least, -ourioBity ? "
" I like to observe all the faces, and all the figures. "
'■ But do you never single one from the rest — or it may
be, two ? ■'
" I do frequently; when the gestures or looks of
seem telling a tale; it amuses me to watch them? "
■'What tale do you like best to hear ? "
" Oh, I have not much choice ! They generally mi
the same theme — courtship ; and promise to end in
same (.-atastrophe — marriage. "
" And do you like that monotonous theme ? "
" Positively, I dou't care about it; it is nothing to me. "
" Nothing to you ? When a lady young and full of life
and heail.h, charming with beauty and. endowed with the
gifts of rank and fortune, sits and smiles in the eyes of a
gentleman you "
" I. what ? "
" You know — and, perhaps, think well of ? "
" I don't know the gentlemen here. I liave scarcely
mterchanged a syllable with one of them; and us to think-
ing well of them, I consider some respectable and stately,
and middle-age < ]. and others young, dashing, handsome,
1'= ^
I one,
fone'
: sit-
your
Nhe
'la
love-
may
m
r
308 JANE EYRE.
recipients of whose smiles they please, without my feeling
diBposed to consider the tranEaotion of any moment lo
me. "
" You don't know the gentlemen here ? Ton have not
exchanged a, syllable with one of them ? Will you say that
of tho master of the house ? "
" He is not at home. "
" A profound remark! A most ingenious qnibblel He
went to Millcote this morning, and will be back here to-
night, or to-morrow; docs that circumstance exclude him
from tlie list of yonr acquaintance — blot him, as it were,
out of existence? "
" No: but I can scarcely see what Mr, Eochester hafi to .
do with the theme yon had introduced. "
" I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of gentle-
men; and of late so many Bmiles have been shed into Mr.
Eochester's eyes that they overflow like two cups filled
above the brim; have you never remarked that Y "
" Mr. Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his
guests. "
" No question about his right: but have you never ob-
served that, of all the tales told here about matrimony, Mr.
Rochester has been favored with the most lively and "'
most continuous ? "
" The eagerness of a listener quickeris the tongue
narrator. " I said this ratlier to myself than to tho gipfff,
whose strange talk, voice, manner, had by this time wrap-
ped uie in a kind of dream. One unexpected sentence
came from lier lips after another, till I got involved in a
web of mystification ; and wondered what unseen spirit had
been sitting for weeks by my heart watching its workings,
and taking record of every pulse.
" Eagerness of a listener! " repeated she: " yes; Mr.
Rochester has sat by the hour, his ear inclined to the fas-
cinating lips that took such delight in their task of com-
municating; and Mr. Rochester was bo willing to receive
and looked so grateful for the pastime given him: you
have noticed this ? "
" Grateful! I can not remember detecting gratitude
his face. "
" Detecting! You have analyzed, then. And whatdiff**
yon detect, if not gratitude P "
I said nothing.
''You have seen love: have yon oot F aodj looking fe^v
Mr.


V & rdi jon bare seen bim married, and behelJ hie t
hftjipy? "
" linmph! Not exactly. Your witch's skill ;
at frtiitt sometimoa, "
" What the devil have yon soon, tlieu? "
" Never mind: I cftme ht-re to inquirp. not to oonf^
Is it known that Mr. Kochestor h lu bo uiurriod? "
" Yes; and to the beautiful Misa Ingram. "
" Shortly? "
" A < > pcanince8 would warrant thiit concJosion; Hnd,4
doubt (though wilb an auduoity tbut wanle cbnsliaing (^ _
of you. you seem lo qitestiou it), thoy will lio u stiperla-
fively happy pair. He mnst love such a hamJaomi^, noblei
witty, aooomplishod lady; iitui pcobiiUy slie, loves liim: or,
lE not his poraon, at ieasl his piiraa. I kno'.v Bho considers
lliB RocbefittT estnte eligible to the last dogr«e; thongh
(God pardon nip!) I told her aomothing on that point
about an boor ago, which mailo hpr look wuiTdruiia gravo:
the cornera of her month fell half an inch. I ivmiid ad-
Tiae her blackaviccd suitor to look out: if nnotliw cornea,
with a longer or clearer rent-roll, he's ilislicd "
" But, mother, I did rwt come to heur Mr. Rochester'a
fortune: 1 came to hear my own; and you have told me
nothing of it. "
" Your fortune is yet doubtful: when I pxamined youi',
face, one trait contradicted anoHi'.T. Chance has met^'
you a measure of happinGS-*; that I know, I knew it t
fore I came licrc this evening, 8hc has laid il carcfiifl
on one side for you. I saw her do it. It dc|ieude on yo^
self to stretch out your h-ind, and tiike it ii| > ; hut wbetW
yon will do ao, is the problem I study. Kneel again J
the rug. "
" Don't keep me long; the fire scorchea me. "
I knelt. She did not stoop toward me, hut onlygiiad
leaning back in her cliair. She began muttering, " Tj
flame flickers in the eye; the eye shines like dew: it !o(
soft and full of feeling; it smiles at iny jargon:
coptible; impreaaion follows iiujircs^ion through Us clra?
spnere; where it ceases to smile, it is sad; an unconscious
laseitude weighs on the lid: that signiflps melanchnly re-
RUlting from loneliness. It tnrna from me; it will not'snf-
fer farther scrutiny; it seems to deny, tiy a mocking
glatioe, the truth of the discon'riea I have already made —
~~i 41«oyn the .'liarge both of sensibility and chagrin: its.
810 JANE ETRE.
pri(}e and reaerve only confirm mo in my opinion,
eye IB favorable.
" As to t.liQ mouth, it doHghts at times in laughter; il
IB disposed to impurt all timl the brain conceives; thouf*
I dare eay it wonld bo silent on much tliu heart expei
enoes. Mobile and flexible, it was never intended ;
be oompressed in the eternal silence uf Bolitnde: it la
month which should apeak nuich and amile often, and
have human affection for its interlocutor. That feature
too tB propitious.
" I see no enemy to a fortunate isHiie but in the brow:
and that brow protesaea to aay,'I can live alone, if eeU-
respect snd circumstances require me so to do. I need
not sell my eonl to buy bliss. I have an inward treasure,
born with me, which can keep mo alive if all extrHneooff'
delights ebould be withheld; or offered only at a price " * "
cannot afford to give,'The forehead declures,'RoaM_
sits firm and holds the reins, and she will not let the feel-
ings buret away and hurry her to wild chasma. The pas-
eioos may rugc furiously, like true beatheu?, as they are;
and the desires may imagine all sorts of vain things: bnt
judgment sbull still have the last word in. every argument.
and the ciiating vote in every decision. Strong wind,
earthquake-aliock, and flte may pasa by: but labail follow
the guiding of that still amull voice which interpreta the
dictates of conscience,'
" Weil Baid, forehead; your declaration shall be
Bpected. I have formed my plans — right plana I det_
teem — and in them I have attended to the claims of ooii*
science, the counaela of reason. I know how Boon youth
would fade and bloom perish, if, in the cup of bllBH offered,
but one dreg of shame, or one flavor of remorse were de-
tected; and I do not want sacrifice, sorrow, diasolntion —
snch is not my taste. I wish to foster, not to blight — to
earn gratitude, not to wring tears of blood — no, nor of
brine: my harvest must be in smiles, in endearments, in
sweet. That will do. I tlrnk I rave in a kind of exqui»«
ite delirium. I should wiah now to protract this momi
ad infinitum; but I dare not. So far I have goveriL_
myaelf thoroughly. I have acted as I inwardly ewore
would act; but further might try me beyond myetrength.
Rise, Misa Eyre: leave me;'the play ia played out.'"
Where was I? Did I wake or sleep? Had I been
drefuning? Did I dream atill? The old woman's voi <
JANK KIKE.
ftftd cbftDget] : Iier accent, lier gestnre, and all woro fai.
arto me us til;'" wn face in ngliiHs — as tlie speech o[^
own tongue, i got up. but did not go, ! lt > oki > d; I etir
the five, aud 1 looked again: bnt bIiu drciii'Lor > ioim " t
her bu'idage oloaei'about her face, and agaiu heckoncd i
to depart. The flame iUuminated her liund etrt-tched o'
HMiscd uow, and on the alert for d iaooTeiieR, J d,t on
uo'.iced that liaad. It was no more tlic- wlthert'd limbj
dd than my own; it was a. rounded supple nienibor, v
smooth lingeiy, eyra metrically turned; a broad ring Saam
ou tlio little finger, and atooping forward, I looked atl
and a.iwr a gem I had seen a. hundred times before. AgtB
'looked at tlte (ace; which was no longer turned frd
^le — on the contrary., the bonnet waa doffeil, the handu
displaced, the head advanced. ]
" Weil, Jane, do yon know me? " asked I he fami^
voice.
" Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then "
" But the atring ia in a knot — help me.''
" Break it, air. "
" There, then —'Off, ye lendings! "'
And Mr. Rochester stepped out of hia disguise.
" Now, sir, what a strange idea! " -
" Bcit well carried out, eh? Don't you think so? "
" With the ladies yon muat have managed well, "
" But not with yoH? "
" Yon did not aet the character of a gypsy with me.'*
" What character did I actP My own? "
" No: aome unaccountable one. In short, I believa
yon have been trying to draw me out — or in; you hai
been talking nonsense to make me talk nonsense. ItHJ
Bcarcely fair, sir. "
" Do yon forgive mo, Jane? "
" I cannot teli till I have thought it all over. If, i
efiection, I find I have fallen into no great absurdityj
|)all try to forgive you; but it waa not right. "
" Oht you have been v.ry correct — very careful,
aenaible.
I reflected, and thought, on the whole, I had. It v
comfort; bnt, indeed, I had been on my guard alm^
from the beginning of the interview. Sometliing of maS
querade I suapected. I knew gypsies and fortune- tollers
did not expreaa themaelvea aa this seeming old woman had
U3 > Teseed herself; besides, I had noted her feigned voioa.
2li JaNB RYIig.
her auxiuty to eonoeal hei'features. Bnt my mind had
been niuniiig ou Grace Poole — that living enigma, tliaf
myatery of myateriea, aa I considered her. I had never
thought of Mr. Rochester. "
" Well, " siiiJ lie,'" what are yoii musing abontP ^
does that grave smile signify? "
" Wonder and eelf-congrdtulation, sir. I hare yonf^
permissiou to retire now, I auppose? "
" No; stay a moment; and tell me what the people i &
the drawing-room yonder are doing. "
" Discussing the gypsy, I dare say. "
" Sit dowu! Let me hear what they said about me. "
" I had better not stay long, si/; it rfiKsc be nearly
eleven o'clock. Ohl are you aware, Mr. Bochister, that a
stranger has arrived here since you left this morning? "
" A stranger! — no; who can it be? I expected no one;
is he gone? "
" No; lie said he had known you long, and that he
could take tho liberty of installing himseff here till yon
returned. "
" The devil he didl Did he give his name? "
" HiB name is Mason, sir; and he comes from the West
Indies; from Spanish Town, in Jamaica, I think. "
Mr. Rochester was standing near me; he had taken my
hand, as if to lead me to a chair. As I spoke, he gave my
wrist a convulsive grip; the smile on his lips froze: appar-
ently a spasm caught his breath.
" MasonI— the West IndiesI " he said, in a tone one
might fancy a apeakiug automaton to enounce its single
Tords; " Mason f— the West Indies! " ho reiterated; and he
went over the syllables three times, growing, in the intervals
of speaking, whiter than ashes: he hardly seemed to know
what he was doing,
" Do you fee? 31, sir? " I inquired.
, I've got a blow; I've got a blow, Jane! " 1
'Ohl lean on me, sir, "
" Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before; 1
iDii have it now. "
" Yes, sir, yes; and my arm. " _
" He eat down, and made me sit beside him. Holding "
mj hand in both his own, he chafed it; gazing on me, at
the same time, with the most troubled and dreary look.
^^'* Mj little friendl " said h^ " 1 wish I were in a ^uii'
I
ding I
ae, at i
look. J
island with only yon; and tronble. and danger, and hid-
eoua recollections removed from nie, "
• " ■ " Ciin I help you, sir* I'd give my life to serve you. "
" " Jaue. if aid is wanted, I'll seek " it at yonr hands: I
promise you that. "
" Thank you, sir; tell me what to do — I'll try, at least,
to do it. "
'• Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining-
room: they will be at supper there; and tell me if Mason
is with themj and what he is doing. "
" I went. I found all tiie party in the dining-room av
supper, as Mr, Rochester had said; tliey were not seated at
the table, the supper was arranged on the sideboard ; uaoh
had taken what he elioae, and they stood about here and
there in groups, their plates and glasses in their hands.
Everyone seemed in high gjee ; laughter and conversation
were general and animated. Mr. Mason stood near the
Ere, talking to Colonel and Mrs. Dent, and appeared aa
men-y as any of them. I filled a wine glass (I saw Miss
Ingram watch me frowningly as I did so: she thought I
was taking a liberty, I dare say), and I returned to the
library.
Mr, Rochester's extreme pallor had disappeared, and he
looked onco more firm and stern. He took the glass from
my hand.
" Here is to yonr health, ministrant spirit ! " he saidi,«
he swallowed the contents and returned it to me. " Wlutfefl
are they doing, Jane ? " H
** Laughing and talking sir. " ^M
" They don't look grave and mysterious, as if they l^^l
heai-d something strange. " ^^H
" Not at all: they are full of jests and gayety. " ^H
" And Mason? " ^H
" He was laughing too. " ^^t
" If all these people came in a body and spat at fl^^|
what wonld you do, Jane ? " ^^H
" Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could. " ^B
He half smiled. " But if I were to go to them and they
only looked at me coldly, and whispered sneeringly among
each other, and then dropped off and left me one by one,
what then ? Would you go with them ? " j^m
" I rather think not, sir: I should have more pleas!^^|
in staying with you. " ^^M
^ ^^M
«w
" Yes, siv, to comfort you, as well aa I conld. "
" Aad if they laid you under a ban for adhering to meR "
" I, probably, should know nothing about their bai "
and it I did, 1 ehonld care nothing about it. "
" Then, you could dare censure for my sake ? "
" I could dare it for the sake of any friend who di
my adherence, as you, I am sure, do.'
" Go back now into the room, step quietly up to Mai
and whisper in his ear that Mr. Kocncster is come, I
wishes to Hee him ; show him in here, and then leave ma.^
" Yes, eir.'"
I did his behest. The company all stared at me e
passed straight among them. I sought Mr. Mason, deUi.
eiwl the message, and preceded him from the room: "
ushered him into the library, and then I went up stairs.
At a late hour, after 1 had been in bed some time, I
heard the visitors repair to their chambers: I distinguished
Mr. Rochester's voice, and heard him say, " This way,
Mason; this is your ruum. "
Ho spoke cheerfnlly; the gay tonus set my heart at eaa
I was soon asleep.
CHAPTER XX.
I HAD forgotten to draw my curtain, which I i
did; and also to let down my window-blind. The cohwL
qucnce was that when the moon, which was full and brigm
ffor the night was fine), came in her course to that epa'
ni the sky opposite my casement, and looked in at i
through the unveiled panes, her glorious gaze roused me.
Awakening in the dead of night, 1 opened rny eyes on her
disk — silver-white and crystal clear! It was beautiful, but
ton solemn: I half rose, and stretched uiy arm to draw thc._
curtain.
Good God! What a cry!
The uight^its silence — its rest, was rent in tH
savage, a sharp, a shrilly sound, that ran from cni
of iTiomficldHall.
My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my atretch(
arm was paralyzed. The cry died, and was not reaoW "
Indeed, whatever being uttereJ that fenrf«\ shriek oould
not soon repeat it: not the wideat-winged condor on the
Andes oould, twice in succeaaion, send out such a yell
from the cloud shrouding bis eyrie. The thing delivering
such uttcriLDce laiist rest ere it conid rejieut the effort.
It came out of the third story; for it passed overhead.
And overhead — yea, iu the room just above my chamlier
ceiling — I now heard a struggle: a deadly one it seemed
from the noise; and a half-emothered voice shouted " Help I
help 1 help 1 " three timea rapidly.
''Will no one come? " it cried; and then, while the
staggering and stamping went on wildly. I distinguished
through plank and piaster. " Rochester ! Rochester I for
God's sake, come I "
A chamber door opened: Bome one ran, or raahod along
the gallery. Another step stamped on the flooring above,
and Bomeihing fell; and there was silence,
I had pnt on Bomo clothes, though horror shook all my
limbs: I issued from my apartment. The sleepers were all
aroused: ejaculations, terrified murmurs sounded in every
room; door after door unclosed: one looked out and another
looked out; the gallery filled. Gentlemen and ladies alike*
had quitted their beds; and " Oh ! what is it? " " Who is
hurt? " " What has happened? " " Fetch a hght! "
" Is it fire ? " " Are there robbers ? " " Where shall we
tan? " was demanded confusedly on all hands. But foi
tha moonlight they would have been in complete darkness,
" fhey ran to and fro; they crowded together; soaie sobbed,
some stumbled: the confusion was inextricable.
" Where the devil is Rochester? " cried Colonel Dent.
" I can not find him in his bed. "
" Here! here! " was shouted in return. Be composed,
all of you: I'm coming. "
And the door at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr.
Rochester advanced with a candle: he had just descended
from the upper story. One of the ladies ran to him
directly; she seized bis arm: it was Miss Ingram.
" What awful event boa taken place? " said she.
" Speak! let us know the worst at oncel "
" But don't pull me down or strangle me, " he replied:
for the Misses Eahton were clinging about him now; and
the two dowagers, in vast white wrappers, wore bearing
down on him like ships in full sale.
-'«'AJl's rightl— all's rightl " he cried. " it's a mere

Mfi JAKE BTRB,
LearBalof " Much Ado About Nothing. " Ladies, keep off;
or r shall wiix dangerouB. "
AikI divngeroue ne looked : his black eves flarted Bparks.
Calming himself by an effort, he nddcd, " A eervant haa
had the uight.mare; that is all. She's an excitable, nery-
ous person: she eoiiBtrued her drcim into an npparition, or
doraething of that aort, ko doubt; mid has takeii a fit with
fright. Now, then, I must see toq all back into yonr
rooms; for, till the house ia settled, ahe can not be looked
after. Gentlemen, have the goodness to aet theladiea the
example. Mies Ingram, I am sure you will not fail in
evincing superiority to idle terrors. Amy and Loitsia,
return to yciir nests like * pair of doves, ss you aj'e. Mes-
dames (to the dowagera) von will take cold, to a dead
certainty, it you stay in thia chill gallery any longer, "
And 80, by dint of alternate coaxing and commandin^^,
he contriTed to get them all once more inclosed in their
separate dormitorits. I did not wait to be ordered back
to mine, but retreated unnoticed — as unnoticed I had left
it
Not however, to go to bed: on the contrary, I began
and dressed niyself carefully The sounds I had heard
after the scream, asid the words that had been uttered
had probably been heard only by me; for they had pro-
ceeded from the rocin above mine: bnt they assured me
that it was not a servant's dream which had thus struck
horror through the house; And that the explanation Mr.
Rochester had given was m & roly an invention framed to
pacify his guests. I dressed, then, to be ready for emer-
?;euciea. When dresead, I sat a long time by the window,
coking out over the silent grounds and silvered fields, and
waiting for I knew not what. It seemed to me that sopic
event must follow the strange cry, struggle and call.
No; stillness returned: each murmur and movement
ceased gradually, and in about an hour Thonifield Hall
was again as hushed as a desert. It seemed that sleep and
jiight had reaumed their empire. Meantime the moon
declined: she was about to set. Not liking to sit iu the
cold and darkness, I t]io " .ghtI wtuld lie down on my bed.'
dressed as I was. I left the window, and moved with
little noise across the carpet; as I stooped to take o~'
Dhoes, a cautious hand tapped low at the door.
" Am I wanted? " I asked.

" Are yoa npP " asked the voice I expected to hear, viz.,
my master's.
* Yes, sir. " ^^
" Aud dressed? " j^|
" Tes. " ^1
" Come OQt, then, miietly, " ^H
I obeyed. Mr. Roclieater stood in the gallery, holdffl^
a light.
" I want yon, " he said: " come this way: take yo.ir
time, and make no noise. "
My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor
as softly as a cat. He glided np the gallery and np the
stairs, and stopped in the dark, low corridor of tlie fjtte-
jni third storv: I had followed, and stood at his side.
" Have you a spouge in your room? " he askad in a
whisper.
" Yes, sir. "
" Have you any salts — volatile salts? "
" Yea. "
" Go hack and fetch both. "
I returned, sought the sponge on the wash-stand, the
salts in my drawer, and once more retraced my steps. He
still waited; he held a key in his hand: approaching one
of the small, black doors, he put it in the lock ; be paused,
and addressed me again.
" You don't turn sick at the sight of blood? "
" I think I shall not: I have never been tried yet. "
I felt a thrill while I answered him, but no coldness,
And no fiiintuess.
" Just give me your hand, " he said; " it will not do to
risk a fainting-fit.
I pat my fingers into his. " Warm and steady, " was
his remark: he turned the key and opened the door.
1 saw a room I remembered to have seen before; the
day Mrs. Fairfax showed me over the house: it was hung
with tapestry; but the tapestry was now looped np in one
part, and there was a door apparent, which had then been
concealed. This door was open; a light shone out of the
room within: I heard thence a snarling, snatching sound,
almost like a dog quarreling, Mr. Rochester, putting
down his candle, said to me, " Wait a minntc, " and he
went forward to the inner apartment. A shoutoflaughter
" "'ed his entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in
e Poole's own goblin ha ^ a! SJie then was th^

218 JAVE EIRE.
He made some Bort of .■irrangpiiiritt, but without speaking:
though I heard a lew voice address him; he came out and
closed the dooi- behind him.
" Here Jane! " he said; and I walked round to the other
eide of ft large bed, which, with ita drawn curtains, concealed
acouBidfrahle portion of iheclmniber. An easy-chair was
near the bed-head : ii man eat in it, dreased witlnthe excep-
tion of his coat; he wns still; his head leaned back; Hjb
eyes were closed. Mr. Rochester held the candle over
him; I recognized, iu his pale and seemingly'ifeless faoe,
the stranger. Mason: I sivr too that his linen on one aide
and one arm was almost coaked in blood.
" Hold the candle, " said Mr. Rochester, and I tonk it;
ho folched a baain of water from the wash-stand: " Hold
that, " said he, I obeyed. He took the sponge, dipped-H
in and moistened the corjise-like face. He asked for
smelling-bottle, and applied it;o the nostrils. Mr Mai
shortly unclosed hia eyes; he groaned. Mr. Roches
opened the shirt of the wounded man, whoae arm and
shoulder wore bandaged: he sponged away blood, trickling
fast down.
" Is there immediate danger, " murmnred Mr, Mason.
" Pooh ! No — a mere scratch. Don't be bo overco)
man; bear iipl I'll fetch a surgeon for you now, myi
you'll be able to be removed by morning, I hope. Jam
he continued.
" Sir? "
" I shall have to leave you in this room with this
tleman for an hour, or perhpps two Jioure. Yoa _
^onge the blood nsl do when it returns; if he feels faint,
you will put the glass of water on that stand to bis li[ > B,
and your salts to hia nose. You will not spoak to him on
any pretext — ^and — Richard — it will bo at the peril of yoi
life if you speak to her: open your lips, agitate yoursel
and I'll not answer for the consequences. "
Again the poor man groaned: he looked as if he dai
not move: fear, either of death or of aomething else,
peared almost to paralyze him. Mr, Rochester put
now bloody sponge into my hand, and I proceeded to use
it as he had done. He watched me a second, then saying,
" Remember! — No conversation, " ho left the room. 1 ex-
perienocd a strange feeling as the key grated in tli'! lock,
and the sound of his retreating step ceased to be heard.
Here, then, I waa in the third story, fastened into c "
Hold J
> ed^^g
3|
klilig ]
son, ^^^^
'con^^^H
lan^^^^l
faint] I
I on'
oo^^^J
m
JANP KTRe.
0f the mystic cells; night around me; a pale and bloody
Bpectacla under tny oyes and hands, a murderees hardly
.separated from mo by a single door: jee — that ivas appal.-
iag — the rest I could bear; but I shuddered at the thought
of Grace Poole bui'stmg out upon me.
I must keep to my post, however. I most watch this
ghastly conntenaooe — these blue, stilt lipa forbidden to ubT "
close— these eyea now shut, now opening, now wanderinj|
through the room, now fixing on me, and ever glazed wiB
the dullness of horror. I must dip my hand uguin aiS
again in the basin of blood and water, and wipe away tU
trickling gore. I mast see the liglit of Lhc unsuufFf
candle wane on mj employment; the ehadorta darken c
the wrought, antique tapestry ronnd me, and grow bliri
Under the hangings of the vast old bed, and quivi
Btrangely over the doors of a great cabinet oppoaite-i
whose front, divided into twelve panels, bore, in grim d^B
sign, the beads of the twelve apostles, each inclosed in its
separate panel as In a frame; while above tbeni at the top
T030 an ebon crucifix and a dying Christ.
According us the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam
hovered here or glauced tliere, it was now the bearded
phyaiciaQ, L'lke, that bent bia brow; now St. John's long
kftir that waved; and anon the develish face of Judas,
that grew out of the pane!, and seemed gathering life and
threatening a revelation of the arch-traitor — of Satan
himself — ^in his subordinate's form.
Amidst all this, I had to listen a3 well as watch : listen
for the movements of the wild beast oi the fiend in yonder
side don. But since Mr. Rochester's visit it seemed spell-
boand: all thu night I hoard but three sounds at three
long intervals — a step creak, a momentary renewal of the
saarliug, canine'uoise, and a deep human groan.
Then my own tboughts worried me, Wliai crime was
this, that lived incarnate in this sequestered mansion,
and oould neither be expelled nor aubdued by the owner?
What mystery, that broke out, now in firo and now in
blood, at the deadest houro of night? What creature was
it, that, masked in an ordinary woman's face and shape,
uttered the voice, now of a mocking demon, and anon of
a carrion-seeking birdof prey?
And this man I bent over — this commonplace, quiet
^ —how had he become involved in the web of
■? and why had tho Fury flown at bim? Win
JANE EYHE.
made him seek this quarter of the house at au untimq
season, when lie should have been asleep iu bed? I 1:
heai'd Mr, HocLi^Bter aBaign iiiin an apartment beloiC
what brought him here? And why, now, waa he so'
nnder the violence or treadiery donu him? Why d
BO quietly submit to the concealment Mr. Roohester i
forced? Why tfid Mr Rochester enforae this concei._
ment? His guest had been outraged, his own life on a
former occasion had been hideously plotted against ; and
both attempts ho smothered in secrecy and sank In obliv-
ion! Lastly, I saw Mr, Mason was submiasire to T "
Kochester; that the imjietuoua will of the latter'.
complete Bwav over tiio inertness of the former : the i < _
words whicli had passed between them assured me of thi
It was evident that in their former intercourse, the passive
disposition of the one had been habitnallv influenced by
the active energy of the other : whence, then, had arisen
Mr, Rochester's dismay when he heard of Mr. Masoqj
arrival? Why liad the mere name of this unresisting in(
vidual — whom his word now sufficed to control like a chj
— fallen on him, a few hours since, as a thuuder-bolt mig
fall on au oak?
Oil I I could not forget his look and Iiis paleneas whi
he whispered, " Jane, I have got a blow—I have (
blow, Jane. " I could not forget how the arm had 1
bled which he had rested on my shoulder : and it w
light matter which could thus bow the resolute spirit a
thrill the vigorous frame of Fairfax Rochester,
" When will he come? When will become? " I cr^
inwaHly, as the niglit lingered and lingered — as ]
bleeding patient drooped, moaned, .lickened: and ueitM
day nor aid arrived, I had, again and again, held ^
water to Mason's white lips ; agiiin and again offered hS_
the stimulating salts ; my efforts seemed ineffectual ; either
bodily or mental suffering, or loss of blood, or all three
combined, were fast prostrating his etrougth. He moaned
BO, and looked ao weak, wild and lost, I feared he i
dying ; and I might not even speak to him !
Tlio candle, wasted at last, went out; as it expire
perceived etreaka of gray light edging the window-c
tains; dawn was then a]iproacliius. Presently I heard
Pilot bark far below, out of his distant kennel in the
court-yard: hope revived. Nor was it unwarranted; in
five minutes more the grating key, the yielding lot
JANE ETBB.
warned me my watch was relieved. It could not ha^
lasted more than two hours: many a week haa seem
shorter.
Mr. Booheater entered, and with him the surgeon 1
Imd been to fetch.
" Now, Carter, be on the alert, " he said to thia last:'
give yoii bat half an hour for diessing the wound, fasten-^
ing the bandages, getting the patient down stairs, and all. "
'■ But is he fit to move sir? "
" No doubt of it; it is nothing serious: he is Dervous,
Ilia spirits must be kept up. Come, set to work. "
Mr, Rochester drew back the thick curtain, drew utl
the itolland blind, let in all tlie light he could; and I n
suriiriaed and cheered to see how far dawn was advance
what rosy streaks were beginning to brigliten the (
Then he approached Mason, whom the surgeon was alrea
handling.
*Kow, my good fellow, how are you? " lie asked.
*'She's done for me, I fear, " was the faint reply.
" Not a whit! — courage! This day fortnight yon " ,
hardly be a pin the worse for it: yon've lost a little bloodfl
that's all. Carter, assure him there is no danger. " *
" I can do that conscientiously, " said Carter, who had
now uudoue the bandages; " only I wish I could have got
here sooner: he would not have bled so much — but how is
this? The flesh on the shoulder is torn as well as cut^il
This wound was not done with a knife: there have bee
teeth here! "
" She bit me, " he murmured. " She worried me liktr^
a tigress, when Rochester got the knife from her. "
" Yon should not have yielded: you should have
grappled with her at once, " said Mr. Eochester.
" But under such circumstances, what could one do? "
returned Mason. " Oh, it was frightfnll " he addedjJ
shuddering, " And I did not expect iti she looked i
quiet at first. "
" I warned you,'" was his friend's answer; " i saiu —
be on your guard wh^n you go near her. Besides, you
might have waited till to-morrow, and had me with you:
it was mere folly to attempt the interview to-night, and
alone. "
" I thought I could h»ve dcie some good. "
" You thought! you thought! Yus, it makes me i
natient to hear you: hut, however, yt»i have sufEered, an < ]^
323
JANE EYRE.

are likely to suffer enough for not taking my advice; ao
I'll say no more. Curter — hnrryl — hiiiTyT Tiie siiii will
Boon rise, and I must have him off. "
" Directly, sir; tlio shoulder is just bandaged. I must
look to this other wound in the arm: she lias had hej
teeUi here too. I think. "
" She sucked the blood: she said she'd drain my beBrt^^iH
Baid Mason. f^M
1 saw Mr. Rochester shudder: a eingular marked Q^fl
pression of disgust, horror, hatred, warped his conQQ^|
nance almost to distortion; but ho only said, " Conie,^^fl
silent, Bieliard, and never mind her gibberish: don't t^H
peat it. " JH
" I wish I fould forget it, "'was the answer. J^M
" You will when you are out of the couuti^: when Vfl^H
get back to Spanish Town, yoi; may thi^k nt^^ her as cto^H
and buried — or rather, you need not think of her at ttlI,'''< H
" Impossible f o forget this night!'* ^
'■It )8 not impossible: have some energy, man. You
thought you were as dead as a herring two hours since,
and you are all alive and talking now. Therel Carter has
done with you, or nearly so; I'll make yon decent ia eh
trice. Jane (ho turned to me for the first time since fl^l
re-entrauoe), ttikL- this key: go down into my bedi-odJiB
and walk straightforward into my dressing-room; 0B^|
the top drawer of the wardrobe, and take out a,olean s^m|
and neck-handkerchief: brin^ them hei-e; and be nimbt^oH
" I went, sought the I'epositoi'y he had mentioned, fauflH
tlie articles named, and returned with them.'H
" Now. " said he, " go to the other side of the bed while
I order his toilet; but don't leave the room: yon may be
wanted again. "
I retired as directed. m
" Was any bodv stirring below when yon went dowl ^J
Jane? " inquired Mr. Rochester, presently. ^1
" No, sir; all was very still. " ^
■ "'We shall get you off cannily, Dick: and it will hB
better, both for your sake, and for that of the poor c HSHB
ture in yonder. 1 have striven loug to avoid esposidgH
und I shoiiid not like it to come at last. Here, Carto^H
iielp him ou with his waistcoat. Where did you leava
your furreil cloak? You can't travel a mile without that,
,1 jiapvt, ill tlus 4 < wuB < l cQld cluaatg. Id. mn tsca^
JAITE EYRE. 223
Jane, run down to Mr. Mason^s room — the one next mine
— and fetch a cloak you will see there/^
Again I ran, and again returned, bearing an immense
mantle lined and edged with fur.
''Now, IVe another errand for you,^'said my untiring
master; " you must away to my room again. What a
mercy you are shod with velvet, Jane ! — a clod-hopping
messenger would never do at this juncture. You must
open the middle drawer of my toilet table and take out a
little phial and a glass you will find there — quick !''
I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels.
''That's well ! Now doctor, I shall take the liberty of
administering a dose myself, on my own responsibility. I
got this cordial at Rome, of an Italian charlatan — a fellow
you would have kicked. Carter. It is not a thing to be
used indiscriminately, but it is good upon occasion — as
now, for instanc'e. Jane a little water. "
He held out the tiny glass and I half filled it from the
water-bottle on the wash-stand.
''That will do : now wet the lip of the phial.''
" I did so : he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid
and presented it to Mason.
'* Drink, Richard : it will give you the heart you lack,
for an hour or so. "
''But will it hurt me ? is it inflammatory ? "
" Drink ! drink ! drink ! "
''Mr. Mason obeyed, because it was evidently useless to
resist. He was dressed now : he still looked pale, but he
was no longer gory and sullied. Mr. Rochester let him sit
three minutes after he had swallowed the liquid ; he then
took his arm.
''Now I am sure you can get on your feet, " he said :
" try. "
The patient rose.
" Carter, take him under the other shoulder. Be of
good cheer, Richard ; step out : that's it ! "
" I do feel better, " remarked Mr. Mason.
" I am sure you do. Now, Jane, trip on before us away
to the back stairs, unbolt the side-passage door and tell
the driver of the post chaise you will see in the yard — or
just outside, for I told him not to drive his rattling wheels
over the pavement — to be ready, we are coming : and,
Jane, if any one is about, come to the foot of the staira
and hem/'

234 .UNB EYRE.
It was by this time half-past five, and the gen was e
the point of rising, but I found the kitchen stil] dark aiL
Bilent, The side-paaaage door was fastened ; I opened i
with as little noise as possible; all the yard waa qu''
but the gate stood wide open, and there was a post-clii
with horses ready harnessed and driver seated on the b
stationed outside. 1 approached him and said the gentle-'
men were coming ; he nodded : then I looked cjirefully
round and listened. The stillDesa of early morning slum-
bered everywhere ; the curtains were yet di-awn over the
servants'chamber windows ; little birds were just twitter-
ing in the blossom -blanched orchard-trees, whose boughs
drooped like white garlands over the wall inclosing one
side of the yard ; the carriage horses stamped from timo
to time in their closed stables : all else was still. " ^
The gontlumeu now appeai'od. Mason^ supported 1
Mr. Rochester and- the surgeon, seemed to walk with U
erable ease : they assisted him into the chaise ; Cart
followed.
" Take care of him, " said Mr. Rochester to the latt
" and keep him at your house until he is quite well : I shu
ride over in a day or two to see how he gets on. Richi'
how is it with you ? "
" The fresh air revives me, Fairfax. "
" Leave the window open on his side. Carter ; there i
no wind — good by, Dick, "
" Fairfax'
" Well, what ia it ? "
" Let lier be taken care of : let her be treated as tenj
derly as may be : let her " he stopped and burst in^
tears.
" I do my best ; and have done it, and will do it, "
the answer : he shut up the chaise door and the vohieltf'"
drove away.
" Yet would to God there was an end of all this! "
added Mr. Rochester, as he closed and barred the heavy
yard-gates. This done, ha moved with slow step and
abstracted air toward a door in the wall bordering the
orchard. I, supposing he had ilono with me, prepared to
retcjn to the house ; again, however, I heani him call
" Jane ! " He had opened the portal and stood at it, wait-
ing for me.
" Come whtrb there is some freshness, for a few mo-
JANE EYIIE.
ments, " he s^d ; " that honso is a mere dnngeon: don't
you feel it ao? "
" It SBema to me a Bplendiii mansion, sir. "
" The glamour of iaexperience is over your eyes, " ha
answered; " and yon see it through a charmed medium;. I
you cannot discern that the gilding is slime, and the silk I
draperies cobwebs ; that the marble is sordid slate, and tha 1
polished woods mere refuse chips and scaly bark. Now
here (he pointed to the leafy inclosure we had entered) all .^
is real, sweet, and pure. "
He strayed down a walk edged with box; with i
trees, pear-trees, and cherry-trees on one side, and i
der on the other, full of all sorts of old-fashioned iloweru
stooke, sweet-williams, primroses, pansiea, mingled witfl^
Bouthemwood, sweet-bner, and varions fragrant herbs.'
They were fresh now as a anccession of April showers and
gleams, followed by a lovely spring morning, could make
them: the sun was just entering the dappled east, and his
light illumined the wreathed and dewy orchard- trees, and
shone down the quiet walks under them.
" Jane, will you have a flower? "
He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush^
and offered it to me.
" Thank you, sir. "
" Do you like this annrise, Jane? That sky. with its.]
high and light olouds, which are sure to melt away as th^
day waxes warm— this placid and balmy atmosphere? "
" I do, very much. "
" You have passed a strange night, Jane. "
" Yes, sir.'"
" And it has made you look pale ; were you afraid when
I left you alone with Mason? " i
" I was afraid of some one coming out of the inner
room. "
" But I had fastened the door — I had the key in my
fiocket: I should have been a careless shepherd if I had
eft a lamb — my pet Iamb — so near a wolf's don, unguarded:
you were safe. "
" Will Grace Poole live here atill, sir? "
" Oh, yes! don't trouble your head about her — put the
thing out of your thoughts. "
" Yet it seema to me your life is hardly secure while "
ehe stays. "
" Never fear — I will take care ot myBelf. "

it, ill a mo-
of life, TO^^
nd, aaS^^
226 JANE ETBE.
" Ib the danger yon apprehended last night gonfl 1
now, air? "
" I cannot vouch for that till Mason is out of England:
nor even then. To live, for me, Jane, ia to etana on a
crater-cru9t which may cracjk and spew lire any ilay. "
" But Mr. Mason B«emB a man easily led. Your influ-
ence, sir, ia evidently potent with him: he will never act
you at defiance, or willfully injure you. "
" Oh, no I Mason will not defy me; nor. knowing it,
will ho hurt me— but, unintentionally, he might in a mo-
ment, by one carelesa word, deprive me, if not of life, 3
forever of happiness. "
" Tell him to be cautions, sir: let him know'^
fear, and ehow him how to avert the danger. "
lie laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, :
hastily threw it from him,
" If I could do tliat, simpleton, where would the dan-
f;r be? Annihilated in a moment. Ever since I have
nowii Mason, I have only had to say to him'Do that,
and the thing has been done. But I can not give him or-
ders in this case.: I can not say,'Beware of harming me,
Richard;'for it ia imperative that I should keep him
ignorant that harm to mo is posaible. Now yon look
puzzled; and I will puziile you further. Yon are my little
friend, are you not?
" I like to serve you, sir, and to obey you in all that is
right. "
" Precisely : I see you do. I seen genuine contentment
in your gait and mien, your eye and face, when you are
helping me and pleasing me— working for me, and with
me, in. as you characteriatioally say,'all (hat ia right:'
ioT if I bid you do what yon thought wrong, there would
be no light-footed running, no neat-handed alacrity, no
lively glance and animated complexion. My friend would
then turn to me, quiet and pale, and would say,'No. sir ;
that is impossible; I can not do it, because it is wrong ;'
and would become immutable as a fixed star,- Well, you
too have power over me, and may injure me: yet I dare
not show you where I am vulnerable, lest, faithful and
friendly as you are, you should transfix rae at onco, "
" If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than
yon have from mc, sir, you are very safe. "
" God grant it may be so! Here, Jane, is an arbor ; sit
down. "
JANE EVHt.
mm
The arbor was an arch in the wall, lined with try;
Eontained a rustic scat. Mr. liochesttr took it. leavingB
worn, however, for me; but I stood before him. I
" Sit, " he said; " the bench is long enough for two. J
Foti don't hesitate to take a place at nij side, do you? Ia|
that wrong, Jane? "
I anawei'Od him by aBSuming it: to refuse would, I feltV
lave been an wise.
Now. my, little friend, while the sun drinks the dew—
while all the flowers in this old garden awake and expand J
md the birds fetch their young ones'breakfast out of thm
jornliold, and the early bees do their first spell of work — *
I'll ptit & case to you; whieh yon must endeavor to snp-l
Me your own: bnt first, look at me, and tell mo yoii aral
: eaae. and not fearing that I err in detaining yow, oh
that you err in staying. "
" No, sir; lam content. "
" Well then, Jane, call to aid your fancy: — suppose youl
..■ers no longer a girl well reared and disciplined, but aJ
irild bay indulged from childhood upward; imagine yonr-l
iQlf in a remote foreign land: conueire that you therefl
Wnmit a capital error, no matter of what nature or fronj^
Trhat motives, but one whose consequences must follow
Boa through life and taint all yonr existence. Mind, I
on't say a crime; I am not speaking of shedding of bloodJ
or any othei- guilty act, which might make the perpetrator
Bmenitble to the law: my word is error. The results o^
iirhat yoti have done become in time to you utterly ii
portable: you take measures to obtain relief: unwsu'd
measnrce, hut neither unlawful nor culpable. Still yonl
are miserable; for hopo has quitted you on the very oon-a
fines of hfe: your sun at noon darkens in an eclipse, whicld
yoH feel will not leave it till the time of setting. Bittoii
taA base associations have hecome the sole food of yonrl
tnomorv: you wander here and there, seeking rest .'
Oxilc: happiness in pleasure — I mean in heartless, sensu
jilensnre— auch as dulls intellect and blights feeling.^
Hi'iirl-weary and soul-wilhered, you come home aftorB
years of voluntury banishment; you make a new aequaint-|
wr.oe — how or where no matter; you find in this stranger^
^much of the good and bright quaHties which you have'
eonght for twenty years, and never before encountered;
aDCithev are all fresh, healthy, without soil and without
taut. Such society revives, regenerates: you feel bettei
r
?;
JANE EYRE.
days come back — higher wishes, parer feelings; you dewre
to reoommence your life, and spend what remains to
ou of days in a way more worthy of an immortui being.
To attain this end, are yon justified in overleaping an
ohstaclo of cuBtom — a mere conventional impediment,
wliich neither your conscience sanctifies nor your judg-
ment approves? "
He paused for an answer: and what was I to aay? Oh,
for some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory
response! Vain aspiration! The west wind whispered in
the ivy round me; but no gentle Ariel borrowed its breath
as a medium of speech: the birds snug iu the tree-tops;
but their song, however sweet, waa inai'ticulate.
Again Mr. Rochester propounded his theory.
" la the wandering and sinful, bnt now rest^seeking
and repentant man justified in daring the world's opinioOi
in order to attach to him forever this gentle, gracious,
genial stranger; thei'eby securing his own peace of mind
and regeneration of lifeP "
" Sir, " I answered, " a wanderer's repose or a sinner's
■.'^formation sbould never depend on a fellow Kireatnre.
Men aiid women die; philosophers falter in wisdom, and
Christians in goodness: if any one you know has suffered
and erred, let him look higher than his equals for strength
to amend, and solace to heal. "
" But the inetrnment — the instrument! God, who
does the work, ordains the instrument. I have myself — I
tell it you without parable — been a worldly, dissipated,
restless man; and I believe I have found the instrument
for my cure, in "
He paused: the birds went on caroling, the leaves
lightly rustling. I almost wondered they did not che < ^
their songs and whispers to catch the suspended revelation;
but they would have had to wait many minutes — so long
was the silence protracted. At last I looked up at the
tardy speaker: he was looking eagly at me.
" Little friend, " said he, in quite a changed tone —
while his face changed too; losing all its softness and
gravity, and becoming harsh and sarcastic — " you have
noticed my tender penchant for Miss Ingram: don't you
think if I married her she would regenerate me with a
vengence? "
He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of the
wftLk, and wnen he came back he was hummiug & tua«. j^m
JANE EYRE.
" Jane, Jane, " said he, stopping before me, " yoi
quite palo with your vigils : don't you curse me for distarb^
iHg your rest ? "
" Curse yoii ? No. air, "
" Shake hands in confirmation of the word. What cold
fingers! They were warmer last night whfin I touched
them at the door of the mysterious chamber. Jane, when
will you watch with me a^in ? "
" Whenever I can be useful, sir. "
" For instance, the night before I am married !
Bure I shall not be able to sleep. Will you promise to sifl
up with me to bear me company ? To you I can talk oP
my lovely one : for now you have seen her and know her.
" Yea, air. "
" She's a rare one, is she not Jane ? "
" Yes, sir. "
" A strapper — a real strapper, Jane; big, brown and'J
bnxom ; with hair juat such as the ladies of Carthage
most have had. Biees me ! there's Dent and Lynn in the
Etnbles I Go in by the shrubbery, through that wicket. "
As I went one way, he went another, and I heard him
in the yard, saying cheeringly, " Mason got the start of
you nil this morning ; he was gone before sunrise. I rose
at fonr to see him off. "'
CHAPTER XXI.
PRBSENTTMEirrs are strange things ! and so are sympa-
thies ; and so are signs : and the three combined make one
mystery to which humanity has not yet found the key. I
never laughed at presentiments in my life ; because I have
had strange ones of my own. Sympathies, I believe, exist:
(for instance, between far-distant, long-absent, wholly
estranged relatives : asserting, notwithstanding their alien-
ation, the unity of the source to which each traces hja
origin) whose workings baffle moral comprehension. And
signs, for aught we know, may be hut the sympathies of
Nature with man.
Wbrn I was a little girl, onlv six years old, I one night
heard Bessie Leaven say to ifartha Abbot that she had
Imfeu dreaming about a little child ; and that to dream at

230 Jane kyhe.
children was a sure aigti of trouble, either to one's eelf or
cue's kin. The saying might huve worn out of ray raem-
ory, had not a circumstance immediately followed which
served indelibly to fix it there. The next day Bessie was
sent for home to the death-bed of her little sister.
Of late I had often recalled this saying and this inoi-
dent ; for during the past week scarcely a night had gone
^ver my couch that had not brought with it a dream of an
infant ; which I sometimes hushed in my arms, sometimes
dandled on my knee, sometimes watched playing with
daisies on a lawn ; or again, dabbling its hands in running
- water. It waa a wailing child this night, and a laughing
one tlie next : now it nestled close to mc, and now it ran.
from me, but whate-vBr mood the apparition evinced,
whatever aspect it wore, it failed not for seven succesBi'"'
nights to meet me the moment I entered the land
slumber.
I did not like this iteration of one idea — this stri ,_^
recurrence of one image ; and I grew nervous as bedtimA'
approached, and the hour of the vision drew near. It was
from companionship with this baby-phnntom I had been
roused on that moonlight night when I heard the cry ; and
it was on the afternoon of the day following I was sum-
moned down stairs by a message that some one wanted me
in Mrs. Fairfax's room. Ou repairing thither, I found a
man waiting for me, having the appearance of a gentle-
man's servant ; he was drecsed in deep mourning, and the
hat he held in his hand was surrounded with a crape band.
■'I dure say you hardly remember me. Miss, " he said,
rising as I entered; but my name is Leaven: I lii'ed
coachman with Mrs. Reed when you were at Gateshead,
eight or nine years since, and I live there still. "
" Oh, Robert, how do you do? I remember you very
well : you used to give me a ride sometimes on Miss
Georgiana's bay pony. And how is Bessie ? Yon are
married to Bessie ? "
" Yea, Mias : my wife is very hearty, thank you ; she
brought me another little one about two months since — wu
have three now — and both mother and child are thriving. "
" And are the family well, at the house, Robert'i "
" I am sorry I can't give you better news of them,
they are very badly at present — in great trouble. "
" I hope no one is dead, " 1 said, glancing at his
iced,
dress. He too loolced down at the crape round his hat and
Implied, " Mr. John died, yesterday was a week, at his
chambers in London. "
" Mr, John? "
•■YeB. "
*'And how does his mother bear it? "
" Why do you see, Miss Eyre, it is not a common raishapj
hie life lias been rery wild: these last three years he gav^
liiniself up to strange ways; and his death was shocfc
ing. "
" I heard from Bessie he was not doing well, "
" Doing well! He could not do worse: he ruined hlft]
health and his estate among the worst men and the w
women. He got into debt and into jail: his mother helpedl^
him out twice; but as soon as he was free he returned to
hia old companions and habits. His head was not strong:
tJie knaves he lived among fooled him beyond anything I
ever heard. He came down to Gateshead about three
weeks ago, and wanted Missis to give up all to him. Missis
rcfnseil: her means have long been much reduced by his
extravagance; so he went back again, and the next news
was that he was dead. How he died, God knows! — they
■ aay he killed himself. "
I was silent: the tidings was frightful. Robert Leaven
resumed:'• Mieais had been out of health herself for some
time; she had got very stout, but was not strong with it;
and the loss of money and the fear of poverty were quite
breaking her down. The information about Mr. John's
death and tlie manner of it came too suddenly: it brought
on a stroke. She was three days without speaking; but
last Tuesday she seemed rather better: she appeared as if
flho wanted to say something, and kept making signs to my
wife and mumbling. It was only yesterday morning, how-
ever, that Bessie understood she was pronouncing your
name; and at last she made out the words,'Bring Jane —
fetch Jane Eyre: I want to speak to her,'Bessie is not
sure whether she in in her right mind, or means anything
by the words; but she told Miss Reed and Miss Georgina,
and advised them to send for you. The young ladies put
it off at first: but their mother grow so restless, and said,
'Jane. Jane,'BO many times, that at last they consented.
I left Oateshead yesterday; and if you can got ready. Miss,
I should like to take jou back with me early to-morrow
\
232 JANE EYRB.
" Yes, Robert, I ehall be ready: it seems to me that I
ought to go, "
" I tlimk so, too, Miss. Bessie said she waB sure you
would not refuse: but I aupposo you will have to aak leave
before yoii can get off? "
" Yes; and f will do it now; " and having directed him
to the servant's hall, and recommended him to the care of
John's wife, and the attentions of John himself, I went iu
search of Mr. Rochestev.
He was not in any of the lower rooms; he was not in
tlio yard, the stables, or the grounds: I asked Mrs. Fair-
fax if she had seen him; yes, she believed he was playlns
billiards with Miaa Ingram, To the billiard-room I
hastened; the click of balkand the hum of voices resounded
thence: Mr, Rochester, Miss Ingram, the two Misses Esh-
ton, and their admirers, were all busied in the game. It
required some courage to distui'b so interesting a party; my
en-and, however, was one I could not defer, so I approached
tile master where he stood at Miss Ingram's side. She
turned as I drew near and looked at me haughtily: her
eyes seemed to demand, " What can the creeping creatnre
want now? " and when I said, in a low voice, " Mr. B*-
chester, " she made a movement as if tempted to order me
away. I remember her appearance at that moment — it
was very graceful and very striking: she wore a morning-
robe of sky-blue crape; a gauzy azure scarf was twisted in
her hair. She had been all animation with the game, and
irritated pride did not lower the expression of her haughty
lineaments.
" Docs that person want you? " she inquired of Mr.
Rochester; and Mr, Rochester turned to see who the
" person " was. He made a curious grimace — one of his
strange and equivocal demonstrations — threw down his
cue, and followed me from the room.
" Well, Jane? " he said as he rested his back against
the ECJiooJ-room door, which he had shut.
" If you please, sir, I want leave of absence for a vi
or two. "
" What to do? AVhere to go? "
" To see a sick lady who has sent for me
" What sick lady? Where does she live!
" At Gateshead, in shire. "
" shire? That is a hundred miles off! Who
^§ be that sends for people to see her that distancef "
^inst
'ma;^!
''Her name is Beed, sir — Mrs. R«ed. "
" Reed of Gateahead? There was a Reed of Gatesheadjg
a magistrate. "
" It is hia widow, sir. "
" And wliat have yon to do with her? How do yoi
know her? "
" Mr. Reed was my uncle — my mother's brother. "
" The deuce he was! You never told me that before;
jou always said you had no relatious. "
" None that would own mc, aii-, Mr. Reed is dead,'and
hia wife cast me off. "
" Vfhyr
" Because I was poor, and burdensome, and she dislilted
me. " _
" But Reed left children — ^you must have cousins? Sir
George Lynn wag talking of Reed of Gateshead, yesterday
— who, he said was one of the veriest rascals on town; and
Ingram was mentioning a Geovgiana Reed of the same
pliwe, who was much admired for her beauty, a season a
two ago, in London. "
" John Reed is dead, too, sir; he ruined himself and hald
ruined his family, and ia supposed to have committea
suicide. The news so shocked his mother that it broughd
oil an apoplectic attack. "
" And what good can you do her? Nonsense, Jane!
would never think of rtinning a hundred miles to see a
old lady who will, perhaps, be dead when you reaeh hera
besides, you say she east you off. "
" Yes, sir, but thut is long ago; and when her circumJ
stances were very different; I could not be easy to negleeta
her wishes now. "
" How long will you stay ? "
" As short a time as possible, sir. "
" Promise me only to stay a week "
" I had better not pass my word; I might be obligi
break it, "
" At all events you wili come back; yon will not be in-j
duced under any pretext to take up a permanent restdenoc
with lier. "
" Oh, uo! I shall certainly return if all be welL "
" And who goes with yon? You don't travel a hundred^
miles alone. "
" No, sir, she has sent her coachman.
person to be tnisted? "
" Yes, sir, he hais lived tea years in the family. "
Mr. Eochester meditated. " When do you wish (
go? "
" Early to-morrow morning, sir. "
" Well, you must have some money; you cnu't tra^
without money, and 1 dare say you have not much; 1 1'-
5iven you no salary yet. How much have you in the w
ane? " he asked, smiling.
I drew out my purse; a meager thing it was. "
shillings, sir. " He took the purse, poured the hoard i:
his palm aud chuckled over it as if its scantiness plee
him. Soon he produced his pocket-book: " Here, " s
offering me a note: it was nity pounds and he om
but fifteen. I told him 1 had no change.
" I don't want change; you know that. Take yflS
wages. "
I declined accepting more than was my t.__. _
scowled at first; then, as if recollecting something, .]
said, " Right, right! Better not give you all now; ^'
would, perhaps, stay away three months if you had B
pounds. There are ten; is it not plenty? "
" Yes, sir, but now you owe mc five. "
" Come back for it theu: I am your banker for forty
pounds. "
" Mr. Rochester, I may as well mention another matter^
of business to you while I have the opportunity. "
" Matter of business? I am curious to hear it. "
" You have as good as informed me, sir, that yon A
going shortly to be married? "
" Yes; what then? "
" In that case, sir, Adele ought to go to school: 1 i
sure you wiii perceive the necessity of it. "
" To get her out of my bride's way; who might ot
wise walK over her rather too emphatically. There's sense
in the suggestion; not a doubt of it, Adele, as you sav,
must go to school; and you, of coui-se, must march straight
to — the devil? " ^
" I hope not, sir; hut I must seek another eituati
somewhere. "
" In course! " he exclaimed, with a twang of voice a
distortion of features equally fantastic and ludicrous,
looked at me some minutes.
" And old Madam Reed, or the Misses, her daughters,,^
rill be solicited by you to seek a place, I suppose? "
JANE EYRE.
" Ho, sir; I am not on such terms with my relatives as
would justify me in asking favors of them — but I shall
advertise, "
" You ehall walk up the pjraraida of E^ypt! " ho
growled, " At your peril you advertise! I wisb I had
only offered you a sovereign instead often pounds, tiive
tneback nine pounds, Jane; I've a use for it. "
" And BO nave I, sir, " I returned, putting my hande
and my purse behind me, " I could not spare the money
on any account. "
" Little niggardl " said he, " refusing ma a pecuniary
request! Give mo five pounds, Jane. "
" Not five shillings, sir; nor five pence. "
" Just let me loot at the casii, " ^^
" No, sir; you are not to be trusted. " ^H
" Jane? "'^M
" Sir? " V
" Promise me one thing, " ^*
" I'll promise yon anything, air, that I think I am
likely to perform.
" Not to advertise: and to trust this quest of a situa-
tion to me. I'll find you one in time. "
" I shall be glad so to do, sir, if you in your turn, will
promise that I and Adelo shall both be safe out of the
house before yonr bride enters it. "
" Very well! very well! I'll pledge my word on it.
You go to-morrow then? "
" Yes, sir; early, "
" Shall you come down to the drawing-room ;
dinner? "
" No, sir, I must prepare for the journey. "
" Then you and I must bid goo(i-by for a little whildl
" I suppose so, sir. "
" And how do people perform that eeremony of parting,
Jane? Teach me; I'm not quite up to it. "
" They say, Farewell: or any other form Ihey prof er. "
" Then say it. " ^
" Farewell, Mr. Rochester, for the present. "
" What must I say? "
" The same, if you like, sir. "
" Farewell, Miss Byre, for the present: is that all. "
" Yes. "
" It seems stingy, to my notions, and dry, and un-
friendly. I should like something else: a little additu "
a^^_
■ting,
sfer/^l
1 un- ,|
litM^^

238 JANE EYRE.
to the rite. If one shook liands, for instance; but m
that would ijot content me either. 80 you'll do no nt
than 98^ Farewell, Jane? "
" It 18 enough, sir: as much good-will may be conveyed
ill one hearty woi-d aa iii many. "
*■ Very likoly: bnt it is bliink and oool —'farewell.'"
" How long IB ho going to stand with his back against
that door? " I usked rnvHelf; " I want to commence my
jMicking. " The dinner-bell rang, and suddenly away h«
holtod, without another syllable: I saw him no more dup-
ing the day, and waa off before lie had risen in the m( ^^^
ing.
I re-fiohed the lodge at Gateshead about five o'clock
the afternoon of the first of May: I stoppeQ in there heft
going up to the hall. It was very clean and neat: the or-
namentivl windows were hnug with little white curtains;
the floor was spotless; the grate and fire-irons were burn-
ished bright, and the fire burned clear. Bessie eat on the
hearth, nursing lier laat-born, and Robert and his sister
played quietly in a corner.
" Bless you! I knew you would come! " exclaimed Mrs.
Leaven, as I entered.
" Yes, Bessie, " said I, after I had kissed her;
trust I am not too late. How is Mrs. Keed? Alive si
hope. "
" Yea, she is alive; and more sensible and collected
than she was. The doctor says she may linger a week or
two yet; bnt he hardly thinks she will finally recover. "
" Has she mentioned me lately? "
" She was talking of yon only this morning, and wish-
ing yon would come: but she ia sleeping now; or was ten
minutes ago, when I was up at the house. She generally
lies in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon, and wakes up
about sis or seven. Will you rest yourself here an hour.
Miss? and then I will go up with you. "
Bobert here entered, and Bessie laid her sleeping child
in the cradle and went, to welcome him: afterward she in-
sisted on my taking oS my bonnet and having some tea;
for she said I looked pale and tired. I was glad to accept
her hospitality; and I submitted to be relieved of my traT-
eling garb nist as passively as I used to let her undress -^
when a child.
Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched
hustling about— setting out the tea-tray with her

IMrs.
stisi^H
oept
I
c^iina, cutting breact and butter, toasting a tearcako, ani
between whiles, giving little Robert or Jane an occaaiot
tap 01- push, just a8 slie used to give me in former ilai
Beesienad retained her quick temper as well aaheriigl
foot and good looks.
Tea ready, I was going to approach the table ; but al_,
desired me to sit still, qnite in ner old, peremptory tones,
I mnet be served at the fireside, Bhe said; and she plaaed
before me a little round stand with my cup and a plate of
toast, absolutely aa she used to accommodate me with some
privatelypurloined dainty on a nursery chair, and I smiled
and obeyed her as in by-gone days.
She wanted to know if I was happy at Thornfield Hall,
and what sort of a person the mistress was ; and when
told her there was only a master, whether he was a nil
gentleman, and if I liked him. I told her he was rathi
an ugly man, but quite a gentleman ; and that he tr
me kindiy, and I was content. Then I went on to do!
scribe to her the gay company that had lately been staying
at the honse ; and to those details Bessie listened with in-
terest: they were precisely of the kind she relished.
In such conversation an hour was soon gone: Bessie re-
stored to me my bonnet, etc., and, accompanied by her, I
quitted the lodge for the hall. It was also accompanied
oy her tliat I had, nearly nine years ago, walked down the
path I was now ascending. On a dart, misty, raw morn-
ing in January, I had left a hostile roof with a desperate
and imbittered heart— a sense of outlawry and almost of
reprobation — to seek the chilly harborage of Lowoodr " ■ " ^
honme so far away and unexplored. The same hi
roof now again rose before me: my prospects were douGj
ful yet; and I had yet an aching heart. I still felt
wanderer on the faoe of the earth; but I experie
firmer trust in myself and my own powers, and less with-
ering dread of oppression. The gaping wound of my
wrongs, too, was now quite healed; and the flame of re-
sentment extinguished.'
" You shall go into the break fast- room first, "
Bessie, as she preceded me through the hall ; " the youd
hidies will he there. " «
In another moment I was witliin that apartment.
There was every article of furniture looking just as it did
oa the morning I was first introduced to Mr. Brockle-
the very rug be had stood upon still covered
JANE EtBB.
hearth. Glancing at the book-case. I thought I could
distinguish the two volumes of " Bewick's British Birds "
occupviiig their old place on the third shelf, and " Gulli-
ver's Travels " and the " Arabian Nights " ranged just
above. The iuaniinate objeote were not changed; but the
living things had altered past recognition.
Two yoimg ladies appeared before me, one very tall,
almost as tnll as Miss Ingi'am — very thin too, with a sallow
face and severe mien. There was something ascetic in hi-r
look, which was aueomented by the exti'emc plainness of
a straight-Bkirtpd, black, stull dress, starclied linen collm',
hair combed away from the temples, and the nun-like
ornament of a slnng of ebony beads and a erneifix. This
I felt sure was Elisa, though I could trace little resem-
blance to her former self in that elongated and colorless
visage.
The other was certainly Georgiana: but not the Geor-
eiana I remembered — the slim and fairy-like girl of eleven.
This was a full-blown, very plump damsel, fair as wax-
work; with liandsome and regular features, Jangnighing
blue cyea, and ringleted yellow hair. The hue of her
dress was black, too, but its fashion was so diSerent from
lier sister's — so much more flowing and becoming — ^it
looked as stylish aa the other's looked puritanical.
Ill each of the sisters thei'e was one ti'ait of the mother
— and only one: the thin and pallid elder daughter had
her parent's Cairngorm eye: the blooming and luxuriant
founger girl had her contonr of jaw and chin — perhaps a
ittlc softened, but still imparting an indescribable hardness
to the countenance, otherwise so voluptuous and buxom.
Both ladies, as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and
both addressed me by the name of " Miss Eyre. " Eliza's
greeting was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a
smile ; and then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the
fire, and seemed to forget me, Georgiana added to her
" How d'ye do? " several commonplaces about my journey,
the weather, and so on, uttered in rather a drawling tone:
and accompanied by sundry side glances that measured me
from head to foot — now traversing the folds of my drab
merino pelisse, and now lingering on the plain trimming
of my cottage bonnet. Young ladies have a remarkable
way ot letting you know that they think you a " quia, "
without actually saying the words. A certain supercil-
WHsness of look, eolornees of manner, nonchalance of toi
JANE EYRE.
express fnlly tlieir flentimenta on the point, without earn-
luittiug tlietniielvea ] > y any positive rudeaeas in word or
deed.
A Bueer, however, whether coveii or open, had n
longtir that power over me it once possessed : as I sat 1
tween my cousins, I was surprised lo find how easy I ttA
iiudtT the total neglcn;t of the one and the aemi-sarcastj
uttentions of the other— Eliza did not mortify, nc
giana ruffle me. The fact was, I had oLher things to thin]
tibotit; within the last few months feelings had heen stirrfl^
in me so mach move potent than any tJiey could riufl
—pains and pleasures so mucli more acnte and exquieM
had been excited, than any it was in their power to infli "
or bestow — that their airs gave me no concern either fi
good or had.
*'How is Mrs. Rcod? " I asked soon, looking calmly i
Georgiaua; who thonght 6t to bridle at the direct addrea
us if it were an unexpected liberty.
" Mrs. Reed ? Ahl mamma, you mean; she ia extreme|
poorly: I doubt if you can see her to-night. "
" If, " 6aidl, " you would just step up stairs and 1
her I am come, I should be much obliged to yon, "
Oeorgiana almost started, and siie opened lier blue eya
vild and wide. " 1 know she bad a particular wish to a
me, " I added, " and 1 would nut defer attending to 1
desire longer than is absolutely necessary, "
" Mamma dislikes being distnrbed in an evening, "
marked Eliza. I soon rose, tjuietly took off my boniu
and gloves, uninvited, and eaid I would just step out i
Bessie — who was, I dared say, in the kitchen — and ati
her to ascertain whether Mre. Reed was disposed to receiiS
me or not to-night. I went, and having found Bessie anj
dispatched her on my eri-and, I proceeded to take further
measures. It had heretofore been my habit always to
shrink from arrogance; received as I had been to-flay, I
ehonld. a year ago, have resolved to quit Gateshead the
very nest morning; now it was disclosed to me all at once
that that would be a foolish plan. I had taken a journey
of a hundred miles to see my aunt, and I must stay with
her till Bhe was bettor— or dead; as to her daughters pridj
or folly, I must put it on one side; make mystyf indepeu^
ent of it. So I addressed the housekeeper; asked her i
sLow roe a room, told her I should prohably be a visits
■ "'" ^tfor a week or two, had my trunk conveyed to i'
340
JANE E¥nB.
^moMi
chamber, and followed it thither myself: I met Bessie on
the UnrJing.
'■ MiBBis is awake, " said she; " I have told her you actt.
hei-e: come and let us see if she will know you. "
I did not need to be guided to the well-known
to which I had so ofteu been summoned for ohastisemaolj
or reprimand in former days, I hastened before Bessie,
softlv opened the door: a shaded light stood on the tabic,
for it was now getting dai-k. There was the great four-
post bed with amber hangings as of old: there the toilut-
table, the arm-chair, and the footstool: at which I had a
hundred times been sentenced to kneel, to ask pardon for
offenses, by me uncommitted. I looked into a certain
cofuer near, half expecting to see the slim outline of a
once-dreaded switch; which used to lurk there, waiting to
leap out irnp-like and lace mv quivering palm or shrink-
ing neck. I approached theoed; I opened the curtains
and leaned over the high-piled pillows.
Well did I rememMr Mrs. Reed's face, and I eagerly
sought the familiar image. It is a happy thing that time
([UbTIb the longings of vengeance, and hushes the prompt-
ings of rage and aversion: I had left this woman in bitter-
ness and hate, and I came back to her now with no other
emotion tlian a sort of rnth for her great sufferings, and a
strong yeiirning to forget and forgive all injuries — to be
reconciled and clasp hands in amity.
The well-known face was there: stern, relentless as
ever — there was that peculiar eye which nothing could
melt; and the somewhat raised, imperious, despotio eye-
brow. How often had it lowered on me menace and hate!
and how the recollections of childhood's terrors and sor-
rows revived as I traced its harsh line now! And yet I
Btooped down and kissed her: she looked at me.
" Is this Jane Eyre? " she said,
" Yea, Aunt Reed. How are you, dear aunt? "
I had once vowed that I would never call her aui
again: I thought it no sin to forget and break that vow'
now. My fingers had fastened on Tier hand which lay out-
side the sheet: had slie pressed mine kindly, I should at
that moment have experienced true pleasure. But unim-
pressionable natures are not so soon softened, nor are
natural autipBthies so readily eradicated: Mrs. Eeed took
her hand away, and, turning her face rather from me, she
■ked that the night was warm. Again she regari
JANE ETRB.
me, 80 ioily, T felt at once that her opinion of me — her
feeling toward me — was unchanged, and unchangeable. 1
knew by her atony eye — opaque to tenderness, indiesoluble
to tears — that ehe was resolved to consider me bad to the
last', because to have believed me good would give her no
generona pleasure: only a sense of mortification.
I felt pain, and then I felt ire; and then I felt a deter-
mination to subdue her — to be her mistresa in spite both of
lier nature and her will. My tears had risen, jUBt as in
childhood; I ordered them back to their source, 1 brought
a chair to the bed-head: I sat down and leaned over ihe
pillow.
" You sent for me, " I said, " and I am here; and it is
my intention to stay until I see how you get on. "
" Oh, of course! You have seen my daughters? "
" Yes. "
" Well, yon may tell them I wish you to stay till I can
talk some things over with you I have on my mind; to-
night it is too late, and I have diflBoulty in recalling them.
But there was something I wished to say — let me see "
The wandering look and changed utterance told what
wreck had taken place in her once vigorous frame. Turn-
ing restlessly, she drew the bed-clothes round her; my
elbow, resting on a corner of the quilt, fixed it down; she
was at once irritated.
" Sit up!'" said she; " don't annoy me with holding the
clothes fast — are yon Jane Eyre? "
" lam Jane Eyre? "
" I have had more trouble with that child than any
one would believe. Such a burden to be left on my
hands— and so much annoyance as she caused me, daily
and hourly, with her incomprehensible disposition, and
her sudden starts of temper, and her continual, unnatural
watching of one's movements! I declare she talked to me
once like something mad, or like a fiend — no child ever
spoke or looked as she did; I was glad to get her away from
the house. What did they do with her at Lowood.- " The
fever broke out there and many of the pupils died. She,
however, did not die: but I said she did — I wish she had
died! "
" A strange wish, Mrs. Reed: why do you hate her
BO? "
" T had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my
hnslmnd'B only sister, and a great favorite with him:
opposed the (amily'B ilisownmg lier when she made f
low marriage; and when news came of her death, he wea
like a simpleton. He would send for the hahy; though i
entreated him rather to put it out to nurse and pay for its
maintenance. I hated it the first time I set my eyes on it
— n sickly, whining, pining thing! It would wail in ita
cradle all night long— not screaming heartily like airi
other child, but whimpering and moaning. Eeed pitia
it; and he used to nurse it and notice It as if it had beaj
hie own; more, indeed, than he ever noticed his own f
that age. He would try to make my children friendly i
the little beggar: the darlings could not hear it, and ^
was angi'y with them when they showed their dislike,
his last illness, he had it brought continually to his he^
side; and hut an hour before he died, be hound i
TOW to keep the creature. I would as soon have bwL
charged with a pauper brat out of a workhouse; hut I^^
was weak, naturally weak. John does not at all resemhli*
his father, and I am ^lad of it: John is like me, and like
my brothers — he is quite a Gibson. Oh, I wish he would
ceaae tormenting me with letters for money! I have no
more money to give him: we are getting poor. I miistj
send away half the servants, and shut up part of thaj
house; or let it off, I can never submit to do that — ^yfit
how are we to get on? Two-thirds of my income goes infS
paying the interest of mortgages. John gambles dread.*j
fully, and always loses^poor boy! He is beset hy,a
sharpers: John is sunk and degratied — his look is fright- 1
ful — 1 feel ashamed for him when I see him. " 1
She was getting; much excited. " I think I had bettef;*
leave her now. " said I to Bessie, who stood on the otherj
side of the bed.
" Perhaps yon had. Miss; but she often talks in thuil
way toward night— in the morning she is calmer. " M
I rose. " Stop! " exclaimed Mrs. Reed. " There i^M
another thing I wish to say. He threatens me — he con- _
tinuaily threatens me with his own de^h or mine; and I
dream sometimes that I see him laid out with a great
wound in his throat, or with a swollen and blackened
faiic. I am come to a strange pass: I have heavy
troubles. What is to be done? How is the money to h
> iad? "
Bessie now endeavored to persuade her to take a ai
a1;ive draught: she succeeded with difficulty. Soon ait«
JANE BYRE.
Mrs. Reed grew more oompoaed, and ssuk into ii dozing
etate. I then left her.
More than ten days elapsed before I had again any con-
versation with her. She continued either delirious or
lethargic ; and the doctor forbade every thing which coiild
painfully excite her. Meantinie, I got on as well as I
oould with Georgiana and Eliza. They were very cold,
indeed, at first. Eliza would sit half the day sewing,
reading, or writing, and scarcely utter a word either to nie
or her Bister. Georgiana would chatter uouseiiae to her
canary-bird by the hour, and take no notice of me. But
I was determined not to seem at a loss for occupation or
amueement : I liad brought my drawing-materials with mo,
and they served me for both.
Provided with a case of peaijils and Bome sheeta of
paper. I used to take a seat apart from them, near the
window, and busy myself in sketching fancy vignettes,
representing any scene that happened momentarily to
shape itself in the ever shifting kaleidoscope of imagine
tion : a glimpse of sea between two rocks ; the rising moon,
and a ship crossing its disk ; a group of reeds aud water-
flags, and a naiad's head, crowned with lotus-flowers,
rising out of them ; an elf sitting in a hedge-Bi > arrrow*8
nest, under a wreath of haw thorn- bloom.
One morning I fell to sketching a face : what sort of a
face it was to be I did not caro or know. I took a soft
black pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away.
8oon I had traced on the paper a broad and prominent
forehead, and a square lower outline of visage : that con-
tour gave mo pleasure ; my fingers proceeded actively to
fill it with features. Strongly-marked horizontal eye-
brows must be traced under that brow ; then followed,
naturally, a well-defined nose, with a straight ridge and
full nostrils ; then a fleiiEile-looking mouth, by no means
narrow ; then a firm :^hin. with a decided cleft down the
middle of it : of course, some black whiskere were wanted,
and eonift jetty hair, tufted on the temples, and waved
above the forehead. Now for the eyes : I had left them
to the last, because they required the most careful work-
I drew them large ; I shaped them well : the eye-
laalies 1 traced long and somber ; the irids lustrous and
large, " Good ! but not quite the thing, " I thought, as I
surveyed the effect :'■ " They want more force and spirit ; "
md 1 wrought the shades blacker, t'lat the lights


JANE EYRE.
flash more brilliantly — a happy touch or two secured auo-
cesa. There, I had a. frieud's face under my gaze; and what
did it signily that those young ladies turned their baeka
on.me ? I looked at it ; I Gmiled at the speaking likeness :
I waa absorbed and content.
" Is that a portrait of some one you know? " asked
Eliza, who had approached me nnnoticed. I responded
that it was merely a fancy head, and hurried it beneath
the other sheete. Of course I lied : it was, in fact, a very
f^thful representation of Mr. Rochester. But what wa8_.
that to her, or to any one but myself ? Georgians all .
advanced to look. The other drawings pleased her much,
but she called that " an ugly man. They both seemeiL
eurprised at my ekili. I offered to sketch their portraits ;■
and each, in turn, sat for a pencil outline. Then Georgiana
produced her album. I promisod to contribute a water-
color drawing: this put her at once into good-humor.
She proposed a walk in the grounds. Before we had been
out two hours, we were deep in a confidential convereation :
she had favored me with a description of the brilliant
winter she had spent in London two seasons ago — of the
admiration she had there excited — the attention she had
received ; and I even got hints of the titled conquest slie
had made. In the course of the afternoon and evening
these hints were enlarged on : various soft conversations
were reported, and sentimental scenes represented; and,
in short, a volume of a novel of fashionable life was that
day improvised by her for my benefit. The communica-
tions were renewed from day to day ; they always ran on
the same theme— herself, her loves, and woea. It was
strange she never once averted either to her mother's ill-
ness, or her brothei^'s death, or the present gloomy state
of the family prqspects. Her mind seemed wholly taJcen up'
with reminiscences of past gayety, and aspirations af* " "
dissipations to come. She passed about five minutes
day in her mother's sickroom and no more.
Eliza spoke little : she had evidently no time to talk.
I never saw a busier person " than she seemed to be ; yet it
was difficult to say what she did : or rather, to discover
any result of her diligence. Sho had an alarum to call her
up early. I know not how she occupied herself befoi
breakfast, but after that meal she divided her time in!
regular portions: and each honr had its allotted —
Th " ec times u day she studied a little book, which I foui
JANE EYRE.
on inspection, was a Common Prayer Book. I asked her
once what was the great attraction of that vottime, and
she said " the Rubric, " Three houra she gave to atitcih-
ing.. with gold thread, the border of a square crimson
cloth, almnet large enough for a carpet. In answer to my
inqniries afi.er the nse of this article, she informed roe it
wa8 a covering for the alter of a new chnrch lately erected
near Gateshead. Two hours she devoted to her dairy,
two to working bj herself in the kitchen-ganden, and one
to the regulation of her accounts. She Beemed to want no
company, no conversation, I believe ahe was happy in
her way: this routine sufficed to her; and nothine annoyed
her so much as the occnrrence of any incident which forced
her to Tary its clock-work regularity.
She told me one evening, when more disposed to be
communicative than usual, that John's conduct, and the
threatened ruin of the family, had been a source of pro-
fuund affliction to her: but siie had now, she said, settled
her mind, and formed her resolution. Her own fortnne
she hail taken care to secure; and when her mother died
— and it was wholly improbable, she tranquilly remarked,
that she should eitner recover or linger long — she would
execute a long-cherished project: seek » retirement where
punctual habits would be permanently secured from dis-
turbance, and place safe barriers between herself and a
frivolous world. I asked if Georgiua would accompany
her.
" Of course not, Georgiana and she had nothing in
common: they never had had, 8lie would not be hur-
doued with her society for ajiy consideration, Georgiana
should take her own course, and she, Eliza, would take
hers. "
Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me,
snent most of her time in lying on the sofa, fretting about
ttie dullness of the house and wishing over and over again
that her atmt Gibson would send her an invitation up to
town, " It would be so much better, " she said, " if she
conid only get out of the way for a month or two, till all
was over, " I did not ask what she meant by " alt being
over. " but I supposed she I'eferred to the expected decease
of her mother and the gloomy aeqnel of the funeral rites.
Etiaa generally took no more notice of her sister's indo-
Kiice and complaints than if no such murmuring, loung-
eobject had been before her. One day, however, m ft'
246 JANB ETHB.
put away her account book and unfolded her embroideri
she saddenly took her up thus; " Geor^iina, a more t —'
and absurd animal than you was certuinly never allo <
to cumber the earth. You had no right to he bnrn;
you make no nae of life. Instead of living for, in i
with yoiii'self, as a roitsouable being ought, you seek o
to fasten yoiir feehloness on some other person's string
no one can be found willing to burden her or himself w
Buch a fat, weak, puffy, ueeleas thing, yoii cry out tiu
you are illtveated. neglected, miserable. Then, too, 63
istence for you must he a scene of tioutinual change am
exeitemont, op else the world is a dungeon: you mae'
admired, yoii must be courted, yon must be flattered — yen
must Lave music, dancing and eociety^ — or you languish
you die away. Have you no sense to devise a system whid
will make you independent of all efforts and lul wills 1
your own? Take one day, share it into sections, to et
section apportion its task: leave no stray unemployed qu„
tersof an hour, ten minutes, five minutes, include all; i
each piece of business in its turn with method, wiih ri,
regularity. The day will close almost before you
aware it nas begun, and you are indebted to no one 1
helping you to get rid of one vacant moment: you ha
had to seek no one's company, conversation, eympathjvj
forbearance: you have lived, in short, as an independer "
being ought to do. Take this advice: the first and last
shall offer you: then you will not want me or any one elU
happen wliat may. Neglect it — go on as heretofore, o
ing, whining and idling — and suffer the results of j
idiocy, however bad and insufferable they may be. I tell
yOrt this plainly, and listen: for though I shall no more
repeat what I am now about to say, 1 shall steadily act on
it. After my mother's death 1 wash my hands of yoa ~
front the day her coffin is caiTied to the vault in Gates
head Church, you and I will be as separate as if we hw
never known each other. You need'not think that ba _
cause we chanced to be born of the same parents, I shall
suffer you to fasten me down by even the feeblest claim:
I can tell you this — if the whole human race, ourselves ex-
cepted, were swept away, and we two stood alone on the ,
«arth, I would leave you in the old world and betake n
self to the new. "
She closed her lips.
" Yon might have spared yourself the trouble of dol

ering that tirade, " answered Georginua. " Everv
knows you are the moat selfish, heartlesa creature in i
eiice, and / know your Bpiteful hatred toward me: I
had a apecimen of it before, in the trick you played me
abont Lord Edwin Vere; you could not bear me to be
raised above you, to have a title, to be received into circles
where you dare not ehow your face, and so joii acted the
spy and informer, and ruined my prospects forever, "
Ooorgiana took ont her handlrerchief aud blew her nose
tor an hour afterward; Eliza sat cold, impassible and na-
aiduouBly industrious.
True, generous feeling ia made small account of by
some: bat here were two natures rendered, the one in-
tolei-ably acrid, the other despicable savorless for the waut
of it. Feeling without judgment ia a washy dran)
indeed; but judgment nntempered by feeling is too bif
and husky a morsel for human deglution.
It Was a wet and windy afternoon; Georgiana had fallM^
asleep on the sofa over the perusal of a novel; Eliza was
gone to attend a saint's day service at the new church —
for in mattcra of religion she was a rigid formalist; no
weather ever prevented the punctual discharge of what she
considered her devotional duties: fair or foiH she went to
church thrice every Sunday, aud as often on week-days aa
there were prayers,
I bethought myself to go up stairs and see now the
dying woman sped, who lay there almost unheeded; the
very servants paid her but a remittent attention: the hired
mirse, being little looked after, would slip ont of the room
whenever she could. Bessie was faitliful; hut she had her
own family to mind, and could only come occasionally to
'the hall; I found the sick-room unwatched, as I had ex-
pected: 110 nurse was there; the patient lay still, and
seemingly lethargic; her livid face sunk in the pillows:
the fire was dying in the grate. I renewed the fuel, re-
an-angei3 the bed-clothes, gazed awhile on her who could
not now gaze on me, and then I moved away to the win-
dow.
The i-ain beat strongly against the panes, the wind blew
tempestuously: " One lies there, " I thought, " who will
soon be beyond the war of earthly elements. Whither will
Ihat spirit — now stniggling In (juit its material tenement —
flit when at length rclfii^cd:-'"
^^ In pondering tliL- grc:it mystery, I thought of Helen
248
JANE EYRE,
Bums, recEilled b«i'dying words — her faith — her doctrine
of the eouaUty of disembodied bouIs. I was atill listening
in thouglit to her ivell remembered tones — still pictaring,
herpalQ and spiritual aspect, her wasted face and siiblimB^
fozQ, as she lay on her placid death-bed, and whispers^T
er longing to be restored to her divine Father's bosomJ
when a feeble voice murmured from the couch behini'
" WhoietJiat? "
I knew Mrs, Keed had not spoken for diiya: was t
reviving? I went up to her.
■'It IS I, Aunt Reed. "
" Who — I? " was her answer. " Who are you? " loc
ins at me with surprise and a sort of alarm, but still ud
wildly. " You aru quite a stranger to me — where is Bef
" Slie is at the lodge, annt. "
" Aunt! " she repeated. " Who calls me annt? Y0|
are not one of the Gilwona; and yet I know yon — that fao
aud the eyes and forehead are quite familiar to me: yotf
arc like— why, you are like Jane Eyre! " ^
I said nothing: I was afraid of occasioning some fibookl
by declaring my identity.
" Yet, " said she, " I am afraid it is a mistake: mj 1
thoughts deceive me. I wished to see Jane Eyre, and " til
fancy a likeness where none exists: besides, in eight yean. 1
ehe must be so changed. " I
I now gently assured her that I was the person she sup»9
posed and desired me to be: and seeing that I was undern]
stood, and that her eenaes were quite collected, I explained'!
how Bessie had sent her hueband to fetch me from Thora-'f
field,
" I am very ill, I know, " she said ere long. " I i
trying to turn myself a few minutes since, and find I caa-i
not move a limb: It is well I should ease my mind beforal
I die: what we think little of in health, buixiene us at sucIlJ
an hour as the present is to me. Is the nurse here? or ii
there no one in the room but yon? "
I assured her we were alone.
■'Well, 1 have twice done you a wrong which I regi-_,
now. One was in breaking the promise which I gave nifi
husband to bring you up as my own child; the other—
alie stopped. " After all, it is of no great importanoSfi]
perhaps,'she murmured to herself; " and then I may g'
better; and to humble myself to her is painful. "
JANE EYRE,
She made an effort to change her position, but failed:
her face changed; she seemed to experience some inward
sensation — the precursor, perhaps, of the laat pang.
" Well: I must get it over. Eternity is before me. I
had better tell her. Go to my dressing-case, open it, and
take out a letter yon will see there. "
I obeyed her directions. ^H
" Bead the letter, " she said. ^H
It was short, and thus conceived: ^H
" Madam, — Will you have the goodness to send me tBe
address of my niece, Jane Eyre, and to tell mc how she is:
it is my intention to write shortly and desire her to come
to me at Madeira. Providence has blessed my endeavors
to secure a competency; and as I am unmarried and child-
less, 1 wish to adopt her during my life, and bequeath her
at my death whatever I may have to leave.
" I am. Madam, etc., etc., .
" John Evbe, Madeinw^^H
It WEI8 dated three years back.'J^^
" Why did I never hear of this? " I asked. ^|
" Because I disliked you too fixedly and thoronghly^
ever to lend a hand in lifting yon to prosperity, I could
not forget your conduct to mo, Jane— the inry with which
you once turned on me; the toue in which you declared
you abhorred me the worst of any body in the world; the
unchild-like look and voice with which you ailirmod that
the very thought of me made you sick, and asserted that I
had treated you with miserable cruelty. I could not forget
my own sensations when you thus started up and poured
out the venom of your mind: I felt fear, as if an animal
that I had struck or pushed had looked up at me with
human eyes and cursed me in a man's voice. — Bring me
some water! Oh, make haste! "
" Dear Mrs. Heed, " said I, as I offered her the draught
she required, " think no more of all this, let it pass away
from your mind, For^ve me for my passionate language:
I was a child then; eight, nine years have passed since
that day. "
She heeded nothing of what I eaid; but when she had
tasted the water and drawn breath, she went on thus: " I
tell you I could not forget it; and I took my revenge: for
you to be adopted by your uncle, aud placed in a state of
) and comfort was what I could not endure.'


250 JXUE ETKE.
to him; I said I waa Borty for his disBappointment, bat Jw
Evre waa dead: she had died of typtia fever at Lowood'J
Now act as you please: write aud contradict ray asaer "
'— expose my falBchood as soon as vow like. You i
born, I think, to bo my torraeut: my last hour is racked i
the recollection of a deed which, but for you, I elioula
never have been tempted to commit. "
" If you could but be persuaded to think no more of it,
aunt, and to regard me with kindneas and forgiveneas "
" You have a very bad disposition, " said ehe, •'and one
to this day I feel it impossible to nnderstand: how for
nine yearayoii could be patient and quiescent under any
treatment and in the tenth break ont all fire and violence,
I can never comprehend. "
" My disposition is not eo bad as you think: I am pas-
wouate, but not vindictive; Many a time, aa a little child,
I should have been glad to love you if you would have let
me; and I long earnestly to be reconciled to you now: kiss
me, aunt. "
I approached my cheek to her lips: she would not touch
it. She said I oppressed her by leaning over the bed; and
again demanded water. As I laid her down — for I raised
her aud aiipported her on my arm while she drank — I
covered her ice-cold and clammy hand with mine: the
feeble fingera shrank from my touch — the glazing eyes
shunned my gaze.
" Love me, then, or hate me, as you will, " I said at
last, " yoii have my full and free forgiveness: ask now for
God's; and be at peace. "
Poor snfEering woman! it was too late for her to make
now the effort to change her habitual frame of mind:
living, she had ever hated me — dying she must hate me
still.
Tlie nurae now entered, and Bessie followed. I yet
lingered half an hour longei " , hoping to see some sign of
amity: but she gave none, She was fast relapsing into
stupor; nor did her mind again rally: at twelve o'clock
that night she died, I was not present to close her eyes;
nor were either of her daughters. They came to tell us
next morning that all was over. SJie was by that time
laid out. Eliza and I went to look at her: Georgiaiia,
who had burst out into loud weeping, said she dartS not
go. There was stretched Sarah Heed's once robust and^,
activ frame, rigid and still: her eye of flint was covei
JANE EYKE.
with Its cold Jid; her brow and strong trails wore yet tLo
iniproBs of her iuexorable soul. A strange and solenm
object was that coi-pse to me. I gazed on it with gloom
and pain: nothing soft, nothing aweet, nothing pitying,
or hopeful, or subduingj did it inspire; only a grating an-
guish for her woes— not my loss — and a aoniberj tearless
diamay at the fearfuIaeBS of death in sacli a fonn.
Eliza aurveyed her parent calmly. After a silence of
Bonio minntes she observed, " With her constitution, she
ehould have lived to a good old age: her life was short-
ened by trouble. " And then a spasm constricted her
month for an instant: as it passed away she turned and
left the room, and go did I. Neither of us had dropped a
CHAPTER XXn.
Mb, R00HE8TER had given me but one week's leave of
absence; yet a month elapsed before I quitted Gateshead,
I wished to leave immediately after the funeral; but
Georgiana entreated me to stay till she could get off to
Loudon: whither she was now at last invited by her uncle,
Mr. Gibson; who had come down to direct his sister'a
interment, and settle the family aflairs. Georgiana said
she dreaded being left alone with Eliza; from her she got
neither sympathy in her dejection, support in her tears,
nor aid in her preparations; so I bora with her feeble-
minded quailings, and selUsh lamentations, as well as I
could, and did my best in sewing for her and packing her
dresses. It is true, that while I worked, she was idle;
and I thought to myself, • "'If yon and I were destined to
live always together, cousin, we would commence matters
on a different footing. I should not settle tamely down
into being the forbearing party ; I should assign you your
share of whor, and compel you to accomplish it, or else it
should be left undone; I should insist, also, on your keep-
ing some ot those drawling, half-insincere complainta
hushed in your own breast. It ia only because our con-
nection happens to be very transitory, and comes at a
peculiarly mournful season, that I consent thus to tender
rieo patient and compliant on my part. "

At last I saw Georgiana off; bnt now it was Elii
turn to request me to stay another week. Her plaus ro-
quired all her time aod attention, she sivid: glie was about'
to depaK for some unknown bourne; and all day long she
Btaid in her own room, her door bolted within, filling
truuka, emptying drawers, burning papers, and holdiu " no
communication with any one. bhe wished me to Took
alter the house, to see callers, and answer notes of con-
dolence.
One morning, she told me I was at liberty. " And, "
she added, " I am obliged to you for your valuable services
and discreet conducti There is some difference betwf
living with such a one as you, and with Georgiana;
perform your own part in life, and burden no one.
morrow, " she coittinued, " I set out for the Continent. I
shall take up my abode in a religious house, near Lisle —
a nunnery you would call it: there I shaU be quiet and
nnmolested. I shall devote myself for a time to the
examination of the Roman Oatholic dogmas, and to a
careful stutly of the working of their system; if I find
it to be, as I half suspect it is, the one best calculated to
insure the doing of all things decently and in order, I
Hlial] embrace the tenets of Rome and probably take the^
veil. "
I neither expressed surprise at this resolution nor al
tempted to disuade her from it. " The vocation will fit
you to a hair, " I thought: " much good may it do yoal'
When we parted, she said, " Good-by, Cousin Ji
Eyre; I wish you well: you have some sense. "
I then returned: " You are not without sense. Cousin
Eliza; but what you have, I suppose in another year will
be walled up alive in a French convent. However, it is not
my business, and, so it suits you, I don't much care. "
" You are in the right, " said she: and with these words
we each went our separate way. As I shall not have wx
sion to refer either to her or her sister again, I may
well mention here that Georgiana made an advantageoi
match with a wealthy worn-out man of fashion; and tl
Eliza actually took the veil, and is at this day superior
the convent where she passed the period of her novitial
and which she endowed with her fortune.
How people feel when they are returning home from
abeence, longer short. I did " not know: I had never exi
\ Ui$ sensation. I had known what it was to c(
ices ^^
m
JANE EVHE.
bftokto Gateshead when ii child, after a long ralk-wfia-l!!.
scolded for looking cold or gloomj'; and later, what it was
to eome baet from church to Lowood — to long for a pleu-
toou;; meal and a good fire, and to btj enable to get either.
Neither of these returning^ were very pleasant or desirable:
uo magnet drew ms to a given point, increasing in its
Btrength of attraction the nearer I came. The return to
Thornfield was yet to be tried.
My journey seemed tedious — very tedious: fifty miles one
day, a uight spent at an inn; fifty miles the nest day.
During the first twelve hours I thought of Mrs. Beed m
her last momenta: I saw her disfigured and discolored face,
(ind heard her strangely altered voice. I mused on the
funeral day, the coffin, the hcarae, the black train of tenants
and servants — few was the number of relatives — the gaping
vault, the silent church, the solemn service,'flien I
thought of Eliza and Oeorgiana ; I beheld one the cynosure
of a ball-room, the other the inmate of a convent cell; and
I dwelt on and analyzed their separate peculiarities of per-
son and character. The evening arrival at the great town
of scattered these thoughts; night gave them quite
another turn: laid down on my traveler's bed, I left
reminiscenoe for anticipation.
I was going back to Thornfield: but how long was I to
stay there? Not long; of that I was sure. I had heard
from Mrs. Fairfax in the interim of my absence: the party
at the hall was dispersed: Mr. llochester had left for Lon-
don three weeks ago, but he was then expected to return
in a fortnight. Mrs. Fairfax surmised that he was gone
to make arrangements for his wedding, as he had tiuked
of purchasing a new carriage ; she said the idea of hia
marrying Miss Ingrain still seemed strange to her; but
from what everybody said, and frq^m what she had herself
seen, she could no longer doubt that the event would
shortly take place. " You would be strangely incredulous
if you did doubt it, " was my mental comment. " I don't
doubt it. "
The question followed, *'Where was I to go? " I
dreamed of Miss Ingram ail the night: in a vivid morning
dream I saw her closing the gates of Thornfield against me
and pointing me out another road; and Mr, Rochester
looked on with his arms folded — smiling sardonically, as
it seemed, at both her and me.
1 had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax the exact day of mj
^
return ; for I did not wish eitlier car or carriage to mefl
me at Millcote. I pi-oposeil to walk the Jistance (juietlj
by myself; and very quietly, after leaving my bos m tl?
hostler's cai " e, did I enp away from tbe George Inn, abotq
BiK o'clock of a Jiiue evening, and take the old road I
Tliornfield. a road wliich lay chiefly throngh fields, an^
waa now little frei^iicntod.
It waa not a bright or splendid summer evening, thougj,
fair and soft: the hay-makers were at work ail along thi
road; and the sky, though far from cloudless, was auch tf
promised well for the future; its blue — where blue wfi
vieible — was mild and settled, and its cloud strata higji
and thin. The west, too, waa warm: no watery gleaifl
chilled it — it seemed as if there was a fire lit, an altai
burning behind its screen of marbled vapor, and out of
aperatures shone a golden redness.
I felt glad as tbe road shortened before me: SO glad that
I stopped once to ask myself what that joy meant: and to
remind reason that it was not to my home I was going, or
to a permanent resting-place, or to a place where fond
friends looked out for me and waited my arrival. " Mrs,
Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to he sure, "'said I
" and little Adele will clap her hands and jump to see jou^
but you know very well yon are thinking of another thai
they; and that he is not thinking of you. " i
But what is so headstrong as youth? What so blind a
inexperienee? These affirmed that it was pleasure e
to have the privilege of again looking on Mr. Bochester, I
whether he looked on me or not; and they added, " Hast'eaf*
hasten! be with him while you may; but a few more days
or weeks, at most, and you are parted with him forever! "
And then I strangled a new bom agony — a deformed
thing which 1 could not-persuade myself to own and r
*nd ran on.
They are making hay, too, in Thomfield meadows:
■ather, ^he laborers are just quitting their work, a
curniug home with their rakes on their shotildei
it the hour I amve. I have but a field or two to traverse,
md then I shall cross the road and reach tlie gates. How
full the Hedges are of roses! But I have no time to
gather any; I want to be at the house. I i .. "
brier, shooting leafy and flowery branches across the patU
i eee the narrow stile with stone steps; and I e'" "
Boohester sitting there, a book and a pencil in lua handi
he is writing.
Well, he is not a ghost; yet every nerve I have is un-
strung: for a moment I am beyond my own myBtery.
What does it mean? I did not think I should tremble in
this way when I saw him— or lose my voice or the power
of motion in his presence, I will go back as soon aa I can
etir: I need not make an absolute tool of myself. I know
another way to tlie house. It does not signify if I knew
twenty ways, for he has seen me.
" Hillo! " he cries; as he puts np hia book and his
pencil. " There yon are! Come on if you please, "
I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I know
not; being scarcely ct^nizant of my movements, and so-
licitous only to appear calm; and, above aJl, to control
the working muscles of my face — which I feel rohel inso-
lently against my will, and struggle to express what I had
resolved to conceal. But I have a veil — it is down: I may
make shift yet to behave with decent composnre,
" And this is Jane Eyre? Are you coming fi-om Mill-
cote, and on foot? Tes — just one of your tricks: not to
send for a carriage, and come elatlering over street and
road like a common mortal, but to steal into the ^incinage
of your homn along with twilight, Just as if you were a
dream or a shade. What the deuce have you done with
yourself this last month? "
" 1 have been with my aunt, sir, who is dead. "
" A true Janian reply ! Good angels be my guard! She
comes from the other world — from the abode of people
who arc dead; and telle me so when she meets me alone
here in the gloaming! If I dared, I'd touch you, to see if
jnu are substance or shadow, you olf ! — ^but I'd as soon offer \
to take hold of a blue ignis fofinis light in a marsh. /
Trcant! truant! " he added, wlien he had paused an in-
stant, " Absent from me a whole month: and forgetting
me quite, I'll be sworn! "
I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master
again; even though broken by the fear tiiat he was soon to
cease to be my master, and by the knowledge that 1 was
nothing to him: but there was ever in Mr. iktchester {so
at least I thought) such a wealth of the power of commu-
nicating happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scat-
tered to stray and stranger birds like me, was to feast gen-
iallv. J^ia Jiiat ffprds were balm: they seemed to imply
256 JANE ETEB,
that it imported somethiug to Kim whether I forgot
not. And he had epoken of Tborafleld as my homt
would that it were my homel
He did not leave the Btilo, and I hardly liked to ask to
go by. I inqnired soon if he had not been to London.
" Yea: I sappose you found that out by second flight. "
" Mrs. Fairias told me in a letter. "
" And did she inform you what I went to do? "
" Oh, yes, sirl Everybody knew your errand. "
" You maet see the carriage, Jane, and tell me if
don't think it will suit Mrs. Rochester exactly ;
whether she won't look like Queen Boadicea, leaning back
against those purple cushions. I wish, Jane, I were a
trifle better adapted to match witTi Iier externally. Tell
toe now, fairy as you are, can't you give a charm, or &
philter, or something of that eort, to make me a han^ "
man? "
" It would be past the power of magic, sir; " and,
fiionght, I added, " A loving eye is all the charm needed;
to such you are handsome enongh; £ > r rathor, your stem-
Z1BS8 hae a power beyond beanty. "
Mr. Rochester had sometimes read my unspoken
Chonghts with an acumen to me incomprehensible: m the
present instance he took no notice of my abrupt > ocal re-
cponge; but he smiled at mo with a cei-fain smile he hod
< ff his own, and which he used but on rare occasions. He
seemed to thiak it too good for common purposes; it was
the real sunshine of feeling — he shed it over me now.
" Pass, Janet, " said he, making room for me to cross
the stile: " go up home and stay your weary little waor
cerin^ feet at a friend's threshold, "
All I had now to do was to obey him in silence:
need for me to colloqnize further. I got orer the fltS
without a word, and meant to leave him calmly. An im-
^nlse held me fast — a force turned me round, I said, or
eomething iu me said for me, and in spite of me:
" Thank you, Mr. Rochester for your great kindness.
I am strangely glad to get back again to you ; and wherever
you are is my home — my only home. "
I walked on so fast that oven he could hardly have over-
taken me had he tried. Little Adele was half wild wiUi
delight when she saw me. Mrs. Fairfax received me wil "
her usual plain friendliness, Leah smiled ;
Sophie bid me " bon eoir " with glee. This

pleaaant : there is no happiness like that of being loved by
yoor fellow-creatures, and feeling that your presence is an
addition to their comfort.
I, that ereniog, shut my eyes reaolntely against the
future : I Btopped my ears against the voice that kept
warning me of near separation and coming grief. When
tea was over, and Mrs. Fairfax had taken her Knittii
tnitting, and
I had osenmed a low Beat near her, and Adele, kneeling OS'
the carpet, had nestled close up to me, and a eense oh
mutual affection seemed to surround us with a ring oi
golden peace, I uttered a silent prayer that we might n.''
be parted far or soon ; but when, as we thus sat, IL
Hoohester entered, unannounced, and, looking at us,
seemed to take pleasure in the spectacle of a group so ami-
cable — wlien he said he supposed the old lady was all right,
now that she had got her adopted daughter back again,
and added that he saw Adcle was " prt^te & croquer ea
petite maman Anglaise " — I half ventured to hope that he
would, even after his marriage, keep us together some-
where under the shelter of his protection, and not quite
esiled from the sunshine of his presence,
A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to
Thornfield Hall. Nothing was said of the master's mar-
riage, and I saw no preparations going on for such an event.
Almost every dav I asked Mrs. Fairfax if she had yet
heard anything decided ; her answer was always in the
negative. Once, she said, she had actually put the ques-
tion to Sir. Itocheater ua to when he was going to bring hia
bride home ; but he had answered her ouly by a joke, and
one of his qubcr looks, and she could not tell what to ma &
of him.
One thing especially surprised me. and that was there
were no joumeyings backward and forward, no visits to
Ingram Park : to be sure, it was twenty miles off, on the
borders of another county ; but what was that distance to
an ardent lover? To so practiced and indefatigable a
horseman as Mr. Rochester it would be but a morning's
ride. I began to cherish hopes I had no right to con-
coive; that the match was broken oil; that rumor had been
mistaken; that one or both jiarties had changed their
minds. I used to look at my master's face to see if it
were sad or fierce : but I conld not remember the time
when it had been so uniformly clear of clouds or evil
'" Iff in the moments I and my pupil spent with
i
liim, I lacked spirits and sank into inevitable dejeotion, he
became even gay. Ne»er had he called me more fre-
quently to his presence ; never been kinder to me whait
tnere-^and, alaa 1 never had I loved him so well.
CHAPTER XXin.
A SPLENDID midsummer shone over England : skiea
80 pure, snns so radiant as were then seen in long suiytes-
eion, seldom favor, even singly, our vrave-girt land. It wae
as if a band of Italian days had come from the South, like
a flock of glorious passenger-birds, and lighted to rest
them on the cliffs of Albion. The hay vpas all got in ; the
fields around Thornfield were green and shorn ; the roads
white and baked ; the trees were in their dark prime ;
hedge and wood, full-leaved and deeply tinted, contrasted
well with the sunny hue of the cleared meadows between.
On midsummer eve, Adele, weary with gathering wild
Btpawberries in Hay Lane half the day, had gone to bed
with the sun. I watched her drop asleep, and when I left
her I sought the garden.
It was now the sweetest hour of the twenty-four:
" Day its fervid flres had wasted, " and dew fell cool on
panting plain and scorching summit. Where the sua had
gone down in simple state^pure of the pomp of clouds —
spread a solemn purple, burning with the light of red
jewel and furnace ilame at one point, on one hill-peak, and
extending high and wide, soft and still softer, over half
heaven. The east had its own charm of fine deep blue,
and its own modest gem, a rising and solitary star : soon it
would boast the moon; but she was yet beneath the horizon.
I walked a while on the pavement; but a subtle, well-
known sCent — that of a cigar — stole from some window ;
I saw the library casement open a hand-breadth ; I knew I
might be watched thence; so I went apart into the orchard.
No nook ill the grounds more sheltered and more Eden-
like ; it was full of trees, it bloomed with flowers : a very
high wall shut it out from the court on one side ; on the
other, a beech avenue screened it from the lawn. At tl
JANE EYRE.
36ft'
bottom vae a snnk fence; its sole eeparation from lonelj
fields; a winding walk, bordered with laurels and termi-
nating witli giant horse-chestnut, circled at the base by a
seat, led down to the fence. Here one could wander un-
seen. While such honey-dew fell, such silence reigned,
such gloaming gathered, I felt as if I eould haunt such
eliade forever: but in threading the flower and fruit par-
terres at the upper part of the inclosure, enticed there by
the light the now rising-moon casts on this more open
quarter, my step is stayed — not by sound, not by sight,
but once more by a warning fragrance.
Sweet-briar and southernwood, jasmine, pink, and
have long been yielding their evening sacrifice of incense]
thb new scent is neither of shrub or fioweri it is — I knov
it well — it is Mr. Rochester's cigar. I look round and
listen. I see trees laden with ripening fruit. I hear a
nightengale warbling in a wood half a mile off': no moving
forra is visible, no coming step audible; but that perfume
increases; I must flee, I maie for the wicket leading to
the shrubbery, and I see Mr. Rochester entering, I step
aside into the ivy recess; he wilt not stay long: he will soon
return whence he came, and if I sit still he will never see
me.
But no — eventide is as pleasant to him as to me,
this antique garden is attractive; and he strolls on,
lifting the gooseberry-tree branches to look at the fruit,
large as plums, with which they are laden; now taking a.
ripe cheriy from the wall; now stooping toward a knot of
flowers, either to inhale their fragrance or to admire the
dew-beads on their petals. A great moth goes hummin|[ "
by me: it alights on a plant at Mr. Rochester's foot: *— "
sees it and bends to examine it.
" Now he has his back toward me, " thought I, " :
he is occupied too; perhaps, if I walk softly, I can slip away
unnoticed. "
I trod on an edgeing of turf that the crackle of the
pebbly gravel might not betray mo: he was standing among
the beds at a yard or two distant from where I had to pass;
the moth apparently engaged hira, " I shall get by very
well, " I meditated. As I crossed his shadow, thrown long
over the garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he aaid
Suietly without turning, " Jane, come and look at this
allow. "
I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind — could
'ose^^H
nov^^H
360 JANE EYKB.
bifi shadow feeir I started at first, aud titen I approacHi
him.
" Look at his winga, " said he, " he reminds me ratW
of a West Indian insect; one does not often see so lai
and gay a night-rover in England: there! he is flown.'
The Diotli roamed away. I was sheepishly retreatiiU^
also; but Mr. Rochester followed me, and when we reacb^
the wicket, he said, " Turn hack: on so lovely a night f
is a shame to sit in the house; and surely no one can wis "
to go to bed while sunset is thus at meeting with mooi
rise. "
It is one of my faults, that though my tongue is i
times prompt enongh at an answer, there are times
it sadly fails me in framing an excuse; and always the
lapse occurs nt some crisis, when a facile word or plausible
pretext is specially wanted to get me out of painful em-
barrassment. I aid not like to walk at this hour alone
with Mr. Rochester in the shadowy orchad; but 1 could
not find a reason to allege for leaving him. I followed
with lagging step, and thoughts busily bent on discovering
a means of extrication; but he himself looked bo com-
posed and 80 grave also, I became ashamed of feeling ativ.
confusion: the evil — if evil existent or prospective thf " ^
was seemed to lie with me only; his mind was unconaci
and quiet.
" Jane, " he recommenced, as we entered the laurel
walk, and slowly strayed down in the direction of the sunk
fence and the liorse-chestnut, " Thornfield Is a pleasant
place in summer, is it not? "
" Yes, sir. "
" You nust have become in some degree attached to
the house — you, who have an eye for natural beauties, and
a good deal of the organ of adhesiveness? "
" I am attached to it, indeed. "
" And though I don't comprehend how it is, I perceive
you have acquired a degree of regard for that foolish little
child, Adele, too: and even for simple dame Fairfax? "
" Yes, sir; in different ways, I have an affection f
both. "
" And would be sorry to part with them?
" Yes. "
" Pityl " he said, and sighed and paused. " It is i
ways the way of events in this life, ho continued m*
ently; no sooner have you got settled in a pleagftlitli


JANE ETEB.
ing-place, than a voice calls out to you to rise and i
on, for the honr of repose is expired. "
'■ Must I moTe on, sir? " I asked. " Must I Ieal3
Thomfield? "
" I believe you must Jane. I am sorry, Janet, but |
believe indeed yon must. "
This wag a blow: but I did not let it prostrate me.
" Well, sir, I shall be ready when tne order to mai
" It must come now^I must givo it to-night. "
" Then you are going to be married, sir?'
" Ex-act-ly — pre-ciae-ly: with yourneual acntenesB, yO(
have hit tlie nail straight on the head, "
" Soon, sir? "
" Very soon, my — that is. Miss Eyre: and yoiill re-
member. Jane, tlie first time I, or Rumor, plainly inti-
mated to you that it is my intention to put my old
bachelor's neck into the sacred noose, to enter into the
holy estate of matrimony — to take Miss Ingram to my
bosom, in short (she's an extensive armful: but that's not
to tlie point— one can't have too much of such a very ex-
cellent thing as my beautiful Blanche): well, as I was say-
ing — listen to me, Jane — ^! You're not turning your head
to look after move moths, are you? That was only a lady-
clock, child, flying away home.'I wish to remind you
that it was you who first said to me, nith that discretion
I reapect in you — with that foresight, prudence and hu-
mility which befit your responsible and dependent position
— that in case I married Miss Ingram— both you and little
Adele had better trot forthwith. I pass over the sort of
Blur conveyed in this suggestion on the character of my
beloved indeed, when you aie far away, Jauet, I'll try to
forget it; I shall notice »uly its wisdom; which is such that
I have made it my law of action. Adele must go to school;
and you. Miss Eyre, must get a new situation.
" Yes, sir, I will advertise immediately: and meantime,
I suppose — :— " I was going to Bay, " I suppose I may stay
bore till I find another shelter to betake myself to; " but I
stopped, feeling it would not do to risk a long sentence,
for my voice was not quite under command.
" In about a month I hope to bo a bridegroom, " con-
tinned Mr. Rochester; -'and in ihe interim, I shall myself
iook out for employment and an asylum for you. "
^—f'Thank you, sir; I am sorry to give'
Z^a JAKE BTBB. ^^^^H
" Oh, no need to apologiael I consider that when 19
dependent does her duty as well aa you have done yoar%9
she hae a sort of claim upon her employer for any littla-3
assistance he can conveniently render her; indeed I have
alreadj, through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place
that /think will suit: it is to undertake the educauon of
the Gve daughters of Mrs. DionysiuB O'Gall, of Bitterniit'—
Lodge, Connaught, Ireland. You'll like Ireland, I thlnkjM
they're such warm-hearted people there, they say. " ^ *■
" It is a long way off, air. "'^
'* No matter— a girl of your sense will not object to the
Toyago or the distance. "
" Not the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is
a barrier "
" From what. Jane? " ^M
" From England and from Thornfield: and " ^M
" Well? " ■
" From you, sir, " IH
I eaid tnis almost involuntarily; and, with ta lit^fl
sanction of frec-will, my tears gushed out. I did tiM|
cry so aa to be heard, however; 1 avoided sobbing. Tbefl
thought of Mrs. O'Gall and Bitteruut Lodge struck cold'
to my heart; and colder the thought of all the brine and
foam destined, as it seemed, to rush between me and tl)e
master at whose side I now walked! and coldest the
remembrance of the wider ocean — wealth, caste, custom
intervened between me and what I naturally and inevi-
tably loved.
" It ia a long way, " I again said.
" It ia, to be sure; and when you get to Bi tt emu t Lodge,
Connaught, Ireland, I shall never see you again, Jane;
that's morally certain, I never go over to Ireland, not
having myself much of a fancy ,^{or the country. Wo. ,
have been good friends, Jane; have we not? "
" Yes, sir. "
" And when friends are on the eve of separation thq
like to spend the little time that remains to them close f»
each other. Come — ^we'll talk over the voyage and the
palling (juietly, half an hour or so, while the stars enter
into their shining life up in heaven yonder: here is the
chestnut-tree: here is the bench at its old roots. Ciome,
we wiU sit there in peace to-night, though we should
never more be destined to sit there together. " He seated
me and himself.
JANB ETUE.
" It 18 a long way to Ireland, Janet, and I am sorry to
send ray little ftiend on ancli weary travels: but if I c "
do better, how is it to be helped? Are you anything e
to me, do yoii think. Jane?
I could risk no sort of answer by tliie time: my hei
was full. ^_
" BecauBG, " he eaid, " I Bometimes have a queer feeling™
with regard to you — especially when yon are near me, as
now: it is as if I had a string somewhere under my left
riba, tightly and inextricably knotted to a similar string
situated in the corresponding quarter of your little frame.
Aud if that boisterona channel, and two hundred miles or
ao of land come broad between us, I am afraid that cord of
communion will be snapped ; and then I've a nervous
notion I should take to bleeding inwardly. As for you —
you'd forget nie. "
" That I never should, sir; you know " impoaeible
to proceed.
" Jane, do you hear that nightingale singing in the
wood? ListenI "
In listeiiing, I sobbed convulsively; for I could repress
what I endured no longer; I was obliged to yield, and I
was shaken from head to foot with acute distress. When
I did speak it was only to express and impetuous wish that
I liad never been born, or never come to Thornfleld.
''Because you are sorry to leave it ? "
The vehemence of emotion, stirred by gi-icf and love
within me, was claiming mastery, and struggling for. full
sway; and aifesevting a right to predominate; to overcome,
to live, rise, and reign at last: yes — and to speak.
" I grieve to leave Thornfield : I love Thornfield: — I
love it. because I have lived in it a full and delightful life
— momentarily, at least. I have not been trampled on.
I have not been petrified. I liave not been buried with in-
ferior minds, and excluded from every glimpse of com-
munion with what is bright and energetic, and high. I
lutvo talked, face to face with what I reverence ; with
whiit I delight in — with an original, a vigorous, and an ex-
panded mind. I have known you, Mr. Rochester; and it
strikes me with terror and anguish to feel I absolutely
mnat be torn from you forever. 1 ace the necessity of de-
parture; and it is like looking on the necessity of death. "
'•'Where do you see the necessity? " he aeked, suddenly.
■'Whore? You, sir, have placed it before me. "
204
JANE EYRE,
" In what Hhapo? "
" In the shape of Mias Ingram; a noble and beautif
woman — your bride. "
" My bride! what bride? I have no bridel "
" But you will have,''
" Yes; I will! I will! " He set hia teeth.
" Then I must go: you have said it yourself. "
" No: you muBtstaj! I swear it — and the oathshi
kept. "
" I tell you I muet go! " I retorted, roused to f
i^a^ like passion. Do yon think I can stay to become
nothing to youi " Do you think I am an automaton? — a
maehine without feeliugs? and can bear to have my morsel
of bread Buatohed from my lips, and my drop of living_
water dashed from my cup? Do yon think because I
Eoor, obscure, plain, and little. I am soulless and hei
tss? You think wrong!^I have as mucli soul ob ]
and full as much heart! And if God had gifted me v
some beauty and much wealth, I should have made it
ha] " d for you to leave me, as it is now for me to leave t
I am not talking to you now thi-ough the medium of ctisto
conventionalities, nor even of mortal flesh: it is my a;
ihat addresses your spirit; just as if both had ]
through the grave, and we stood at God's feet, e
we arel "
" As we arel " repeated Mr, Rochester — " so, " he added, "
inclosing ine in hia arms, gathering me to his breast, press-
ing hia nps on uiy lips: " so, Janei "
" Yes, so, sir, " I rejoined: " and yet not so; for you
are a married man — or as good as a married man, and wed
to one Inferior to you— to one with whom you have no
sympathy — whom I do uot believe you truly love; for I
have seen and heard you sneer at her. I would scorn sucl^ ■
• union: therefore I am better than you— let me go!''
" Where, Jane? To Ireland? "
" Ves — to Ireland. I have spoken my mind, and i
go anywhere now. "
" Jane, be still; don't struggle so like a wild, frani
bird, that is rending its own plumage in its deaperatio
'.'I am no bird: and no net ensnares me; Iam»t__..
human being, with an independent will; which I now ex-
ert to leave you. "
Another eSort set me at liberty, and I stood erect h%-
fore him.
" And yoor will shall decide your destiny, " he said;
" I offer yon ray hand, my heart, and a share of all my
1 torn away
is you ouly
" You play a farce, which I nierely laugh at. "
" I ask you to pass through life at my side — to be my
second self, and heet eai-thly companion.'
'■For that fato you have already made your choice, and
must abide by it, "
" Jane, be still a few moments: you are orer-excited; I
will be still too. "
A wafl of wind came sweeping down tlie laurel-walk,
and trembled through the boughs of the chestnut: it waa-
dered away — away — ^to au indefinite distance — it died.
The nightingale's song was then tlie only voice of the
houi-: in listening to it I again'wept, Mr. Rochester sat
quiet, looking at me gently and serionsly. Some time
passed before be spoke: he at last said: " Come to my
side Jane, and let ua explain and uuderstund one an-
other. "
" I will never again come to jour side: I a
now, and can not return, "
" But, Jane, I summon you as my wife; i
I intend to marry. "
I was silent: I thought he mocked me,
" Come, Jane — come hither. "
" Your bride stands between us. "
He rose, and with a stride reached me.
" My bride is here, " he said, again drawing me to him,
" because my equal is here, and my likeness, Jane, will
you marry me?
Still I did not answer, and still I writhed myself from
his gi'asp: for I was still inci-edulous.
" Do you doubt me, Jane? "
" Entirely. " JH
" You have no faith in rae? " ^M
" Not a whit. " ^M
" Am I a liar in your eyes? " he asked, passionately? "
" Little skeptic, you s/iall be eonvinced. What love have
I for Miss Ingram? None: and that you know. What
love has she for me? None: as I have taken pains to
prove: I caused a rumor to reach her that my fortune was
not a third of what was supposed, and after that I pre-
sented mvself to see the rosiilt; it was coldness both from
bc r and ner mother- I would not — I could not — marry
266 JANE EYE£.
Miss Inipram. You — you atrange — you almost uneartli],
thingl — I love aa my own flesh. You — poor and obacurfl
and anmll and plain as yon are — I entreat to accept d
a husband. "
" What, me? " I ejaculated: beginning in his eameet-
neas — and especially in his incivility — to credit his sin-
cerity: " me wlio have not a friend in the world but y
— if you arc my friend: not a shilling but what yon fc
given me? "
" You, Jane. I must have you for my own— entire
my own. Will you be mine? Say yes, quickly. "
" Mr, Rochester let me look at your face, turn ti
moonlight. "
" Why? "
" Because I want to read your countenance; inml "
" There: you will Bnd it scarcely more legible than a
crumpled, scratched page. Bead on: only make haste,
for I suffer. "
His face was very much agitated, and very much
flBshfd, and there wore strong workings in the featnres,
anil strange gleams in the eyes.
" Oh, Jane, you torture me! " he exclaimed. " With
that ecarcliing and yet faithful and generous look, you
torture me! "
'■ How can I do that? If you are true, and your offer
real, my only feelings to you must be gratitude and ^
votion — they can not torture. "
" Omtitude! " he ejaculated: and added wildly, " Jani
accept me quickly. Say Edward — give me my nam & 7
Edward I will maiTy you, "
" Are you in earnest? Do yon truly love me? Doyoi
dncerely wish me to be your wife? " \
" I do; and if an oath is necessary to satisfy jon^ J
swear it. "
" Then, sir, I will marry you, "
" Edward — my little wiiel "
" DeorEdwaral "
" Come to me — come to me entirely now, " said he:
and added, in hia deepest tone, speaking in my ear aa his
cheek was laid on mine, " Jfake my nappiness — I will
makeyoiirs. " —
" God pai'don me! " he subjoined ere long; " and t
noddJe not with me: I have her and will hold her. "
JANE EYEE.
one to meddle, sir. I Ii
(nterfere. "
" No— tliat is the best of it, " he said. ~M
And if I had loved him less I should have thought hia
accent and look of exultation aavage: but, sitting by him,
roTised from the nightmare of parting — called to the
Saradise of union — I thought only of the blies given me to
rink in so abundant a flow. Again and again he said,
" Are you happy, Jane? " And again and again I
answered, " Yes,'After which he murmnred, " It will
atone — it will atone. Have I not found her friendless,
and cold, and comfortless? Will I not guard, and cherish,
and solace her? Is there not love in ray heart, and con-
stancy in my resolves? It will expiate at God's tribunal.
I know my Maker sanctions what I do. For the world's
judgment, I wash my hands thereof. For man's opinion,
I defy it. "
But what had befallen the night? The moon was not
yetset, and we were all in shadow: 1 could Bcarcely see my
master's face, near as I was. And what ailed the chest-
nut-tree? It writhed and groaned ; while wind roared in
the laurel walk, and came sweeping over us.
" We must go in, " said Mr. Rochester; " the weather
changes. I could have sat with thee till morning;, Jane. "
" And so, " thought I, " could I with you. " I should
have said so, perhaps, but a livid, vivid spark leaped oat
of a cloud at which I was looking, and there was a crack,
B, crash, and a close rattling peal; and I thought only of
hiding my dazzled eyes against Mr. Rochester shoulder.
The rain rnehed down. He hurried me up the walk,
through the grounds, and into the house; but we wero
quite wet before we cou!d pass the threshold. Ho waa
taking off mj shawl in the hall, and shaking the water out
of my looseiied hair, when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from her
room. I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr. Roches-
ter, The lamp was lit. The clock was on the stroke of
twelve.
" Hasten to take off your wet things, " said he; " and
before tou go, good-night^good-night, my darling! "
He kissed me repeatedly. When I looked up, on leav-
ing his arms, there _stood the widow, pale, grave, and
amazed. I only smiled at her, and ran up atairs.
'Explanation will do for another time, " thought I. Still,
'hea I reached my chamber, I felt a pang at the idea that

368 Jane eyrk.
she should even temporarily misconatme what she Iia3
seen. But joy soon effaced every other feeling; and loud
as the wind blew, near and deisp as the thunder crashed,
fierce and frequent as the lightning gleamed, cataract-like
as the ruin fell during a storm of two hours duration, I
experienced tio fear, and little awe. Mr. Rocheater came
thrice to mv door in the course of it, to ask if I was saf^
and tranquil: and that was comfort, that was strength t'
any thing.
Before I left my bed in the morning, little Adele c
rnnning in to tell me that the great horse-chestnut at t
bottom of the orchard had been struck by lighting in t
night, and half of it spht away.
CHAPTER XXIV.
As T ROSE and dressed, I thonght over what had hi
pened, and wondered if it were a dream. I could not
certain of the reality till I had seen Mr. Rochester again,
and heai-d him renew hia words of love and promise.
While arranging my hair, I looked at my face in the
glaBB, and felt it was no longer plain; there was hope in
its aspect, and life in its color; aud ray eyes seemed as if
they had beheld the fount of fruition, and borrowed
beams from the lustrous ripple. I had often been unwill-
ing to look at my master, because I feared he could not
be pleased at my looks; but I was sure I might lift my
face to his now, and not cool his affection hj its expression.
I took a plain but clean and light summer dross from m'
drawer and put it on: it seemed no attire had ever so Wft "
become me; because none had I ever worn in so blissful
mood.
I was not surprised, when I ran down into the hall, by'
see that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the
tempest of the night; and to feel, through the open glass
door, the breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze. Nature
must he gladsome when I was so happy. A beggar-woman
and her little boy — pale, ragged objects ooth — were
coming up the walk, aud I ran down and gave them all
the money I happened to have in my purse — some thrWI
3n.
m v
i

JANE EYBE.
a^H
or four shiiliiigs : good or bad they must partake of my
jnbilee. The rooks cawed, and blither birds eun^: but
nothing was bo merry or so musical as my own rejoicing
heart.
Mi's. Fairfax surprised mo by looking out of the window
with a Bad countenance, and saying gravely, " Miss Eyre,
will you come to breakfast ? " During the meal she waa
quiet and cool : but I could not undeceive her then. I
mitst wait for my maeter to give explanations ; and so must
she. I atf what I could, and fhen I liastened up stairs. I
met Adele leaving the school-room. -«
" Where are jou going ? It is time for lessons, " J
" Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery. " fl
" Where is he ? " ^
" In there, " pointing to the apartment she had left;
and I went in, and there he stood.
" Come and bid me good-morning, " said he. I gladly
advanced ; and it was not merely a cold word now, or even
a shake of the hand that 1 received, bnt an embrace and a
kiss. It seemed natural : it seemed genial to bo so well
loved, so caressed by him.
" Jane, yon look blooming, and smiling, and pretty, "
said he : " truly pretty this morning. la this my pale,
little elf ? Ib this my mustard-seed ? This little sunny-
faced girl with the dimpled cheeks and rosy lips ; the satin-
smooth hazel hair, and the radiant hazel eyes? " (I hai
■en eyes, reader; but you must e! "''''" "
1 the^ were new-dyed I suppose.)
" It IS Jane Eyre, sir. "
" Soon to be Jane Eoeheater, " he added: In four
weeks. Janet ; not a day more. Do you hear that ? "
I did, and I could not quite comprehend it : it made me
giddy. The feeling the announcement sent through me,
was something stronger than was consistent with joy —
Bomethiug that smote and stunned : it was, I think,
almost fear.
" You blushed, and now yon are white, Jane: what in-
that for? "'
" Because yoa gave mi: ,1 new name — Jane RooheE
and it seems so strange. "
" Yes, Mrs. Rochester, jaid he: " young Mrs. Bochea-'
ter — Fairfax Rochester*:; girl bride. "
" It can never be, sir; it does not sound likely,
man beings never enjoy complete happiness iu this world,
green eyes, reader ; but you must excuse the mistake : ta^^^^
him they were new-dyed I suppose.) j^^|
tat ift^H
Hu-
'orld. I

870 JANE EYRE.
I was not bom for a different deetiDy to the rest of my
epecies: to imagine such a lot befalling me is a faii^ tale —
a day-dream. "
" Which I can and will realize. I shall begin to-day.
This morning I wrote to my banker in London to send me
certain jewels he has in his keeping — heir-looms for the
ladies of Thornfleld. In a day or two I hope to ponr then*,
into your lap : for every privilege, every attention shall'
yonrs, that I would accord a peer's daughter, if about
mariT her. "
" Oh, sir, never mind jewels ! I don't like to hear tbt
spoken of. Jewels for Jane Eyre sounds unnataral "
strange : I would rather not have them. " ,
■■ I will myself put the diamond chain round yonr necl^ ,
and the circlet on your forehead, which it will become ; for
Nature, at least, has stamped her patent of nobility on this
brow, Jane ; and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine
wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers with rings. "
" No, no, sir! think of other subjects, and speak of
other things, and in another strain. Don't address me as
if I were a beauty ; I am your plain, Quakerish governess. "
" You are a beauty, in my eyes : and a beauty just "
the desire of my heart— ^Jelicate and aerial, "
" Puny and insignificant, you mean. You are dref
tng, sir, or you are sueei^ng. For God's sake, don''
ironical ! "
" I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty,
too, " he went on, wliile I really became uneasy at the strain
he had adopted ; because I felt he was either deluding him-
self, or trying to delude me, " I will attire my Jane in
satin and lace, and she shall have roses in her hair ; and I
will cover the head I love beat with a priceless veil. "
" And then you won't know me sir; and I shall not be
your Jane Eyre any longer, hut an ape in a harlequin's
jacket^a Jay in borrowed plumes, I would aa soon see
you, Mr. Rochester, tricked out in stage-trappings, aa my-
self clad in a court-lady's robe ; and I don't call you hand-
some, sir, though I love you most dearly ; far too dearly to
flatter you. Don't flatter me. "
He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my
deprecation. " This very day I shall take you in the car-
riage to Millcote, and you must choose some dresses for
yourself. I told you we shall be married in four weeks.
The wedding is to take place quietly, in the church doyiftj
the
LOSS. "
afte^^_
JAK£ ETBE.
below yonSer ; and then I shall waft you away at once to
town, AtUr a brief stay there, I shall hear my treasure I«
regions ncar«r the sun: to French vineyards and Italian
plains ; and s'ae shall see whatever is famous in old story
and in modern record : she shall taste, too, of the life of
cities ; and elie shall learn to value herself by just compari-
80U with others. " _
" Shall I travel ? — and with yon, sir ? "
" You shall sojourn at Pans, Rome, and Naples :
Florence, Venice, and Vienna : all the ground I have wan^
dered over shall be re-trodden by you : wherever I stampedr
my hoof, yonr svlph'a foot shall step also. Ten years sinc^
I flew through tlurope half mad ; with diegust, hate, tmm
rage, as my companions : now I shall revisit it healed snq
cleansed, with a very angel as my comforter, "
I laughed at him as he said this. " I am not an angel, ,
I asserted ; " and I will not be one till I die : I will be myij
self. Mr. Rochester, you must neither expect nor ex
anything celestial of me — for you will not get it, i
more than I shall get it of you: which I do not at all antia-1
pate. "
" What do you anticipate of me ?
" For a little while you will perhaps be as you are now
— a very little while; and then you will turn cool; and then
you wiU be capricious ; and then yon will be stern, and I
shall liave much ado to please you : but when you get woU
naed to me, you will perhaps like me again — like me, not
iove me. I suppose your love will etfervesce in six months,
or less. I have observed in books written by men, that
poriod assigned as the farthest to which a husband's ardor'
extends. Yet, after all, as a friend and companion, *^
hope never to become qnite distasteful to my del
master. "
" Distasteful! and like you again! I think I shall
like you again and yet again : and I will make you
fess I do not only like, but lova you — with truth, fervor,
constancy, "
" Yet you are not capricious, sir ? "
" To women who please me only by their faces, I am
the very devil when I bnd out they have neither souls nor
hearts — when they open to me a perspective of flatness,
triviality and, perhaps, imbecility, coarseness and ill-
temper : bat to the clear eye and eloquent tongue, to the
'& re, and the chai-actur that bcuds but does
IS,
M
\

T^
272 JflJfE EYBE.
not break — at once snpple and stable, tractable and con-
BJsteQt — I am ever tender and true. "
" Had you ever experience of auch a character, air?
Did you ever love snch an one ? " ^ "
" I love it now. "
" But before mo : if I, indeed, in any respect ccmo *
to that difficult standard ? "
" I never met your likeness. Jane, yon please me, and
you master me — you seem to submit, and I like the sense
of pliancy you impart : and while I am turning the soft,
silken skein round my finger, it sends a thrill np my arm
to my heart. I am influenced — conquered ; and the influ-
ence is sweeter than I can express, and the eomjnest I
undergo has a witchery beyond any triumph / can win.
Why tto you smile, Jane ? Wliat does that inexplicable,
that uncanny turn of coimtenanee mean ? "
" I was thinking, sir (yon will excuse the idea ; it waa
involuntary), I was thinking of Hercules and Samson wi th_
their charmers " ^ "
" You were, you little elfish "
" Husb, sir! Yon don't talk very wisely just now;
more than those gentlemen acted very wisely. Howw
had they been married they would no doabt by their
severity as hnsbauds have made up for their softness & e
Buitore. and bo will yon, I fear.- I wonder how you will
answer me a year hence should I ask a favor it does i
Buit your convenience or pleasure to grant, "
" Ask me something now, Janet — ^the leaet Uudff^
desire to be entreated " ^^1
" Indeed, I will, sir ; I have my petition all ready. "
" Speak! But if you look up and smile witti''
countenance I shall swear concession before I km
and that will make a fool of me. "
■*'Not at all, air ; I ask only thin : don't send for the
Jewels and don't crown me with roses ; yon might as well
put a border of gold lace round that plain pocket handker-
chief you liave there. "
" I might as well'gild reflned gold.'I know it ; your
request is granted, then — for tlie time. I will remand'the
order I dispatched to my hauker. But you have not yet
asked for anything ; yon have prayed a gift to be witt —
drawn : try again.
" Well, then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my o
ttty which is much pi^ne^ ptt ons.poillt^-'^ " " ^^
JANE EYRB, 273
He looked disturbed, " Wliat? what? " he said hastily.
■'Curiosity is a dangerous petition: it is well I hava not
taken a vow to accord every request "
" But there can be no danger in complying with this,
sir. "
" TJtter it, Jane, but I wish that instead of a mere in-
quiry into, perhaps, a secret, it was a wish for half my
estate. "
" Now, King Ahaauerus! What do I want with half
your estate? Do ^ou think I am a Jew-usurer, seeking a-
good investment in land? I would much rather have all
your confidence. You will not exclude me from your con-
fidence if you admit me to your heart? "
" You are welcome to all my confidence that is worth
having, Jane; but for God's sake, don't desire a useless
burden! Don't long for poison — don't turnout a down-
right Eve on my hands! "
" Why not, sir? You have been just telling me how
much you liked to be conauered, and how pleasant over-
persuasion is to you. Don t you think I had better take
advantage of the confession, and begin and coax and en-
treat — even cry and be sulky, if necessary — for the sake of
a mere essay of my power? "
" I dare you to any such e.vperiment. Encroach, pre-
sume, and the game is up. "
" Ib it, sir? You soon give in. How stern you look
now! Your eyebrows have become as thick as my finder,
and your forehead resembles what, in some very astonish-
ing poetry, I once saw styled'a blue-piled thunder-loft.'
That will be your married look, sir, I suppose? "
" If that will be your married look, I, as a Christian,
will soon give up the notion of consorting with a mere
sprite or salamander. But what had you to ask, thing? —
out with it! "
" There, you are leas than civil now; and I like ruda-
neeaagreat deal better than flattery: I had rather be a
thing than an angel. This is what I have to ask: Why did
yon take such pains to make me believe you wished to
marry Miss Ingram? "
" Is that all? Thank God, it is no worse! "
And now he unknit his black brows; looked down smil-
ing at me. and stroked my hair, as if well pleased at seeing
a daoEer averted.
think I may confess, " he continued,
ev^^d
JANE ETRE.
althongh I should make you a littk indienant, Jane — and'
I have seen what a fire spirit yoa can be when yon are
indignant. You glowed in the cool moonlight last nJEht,
wlien you mutinied against fate, and claiTned yoar rank as
my equal. Janet, by-the-by, it was you who made me the
offer/'
" Of course I did. But to the point, if you pleaae, sir
— Miss Ingram? "
" Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I
wished to render von & a madly in love with measlwaa
with you; and I knew iealousy would be the best ally I
oonld call in for the furtherance of that end. "
" Excellent! — Now you arc small — ^not one whit bigger
than the end of my little finger. It was a burning shame
and a scandalous disgi'ace to act in that way. Did yoi
think nothing of Miss Ingram's feeiinga, sir?
" Her feelings are concentrated in one — pride; and t]
needs humbling. Were you jealous, Jane? "
" Never mind, Mr. Rochester; It is in no way interesting
to yon to know that. Answer me truly once more: Do
you think Miss Ingram will not suffer from your dishonest
coquetry? Won't she feel forsaken and deserted?
" Impossible! — when I told you how she, on the con-
trary, deserted me; the idea of my insolvency cooled, or
rather extinguished, her flame in a moment. "
" You have a curiouB, designing mind, Mr, Bocbester.
I am afmid your principles on some points are eccentric. "
" My principles were never trained, Jane; they may
have grown a little awry for want of attention. "
" Once again, seriously; may I enjoy the great g
that has been vouchsafed to me, without fearing that
one else is suffering the bitter pain I myself felt awl
ago? " _
" That you may, my good little girl: there is not
another being in the world has the same pure love for me
us yourself — -for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul,
Jane, a belief in your affection. "
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shouldt
I loved him very much — more than I could trust n "
aay — more than words had power to express.
" Ask something more,'he said presently;'
delight to be entreated, and to yield. "
r was again ready with my request,
" Communicate your intentions to Mm. FMriai^ t
ime ■ H
41
JANE EYRE.
slio saw me with yoii last night in the hall, and she was
shocked. Give her eome explanation before I see her
again. It pains me to be misjndged by so good a woman. "
" Go to jour foom, and put on your bonnet, " lie w-
plied. " I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this
moraiiig; and while you prepare for the drive, I will en-
lighten the old lady's understanding. Did she think,
Janet, you had given the world for love, and considered
it well lost? "
" I believe she thought I had forgotten my station,
and yotirs, sir. "
" Station! gtation! — your station is in my heart, and on
the necks of those who would insult you, now or hereafter
Go. "
I was soon dressed ; and when I heard Mr. Rochester
qoit Mrs. Fairfax's parlor, I hurried down to it. The old
lady had been reading her morning portion of Scripture —
the lesson for the day; her Bible lay open before her, and
her spectacles were upon it. Her occupation, suspended
by Mr, Rochester's announcement, seemed now forgotten:
her eyes fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the
surprise of a quiet mind, stirred by unwonted tidings.
Seeing me, she roused herself: she made a sort of effort to
smile, and framed a few words of congratulation; but the
smile expired, and the sentence was abandoned iiufiuished.
She put up her spectacles, shut the Bible, and pushed her
chaii'back from the table.
" I feel so astonished, " she began, " I hardly know
what to say to you, Miss Eyre, I have surely not been
dreaming, have I? Sometimes I half fall asleep when I am
Bitting alone, and fancy things that have never happened.
It has seemed to me more than once when I have been in
a doze, that my dear husband, who died fifteen years since,
has come in and sat down beside me; and that I have even
heard him call me by my name, Alice, as he used to do.
Now, can yon tell me whether it is actually true that Mr.
Rochester has asked you to marry him? Don't laugh nt
me. But I really thought he came in here five minutes
ago, and said, that in a month you would be his wife.
" He has said the same thing to me, " I replied.
" He has! Do you believe him? Have you acceptfl
him? "
" Yes. "
e fookgd > t me bewilderad.

276 JANG EYRE.
" I could never haye tliough it. He is a proud i
all the RocbeaterH were proud: and his father, at leai
liked money. He, too, has always been called cat *
He meana to man-y you ? "
" He tells me so.'
She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that
they had there found uo charm powerful enough to solve
the enigma.
" Itpaases mel " she continued:'" but no doubt it is
true, since you aay so. How it will answer, I cannot tell:
I really don't know. Equality of position and fortune is
often udvisable in such caeea: aud there are twenty years
of difference in your ages. He might almost be your
father. "
" No, indeed, Mrs, Fairfax! " exclaimed I, nettled; " he
is nothing like my father! No one, who saw us together,
would sn]ipoee it for ao instant. Mr. Rochester looke as
young, and is as young as some men at five-and-twenty. "
" Ib it really for love he is going to marry yon? " *
asked.
I was so hurt by her coldneas and skepticism, that
tearfl rose to my eyes.
" I am sorry to grieve you, " pursued the widow; " but
you are so young, and so little acquainted with uien, I wish
to put you on your guard. It is an old saying that'all is
not gold that glitters;'and in this case I do fuar there will
be something found to be different to what either you or I
expect. "
" Why? — am I a monster? " I said: " is it impossible
that Mr. Rochester should hare a sincere affection for
me? "
" No; you are very well; and much improved of late;
and Mr. Rochester, I dare say, is fond of you. I have
always noticed that you were a sort of pet of hie. There
are times when, for your sake, I have been a little uneasy
at hia marked preference, and have wished to put you on
vour guard: but I did not like to suggest even the posai-
bility of wrong. T knew such an idea would shock, perhaps
offend you; and you were so discreet, and so thoroughly
modest and senBible, I hoped yon might be trusted to pro-
tect yourself. Last night I cannot tell you what I suffered
when I sought all over the house, and could find yon no-
where, nor the master either; and then, at twelve o'clock,
Wir jou come in with him. "
JAKE ETRE.
" TTeH, never mind that now, " I interrupted, impa-
tiently: " it is enough that all was right.''
" I hope it aU win be right in the end, " she said: " but
believe me, you can not be too careful. Try and keep
Eochester at a distance; distrust joureelf ae well a8
Gentlemen in his station are not accuBtomod to i
their governesses. "
I was growing truly irritated : happily, Adele ran i
" Let me go — ^Ict me go to MiUcote tool " she cried,
" Mr. Hochester won't: though there is ao much room in
the new carriage. Beg him to let me go. Mademoiselle. "
" That I will, Adele; " and I hastened away with her,
glad to quit my gloomy monitrees. The carriage
ready: they were bringing it round to the front, and
master was pacing the pavement. Pilot following him bf
ward and forward.
" Adele may accompany us, may she not, sir? "
" I told her no. I'll have no brats! — I'll have
yon. "
" Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please: it woi
be better. "
" Not it: she will be a restraint. "
He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
chill of Mrs. Fairfax's warnings, and the damp of her
doubts were upon me: something of un substantiality and
nncertainty had beset my hopes. I half lost the sense of
power over him. I was about mechanically to obey him,
without further remonstrance; but as he helped me into
the carriage, he looked at my face.
" What is the matter? " he asked; " all the sunshine ia
gone. Do yon really wish the bairn to go? Will it annoy
yoa if she is left behind? "
" I would far rather she went, sir. "
" Then off for your bonnet, and back, like a flash of
lightning! " cried he to Adele.
She obeyed him with what speed she might.
" After all, a single morning's interruption will not
matter much, " said he, "''....
riea.
m in I
ille. " I
her,
was
,.»
oi^^^l
Th^H
'on — ypur thoughts.
'when I mean shortly to claim
conversation, and company— for
Adele, when lifted in, commenced kissing me, by way
of expressing her gratitude for my intercession: she was
iuBtautly sLowoti nvmy iuto a corner on the other side of

878 JANE EViii:.
neighbor was too restrictiTe: to him, in hia present i
tious mood, she darod whisper no observationa, nor ask.^
him any information.
" Let her come to me, " I entreated: " she will, perha]
trouble you, sir: there is plenty of room on thta aide.'"
He handed her over as if she had been a lap-dog;
send her to school yet, " he said, but now he was smilin^^
Adele heard him, and asked if she was to go lo school
" sans mademoiselle. "
" Yes, " he replied, " absolutely sans mademoiselle; for
I am to take mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall
seek a cave in one of the white valleys among the volcano-
tops, and mademoiselle shall live with me there, and only
me. "
" She will have nothing to eat: you will starve her, "
observed Adele.
" I shall gather manna for her morning and night: the
plains and hiU-sidsB in the moon are bleafhed with manna.
Adele. " ;■
" She will want to wami herself: what will she do io^
fire? "
" Fire rises out of the lunar mountains: when sh?
pold, I'll carry her np to a peak and lay iier down on
edge of a crater. "
" Oh, qn'elle y sera mal — pen comfortable! And
clothes, they will wear out: how can she get new onesl
Mr. Bochester professed to be puzzled. " Hem? " said
he. " What would von do, Adele? Cudgel your brains
for an expedient. How would a white or pink cloud
auswer for a gown, do you think? And one could cut a
pretty enough scarf out of a rainbow. "
" She is far better as she is, concluded Adele, after
musing some time: " besides, she would get tired of livij
with only you in the moon. H I were mademoiselle,
would never consent to go with you. "
" She has consented: she has pledged her word. "
" But ^ou can't get her there: there is no road to
moon: it la all air; and neither you nor she can fly. "
" Adele, look at that field. " We were now. oui
Thornfield gates, and bowling lightly along the smi
road to Millcotte, where the dust was well laid by the
thunderstorm, and where the low hedges and lofty timber-
trees on each side glistened green, aM rain-refreshed.
" In that fieldj Adele, I was walMltg late one evenii
the
ina^^
i
ttbont a fortnight since — ^the evening of the day yon helped
me lo make hay in the orchard meadows; and as I was
tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest me on a stile ;
and tliere I took out a little book and a poncit, and began
to write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a
wish I had for happy days to come : I was writing away
rery fast, thongh daylight was fading from the leaf, when
something came up the path and stopped two yards off rae.
I looked at it. It was a little thing with a veil of gossamer
on its head. I beckoned it to come near me : it stood
soon at my knee. 1 never spoke to it, and it never spoke
to me, in words ; but I read its eyes, and it read mine ;
and our speechless colloquy was to this effect : — It was a
fairy, and come from Elf -land, it said ; and its errand was
to make me happy : I must go with it out of the common
world to a lonely place — such as the moon for instance —
and it nodded its head toward her horn, rising over Hay-
hill : it told me of the alabaster cave and silver vale where
we might live. I said I should like to go ; but reminded
it, as you did me, that I had no wings to fly. "
"'Oh,'returned the fairy,'that does not signify I
Here is a talisman will remove all dilBcuIttes;'and slie^
held out a pretty gold ring.'Put it,'she said,'onth^
fourth finger of my left hand, and I am yours, and yo(
are mine ; and we shall leave earth and make oar owi
heaven yonder.'She nodded again at the moon. TIM.
ring, Adele, ia in my breeches-pocket, under the diBguiB|
of a sovereign : but I mean soon to change it to a rin
again. " _
" But what has mademoiselle to do with it ? I don't
care for the fairy : you said it was mademoiselle you would
lake to the moon ? "
" Mademoiselle is a fairy, " he said, whispering mys-
terioasly. Whereupon I told her not to mind his badin-
age ; and she, on her part, evinced a fund of genuine
^eneh skepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester " un-
vrai menteur, " and assuring him that she had made no.
account whatever of his " Oontesde fee, " and that " cf
rests, il n'y avait pas de f^es, et quand mfime il y t
avait, " she was sure they would never appear to him, noJ
ever give him rings, or offer to hvc with him in the™
moon.
The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing
e Ut JOA. Mr. Bochester obliged me to go to a certain
2fi0 JANE EYItE.
Bilk warehouse : there I was ordorptl to choose half a dowt "
dreBses. I hated the buBinesH, 1 begged leave to defer it :
no — it should, he gone throngh with now. By dint of en-
treaties oxpreBsed in energetic whispers, I reduced the
half-dozen to two : these, however, ne vowed he would
»i^hwl himself. With anxiety I watched his oje rove over
the say storea : ho fixed on a rich dlk of the most brilliaot
lunoThyst dye, and a superb pink satin. I told him in a
now sorieB of wliispera, that be might as well buy me a
pold gown and a silver bonnet at once : I should certainly
never venture to wear his choice. With infinite difficulty,
for he was stubborn aa a stone, I persuaded him to make
an exchange in favor of a sober black satin and pearl-gray
silk. " It might pass for the present, " he said; " but he
would vet sue me glittering like a parterre. "
Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse, and
then out of a jeweler's shop : the more he bought me the
more my cheek burned with a sense of annoyance and
degradation. As we re-entered the carriage, and I aat
back feverish and figged, I remembered what in the Imrrj
of events, dark and bright, 1 had wholly forgotten — the
letter of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs. Reed ; his intention
to adopt mo and make me his legatee. " It would, indeed,
bea relief, " I thought, " if I had ever so small an inde-
pendency; I never can bear being dressed like a doll by
Mr. Rfichester, or sitting like a second Danae with the
golden shower falling daily round me. I will write to
Madeira the moment I get home, and tell my uncle John
I am going to be msmed, and to whom : if I had but a
prospect of one day bringing Mr. Rochester an accession
of fortune I could better endure to be kept by him now. "
And somewhat relieved by this idea (whicli I failed not to
execute that day), I ventured once more to meet my
maslei'^H and lover's eye ; which most pertinaciously sought
mine, though I averted both face and gaze. He smiled,
and I thought his smile was such as a sultan might, in a
hlissful and fond moment, bestow on a slave his gold and
gems had enriched : I crushed his hand, which was ever
hunting mine, vigorously, and thrust it back to him red
with the passionate pressure.
" You need not look in that way, " I said : " if you do I'll
wear nothing but my old Lowood frocks to the end of the
chapter. I'll be married in this lilac gingliam — you may
make a dressing-gown for yourself out of the pearl- ~
ja.se eyee.
silk, and im infinite aeries of waistcoats out of the bli
ile chuckled; lie rubbed his hands: " Oh, it ia rich
see and hear her! " he exclaimed. " la she original?
she piquant? I would not exchange thiB one little English
girl for the grand Turk's whole seraglio; gazelle eyea,
honri forms and all! "
The Eastern allusion hit me again: " 111 not stand yi
an inch in the stead of a seraglio, " I said; " so don't ooi
eider me an equivalent for one; if you have a fanoy f(
anything in that line, away with yoa, sir, to the bazars t
Stamboul without delay; and lay out in extensive alavj
jmrcfaoses some of that spare cash you seem at a loss
spend satisf actoril V here. "
" And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining
for so many tons of flesh and such an assortment of black
eyes? "
" I'll be preparing myself to go out as a missionary to
preach liberty to them that are enslaved — ^your harem in-
mates among the rest, I'll get admitted there, and Xll
stir lip mutiny; and you, three-tailed pashaw as you are,
air, shall in a trice find yourself fettered among oui
hands: nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds til
you have signed a charter, the most liberal that despta
ever yet conferred. "
" I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane. "
*'I would have no mercy, Mr. Eoehester, if you supplB
cated for it with an eye like that. While you looked sJ
I should bo certain tiiat whatever charter you might graaj
under coercion, your first act, when released, would T
violate its conditions. "
" Why, Jane, what would yon have? I fear yon wil
compel me to go through a private marriage ceremoEW
besides that performed at the aJtar. You wiU stipulate, " !
see, for peculiar terms — what will they be? " T
" I only want an easy mind, sir; not crushed by crowdrf
obligations. Do you remember what you said of Celine
Varens? — of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her?
I will not be. your English Celine Varens. I shall con-
tinue to act as Adele's governess; by that I shall earn my
board and lodging, and thirty pounds a year besides. I'U,
furnish my own wardrobe out of that money, and yoia
'" (ive me nothing but "
Tell, but what? "
]
I. ^

Jane eyre,
" Your re^rd: and if I give you mine in return, t\
debt will be quit. "
" Well, for cool native irapudenoe, and pure innate
pride, you haven't your equal, " said he. We were now ap-
proaching Thomfield. " Will it please you to dine with
me to-day? " he asked, as we re-entered the gatei
" No, thank you, sir. "
" And what for'no thank yon,'if one may inquire?
" I never have dined with yoii, air; and I see no
why I should now: till . "
" Till what? You delight in half phrases. "
" Till I can't help it. "
" Do vou suppose I eat like an ogre, or a ghoul, tl
you dread being tne companion of my repast? "
" I have formed no suspicion on tne subject, sir; but I
want to go on a^ usual for another month. "
" You will give up your governeaaing slavery at ouoe. "
" Indeed! begging your pardon, eir, I ehall not. 1
shall just go on with it as usual. I shall keep out of your
way all day, as I have been accustomed to do: you may
send for me in the evening, when yon feel disposed to see
), and I'll come then: but at no other time. "
" I want s smoke, Jane, or a pinch of enufl, to comfort
) under all this,'pour me donner uue countenance, " as
Adele would say; and unfortunately I have neither my
cigftr-case nor my snufl-bos. But listen — whisper — it is
your time now, little tyrant; but it will be mine presently:
and when once 1 have fairly seized you, to have and to
hold, I'll just — figuratively speaking — attach you to a
chain like this (touching his watch-guard). Yes, bonny
wee thing, I'll wear you in my bosom, lest my jewel
I should tyue. "
He said this as he helped me to alight from the car-
riage; and while he afterward liftetl out Adele, I entered
the house, and made good my retreat up stairs.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I had prepared an occupation for him; for I was deter-
mined not to spend the whole time in a tete-A-tete conver-
sation. I remembered his fine voice; I knew he liked to
sing — good singere generally do. I was no vocalist i
and in his fastidious judgement, no musician either;
delighted in listening when the performance was
No sooner had twilight, that hour of romance, begaa
lower her \Aua and starry banner over the lattice, thatti
Dnver-
ced to
JAKE EYRE. 283
rose, opened the piano, and entreated him, for the love of
heaven, to give me a song. He said I was a capricious
witch, and that he would rather sing another time; but I
averred that'no time was like the present.
• *^Did I like his voice ?'^ he asked.
'* Very much.^'I was not fond of pampering that sus-
ceptible vanity of his; but for once, and from motives of
expediency, I would e'en soothe and stimulate it.
^^Then, Jane, you must play the accompaniment. "
*'Very well, sir, I will try.''
I did try, but was presently swept off the stool and de-
nominated ^^a little bungler. " Being pushed unceremon-
iously to one side — which was precisely what I wished — he
usurped my place, and proceeded to accompany himself:
for he could play as well as sing. I hied me to the window-
recess; and while I sat there and lool^d out on the still
trees and dim lawn, to a sweet air was sung in mellow
tones, the following strain:
** The truest love that ever heart
Felt at its kindled core
Did throuffh each vein, in quickened start,
The tide of beinj? pour.
Her coming was ray hope each day.
Her parting was my pain;
The chance that did her steps delay
Was ice in every vein.
I dreamed it would be nameless bliss,
As I loved, loved to be ;
And to this object did 1 press
As blind as eagerly.
But wide as pathless was the space
That lay, our lives, between.
And dangerous as the foamy race
Of ccean-surges green.
And haunted as a robber-path
Through wilderness or wood;
For Might and Right, and Woe and Wrath,
Between our spirits stood.
I dangers dared : I hind^rance scorned ;
I omens did defy :
Whatever menaced, harassed, warned;
I passed impetuous by.
On sped m > r rainbow, fast as light ;
I flew as in a dream ;
For glorious rose upon ray sight
That child of Shower and Gleam.
Still bright on clouds of suffering dim
Shines that soft, solemn joy ;
Nor care I now, how dense and grb^
pjp^terd Heather ni^b,
Though all 1 have rusliod o'er
Bbould ctnae on pinlbii, Klnmg anil Oeet.
Proclaiming vengtMnce sore ;
TbouKh baugbty Hate should atrike me down,
Bto-Et, bar approach to me,
Andarind In p Might with furious frown.
idBrinii In p Might w
Iwear endteHB enmic.
U; love has pJaoed b?r liCtle haod
With Doble faith in mine.
And ruwFd that wedlock's sacred band
Our nature ehall entwine.
He roee and came toward me, and I saw his ^e hH
kindled, and his fuil falcon-eye flashing, and tendemeBa
and paesioh in everj- lineament. I quailed momentarily —
then I i-allied. Soft scene, daring demonstration, I woxilii,^
not have; and I stood in peril of both; aweaponof defei
must be prepared — I whetted my tongne; bb he reacboj
me I asked with asperity, " whom he was going to msi
now? "
" That was a strange question to be put by his dartim
Jane. "
" Indeed! I consider it a very natural and necess
one: he had talked of his future wife dying with hifld
What did he mean by such a pagan idea? / had no inte
tion of dying with hiin — he might depend on that. "
" Oh, a!! he longed, all he prayed for, wae that I'migld
live with himi Death was not for such as I! "
" Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when i
time came as be had: but I should bide that time, and n
be hurried away in a suttee. "
" Would I forgive him for tlie selfish idea, and proi
my pardon by a reconciling kiss? "
" No: I would rather be excused. "
Here I heard myself apostrophized as a " hard little
thing; " and it was added, " any other woman would have
been melted to marrow at hearing such stanzas crooned in
her praise. "
I assured him I was naturally hard^ — very flinty, and
thwt he would often find me so; and that, moreover, I waa
determined to show him diverse rugged points in my char-
acter before the ensuing four weeks efipsed: he Rhould king'
ja.se eyre.
fully what eoi-t of a bargain he had made, wliile there
yet time to rescind it.
" Would I be quiet and talk rationally? "
" I would be quiet if he liked; and as to talking ra-
tionally, I flattered myself I was doing that now. "
He fretted, pished and pshawed. " Very good, " I
thought; " you may fume and fidget as you please; but
this la the best plan to porsue with you, I am certain, I
like you more than I can say; but I'll not sink into a
bathos of sentiment: and with this needle of repartee I'll
keep you from the edge of the gulf too; and, moreover,
maintain by its pungent aid that distance between you and
myself moat conducive to our real mutual advantage. "
From less to more, I worked him up to considerable
irritation: then, after he had retired, in dudgeon, quite
the other end of the room; I got up, and saying, " I «'
you good-night, air, "'in my natural and wonted respecl
manner, I slipped out by the side-door and got awa^.
The system thus entered on, I pursued during the
whole season of probation; and with tlie best success. He
was kept, to be sure, rather cross and crusty: but on the
whole I could see he was excellently entertained; and that
a tamb-likc submission and turtle-dove sensibility; while
fostering his despotism more, would have pleased his judg-
ment, satisfied hia common sense, and even suited his taste
less.
In other people's presence I was, as formerly, deferen-
tial and quiet: any other line of conduct being uncalled
for: it was only in the evening conferences I thus thwarted
and afflicted him. He continued to send for me punctu-
ally the moment the clock struck seven; though when I
appeared before him now, he had no such honeyed terms
as " love " and " darling on his lips: the best words at
my service were " provoking puppet, " " malicious elf, "
" sprite, " " changeimg, " etc. For caresses, too, I now
got grimaces; for a pressure of the hand, a pinch on the
arm; for a kiss on the cheek, a severe tweak of the ear.
It was all right: at present I decidedly preferred these
fierce favors to anything more tender. Mrs, Fairfax, I
saw, approved me: her anxiety on my account vanished;
tlierefore I was certain I did well. Meantime, Mr. Eo-
chester affirmed I was wearing him to skin and bone, and
tJireatened awful vengeance for my present conduct at some
period fast coming. I laughed in my sleeve at his meiy
was^^l
able
e to^^H
iti^^H
286 JAN2 EYRE.
aces: " I can keep yoQ in reaeonftble check nov, " I i
fl«ct«d; " and I don t doubt to be able to do it here & ft^J|
if one expedient looses ita Tirtue, another must be devised.'r
Yet, after all, my task was not an easy one ; oftL-ii f
would rather have pleased than teased him. My futnd
husband was becoming to me my whole world; and i
than the world: almost my hope of heaven. He t
between me and every thought of religion, as an eclipi
intervenes between me and ihc broad sun. I could nol
in those days, eee God for his creature: of whom I 1:
m«de an idol.
CHAPTER XXV.
The month of courtship had wasted: its very last hot
were being numbered. ITiere was no putting off the d
that advanced — the bridal day; and all preparations i
its arrival wei'e complete, /, at least, had nothing mord
to do: there were my trunks, packed, locked, corded,
ranged iu a. row along the wall of my little chamber: to-
morrow, at this time, th^ would be far on their road to
London: and so should I (D. V.) — or rather, not I, bul
one Jane Rochester, a person whom as yet I knew lU^
The cards of address alone remained to nail: they 1^
four little squares, on the drawer. Mr. Rochester 1
himself written the direction, " Mrs. Rochestw, —
Ifotel, London, " on each: I could not persuade myself I
aRix them, or to have them afiixed. Mrs. Ruchcsteri 8N
did not exist: she could not bo bom till to-morrow, som
time after eight o'clock a. m.; and I would wait to be as-
sured she had come into the world alive, before I assigned
to her all that property. It was enough that in yonder
closet, opposite my dressing-table, garments said to be
hera had already displaced my black stuS Lowood frock
and straw " bomiei; for not to me appertained that suit gf
wedding raiment; the pearl-colored robe, the vapory TeJI,
pendent from the usurped portmanteau. 1 ahui tne closet^
to conceal the strange, wraith-like apparel it contain«{
which, at this evening hour — nine o'clock — ^gave out c "
■■ "'ly a most ghastly shimmer through the sh^ —'—

JANE EYBE.
apftrtment. " I will leave you by yourself, white dream, "
I said. " I am feveriah : I hear the wind blowing : I will
go out-of-doors and feel it. "
It W!is not only the hnrry of preparation that made mo
feverish : not ouly the anttcipatioii of the great change —
the new life which was to commence to-morrow: both
late hour into the darkening grounds ; bu{ a third cause
influenced my mind more than they.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thought. Some-
thing had happened which I could not comprehend ; no
one Kuew of or had seen the event but myself : it liad
taken place the preceding night. Mr. Rochester that night
was absent from home ; nor was ho yet returned ; business
had called him to a small estate of two or three farms ho
possessed thirty miles off — ^business it was requisite ho
BhoulU settle in person, previously to his meditated depart-
ure from England. I waited now his return ; eager to die-
burden my mind, and to seek of him the solution of the
enigma that perplexed me. Stay till he comes, reader;
and, when I disclose my secret to him, you shall share the
confidence.
I sought the orchard ; driven to its shelter by the wind,
which afi day had blown strong and ful! from the south :
without, however, bringing a speck of rain. Instead of
subsiding as night drew on, it seemed to augment its rush
and deepen its roar; the trees blew steadftstly one way,
never writhing round, and scarcely tossing back their
boughs once iu an hour; so continuous was the strain
bending their branchy heads northward — the clouds drifted
from pole to pole, fast following, mass on mass ; no glimpse
of blue sky had been visible that July day.
It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before
the wind, delivering my trouble of mind to the measureless
air-torrent thundering through space. Descending the
laurcl-watk, I faced the wreck of the chestnut-tree; it
stood up, black and riven : the trunk, split dowu the
center, gasped ghastly. The cloven halves were not broken
from each other, for the firm base and strong roots kepi
them unsundered below; though community of vitality
was destroyed — the sap could flow no more : their great
boughs on each side were dead, and next winter's tempests
would be sure to fell one or both toiearth : as yet, hotraW "
388 JANE BTKE.
the; might be Baid to form one tree — a ruin, but an entxn
ruin. -'
" YoE did right to hold fast to eiieh other, " I " aid : 1
if the monster splinters were living thinga, and could ha,
me. " I think, scathed as you look, and charred aof
Bcorched, there must he a little sense of life in yon ye|^
rising out of that adhesion at the faithful, honest root^g
YOU will never liave green leaves more — never more sbP
Dirds making Jiests and siuging idyls in yourbonghe; thi
time of pleasure and love is over with you ; but you are noi
desolate ; each of yon has a comrade to sympathize witi|
him in his decay. As I looked up at them, tlie moon Hp^
peared momentarily In that part of the sky which fillMJ
their fissure ; her dtek was hlood-red and half overcast ; eh & :l
aeomod to throw on me one bewildered, dreary glance, and
buried herself again instantly in the deep drift of cloud.
The wind fell, for a second, round Thomfield ; hut far
away over wood and water, poured a wild, melancholy wdl ;
it was sad to listen to, and I ran off again.
Here and there I strayed tlirough the oi-ohard, gathei .
up the apples with which the grass round the tree rooC3
was thickly strewn : then I employed myself in dividing^
the ripe from the unripe ; I carried thorn into the house
and put them in the store-room. Then I repaired to the
library to ascertain whether the fire was lit; for, though
summer, I knew on such a gloomy evening, Mr. Rochester
would like to see a cheerful hcartn when he came in : yes,
the Are had been kindled some time, and burned well, I
placed his arm-chair by the chimney-corner ; I wheeled tho
table near it : I let down the curtain, and had the can "
brought in ready for lighting. More restless than (
when 1 had completed these arrangements I could not i
still, nor even remain in the house: a little timepiet
in the room and the old clock in the hall simultaneoui'
struek ten.
" How late it grows I " I said : " I will run down to t
gates : it is moonlight at intervals ; I can see a good i
on the road. He may be coming now, and to meet 1
will save some minutes of suspense.
The wind roared high in the great trees which emh <
ered the gates; but the road as far as 1 coald see,'
right hand and the left, wu^ all still and solitary -
the shadows of clouds crossing it at iutervyJ^, i
JANE EYRK.
looked ovit, it was but a long pale line, unvaried 1
moYiag ai > eck.
A puerile tear dimmed my eye while I looked — a tear
of disappointment and impatience: ashamed of it, I wiped
it away. I lingered; the moon shut herself wholly within
her chamber, and drew close her curtain of dense cloud:
the night grew dark; rain came driving fast on the
gale.
'■I wish he would come! I wish he would come! " I_
exclaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding. I had
expected his arrival before tea; now it was dark: what
could keep him? Had an accident happened? The event
of last night again recurred to nie. I interpreted it as
a warning of disaster, I feared my hopes were too bright
to be realized; and I had enjoyed ao much bliss lately that
1 imagined my fortune had passed its meridian, and must
now decline.
•* Well, I cannot return to the house, " I thonghfc; " I
cannot sit by the fireside, while he ia abroad in inclement
weatliev: better tire my limbs than strain my heart; I will
go forward aud meet him. "
I set out; I walked fast, but not far: ei-e I had meaa-
nred a quarter of a mile, I heard the tramp of lioofs;
horseman came on, full gallop: a dog ran by his aide.
Away with evil presentment! It was he: here he waB,-
mounted on Mearour, followed by Pilot. He saw me; foi-
the moon had opened a blue field in the eky, and rode iJ
its watery bright: he took his hat off, and waved it round
his head. I now ran to meet him.
" There ! " he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand
and bent from the saddle: " You can't do without m & ,
that is evident. Stop on my boot-toe; give me both hands:
mount! "
I obeyed: joy made me agile: I sprang up oei'ore him.
A hearty kissing I got fnr i welcome: and some boastful
triumph; which I swallowed as well as I could. He
chocked himself in his exultation to demand, " But ia there
anythiug the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at
juch nn hour? Is there anything wrong? "
" No; but i thought you would never come. I could
ngt bear to wait in the house for you, especially with this
niiu and wind. "
" Pain and wind, indeed! Yes, you are dripping like a
mermnirr; pnll my cloak round ymi; huf I think you
It
11
1
'I
m
fuvurish, Jane: butli your cheek and hand ar« barning %
I ask again, is there anything Ihe matter? " J^
" Nothing, now: 1 am neither afraid nor unhappy.'*
" Then yon have been both? "
" Rather: but I'll tell you all about it by and by, )_
and I dare say you will only laugh at me for my pains. " ^
'■ I'll l»ngn at j'oii hrartilv when to-morrow is past:
till then I dare not: my prize is not certain. This is you,
who have been as slippery as an eel this last month, and
aa thorny aa a brier-rose. I co'uhl not lay a finger any-
where but I waa pricked: and now I seem to have gathered
up a stray lamb in my arms: yon wandered out of the fohl
to seek your sheiiherd, did yoti Jane? "
" I wanted voii: but don't boast. Here we are at,
Thomfiohl: now let me get down. "
lie landed nie on the pavement. As John took 1
horse, and lie followed me into the hall, be told me'
make haste and put something dry on, and then i-etum ft
htm in the library; and he stopped me, aa I made for t
staircase, to extort a promise that I would not be lof^
nor was I long: in five minutes I rejoined him. I fouQi
him at supper.
" Take a seat and hear me company, Jane: please <
it ia the last meal but one you will eat at Thornfield J
for a long time, "
I sat down near him; but told him I could not eat.
fore you, Jane?
that takes away youi
" I can not see my prospects clearly to-night, sir;
I hardly know what thoughts I have in my heai^ Eveij
thing in life seems unreal. "
" Except me: I am substantial enough: touch me. "
" You. sir, are the most phantom-Iike of all: yon a
a mert* dream. "
He held out his hand, laughing: " Is that a dream?^
said ho, placing it close to my eyes, Ho hud a ronndet "
muscular, and vigorous hand, as well as a long, strooji
avm. "
• Ves; though I touch it, it is a dream. " said I,
put it down from befoi'e my face. * "'Sir, have you fiuisllsj
supper? "
" Yes, Jane. "
I rang the bell, and ordered away the tray. When \
JANE EYRE.
were again alone. I stirred th^ fire, and tlien took a It
seat at my master's knee.
" It is near midnight, " I eaid.
" Yes: but remember, Jane, jou promised to wake
with me the night before my wedding. "
" I did ; and I wDI keep my promise, for an hour or
two at least; I have no wish to go to bed. "
" Are all yout arrangementa complete? "
" All Sir.*'
" And on my part, likewise, " he returned, " I IiSi^^
settled evei'ything; and we shall leave Thornfield to-mor-
row, within half an hour after our return from chnrch. "
" Very well, sir. "
" Witli what an extraordinary smile you uttered that
word,'very well, " Jane! What a bright spot of color j ^^^
have on each cheek! and how strangely your eyes glirt
Are you well? "
" I believe I am. "
" Believe! What is the matter? Tell me what you
feel. "
" I could not, sir; do words conld tell you what I feol.
i wish this present hour would never end: who knows with
what fate the next may come charged? "
" This is hypochondria, Jane. You have been over-
excited; or over-fatigued. "
" Do you, sir, feel calm and happy? "
" Calm? no: but happy — to the hearfe core. "
I looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in 1
it was ardent and flushed.
" Give me your confidence, Jane, " he said: " relieve
your mind of any weight that oppresees it, by imparting
it to me. What do you fear? — tnat I shaJl not prove a
good husband? "
" It is the idea farthest from my thoughts. "
" Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are
about to enter? of the new life into which you are passing? "
" No. "
" You pUKzle me, Jane; yonr look and tone of sorrow-
ful audacity perplex and pain me. I want an explanation. "
" Then, sir, listen. Yon were from home laet night, "
" I was: I know that; and you hinted awhile ago at
something which had happened in my absence: nothing,
^frobably of consequence; bnt, in short, it has disturbed.
jjauu. Let me hear it. Mrs, Fairfax has said aomethiai
293 JANE ETKE.
perhapa? or yon have oTerheard the sorvants talk ? yoj
sensitive selt-respert has been wounded? "
" No, air. " It Btmck twelve. I waited till the tinj
piece had conclude < l ite gilyer chime, and the i
noarse vibrating stroke, and then I proceeded.
" All dav, yesterday, I was very busy^ and very h
in my ceitseless biiBtle; for I am not, as you seem to tl ...,
troubled by the haunting fears about the new sphere, i
cetera: I think it a glorious thing to have the hope'
living with yon, hecaiise I love yon. Ko, sir, don't care
me now — let me talk undisturbed. Yesterday I tn
well in Providence, and believed that events were v
ing together for your good and mine: it was a fine df _.
you recolieet.— the calmneES of the air and sky forbt _^_
apprehensions respecting your safety or comfort on yonr
journey. I walked a little while on the pavement after
tea, thinking of you; and I beheld you in imagination so
near me, I scarcely missed your actual presence. I thought ^
of the life that lay before me — ^our life, sir — an existeuc'
more expansive and stirring than my own: as much mot
eo as the depths of the sea to which the brook runs, B
than the shallows of its own straight channel. I wonde^
why moralists call this world a dreary wilderness;
it blossomed like a rose. Just at sunset the air tun
cold and the sky cloudy; I went in. Sophie called n
stairs to look at my wedding-dress, which they had jusi "
brought; and under it in the box I found your present —
the veil which, in your princely extravagance, you sent
for from London: resolved, I suppose, since I would not
have jewels, to cheat me into accepting something as
costly. I smiled aa I unfolded it, and devised how I would
tease you about your aristocratic tastes, and your efforts to
mask your plebeian bride in the attributes of a peeress, I
thought how I would carry down to you the square of tinem-
broidcred blonde I had myself prepared as a covering for
my low-born head, and ask if that was not good enough
for a woman who could bring her husband neitlier fortune,
beauty, nor connections. I saw plainly how yon would
look; and heard your impetuous republican answers, and
your haughty disavowal of any necessity on your part to
augment your wealth, or elevate your standing, by marry-
ing either a purse or a coronet. "
" How well you read me, you witch! " interposed Mr..
Hochseter; " but what did you Snd in the veil oesidos "
embroidery? Did you find poison, or a dagger, that jou
look so mouriifii! now? "
" No, no, sii-: besides the delicacy and richness of the
fabric, I found nothing save Pairfax Kochester's pride;
and that did not scare me, becauae I am used to the sight
of the demon. But, air, as it grew dark, the wind rose:
it blew yesterday evening, not as it blows now — wild and
high — but'with a BuUen moaning Gound'far more eerie,
I wished you were at home, I came into this room, and
the sight of the empty chair and firelesa hearth chilled me.
For some time after I went to bed, I couM not Bleep; a
sense of anxious excitement distressed me. The gale still
rising, seemed to my ear to mufBe a mournfid under-
sound; whether in the house or abroad I could not at firet
tell, but it recurred, doubtful yet doleful at every lull; at
last I made out it must be some dog howling at a dis-
tance. I was glad when it ceased. On sleeping, I con-
tinued in dreams the idea of a dark and gusty night I
continued also the wish to be with you, and experienced a
strange, regretful consciousness of some barrier dividing
UB. l > nring all my first sleep, I was following the wind-
ing of an unknown road; total obscurity environed me;
nun pelted me; I was burdened with the charge of a littla
child; a -very small creature, too young and feeble to walk,
and which shivered in my cold arms, and wailed piteouflly
in my ear. I thought, sir, that you were on the road a
long way before me; and I sti'ained every nerve to over-
take you, and made effort on effort to utter your name and
entreat you to stop, but my movements were fettered; and
my voice still died away inarticulate; while you, I felt.
Withdrew farther and farther every moment. "
" And these dreams weigh on your spirit now, Jane,
when I am close to you? Little nervous subjectl Forget
visionary woe, and think only of real happiness! ^u
say you love me, Janet: yes — I will not forget that; anit
you can not deny it. Tliose words did not die inarticu-
late on your lips. I heard them clear and soft; a thought
too solemn, perhaps, but sweet as music —'I think it
is a glorioiiB thing to have the hope of living with you
Edward, because I love you.'Do you love me, Jane?
repeat it "
" I do, sir, I do with my whole heart.-'
" Well, " he said, after some minutes'silence, " It ia
; hut that sentence has penetrated my breaflt p

394 JAKE EYBE.
fully. Why? I think because you said it with snch
earnest, religious energy; aud becauae your upward g __
at m^now ia the very eubltDie of faith, truth and dero^
tioQ; it ia too much as if eoiue spirit were near me. hook
wicked, Jane, as yon know well how to look; coin one of
your wild, sliy, proYoking smiles; tell me you hate me —
tease me, vex me; do anything, but move me: I wouI4,,
rather be incensed than saddened. "
" I will tease you and vex you to your heart's contei
when I have finishe-d my tale: but hear me to the eml. "
" I thought, Jane, you had told me all. I thought T'
had found the scource of vour melancholy in a dream. "
I shook my head. " What ia there more? But I will
not believe it to be anything important. I warn you of
incredulity beforehand. Go on. "
The disquietude of his air, the somewhat appi^ehensive
impatience of his manner, surprised me, but. I proceeded:
" I dreamed another dream, sir: that Thomfield Hall
was a dreary ruin, the retreat of bats and owls. I thought
that of all the stately front nothing remained but a shell-
like wall, very high and very fragile looking. I wandered
on a moonlight night, through the grass-grown incloaure
within; here I stumbled over a marble hearth, and there
over a fallen fragment of cornice. Wrapped up in a shawl
I still carried the unknown little child; 1 might not lay
it down anywhere, however tired were my arms; howeT«
much its weight impeded my progress, Imust retain ; " "
I heard the gallop of a horse at a distance on the road,
was sure it was you; and you were departing for manv;
years, and for a distant country. I climbed the thin wall
with frantic, perilous haste, eager to catch one glimpse of
you from the top: the stones rolled from under my feet,
the ivy branches I grasped gave way, the child clung round
mv neck in terror, and almost strangled me: at last I
gamed the summit. I saw you like a speck on a white
track, lessening every moment. The blast grew so strong
I could not stand. I sat down on the narrow ledge; I
hushed the scared infant in my lap: you turned an angle
of the road: I bent forward to take a last look: the wall
crumbled; I was shaken; the child rolled from my knee, I
lost my balance, fell, and woke. "

't my
" Now, Jane, that is all. "
" All the preface, sir; the
ing, a gleam dazzled my eyes: I ttought — oh, it is
All the preface, sir; the tale is yet to come. On wak-
tnoi:
JANE ErKE.
1
lightl But I was miatakeu: it was only candle-liglit.
Sophie, 1 supposed, had come in. There was a light on
iBe dressing-table, and the door of the closet, where, before
going to bed, I had hung my weddin* dress and veil,
stood open: I heard a rustling there. I asked,'Sophie,
what are you doing there?'No one answered; but a form
emerged from the cioaet; it took tlie light, held it aloft,
and surveyed the garments pendant from the porfmauteau,
'Sophie, Sophie 1'I again cried: and still it was silent. I
had risen up i^ bed, I bent forward: firat surprise, then
bewilderment, came over me; and then my blood crept
cold through my veins. Mc Rochester, this was not
Sophie, it was not LL-uh, it was not Mrs. Fairfas: it was
not — no, I was sure of it, and am still — it was not even
that strange woman — Grace Poole, "
" It must have been one of them, " interrupted my
master.
" No, sir, I solemnly assure yon to the contrary. The
shape standing before me had never crossed my eyes within
the precincts of Thornfield Hall before; the height, the
contour were new to me, "
" Describe it, Jane. "
" It seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick
and dark hair hanging long down her back. I know not
wliat dress she had on : it was white and straiglit ; but
whether gown, sheet or shroud, I cannot teli.
" Did you see her face? "
" Not at fii-et. But presently she took my veil from its
place; she held it up, gazed at it long, and she threw it
over her own head, and tnmed to the mirror. At that
moment I saw the reflection of the visage and features
quite distinctly in the dark oblong glass. "
" And how were they? "
" Fearful and ghastly to me — oh, sir, I never saw a face
like it ! It was a discolored face — it was a savage face. I
wish I could forget the roll of the red eyes, and the fearful
blackened inflation of the lineaments. "
" Ghosts are usually pale, Jane. "
" This, sir, was purple: the lips were swelled and dark;
the brow furrowed; the black eyebrows widely raised over
the bloodshot eyes. Shall I tell you of what it reminded
" You may. "
''Of the foul German specter—
a Vamp;
208
JANI! KYHE.
■'Ah? What did it do? "
" Sir, it removed my veil from its gaunt bead, rent$
in two partH, and, flinging botli on the floor, trampled C "'
them. "
" Afterward? "
" It drew aside the window curtain and looked oat: ]
hapa it saw dawn approaching, for, taking the candle, ! .
retreated to Ihe door. Juat at mj'bedside the figure
stopped; the fiery eye glared upon me; she thrust up her
caiidle close to my face, and extinguished it under i
3. I was aware her hirid visage ffamed over mine, uim
I lost consciousness : for the secoud time in my life — onf
tho second time — I became insensible from terror. "
" Who was with you when you revived? "
" No ont', sir, hut the broad day. I rose, bathed i
head and face hi water, drank a long draught; felt tha^
though enfeebled, I was not ill, and determined that l|
none but you would I impart this vision. Now, sir, 1
me who and what that woman was.
" The creature of an over-stimulated brain; that tB ce|
tftin. I must be careful of you, my treasure: nerves Iln
yours were not made for rough handling, " 1
" Sir, depend on it, my nerves were not in fault; tn
thing was real: the transaction actually took place. "
" And your previous dreams: were tliey real too?
Thornlield HaSl a ruin? Am I severed from yon
insuperable obstacles? Am I leaving you without a tear-^
without a kiss — without a word. "
" Notyet. "
" Am 1 about to do it ? ^VTiy, the day is already coii
menoed wbich is to bind us indissolubly; and when we i^
once united, there shall be no reeurrenee of these ment^
terrors : I guarantee that. "
" Mental terrors, sir! 1 wish I could believe them fl
be only 8Uch : I wish it more now than ever, since even yffl
cannot explain to me the mystery of that awful visitantMi
" And since I cannot do it, Jane, it must have 1
ttnwal. "
f^ " But, sir. when I said so to myself on rising this moi^
^i & ,and when I looked round the room to gather oour^
IjiKv comfort from the cheerful aspect of each familift "
^titject in full daylight, there — on the carpet — I saw what
gave the distinct lie to my hypothesis — the veil, torn from
top to bottom in two halves !

JUlfE ETRE. mP
I felt Mr. Rochester stai't and shudder; ho hastily flung
Ms arme around me.
" Thank God! " he exclaimed, " that if anything ma-
lignant did come near you last night, it was only the
veil that was harmed. Oh, to think what might have
happened ! "
He drew his breath short, and strained me so close to
him, I could ecarcety pant. After some minutes'silence,
he continued cheerily: " Now, Janet, I'll explain to you
all about it. It was half dream, half reality: a woman
did, I doubt not, enter your room: and that woman was
— must have been — Grace Poole. You call her a strange
being yourself: from all you know, you have i-eaaon 80 to
call her — what did she do to me? what to Mason? In &
state between sleeping and waking, you noticed her entrance
and her actions; but feverish, almost delirious as you were,
you ascribed to her a goblin appearance different from her
own: the long disheveled hair, the swelled black face, the
exaggerated stature, were figments of imagination; results
of nightmare: the spiteful tearing of the vai! was i-e^:
and it is like her. I see you would ask why I keep such a
woman in my house; when we have been married a year
and a day, I will tell yon; but not now. Are you satisfied,
Jane? Do yon accept my soIution_of the mystery? "
I reflected, and m truth it appeared to me the only
possible one: satisfied I was not, but to please him I en-
deavored to appear so— relieved, I certainly did feel; so I
answered him with a contented smile. And now, as it
was long past one, I prepared to leave him.
" Does not Sophie sleep with Adele in the nursery? "
he asked as I lit my candle.
" Yes, air. "
" And there is room enough in Adele's little bed for
you. You must share it with her to-night, Jane: it is
no wonder that the incident you have related should make
you nervous, and I would rather yon did not sleep alone:
promise me to go to the nursery. "
" I shall be very glad to do so, sir. "
" And fasten the door securely on the inside. Wake
Sophie when you go upstairs, under pretence of requesting
her to rouse you in good time to-raorrow; for j^ou must be
dressed and have finished breakfast before eight. And
now, no more somber thoughts: chase dull care .
Don't you hear what soft whispers t\ia
'208 JANE EYBB.
has fallen? and there is no more beating of rain agaioi
the window-panes: look here (he lifted up the curtain)-
it is a lovely night! "
It was. Half heaven wtis pure and stainless : the clouda?!
now trooping before the wind, which had shifted to th > ^
west, were filing off eastward in long silvered coIumita.a
The moon shone peacefully.
" Well, " said Mr. Rochester, gazing inquiringly i
my eyes, " how is my Janet now?
'"'The night is serone, sir, and so am I. "
" And you will not dream of separation and sorrow to-
night ; but of happy love and blissful union. "
This prediction was but half fulfilled: I did not indeed
dream of sorrow, but as little did I dream of joy; for I
never slept at all. With little Adele in my arms, I watched
the slumber of childhood — bo tranfjuil, so passionless, so
innocent — and waited for the coming day: all my life was
awake and astir in my frame: and as soon as the sun rose
1 rose too. I remember Adele clung to me as I left her: I
remember I kissed her as I loosened her little hands from
my neck; and I cried over her with strange emotion, and
quitted her because I feared my soba would break her still
sound repose. She seemed the emblem of my past life;
and he I was now to %rray myself to meet, the dread, but
adored, type of my unknown future day.
CHAPTER XXVI.
J
fflfinottg!
Sophie came at seven to dress me; she was vfflf^ ^
indeed in accomplishing her task; so long that Mr. Ro-
chester, grown, I suppose, impatient of my delay, sent up
to ask why I did not come. She was just fastening m_v veil
(the plain square of blonde, after all) to my hair with a
brooch; I hurried from under her hands as soon as I
could.
" StopI " 8he cried in French. " Look at yourself in
the mirror: you have not taken one peep. "
So I turned at the door; I saw a robed and veiled figure,
80 unlike my usual sell that it seemed almost the image
of a stranger. " Jane! " called a voice and I hastei

JANE EYRE.
at the foot of the staira by
fire with impa^
down, I was receired
Rochester,
" Lingerer, " he said, " my brain
tienoe; and you tarry bo longf "
He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly
all over, pronounced me " fair as a lily; and not only the
pride of his life, but the desire of his eyes; " and then,
telling ma he would give me but ten minu'.os to eat some
breakfast, he rang the bell. One of liis lately hired serv-
ants, ii footman, answered it.
'*Ia John getting the carriage ready? "
" Yes, sir. "
" Is tbe luggage brougiit down ? "
" They are Bringing it down, sir. "
" Go you to the church: see if Mr. Wood (the clergy*
man) and the clerk are there: return and tell me. "
The chnrch, as the reader knows was but just beyond
the gates; the footman soon returned.
" Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on ids
plice. "
" And the carriage? "
" The horses arc harnessing, "
" ffe shall not want it to go to church; but it must
ready the moment we return: all the boxes and lugj
arranged and strapped on, and the coachman in
Beat.
" Yes, sir. "
" Jane, are you ready!
I rose. There were no groomsmen, no brideamaida,
no relatives to wait for or marshal: none but Mr, Roches,
ter and I, Mrs. Fairfax stood in the liall as we passed.
I would fain have spoken to her. but my hand was held
by a grasp of iron: I was hurried along by a stride i
could hardly follow; and to look at Mr. Koohestei''a face
was to feel that not a second of delay would be tolerated
for any purpose. I wondered what other bridegroom ever
looked as he did — so bent up to a purpose, so grimly reso-
lute: or who, under such steadfast brows, ever revealed
such flaming and flashing eyes.
1 know not whether tbe day was fair or foul; in de-
scending the drive, I gazed neither .on sky nor earth: my
heart was witli my eyes; and both seemed migrated into
Ml-. Rochoster'a frame. I wanted to see the iuvisibla
thin^ on which, as we went along, he appeared to f & atoo.H
1
glance fierce and fell. I waute < I tu fool the thouglitB
wlioee force he seemed breaating and reeisting.
At the charch-yard wicket he stopped: he discovered ]
was qaite out of breath. *
" Am I cruel in my love? " he said. " Delay an i
Btant: lean on me, Jane. "
Ajid now I can recall tlie picture of the grav old hoti^
of Ood riBing calm before me, of a rook wliecling roum
the fileeplo, oC a rnddy morning aky beyond. I remembi
Eomethiugr too, of the green grave-mouuds; and I had
not forgotten, either, two figures of Btraugere, BtrayioT
among the low hillocks, and reading the mementoq
graven on the few mossy hood-stoues. I noticed thei^
because, as they siiw us, tiiey passed round to the back a
the obureh; and 1 doubted not they were going to ent < |
by the side-ai & lo door, and witness the ceremony. By Iffii
Rochester they were not observed: he was earnestly looH
ing at my face, from which the blood had, I dare a
momentarily fled: for I felt my forehead dewy, and i_^
cheeks and lips cold. When I rallied, which I sooa di^
be walked gently with me up the path to the porch.
We entered the quiet and humble temple: the priea
waited in his white surplice at the lowly altar, the clerl^
beside him. All was still: two shadows ouly moved in A
remote coruer. My conjecture hiul been correct: tl > ^
strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood bj3
the vault of the Rochesters, their hacks toward us, vieTT-J
ing through the rails the old tirae-stained maj'ble tomb,,9
where a kneeling angel guarded the remains of Darner iter
Rochester, elain at Marston Moor in the time of the oiriy
wars, and of Eiizabeth, hia wife.
Onr place was taken at the communion rails. Ueai ^
a cautious step behind me, I glanced over myshouldei';
one of the strangers — a gentleman, evidently — was ad-
vancing up the chancel. The'service began. The ex-
planation of the intent of matrimony was gone through;
and then the clergyman came a step farther forward, andw
bending slightly toward Mr. Rochester, went on.
" I require and charge you both (as you will answer si
the drea^tful day of .iuOgment, when the secrets of i'
hearts shall be disclosed), that if either of you know h
impediment why ye may not lawfully be joined togetl
in matrimony, ye do now confess it; for be ye well a«8m
thateo many as lu-e coupled togplhor ntherwiec ih "
^^^pcte <
JAKE EYRE.
word iloth allow, are not joined together by God, aoither
13 tlieir matrimony lawful.
IIu ] > aiised, as tho cnstom is. Wben ia the pause after
that sentence ever broken by reply? Not, periiaps, oiice
in & hundred years. And the clergyman, who liad not
lifted his eyes from his book, and had held his breath but
for^ a moment, was proceeding; his hand waa ah'eady
stretched toward Mr. Rochester, as his lips nnelosed to
aak, " Wilt thou have this woman for thy wedded wife? "
— when a distinct and near voice said, " The marriage
can not go on; I declare the existence of an impediment. "
The clerCTmau looked up at the speaker, and stood
mute ; the clerk did the same ; Mr. Rochester moved
slightly, as if an earthquake had rolled under, his feet:
taking a firmer footing, and not turning his head or eyes,
he said, " Proceed. "
Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word,
with deep but low intonation. Presently Mr. Wood said,
" I can not proceed without some investigation into what
has been asserted, and evidence of its truth or falsehood. "
" The ceremony ia quite broken off, " subjoined the
voice behind us. " I am in a condition to prove my alle-
gation: an insuperable impediment to this marriage es-
ista . "
Mr. Rochester heard, but heeded not: he stood stub-
born and rigid: making no movement but to possess him-
self of my hand. What a hot and strong grasp he had!—
and how like quarried marble wag his pale, firm, massive
fi'ont at this moment! How bis eye shone still, watcliful
and vet wild beneath!
Mr. Wood seemed at a loss. *'What ia the nature of
the impediment? " he asked. " Perhaps it may be got
over — explained away? "
" Hardly, " was the answer: " I have called it insuper-
able, and I speak advisedly. "
The speaker came forward and leaned on the rails. He
continued, uttering each word distinctly, calmly, steadily,
but not loudly.
•'It simply consists in the existence of a previous mar-
riage. Mr. Rochester has a wife now living.'
My nerves vibrated to those low-spoken words as they
hod never vibrated to thunder; my blood felt their subtle
violence aa it had never felt frost or fire: but I was col-
id and in no danger of swooning. I looked at KL^
JAME EYBE.
Booliester: I made liim look at me. His w1io]o face was
colorless rock: his eye was both spark and flint. lie dis-
avowed nothing: lie seemed bb if Le would defy all t
Without speaking, without smiling, without seeming (
recognize in me a human beine he only twined my wai'
with his arm and riveted me to nis side.
'Who are you? " he asked of the intruder.
'My name ia Briggs, a solicitor of Street, Lonj
don. "
• And you would thmet on me a wife?
'I would remind you of your lady's existence, sir, \
the law recognizes, if you do not, "
" Favor me with an account of her — with her nam
her porentage, her place of abode, "
" Certainly, " Mr, Briggs calmly took a paper from
his pocket and read out in a sort of ofScial, nasal voice;
"'I affirm and can prove that on the 30th of October,
A. D. (a date of fifteen years back), Edward Fairfax
Rofhester, of Thornfield Hall, in tlie county of , aai
of Ferndean Manor, in — — -shire, England, was marriel
to my sister. Bertha, Antoinetta Mason, daughter of Jon^
Mason, merchant, and of Antoinetta, his wife, a Creole —
at church, Spanish Town, Jamaica. The record of
the marriage will be found in the register of that church —
a copy of it is now in my possession. Signed, Bichard
Mason.'" ^
■'That — if a genuine document — may prove I haw
been married, but it does not prove that the »
tionod therein as my wife ia still living. "
" She was living three mouths ago, " returned the laiP
yer,
" How do you know? "
" I have a witness to the fact, whose testimony e
you, sir, will scarcely controvert. "
" Produce him — or go to hell. "
" I will produce him first— he is on the spot: Mr.'.
eon, have llie goodness to step forward. "
Mr. RofihoBtcr, on hearing the name, set his teeth; ho
experienced, too, a sort of strong, convulsive quiver; near .
to nim as I was I felt the spasmodic movement of fury or
despair run through his frame. The second stranger, who
had hitherto lingered in the background, now drew near;
a pale face looked over the solicitor's shoulder — ^yes, it was
Jtmou himself. Mr. Rochester turned and glared at biiq
r, whici
}
JANE EYRE.
sS
lud tt
I
His eye, as I have often said, was a black eye ; it had now
a tawny, nay, a bloody light in ila gloom ; and his face
flushed — olive cheek, andliueless forehead received a glow,
as from spreading, ascending heart-fire : and he stirred,
lifted hia strong arm— he could have stTuck Maaon —
dashed him on the church floor— shocked by ruthless blow
the breath from his body — but Mason shrank away and
cried faintly, " Good God! " Contempt fell cool on Mr.
Rochester — his passion died as if a blight had shriveled tt
np : he only asked, " What have t/ou to say ? "
" The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly,
again demand, what have you to say ? "
An inaudible reply escaped Mason's white lips.
" Sir— sir " — interrupted the clergymen, " do not
get you are in a sacred place. " Then addressing Mi
he inquired gently, " Are you aware, sir, whether
this gentleman's wife is still living ? "
" Courage, " urj[ed the lawyer, " speak out. "
" She is now living at Thornfield Hall, " said Mason, in
more articulate tones : " I saw her there last April. I am
her brother. "
" At Thornfield Hall ! " ejaculated the clergyman. " Im-
possible ! I am an old resident in this neighborhood, sir,
and I never heard of a Mrs, Rochester at Thornfield Hall. "
I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester's lip, and he
muttered, " No, by God ! I took care that none should
hear of it, or of her under that name. " He mused ; for
ten minutes he held counsel with himself : he formed his
resolve, and announced it : — " Enough, all shall bolt out
at once, like a bullet fi-om the barrel. Wood, close yonr
book, and take off your surplice; John Gieen (to the
clerk), leave the church : there will be no wedding to-day: "
the men obeyed.
Mr. Rochester continued, hardily and recklessly : " Big-
amy is an ugly word ! I meant, however, to he a bieamiati
but fate has outmaneuvered mo ; or Providence has checked
me^perhaps the laat. lam little better than a devil at
this moment ; and, as my pastor there would tell me, de-
serve no doubt the sternest judgments of God, even to the
quenchless fire and deathless wonn. Gentlemen, my plan
is broken up I what this lawyer and his client say is true :
I have been married, and the woman to whom I was mar-
ried lives ! You eay you never heard of a Mrs. Rochester
ftt the house up yonder, Wood : but 1 dare say you bavw
30i JANB BrBB.
many a time inclined your ear to goaaip about the i
teriouB lunatio kept there under watch und ward, SonL
have whispered to you that she is my bastard half-eistM^
8ome, my cast-off mistress : 1 now inform yoa that she In
my Tifife, whom I married fifteen years ago— Bertha Mattitf
byname; sister of this resolute personage, who is norf
witli his quivering limbs and white cheeks, showing jxj
what a stout heart men may bear. Cheer up, Dick, net*
fear me 1 I'd atmofet as aonn strike a woman as yo^
Bertha Mason is mad and shu came of a mad fanulji]
idiots and maniues thiongh thttc generations !
mothei', the Creole, was both a mad woman and a drua!
ard ! — as I found out aftei I bad married the daugbtei
for they were silent on famdy aeciets befoi-e. Bcrth^
likeadntifnl child, copied her parent in both points. 1
had a charming partner — pure, wise, modest; you can
fancy I was a happy man. I went throngh rich scenes!
Ob, my experience has been heavenly ; if you only knew it !
But I owe you no further explanation. Briggs, Wood,
Mason, I invite yon all to come to tbe bouse and visit Mrs.
Poole's patient, and tny wife] Yon wit) see what sort of "'
being I was cheated into espousing, and judge whether or
not I had a right to breals the compact, and seek sym-
pathy with something at least human. This girl, " be con-
tinued, looking at me, " knew no more than you, Wood,
of the disgusting secret ; she thought all was fair and
legal ; and never dreamed she was going to be entrapped
into a feigned union with a defrauded wretch, already
bound to a bad, mad, and imbruted partner I Come, all
of you, follow, "
Still holding me fast, bo left the church : the thl
gentlemen came after. At the front door of the hall \
found the carriage.
" Take it back to the coach-house, John, " said
Rochester, cooly ; " it will not he wanted to-day, "
At our entrance, Mrs. Fairfax, Adele, Sophie,
advanced to meet and greet us,
" To the rightabout — every soul! " cried the mastflrJ
" away with your congratulations ! Who wants them iM
Not I ; they are fifteen years too late ! "
He passed on and ascended the stairs, still holding
hand ; and still beckoning the gentlemen to follow h
which they did. We mounted tbe first staircase, passed
. »yti*»8*™'y'proceeded to the third story : the low, blacky

(Joor, opened by Mr. Eoeheater'a maater-key, admitted us
tn the tapestried room, with its great bed, and its pictorial
cabinet,
" You know this place, Mason, " said onr guide; " she
bit and stabbed you here. "
He lifted the hangings from the wall, uncovering the
second door: this, too, he opened. In a room withotit a
window there burned a fire, guarded by a high and strong
fender, and a lamp suspended from the ceiling hy a chain.
Grace Poole bent over the fire, apparently cooking soms-
thiiig in a saucepan. In the deep shade, at the farther
end of the room, a figure ran backward and forward.
What it was, whether beaat or human being, one could
not, at first sight, tell : it groveled, seemingly, on all
fours: it snatched and growled like some strungi! wild
animal: but it was covered with clothing; and a quantity
of dark, grizzled hair, wild as a mane, hid its head and
face.
" Good-morrow, Mrs. Poole! " said Mr. Rochester.
" How are you? and how is your charge to-day? "
" We're tolerable, sir, I thank you, " replied Grace, lift-
ing the boiling mess carefully on to the hob: " rather,
snappish, but not'rageous. "
A. fierce cry seemed to give the lie to her favorable re-
port: the clothed hyena, rose up and stood tall on its hind
feet.
" Ah, sir, she sees you! " exclaimed Grace: " yoa'd
better not stay. "
" Only a few moments, Grace: you must allow me a
few moments. "
" Take care then, sir! for God's sake, take care! "
The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from
her visage, and gazed wildly at her visitors. I recognized
well that purple face — those bloated features. Mrs. Poole
advanced.
" Keep oat of the way, "'said Mr, Rochester, thrusting
her aside: " she has no knife now, I suppose? and I'm on
my guard. "
" One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning:
it is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft. "
" Wf^ had better leave her. " whispered Mason.
" Go to the devil! " was liis brother-in-law's recommen-
dation.
- "'Wwaiyjcried-Cfaioe. The tluwB gentlamten rgtwatBd
306 JANE KIRE.
GimtiltaneouGly. Mr. Bochester flung me behind
the lunatic Bpraug and grap])Ie(l Iub throat vicioaaly, a]£
laid htT tpetn to his clieek: they stniggled. Slie waaj,^
big woman, in stature almost equaling her husband, ana
corpulent besides: she showed virile furce in the contest-
more than once Bhe almost throttled him. athletic as he
was. He could havesettlod her with a well-planted blow ;
but he would not strike: he would only wrestle. At last
he mastered her arms; Grace Poole gave him a cord, and
he pinioned them behind her: with more rope, which was
at hand, he bound her to a i;hair. The operation was Dei-,-—
formed amidst the fiercest yells and the most conyulaii^^y
plunges. Mr. Rochester then turned to the spectators:
looked at them with a smile both acrid and desolate.
" That is iiti/ wife, " said he. " Such is the sole con]ii=-*
gal embrace 1 am ever to know — «uch are tho endearments
which are to solace my leisure hoursl And this is what I
wished to have " (laying his hand on my shoulder) :''this
f'onng, girl who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth fl " "
lell, looking collectedly at the gambols of a demon.
wanted her just as a change after that fierce ragoof.
Wood and Bnggs, look at the difference! Compare the«
clear eyes with the red balls vonder — this face with that
mask — this form with that bulk; then judge me, priest of
the Gospel and man of the law, and remember, with what
i'ndgmont ye judge ye shall be judged! Off with you now.
must ahnt up my prize. "
We all withdrew. Mr. Rochester staid a moment be-
hind uB, to give some further order to Grace Poole. The
solicitor addressed me as he was descending the stair.
" You, madam, " said he, " are cleared from all blai
your uncle will be glad to hear it — if, indeed, he should 8
still living — when Mr, Mason returns to Madeira. "
" My uncle? T\Tiat of him? Do you know him?*'
" Mr. Mason does: Mr. Eyre has been the Fnnchal cor-
respondent of his house for some years. When your uncle
received your letter intimating the contemplated union
between yourself and Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason, n'
was staying at Madeira to recruit his health, on his fl
back to Jamaica, happened to be with him. Mr. R
mentioned the intelligence ; for he knew that my client •
here was acquainted with a gentleman of the name of
Rochester, Mr. Mason, astonished and distressed aaj-ou
may suppose, revealed the real etate of mattere, ^oiWi ■
JANE EYRE,
30^H
uncle, I am soriy to say, is now on a sick-bed; from which,
considering the nature of bis disease — decline — and the
stage it lias reached, it is unlikely lio will ever rise. He
could not then hasten to England himself to extricate jou
from the snare into which yon had fallen, hut he implored
Mr. Mason to lose no time in taking steps to prevent the
false marriage. He referred him to me for assistance. I
used all dispatch, and am thankful I was not too late: as
you, doubtloas, must be also. Were I not morally certain
that your uncle will be dead ere you reach Madeira) I
would advise you to accompany Mr. Maaon back: bat
it is. I think you had better remain in England till r <
can hoar further, either from or of Mr. Eyre. Have
anything else to stay for? " he inquired of Mr, Mason.
" No, no; let its be gone, " was the anxious reply;
without waiting to take leave of Mr. Rochester, they made
their exit at the hall door. The clergyman stayed to es-
change a few sentences, either of admonition or reproof,
with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too
departed.
I beard him go as I stood at the half-open door of my
own room, to which I had now withdrawn. The house
cleared, I shut myself in, fastened the bolt that none
might intrude, and proceeded^not to weep, not to mourn,
I was yet too calm for that, but — mechanically to take off
the wedding dvesa, and replace it by the stnfl gown I had
worn yesterday, as I thought for the last time. I then
eat down: I felt weak and tired. I leaned my arms on a
fable, and my head dropped on them. And now I
thought: till now I had only heard, seen, moved— followed
up and down where I was led or dragged — watched oveiit
rush on event, disclosure open beyond disclosure: but,
now, I thought.
The morning had been a quiet morning enough — all
except the brief scene with the lunatic: the transaction in
the church had not been noisy; there was no explosion of
passion, no loud altercation, no dispute, no defiance or
challenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken,
a calmlvpronounced objection to the marriage made; some
stern, snort (Questions put by Mr. Rochester; answers, ex-
planations given, evidence adduced; an open admission of
truth had been uttered by my master; then the living
proof bad been seen; the intruders were gone, and all was
ind I
Sufi .lANE EYRR..
I waa in my room aa usual — just myself, wiihout obvim
change: nothing had eniUteu me.orscathetl mo, ormainu
me. And yet where was the Jane Ejre of yeaterdayj]
where was her life? where were her prospects? ^
Jane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant W0M_
— almost a bride — was a eoid, solitary girl again: her IHI,
was pale; her prospects were desolate. A Christmas frosfr "
had come at midsummer; a white December storm had
whirled over June; ice glazed the ripe apples, drifts
crushed the blowing roses; on liay-fleld and cornfield lay
a frozen shroud: lanes which last night blushed full o$h
Sowers, to-day were pathless with untrodden snow; a
the woods, which twelve hours since waved leafy and f
grant as groves between the tropica, now spread, waef^^
wild, and white as pine forests in wintry Norway. My
hopes were all dead — struck with a subtle doom, such as,
in one night fell on all the flrst-hom in the land of Egypt.
I looked on ray cherished wishes yesterday so bloommg
and glowing; they lay stark, livid corpses that could never
revive. I looked at my love : that feeling which
was my master's — which lie had created ; it shivered
in my heart, like a suffering child in a cold cradle^-g
sickness and anguish had seized it; it could not seek Y
Rochester's arms — it could not derive warmth from 1
breast. Oh, never more could it turn to him; for faitf
was blighted — confidence destroyed! Mr. Rochester ^
not to me what he had been; for he was not what I had
thought him. I would not ascribe vice to him; I would
not say he had betrayed me: but the attribute of stainless
truth was gone from hia idea; and from his presence,^
must go: that I perceived well. When — how — wliither^X
could not yet discern; but he himself, I doubted no^
would hurry me from Thomfield. Real affection, :
seemed, he could not have for me; it had been only fltS
passion: that was balked; be would want me no more,
should fear even to cross his path now: my view must t)
hateful to him. Oh, how blind had heen my eyes ! Hoi
weak my conduct!
My eyes were covered and closed: eddying darkness
seemed to swim round me, and reflection came in as black
and confused a flow. Self-abandoned, relaxed and effort-
less, I seemed to have laid me down in the dried-up
bed of a great river; I heard a flood loosened in remote _
" " " ■ *'.and felt the torrent come; to rise I had i
" •v
JANE EYEE.
will, to flee I had no streiigth. I lay faint; longiug to be
dead. One idea only still tlirobed life-like witliin me — a
remembmnce of God: it begot an iinnttered pmyer: tbese
words want wandering up and down in my raylesa mind,
aa eomething that should be whispered; but no energy was
found to express them: " Be not far from me, for tronble
is near: there ia none to help. "
It was near: atid as I had hfted no petition to Heaven
to avert it — as I hud neither joined Diy hands, nor bent
my knees, nor moved my lips— it cume: in fall, heavy
swing the torrent poured over me. The whole consciona-
ness of my life lorn, my love lost, my hope quenched, my
faith death -struck, swayed full and mighty- aboTe me in
one sullen maas. That bitter hour cannot be described: ia^
trnth, " the waters came into my soul; I sank in the deep
mire: I felt no standing; I came into the deep waters; the
floods overflowed me. "
CHAPTER XXVII.
4
Some time in the afternoon I raised my head, and
looking around and seeing the western sun gilding the
sign of its decline on the wall, I asked, " What am I to do? "
But t lie answer my mind gave — " Leave Thornfleld at
once " was bo prompt, so dread, that I 8toppe < l mjiears: I
said, I could not " bear such words now. " That lam not
Edward Rochester's bride is the least part of my woe, " I
alleged: " That I have wakened out of most glorious
dreams, and found them all void and vain, is a horror I
eoald bear and master; but that I must leave him decided-
ly, instantly, entirely, is intolerable. I can not do it. "
But then a voice within me averred that I could do it,
and foretold that I should do it, I wrestled with my own
resolntion: 1 wanted to be weak, that I mi^ht avoid the
awful passage of further suffering I saw laid out for me;
and conscience, turned tyrant, held passion by the throat,
told her tauntingly she had yet but dipped her dainty foot
in the slongli. and swoi-c that, with that arm of iron, he\|i "
would thrust her down to unsounded depths of agony,
Iflie bo tarn away then! " I cried. " Let. iuioJi
310 JANE E\RH.
" No; you shall tear yourself away; none shall help you:
you shall, yourself, pluck out your right eye; yourself cut
off your right hand: your heart shall he the victim; and
you, the priest, to transfix it. "
I toBe up suddenly, terror-struck at the solitude whiol
so rothloBs a judge haunted— at the silence which so awfi^
a voice filled. My head swam as I stood erect: I perceived
that I was sickening from excitement and inanition
neither meat nor drink had passed my lips that day, forfl
had tuken no breakfast. And, with a strange pang, I naf
reflected that, long as I had been shut up here, no ma
sage haft been eent to ask how I was, or to invite me a
come down: nSt even little Adele had tapped at the doot
pot even Mrs, Fairfax had sought me. " Friends alwafl
forget those whom fortune forsakes, " I murmured, as^_^
undrew the holt and passed out. I stumbled over an ob^
8tKcle:»niy head was still dizzy, my sight was dim, aa^
mv limbs were feeble. I could not soon recover
self. I fell, but not on to the ground; an outstretch^
arm caught me; I looked ui > — I was supported by Bfl
Rochester, who sat in a cliair across my chamber threshold
" You come out at last, " he said. " Well, I have beofi
waiting for you long, and listening: yet not one movement
have I heard, nor one sob: five minutes moreof that death-
like hush and I should have forced the lock like a burglar.
So you shun me?— you shut yourself up and gi-ieve alonat
I would rather you " had come and upbraided me with x6*^
hemence- You are passionate: I expected a sc
kind. I was prepared for the hot rain of tears; only I
wanted them to ho shed on my breast: now a senseleoj
floor has received them, or your drenched handkerchietj
But I eiTT you have not wept at all! I see a white chee^T
and a faded eye, but no trace of tears. I suppose, then,-
your heart has been weeping blood?
■ "'Well, Jane; not a word of reproach? Nothing bitter
— nothing poignant? Nothing to cut a feeling or sting a
passion? You ait quietly where I have placed you, and re- ]
gard me with a weary, passive look.
" Jane I never meant to wound yon tJius. If the i
who had but one little ewe lamb that was dear to him i_ „,,
daughter, that ate of his breiid and drank of his cup, and
lay m his bosom, had by some mistake slaughtered it at
the shambles, he would not have rued his bloody blunder
than I now rue mine. Will you ever forgive me? "
JANK EYRE,
^
Reader! — I forgavo him at the moment, and on the
spot. There wa^ such deep remorse in his eye, such true
pit;^ in his tone, such manly energy in his manner; and,
besidee there was such unchanged love in hia whole look
and mein — I forgave him all: yet not iu words, not out-
wardly; only at my heart's core.
" You know I am a scoundrel, Jane? " ere long he in-
quired wistfully — wondering, I suppose, at my continued
silence and tamcness: the result rather of weakness than
of will.
" Yes, sir. "
" Then tell me so roundly and sharply — don't spare
me, "
" I cannot: I am tired and sick. I want some water. "
Ho heaved a sort of shuddering sigh, and taking me in his
arms, carried me down stairs. At first I did not know to
what room he had borne me; all was cloudy to my glazed
sight: presently I felt the reviving warmth of a fire: for,
summer as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber.
He put wine to my lips; I tasted it, and revived; then I
ate something he oifered me, and was soon myself. I was
in the library — sitting in his chair— he was quite near.
" If I could go out of life now, without too sharp a pang,
it would be well for me, " I thought; " then I should not
have to make the effort of cracking my heart-strings in
rending them from among Mr, Rochester's. I must leave
him, it appears. I do not want to leave him — I can not
leave him. "
" How are you now, Jane? "
" Much better, sir: 1 shall be well soon, "
" Taste the wine again, tiane? "
I obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood
before me, and looked at me attentively. Suddenly he
turned away, with an articulate exclamation, full of
passionate emotion of some kind; he walked fast through
the room and came back: he stooped toward me as if to
kiss me; but I remembered caresses were now forbidden.
I turned my face away, and put his aside.
" What! How is this? " he exclaimed, hastily. " Oh,
I know! you won't kiss the husband of Bertha Mason?
You consider my arms filled, and my embraces appropri-
" At
an^
rate, there is neither i
1 nor claim for me,
JAKE EVBE.
m
e of ™^^^H
d a wifelj^^H
" Why, Jane? I will apare you the ironWe
talking: I will answer for you — because I have
ready, yon would reply. I guess rightly? "
" Yea. "
" If yon think so you must have a strange opinion of
me: you must reeard me as a plotting pronigati'— a baso
ami low rake who has been simulating (liMiTitLTtislud love
in order to draw you into a snare deliberately laid, and
atrip you of honor, and rob you of self-respect. What do
you say to that? I see you can say nothing: in the first
place, you are faint, still, and have enough to do to drw
your breath; in the second place, you cannot yet aecUE'"
y-uirself to accuse and revue me, and, besides, the fli
gates of tears are opened, and they would rush ont if
spoke much: and you have no desire to expostulate, to
braid, to make a scene: you are thinking how io ai
talking, you consider, is of *no use. I know you — I am tl
my guard. "
" Sir, I do not wish to act against you, " I said; and my
unsteady voice warned mc to curtail my sentence.
" Not in yoitr Bense of the word, but in mitie, you are
scheming to destroy me. You have as good as said that
I am a married man— -as a married man you will ehun me,
keep out of my way: just now you have refused to kiss
mii. You intend to make yourself a complete etranger to
me: to live under this roof only as Adele's governess: if
ever I say a friendly word to you; if ever a friendly feeling
iucli;iea you again to nie, you will say,'That man has
nearly made mo his mistress: I must he ice and rock to
him; and ice and rock you will accordingly become. "
" I cleai-ed and steadied my voice to reply: " All ia
changed about me, sir; I must change too — there is Do
doubt of that: and to avoid fluctuations of feeling, and
continual eorabata with recollGctiona and associatii'"''
there is only one way^ — Adele must have a new gover:
sir. "
" Oh, Adele wiU go to school— I have settled
already, nor do I mean to torment you with the hideous
asBOciatinuB and recollections of Thornfleld Hall — this
accursed place — this tent of Achan — this insolent vault,
offering the ghaatiineas of living death to the light of the
open sky — this narrow stone hell; with its one real fiend,
worse than a legion of such as we imagine — Jane, you shall
not stay here, nor will I. I was wrong ever to bring'~
ioag^B
th^B
to Thornfield Hall, knowing as I did how it waa banntedJ
I charged them to conceal from you, before I ever saw yoaM
all knowledge of the curse of the place ; merely because 9
feared Adele never would have a governess to stay if shfH
knew with what inmate slie was bouaed, and my plans
would not permit me to remove the maniac elsewhere J
though I possess an old house, Ferndean Manor, even mora
retired and hidden than this, where I could have lodgeijl
her safely enough, had not a scruple about the unhealthy
noGS of the situation, in the heart of a ^vood, made mjS
conscience recoi! from the arrangement. Probably thowB
damp walls would soon have eased me of her charge : bufl
to each villain his own vice ; and mine is not a tendencjfl
to indirect assassination, even of what I most hate. fl
" Concealing the mad-woman's neighborhood from
you, however, was something like covering a ciiild with a
cloak, and laying it down near a upas-tree ; that demon's
Ticinage is poisoned, and always was. But I'll shut up
Thornfield Hall ; I'll nail up the front door, and board tb^J
lower windows ; 111 give Mrs. Poole two hundred a yea™
to live here with my wife, as you term that fearful hag M
Graoe will do much for money, and she shall have her sonjM
the keeper at Gr'n si j Ret eat to bear her company anw
be at Itand to g e 1 e a I the paroxysms, when »ijfl
w^fl is prompted by 1 r fa 1 ar to onrn people in thein
bods at night, to stab the to bite their flesh from thein
bones, and so on I
" Sir, " I inteirupted h m you are inexorable for thaS
unfortunate lady yo sp k of her with hate — witWB
vindictive antipa,thy It s cruel — she can not help hein^fl
mad. " I
" Jane, my little darl g ( o I will call von, for so yovM
are), you don't k v what you are talking about ; yoij
misjndgo me again : it is not because she is mad I hate her.I
y you were mad, do you think I should hate you ? " ■
" I do indeed, sir.'I
" Then you are mistaken, and you know nothing aboutl
me, and nothing about the sort of love of which I am canfl
pablB. Every atom of your flesh is as dear to me as mjrS
own : in pain and sickness it would still be dear. Your J
mind ia my treasure ; and if it were broken, it would be
my treasure still : If you raved, my arms should confine
yon, and not a strait-wuistcoat — your grasp, even in fury,
■ *— ^-^ hftve a oharm for me ; if you flew al me as wildly as
f
314
JANE EYBE.

tliat wODiaa did this morning, I ahonld receive joa in an
embrace, at least aa fond as it would be restrictive. I ghonld
not shrink from you with disgust- as I did from Imr : in
jour quiet moments you should have no watcher and no
norae but me; and I could hang over you with uniinng
tendemeBa, though you gave me no amile in return ; and
never weary of gazing into your eyes, though they had
no longer a ray of recognition for me. But why do I fol-
low that ti-aiu of ideas ? I was talking of removing you
from Thorafield, All, you know, is prepared for prompt
departure : to-morrow yon shall go. I only ask you to
euflure one more night under this roof, Jane : and then
farewell to its miseries and terrors forever ! I have a place
to repair to, which will be a secure sanctuary from hateful
reminiscences, from unwelcome intrusion — even from tt'" "'
hood and slander. "
" And take Adele with you, sir, " I interrupted ;
will lie a companion for you, "
" What do you mean, Jane ? I told you I would
Adele to school: and what do I want with a child for-
companion ? and not my own cliild — a French dam
bastard. Why do yon importune me about her ? I
why do you assign Adele to me for a companion ? "
" You spoke of a retirement, sir; and retirement
solitude are dull ; too dull for you. "
" Solitude! solitude! " he reiterated, with irritation.
see I must come to an explanation. I don't know wl
^hinx-like expression is forming in your countenai
i'ou oro to share my solitude. Do you uuderstand ? "
I shook my head : it required a degree of courage, ex-
cited 03 he was becoming, even to risk that mute sign of
dissent. He had been walking fast about the roomy and
stopped, as if suddenly rooted to one spot. He looked
ai me long and hard: I tunied my eyes from him, fixed
them on tlic fire, and tried to assume and maintain a quiet,
collected aspect.
" Now for the hitch in Jane's character, " he said at
last, speaking more calmly than from his look I had ex-
pected him to speak. " The reel of silk has run smoothly
enough so far ; but I always knew there would come a knot
and a puzzle : here it is. Now for vexation, and exaspei
tiou, and endless trouble! My God! I long to exert & * "'
tion of Sampson's strength, and break the entangli
''" " towl "

He recommenced Iiis walk: but soon again etoppedfJ
tnd this time just before me. |
" Jane, will you hear reason? " (ha stopped and ap-
proached hie lips to my ear) " " because, if you won't, 111
try violence. " His voice waa hoarse; his look that of a
man who is just about to bnrst an insuffecable bond and
plunge headlong into wild license. I saw that in another ^
moment, and with one impetus of frenzy move, I«lioul('
be able to do nothing with him. The pvesent— the passim
second of time — waa all I had in which to control aiu_
restrain him : a movement of repulsion, flight, foiir, wotilil
have sealed my doom — and his. But I was uot afraid : not
in the least. 1 felt an inward power ; aseuse of influence,
which supported mc. Tlio crisis was perilous : bnt not
witliout its charm : Buch as the Indian, perhaps, feels when
hti slips over the rapid in his canoe. I tooK hold of his
clenched hand ; loosened the contorted fingers, and said to
him, sootliingly, " Sit dovrn ; I'll talk to you as long as you
like, and hear all yon have to say, whether reasonable or
unreasonable. "
He sat down : but he did not get leave to speak directly,
I had been struggling with teaia for some time ; I had
taken great pains to repress them, because I knew he
would not like to see me weep. Now, liowcver, I con-
sidered it well to let tlicni flow as freely and as long nt
they liked. If the flood annoyed him, so much th.^ Ijettcr. J
So I gave way and cried heartily, ■
Soon I hcai'd him earnestly entreating me to be eom^fl
posed. I siiid I could not while he was in such a ptissioiuM
" But I am not angry, Jane, I only love yon too wellsB
and you had steeled your little pale face with such a reac > n
lute frozen look, I could not endure it. Hush, now, ao^
wipe ^your eyes,''" J
Hia softened voice announced that ho was subdued ; bom
I, in my turn, became calm. Now ho made an effort to rest J
his head on my shoulder : but I Would not permit it. Thett "
he would draw rae to him : no.
" Jauf, Juno !''he said, in such an accent of bitter sad-
ness, it thriilcd along every nerve I had ; you don't love
me, then ? It was oidy my station, and tlio rank of my
wife, that you valued ? Now that you think me disqnali- \
fiod to become yonr hnsband, you recoil from ray touch as I
if I were some toad nr ape. " 1
5)beBe words cut me: vet ffbat could I do or aay. M
ougbt probably to have done or said uothing ; but I was
so tortured by'ii sense of remorse at thus hurting his feel-
ings, I could uot control the wish to drop balm where I
bad wounded.
I do love you, " I said, " more than ever: but I a
not show or indulgo the feeling ; and this is the lafit ti
1 must cxpiese it.'
" The fast time, Jane I What 1 Do you think you can
live with me, and see me dailv, and yet if you still lovo
me, be always cold and distant ? "
" Na,sir; that I am certain I could not; and therefore
X see there is but one way : but you will be furious if I
mention it, "
" Oh, mention it 1 If I storm, you have tlie art of
weeping. "
" Mr. Rochester, I must leave you. "
" For how long, Jane ? For a few minutes, while j
smooth your hair — which is somewhat disheveled ; i
bathe your face — which looks feverish ? "
" I must leave Adele and Thornfield. I must part
with you for my whole life : I must begin a new existence
among strange faces and strange scenes. "
" Of course: I told you you should. I pass over the
madness about parting from me. You mean you must
become a part of nie. As to the new existence, it is
all right: you shall yet he my wife: lam uot married.
You shall be Mrs. Rochester — both virtually and nomi-
nally. I shall keep only to you ao long as you and I live.
You shall go to a place I have in the south of Fi'ance : a
whitewashed villa on the shores of the Mediterranean.
There you shall live a happy, and guarded, and most inno-
cent life. Never fear that I wiali to lure you into error —
to make you my mistress. Why do you shake your head ?
Jane, you must be reasonable; or in truth I shall again
become frantic. "
His voice and hand quivered ; his large nostrils dilated ;
his eyes blazed ; still I dared to apeak :'■ Sir, your wife is
living: that ia a fact acknowledged thia morning by your-
self. If I live with you as you desire, I should then be
your mistress: to say otherwise is sophistical — is false. "
" Jane, I am not a gentle-tempered man — you forget
that : I am not long enduring ; I am not cool and dispas-
sionate. Out of pity to me and yourself, put your fiugor
on my pulse, feel how it throbs, and — beware I "
JANE I
He bared his wrist and offered it to me: the blood was
forsaking his cheek and lips, they were growing livid; I
was distressed on all hands. To agitate him thus deeply,
by a resistance he eo abhorredj was cruel: to yield was out
of the question. I did what human beings do iustinct-
iTely when they are driven to ntter extremity — looked for
aid to one higher than man: the words " God help me'"
burst involuntarily from my lips.
" I am a fool! " cried Mr. Rochester, suddenly.''
keep telling her I am not married, and do not explain
her why. I forget she knows nothing of the character
that woman, or of the circumstances attending my
fernal union with her. Oh, I am certain Jane will agi
with me in opinion, when she knows all that 1 knoi
Just pnt yonr hand in mine, Janet — that I may have ti
evidence of touch as well as sight, to prove you are n'
me — and I will in a few words show you the real state
the case. Can you listen to me? "
" Yes, sir; for hours if yon will. " ^
" I ask only minntoa. Jane, did you ever hear or knoWj
that I was not the eldest son of my house; that I hi
once a brother older than I? "
" I remember Mrs. Fairfax told me so once. "
" And did you ever hear that my father was
eious, grasping man? "
" iTiave understood something to that effect.'
" Well, Jane, being so, it was liis resolution to keep the
property together; he could not bear the idsji of dividing
bis estate and leaving mo a fair portion: all, he resolved,
shou]d go to my brother, Rowland. Yet as little oould he
endure that a son of bis should be a poor man. I must
be provided for by a wealthy marriage. lie sought me a
partner betimes. Mr. Mason, a West India planter and
merchant, was his old acquaintance. lie was certain his
poBseseions were real and vast; he made inquiries. Mr,
Mason, he found, had a son and daughter; and ho learned
from him that he could and would give the latter a fortui
of thirty thousand pounds: that sufficed. When I left
lege, I was sent out to Jamaica, to es|ionEe a bride alret
courted for me. My father said nothing about her monej
but he told me Miss Mason was the boast of Spanish Towl
for her beauty: and this was no lie. I found her a fin
woman, in the style of Blanche Ingram; tall, dark, and
" -'- ■'Her family wished to secure me, because I was
1
was I
Mr. I
irned ^J
^c^^H
reacO^^^H
Pow^^^
" fine
ind I
of ft good race; and ao did fJic. They showed her tij
in parties, splendidly dressed. I seldom saw her i'
and had very little private conversation with her, ^
flattered me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her
charma and accomplishments. All the men in her circle
seemed to admire her, and envy me. I was dazzled, stimu-
lated: my Bcnsea were excited; and being ignorant, raw,
and inexperienced, I thonght I loved her. There is no
folly 80 besotted that the idiotic rivalries of society, the
Erurience, the rashness, the blindness of youth, will not
urry a m;m to its commission. Her relatives encouraged
me; competitors piqued me; she altnred me: a marriage
was achieved almost before I knew where I was. Oh, I
have no respect for myself wiien I think of that act! — an
agony of inward contempt masters me. I never loved,
I never esteemed, I did not even know her. I was'not
sure of the existence of one virtue in her nature: 1 had
marked neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candor, nor
refinement in her mind or manners — and, I married he»i
gross, groveling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was!
fesa sin I might have — but let me remember to whom
faking.
" My bride's mother I had never seen: I understood she
was dead. The honey-moon over, I learned my mistake;
she was only mad, and shut up in a lunatic asylum. There
was a younger brother, too; a complete dumb idiot. The
elder one. whom you have seen {and whom I can not hate,
while I abhor all hia kindred, because he has some grains
of affection in his feeble mind; shown in the continued
interest he takes in his wretched sister, and also in a dog-
like attachment he ouce bore me), will probably bo in the
same state one day. My father, and my brother Rowland,
knew all this; but they thought only of the thirty thou-
sand pounds, and joined in the plot against me.
" These were vile discoveries; but except for the
treachery of concealment, I should have made them no
subject of reproach to ray wife: even when I found her
nature wholly alien to mine; her tastes obnoxious to
me; her caste of mind common, low, narrow, and singn-
jarly incapable of being led to anything higher, expanded
to anything larger — when I found that I could not pass a
single evening, nor even a single hour of the day, with
her in comfort: that kindly conversation could notue sua-
tained between us, because whatever topic I bI
•. nor
ho^H
mediately rsceived from her a tarn at once coarse and
trite, perverse and imbecile— when I perceived that 1
should never have a quiet or settled household, becan»e no—
servant wonld besir the continued outbreaks of her violenff
and iinreasoiiable- temper, or the vexations of her abaurdS
contradictory, exacting orders — even then I restraliiM
myself; I eschewed upbraiding; I curtailed remonstranoai
I tried to devour my repentance and disgnst in secret; J
repressed the deep antipathy I felt. , i
" Jane, I will not trouble you with abominable detailsa
some strong words shall express what I have to say. I
lived with that woman up stairs four years, and hefore
that time she had tried me indeed: her chamcter ripened
aud developed with frightful rapidity; her vices sprang MU,
fast and rank; they were so strong, only cruelty coulS
check them; and I would not use cruelty. What a pigni^
intellect she had — and what giant propensities! fir "
fearful were the curses those propensities entailed i
me! Bertha Mason — the true daughter of an infamod
mother— dragged me through all the hideous and degradL
ing anonies wliich must attend a man bound to a wife m
once intemperate and unchaste.
" My brother in the interval was dead; and at the end
of the four years my father died too. I was rich enough
now — ^yet poor to hideous indigence: a nature the most
gross, impure, depraved I ever saw, was associated witl
mine, and called by the law and by society a part of mf
And I could not rid myself of it by any legal proceeding*
for the doctors now discovered that mt/ wife was mad — ha
excesses had prematurely developed the germs of, insanitw
Jane, you don't like my narrative; you look almost sick-ir
shall I defer the rest to another day? "
" No, sir, finish it now: I pity you — I do earnestly pity'
yon. "
" Pity, Jane, from some people is a noxious and insult-
ing sort of tribute which one is justified in hurling back
in the teeth of those who offer it; hut that is the sort rf~
pitv native to callous selfish hearts: it is a hybrid, ogotiatj
ical pain at hearing of woes, crossed with ignorant oonf
tempt for those who have endured them. But that is nd_
your pity, Jane: it is not the feeling of which your whole
face is full at this moment — with which your eyes are now
almost overflowing — with which your heart is heaving —
" ^ " .ffhich your band is trembling in mine. Tour pity„

830 JANE EYRE.
my flarling, is the Buffering mother of love; its anguialilj,
the very natal pang of the divine paBsion. I accept it, Jano]
let the daughter have free advent — my arms wait to reGelT(
her. "
" Now, sir, proceed: what did you do when yuu foul
she was mad? "
" Jane, 1 approached the verge of despair: a remnantH
of seif-respect was all that intervened between me and the
gulf. _ In the eyes of the world I waa doubtless covered
with " grimy dishonor: but I resolved to be clean in my own
eight — and to the last I repudiated the contamination of
her crimes and wrenched myself from connection with her
mental defects. Still, society associated my name and
person with hers I I yet saw her and heard her daily:
something of her breath (faugh!) mixed with the air I
breathed: and, besides, I remembered I had once been her
husband — that recollection was then, and is now, inex-
fireasfbly odious to me: moreover, I knew that while she
tved I could never be the husband of another and better
wife; and though five years my senior (her family and her
father had Ued to mo even in the partiealar of her ftge),
ahe was likely to live as long as I, being as robust in frame
as she was infirm in mind. Thus, at the age of twenty-
six I was hopeless.
" One night I had been awakened by her yells — (since
the medical men had pronounced her mad she had, of
course, been shut up) — it was a fiery West Indian night;
one of tiie description that frequently precede the hurri-
canes of those climates; being unable to sleep in bed I got
up and opened the window. The air was like sulphur-
streams — I could find no refreshment anywhere. Mosqui-
toes came buzzing in and hummed suUeidy round the
rocm; the sea, which I could hear from thence, rumbled
dull like an earthquake— black clouds were easting up
over it; the moon was setting in the waves, broad and red,
like a hot cannon-ball — she threw her last bloody glanoe
over a world quivering with a ferment of tempest. I fl
physically influenced by the atmosphere and scene, &
my eai " s were filled with the curees the maniac still ahrJefcsL^
out, wherein she momentarily mingled my name with Bawfl
a tone of demon-hate, with snob language! — no professed
harlot ever had a fouler vocabulary tliaa she; though two
roonjg ofEj I heard every word — the thin pM^itions of the
JANE EYRE.
West Indiau house opposing but slight obatrnction to her
wolfish cries.
"'This life,'said I, at last,'is hell! this is the air—
those are the souadsof the bottomlesB pit ! I huve a ri^ht
to deliver myself from it if I can. The sufferings of this
mortal state will leave me with the heavy flesh that uow
cumbers my soul. Of the fanatic's biiming eternity I have
no fear: there is not a future state worse than this present-
one— let me break away and go home to God !'
" I said this while I knelt down at and unlocked {
trunk which contained a bra^e of loaded pistols : I meant
to shoot myself, I only entertained the intention for a
moment ; for not being insane, the crisis of exquisite and
unalloyed despair which had originated the wiah and de-
sign of self-destruction was past in a second.
" A wind fresh fronf Europe blew over the ocean and
rushed through the open casement : the storm broke,
streamed, thundered, blazed, and the air grew pure. I
then framed and fixed a resolution. While fwalked under
the dripping orange-trees of my wet garden, and among
its drenched pomegranates and pine-upples, and while the
refulgent dawn of the tropics kindled round me — -I rea-
soned thus, Jane : — and now listen ; for it was true Wisdom
that consoled me in that iiour, and showed me the right
path to follow.
" The sweet wind from Europe was still whispering in
the refreshed leaves, and the Atlantic was thundering in
glorious litierty ; my heart, dried up and scorched for a
long time, swelled to tlie tone and filled with living blood
— my being longed for renewal — my soul thirsted for a
pure draught, f saw Hope revive — and felt Regeneration
possible. From a fiowery arch at the bottom of my gar-
den 1 gassed over the sea — bluer than the aky : the Old
World vas beyond ; clear prospects opened thus :
"'Go,'said Hope,'and live agam in Europe : there it
is not known what a sulli^ name you bear, nor what a
filthy burden is bound to you. You may take the maniac
with you to England ; confine her with due attendance and
precautions at Thomfield: then travel yourself to what
clime yoii will, and form what new tie you like. That
woman, who has so abused your long-sufEering — so sullied
your name ; so outraged your honor ; so blighted your youth
— is not your wife ; nor are you her husband. See that
she is cared for as her condition demands, and you havea
3S2 JANE EYRE.
done all that God and Humanity reqnire of yon. Let her
identity, lier connection witii yourself, be buried in
oblivion : you are bound to impart tlicm to no living beiuj
Place her in eafty and comfort : shelter her de^adatto
with secreey, and leave lier,'
" 1 acted precieelj on this eng^estion. My father a .
brother had not made my marriage known to their ac-
quaintance ; because in the very first letter 1 wrote to ap-
prise them of the union — having already begun to experl-
once extreme disgust of the congeqneuces ; and from tlie
family character and constitution, seeing a hideous futiU ~
opening to rae — I added an urgent charge to keep it secrq
and very soon the infamous conduct of the wife my fatbl_
had selected for rae, was such as to make him blush to ow^E
her as his daughter-in-law. Far from desiring to publish
the connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.
" To England, then, I conveyed her ; a fearful voyage
I had with such a monster in the vessel. Olad was I wlu
I at last got her to Tbomfield, and saw Iier eafely 1«
in that third-story room, of whose secret inner cabinet!^
has now for ten years made a wild beast's den — a goblu
coll. I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her'?
OS it was necessai-y to select one on whose fidelity depend-
ance could be placed ; for her ravings would inevitably be-
tray my secret : besides, she had lucid intervals of days —
sometimes weeks — which she filled up with abuse of me.
At last I hired Grace Poole, from the Grimsby Retreat.
Shu and the surgeon, Carter {who dressed Mason's wouiida
that night he was stabbed and worried), are the only two
I have ever admitted to my confidenofe Mrs. Fairfax
may indeed have suspected something ; but she could have
gaine < l no precise knowledge as to facts. Grace has, oil
the whole, proved a good keeper ; though, owing partly to a
fault of her own, of which it appears nothing can cure
her, and which is incident to her hai-assing profession, her
vigilance has been more than once hiUed and baffled. The
lunatic is both cunning and malignant; she has neT <
failed to take advantage of her guardian's temporary lap? " "
once to secrete the knife with which she stabbed I
brother, and twice to possess herself of the key of her o
~~'- — ■; therefrom in the night-time. On the firet of
casions, she perpetrated the attempt to burn me in
; on the second, she paid that ghastly visit to yoUj.,
'" rovidence, who watched over yon, that she & "

JANE ETRE.

spent her fury od your wedding apparel; which perhap9',B
brought; baok vague reminiscences of her own bridal daju'T
but on what might have happened, I cannot endure to re**
fleet. " When I thini of the thing which flew at mj throaM
this morning, hanging ite black and scarlet vieage over tlin
nest of my dove, my blood curdles " fl
" And what, sir, I asked, wlule he paused, " did you do'
when you had settled her here? Where did you go? "
" What did I do, Jane? I transformed myself into a
will-o'-the-wisp. Where did I go? I pursued wandering
as wild aa those of the March spirit. I aonght tlie Conti-
uent, and went devious ways through all its lands. My
fixed desire was to seek and find a good and intelligent
woman, whom I could love: a conti'aat to the fury I left at
Thorufield "
" But you could not marry, sir. "
" 1 had determined, and was convinced that I could ftW
ought. It was not my original intention to deceive, as J
have deceived yon. I meant to tell my tale plainly, and
make my proposals openly; and it appeared to me 30'
Bolutely rational that I should be considered free to 1
and be loved, I never doubted some woman might be found.,
willing and able to understand my case and accept me, f
spite of the curse with which I was burdened. "
" Well, sir? "
"'Wlien you are inquisitive, Jaue, you always make i
smile. Yon open your eyes like an eager bird, and make
every now and then a restless movement; as if answers in
speech did not fiow fast enough for you, and you wanted
to read the tablet of one's heart. But before I go on, tell
me what yon mean by your'Well, sir?'It is a small phrase
very frequent with yon; and which many a time has drawn
me on and on through interminable talk: I don't very weli
know why. "
" I mean. What next ? How did you proceed ? What
came of such an event? "
" Precisely: and what do you wish to kuow now?
" Whether you found any one you liked: whether you
asked her to marry you; and what she said. "
" 1 can tell you whether I found any one I liked, and
whether I asked her to marry me; but what she said is yet
to be recorded in the book of Fate, For ten long years I
roved about, living first in one capital, then another: some-
times in St. Petersburg, oftener in Paris; occasionally il'"

324 JAN£ EYEB.
Rome, Naples, and Florence. Providod wltt
money, and tho pas^ort of an old name, 1 could ch'(
my own eociety : no circlea were closed against me. I sou^
my ideal of a woman among English ladies, Frenci
ooantesaes, Italian eignorae, and uei'man gratinnoti. 1
could not find her. SometimeB, foi'a fleeting moment, I
tliouglit I caught a glance, heard a tone, beheld a focm,
which annoiinMid the realization of my dream; htit I was
Sreseutly undeeeived. You are not to snppose that I
eaircd perfection, either of mind or person. I longed
only for what suited me— for the antipodes of the Creol
and I longed rainly. Among them all I found not
whom, had I been ever ao free, I — warned as I was of
risks, the horrors, the loathings of incongruous nnioi
would have asked to marry me. Disappointment made
reckless, I tried dissipation — never debauchery: that'
hated, and hate. That was my Indian Measalina's attribul
rooted disgust at it and her restrained me much, even
pleaaure. Any enjoyment that bordei-od on riot seemi "
approach me to her and her vices, and I esohewed it.
••'Yet I could not live alone: so 1 tried the companu
ship of mistresses. The first I chose was Cfeline Varene
another of those steps which make a man spurn hims^
when he recalls them. You already know what ehe woe,
and how my liaison with her ternimated. She had two
succcGSDrs : an Italian, Giacinta, and a German, Glai
both considered singularly handsome. What was th
beauty to me in a few weeks? Giacinta was unprincipl
and violent: I tired of her in three months. Clara
honest and quiet, but heavy, mindless, nnimpressible:
one whit to mj taste. I was glad to give her a sufficient
sum to set her np in a good line of business, and so get
decently rid of her. Bnt, Jane, I see by your face, you are
not forming a very favorable opinion of me j'tist now. You
think mo an unfeeling loose-principled nike; don't you? "
" I don't like you so well aa I have done eometimea,
indeed, sir. Did it not seem to you in the least wrong to
live in that way: first with one misti-ess and then another?
You talk of it as a mere matter of course. "
" It was with me: and I did not like it. It was a
groveling fashion of existence: I should never like to reti
to it. Hiring a mistress is the next worst thing to buy
a slave: both are often by nature, and always by posltit
inferior: and to live familiarly with inferiors Is dr — " " "
was,
two-,^^
1
I now hate the recollection of the time I paesed with
Celine, Giacinta, and Clara. "
I felt the truth of these words; and I drew from them
the certain inference, that if I were so far to forget m^
self .and all the teaching that had ever heen instilled in^
me, as — under any pretest — with any justiflcation-
througli any temptation — to become the successor of thai
poor girls, he would one day regard me with the same fee'
ing which now in his mind desecrated their memory,
did not give utterance to this conviction; it was enough I
feel it, I impressed it on my heart, that it might remain *
there to serve me as aid in the time of trial.
" Now, Jane, why don't you say'Well, sir?'I have
not done. You are looking grave. You disapprove of
me still I see. But let me come to the point. Last
January, rid of all mistroases — in a harsh, bitter, frame
of mind, the result of a useless, roving, lonely life — cor-
roded with disappointment, sourly disposed against all
men, and eeiiecially against all woman kind ^for I began to
regard the notion of an intellectual, faithful, loving
woman as a mere dream), recalled by business, I came
back to England.
" On a frosty, winter afternoon, I rode in sight of
Thornfield Hall. Abhorred spot! I expected no peace —
no pleasure there. On a, stile in Hay Lane I saw a quiet
little figure sitting by itself. I passed it as negligently as
I did the pollard willow opposite to it: I had no presenti-
ment of what it would be to me; no inward warning that
the arbitress of my life — my genius for good or evil —
waited there in humble guise. I did not know it, even
when, on the occasion of Mesrour's accident, it came up
and gravely offered me help. Childish and slender creat-
ure! It seemed as if a linnet had hopped on my foot and
proposed to bear me on its tiny wing. I was surly; but
the thing would not go: it stood by me with strange per-
severance, and looked and spoke with a sort of antnonty.
I must be aided, and by that hand: and aided I was.
" When once I had pressed the frail shoulder, some-
thing new — a fresh sap and sense— stole into my frame.
It was well I had learned that this elf must return to me
— that it belonged to my house down below — or I could
not have felt it pass away from under my hand, and seen
it vanish behind tiie dim hedge, without singular regret.
I heard you come home that night, Jane: though probal^'
326 JANE EXBE.
yon were not aware that 1 thonght of yon, or watched i__
you. The next day I observed you — myself unseen — ftjji
naif an liour, while you played with Adele in the galleij'
It was a snowy day, 1 recolloctj and yon could not go om
of-doora. I was in my room; the door was ajar; I coi'
both listen and watch, Ad.;la claimed your outwi
attention for a while; yet I fancied your tnoughts wi
elsewhere, but you were very patient with her, my Htl
Jane; you talked to her and amused her a long tit
When at last she left you, you lapsed at once into di
reverie: you betook yourself slowly to pace the galle
Xdw and then, in passing a casement, you glanced out
the thick-falling snow; you listened to the sobbing wir.„
and again you paced gently on and dreamed. I thin]
those day visions were not dark; there was a pleasumble
illumination in your eye occasionally, a soft excitement in
yonr aspect, which told of no bitter, bilious, hypochon-
driac brooding: your look revealed rather the sweet
musings of youth, when its spirit follows on willing wings
the flight of Hope, up and on to an ideal heaven. The
voice of Mrs. Fairfax, speaking to a servant in the hall,
wakened you: and how curiously you smiled to and at
yourself, Janet! There was much sense in your smile; it
was very shrewd, and seemed to make light of your own
abstraction. It seemed to say,'My fine visions are all
very well, but I must not forget they ai'e absolutel
unreal. I have a rosy sky, and a green flowery Edes "
my brain; but without, I am perfectly aware, lies at
feet a rough tract to travel, and around me gather bl
tempests to encounter,'You ran down stairs and
manded of Mrs. Fairfax some occupation; the'
house accounts to make up, or something of that
think it was. I was vexed with you for getting out of
eight.
■'Impatiently I waited for evening, when I might
summon you to my presence. An unusual — to me — a
perfectly new character I suspected was yours : I desired
to search it deeper, and know it better. You entered the
room with a look and air at once shy and independent:
you were quaintly di-essed — much as you are now. I mode
you talk ; ere long I found you full of strange contrasts.
Your garb and manner were restricted by rulej your air
was often diffident, and altogether that of one refined by
Ktare, but absolutely unusw to sooietyj and a good c'

.USE EYRB. 33?^
afraid of making herself disadvantageoualy oonspicuoaa by
some solecism or blunder; yet when addressed, you lifted
a keen, a daring, and a glowing eye to your interlocutor's
face; there waa penetration and power in each glance yoii
gfive; when plied by close questions, you found ready and
round answers, Very soon, you seemed to get used to me:
I believe you felt the existence of sympathy between'yoq
and yonr grim and cross master, Jane; for it was astoni & t^
ing to see how quickly a certain pleasant ease tranqniliz( _^
your manner: snarl as I would, you showed no surpriaejjl
tear, annoyance, or displeasure at my moroseness; yon
watched me, and now and then smiled at me with a simple
yet sagacious grace I can not describe. I waa at once con-
tent and stimulated with what I saw: I liked what I had
Been, and wished to see more. Yet, for a long time, I
treated you distantly, and sought yonr company rarely, I
was au intellectual epicure, and wished to prolong the
gratification of malung this novel and piouant acquaint-
ance: besides, I was for a while troubled much with a
haunting fear that if I handled the flower freely its bloom
would fade — the sweet charm of freshness would leave it.
I did not then know that it was no transitory blossom;
but rather the radiant resemblance of one, cut in an inde-
structible gem. Moreover, [ wished to see whether you
would seek me if I shunned you— but yon did not: you
kept in the school-room as still as yonr own desk and
easel; if by chance I met you, you passed me as soon, and
with as little token of recognition, as was consistent with
respect, Yonr habitual expression in those days, Jane,
waa a thoughtful look: not despondent, for you were not
Bickly; but not buoyant, for you had little nope, and no
actual pleasure. I wondered what you thought of me — or
if you ever thought of mo; to find this out, f resumed my
notice of you. There was something glad in yonr glance,
and genial in your manner, when you coutersea: I saw yon
had a social heart; it was the silent school-room, it was the
tedium of yonr Hfe, that made you moumfnL I permitted
myself the delight of being kind to you; kindness stirred
emotion soon: your face became soft in expression, yonr
tones gentle; I liked my name pronounced by your lips in
a grateful, liappy acceiit. I used to enjoy a chance meet-
ing with you, Jane, at this time; there waa a curious hesi-
tation in your manner: you glanced at me with a slight
trouble — a hovering doubt: you did not know what mr'

328
JANE EYEE.
caprice inigbt be— whether I was going to play the mas
and be stern, or the friend, and be benignant. I was n
too fond of you often to stimulate the flrat whim; nam
wlieii I stretched my hand out cordially, such bloom aif
light mid bliss rose to yonr young, wistful features, I hf
much ado often to avoid straining you then and there 1
my heart. " j
" Don't talk any more of those days, sir, " I interrnptej
furtively dashing some tears from my eyes; his languaf
waa tor'tui-e to me; for I knew what I must do— and s
soon — and all these reminiscences and these revelatjona (
hia feelings only made my work more diiRcult,
" No, Jane,'lie returned; " what necessity is there i
dwell on the I'ast, when the Present is so much i
the Future so min^h brighter? "
I shuddured to huur the infatuated assertion,
" You see now how the case stands — do you not? " J
CUDtinued. " After a youth and manhood passed half J
umUterable misery and half in dreary solitude, I have T
the first lime found what I can truly love — I have foai
t/ou. You are my sympathy — my better self — my go
au^l; I am bound to you with a strong attachment,
think yon good, gifted, lovely: a fervent, a solemn paeaifl
is conceived in my heart; it leans to you, draws you to id
center and spring of life, wraps my existence about yoa4
and, kindling in pure, powerful ilame, fuses you and r^
in one.
" It was because 1 felt and inew this, that I resolved j
marry you. To tell me that I had already a wife is e__.j_,
mockery: you know now that I had but a hideous dem^
1 waa wrong to attempt to deceive you; but I feared!
stuhbomess that exists in yonr character. I feared eajT
instilled prejudice: I wanted to have yow safe befoL
iJMarding conlidenoes. This was cowardly: I should h$]
'Mpealed to your nobleness aud magnanimity at first, i
So iiow — opened to you plainly my life of agony — descri
to yon tny hunger and thirst after a higher and worthi^
i_gj^cnce— shown to yon. not my resohtiioii (that word is
^} but my resistless bent to'love faithfully and well,
- " ! I am faithfully and well loved in return. Then I
■**■ :■ asked you to accent my pledge of fidelity, 8 "
s: June — give it me now. "
Mt. JaneP'
JANE BYRK.
33^H
I -was eiperieDcing an ordeal : a hand of fiery iron
f rasped my vitals. Terrible moment ; full of'struggle,
Laokness, tjurning! Not a human being thiit ever lived
could wish to be loved better than I was loved ; and him
who thus loved me I absolutely ■worshipped : and I must
renounce love and idol. One doarer word comprised my
intolerable duty — " Depart ! " —
" Jape, you understand what I want of yon ? Juet ti
promise —'I will be yours, Mr, Rochester.'"
" Mr. Rochester, I will not be yours, "
Another long silence,
" Jane, " recommenced he, with a gentleness that broke
me down with grief, and turned me stone-cold with omi-
nous terror — for this still voice was the pant of a lion
rising — " Jane, do you mean to go one way in the world,
and let me go another P "
" r do. "
" Jane " (bending toward and embracing me), " do you
mean it, now? "
" I do. "
" And now ? " softly kissing my forehead and cheek.
" I do " — extricating myself from restraint rapidly and
completely.
" Oh, Jane, this ia hitter I This — ^thia is wicked. It
would not be wicked to love me. "
" It would to obey you. "
A wild look raised hisbroft-s — crossed his features: he
rose : but he forebore jet. I laid my hand on the back of
a chair for support : I shook, I feared — but I resolved.
" One instant, Jane. Give one glaaice to my horrible
life when you are gone. All happiness will be torn away
with yon. What then is left ? For a wife I have hut the
maniac up stairs: as well might you refer me to some
corpse in yonder church-yard. What shall I do, Jane?
Where turn for a companion, and for some hope ? "'
" Do as I do : trust in God and yourself. Believe in
heaven. Hope to meet again there. " ~
" Then you will not yield ? "
" No. "'
" Then yon condemn me to live wretched, aud to die
accursed ? " Hia voice rose.
" I a^Jvise you to live sinless: and I wish you to die
.Wnouil. " ■—
■ — ** Then you snatch love and innocence from me
330
JAJXE EY & a.
fling tofi back on last lor a passion — vice for an occit||i
tlon ? "
•'Mr. Rochester, I no more assign this fate to you than "
I grasp at it for myself. We were born to strive and en-
dure — you as well as 1 : do so. You will forget me before
I forget yon, "
" You make me a liar by such language : yon sully my
honor. I declared I could not change ; you tell me to my
face I shall change soon. And what a distortion in your
judgment, what a perversity in your ideas, is proved by
ybnr conduct ! Is it better to drive a fellow-creature to
despair than to transgress a mere human law — no man
being injured by the breach ? for you have neither rela-
tives nor acquaintances whom you need fear to offend by
vine with nie. "
This was true : and while he spoke, my very conscience
and reason turned traitors against me, and charged me
with crime in resisting him. Xhey spoke almost as loud as
Feeling; and that clamored wildly. " Oh, comply! " it
BUd. " Think of liis misei^ ; think of his danger— look at
his state when left alone ; remember his headlong nature ;
consider the recklesanesa following on despair— soothe him ;
save him ; love him ; tell him yon love him, and will be his.
Who in the world cares for yOK f or who will be injured by
what you do ?
StUl indomitable was the re_ply — " / care for myself.
The more solitary the more friendless, the more unaus-
tained I am, the more I will respect myself. I will keep
the law given by God ; sanctioned by man. I will hold to
the principles received by me when I was sane, and not
mad — as 1 am now. Laws and principles are not for the
times when there is no temptation : they are for such
moments as this, when body and soul i-iso in mnti! " ^ "
against their rigor ; stringent are they ; inviolate tS
shall be. If at my individual convenience I might brfl
them, what would be their worth ? They have a wortB
80 I have alw^s believed ; and if I cannot believe it now,,
it is because I am insane — quite insane : with my veine
running fire, and my heart beating faster than I can count
its throbs. Preconceived opinions, foregone detennim
tious, are all I have at this hour to stand by : there I p'
my foot. "
I did. Mr. Rochester, reading my countenance, i
had done 6o, His fury was wrought to the highest :
JANE BIfBE.
must yield to it for a moment, whatever followed; ho croesed'B
the floor and seized my arm, and grasped my waist. H«^
aeemed to devour mo with his flaming glance: physically I
felt, at the moment, powerless as stubble exposed to the
draft and glow of a furnace — mentally I stiil possessed my
soul, and with it the certainty of ultimate safety. The
soul, fortunately, has an interpreter — often an uncon-
scious, but still u truthful interpreter — iu the eye. My
eye rose to his; and while I looked in his fierce face. I
gave an involuntary sigh: liis grip was painful, and my
overtasked strength almost exhausted. ,
" Never, " said he, as he ground his teeth, " never wafl
anything at once so frail and so indomitable. A more reed
she feels in my hand! " {And he shook me with the force'
of his hold.) " I could bend her with my finger and
thumb: and what good would it do if I bent, if I nptore,
if I cmslied her? Consider that eye: consider the reso-
lute, wild, free thing looking out of it, defying me with
more than courage — with a stern triumph. Whatever I
do with its cage, I cannot get at it — the savage, bcan-
tifnl creature! If I tear, if I rend the alight prison, my
outrage will only lot the captive loose. Conqueror I
might bo of the house, but the inmate would escape to
heaven before I could call myself possessor of its clay
dwelling place. And it is your spirit — with will and en- ^
ergy, and virtue and purity — that I want; not alone yonj
brittle fi'ame. Of yourself, you could come with sofi
flight and nestle against my heart, if yon would: scizee
against your will,- you wtll elude the grasp like an essence'
— ^yon will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance. Ohl come,
Jane, come! "
Ab he said this he released me from his clutch, and
only looked at me. The look was far worse to rerist thaivj
the frantic straiu: only an idiot, however would have sue-
enmbed now. I had dared and baffled his fury; In'
dude his sorrow; I retired to the door.
" You are going, Jane? "
" I am going, sir. "
" You are leaving me? "
" Yes. "
'You will not come? You will not be my comforter,
my rescuer? My deep love, my wild woe, my frantic
i^er, are all nothing to ^oui "'
333 JAKE EtBE.
How har^^l
What nmitterable patlios wns in hU voice! How i
it was to reiterate firmly, " I am going, "
■'Janel "
" Mr, Rochester! "
" Withdraw then; I consent — ^bnt remember, you leave
me here in anguish. Go np to your own room; thinlt over
all I have said, and, Jane, cast a glanSe on my Bufferings —
think of me. "
He turned away; he threw himself on hia face on the
sofa. " Oh, Jane! my hope — my love — my life! " broke
in anguish from his lips. Then came a deep, strong sob.
I had already gained the door; but, reader, I wall
baok — walked back as detenniuedly as I liad retreated.
kneeled down by him; I turned his face from the cushion
to me; I kissed hia cheek; I smoothed his hair with my
hand.
" God bless you, my dear master! " I said. " God keep
you from harm and wrong — direct you, solace you — re-
ward you well for your past kindness to me. "
'•Little Jane's love would have been my best reward, "
lie answered: " without it my heart is broken. But Jane
will give me her love: yes — nobly, generously. "'
Tip the blood rushed to hia face; forth flashed the
from hia eyes: erect he sprang; he held hia arm out
I evaded tlic embrace and at once quitted the room.
" Farewell! " was the cry of my heart, as I left
Despair added, " Farewell forever!'*
" That night I never thought to sleep; but a slumber:
on me aa I lay down in bed. I was transported in thong!
to the scenes of childhood; I dreamed I lay in the red-
room at Gateshead; that the night was dark, and my mind
impressed with strange fears. The light that long ago
had struck me into syncope, recalled in this vision, seemed
gtidingly to mount the wall, and tremblingly to pause in
the center of the obscured ceiling, I lifted up my head
to look: the root j'eaolved to clouds, high ana dim; the
gleam was such as the nioun imparts to vapors she is
about to sever. I watched her come— watched with the
strangest anticipation; as though some word of doom were
to be written on her disk. She broke forth as never moon,
yet burst from cloudr a hand first penetrated the
folds and waved them awiiy; then, not a moon, but awMl
human form shown in the aziire, inclining a gtoriona *
earthward. It gazed and gazed on me. It spoke to
4


rf „K, ..... M
spirit: immeasurably distant was the tone, yet so iiear > ^^^|
whispered in my heart, " Mt daughter, flee temntationw^^H
" Mother, I will. " ^H
So I answered after I had waked from the trano«-like I
dream. It was yet night, but July nights are short: soon
after midnight, dawn comes. " It can not be too early to
commence the task I have to fulfill, " thought I. I rose: I
was dressed; for I had taken off nothing but my shoes. I
knew where to find in my drawers some linen, a locket, a
ring. In seeking these articles, I eneountei'ed the beads
of a pearl necklace Mr. Boehester had forced mo to accept
a few days ago. I left that; it was not mine: it was the
visionary bride's, who had melted in air. The other
articles I made up in a parcel; my purse, containing twenty
shillings (it was all I had), I put m my pocket: f tied on
my straw bonnet, pinned my shawl, took the parcel and
my slippers, which I would not put on yet, and stole from
my room.
" Farewell, kind Mrs, Fairfax! " I whispered, as I glided
fast her door. " Farewell, my darling AdeleI " Isaid as
glanced toward the nursery. No thought could be ad-
mitted of entering to embrace her. I had to deceive a
fine ear; for aught I knew, it might now be listening.
I would have got past Mr. Rochester's chamber without
a pause; hut my heart momentarily stopping its beat at
that threshold, my foot was forced to stop also. No sleep
was there; the inmate was walking restlessly from wall to
wall; and again and again he sighed while I listened. There
was a heaven— a temporary heaven — in this room for me,
if I chose: I had but to go in and to say, " Mr. Rochester,
I will love you and live with you through life till death, "
and a fount of rapture would spring to my lips. I thought
of this.
That kind master, who could not sleep now, was wait-
ing with impatience for day. He would send for me in
the morning; I should be gone. He would have me sought
for: vainly. He wonid feel himself forsaken; his love re-
jected: he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate. I thought
of this too. My hand moved toward the lock: I caught it
back, and glided'on.
Drearily I wound my way down stairs: I knew what I
had to do, and I did it mechanically. I sought the key of
the side-door in the kitchen; I sought, too, a phial of oC
»^ a feather; I oiled the key and the lock. 1 got i
3U
JANE EYEE,
water, I got eotne bread: for perhaps I should have to waJk
far; and my strougth, sorelj^ shaken of late, must not
break down. All this I did without one sound. I opened
the door, passed out, shut it softly. Dim dawn glimni'* "
in the yard. The great gates were closed and locked;
a wicket in one of them was only latched. Through thai
X departed: it, too, I shut; and now I was out of Tbom^
field.
A mile off, beyond the fields, lay a road which stretched
in the contrary direction to MiUcote; a road I had never
traveled, but often noticed, and wondered where it led
thither I bent my stepa. No reflection was to be allowejj
now; not one glance was to be cast back: not ev
forward. Not ono thought was to be given either to tM
past or the future. The first was a page so heavenly
BWeet—^o deadly sad — that to read one line of it would
dissolve my courage and break down my energy. The last
was an awful blank: something like the world when the
deluge was gone by.
I skirted flelds, and hedges, and lanes, till after sunrise.
I believe it was a lovely summer morning: I know my
shoee, which I Imd put on when I left the house, were soob
wet with dew. But I looked neither to rising gnn, ncf
smiling sky, nor wakening nature. He who is taken oq
to pass through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not c
the flowers that smile on his road, but of the block an
axe-edge; of the dJaservoment of bone and vein; of the
grave gaping at the end: and I thought of drear flight
and homeless wandering— and, olil witn agony I thought
of what I left, I could not help it, I thought of hid
now — in his room — watching the sunrise; hoping I & houH
soon come to say I would stay with him, and be his. r
longed to be his; T panted to return: it was not too lat|
I could yet spare him the bitter pang of bereavement,
yet myfligjit, I was sure, was undiscovered. 1 could go bafl
and be his comforter — his pride; his redeemer from miseP,
perhaps from ruin. Oh, that fear of his self-abandow
raentr—far worse than my abandonment — how it goaded
me! It was a barbed arrow-head in my breast; it tore me
when 1 tried to extract it; it sickened me when remem-
brance thrust it farther in. Birds began singing in brake
and copse: birds were faithful to their mates; birds were
omblems of love. What was I ? In the midst of my pain
el hearty and frantio effort oi principle, I abhorred mv«
JAHE DTEB,
^m
self, I had no solace from self -approbation; noOe even from
self-respect. I had injured — wounded — left mj master,
I waa hateful in my own eyes. Still I could not turn, uor
retrace one step. God must have Jed me on. As to my
own will or conscience, impassioned grief had trampled
one and stifled the other. I was weeping wildly as I
walked along my solitary way: fast, fast I went like one
deliriouK. A weakness, beginniug inwardly, exti'nding to
the limbs, seized me, and I fell: I lay oii the ground some
minutes pressing my face to the wet turf, I had some
fear — or hope — that here I should die: but I was soon up;
crawling forward on my hands and knees, and then again
raised to my feet — as eager and determined as ever to reach
the road.
Wlien I got there I was forced to sit to rest me under
the hedge ; and while I sat, I heard wheels, and saw a
coach come on. I stood np and lifted my baud ; it
stopped. I asked where it was going: the driver named a
place a long way off, and where I was sure Mi-. Rochester
had no connections. 1 asked for what sum he would take
me there; he said thirty shilliuga; I answered I had but
twenty; well, he would try to make it do. He further
gave me leave to got into the inside, as the vehicle waa
empty; I entered, was shut in, and it rolled on its way.
Gentle reader, may you never feel what I then felt;
May yotir eyes never shed such stormy, scalding, lieart-
wmng tears as poured from mine. May you never appeal
to Heaven in prayers so hopeless and so agonized as in that
hour left my lips: for never may you, like me, dread to be
the instrument of evil to what you wholly love,
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Two DAYS are passed. It is a summer evening; the "
coachmen has set me down at a place called Whitcross: he
could take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I
was not possessed of another shJliiiig in the world. The
coacli is a mile oB by this time ; I am alone. At this
moment I discover that I forgot to take my parcel out of
iQtkat 9i tlie CPB'^lij W-Iiwo 1 had placed it for atifety;
336 .TASK EYBE.
there it remainfl, there it must remain; and now, 1
■olnteljr destitute.
WhitcrosB ia no town, nor even a banUet; it is bufl
Btone pillar set up where four roada meet: whJte-washd
I suppose, to b« more obvious at a distance and in dar||
ness. Four arms spring from its summit : the nei
town to which these point is, according to the iuscriptiai
distant ten miles; the fartlieet, above twenty. From ii
veil-known names of these towns I learn in what coua
I have lighted: a north-midland shire, dusk with mof
land, ridged with monntaiu; this I see. There are gri
moors behind and on each hand of me; there are wavea < ^
monntaina far beyond that deep valley at my feet. Tli(
population here must be thin, and I see no passengers 4
these roads: they stretch out east, weet, north, and EoaUj
— white, broad, lonely; they all cut in the moor, aj
the heather grows deep and wild to their verge. Yej
chance traveler might pass bv; and I wish no eye to i
me now: strangers would wonder what I am doing, ling*
htg here at the sign-post, evidently objectless and lost,
might he questioned: I could give no answer but whj
would sound incredible, and excite suspicion. Not n t!
Iiolds me to human society at tliis moment — not a charm'
or hope calls me where my fellow-creatures ai-e — none that
saw rae would have a kind thought or a good wish for t
I have no relative but the universal mother. Nature: I w ill ]
Beak her breast and ask repose.'
1 struuk straight into the heath; I held on to a hoUi
I saw deeply furrowing the brown moor-side; I
knee-deep in its dark growth; I turned with its turning
allfl finding a moss-blackened gi-anite crag in a hid(5
angle, I sat down under it. Iligh banks of moor we
about me; the crag protected my head: the sky was o^
that. 3
Some time passed before I felt tranquil even here: I htfJ
a vague di'ead that wild cattle might he near, or that soiq
sportsman or poacher might discover me. If a i
wind swept the waste, I looked up, fearing it was the rush "
of a hull; iC a plover whistled I imagined it a man. Find-
ing my apprenensions unfounded, however, and calmed
by the deep silence that I'eigned as evening declined at
night-tall, I took confidence. As yet I had not thongf^ "
1 Had only listened, watched, dreaded; now I regained 1
faculty of reflection.
JANE EYRE. ^^M
AVTiat was I to do? Where to go? Oh, intolerable
questioiis, when I could do nothing and go nowhere! —
when a long way must yet be measured by my weary,
trembling limbs before I could reach human habitation —
when cold charity must be entreated before I could get a
lodging: reluctant sympathy importuned: almost certain
repulse incurred, before my tale could be listened to, or
one of my wants relieved!
I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the
heat of the summer day. I looked at the sky; it was pure:
a kindly star twinkled just above the chasm ridge. The
dew Jell, but with propitious softness; no breeze whispeied.
Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought die
loved me, outcast aa I was; and I, who from man could
anticipate only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her
with filial fondness. To-night, at leaet, I would be her
gueat — as I was her child: my mother would lodge mo
without money and without price. I had one morsel of
bread yet: the remnant of a roll I had bought iu a town
we passed tlirough at noon with a stray penny — my last
coin. I saw ripe bilberries gleaming here and there, like
jet beads in the heath: I gathered a handful and ate them
with my bread. My hunger, shai-p before, was, if not sat-
isfied, appeased by this hermit's meal. I said my evening
prayers at its conclusion, and then chose my couch.
Beside the crag the heath was very dee^; when I lay
down my feet were bui-ied in it; rising hi^h on each side,
it left only a narrow space for the nignt air to invade. I
folded my shawl double, and spread it over me for a
coverlet; a low, mossy swell was my pillow. Thus lodged,
I was not, at least at the commencement of the night,
cold.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad
heart broke it. It plained of its gaping wounds, its in-
ward bleeding, its riven chords. It trembled for Mr. Ro-
chester and his doom: it bemoaned him with bitter pity; it
demanded him with ceasCleas longing; and, impotent as a
bird with both wings broken, it srill quivered its shattered
pinions iu vain attempts to seek him.
Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my
knees. Night was come, and her planets wore lisen: ft
safe, still night; too eereue for companionship of fear. Wo
know that God is everywhere; but certainly we feel His
presence most when His works are on the grandest KtJft- j
api-ead before na; and it ia in the unclouded uight-aky,
where His worlds wheel their silent coui'se, that we re*d
clearest Hia infinitude. Ilia omnipotence. His omaipree-
euce. I had risen to my kueea to pray for Mr, Rochester.
Looking np, I, with tear-dimmed-eyoa, saw the mighty
Milky Way. Hememhering what it was — what coimlleas
systems there swept space like a soft trace of ligiil.^I felt
the might and strength of God. Sure was I of His
efficiency to save what lie had made: convinced I grew
that noithfir earth should perish, nor one of the eouTh it
treasnrcd, I turned my prayer to thanksgiving: the
Source of Life was also the Savior of spirits. Mr. Koches-
Jer was safe: he was God's, and by God would he he
guarded. I again nestled to the breast of the hill; and en
long, in sleep, forgot sorrow, ~
But next day Want came to me, pale and bare.
After the little birds had left their nests; long after b
had come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heu„
honey'before the dew was dried — when the long moroln^
shadows were curtailed, and the sun filled earth and skj^
1 got np, and. I looked round nio.
What a still, hot, perfect day! What a golden de«._
this spreading moor! Everywhere sunshine. I wished I
could live in it and on it. I saw a lizard run over the
crag; I saw a bee busy among the sweet bilberries, I
would fain at the moment have become bee or lizard that
I might have found fitting nutriment, permanent shelter
here. But I was a human being and had a human being'a
wants: I must not linger where there was nothing to aup-
Sly them. I rose; I look back at the bed I had left,
[opeleas of the future, I wished but this — that my Maker
had that night thought good to require my soul of me
while I slept; and that this weary frame, absolved by death
from further conflict with fate, had now but to decay
quietly and mingle in peace with the soil of this wilder-
ness. Life, however, was yet in my possession; with all
its requirements and pains and reapon si bill ties. The bur-
den must be canned, and want provided for, the suffering
endured, the responsibility fulfilled. 1 set out.
Whitcross regained, I followed a roud which led from
the sun, now fervent and high. By no other circumstance
had I will to decide my choice, I walked a long time,
and when I thought I had nearly done enough, and might
oonacientioualy yield to the fatigue that almoet
JANE EYRE.
Sowered me — might relax tMa foroed ftction, and, sitting
own on a stone I saw near, Bubmit resistiesslj to the apa-
thy that clogged hetirt and limb — I heard a bell chime — a
church- bell.
I turned in the direction of the sonnd, and therej'J
lunong the romantic hilla, whose changes and aspect 1 1:
cuusud to note an hour ago, I saw a hamlet and a. spin
All the valley at my right hand was ftd) of pasture-fieldul
and corn-fields and wood; and a glittering stream ran zig
eag through the varied shadee of green, the mellowin]
grain, the somber woodland, the clear and sunny lea. Re
called by the rumbling of wheels to the road before me, ;,
aaw a heavily-laden wagon laboring up the liill; and nei
far beyond were two cows and their drover. Human UfeTl
and human labor were near, I mnat atruggie on: strive
to live and bend to toil like the reat.
About tivo o'clock p. m. I entered the village. At the
bottom of its one street there was a little shop with some
oakee of bread in the window. I coveted a case of bread.
With that rofreshmeut I could perhaps regain a degree of
energj'; without it, it would be difficult to proceed. The
wish to have some strength and some vigor returned to me
OB soon aa I was among my fellow- beings. I felt it would
be degrading to faint with hunger on the causeway of a
liamlet. Had I nothing about me I could offer in ex-
change for one of these rolls? I considered, I had a
Bmalfsilk handkerchief tied around my throat; I had my
gloves. I could hardly tell how men and women in ex-
tremities of destitution proceeded. I did not know
whether cither of these articles would he accepted: prob-
ably they would not; but I must try.
I entered the shop: a woman was there. Seeing a re-
spectably-di-esaed person, a lady as she supposed, she came
forward with civility. How could she serve me? I was
seized with shame: my tongue would not utter the request
I had prepared. I dared not offer her the half-worn
gloves, the creased handkerchief: besides, I felt it would j
be flbsurd, I only begged permiasion to sit down a mo''j
inent, & s I was tired. Disappointed in the expectation o^
a customer, she cooly acoedea to my request. She pointeL
to a seat; I sank into it. I felt eorely urged to weep; buCl
eonsclous how unseasonable such a manifestation woul^f
be, I restrained it. Soon I asked her, " if there were a
dreas maker or plain work woman in the village? "

340 JANE EYKE.
" Yos; two or three. Quite as manj as there was em-
plOTHient for.
I reflected. I was driven to the point now.'
brought face to face with necessity. 1 stood in the
tion of one without resource; without a friend; withoat
coin. I must do something. What? I must apply soi
where. Where?
'Did she know of any place in the neighborhood wh(
a servant was wanted? "
" Nay: she couldn't say. "
" What was the chief trade in this place? What
moat of the people do? "
" Some were farm laborers; a good deal worked st
Oliver's needle-factory, and at the foundry. "
" Did Mr. Oliver employ women? "
" Nay; it was men's work. "
" And what do the women do? "
" I kawn't, " was the answer. ■'Some does one thing, "
and some another. Poor folk mun get on as they can, "
She seemed to be tired of my questions: and, indeed,
what claim had I to importune ber? A neighbor or twg
came in; my chair was evidently wanted. I took leave,
I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the boni
to the right hand and to left: but I could discover no ]
text, nor see any inducement to enter any. I ramhled roi
the hamlet, going sometimes to a little distance, returning
again for an hour or more. Much exhausted, and suffer-
ing greatly now for want of food, I turned aside into a
lanoand sat down under the hedge. Ere many minutes
had elapsed, I was again on my feet, however, and again
searching something — a resource, or at least an informant.
A pretty little house stood at the top of the lane, with a
garden before it; exquisitely neat, and brilliantly bloom-
ing. I stopped at it. What business had I to approach
the white door or touch the glittering knocker? In what
way could it possibly he the interest of the inbabit-
ants of that dwelling to serve mo? Yet I drew near and
knocked. A mild-Iooking, cleanly attired young woman
opened the door. In such a voice aa might be expected
from a hopeless heart and fainting frjlme — a voice wretch-
edly low and faltering — 1 asked if a servant was wanted
here?
■'No, " said she, " we do not keep a servant, "
" Can you tell me where I could git employment of

JAJfB ETHE.
kind? " I continued. " I am a stranger, withont acquain-
tance, in this place. I want some work : no matter wbat. "
But it was not her business to think for me, or to seek
a place for me : besides, in her eyes, how doubtful must
have appeared my cliaracter, position, tale. She shook
her head, she " was sorry she could give me no informa-
tion, " and the white door closed, quite gently and civilly :
but it shut me out. If she held it open a little longer, 1
believe I diould have begged a piece of bread ; for I was
now brought low.
I could not bear to return to the Eordid village, where,
besides, no pcospect of aid was visible. I should have
longed rather to deviate to a wood I saw not far off, which
appeared in its thick shade to offer inviting shelter ; hut I
was so sick, so weak, bo gnawed with nature's cravings, in-
stinct kept me roaming round abodes where there was a
chance of food. Solitude would be no solitude — rest no
rest — while the vulture, hanger, thus sank beak and talona
into my side.
I drew near houses ; I left them, and came back again,
and again J wandered away . always repelled by the con-
sciousness of having no claim to ask — no right to expect
interest in my isolated lot. Meantime, the afternoon ad-
vaupod, while I thus wandered about like a lost and starv-
ing dog. In crossing a field, I saw the church spire before
me: I hastened toward it. Near the church-yard, and in
the middle of a garden, stood a well-built though small
house, which I had no doubt was the parsonage. I remem-
bered that strangers who arrive at a place where they have
no friends, and who want employment, sometimes apply to
the clergyman for introduction aud aid. It is tlie clergy-
man's function to help — ^at least with advice — those who
wished to help themselves. I seemed to have something
like a right to seek counsel here. Renewing, then, my
courage, and gathering my feeble remains of strength, I
fushed on. I reached the house, and knocked at the
itcheu door. An old woman opened it : I asked was Uus-J
the parsonage?
" Yes. "
" Was the clergyman in?**
" No, "
*'Wouid he be in soon? "
" No, he was gone froin home. "
I'To a distance?''
342
.UNE EVitE.
" Not BO far — happen three mile. He hatl been callH
away hy the Biiddeti death of his father; he was at Marrf
End now, and would very iikely stay there a fortnig'^
longer, "
" Was there any lady of the house? "
" Nay, there was naught but her, and she was hotu
keeper; " and of her, reader, 1 could not bear to ask tb
relief for want of which I was sinking; I could not yet b
and again I crawled away.
Once more I took off my handkerchief— once more I
thought of the cakes of broad in the littlG shop. Oh, to
hut u crust! for but one mouthful to allay the pang q
famine! Indistinctly I turned my face ugain to the y3
lage: I found the shop again, and I went in; and thouml
others were there besides the woman, I ventured the
rotjnest: " Would she give me a roll for this handker-
chief? "
She looked at me with evident suspicion: " Nay, slie^
never sold stuff i'that way. "
Almost desperate I asked for half a cake: she again r
fused. " How could she tell where I had got the hai
kerchief? " slie said.
" Would she take my gloves? "
" Nol what could she do with them? "
Reader, it is not plcsisaut to dwell on these detai
Some say there is enjoyment in looking hack to pai-'
esporieuces past; but at this day I can ecaroely bea
review the times to which I allude: the moral degredatioi
blent with physical suffering, form too distressing a reoo.
lection ever to be willingly dwelt on. I blamed non6 < |i
those who repulsed me. I felt it waa what was to w
expected, and what could not bo helped: an ordinary bc^
far is frequently an object of suspicion: a well-dres»'
eggar inevitably so. To be sure, wtat I begged
employment: but whose business was it to provide i
witn employment? Not, qertainlv, that ])erson who sa^
me then for the first time, and who knew nothing ab < H^
my character. And as to the woman who would not tafiM
my liandkerchief in exchange for her bread, why, (the f
right, if the offer appeared to her sinister, or tho cxchail^
unprofitable. Let mo coiHlenae now. I am sick of 1
subject.
A little before dark I passed a farm-houae, at th« opt
door of which the farmer was sitting, eating his supper ij
JANE EYRE.
348^1
bread and cheese; I stopped and said, " Will yon give me
a piece of bread? for I am very hungry. " He caat on me
a glance of surprise; but without answering, he cut a
thick slice from his loaf, and gave it to me. I imagine
he did not think I was a beggar, but only an eccentric
Bort of a lady, who had talten a fancy to his brown loaf.
Aa soon & b I was out of sight of his house I sat down and
ate it.
I could not hope to get a lodging under a roof, and
sought it in the wood I have before alluded to. But my
night was wretched, my rest broken: the ground waa
damp, the air cold: besides intruders passed near me more
than once, and I had again and again to change my
quarters: no sense of safety or tranquility befi-iended me.
Toward morning it rained; the whole of the following
day was wet. Do not ask me, reader, to give a minute
account of that day: as before, I sought work; as before,
I was repulsed; as before, I starved; but once did food pass
my lips. At the door of a cottage I saw a little girl about
to throw a mess of cold porridge into a pig trough. " Will
you give me that? " I asked.
She stared at me. " Mother! " she exclaimed; " there
is a woman wants me to give her these porridge. "
" Well, lass, " replied a voice withm, " give it her if
she ia a begger. T'piga doesn't want it, "
The gill emptied the stiffened mold into my hand, and
I devoured it ravenously,
As the wet twilight deepened, I stopped in a solitary
bridle-path, which I had been pursuing for an hour or more.
" My strenth is quite failing me,'I said in soliloquy.
" I feel I can not go much farther. Shall I be an out-cast
again this night? While the rain descends so, must I lay
my head on the cold, drenched ground? I fear I can not
do otherwise, for who will receive me? But it will be
very dreadful: with this feeling of hunger, faintness, chill,
and this sense of desolation — this total prostration of hope.
In all likelihood, though, I should die before morning.
And why can not I reconcile myself to the prospect of
death? Why do I struggle to retain a valueless life?
Because I know, or believe, Mr. Rochester is still living:
and then, to die of want and cold, is a fate to which nature
can not submit passively. Oh, Providencel sustain me a
little longoi'! Aid — direct me! "
My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty land,-
zu
JASB EYRE.
BOape. T saw T hud etrayet) far from the rUUge: it i
quite out of sight. The very cultivation surrounding 1
had (lisitppeared. I had, hy croea-wavs and by-jiaths,'
more drawn near the tract of monr-laTid; and now, >
n f(.'w Solds, almost as ivild and nnprodnL'tivo as the he
frgtn which thej were scarcely reclaimod, lay between i
and.iJie dusky hill,
" Well, I would rather die yonder than in a street, f
on a frequented road, " I reflected, " And far better tlij
crows and ravens — if any ravens there be in th < ;ae regioi
— should pick my flesh from my bones, than that tU
should he prisoned in a worlt-house coSin and molder I
paniier'B grave,''
To the hill, then, I turned. I reached it. It i-emaiij
now only to find a hollow where I could lie down, and f
at least'liidden. if not Becura: but all the surface of 1
waste looked level. It showed no variation but of t
green, where rush and moss overgrew the marshes; bla(
where the dry soil bore only heath. Dark as it waa f "
ting, I could still see these changes; though but a_ _.
oltcruutious of light and shade: for color had faded v
the daylight.
My eye still roved over the sullen swell, and along t
moor-edge, vanishing amidst the wildest scenery; wl
at one dim point, far in among the marahes and
ridges, a light sprang up. " That is an if/iiis /a/vud
was my first thought; and I ex]iected it would soon t«
ish. It burned on, however, quite steadily; neither reca
ing nor advancing. " Is it, then, a bonfire just kiudledl
I questioned. I watched to see whether it would Bprcu
but no: as it did not diminish, so it did not enlarge.'^
maybe a candle in a house, " I then conjccted: " butj
BO, I can never reach it. It is much too far away:
were it within a yard of me, what would it avail? j
should hut knock at the door to have it shut in my faca
And I sauk down where I stood, and hid my fa
against the ground. I lay still awhile: the night-wia
swept over the hill and over me, and died moaning T
the distance; the rain fell fast, wetting me afresh to t
skin. Could I but have stiffened to the still frost-
friendly numbness of death — it might liave pelted onj
should not have felt it; but my yet living fle^ shi?
dered to its chilling inlluence. 1 rose ere long.'
The light was yet there: shining dim, but c
JANE EYEB.
341^1
througli the rain. I tried to walk again : I dragged my
exliaiisted limbB slowly toward it, It led me aalant over
the hill, through a wide bog which would have been im-
passable ia winter, aud was splashy and shaking even now,
m the height of eummer. Here I fell twice : but as often
I rose and rallied my faculties. This light was my for-
lorn hope : I must gam it.
Having crossed the marsh, I saw a trace of white ov
the moor. I approacJied it ; it was a road or a track ;
led straight np to the light, which now beamed from _^
sort of knoll, amidst a clump of trees — firs, apparently;
from what I eoiild distinguish ft the character of their
forms and foliage through the gloom. My star vanished
as I drew near : aome obstacle had intervened between me
and it. I put out my hand to feel the dark mass before
mo ; I discriminated the rough stones of a low wall — above
it something like paUsades, and within, a high nud
priukly hedge. I . groped on. Again a whitish objeot
gleamed before me : it was a gate — a wicket ; it moved on
its hinges as I touched it. On each side stood a sable
bush — holly or yew.
Entering the gate and passing the shrubs, the ahilhou-
ette of a house rose to view ; black, low, aud rather long ;
but the guiding light shone nowhere. All was obscurity.
Were the inmates retired to rest? I feared it must be so,
In seeking the door, I turned an angle : there shot out tho
friendly gleam again, from the lozeiiged panes of a very
small laticed window, within a foot of the ground ; made
still smaller by the growth of ivy or some other creeping
plant, whose leaves cTostercd thick over the portion of Ihrfi
tioiise wall in which it was set. The aperture was " ™
screened and narrow, that curtain or shutter had b(
deemed unnecessary ; aud when I stooped down and
aeide the spray of foliage shooting over it, I could sei
within. I could see clearly a rofini with a sanded flo(
clean sooured ; a dresser of walnut, with pewter plal
ranged in rows, reflecting the redness and radiance of a
glowing peat fire. I could see a clock, a white deal table,
some chairs. The candle, whose ray had been my beacon,
liuraed on the table ; and by its light an elderly woman,
somewhat rough-looking, hot scrupulously clean, liki
about her, was knitting a stocking.
I noticed these objects cursorily only — in them thi
'" Soothing extraordinary. A group of more iatewigfc
Md JANK EVRR.
peared near the hearth, sitting still amidst the rosy p
and warmth euSusiiig it. Two young, gracpriU wonten:^|
ladies in every point-— -sat, one in a low rocking-chair, t''
other oil a lower atool ; both wore deep mourning of era
and bombazine, which somber g»rb singularly set off vt
t6it necks and faces : a lui'ge old pointer dog rested j .
massive head on the knee of one girl — in the lap of tiSm
other waa cushioned a black cat.
A strange p'tce was this humble kitchen for such
occuiMinta I Wno were they ? They could not be the
daughters of the elderly pereon at the table ; for she looke*
like a rustic, and they \rtre all delicacy and cultivatiw
I had nowhere seen such faees as theirs : and yet, as
fazed on them, I seemed intimate with every liniameoffl
cannot call them handsome — they were too pale ano "
grave for the word : as thoy each bont over a book, they
looked thoughtful almost to severity, A stand between
them supported a second candle and two great volumes, to
which they frequently referred ; comparing them seeming-J
ly with the smaller books they held in iheir hands, lil^^
people consulting a dictionary to aid them in the task of.
translation. This scone was as silent as if all the figured
had been shadows, and the lire-lit apartment a pictui'e; so
hushed was it, I could hear the cinders fall from the grate,
the clock tick in its obscure corner; and T even fancied I
could distinguish the cHck-olick of the woman's knitting-
needles. WTien, therefore, a voice broke the strange stitt
ness at lust, it was audible enough to me,
" Listen, Diuna, " said one of the absorbed students
" Fi-anz and old Daniel are together in the night-tiiniL
and Pranz is telling a di-eam from which he has awakeuM
in terror — listen! " And in a low voice she read soma
thing, of which not one word was intelligible to mo; for IT
was in an unknown tongue — neither French nor Latiitj
Whether it were Greek or German I could not tell.
" That is strong, " she said, when she had finished ;
relish it. " The other girl, who had lifted her head tofl
listen to her sister, repeated, while she gased at the fire, a
line of what had been read. At a later day, I knew the
language and the book ; therefore I will here quote the
line-^though when I first heard it, it was only like a stroke
on sounding brass to me— conveying no meaning : " "'Da
trat hervor Einor, anzusehen wie die Sternen Nacht,'
L€h > 9d!,gPQ41 " -i^fixolaimed, while her dark and deep 939*
JANE EYRE. 347
gparkled. ^^ There you liaVe a dim and mighty archangel
fitly set before you! The line is worth a hundred pages of
fustian. ^ Ich wage die Gedanken in der Schale meines
Zornes und die AVerke mit dem Gewichte meines Grimms/
I like it /^
Both were again silent.
'^Is there ony country where they talk i^ that way?'*
^^ Yes, Hannah — a far larger country than England;
where they talk in no other way.''
^'Well, for sure case, I knawn't how they can under-
stand t'one t'other: and if either o'ye went there, ye
could tell what they said, I guess. "
^^ We could probably tell something of what they said,
but not all — for we are not as clever as you think us, Han-
nah. We don't speak German, and we cannot read it with-
out a dictionary to help us.
^'And what good does it do you?'
^'We mean to teach it some time — or, at least, the ele-
ments, as they say; and then we shall get more money thiin
we do now. "
^'Varry like; but give ower studying: ye'vd done enough
for to-night. "
''I think we have; at least I'm tired. Mary, are you? "
^^ Mortally; after all, its tough work, fagging away at a
language with no master but a lexicon. "
^^Itis: especially such a language as this crabbed but
glorious Deutsch. I wonder when St. John will come
home. "
^^ Surely he will not be long now: it is just ten " (look-
ing at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle). ^^It
rains fast. Hannah, Avill you have the goodness to look at
the fire in the parlor? "
The woman rose: she opened a door, through which I
dimly saw a passage: soon I heard her stir a fire in an
inner room: she presently came back.
'^Ah, childer! " said she, ^Mt fair troubles me to go
into yond'room now; it looks so lonesome wi'the chair
empty and set back in a corner. "
She Aviped her eyes with her apron: the two girls, grave
before, looked sad now.
^^ But he is in a better place, " continued Hannah; ^'we
shouldn't Avish him here again. And then, nobody need
to have a quieter death nor ha b94f

348 JANE EYRE.
" Yon say be never mentioned us? " inquired one'iQ^fl
ladies.
" He hafln't time, bairn: he was gone in n minute
wtts your fatlier. He Lad been a bit aib'ng like tbo d
before, but naught to signify; and Triien Mr. St. Jo3
usked if he wonkl like either o'ye to be sent for, he fe
laughed at him. He began again with a bit of a heavinai ^
in His head the next day — that is, a fortnight sin'— and he "
vrent to sleup and never wakened: he wor a'niost stark
when your brother went into t'chamber and fand him.
All, childerl that's t'last o't'old stock — for ye and Mr.
St. John is like of a different soart to tlieni'at s gone; for
all your mother wor mich i'your way; and a'most as book-
learned. She wor the pictui " " o'ye, Mary; Diana is more
like your father. "
I thonght them so similar I oould not tell where the old
servant (for such I now concluded her to be) saw the dif-
ference. Both were fair complexioned and slenderly
made; both possessed faces fall of distinction and intelh-
gence. One, to be sure; had hair a shade darker than the
other, and there was a difference in their style of wearing
it: Mary's pale brown locks were i)ai " tc(J and braided
smooth; Diana's duskier tresses covered her neck ■ " " ■ "
thick curls. The clock struck ten,
. " Ye'll want your supper I am sure, " obseiTed',
nah; " and so will Mr. St. John when he comes in. " «
And she proceeded to prepare the meal. The ladies
rose; they seemed about to withdraw to the parlor. Till
this moment I had boon sc intent on watching them.
their appearance and conversation had excited in me i
keen an interest, I had half forgotten my own wretebf
iiosition: now it recuri'ed to me. More desolate n
lesperate than ever it seemed from contrast. And 1
impossible did it appear to touch the inmates of this b
with concern on ray behalf; to make them believe in
truth of my wants and woes — to induce them to vouchsa
a rest for ray wanderings! As I groped out the door, ai _
knocked at it hesitatingly, I felt that last idea to be a
mere chimera. Hannah opened.
" What do yon want? she inquired, in a voice of sur-
prise, as slie surveyed mc by the light of the candle she held«H
• " " ■ May I speak to your mistressesp " I said.
" You had better tell me what you have to Bay to tl
Where do you come from? "
JANE KTRE.
" I am a stranger. "
" What is your business here at this hoiir? "
" I want a night's shelter in an otit-liouse or anywhw
and a morsel of bread to eat, "
Distmst, the very feeling I dreaded, appeai'ed in Han-
nah's face. " Ill give yon a piece of bread, " she said,
after a pause; " but we can't take in a vagrant to lodge.
It isn't likely. "
" Do let me speak to your mistresses. "
" No; not I. What can they do for you ? You ehou]
not be roving about now; it looks ver^ ill. "
" But where shall I go if you drive me away? What
shall I do? "
" Oh, I'll warrant you know where to go, and what to
do. Mind you don t do wrong, that's aJl. Here is a
penny; now go "
■'A penny can not feed me, and I have no strength to
go farther. Don't shut the door: oh, don'tj for God's
sake! "
" I must; the rain ia driving in "
" Tell the young ladies. Let me see them "
" Indeed, I will not. You are not what you ought to
be, or you wouldn't make such a noise. Move off. "
" But I must die if I am turned away. "
" Not you. I'm fear'd you have some ill plana agate,
that bring you about folk's houses at this time o'night.
If you've any followers — housebreakers or such likt. — any-
where near, you may tell them we are not by ourselves in
the house; we have a gentleman, and dogs, and guns. "
Here the honest but inflexible servant clapped the door to
and bolted it within.
This was the climax. A pang of exquisite suffering — a
throe of true despair — rent and neaved my heart. Worn
out, indeed, I was; not another step could I stir. I sank
on the wet door-step: I groaned — I wrung my hands — I
wept in utter anguish. Oh, this specter of deathi Oh,
this last hour, approaching in such hoiTorl Alas, this
isolation — this baniahment from my kind. Not only the
anchor of home, but the footing of fortitude was gone — at
least for a moment: but the last I soon endeavored to re-
i;;ain.
I can but die, " I said, " and I believe in God. Let
me try to wait His ivill in silence. "
Tbeee words I not only thought, but ntteradj a^d
L i;;ain.
H me t
350 JANE BTBB.
thrusting back all my misery into my heart, I made an
effort to compel it to remain there — dumb and still.
" All men must die/'* said a voice quite close at hand;
'^ but all are not condemned to meet a lingering and prem-
ature doom, such as yours would be if you perished here of
want.'*
^ " Who or what speaks?** I ask-ed, terrified at the unex-
pected sound, and incapable now of deriving from any
occurrence a hope of aid. A form was near — what form,
the pitch-dark night and my enfeebled vision prevented
me from distinguishing. AVith a loud, long knock, the
new-comer appealed to the door.
" Is it you Mr. St. John?** cried Hannah.
" Yes — yes; open quickly.^*
" Well, how wet and cold you must be, such a wild
night as it is! Come in — your sisters are quite uneasy
about you, and I believe there are bad folks about. There
has been a beggar-woman — I declare she is not gone yet ! —
laid down there. Get up! for shame! Move off I say! **
" Hush, Hannah! I have a word to say to the woman.
You have done your duty in excluding, now let me do
mine in admitting her. I was near, and listened to both
you and her. I think this a peculiar case — I must at least
examine into it. Young woman, rise, and pass before me
into the house.**
With difficulty I obeyed him. Presently I stood within
that clean, bright kitchen — on the very hearth — trem-
bling, sickening; conscious of an aspect in the last degree
ghastly, wild, and weather-beaten. The two ladies, their
brother, Mr. St. John, the old servant, were all gazing at
me.
" St. John, who is it?** I heard one ask.
" I can not tell: I found her at the door,** was the reply.
" She does look white,** said Hannah.
" As white as clay or death,** was responded. " She
will fall: let her sit.**
And indeed my head swam; I dropped; but a chair
received me. I still possessed my senses; though just now
I could not speak.
" Perhaps a little water would restore her. Hannah,
fetch some. But she is worn to nothing. How very thin,
^nd how very bloodless!**
" A mere specter!** •
" Is she ill, or only famished?''

I felt
JANE EVRE. SSW
" Famifilied) I think. Hannah, is that milk? Give it
flie and a piece of bread. "
Diana (I knew her by the long curls which I saw drooi > -
iog between me and the fire as she bent over me) broke
some bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips. Her
face waa neai- mine: I saw there was pity in it, and 1 felt
sympathy in her hurried breathing. In iier simple words,
loo, tlie same balm-like emotion epoke; " Try to eat, "
" Yes — try, " repeated Mary, gently; and Mary's I
removed ray sodden bonnet and lifted my head, I ti
what tlity offered nie: feebly at first, eagerly soon.
" Not too much at first — restrain her, " said the brotl
" she has had enough. " And he withdrew the oup
milk and the plate of bread. __
" A little more, 8t. John, look at the avidity in her
eyes. "
" No more at present, sister. Try if she can speak now;
ask her her name. "
I felt I could speak, and I answered, " My name is Jane
Elliott. " Anxions as ever to avoid discovery, 1 had before
resolved to assume an alias.
" And where do you live ? Where are your friends ? " ■
I was sibnt, J
" Can we send for any one you know? " I
I shook my head. "
" What account can you give of yourself? "
Somehow, now that I had once crossed the threshold of
this house, and once was brought face to face with its
owiiera, I felt no longer outcast, vagrant and disowned by
the wide world. I dared to put off the mendicant — to re-
sume my natural manner and cliai-acter. I began once
more to know myself; and when Mr. St. John demanded
an account — which at present I was far too weak to render
— 1 said after a. brief pause, " Sir, I can give you no de-
tails to-night. "
" But what, then, " said he, " do you expect me to do
for yon ? "
" Nothing, " I replied. My strength sufficed for bui
short answers. Diana took the word-
" Do you mean, " she asked, " that we have now given
you what aid you require? and that we may dismiss you to
the moor and the rainy night? "
I looked at her. She had, I thought, a remarkable
IQDtenance; instinct both with power and goodness. I
ANE EYKE.
took Eudduti oouruge. AuBwering bar compaBsionato gaati
with a Binile, I saiJ, " 1 will tr^st yon. If I were a ma & -
i.erless and stray dcg, I know that yoa would not turn me.
from yonr hearth to-night: as it is, I really have no teaxtj
Do with me and for me as you like; but excuse me froain
much discourse — my brealb is short— I feel a epasm whn
I 8i > eak, " All three surveyed me, and all three i
Bilent.
" Hannah, " said Mr. St. John, at last, " let her b^
there al present, and aak her no questions.: in ten minutS
more, give her the remainder of that milk and bread. *
Mary and Diana, let us go into the parlor and talk the
matter over. "
They withdrew. Very soon one of the ladies returned
— I could not tell which. A kind of pleasant stupor was
stealing over me as I sat by the genial fire. In au tindcr-
tono she gave directions to Hannah. Ere long, with the
tvrvant's aid, I contrived to mount a staircase; my drip^^
ping clothes were removed; boo i a warm, dry bed reccivef
me. I thanked God— experienced, amidst nuuttersl:^
exliaastion, a glow of grateful joy — and slept.
CHAPTER XXIX.
The recollection of about three days and nights sa®_
caeding this is very dim in my mind. I can recall soma
sensations felt in that Interval; but few thoughts framed,
and no actions perfornie < l. 1 knew I was in a small room,
and ill a narrow bed. To that bed I seemed to have gi'owu^
I lay on it motionless as a stone; and to have torn me froffl'"
it would have been almost to kill me, I took no note u
the lapse of time — of the change from moming to iioo^ .
from noon to evening. I observed when any one entered "
or left the apartment; I could even tell who they were; 1
could understand what was said when the spealcer stood
near me; but I could not answer; to open my lips or move
my limbs was equally impossible. Hannah, the servant,
was my most frequent visitor. Her coming disturbed roe.
I bad a feeling that she wished me away: that she did not
" Ldt.^tand me or my circumstances: that she was prejo^'
diced against me. Diana and Mary appeared ._
chamber once or twice a day. They would whisper t
tencea of this sort at my bedside;
" It is very well we tooit her in. "
" Yos; aho would certainly have been found dead at t
door in the morning, had she been left ont all night.
wonder what she has gone through? "
" Strange hardships, I imagine — poor, emaciated, ]
lid wanderer! "
" She is not an uneducated peraou, I should think li__
her manner of speaking; her accent was quite pure; and
the clothes she took off, though splashed and wet, were
little worn and fine. "
" She has a peculiar face; ficshless and haggard as it is,
I rather like it; and when in good health and animated,
I can fancy her physiognomy would be agreeable. "
Never once in their dialogues did I hear a syllable of
regret at the hospititlity they had extended to me; or of
suspicion of. or aversion to, myself. I was comforted.
Mr. St. John came hut once: he looked at me, Hud said
mj state of Jetliargy was the result of reaction from ex-
cessive and protracted fatigue. He pronounced it need-
less to send lor a doctor: nature, he was sure, woold man-
age beet, left to herself. He said every nerve had been
overstrained in some way, and the whole system must
xleep torpid awhile. There was no disease. He imagined
iny recovery would he rapid enough when once commenced.
These opinions he delivered in a few words, in a quiet,
low voice; and added, after a pause, in the tone of a man
little accustomed to expansive comment, "'rather an un-
uanal physiognomy; certainly, not indicative of vulgarity
or degradation. "
" Far otherwise. " responded Diana. " To speak truth,
St. John, my lieai't rather warms to the poor little soul.
I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently. "
" That is hardly likely, " waa the reply, " You will
find she is some yonng ladv who has had a misunderstand-
ing with her friends, and has probably injudiciously left
themi We may, perhaps, succeed in restoring her to
them, if she is not obstinate: hut I trace lines of force in
her face which make me skeptical of her tractabilitj.! j
Ae stood considering some minutes; then added, " Sh^
looks sensible, but not at all handsome. "
" She is so ill, St. John.*'


Jane bvrb.
and harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those
On the third day, 1 was better; on the fourth, I cotild
q > eak, move, rise in bed, nnd turn. Hannah had brought
me some gruel and dry toast, about as I suppose, the dio-
ner hour. I had eaten with a relish: the food was good —
void of the feverish flavor which had hitherto poisoueil
what I had swallowed.'When she left me, I felt oonipam-
tively strong and revived; ere long satiety and repose and
desire for action stirred me, I wished to rise; hut what
could I put on? Only my damp and bemired apparel; in
which I nad slept on the ground and fallen in the marsh.
I felt ashamed to appear before my benefactors so clad. I
was spared the humiliation. *
On a chair by the bedside were all my own tilings, cl
and dry. My black silk frock hung agaiuBt the yt
The traces of the hog were removed mim it; the crei
left by the wet smoothed out: it was quite decent. My
Tery shoes and stockings were purified and rendered pre-
sentable. There were the means of washing in the room,
and a comb and brush to smooth my hair. After a weary
Sroceas, and resting every five minutes, I succeeded in
ressing myself. My clothes hung loose on me; for I was
much wasted, but I covered deficiencies with a shawl, and
once more, clean and respectable-looking — no speck of thu
dirt, no trace of the disorder I so hated, and which seemed
so to degrade me, left — I crept down a stone staircase with
the aid of the banisters, to a narrow low pafisage, aaC
found my way presently to the kitchen.
It was full of fragrance of new bread, and the wai
of a generous fire. Hannah was baking. Prejudii
is well known, are most difficult to eradicate fro:
heart whose soil has never been loosened or fertilized by
education: they grow there firm as weeds among stones.
Hannah had been cold and stiff, indeed, at the first: lat-
terly she had begun to relent a little; and when
me come in tidy and well-dressed, she even smiled
" What! have you got up? " she said. " You
her, then. You may sit down in my chair on the h(
clLine, if you will. "
She pointed to the rocking-chair. I took it. She bus-
. I
tied about, examining me every now and then with the
comer of her eye. burning to me, as she took t
JANE EYHE.
3(i^^^
loaves from the oven, she askeil, bluntly, " Did yon eTer
go a-beggjna; afore you came bore? "
I was indignant for a. momont; but remembering that
anger was out of the question, and that I bad indeed ap-
peared as a beggar to her, I answered quietly, but still
not without a certain marked firmness.'■ Yon are mis-
taken in supposing me a beggar. I am no beggar, any
more than yourself or your young ladies. "
After a pause, she said, " I dunnut understand that:
you have like no house, nor no brass, I guess? "
" The want of house or brass (by which I suppose you
mean money) does not make a beggur in your sense of the
word. "
" Are you book-Iearnod ? " she inquired, presently.
" Yes, very. "
" But you've never been to a boardiug-schooll "
" I was at a boarding-school eight years, "
She opened her eyes wide.
" Whatever can not ye keep yourself for, then?
" I have kept myself; and, I ti'ust, shall keep
again. What are you going to do with these j,
berries ? " I inquired, as she brought out a basket rf %
fruit.
" Mak''em into pies. "
" Give them to me, and I'll pick them. "
" Nay; I dunnut want ye to do naught. "
" But I must do Bomething. Let me have them. "
She consented; and she even brought me a clean towel
to spread over my dress, " lest, " as she said, " I should
mucVy it. "
" Ye've not been used to sarvant's wark, I see by your
hands, " she remarked. " Happen ye've been a drees-
mafcer. "
" No; you are wrong. And, now, never mind what I
have been: don't trouble your head further about me; but
tell me the name of tbo house where we are. "
" Some calls it Marsh End, and some calls it Moor
House. "
" And the gentleman who lives here is called Mr. St.
John? " _
" Nay; he doesn't live here: he is oul^ staying a
When he is at home, he is in his own parish at Morton. "
" That village a few miles ofE? "
" Ay. "

866 JANE EYUE.
" And what is he? "
" He is a parson. "
I ru me mix'red the answer of the old housekeeper at l
pareoiiaf^e, when I had asked to see the clergymau. " Th]
then, was hia father's residence? "
" Ay; old Mr. Rivers lived here, and liis father,
grandfather, and gurt (great) grandfather afore him. "
" The nauiBj then, of that gentlemaa is Mr. St. J < rf
Hiversi''
" Ay, St. John is like is kiratened name. "
*■ And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Rivera? "
" Yes. "
" Their father is dead? "
" Dead three weeks sin'of a stroke. "
" They have no mother? "
" The mistress has been dead this mony a year. "
" Have yon lived with the family long.-'"'
" I've lived here thirty year. I nursed them all thr«
" That proves vou must have been an Iionest and fad
fill servant. I will say so much for you, though jou k
had the incivility to call me a beggar. "
She again regarded ma with a surprised stare. " I fla
lieve, " she said. " I was quite mista'en in my thoughts o
you: but there ic so mony cheats goes about, you man I'
gieme, "
" And though, " I continued, rather severely, " jflj
wished to turn lue from the door on a night when ;
should not have shut out a dog. "
" Well, it was hard: but what can a body do? I thoug]
more o'th'diilder nor of mysel', poor things! The^
like nobody to tak'care on'em but me. I'm like to I(
sharpish.
I inaintained a grave silence for some minutes.
" You munuut tliink too hardly of me, " she again i
mark I'd.
" But I do think hardly of you, " I said; " and 111 (
you why — not so much because you refused to give L
shelter, or regarded me as an impostor, as because yon joj
DOW made it a species of reproach that I had no'brase^
and no house. Some of the best people that ever liv^
have been as destitute as I am; and if you are a Christian,
you ought not to consider poverty a crime. "
" No more I ought, " said she: " Mr. St. John tells n
80 too; and I see I wor wrang — ^but I'tc clear a diflerent j
JANE EYHE.
notion on you now to what Iliad. Ton look a raight doW
dacent littlp crater. "
" That will do — I forgive yon now. Shake hands.
She put her floury and horny hand into mine; another
and heartier smile illumined her rough face; and from
that moment we were friends.
Hannah was evidently fond of talking. While I picked
the fruit, and she made the paste for the pies, she pro-
ceeded to give me eundry details ahout her deceased mas-
ter and mistress, aad " the childer, " as she called the
young people.
Old Mr. Rivera, she said, was a plain man enough; but
a gentleman, and of as ancient a family as could be found.
Am-sh End had belonged to the Rtveraes ever since it waa
a house: and it was, she affirmed, " aboon two hundred
year old — for all it looked but a small, humble place,
naught to compare wi'Mr. Oliver's grand hall down i'
Morton Vale, But she could remember Bill Oliver's father
a journeyman needle-maker; and th " Riversea wor gentry
i'thi'days o'th'Henrys, as ony body might see by look-
ing into til'regietera 1'Morton Church vestry, " Still, aha
allowed, " the owd maister waa like other folk — naught
mich out o'f common way: etark mad o'shooting, and
farming, and sich-like. " The mistress was diiferent. She
was a gi'eat leader, and studied a deal; and the " bairns "
had t^cn after her. There was nothing like them in
these parte, nor ever had been; they had liked learning,
all three, almost from the time thej could speak; and they
jiad always been " of a mak'of their own. " Mr. St. John,
when he grew up, would go to college and be a parson;
and the girls, aa soon as they left school, would seek
placra as governesses: for they hud told her their father
had some years ago lost a great deal of money by a man
he had trusted turning bankrupt; and aa he was now not
rich enough to give them fortunes, tliey must provide for
themselves. They had lived very little at home for a long
while, and were only come Jiow to stay a few weeks on ac-
count of their father's death: but they did so like Marsh
End and Morton, and all these moors and hills about.
They had been in London, and many other grand towns;
but thny always said there was no place like homo; and
tlion they were so agreeable with each other — never fell
out nor " threaped. " She did not know where there waa
such a family for bein^ united.
368
/ASE ETBE.
Having finished my task of gooaebeny-picking, I «sb
where the two ladies and their brother were now.
" Gone oyer to Morton for a walk; but they wonld 1
back in half an hour for tea. " 1
They returned within the time HannKh had allottf
them: they entered by the kitchen door. Mr, St, JoW
when he saw me, merely bowed and passed througli; ti
two ladies stopped: Mary, in a few words, kindly and
calmly expressed the pleasure she felt in seeing me
well enough to bo able to come down; and Diana took mj
band: she shook her head at me.
" You should have waited for my leave to descend, " d
said.'" You still look very pale — and so thin! "'
child! — poor girl! "
Diana had a voice toned, to my ear, like the cooin^fl
a dove. She possessed eyes whoso gaze I deliglited to oT
counter. Her wliole face seemed to me full of char|
Mary's countenance was equally intelligent — her featm
equally pretty: but her expression was more reserved; a
her manners, though gentle, more distant. Diana loOM
and Bpoke with & certain authority: she had a will, ovidflf
ly. It was my nature to feel pleasure in yielding to i
authority supported like hers: and to bend, where my con-
science and self-respect permitted, to an active will.
" And what business have you here? " she continued:
" It is not your place. Mary and I sit in the kitchen
sometimes, because at home we like to be free, even to
license; but yon are a visitor, and must go into the parlor. "
" I am very well here. "
" Not at all — with Hannah boBtling about and cover-
ing you with flour. "
'■ Besides, the fire is too hot for you, " interposed
Mary.
" To he sure, " added her sister. " Come, you i
obedient. " And still holding my hand, she made me r
and led mo into the inner room.
" Sit there, " she said, placing me on the sofa,'
we take our things off and get the tea ready; it is anot.
privilege we exercise in our Tittle moor-land home— *o p
Sire our own meals when we are so inclined;
annah ia baking, bi-ewing, washing, or ironing. "'
She closed the door, leaving me solus with Mr. St, i
who sat opposite — a book or newspaper in his hand.
. amined, orst, the parlor, and then its occupant,
JANE EYRE. 359
The parlor was rather a small room, very plainly fur-
nished; yet comfortable) because clean and neat. The oM-
fashioned chairs were very bright, and the walnut-wood
table was like a looking-glass. A few strange antique
portraits of the men and women of other days decorated
the stained walls; a cupboard with the ^laas doors containec)
some hooks and an ancient set of china. There was no
superfluous ornment in the room— not one modern piece
of furniture, save a brace of work-boxes and a ladv 8 desk
in rose-wood, which stood on a eide-table: every thing — in-
cluding carpet and curtains — looked at ouce well worn
and well saved.
Mr. St John — sitting aa still as -one of the dusky
pictures on the walls; keeping his eyes fixed on the page
he perused, and his lips mutely bsaled — was easy enough
to examine. Had he been a statute instead of a man, he
eould not have been easier. He was young— -perhaps fi-om
twent_y-eight to thirty— tall, slender; his face riveted the
eye; it was like a Greek face, very pure in outline: quite a
straight, classic nose; quite an Athenian mouth and chin.
It is seldom, indeed, an English face comes so near the
antique models as did his. He might well be a little
shocked at the irregularity of niy lineaments, his own be-
ing 8o harmonious. His eyes were large and blue, with
brown Iftsheat his high forehead, colorless as ivory, was
partially streaked over by careless locks of fair hair.
This is a gentle delineation, is it not, reader? Yet he
whom it describes scarcely impressed one with the idea of
a gentle, a yielding, an impressible, or even of a placid
nature. Quiescent as he now sat, there was something
about his nostril, his mouth, his brow, which, to my per-
ceptions, indicated elements within either restless, or hard
or eager. He did not speak to me one word, nor even'"
reot to me one glance, till his sisters returned, Diana,
she passed in and out, in the course of preparing t(
hroaght me a little cake, baked on the top of the oven.
" Eat that now/'she said: " you must he hunpy.
Hannah says you have had nothing but some gruel since
breakfast.
I did not refuse it, for my appetite was awakened and
keen. Mr. Rivers now closed his book, approached the
table, and, as he took a seat, fixed his blue pictorial -look-
ing eyes full on me. There was an unceremonious direct-
ness, a searching, deciding steadfastness in his gaze nq|
ard
" km
JANB ETBB.
which told that intection, and not diffidence, had hithert
kept it averted from the stranger.
" Yon are very hungry, " he said.
" I am, sir. " It 13 my way — it always was my ii _
bj instinct — ever to meet the brief with brevity, the dire
with plainnesB.
" It is well for yon that a low fever has forced yoi
Abstain for the last three days: there would have I
danger in yielding to the cravings of your appetite at £
Now you may eat; thongh still not immoderately. "
" I tniet I ehall not ttat long at your expense, sir, "
my very clumBJly-contrivLtd unpoUahed answer.
" No, " he said, coolly: " when you have indicated t
the residence of your friends, we can write to them, a
yon may be vestored'to home. "
'■ That, I must plainly tell you, is out of my power to
do; being absolutely without home and friends. "
Tlie three looked at me, but not distrustfully; I J
there was no suspicion in their glances: there was more
curiosity. I speak particularly of the young ladies.
Joliii's eyes, though clear enough in a literal sense, i
figurative one were difficult to fathom. He seemed to
til em rather as iusti-uments to seai-ch other peopl
thoughts, than as agents to reveal his own: the *
combination of keenness and reserve was conside
more calculated to embarra^ than to encourage.
" Do you mean to say, " he asked, " that you are-coi)CJ
pletely isolated from every connection? "
" I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing:
claim do I possess to admittance under any roof m ]
land. "
" A most singular position at your age 1 "
Hero I saw his glauce directed to my hands,
were folded on the table before me. I wondered what 1
sought there; his words soon explained the quest.
" You have never been married ? You are a spinster|9
Diana laughed.
" Why, she can't be above seventeen or eighteen y
old, St. John. " said she.
" I am near nineteen: but I am not married. No. "
I felt a burning glow mount to my face; for bitter i ...
agitating recollections were awakened by the allnsion |
marriage. They all saw the embarrassment, and the 8
tion. Diana and Mary relieved me bjtnrnu^t'"
JANE EYBE.
elsewhere than to my crimsoned visage ; but the colder and
eterner brother continued to gaze, till the trouble he had
excited forced out tears as well as color.
" Where did you last reside ? " he now asked.
" You are too inquisitive, St, John, " murmured M(
in a low voice ; but he leaned over the table and rejnJ
an answer, by a second firm and piercing look,
" The name of tlie place where, and of the person with
whom I lived, is my secret, " I replied, concisely.
" Which, if yon like, you have, in my opinion, a right
to keep, both from St, John and every other questioner, "
remarked Diana.
" Yet if I know nothing abont you or your history, I can
not help you, " he said. " And you need help, do you not " "
" I need it, and I seek it ; so far, sIj', that some t:
philanthropist will put me in the way of getting W(
which I can do, and the remuneration for which wiU ki
mo : if but in the barest necessaries of life. "
" I know not whether I am a true philanthropist ; yet I
am willing to aid yon to the utmost of my power in a pur-
pose so honest. First, then, tell me what you have been
accustomed to do, and what you can do. "
I had now swallowed my tea. I was mightily refreshed
by the beverage ; as much so as a giant with wine : it gave
new tone to my unstrung nerves, and enabled me to ad-
dress this penetrating jfoung judge steadily.
" Mr. Rivers, " I said, turning to him, and looking at
him, as he looked at me, openly and without diffidence,
" you and your sisters have done me a great service — the
greatest man can do his fellow-being ; you have rescued
me, by your noble hospitality, from death. This benefit
conferred gives you an unlimited claim on my gratitude;
and a claim, to a certain extent, on my confidence, I will
tell you as much of the history of the wanderer you have
harboi-ed as I can tell you without compromising my own
peace of mind — my own security, moral and physical, and
that of others.
" I am an orphan ; the daughter of a clergyman. My
parents died before I could know them. I was brought up
a dependant ; educated in a charitable institution. I will
even tell you the name of the establishment, where I passed
aix yeai^ as a pupil, and two as a teacher — I^jwond Orphan
Aaylum, shire : you will have heard of it, Mr. Kivers?
The Kev. Robert Brocklehurst is the treasurer. "
303
" I have heard of Mr. Brocklehnrst, and I have seen
school. "
" I left Lowood nearly a year Bince, to become a privi
govemeas. I obtained a good situation, and was . _^,
Thia place I was obliged to leave four days before I cai
here. The reason of my departure I can not and oug
itot to explain : it would be useless — dangerous ; and wouM
Bound incredible. No blame attached to me : I am m tree
from culpability as any one of you three. Miserable I am,
and must be for a time; for the catastrophe which drove
me from a house I had found a paradise was of a strange
and direful nature. I observed but two points in planning
my departure — speed, secrecy: to secure these, I had to leave
behind mo everything I possessed except a small parcel
which, in my hurry and trouble of mind, I forgot to ti "
out of the coach that brought me to Wbitcross. To'
neighborhood, then, I came, quite destitute. I slept
uights in the open air, and wandered about two days wii
out crossing a threshold : but twice in that space of time
did I taste food ; and it was when brought by liunger, ei-
hanatiou and despair, almost to the last gasp, that you,
Mr. Rivers, forbacfe me to perish of want at your door, and
took me under the shelter of your roof, I know all your
sisters have done for me since— for I have not been insen-
gible during my seeming torpor — and I owe to their spon-
taneous, genuine, genial compassion, as large a debt as "
jour evangelical charity. "
" Don't make her talk any more now, St. John,
Diana, as I paused ; *'ahe is evidently^ not yet fit for
citement. Come to the sofa and sit down now,'
Elliott. "
I eave an involuntary half-start at bearing the i^iati
I nad forgotten my new name. Mr, Rivers, whi
nothing seemed to escape, noticed it at once.
" You said your name was Jane Elliott ? " he obeei
" I did say so ; and it ig the name by which I think
expedient to be called at present: bnt it is not my
name, and when I hear it it sounds strange to me. "
" Your real name you will not give ? " _
" No : I fear discovery above all things ; and whatever'
disclosure would lead to it I avoid. "
" Y^ou are quite right, I am sure, " said Diana. " Now
do, brother, let her be at. peace a while. "
But when St. John had mused a few moments he re-
eavo
M

Jane evre.
commenced aa impertiirbably and witli as much
aa ever.
" You would not like to be long dependent on our hos-'
pitality— you would wish, I see, to digpense us soon as
maybe with my sister's eompassion; and, above all. with
my cAariii/ {l & m quite eensible of the dis^nction drawn,
nor do I resent it — it is jnst) : you desire to be independ-- j
ent of us? " ■
■'I do : .1 have already said so. Show me how to work;^
or how to seek work ; that is all I now ask ; then let me go,
if it be but to the meanest cottage — but tU.llhcn allow me
to stay here : I dread another essay of the horrors of home-
less destitution. "
" Indeed, you shall stay here, " said Diana, putting hei
white hand on my head,- j
" Von shall, " repeated Mary, in the tone of andemoiw^
utrative sinceritj which Beemed natural to her,
" My sisters, you see, have a pleasure in keeping yoa,^J
said Mr, St. Jonn, " as they would have a pleasure i "
keeping and cherishing a half-frozeu bird some winti
wind might have driven through their casement. I f & _
more inclination to put you in the way ot keeping your-
self, and shall endeavor to do so : but observe, my sphere
IB narrow. I am but the incumbent of a poor country
parish : my aid must be of the humblest sort. And if you
are inclined to despise the day of small things, seek some
more efficient succor than siich as T can offer. "
" She has already said that she is willing to do any-
thing honest she can do, " answered Diana, for me; " anaj
you know, St. John, she has no choice of helpers : she M
forced to put up with such crusty people as you, "
'I will be a dress-maker ; Iwil "
will be a plain work-woman j~
I will be a servant, a nurse-girl, if I can be no better, " I
answered.
" Right, " said Mr. St, John, quite coolly. " If such is
yonr spirit I promise to aid you ; in my own time and
way. "
He now resumed the book with which he had been oc-
cupied before tea. I soon withdrew ; for I had talked as
much and sat up as long as my present strength would
permit.

CHAPTER XXX.
The more Lktiew of the inmatea of Moor Honee, {
better I liked uiem. In a few daya I had eo far reoovar .
my health that I could Bit up all day and walk out Gomg'
times. I could join with Diana and Mary in all their oc
cupations, conferee with them as much as they wished and
aid them when and where they would allow me. There
waa a reviving pleasure in this intercourse, of a kind now
tasted by me for the first time — the pleasure arising
from perfect congeiiiality of tastes, sentiments and princi-
ples,
I liked to read what they liked to read : what
enjoyed delighted me ; what they approved I revereni
Thoy loved their sequestered home. I, too, in the gi
Bmall, antique stmctiire. with its low low roof, ita lattH
casements, its moldering walls, its avenue of aged firs —
all grown aslant under the stress of mountain winds; ita
farden, dark with yew and holly— and where no flowers
ut of the hardiest species would bloom — found a charm
both potent and permanent. They clung to the purple
moors behind and aronnd their dwelling — to the hollow
vale into which the pebbly bridle-path leading from their
gate descended ; and which wound between fern-ba * " *
first, and then among a few of the wildest little pasti
fields that ever bordered a wilderness of heath, or
sustenance to a flock of gray moor-land sheep, with
little moBsy-faced lambs : — they clung to this scene,'
with a perfect enthusiasm of attachment. I eould
Frehond the feeling and share both ita strength and 1
saw the fascination of the locality. I felt the com
tion of its lonelinsss; njy eye feasted on the outline of
swell and sweep — on the wild coloring communicated to
ridge and dell by moss, by heath-bell, by flower-aprinkled
turf, by brilliant bracken and mellow granite crag. Tl
details were just to me what they were to them — so in
pure and sweet sources of pleasui-e. The strong blast
the soft breeze ; the rough and the halcyon day ; tho hi
of sunrise and sunset ; the moonlight and the'
night developed for me, in these regions, the san
tion as for them — wound round my faculties
Bpell that entranced d "'" "
JAKK EYRK. 36$4
Indoors we agreed equally well. Thej were both more
accompUahed and tetter read than I was : but with eager-
ness I followed in the path of knowledge they had trodden
before mo. I devoared the books they lent me : then it
was full satisfaction to discuss with them in the evening
what I had perused daring tho day. Thought fitted
thought; opinion met opinion: we cSincided, iu short,
perfectly.
If in our trio there was a superior and a leader, it waa
Diana. Physically, she far excelled me : she was hand-
some ; she was vigorous. In her animal spirits there was
an affluence of life, and certainty of flow, such ua exeited
my wonder, while it baffled my comprehension. 1 could
talk awhile when the evening commenced : but the first
gush of vivacity and fluency gone, I was fain to sit oa a
stool at Diana's feet, to rest my head on her knee, and
listen alternately to her and Mary, while they sounded
thoroughly the topic on whicli I had but touched. Diana
offered to teach me German. I liked to learn of her ; I
saw the part of instructress pleased and suited her ; that
of scholar pleased and suited me no Icbs. Our natures
dovetailed : mutual affection of the strongest kind — was
the result. They discovered I could draw : their pencils
and color-hoses were immediately at my service. My
skill, greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and
charmed them. Mary would sit and watch me by the
hour together : then she would take lessons ; and a docile,
intelligent, assiduous pupil she made. Thus occupied,
and mutually entertained, days passed like hours, and
weeks like days.
Aa to Mr. St. John, the intimacy which had arisen so
naturally and rapidly between me and his sisters did not
extend to him. One reason of the distance yet observed
between us was, that he was comparatively seldom at
home : a large proportion of his time appeared devoted to
visiting the sick and poor among the scattered population
of his parish.
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral ex-
cnrsiona : rain or fair, he would, when his hours of morn-
ing study were over, take his hat, and followed by hia
father's old pointer. Carlo, go out on his mission of love
or duty — I scarcely know in which light he regarded it.
Sometimes, when uie day was very unfavorable, nis sistera
would e.'ipoMtiihite. lie would then say, with a peculiar
JANE EYRE.

flmile, more solomn tlmn cheerful. " And if I let a gust of
wind or a sprinkling of rain turn me aside from these
easy tasks, what preparation would snch sloth be for the
future I propose for myself? "
Diana ana Marj-'s general answer to this quefltion was a
eigh, and some minutes of apparently mournful meditar
tion.
But besides his frequent absences, there was another
harrier to friendship with him ; he seemed of a reserved,
an abstracted, and even of a brooding nature. Zealous in
}us ministerial labors, blameless in his life and habits,
he yet did not appear to enjoy tbat mental serenity,
that inward content, which should be the reward of every
sincere Christian and practical philanthropist. Often of
an eveniug. when he sat at the window, his desk and
paper before him, he would cease reading or writing, rest
his chin on his hand, and deliver himself up to I Jcnow not
what couree of thought ; but that it was perturbed and ex-
citing might be seen in the frequent flash and changeful
dilation of his eye.
I think, moreover, that Nature was not to him that
treasury of deliglit it was to his sisters. He expressed -
once, and bat once in my hearing, a strong sense of tlu "'
rugged charm of the hills, and an inborn affection for AT
dark roof and hoary walla he called his home ; but thei
was more of gloom than pleasure in tbe tone and wohIb
iu which the sentiment was manifested ; and never did he
seem to roam the moors for the sake of their soothing si-
lence — never seek . at or dwell upon the thousand peaceful
delights they could yield.
Incommunicatiyo as he was, some time elapsed befortj
I had an opportunity of gauging his mind. I first got aT
idea of its caliber when I heard him preach in his ow
church at Morton. I wish I could describe that sermo^jg
but it is past my power. I can not even render faithful "
the etfect it produced on me.
It began calm — and indeed, as far as delivery andpitc^
of voice went, it was calm to the end : an earnestly fellifl
yet strictly restrained zeal breathed soon in the distinm^
accents, and prompted the nervous language. This graw
to force — compressed, condensed, controUed, Tlie heart " "
was thrilled, the mind astouisiied, by the power of the
preacher : neither was softened. Throughout there was a
etrauge bitterness ; an absence of consolatory geDtleness:
JANE £XKG.
B^.eni aJlnaione to Calvanistic dootrinee — ielection, predt
nition, reprobation — were frequent; and each reference
thtse points sounded lite a sentence pronounced for dooi ^
When he had done, instead of feeling better, calmer, more
enlightened by his diBcourse, I experienced an inexpreaa-
ible sadness; for it seemed to nie— I know not whether
equally so to others — -that the eloquence to which I had
been listening had sprung from a depth where laj turbid
dregs ol disappointment — where moved troubling impulses
of insatiate yearnings and disquieting aspirations. I was
sure St. John Rivers — pure-lived, conscientious, zealous
as he was — had not yet found that peace of God which
passeth all understanding; he had no more found it, I
thought, than had I; with my concealed and racking ro-
greta for my broken idol and lost elysium — regceta
which I have latterly avoided referring, but which
seased me, and tyrannized over me ruthiessly.
Meantime a month was gone. Diana and Maiy wt
soon to leave Moor House, and return to the far different
life and scene which awaited them as governesses in a
large, fashionable, south -of- England city; where each
held a situation in families, by whose wealthy and haughty
members thev were regarded only as humble dependents,
and who neither knew or sought one of their innate ex-
cellences, and appreciated only their acquired accomplish-
ments as they appreciated the skill of their cook, or the
taste of their waiting-woman. Mr. St. John had said
nothing to me yet about the employment he had promised
to obtain for me; yet it became urgent that I shouhi have
a vocation of some kind. One morning, being left alone
with him a few minutes in the parlor, 1 ventured to ap-
proach the window-recess — whicli his table, chair, and
desk consecrated as a kind of study — and I was going to
speak; though not very well knowing in what words to
& ame my inquiry — for it is at o-ll times difficult to break
the ice of reserve glossing over such natures as his — when
he saved me the trouble, oy being the flrat to commence
dialogue.
Looking up as I drew near, " You have a question
ask of me? " ho said.
" Yes; I wish to know whether you have heard of aHI
service I can offer myself to undertake. "
" I found or devised something for you three weeka
jbut as you seemed both useful aud iiajipy here — m
]
3oi^^^H
nore il
it, I
irent ^1

368 JANE EYEE.
my sisters had evidently become attached to you, and y
society gave them unnsiial pleasure — I deemed it inexp
ent to break in on your mutual cooifort till their approad
ing departure from Marsh End shouJd render yours E
Bury. "
" And they will go in three days now? " I said.
" Yes; and when they go, I shall return to the paraoi
age at Morton: Hannah will accompany me; and tnis c'
bouse wilt be shut up. "
I waited a few momenta, expecting he would go o _
the subject first broached; but he seemed to have t-nteredl "
another train of reflection; his look denoted abstraction
from me and my business. I was obliged to recall him to
a iheme which was of necesaity one of close and anxious
interest to me.
•* What ia the employment you had in view, Mr. Riv-
ers? I hope this delay will not have increased the diffi-
culty of securing it. "
" Oh no; since it is an employment which depends only
on me to give, and you to accept. "
He again paused: there seemed a reluctance to con-
tinue. 1 grew impatient: u restless movemeiit or two.
atid an eager and exacting glance fastened on his fw
couveyed the feeling to him as effectually as words oot
have done, and with less trouble.
" You need be in no hurry to hear, " he said; " let TL,
franlcly tell you, I have nothing eligible or pro6table'H
suggest. Before I explain, recall, if jou please, mj 1 "
tice, clearly given, that if I helped you, it must be as'
blind man would help the lame. I am poor; for 1 t_
that, when I have paid my father's debts, ail the ps^
mony remaining to me will be this crumbling grange, f
row of scathed firs behind, and the patch of moorish a.
with the yew-trees and holly-bushes in front, I am t
Bcure: Rivers is an old name; but of the three sole i
Boendants of the race, two earn the dependent's c
among strangers, and the third considers himself
alien from his native country — not only for life, but in
death. Yes, and dooms, and is bound to deem, himself
honored by the lot, and aspires but after the day when the
cross of separation from fleshly ties shall be laid on his
shoulders, and when the Head of that Church militant of
whose humblest menibere ho is one, shall give the word,
:^.Bi*^ follow me!'"
JANE EYEB.
St. John said these words as he pronounced his ser«
nuns, with a quiet, deep voit^e ; with an UDfluehed chceW
and a coruscating radiance of glance. He resumed:'" " Ana.,
Biuce I am myaeli poor and obscure, I can offer you but a
eervice of poverty and obscurity. Voh may even think it
degrading — for I sea now your nabits have been what the
world calls reSned : your tastes Itian to the ideal ; and your
society has at least been among the educated ; but leouC
aider that no service degrades whicli can better our raw
I bold that the more arid and unreclaimed the soil whai
the Christian laborer's task of tillage ia appointed him— ^
the scantier the meed his toil brmga—tfie higher the
honor. His, under such circumstances, is the destiny of
the pioneer ; and the first pioneers of the Gospel wore the
Apostles — their captain was Jesus, the Redeemer, himself.
" Well, " I said as he again paused, " proceed. "
He looked at me before he proceeded : indeed, he
seemed leisurely to read my face, as if its featiiT'es and
lines were characters on a page. Tlie conclusions drawn
from this scrutiny he partially expressed in his succeeding
observations.
" I believe you will accept the post I offer you, " said he,
and hold it for a while : not permanently, though, any
more than I could permanently keep the narrow and nar-
rowing—the tranquil, hidden office of English country
incumbent : for in your nature is an alloy as detinmentatti
to repose as that in mine, though of a different kind. " -J
" Do explain, " I urged, when he halted once more. ■
" I will ; and you shall hear how poor the proposal'»— ^
how trivial — how cramping, I shall not stay long at
Morton, now that my father is dead, and that I am ray
own master. I shall leave the place probably in the course
of a twelvemonth : but while i do stay, I will exert myself
to the utmost for its improvement. Morton, when I camo
to it two years ago, had no school ; the children of the
EOT were excluded from every hope of progress. I estab-
hed one for boys : I mean now to open a second school
for girls. I have hired a building for the purpose, with a
cottage of two rooms attached to it for the mistress's house.
Her salary will be thirty pounds a year: her house ia
already furnished, very simply, but sufficiently, by the
kindness of a lady. Miss Oliver, the only daughter of the
sole rich man in my parish — Mr. Oliver, the proprietor of
a needle-factory and iron-foundry in the valiey. The
370 ^^^^^H
same lady pays for the education and clothing of an or^^^H
from the work-house, on condition thai she shall aid ^^H
mistreas in such menial offices connected with her oi^H
house iind tlie ecliool, as her occupatiou of teaching wiH^
prevent her liaving time to discharge in person. Will you
be this mistress? "
He pnt the question rather hurriedly; he seemed half
to e![|)eot an indignant or at least disdainful rejection tgCfl
the olTer: not knowing all my tliuu^hts and feelinmH
though guessing some, he could not teUin what light tUH
lot would apiwar to me. In truth it waB humble — ^^|
then it was sheltered, and I wanted a eafe oaylum; it in^|
plodding— but then, compared with that of a govenieasJ^H
a rich house, it wus independent ; and the fear of Bervltiia|9
with strangers entered my soul like iron : it was not ign(^^
hie — not unworthy — not mentally degi " ading. I made my
decision.
" I thank jon for the proposal, Mr. Btyers, and I accept
it with all my heart. " -J
" But you comprehend me? " he said. " It is a viOa ^liB
school; your scholars will be only ]ioor girls — cottagAnH
children — at the, best, farmere'daughters. Knitting, eeuBfl
ing, reading, writing, ciphering, will be all yon will hava
to teach. What will you do with )oui'accomplishments?
Wliat with the largest portion of your mind — sentiments — . _
taatesF " .^^_
" Save them till they are wanted. They will keep.'S^H
" You know what you undertake, then? " ^^H
■'I do. " J^l
He now smiled : and not a bittsr or a sad smile, bat^^H
well pleased and deeply gratified. ^M
" And when will you commence the exercise of TOwB
function? " ■
" I will go to my house to-mc7row, and open the school,
if you like, next week. "
" Very well : so be it. "
He rose and walked through the room. Standing sti]L,_
he again looked at me. He snook his head. mI
" What do you disapprove of, Mr. Rivers? " I askocl. .|^H
" You will not stay at Morton long : no, no! " ^^H
" Why? What is your reason for saying so? " ■'^
" I read it in your eye; it is not of that description
which promises the maintenance of an eron tenor in life. "
**Irat not ambitious. " - HM
JANE EYRE,
He started at the word " ambitious, " He repeatem
" No, What made you think of ambition? " Who is
bitioiis? I know I am: but how did you find it out? "
" I wfts speaking of myself. "
" Well, if you are not ambitious, you an:- "
paused.
" What. "
" I was going to say, impassioned ; but perhaps you
would have misunderstood the word, and been displeased.
I mean, that human afEectioua and sympathies have a most
powerful hold on you. I am sure you cannot long be con-
tent to pass your leisure in solitude, and to devote ^our
working hours to a monotonouB labor, wholly void of
stimulus; any more than I can be content, " he added, with
emplmaie, " to live here buried in morass, pent in witfi
mouutaina — my nature, that God gave me, contravenei^
my faculties, heaven-beatowed, paralyzed — made
You hear now how I contradict myself. I, who preachei
contentment with a humble lot. and justified the vocation
even of hewers of wood and drawere of water in God's eer^
vice — I, his oi'dained minister, almost rave in my restlesi
neaa. Well,'propensities and principles must be recoucilef
by Bome means.
He left the room. In this brief hour I had leame^
more of him than in the whole previous month: }
he puzzled mc.
Diana and Mary Rivers became more sad and silent as
the day approached for leaving their brother and their
home. They both tried to appear aa usual; but the sorrow
they had to struggle against was one that could not be
entirely conquered or concealed. Dina intimated that
this would be a different parting from any they had ever
yet known. It would probably, asfa.r as St, John waacon-
cerned, be a parting for years; it might be a parting forlifsj
" He will sacrifice alt to his loug-franied resolves, " eitf
said: " natural affection and feelings more potent atilS
St. John looks quiet, Jane; but he hides a fever in h^
vitals. You would think him gentle, yet in some thing!
he is inexorable as death; and the worst of it is, my conJ
science will hai-dly permit me to dissuade him from liS
severe decision; certainly, I cannot for a moment blame
him for it. It is i-ight, noble. Christian: yet it breaks my
heart. " And the tears gushed to her fine eyes. Mary
tent her head low, over her work.
373 JANE EYHE,
" We are now without fatherr wo shall soon be witni
home aud brother, " she murmured. " ^
At that moment a little accident supervened, whi
seemed decreed by fate, pnrpoaely to prove the truth of
the adage, that misfortunes never come single; " and tn
add to tlieir distresses the vexing one of the slip between
the cup and the lip. St John passed the window re^dim
a letter. Ho entered,
" Our uncle John is deiui, " said he.
Both the Histers seemed struck: not shocked or i
palled; the tidings appeared in their eyes rather
0U8 than afflicting.
••Dead? " reMated Diana.
■'Yes. "
She riveted a searching gaze on her brother's face.
" And what then? " she demanded, in a low voice.
" What then. Die? " he replied, maintaining a marble
immobility of feature. " What then? Why— nothing.
Eead. "
He threw the letter into lier lap. She glanced over it,
and handed it to Mary. Mary neruaed it in silence, and
returned it to her brother. All three looked at each
othei', and all three smiled — a dreary, pensive smile
■'Amen! We can yet live, " said Diana, at last.
" At any rate, it makes ns no worse off than we were
before, " remarked Mary.
" Only it forces rather strongly on the mind the picture
of what miff/i/ have been. " said Mr. Rivers, " and contrasta
it somewhat too vividly with what is. "
He folded the letter, locked it in his desk, and e
went out.
For some minates no one spoke. Diana then t
to me.
" Jane, you will wonder at us and our myat^rieB, " ij
Bfiid: " and think us hai'd-heaited beings not to be me
moved at the death of so near a relation us an tinclSJ
but wo have never seen ,him or known him. He was my
mother's brother. My father and he quarreled long ago " .
It was by his advice'that my father risked most of his
pi-opei'ty in the speculation that mined him. Mutual re-
crimination passed between them: they parted in anger,
and were never reconciled. My uncle engaged afterward
in more prosperous undertakings: it appears he realize4ji~
.lAKE EYIIE. 37^
fortntie of twenty thousand ponndB. He waa neve
married, and had no near kindred but ourBtJves, and on
other person, not more cloaely related than we, 1 " "
father always cherished the idea that lie would atone 1
hie error, by leaving his poHseasions to us; that letter- iii^
forms us that he has bequeathed eyery penny to the oth^
relation; with the exception of thirty guineas, to i^
divided between 8t. John, Diana and Mary Rivera, fa
the purchase of three mourning-rings. He had a righH
of course, to do as he pleased: and yet a momentary damM
ie cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news. Maiy
and 1 would have esteemed ourselves rich with a thousand
pounds each; and to St. John such a sum would have been
valuable, for the good it would have enabled him to do. "
This explanation given, the subject was dropped, and
no further reference made to it by either Mr. Rivers or
his sisters. The nest day, I left Marsh End for Morton,
The day after, Diana and Mary quitted it for distant
B , In a week, Mr. Rivers and Hannah repaired ('
the parsonage: and so the old grange was abandoned.
CHAPTER XXXI.
My home, then — when I at last find a home — is s
tage: a little room with whitewashed walls, and a sandef
floor, containing four painted chairs and a table, a clock,
a cupboard, with two or three plates and dishes, and a set
of tea-things in delf. Above, a chamber of the same
dimensions as the kitchen, with a deal bedstead, and chest
of drawers; small, yet too large to be filled with my scanty
wardrobe: though the kindness of my gentle and generous
friends has increased that by a modest stock of such things
as are necessary.
It is evening. I have dismissed, with the fee of an
orange, the litfle orphan who serves me as a handmaid,
I am sitting alone on the hearth. This morning, the vil-
lage school opened. I had twenty scholars. But three
of the number can read: none write or cipher. Several
knit, and a few sew a little. They speak with tha tom^..
3M
3XSZ EVaE.
est accent of the dietrict. At preeent, they acd I 1
difficulty in uoderetanding each other's language.
of them are QQinannered, rough, intractable, aa well I
ignorant; but others are docile, oave a wisii to learn, m
eviime a disposition that please me. X must not fot^
tliat those coarsely-clad little peasants are of flesh i
blood as good U3 the ciuns nf gentlest genealogy; and t
the germs of native eicolleuce, refinement, intelligenj
kind feeling, are as likely to exist in their hearts as
those of the best bom. My dnty will be to develop tbi
germs: snrely I shall find some happiness in dischargi
that olBoe. 5Iuch enjoyment I do not expect in the I
opening before me: yet it will, doubtless, u I regnlate i
mind, and exert my powers as I ought, yield me en
to live on from day to day,
Waa I very gleeful, settled, content, during the I
I passed in yonder bare, humble school-room this morni
and afternoon? Not to deceive myself, I must reply, S _
I felt desolate to a degree. I felt — yes, idiot that I am —
I felt degraded. I donbted I had taken a step which sank
iliste.td of raising me in the scale of social existence. I
was weakly dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty, I
coarseness of all I heard and saw around me. But let t
not hate and despise mysulf too much for these feeltDj
1 know them to be wrong — that is a great step gtanw "
Khali strive to overcome them. To-morrow, I tma'
shall get the better of them partially; and in a few we <
perhaps, they will be quite subdued. In a few months, J
18 possible, the happiness of seeing progress, and a chan^,^
for the better in my scholars may substitute gratification
for disgiiat.
Meantime, let me ask myself one question — Which b
better? — to have surrendered to temptation; listened I
passion; made no painful effort — no struggle; but to 1
euuk down in the silken snare; fallen asleep on iha Hm
ers covering it; wakened in a southern clime, among t
luxuries of a pleasure villa: to have been now living i
France, Mr. Rochester's mistress; delirious with hia ldl._
half my time — for he would — oh, yes, he would havfj
loved mo well for a while. He did love me — no
over love me so again. I shall never more know the swecb
homage given to beauty, youth and grace— for never to
any one else shall I seem to possess these charms. Ue
~''" "'-..--. ^jy^ bosides i

r be. — ^But where am I wandering, and what am I
iag; and, above all, feeling? Whether it is better, I
to be a slave in a fool's paradise at Marseilles — feveri
with delosivo bliss one hour — ^suffocatiug with the bitterest
tears of remorse and shame the next — or to be a village
school-mistress, free and honest, in a breezy mountain
iiooJt in the healthy heai't of England?
Yes; I feel now that I was right when I adhered to
principle and law, and scorned and crushed the insane
promptings of a phrensied moment. God directed me to
a correct choice: I thank His providence for the guid-
ance!
Having brought my eventide musings to this point, I
rose, went to my door, and looked at the sunset of the
harvest-day, and at the quiet fields before my cotl
which, with the school, was distant half a mile from
village. The birds were singing their last strains —
]
" The a;
la mild: the dew b

While I looked, I thought myself happy, and was
prised to find myself ere long weeping — and why''
the doom which had reft me from adhesion to my master:
for him I was no more to see; for the desperate grief and
fatal fury— consequences of my departure — which might
now, perhaps, be di'agging him from the path of right, too
far to leave hope of ultimate restoration thither. At this
thought, I turned my face aside from the lovely sky of eve
and lonely vale of Morton — I say lunely, for in that bend
of it visible to me, there was no building apparent save the
churah and the parsonage, half hidden in the trees; and
q^uite at the extremity, tlie roof of Vale Hall, where the
rich Mr. Oliver and his daughter lived, I hid my eyes,
and leaned my head against the stone frame of my door;
but soon a slight noise near the wicket which slmt in my
tiny garden from the meadow beyond it, made me look up.
A dog — old Carlo, Mr. River's pointer, as I saw in n
moment — was pushing the gate with his nose, and St.
John himself leaned upon it with folded arms; his brow
knit, his gaze, grave almost to displeasure, fixed on me.
I asked him to come in.
" No, I can not stay; I have only brought you a lil
wroel my sisters left for yon. I think it contains a coloj
f the u
376
JANE EYBE.

I approached to take it: a welcome gift it was, ?t
examint'd my face, I thought, with austerity, as I came
near: the traces of tears were yot, doubtless, very risible
upon it.
" Have you found yonr first day's work harder than you
expected? he aaked.
" Oh, no! On the contrary, I think in time I shall gi
on with my scholars very well, "
" But perhaps your accoromodations — your coti
your furuittire — have disappointed your expectatit)
Xhey arc, in truth, scanty euough; but—— "
I interrupted: " Mycottage is clean and weather-pn
my furniture sufficient and commodious. All I see
made me thankful, not despondent. I am not nbaolni
sucli a fool and senetialisb as to re^t the absence of
carpet, a sofa, and Gilver plate: besides, five weeks ago I
had nothing — I was an outcast, a beggar, a vagrant: now
I have acquaintances, a home, a biifiineas. I wonder at tha^
foodneas of God; the more generosity of my friends;
ouiity of my lot. I do not repine. "
" lint you feel solitude and oppression? The li
house there behind you Is dark and empty. "
" I have hardly had time yet to enjoy a senaeof trsni
ity, much less to grow impatient under one of lonelii
" Very well; I hope you feel the conten,t you ex^
at any rate, your good sense will tell you that it is tot? "
floon yet to yield to the vacillating fears of Lot's wife.
What you had left before I saw you, of course I do not
know; but I counsel you to resist, firmly, .every temptation
which would incline you to look back ; pursue your pi'" "
career stijadily for some months at least. "
" It is what I mean to do, " I answered,
St. John continued: " It is hard work to ooutrol
workings of inclination, and turn the bent of nature: bid
that it may ho done. I know from experience. Gud has
given us in a measure, the power to make our own fate;
and when our energies seem to demand a sust^gnancc they
can not get — wlion our will strains after a path we may
not follow^we need neither starve from inanitiuii, nor
stand still in despair: we have but to seek another nourish-
ment for the mind, as strong as the lorhiddeu fruit.
longed to taste — -and jierhaps purer; and to how out
the adventurous loot a road as direct and broad as the
B b$A blockfid np agamst us, if roughi
lo not
)tatioit I
ol ^^t
e: bS J

_ I, I was myseif intensely miserable, bocnnsd
I thouglit I had made a miatake in entering the ministrvj
its uniform duties worried me to death, 1 Dumed for tli^
more active life of the world — for tlie more exciting toils
of a literai-y career — for the destiny of an artiat ; author ;
orator ; anything rather than that of a priest: yes. the
heart of a politician, of a soldier, of a votary of glory, a
lover of renown, a luster after power, beat under my cur-
ate's snrplice. I consider ; my life was so wretched, it
must ho changed, or I must die. After a season of-dark-
ness and struggling, light broke, and relief fell: my cramp-
ed existence all at once spread out to a plain without
bounds — my powers heard a call from heaven to rise,
gather their fnll streugth, spread their wings, and mount
beyond ken. God hati an errand for me; to hear which
afar, to deliver it well, skill and strenglli, courage and
eloquence, the best qualifications of soldier, statesman, and
orator, were all needed: for these all center in the good
Eoiasionary.
" A missionary I resolved to he. From that moment my
state of mind changed; the fetters dissolved and dropped
from every faculty, leaving nothing of bondage but its
galling soreness— which time can only heal. My father,
indeed, oppcKed the determination, but since his death, I
have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with ; some affairs
settled, a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement
or two of the feelings broken through or cut asunder — a
last conflict with human weakness, in which 1 know I shall
overcome, because I have vowed that I will overcome — and,
I leave Europe for the Eiist,''
He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatid
voice : looking; when he ceased spcakiug, not at me, but M
',he setting sun, at which I looked too. Both he and I
hud our backs toward the path which lead up the field to
the wicket. We had hoard no stei tn that grass-grown
track; the water running in the vale was the one Soiling
sound of the hour and scone ; we might wtU then startia
when a gay voice, sweet as a silver hell exclaimed, " Goo^
evening, lir. Rivers. And good evening old Carlo. Yoiq
dog is quicker to recognize his friends than yoi are,
pricked his ears and wagged his tail when 1 was )
the Ijottom of the field, and you have yom back toward b
now. "
was true. Though Mr. Rivers had start.ed at thi

878 JANE EVlll!.
first of those ransical ascents, as if a thunder bolt had split
a cloud over bia head, he stood yet, St the close of the sen-
tence, in the same altitude in which the speaker had sur-
prised him — his arm resting on the gate, his faoe directed
toward the west. He turned at last, with measured de-
liberation. A vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his
side. There appeared, within three feet of him, a form
clad in pure white— a youthful, graceful form: full, yet
fine in contour; and when, after bending to caress Cairo.
it lifted up itB head, and threw back a long veil, there
bloomed under his glance a face of perfect beauty. Pta
feet beauty is a strong exprosaion ; but I do not retrace ^
oualify it: as sweet features as ever the temperate climsflj
Albion molded ; as pure hues of rose and lily as ever li
humid gales and vapory skies generated and screened, joa
fied, in this instance, the term. No charm was want^
no defect was perceptible: the young girl had regular s
delicate lineaments; eyes shaped and colored as we see tb)
in lovely pictures, large, and dark, and full, the long tf
shadowy eyelashes which encircle a fine eye with so Sdl
fascination; the penciled brow which gives such clearoH.
the white, smooth forehead, which adds such repose t?
the livelier beauties of tint and ray; the cheek, oval,
fresh, and smooth; the lips, fresh too, ruddy, healthy,
sweetly formed; the even and gleaming teeth without flaw;
the small dimpled chin; the ornament of rich, plenti-
ous tresses— all advantages, in short, which com-
bined, realize the ideal of beauty, were fully here. I
wondered, as I looked at this fair creature: I admired heiL_
with my whole heart. Nature had surely formed her mj|
partial mood; and, forgettiug her usual stinted stepmot'"
dole of gifts, had endowed this, her darling, with a j
dame's bounty.
What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel?
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn
to her and looked to her; and as uaturaily, I sought the
answer to the inquiry in his countenance. He had aire
withdrawn hia eye from the Peri, and iras looking i
humble tuft of daisies which grew by the wicket.
" A lovely evening, but late for yon to be out al0D8^
he said, as he crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowi
with his fet.
" Oh, I only came home from S " (she
tioned the name of a large town some twenty miles distatll
JANE EYRE. ^79
''this afternoon. Papa told me you had opened your
school, and that the new mistress was come ; and so I put
en my bonnet after tea, and ran up the valley to see her :
this is she ? " pointing to me.
''It is/'said St. John.
''Do you think you shall like Morton ? " she asked of
me, with a direct and naive simplicity of tone and man-
ner, pleasing, if child -like.
** I hope I shall. I have many inducements to do so.**
'*Did you find your scholars as attentive as you ex-
pected V'
''Quite. "
''Do you like your house ?^^
''Very much.''
*'Have I furnished it nicely ? "
*'Very nicely, indeed. "
" And made a good choice of an attendant for you in
Alice Wood ? "
" You have, indeed. She is teachable and handy. " *
(This, then, I thought, is Miss Oliver, the heiress ; favored,
it seems in the gifts of fortune, as well as in those of
nature ! Wliat happy combination of the planets presided
over her birtli I wonder ?)
" I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes, "
she added. " It will be a change for me to visit you now
and then ; and I like a change. Mr. Rivers, I have been
so gyy during my stay at S . Last night, or rather
this morning, I was dancing till two o'clock. The th
regiment arc stationed there since the riots ; and the
officers arc the most agreeable men in the world : they put
all o^.ir young knife-grinders and scissor-merchants to
shame. "
It seems to me that Mr. St. John's under-lip protruded,
and his )ippcr-lip curled a moment. . Kis mouth certainly
looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his
face unusually stem and square, as the laughing girl gave
him this information. lie lifted his gaze, too, from the
dasies, and turned it on her. An unsmiling, a searching,
a meaning gaze it was. She answered it with a second
laugh, and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her
dimples, her bright eyes.
As he stood, mute and grave, she again fell to caressing
Carlo.
'* Poor Carlo loves me, " said eb^» "'H^ is not stern and
he voaldi^^^l
1 native gtv^^^H
distant to bis friende ; snd if be coald speak, be
be silent. "'
As ehe patted the dog's head, bending with native gi ._
before bia young and austere master, I saw a glow rise to.
that niaaterti face. I saw his solemn eye melt with sud-
den fire, and flicker with resistless emotion. Flushed uufl
kindled thus, he luoked nearly as beautiful for a man ae
sbe for a woiniiu. His eliest heaved ouce, ae if bis large
beart, weary of despotio couatriction, bad espantled, do-
spite the will, and made a vigorons bound for tbo attain-
ment of liberty. But he curbed it, I think, as a resolute
rider would curb a rearing steed. He responded neither
by word nor movement to the gentle advances made him.
" Papa says you never come to see ua now, " continued
Miss Oliver, looking up. " You are quite a stranger at
Vale Hall. Ho is alone this evening, and not very well
will you return with me and visit him ? "
" It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliverj
answered St. John.
" Not a seasonable hour I But, I declare, it ia.
just the hour when papa most wants company : when
works are closed, and he has no buBinosa to occany ]
Now, Mr. Rivers, do come. Why are you eo verysby,
so very somber? "
She filled up i^he hiatus his silence left by a rep]
her own.
" I forgot I " she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled
head, as if shocked at herself. " I am so giddy and
thongbtless ! JJo excuse me. It bad slipped my memory
" that you have good reasons to be indisposed for joining in
my chatter. Diana and Mary have left you, and Moor
House is abut up, and you are bo lonely. I am sure I pity
you. Ih* come and see papa. " _
" Not to-night. Miss Rosamond, not to-night. "
Mr. St. John spoke almost like an automaton
only knew the effort it cost bim thus to refuse.
'■Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave yon;
daro not stay any longer : the dew hegiis to fall. " C
evening ! " She held out her hand, he just touched
" Good evening, " be repeated, in a voice low and hi*
OB an echo. She turned : but in a moment returned,
" Are you well? " she asked. Well might she pat
u : his face was blanched as her
ver, "
I
question :
r gown.
JANE EYKK.
" Quite well, " he enunciated; and with s bow lio I
the gate. She went one way, he another. She tun
twice to gaze after him, as she tripped fairj-like dowi
the field; ne, aa he strode firmly across, never turned i
all.
This spectacle of another's suffering and sacrifice, r
my thoughts from exclusive meditation on mv own. Dianj
Rivei-a had designated her brother " inesorable as death.*!
8be had not exaggerated.
CHAPTEK XXXn
I CONTINUED the labors of the village school as activelil
and faithfully as I conld. It was truly hard work at firsfcf
Some time elapsed before, with all my efforts, I coalm
comprehend my scholars and their nature. Wholly na4
taugnt, with faculties quite torpid, they seemed to wM
hopelessly dull; and, at first stgbt, all dull alike: but M
soon found I was mistaken. There was a difference
among them as among the educated; and when I got t^
know them, and they me, this difference rapidly developed!^
itBelf. Their amazement at nic, my language, my rules,
and ways onco subsided, I found some of these heavy-
looking, gaping rustics wake up into sharp witted girls
enough. Many showed themselves obliging and amiable
too: and I discovered among them not a few examples of
natural politeness and innate self-respect, as well as of ex-
cellent capacity, that won both my good will and my ad^ —
miration. These soon took a pleasure in doing their worlb
Veil; in keeping their persons neat; in learning their taskfl
regularly; in acquiring quiet and orderly manners. Thj
rapidity of their progress, in some instances, was e
" " —'" *— and an honest and happy pride I took i-
besi^, r began personally to like some of the best girln
and they liked me. I had among my scholars several
farmers'daughters; young women, grown almost. These "
could already read, write and sew; a.iid to them I taught
the elements of grammar, geography, history, and the
^er kinds of needlework. I found estimable cbftracter?
^^
383 JANE ETBE,
among them — characters desirous of informfttion, and
poaed for improvement— with whom I passed man;
pleasant evening hour in their own homes. Their pan
then (the farmer and his wife) loaded me with attentionB.
There was an enjoyment in accepting their simple kind-
ness, and in repaying it by a consideration — a scrupnioua
regard for their feelings — to which they were not, per-
haps, at all times accustomed, and which both charmed
and benefitted them; because, while it elevated them in
their own eyes, it made tiiem enmlous to merit tlie defer-
ential treatment they received.
I felt 1 became a favorite in the neighborhood. When
ever I went out, I heard on all sides cordial salutations,
and was welcomed with friendly smiles. To live amidst
general regard, though it be but the regard of working-
people, is like " sitting in sunshine csdm and sweet: "
serene inward feelings bud and bloom under the ray. At
this period of my life, my heart far oftener swelled with
thankfulness than sank with dejection: and yet, reader,
to toil you all, in the midst of this calm, this useful exist-
ence — after a day pased in honorable exertion among my
scholars, an evening spent in drawing or reading eoni
ediy alone — I used to rush into strange dreams at n'
dreams many colored, agitated, full of the ideal, the
ring, the stormy — dreams where, amidst unusual 8C
charged with adventure, with agitating risk and romanH?
chance, I still again and again met Mr. Rochester, always
at some exciting crisis; and then the sense of being in his
arma, hearing his voice, meeting his eye, touching hia
hand and cheek, loving him, being loved by him — the
hope of passing a lifetime at hie side, would be renewed;
with all its first force and fire. Then I awoke. Then I
recalled where I was and how situated. Then I rose up
on my ciirtaiulesa bed, trembling and quivering; and then
the still, dark night witnessed the convulsion of despair,
and heard the burst of passion. By nine o'clock the next
morning I was punctually opening the school; tranquil,
settled, prepared for the steady duties of the day.
Rosamond Oliver kept her word in coming to viaifcme.
Her call at the school was generally made in the course of
her morning ride. She would canter up to the door on
her pony, followed by a monnted livery servant. Any
thing more exquisite than her appearance in hei-jmrple
"'Mt, with her Amazon's cap of black velvet'
ngmy

JANE EYRE.
fully above the long curls that kissed her cheek and floated
to her Bhouldere, can ecftrceiy be imagined: and it was thus
she would enter the rustic building, and glide through the
dazzled ranks of the village children. She generally cama^
at the hour when Mr. Kivei's was engaged in giving hi^
daily catechising lesson. Keenly, I & m; did Sio eye o|)l
the visitress pierce tlie young pastor's heart. A sort orl
instinct seemed to warn hini of her entrance, even whenl
he did not see it; and when he was looking quite away;
from the door, if she appeared at it, his cheek woulS'
glow, Mid his marble-seeming features, though they rftl
fused to relax, changed indescribably: and in their veryl
quieacenee became expressive - of a repressed fervor/ J
stronger than working muscle or darting glance could inoT
^icate.
Of course, she knew her power; indeed, he did not, 1
cause he could not, conceal it from her. In spite of hiB " !
Christian stoicism, when she went up and addressed him,
and smiled gaily, encouragingly, even fondly in his face,
his hand would tremble and his eye htirn. He seemed to
say, with his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it
with his lips. ■'I love yon. and I know you prefer me. It
is not despair of success that keeps me dumb. If I offered
my heart, I believe you would accept it. But that heart
is already laid on a sacred altar: the fire is arranged round
it. It will soon be no more than a sacrifice consumed, "
And then she would pout like a disappointed child;
pensive cloiid would soften hor radiaut vivacity; she wouli
withdraw her hand hastily from his, and turn in transien
petulance from his aspect, at once so heroic and so martyrn
like, St. John, no doubt, would have given the world t < ^
follow, recall, retain her, when she thus left him: but ha >
would not give one chance of Heaven; nor relinqniab. tat;
the etysiuTu of her love, one hope of the true, eternal Par^j
adise. Besides, he could not bound all that he had in hi?:^
nature— the rover, the aspirant, the poet, the priest — iti
the limits of a single passion. He could not — he would
not — renounce his wild field of mission warfare for the
parlors and the peace of Valle Hall, I learned so much
from himself, in an inroad X onee, despite his reseiTe, had
the daring to make on his confidence.
Misa Oliver already honored me with frequent visits to
ffiv cottage. I had learned her whole character; which waa
without mystery or disguise: she was coquettish, but — ^
It ng^^J
384 JANE EYItE.
heartleBs; exacting, bat not worthlessly selfish. 8h« ]
been indulged from her birth, but yet was not abaolutfl
spoiled, ahe was hfiety, but eood-humored ; vain (wb'
could act help it, when every glance in the glass showed
her such a flush of loveliness), but not affected; liboral-
banded; innocent of the pride of wealth; ingenious; 8uff-
ficiently intelligent; gay, lively, and unthinking: she i
very charming, in short, even to a cool observer of her oW
S6X like nie, but she was not profoundly interesting if
thoroughly impressive. A very different sort of mind i "
hers from that, for instance, of the sisters of St. Jo^
8till, I liked her almost as I liked my pupil. Adele: exM
that, for a child whom we liave watclied over and tau^.
a closer affection is engendered than we oan girft i
equally attraetive adult acquaintance.
She had taken an amiable caprice to me. She eaid I
like Mr. Rivera (only, certainly, she allowed, " not
tenth so handsome: though I was a niue neat little
enough, but he was an angel " ). I was, however, £.
clever, composed, and firm, like him. I v/as a Imus nati.
she affirmed, as a village school-mistreas: she was sure _^
previous history, if known, would make a delightful ro-
mance-
One evening, while, with her naual child-like activity,
and thoughtless yet not offensive inquiaitiveness, she was
rummaging the cupboard and the table-drawer of my little
kitchen, she discovered first two French books, a volume
of Schiller, a German grammar and dictionary; and then
my drawing-materials and some sketcliea, including a
pencil-head of a pretty little cherub-like girl, one of my
scholars, and sundry views from nature, taken in tiie Vale
of Morton and on the surrounding moors. She waa firrt
transfixed with surprise, and then electrified with deli]'
" Had I done these pictures? Did I know French
German? What a love— what a miracle I was! I ii
better than her master in the first school in S W(
I sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa? "
" With pleasure, " I replied; and I felt a thrill of artist-
ic delight at the idea of copying from so perfect and radiant
a model. She had then on a dark-blue silk dress; her
arms and her neck were bare; her only ornament wae her
chestnut tresses, which waved over her shouldera with all
the wild grace of natural curls. I took a sheet of
card-board, and drew a careful outline. I promised
^^
self the pleasure of coloring it; and, as it iras getting lal
then, I told her ehe must come and sit another day.
She made snch a report of me to her father, that Mr.
Oliver himself accompanied her next eveaing — a tall,
massive- featured, middle-aged, and gray-headed man, at
whose side his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower
near a hoary turret. He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps
a proud personage; but he was very kind to me. The
sketch of liosamoiid's portrait pleased him highly: he said
I must make a finished picture of it. He insisted, too, on
my coming the next day to spend the evening at Vale Hall.
I went. I found it a large, handsome residence, show-
ing abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor. Rosa-
mond was full of glee and pleasure all the time I staid.
Her father was aftable; and when he entered into conver-
sation with me after tea, he expressed in strong terms his
approbation of what I had done in Morton school; and said
he only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too
good for the place, and would soon quit it for one more
suitable.
" Indeed! " cried Rosamond, " she is clever enough to
be a governess in a high family, papa. " ^
I thought— I would far rather he where I am than
any high family in the land. Mr. Oliver spoke of Mrj
Kivers — of tlie Rivers family — with great respect. He
said it was a very old name in that neignborhood; that the
ancestors of the house were wealthy; that all Morton had
once belonged lo them; that even now he considered the
representative of that house might, if he liked, make an
alliance with the best. He accounted it a pity that so fine
and talented a young man should have formed the design
of going out aa a missionary; it was quite throwing a val-
uable life away. It appeared, then, that her father would
throw no obstacle in the way of Rosamond's union with
St. John. Mr. Oliver evidently regarded the young clergy-
man's good birth, old name, and sabred profession, as suffi-
cient compensation for the want of fortune.
It was the 5th of November, and a holiday. My little
servant, after helping me to clean my house, was gone,
well satisfied with the fee of a penny for her aid. All
about me was spotless and bright— scoured floor, polished
grate, and well-rubbed chairs. I had also made myself
neat, and had now the afternoon before me to spend as I
would. I
]

■ " ^T "
The traaalation of a few pttgea of German occupied I
hour; then I got my palette and pencOs, and folT to t'
more soothing, becanae easier oocopation, of ooraplettl
K4;»amond Oliver's miniature. The head was finished i
ready: tliere was but the bactgrouiid to tint, and i'
drapery to shade off; a touch of carmine, too, to add tott _
ripe lips — a soft curl hero and there to the tresses— »
deeper tinge to the shadow of the lash under the aztired
eyelid. I waa uhaorheA in the execution of these nice de-
taila, when after one rapid tap, my door nncloaed, adtnJt-^
ting St. John Rivers. ,
" I am come to see how yon are spending your h«
day, " ho said. " Not, I hope, in thought? No, thw*.
well: while you draw you will not feel lonely. You see-, -1
mistrust vou still, though you have borne up wonderfully
so far. t have brought you a book for evening solace, "
and he laid on the table a new publication — a poem: one of
those genuine productioua so often vouchsafed to "'
fortunate public of those days — the golden age of rood
literature-, Alas! the readers of our era are lesafavoi
But, couragel I will not pause either to accuse or repi
I know poetry is not doud, nor genius lost; nor has sLi
mon gained power over cither, to bind or slay: they ll
both assert their existence, their presence, their libf'
and strength again one day. Powerful angels, aaft
heaven! they smile when sordid souls triumph, and feeble
ones weep over tiieir destruction. Poetry destroyed?
Genius banished? No! Mediocrity, no: do not let envy
jirompt you to the thought. No; they not only live, i'
reign, aiid redeem: and without their divins influn
flpi-ead everywhere, you would be in hell — the hell of j
own meanness.
While I was eagerly glancing at the bright pagea 3^
Marinion (for Marmion it was), St. John stooped to ex-
amine my drawing. His tall figure sprang erect again
with a start: he said nothing. I looked up at him; he
shunned my eye. I knew his thoughts well, and could
read his heart plainly; at the moment I felt calmer and
cooler than he: I had then temporarily the advantage of
him; and I conceived an inclination to do him some good,
it I could,
" With al! his firnmeaa and self-control, thought Ij
" he ta«ka himself too far: locks every feeling and pang
within — expresses, confesses: imparts nothing. 1 am awM

JANE EYEE.
it would benefit him to talk a little about this sweet Be
moud, whom he thinks he ought not to marry: I will mal
him talk. "
I said, first. " Take a chair, Mr, Rivera. " But he an-
swered, as he always did, that he could not stay, " Very
well, " I responded, mentally, " stand if yon like ; but you
fihull not go just yet, I am determined ; solitude is at least
us bad for yon as it is for me. I'll try if I cannot discovur
the secret spriag of your confidence, and find an aperture
in that marble breast through which I can shed one drop
of the balm of sympathy. "
" la this portrait like ? " I asked, bluntly,
" Like 1 Like whom ? I did not observe it closely. "
" You did, Mr, Rivers. "
He almost started at my sudden and strange abrnpt-
neas ; he looked at me astonished. " Oh, that is nothing
yet, " I muttered within. " I don't mean to be baffled by
a little stiffness on your part ; I'm prepared to go to coa-
siderable lengths. " I continued, " You observed it clo5€'
and distiiictly : but I have no objection to your looking
it again, " and I rose and placed it in his hand.
" A weli-executed picture, " h« said; very soft, cli
coloring ; very graceful and correct drawing. "
" Yes, yes; I know all that. But what of the reseajl
blanoo ? Who is it like ? "
Mastering some hesitation, he answered, " Miss Olive
I presume. "
" Of coiirse. And now, sir, to reward you for the ; f-
curate guess, I will promise to paint you a careful 7 id
faithful duplicate of this very picture, provided you ad iiit
tliat the gift would be acceptable to you. I don't wif i to
throw awav my time and trouble on an offering you w lUld
deem wortliloss, "
He continued to gaze at the picture: the long
looked, the firmer he held it, the moro he seemed to jovi.
it. " It is like I " he murmured: " the eye is wel, m»tt^
aged : the color, light, expression, are perfect. It smiles. "
■'Would it domfort, or would it wound you to have a
similar painting? Tell me tliat. When you are at Mada-
gascar, or at the Cape, or in India, would it be a console
tion to have that memento in your possession ? or wonir
the slight of it bring recollections calculated to enervftf
nnddifltiess^'"
3
S8 JANB EYHl!.
He now (urtivoly raised his eyes; lie glancttdnt i
irreaolute, iliatiirbed ; he again snrvcycd tlie picture.
'■■ Tliiit I should like to liavc it, is isertuin ; whether
would be judicious or wise is another question. "
Since I had ascertained that Rosamond really prefer
him, and that her father was not likely to ojiposa
matcli, I— less exalted in my views than St. Jonn—
been strotiyly disposed in my own heart to advocate their
ion. It seemed to me that, should he become the pos-
sor of 3Ir. Oliver's large fortune, ho might do as much
good with it as if he went and laid hisgeuiua out to witbGI
and his strength to waste, under a tropical sun.
this persuasion I now answered ; " As far as I can see, 1
would be wiser and more judicious if yon were to taktf^
yourself the original at once, "
By this time he had sat down : he had laid thepiot^,
on the table before him, and with his brow supported'^
both hands, hung fondly over it. I discerned he was act
neither angry nor shotiked at. my audacity. I saw even
that to he thus frankly addressed on a subject he had
deemed unapproacliahle — to hear it thus freely handled —
was beginning to ho felt hy him as a now pleasure — an n
hoped-for relief. Reserved people often really QSfA^
frank discussion of theii'sentmieuts and griefs more tl
the expansive. The sternest seeming stolo is human, aj
all; and to " burst " with boldness and good-will, i.
" the silent sea " of iheir souls, is often to confer on th|
the first obligations.
" She likes you, I am sure, " said I, as I stood 1
his chair, " and her father respects you. Moreover, a
a swtet girl — rather thoughtless ; but you would hare
fioient thought for both yourself and ner. You o
marry her. "
" Poes she like me ? " he asked.
" Certainly: belter than she likes any one else.
talks of you continually : thei-e is no subject she enjoj]
mach, or touches upon so often. "
" It is very pleasant to hear this, " he said — " very : ^
on for another quarter of au hour. " And he actually took
out his watch and laid it upon the table to measure fe "
time,
" But where is the use of going on,'* I aeked,
you are probably preparing some iron blow of contrj
tiou, or forging a frcfih ciiain to fetter your heart?
JANE BYKE,
" Don't imagine such bard things. Fancy me yielding'J
and melting, as I am doing ; human love rising like a "
f reBlil;^^ opened fountain in my mind and overflowing with
Bweet inundation all the field I have so carefully, ana with
Bueh labor prepared — so assiduously sown with the seeda
of good intentions, of self-denying plans. And now it is
deluged with a neetai-ioua flood^the yoong germs swamped
— delicious poison cankering them : now I see myself
stretched on an ottoman in the drawing-room at A''ale Hall,
at my bride Rosamond Oliver's feet: sho is talking to me
with her sweet voice — gazing down on me with those eyes
your skillful hand has copied so well — smiling at mo with
those coral lips. She is mine — I am hers — this present life
and passing world suEQce to me. Hush! aay uothiug— my
heart is full of dcliglit — ray senses are entranced — let the
time I marked puss m peace. "
I humored bim: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast
and low: I stood silent. Amidst this bush the quarter
sped; he replaced tlie watch, laid the picture down, rose,
and stood on the hearth.
" Now, " eaid he. " that little space was given to deliri-
um and delusion. I rested my temples on the breast of
temptation, and put my neck voluntarily under her y^oke
of flowers ; I tasted ber cup. The pillow was burning;
there is an asp in the garland; the wine has a bitter taste; .
her promises are hollow — her offers false; I see and known. J
all this. "
I gazed at him in wonder.
" It is strange, " pui
mond Oliver so wildly — with all the intensity, indeed, of a
t is strange, " pursued he, " that while I love Rosa-''
first passion, the object of which is exquisitely beautiful,
graoefui, and fascinating— I experience at the same time a
calm, unwarped consciousness, that she would not make
me a good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me;
that I should discover this within a year after marriage;
and tliat to twelve months'rapture wonld succeed a life-
time of regret. This I know. "
" Strange, indeed! " I could not help ejaculating.
" While something in me, " he went on, " is acutely
senBible to her clmrms, something else is as deeply im-
pressed with her defects; tbey are such that she could
sympathize in nothing I aspired to — co-operative in noth-
ing I undertook. Rosamond a sufferer, a laborer, a femals
u^ostle? Rosamond a missionary's wife? No! " ^M
^:^
390
JANR ETBE.
" But you need not be ft miasionary. Yon might re-
linqnisli that scheme. "
" Eelinqiiish ! What! my vocation ? My great \
My foundation laid on earth for a mansion in heavei
My hopea of being numbered in the band who have in
all ambitions in the glorions one of bettering their i
of carrying knowledge into the realms of ignoi-ance-
Bubatitnting peace for war — freedom for bondage — I'eligioa
for BUpei-stition — the hope of heaven for tlie fear of hell?
Must I relinqiiifib that? It is dearer than the blood i n
my veins. It is what 1 have to look forward to, and 1
live for. "
After a considerable pause, I said, " And Mies Olivf.
Are her disappointment aud sorrow of no interest i
yon? " J
" MisB Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors aad Sm
terers; in less than a montli my image will be effad
from her heart. She will forget me ; and will mw'
probably, some one who will make her far happier thi
should do. "
" You speak cooly enough; but you suffer in the e
flict. You are wasting away. "
" !No; if I get a little thin, it is with anxiety abonta
prospects, yet uusettled^niy departure, continually p
crastinated. Only this morning I received inteligence i!
the Buccesaor, whose arrival I have been so long eject-
ing, cannot be ready to replace me for three months to
come yet; and perhaps the tln-fie mouths may extend to
" You tremble and become flushed whenever Miss Olij
enfcers tlie school room. "
Again the surprised expression crossed his face.
bad not imagined tliat a woman would dare to speak 80'B_
a man. For me, I felt at home in this sort of discourse.
I could never rest in communication with strong, discreet,
and refined minds, whether male or female, till I had
Biassed the outworks of conventional reserve, and c
he threshold of confidence, and won a place by ttri
heart's very hearth-atone. -
" You are original, " said he, " and not timid. Tlfl
is something brave in yonr spirit, as well as penetra
in your eye; but allow me to assure you that you partis!
misinterpret my emotions. You tnink them more'
id and potent than they are. You give me » L
JANB EYRE. 3ftt1
allowance of sympathy than I have a just claim to. " WTieD
I color, and when I shake before Mias Oliver, I do not pity
mysBl!. I scorn the weakness. I know it is ignoble: u
mere fever of the flesh : not, I declare, a convulsion of the
soul. Tht > ( is just as fixed as n rock, firm sot in the depths
of a restlese seii. Know me to bo what I am — a cold, hard
man. "
I smiled iuci'cdulonaly.
" Yon have taken m^ confidence by storm, " he goIB
tinued; " and now it is much at your service. I ttd
simply, in my original state — strippod of that bloot
bleached robe with which Christianity covers human di^
formity — a cold, hard, ambitious man. Natural afFectitn
only, of all the sentiments, liaa permanent power over ma*
Reaaon, and not Feeling, ia my guide: my ambition is
unlimited ; my desire to rise higher, to do more than
others, insatiable. I honor endurance, perseverance, in-
dustry, talent ; because these are the means by which men
achieve great ends, and mount to lofty eminence. I watoh
your career with interest, beoanse I consider yon a epeoi-
nien of a diligent, orderly, energetic woman ; not because
I deeply compassionate what yon have gone through, (
what you still sutler, "
" Yon would describe yourself as a mere pagan phil
plicr, " I said,
" No. There is this difference between me and deistic
philosophers: I believe: and I believe tlie Gospel. You
misBed your epithet. I am not a pagan, but a Christian
philosopher— a follower of the sect of Jesus, As his di^ ■
ciple r adopt his pure, his merciful, his benignant doc
trinea. I advocate them : I am sworn to spread thens
Won in youth to religion, she has cultivated my originaj "
C|ualitios thus ; — From the minute germ, natural affection,
she has developed the overshadowing tree, philanthropy.
From the wild stringy root of human uprightness, she lias
reared a due sense of the Divine justice. Of the am-
bition to win power and renown for my wretched self, sh^
has formed the ambition to spread my Master's kingdoni]
to achieve victories for the standard of the cross. "
much has religion done for me ; turning the original
terials to the best account ; pi-nning and training natui
But she could not eradicate nature: nor will it be "
till this mortal shall put on immortality.'"
ing said this, he took his hat, which lay on tl
392 JAKE EYRE.
table beside the palette. Once more he looked at the
portrait.
" She is lovely/^ he murmured. " She is well named^
the Rose of the World, indeed I ^'
" And may I not paint one like it for you ?'^
''Cuihonof No.^'
He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on
which I was accustomed to rest my hand in painting, to
prevent the card-board from being sullied. What he
suddenly saw on this blank paper: it was impossible for
me to tell : but something had caught his ey«. He took
it up with a snatch ; he looked at the edge ; then shot a
glance at me, inexpressibly peculiar, and quite incom-
prehensible : a glance that seemed to take and make note
of every point in my shape, face, and dress ; for it trav-
ersed all, quick, keen as lightning. His lips parted, as if
to speak : but he checked the coming sentence, whatever
it was.
" What is the matter ?^^ I asked.
" Nothing in the world,^'was the reply; and, replacing
the paper, I saw him dexterously tear a narrow slip from
the margin. It disappeared in his glove ; and, with one
hasty nod and " good-afternoon, " he vanished.
" Well !''I exclaimed, using an expression of the dis-
trict ; " that caps the globe, however ! "
I, in my turn, scrutinized the paper ; but saw nothing
on it save a few dingy stains of paint, where I had tried
the tint in my pencil. I pondered the mystery a minute
or two ; but finding it insolvable, and being certain it
could not be of much moment, I dismissed and soon for-
got it.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
When " Mr. St. John went, it was beginning to snow;
the whirling storm continued all night. The next day a
keen wind brought fresh and blinding falls ; by twilight
the valley was drifted up and almost impassable. I had
closed my shutter, laid a mat to the door to prevent the
JANE EYEE.
snow from blowing in under it, trimmed my fire and after
sitting nearly an lionr on the hearth listening to the muf-
fled fury of the leinpest, I lit a candle, took down Mar- ,
mion and beginning —
" Day sat on Norham's castled alfiep
And Tweed's fair river broad and deep,
Aod Cheviot mounuijns lone;
The massive towers the donjon keep,
The Qauking walla that round them sweep.
In jellow luster shone. "
I soon forgot storm in music,
I heara a noiae: the wind, I thought, shook the door.
No; it was St. John Rivera, who, lifting tlie latch, came
in out of the frozen hurricane — the howling darknesa-^
and stood before me; the cloak that covered his tall figure
all white as a glacier. I was almost in conetornatioa; so
little had 1 expected any guest from the btooked-up vale
that night.
" Any ill newa? " I demanded. " Has anything hap-
pened ?'
*■ No. How very easily alarmed you are! " ha answered,
renloving his cloak and hanging it up against the door,
toward which he again cooly pushed the mat whi(.'h his
entrance had deranged. He stamped the snow from his
boots.
" I shall sully the purity of your floor, " said he, " hut
you must excuse me for once. " Then be approached the
fire: " I have had hard work to get here, I assure jou, "
he observed, as he warmed his hands over the flame.
" One drift took me up to the waist; happily the snow ia
quite soft yet. "
" But why are you come? " I could not forbear aaying.
" Rather an inhospitable question to put to u visitor;
but since you ask it, I answer simply to have a little talk
with you; I got tired of my mute hooka and empty rooma.
Besides, since yesterday I have experienced the excitement
of a person to whom a tale has been half told, and who is
ansioMS to hear the sequel. "
He sat down. I recalled his eingiilar conduct of yes-
terday, and really I began to fear his wits were touched.
If he were insane, however, his was a very cool and col-
lected insanity: I had never seen that handsome-featured
face of his look more like chiseled marble than it did just
now, as he put aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead
■ let the fire-light shine free on his pale brow aad''"


3H
JASE EVUE.
aa pale, where it grieved me to discover the hollow i.
of cure or aorrow now so plainly graved. I waited, exptw
ing he would say eomethmg I could at IcMt compreheiiL,—
but liis hand was now at his chin, hia finger ou his lip; he
was thinking. It struck me that liis hand looked wasted
like Hia face. A perhaps uncalled-for gush of pitj came
over my heart: I was moved to say, " I wish Dwoa Qi "
Mary would come and live with you : it is too bad that yoi
should be quito alone; and you are recklessly raah aw
your own health,'"
" Not at all.-''fiaid he: " I care for myself when neceft^
sary; I am well now. What do you act) amiss in me? "
. This was aaid with a careless, abstracted iudifference,
which showed that my solicitude was. at least ill his opin-
ion, wholly euperfluoHS. I was silenced.
He still slowly moved his finger over his upper lip,
and still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate.
Thinking it urgent to say something, I asked hmi j
ently if he felt any cold draft from the door,. ■
behind liim.
" No, no; " he responded, shortly and somewhat teat
" Well, " I reflected, " if yon won't talk, you ma^
still; ni lot you alone now, and return to my book. "
So I snuned the caudle, and resumed the pei*usiilj|
Mai'miou. He soon stirred; my eye was instantly drfl'
to hia movements; he only took out a morocco \ "
book, thence produced a letter, which he i-oa^l in e
folded it, put it back, relapsed into moJitation.
Ttiin lo tiy to read with such an inscrutable fi-tture t
me; nor could I, in my impatience, consent to be d^j
ho might rebuff me it he liked, but talk 1 would.
" HftVB^ou heard from Diana and Mary lately? "
" Not since tho letter I showed you a week ago. "
" There has not been any change made about your a
arrangements i* You will not be summoned to leave T
land sooner than you expected? "
" I feiir not, indeed: such chance is too good to I
me. " Baffled, so far I changed my ground — 11 "
myself to talk about the school and my scholars,
'■Mary Garrett's mother is bettei " , and Mary came I
to the school this morning, and I shall have four n
next week fi'om the Foundry close — they would ha
to-day but for the snow. "
JANK EYJtK.
" Mr, Oliver pays for two. "
" Does he ? "
" He nieaua to give the whole school a treat at Chrid
mas. "
" I know. "
" Was it jour suggestion ? "
" No. "
" Wliose then ? "
" His daughter's, I think. "
" It is like her : she is so good-natured. "
" Yes. "
Again came the blank of a pause : the clock atrni
eight strokes. It aroused him ; he uncrossed his legs,
erect, turned to me.
" Leave your book a moment, and come a little neai
the fire, " he said.
Wondering, and of my wonder finding no end, I col
plied.
^'Ilalf an hour ago, " he pursued, " I spoke of my im-
patience to hear the sequel of a tale : on refiection. I find
the matter will be better managed by my asBuming the
iiarnitor's part, and converting you into a listener. Before
commencing, it is but fair to warn you that the story will
eound somewhat hackneyed in your ears : but stale details
often regain a degree of freshness when tliey pass
through new lips, For the rest, whether trite or novel, it
is short.
" Twenty years ago, a poor curate — never mind hia
name at this moment — fell in love with a rich mao^
daughter; she fell in love with him, and married hii
against the advice of all her friends; who consequea)
disowned her immediately after the wedding. Before "
years passed, the rash pair were both dead, and
cjiiictly side by side under one slab. {I have seen
grave ; it formed part of the pavement of a huge chnrt
yard surrounding the gi'im, soot-black old cathedral of
overgrown manufacturing town in shire. They lei
duiightw, whioii, at its very birth, Charity received in her
lap— ^;olll as that of the snow-drift I almost stuck fast in
to-night. Charity carried the friendless thing to the
house of its ricli maternal relations ; it was reared by an
uunt-in-law, culled (I come to names now) Mrs. Reed of
Grateshoad— yon start — did you hear a noise? I dare say
it is only a rat scrambling along the rafters of the adjoi "
hia ^^
lao^^^H
3d(!
.UNE ETHE,
ing flchool-i'oom : it was a barn before I had it repsii^
and altered, and bams are generaUy haunted by rate, — 1-^
proceed. Mrs, Reed kept the orphan ten years: whethei^
it wiia liappy or not with hor, I cannot say, never having
been told ; but at the cud of that time she transferred it to
a phice you know — bciing no other than Lowood School,
where yon so lont; resided yourself. It seems her career'
there was very honorable ; from a pupil she becami^
toachtfr, like yourself — really it strikes me there are jiai
lei points ill her history and yam's — sheleftit tobeagovei
ness : there, again, your fates were analogous; she un < $
took the cdncation of the ward of a certain gentleiaaiu
Mr, Rochester,
" Mr. Rivers ! " I interrupted,
" I can guess your feelings, " he said, " but reetni
them for a while : I have nearly finished ; liear me to i
end. Of Mr. Rochester's character I know nothing \
the one fact that he professed to offer honorable marrii
to this young girl, and at the very altar she discovered 3
had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic. What his snV
quent conduct and proposals were is a matter of pure 04
lecture ; but when an event transpired which rend^
inquiry after the governess necessary, it was discovE^
she was gone — no one could tell when, where, or how. 1
had left Thornfield Hiili in the night ; every research s
her course had t > een vain: the country had beenscou!-^
far and wide : no vestige of information could be gathered'
respecting her. Yet tliat she could be found is become
a matter of serious urgency : advertisementB have been put
in all the papers ; I myself have receive'
Mr. Briggs, a solicitor, communicating
just imparted. Is it not an odd talo ?
" Just tell me this, " said I, " and
lii know etft
tell it me— what of Mr. Rooi
s he ? What is he doing ? Is.9
much, you surely --.
ter ? How and where
well? "
" lam ignorant of all concerning Mr. Rochester.
latter never mentions him but to narrate the fraudulent
and illegal attempt I have averted to. You should rather
ask the name of the governess — the nature of the eveat
which requires her appearance, "
" Did no one go to Thornfield Hall, then? Did
one see Mr. Rochester?'''
'•I suppose not. " ■
JANE nviir.
L tfaill:
■ terk
■ in p
" Btlt tTiey wrote f.u hiin? "
" Of course. "
" And what did he say? Who has his IcttersP
'• Mr. Briggs intimatea that the answer to his appli
tioii WI18 not from Mr. Rochester, but from a lady: it is "
signed'Alice Fairfax.'"
I felt cold and dismayed: my worst fears then were
probably true: he had in all probability left England, and
rushed, in recklesa rieaneration, to some former hannt on
the Continent. And what opiate for hie severe suffering —
what object for his strong passions — had he sought there?
I dared not answer the qnestion. Oh, my poor master —
once almost my husband — whom I had often called " my
dear Edward!
" He must have been a bad man, " observed Mr. Rivera.
" You don't know him — don't pronounce an opinion
upon him, " I said, with warmth.
" Very well, " he answered, quietly: " and indeed ray
head is otherwise occupied than with him: I have my tale
to finish. Since you won't ask tlie governess's name, I
must tell it of my own accord — stay — I have it here — it is
always more satisfactory to see important points written
down, fairly committed to black and white. "
And the pocket-book waa again deliberately produced,
opened, sought through; from one of its compartments
was extracted a shabby slip of paper, hastily torn off: I
recognized in its texture and its stains of ultiamarino, and
lake, and vermilion, the ravished margin of the portrait-
cover. He got up, held it close to my eyes: and I read,
traced in Indian ink, in my own handwriting, the words
" Jane Eyre " — the work doubtless of some moment of
abstraction.
" Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre, " he said; " the
advertisements demanded a Jane Eyre: I knew a Jane
Elliott. — I confess I had my suspicions, but it was only
yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into cer-
tainty. You own the name and renounce the alias? "
" Yes — yes; hut where is Mr. Briggs? He perhaps
knows more of Mr, Rochester than you do. "
" Briggs is in London; I should doubt his knowing any
thing at all about Mr. Rochester; it is not in Mr, Roches-
ter ho is interested. Meantime, you forget essential points
in pursuing trifles: you do. not inquire why Mr. BriAKa
• sought after yon — what he wanted with you. *
I
" Well, what did he want? "
" Merely to tell yoii that your tincle, Mr, Eyre of ]
deira, ia dead; that ho has left you all his property,
that you are now rich — merely that — nothing more.
" II rich? "
" Yes, you, rich — quite an heireea. "
8ilenco succeeded.
" You must prove your identity, of course, " resui
St. John, presently; " a step which will offer no difficul-
tiee; you can then enter on immediate posscBeion. Yonr
fortune ia yeated in the English funds; Brigga has the
will, and the necessary documents. "
Here was a new card turned up! It is a fine thine
reader, to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealtl
— a very fine thing: but not a matter one cao comprehenr
or consequently enjoy, all at once. And then there
other chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-givii
thia is solid, an affair of the actual world, nothing idi
about it: all its asBOciations are solid and sober, and
manifestations are the same. One does not jump, and
spring, and shout hurra! at hearing one has got a fortune;
one begins to consider responsibilities, and to ponder bus-
iness; on ft base of steady satisfaction rise certain grave
cares, and we contain ourselves, and brood over our bliss
with a solemn brow.
Besides, the words Legacy, Begneat, go side bi
with the words Death, Funeral. My uncle, I had 1
was dead — my only relative; evei'since being made awi
of his existence, I nad cherished the hope of one day st
ing him: now, I never should. And then this mon
came only to me: not to me and a rejoicing family, b«t
my isolated self. It was a grand boon, doubtless; and i
dependence would be glorious— yes, I felt that — ifn
tliought swelled my heart.
" You unbend your forehead at last. " said Mr. Eiveri
" I thought Medusa had looked at you, and that you we«
turning to stone — perhaps now you will ask how mu(^
you are worth ? "
" How much am I worth? "
" Oh, a trifle! Nothing, of course, to speak of — ^twenfl
thousand pounds, I think they say; but what is that? "
" Twenty thousand pounds! "
Hero was a new stunner — I had been calculating on
~ or five thousand. This news actually took my breatb
ilth ^
m
JANE ETRE.
H
irder, ,^
lor a moment: Mr. St. John, whom I had never lieM-d'
laugh before, laughed now.
" Well, " said he, " if yon had committed a murder,
and I had told you jonr crime was discovered, you cou]''
scarcely loolf more aghast. " J
" It is a large sum — don't you thinit there is a mistak^
" No mistake at all. "
''Perhaps you have read the figures wrong — it mayfl
a,000! " _
" It is written in letters, not figures — twenty thousand. "
I again felt rather lllte an individnal of but average
gastronomical powers, sittiug down to feaat alone at a tame
Bpi-ead with provisions for a hundred. Mr. Rivers rose
now and put his cloak on.
" If it were not such a very wild night, " said he, " 1
would send Hannah down to keep you company: you look
too desperately miserable to be left alone. But Ilannah,
poor woman! could not stride the drifts as well as It her
legs are not quite so long: so I must e'en leave you to your
sorrows. Good-night. "
He was lifting the latch: a sudden thought occurred to
me.
" Stop one miuutel " I cried.
" Wefi? "
" It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you
about me; or how he knew you, or could fancy that you,
living iu such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to
aid in mv discovery. "
" Oh! I am a clergyman, " he said; " and the clergy
are often appealed to about odd matters. "
Again the latch rattled.
" No: that Goes not satisfy me! " I exclaimed: and, in-
deed, there was something in the hasty and unexplauatory
reply, which, instead of allajing, piqued my curiosity more
than ever,
" It is a very strange piece of business, " I added. " I
must know more about it, "
" Another time. "
" No: to-night! — to-night! " and aa he turned from the
door, 1 placed myself between it and him. He looked
rather embarrassed.
" You certainly shall not go till you have told n
" I would rather not, juat now, "'
400
JANK EYBE.

" YoQ flhalll — yoti mustl "
" I would nitncr Diana or Mary informed you. "
Of course those objections wrought my eagerueBs to a
oUmax. gratified it must be, and that without delay; and,—
1 told him 80,
" But I apprised you that I was a hard man, " eaid !
" ditEeult to persuade, "
" And 1 am a hard woman — ^imiwsBible to put off. "
" And then, " he pursued, " I am cold: uo fervor in-
fects me. "
" Whereas I am hot, and fire dissolves ice. The blasB
there haa thawed all the snow from your cloak; by 6
same token, it has streamed on to my floor, and maddj
like a trampled sti'eet. As you hofje ever to be forgi^
Mr. Rivera, the high crime and miedemeauor of spoilf
a Banded kitchen, tell me what 1 wish to know. " ]
" Well, then,''he said, " 1 jield; if not to your earni
ness, to your perse venince: as stone is worn by contiio
dropping. Besides, you must know some day — as wellf
a£ later. Your name is Jane Eyre? "
" 0( course, that was alt settled before. " .
" You are not, perhaps, aware that I am your i
sake? — that I was christened St. John Eyre Rivers? "
" No, indeed! I remember now seeing the lette^
eompriGed in your initials written in boots you havflj
different times lent me; but I never asked for what n^
jt stood. But what then? Surely "
I stopped: I could not trust myself to entertain, mfl
less to express, t!ie tliought that rushed upon me — u
embodied itself^that in a second, stood out a etrd
solid probability. Circumstances knit themselves, fin
themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been Ig
hitherto a formless lump of links, was drawn out strai
— every ring was perfect, the connection complete!!
knew, by instiuct, how the matter stood, before St. jfl
had suid another word: but I cannot expect the reader*
have the same intuitive perception, bo I must repeat f
explanation.
" My mother's name was Eyre; she had two brothers;
one a clergyman, who married Miss Jane Reed, of Gates-
head; the other, John Eyre, Esq., merchant, late of Fun-
chal, Madiera, Mr. Briggs, being Mr. Eyre's solicitor,
wrote to us last August to inform us of our uncle's death;
_and *o sa^ that he had left his property to his brother tfee
olergyman'B orphan daughter ; overlooking us, in oonse-
gnence of a quarrel, never forgiven, between him and my
father. Ho wrote again a few weeks since, to intimate
^hat the heiress was lost : and asking if we knew anythingjj
j! her. A name casually written on a slip of paper has ei^fl
abled mcto find her out.'Yon know the rest. " Again tuSm
was going, but I set my back against the door.
" Do let nie speak, I said ; " let me have one moment
to draw breath and reflect. "'I paused — he stood before
me, hat in hand, looking composed enough. I resumed:
" Your mother was my fathei^s sister ? " .. -,
" Yea. " J
" My aunt, consequently. " I
" He bowed. H
" My uncle John was jonr nncle John ? You, Diana,
and Mary, ai'C his sister's children ; as I am hia brother's
child? "
" Undeniably. "
" Tou three, then, are my cousins ; half our blood oi^J
each side fiowa from the same source ? " ■
We are cousina ; yes. " M
I surveyed him. It seemed I had found a brother : one'*
I could be proud of, one I could love ; and two sistera,
whose qualities were such, that, when I knew them but as
mere strangers, they had inspired me with genuine affec-
tion and admiration. The two girls, on whom, kneeling
down on the wet gi'ound, and looking through the low,
latticed window of Moor House kitchen, I had gazed with
ao bitter a mixture of interest and despair, were my near
kinswomen ; and the young and stately gentleman who had
found me almost dying at his threshold was my blood relj
tion. Glorious discovery to a lonely wretch f This wi
ivealth indeed ! — wealth to the heart ! — a mine of pure,-'
genial affection. This was a blessing, bright, vivid, and
Exhilarating; — not like the ponderous gift of gold, rich
and welcome enough in its way, but sobering from its
weight. I now clapped m^ hands in sudden joy — my
pulse bounded, my veins thrilled.
" Oh, I am i^lad !— I am glad ! " I exclaimed.
St. John smiled.'■Did I not say you neglected essen-
tial points to pursue trifles? " he asked. ■'You were
serious when I told you you had goi a fortune ; and now,
for a matter of no moment, you are excited. "
" What can you mean ? It may be of no moment to
ear
rSf^H
40a JANE EYBE.
yon ; you have Bieters, and don't care for a cousin : but I
Mftd nobody ; and now tliroe relations — or two, if you don't
choose to he counted — are born into my world full growu.
I say again, I am glad 1 "
i walked fast through the room ; I Btopped, half sttL
cated with the thought that rose faster than I couldJa
ceive, comprehend, nettle them : — thoughts of what niiffl^
couldj-would, and should be, and that ere long, I looki
at the blank wall : it seemed a sky, thiek with ascending
stars, every one lit me to a purpose or delight. Those who
had saved my life, whom, till this hour, I had loied I
i-enly, 1 could now benefit. They were under a yoka-
oould fret! them ; they were ecattered — I could re —'
them ; the independence, the affluence which waa i
might be theirs too. Were we not four!* Twenty t
sand pounds shared equally, would he five thousand each,
enough and to spare T justice would be done, mutual hap-
piness secured. Now the wealth did not weigh on mer
now it was not a mere bequest of coin, it was a legs
life, hope, enjoyment.
How I looked while these ideas were takingmys]
Btorni, I can not tell; but I perceived soon thi.. .
Rivera ha < .l placed a chair behind me, and was gentlvrj
tempting to make me sit down on it. Ho also advisee
to be composed ; I scorned the insinuation of hslplefi
and distraction, shook oS his hand, and began to \
about again.
" Write to Diana and Mary to-morrow, " I said, " and
tell them to come home directly ; Diana said they would
both consider themselves rich with a thousand pounds ; so
with five thousand they will do very well.^'
" Tell me where I can get you a glass of water, " said
St. John ; you must really make an effort to tranquilize
your feelings. "
" Nonsense 1 and what sort of an effect will the bequest
have on you ? Will it keep you in England, induce you to
marry Miss Oliver, and settle down like an ordiasil
mortal ? "
'• You wander ; your head becomes confused. I 1
been too abrupt in communicating the news ; it I
cited you beyond your strength. "
" Mr. Rivera ! you quite put me out of patience ;
rational enough ; it is you who misunderstand — or ti
who affect to misunderstand. "

JANE EVRE.
" Perhaps if vou explained yourself a little more fuUyJ
I shonlil compraneiicl better. " f
" Explain I ^VTiat is there to explain? You can not faili
ie tliat twenty thousand poimde, the enm in qaestion^B
divided equally between the nephew and three nieces of ouE«
uncle, will give five thousand to each? What I vfaiit is,.l
that you should write to your sisters and tell them of tiiw
fortune that has accrued to them. "
To you, you mean. "
" I have intimated my view of the case: I am incapablrf*
of taking any other. I am not brutally selfish, blindly "
nnjUEt, or fiendishly nngratoful. Besides, I am resolved
I will have a home and connections. I like Moor House,
and T will li^-e at Moor Honse; I like Diana and Mary, and
I will attach myself for life to Diana and Mary. It would
please and benefit me to have five thousand pounds; it
would torment and oppress me to have twenty thousand;
which, moreover, could never be mine in justice, though
it might in law. I abandon to you, then, what ia abso-J
lately superfiuous to me. Let there bo no opposition, anSfl
no discussion about it; let us agree among each other, ancffl
decide the point at once. " M
" This is acting on first implses: yon must take daytfl
to conaider such a matter, ere your word can be regardeSB
valid. " ■
" Ohl if all you donbt is my sincerity, I am easy: yoiM
see the justice of the case ? " ■
" I do see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all cnsM
torn. Besides, the entire fortune ia your right: my nnclH
gained it by its own efforts; he was free to leave it ta
" ffhom he would: he left it to you. After all, justice perfl
mits you to keep it: you may, with a clear conBcienoeJ
flonaider it absolutely your own. " ■
With me, " said I, " it is fully as mnch a matter am
feeling as of conscience: I muat indulge my feeling; X s^
seldom have an opportunity of doing so. Were you tfl
argae, object, and annoy me for a year, 1 could not foregOT
the delicious pleasure of which I have eaught a glimpse-J
thttt of repaying, in part, a mighty obligation, and winrfl
iiing to myself life-long friends.'I
" You think so now, " rejoined St. John; " because yoim
do not know what it is to possess, nor consequently to vaM
y wealth: you can not form a notion of the importanoj
fenty thoueand ponnds wo^ld , gi'^B yon! ol titt J^SfS^M
JASE EVItE.
would enable yoa to take in Bociety; of the progpecta it
wouM open to you: you can not''
'■ And you/'I interrupted, " can not at all imagine the
craving I have for fraternal and sisterly love, J never
had a home, I never hud brothers or sisters; I must and
will have them now: you are not reluctant to admit me
»nd own me, are yon?'
" Jane: I will " he yonr brother — my aisters will be your
Ksters — without stipulating for this SBcriflce of your jnst
rights. "
" Brother? Yea; at the distance of a thousand leagaes!
BisterB? Yes; slaving amongst strangers! I wealthy —
^rged with gold I never earned and do not merit! You,
pennilese! I'amoua equality and fraternization! Close
union! Intimate attachment! "
" But Jane, your aspiration after family ties and do-
me§tic happiness may oe realized otherwise than by the
means you contemplate: you may marry. "
" Nonsenae again! Marry! Idon't want to marry, and
never shall marry. "
" That is saying too muoh: such hazardous affirma-
tions are a proof of the excitement under which you
labor. "
" It is not saying too much: I know what I feel, and
how averse are my inclinations to the hare thought of
marriage. No one would take me for love; and I will not
be regarded iu tho light of a mere money-apecnlation.
And I do not want a stranger — unsympathizing alien,
different from me; I want my kindred: those with whom
I have full fellow-feeling. Say again you will bo my
brother: when you uttered the words " I was aatisfied,
iiappv; repeat them, if you can repeat them sincerely. "
'■I think I can. I know I have always loved my own
(sters; and I know on what my affection for them is
rrounded — respect for their worth, and admiration of
wieir talents; You too have principle and mind: your
testes and habits resemble Diana's and Mary's; your pres-
(nce ia alwaj-a agreeable to me; in your conversation I
iave already for some time found a salutary solace. I
feel I can easily and naturally make room in my heart for
you, as my third and youngest sister. "
" Tliauk you: that contents me for to-night,
you had better go; for if you stay longer, you will per
irritate me afrewi by some mistrustful scmple. " "''^^

" And the school. Miss Eyre? It most now be shut np,
I suppose. "
" No, I will retain my post of miatress till yon get a
subBtitute. " ^
He smiled approbation: we shook hands and he toe
leave.
I need not narrate in detail the further atm^les 3
had, and arguments I used, to get matters regarding the
legacy settled as I wished. My task was a yery hard one:
but, as I was absolutely resolved — as my cousins saw at
length that my mind was really and immutably fixed on
making a just division of the property — aa they must in
their own hearts have felt the equity of the intention;
and must, besides, have been innately conscious that in
my place they would have done precisely what I wished to
do — they yielded at length so far as to consent to put the
affair to arbitration. The judges chosen were Mr. Oliver
and an able lawyer: both coincided in my opinion: I car-
ried my point. The instruments of transfer were draw:
out: St. John, Diana, Mary and I, each became posse^se
of a competency.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
It was near Christmas by the time all was settled: _
aeaeon of geueral holiday approached. I now closed Morton
school; taking care that the parting should not be ban'cn
on my side. Good fortune opens the band as we!! aa the
heart wonderfully; and to give somewhat when we have
largely received, is but to afford a vent to the unusual eb-
ullition of the sensations. I had long felt with pleasure
that many of my rustic scholars liked me, and when we
parted, that consciousness was confirmed: they manifests
their affectionplainly and strongly. Deep was my gratifl
cation to find I bad really a place in their unsophisticated
hearts: I promised tbcni that never a week should pi
future that I did not visit them, and give them an 1
teacbing in tlieir school.
Mr. Hivei-a came up, as — having seen the classes, c
" wring Bixtv girls, Gle out before me^and loiAeJ

406 JASE EYRE.
door — I stood with tlie key in my hand, eschanging a few
Tords of special farewell with some half-dozen of my hesfc
scholars: iia decent, respectable, modest, and well-informed
young women as could W found in the ranks of the Brit-
ish peasaniry. And that ia saying a great deal; for after
all, the British peasantry are the best taught, best irn
nered, moat self-respecting of any in Europe; since th
days I have seen paysannes and baneriunen; and the
of them seemed to me, ignorant, coarse, and beaol
oomparecl with my Morton girls.
■'Do you consider yon have got your reward for a
of exertion? " asked Mr. RiTevs, when they were gone.
" Does not the consciousness of having done some real
man-
" And you have only toiled a few months! Would not
a life dcToted to the task of regenerating your race be well
spent? " .
" Yes, " I said; " but I conld not go on forever sq^j,
want to enjoy my own faculties as well as to cultivateti
of other people. I must enjoy them now; don't W .
either my mind or body to the school: I am ont of it, tt
disposed for full holiday. "
lie looked graye. " What now? W^hat sudden (
ness is this you evince? What are you going to do? "
" To be active: as active as I can. And first I i
be^ you to set Hannah at liberty, and get somebody e
wait on you. "
" Do you want her? "
" Yes, to go with me to Moor House: Diana and Mary
will be at home in a week, and I want to have every thing
ill order against their arrival, "
" I understand: I thought you were for flying off c
Eome excursion. It is better so. Hannah shall go ^ "
you. "
" Tell her to be ready by to-morrow, then; and hei_
the school-room key: 1 will give you the key of my cotti
^1 the morning. "
lie took it. " You give it up very gleefully, " said 1
'I don't (juite understand your Hght-bearteduess; be < " "'
I can not tell what employment you propose to yourw.
a substitute for the one you are relinauiBning. What a
what purpose, what ambition in life, nave you now? "
" My first aim will be to clean down'(do youg
if*
JASE EYKE.
head the full force of the expresBion ?), to clean down Moor
House from chamber to celler; my nest to nib it up wtth
beea-wax, oil, and an indefinite number of eloths, till it
glitters again; my third to ai-raiigc every olmir, tahle, bed,
carpet, with mathematical precision; afterwards I ehull ^o
near to ruin yon in coak and peat to keep up good fires in
every room; and lastly, the two days preceding tliut on
which your siatera are expected, will be devoted by Ilauoi'
and me to such s, beating of eggs, sorting of curranl
grating of spices, compounding of Christmas cakesj choi_
ping up of materials for mince piea, and solemnizing oi
other culinary cites, as words can convey hut an inade-
quate notion of to the uninitiated like you. My purpose-,
in short, is to have all things in an absolutely perfect state
of readiness for Diana una Mary before next Thnrsc'
and my ambition is to give them a beau-ideal of a welci
when they come. "
St. John smiled slightly, still he was dissatisfied.
" It is all very well for the present, " sttid he: " hnt
seriously, I trust that when the first fliisb of vivacity is
over, you will look a little higher than domestic endear-
ments and household joys. "
" The best things the world has, " I interrupted.
" So, Jane, no: this world is not the scene of frnition
— do not attempt to make it so — nor of rest — do not turn
slothful. "
■'I mean, on the contrary, to be busy. "
" Jane, I excuse you for the present: two months'grace
I allow you for the full enjoyment of your new position,
and for pleasing yourself with this late found charm of
relationship but then, I liope you will begin to look be-
yond Jloor House and Morton, and sisterly society, and
the selfish calm and sensual comfort of civilized affluence.
I hope your energies will then once more trouble you with
their strength. "
I looked at him with surprise.
" St. John, " I said, " I think you are almost wicked to
talk so. I am disposed to be as content as a queen, and
you try to stir me up to restlessness. To what end? "
'■ lo the end of turning to profit the talents whieh
God has committed to your keeping; and of which he will
Hui'elv one day demand a strict account, Jane, I shall
watch you closely and anxiously — I warn you of that.
And try torestrain the disproportionate fervor with whicK

408 JANE EYEE.
von throw yoiireelf into commonplace borne pleaauree, "
Don't cling so tenscionsly to the ties of the flesh; save your
conetancy and anior for aii aiJeijuate riaiiee; forhuar to
waste them oii trite, transient objects. Do you hear,
Jane? "
" Yes; just as if yoit were speaking Greek. I feel I
have adequate cause to be happy, and 1 will be happy.
Good- by!''
Happy at Moor House I was, and hard I worked; and
BO did Hannah: she was charmed to see how jovial I could
be amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-turvy — how I
Coald brush, and dust, and clean and cook. And really
after a day or two of confusion worse confounded, it waa
delightful, by degrees, to invoke order from the chaos o«r-
aelves ImJ made. I had previously taken a journey to
S , to purchase some new furnitupe: my cousins hav-
ing given me carte blanche to effect what alterations I
pleased, and a sum having been set aside for that purpose.
The ordinary sitting-room and bed-rooms I left much as
they were: for I knew Diana and Maiy would derive more
pleasure from seeing again the old homely tables, and
chairs, and beds, than from the spectacle of the smartest
innovations. Still, some novelty was necessary to give to
their return the piquancy with which I wished it to be in-
vested. Dark, handsome new carpets and curtains, an
arrangement o^some carefully selected antique ornaments
in porcelain and bronze, new coverings, and mirrors, and
dressing-cases for the toilet tables, answered the end; they "
looke < l fresh, without being glaring, A spare parlor and
bedroom I refurnished eiitii'ely with old mahogany and
crimson upholstery: I laid canvas on the passage, and
carpets on the stairs. AVhen all was finished, I thought
Jloor House as complete a model of bright modest snug-
nesH within, as it was, at this season, a specimen of wintry
waste and desert dreariness without.
The eventful Thursday at length came. They were
expected about dark, and ere dusk fires were lit np stairs
and below; the kitclien was in perfect trim; Hannah and
I were dressed, and all was in readiness.
St. John arrived first. 1 bad entreated him to keep
quite clear of the house till every thing was arranged: and,
indeed, the bare idea of the commotion, at once sordid
and trivial, going on within its walls sufficed to scare Mm
to estrangement. He found me in the kitchmjj "''
JANE EYKE
the progress of certain cakes for tea, then baking. Aj
proaching the hearth, he asked, " If I was at last sutisfi)
with hoiiao- maid's work? " I answered by inviting hii
accompany nic on a guneral inspection of the result of my
labors. With some difficulty, I got him to make the tour
of the house. He just looked in at the doora I opened;
and when he bad wandered np stairs and down stairs, lie
said I must have gone through a great deid of fatigae and
tronble to have effected such considerable changea in bo
short a time; but not a syllable did be ntter indicating
pleasure in the improved aspect ot his abode. ~
This silence damped me. I thought perhaps the all
ationa had disturbed some old associations he valued,
inquired whether this was the ease — no doubt in a
what crest-fallen tone.
" Not at all, he had, on the contrary remarsed that I
had scrupulously respected every association; he feared,
indeed, I mnst have bestowed more thought on the niatf
than it was worth. How many minules. for instan(
had I devoted to studying the arrangement of this ve]
room ?^By-t be-by, could I tell him where such a b(
was ? "
I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it do^
and, withdrawing to hie accustomed window teeees,
began to read it.
Now I did not like this, reader. St. John was a t
man; but I began to think he had spoken the truth of him-
self, when he said he was hard and cold. The humanities
and amenities of life had no attraction for him — its peacfe
fnl enjoyments no charm. Literally, he lived only to :
piro — after what was good and great, certainly: but still
would never rest, nor approve of others resting round hii
Aa I looked at hia lofty forehead, etiil* and pale as a whii
atone — at hia fine linaments fixed in study — I comprehen)
ed all at once that he would hardly make a good husbani
that it would be a trying thing to be his wife. I unde
stood, as by inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss
Oliver; I agreed with him that it was but the love of the
senses. I comprehended how he should despise himself for
the feverish infineni^e it exercised over him; how he should^
wish to stifle and destroy it; how he should mistrust
ever conducing permanently to his happiness or hers.
saw he was of the material from which nature hews M
hn'oea — Christian and PHgan — her lawgivers, her statesmel
I
mT ^
JANE ETRB.
beroonmierorF: a eteadfaet bulwark for great ioterestB to r
upon; but, at t)ie fireside, tou ofteu a cold cnoibrous t
umn, gloomy and out of pla < ;e.
" This parlor is not his sphere, " I reflected: " the Him-
alayan ridge, or Caflre bush, even the plague-pursed
Gmena Coast swamp, would suit him better. Well mjiy
be eschew the calm of domestic life; it is not his element
there bis faculties stagnate — they cannot develop or apm
to advantage. It is in scenes of strife and danger — wo
courage is proved, and energy exercised, and fortitr
tasked — that he will speak and move, the leader i
superior. A merry child wonld have the advantage of i
on this hearth. He is right to choose a miBeiomuy's o
eer — I see it now. "
" They are coming I they are coming ! " cried Hann^
throwing open the parlor door. At the same moment ^
Cai'lo barked joyfully. Out I ran. It was now dark: j
a rumbling of wheels was audible. Hannah soon hai
laiitem lit. The vehicle had stopped at the wicket; 1
driver opened tlie door: first one well-known form, ta
another, stepped out. In a minute I had my face ufiS
their Ijonncts, In contact first with Mary's soft cheek, tfci9f.
with Diana's flowing onrla. Tbey laughed — kissed me —
then Hannah: patted Carlo, who was half wild with delight,
asked eagerly if all was wi-ll; and being assured in the affii^fi^
tive, hastened into the house.
They were stiff with their long and jolting drive i
Whitcroas, and chilled with the frosty night air; but thl
pleasant oounteuances expanded to tne cheerful Qrelt^
While the driver and Hannah brought in the boxes, a
demanded St. John, At this moment he advanced fr^
the parlor. They both threw their arms ronnd I
at once. He gave each one a quiet kisa, said in a low t
a few words of welcome, stood a while to he talked to,
and then, intimating that he supposed they would soon
rejoin him in the parlor, withdrew there as to a place of
renige.
I liad lit their candles to go up stairs, but Diana had
first to give hospitable orders respecting the driver; this
done, both followed me. They were delighted with the
renovation and decoration of their rooms; with the nejf "
drapery, and fresh earpets, and rich-tinted china i
they expressed their gratification unarudiaglv. 1 1
'"'" -a pleasure of feeling that my arrangemente *^

JANE EYRE. 411
wishes exactly; and that what I had done added a vivid
charm to their joyous return home.
Sweet was that evening. My cousins, full of exhilara-
tion, were so eloquent in narrative and comment, tliut
their fluency covered St. John's taciturnity: he was sin-
cerely glad to see his sisters; but in their glow of fervor
and flow of joy he could not sympiithize. The event of
the day — that is, the return of Diana and Mary — pleased
him; but the accompaniments of that event, the glad tu-
mult, the garrulous glee of reception, irked him: I saw he
wished the calmer morrow was come. In the very merid-
ian of the night's enjoyment, about an hour after tea, a
rap was heard at the door. Ilannah entered with the in-
timation that *^a poor lad was come, at that unlikely
time, to fetch Mr. Rivers to see his mother, who was draw-
ing away.''
*^ Where does she live, Hannah? "
'^ Clear up at Whitcross brow, almost four miles off;
and moor and moss all the way. "
'^ Tell him I will go. "
*^rm sure, sir, you had better not. It's the v/orst road
to travel after dark that can be: there's no track at all
over the bog. And then it is such a bitter night — the
keenest wind you ever felt. You had better send word,
sir, that you will be there in the morning. " -
But he was already in the passage, putting on his
cloak; and without one objection, one murmur, he de-
parted. It was then nine o'clock: he did not return till
midnight. Starved and tired enough he was; but he
looked happier than when he set out. He had performed
an act of duty; made an exertion; felt his own streDgth to
do and deny, and was on better terms with himself.
I am afraid the .whole of the ensuiiiiy Avcek tried his
patience. It was Christmas week; we took to no settled
employment, but spent it in a sort of merry domestic dis-
sipation. The air of the moors, the freedom of home, the
dawn of prosperity, acted on Diana and Mary's spirits
like some life-giving elixir: they were gay from morning
till noon, and from noon till night. They could always
talk; and their discourse, witty, pithy, original, had such
charms for me, that I preferred listening to and sharing
in it, to doing anything else. St. John did not rebuke our
vivacity; but he escaped from it: he was seldom in the
house; his parish was large, the population scattered^ v^n^

412 JANE ETKB.
he found daily business in vieiting the Bick and poor is
different districts.
Ono morning, at breakfast, Diana, after looking a lii
pensive, for some mijmtee, asked him, *'If his plans
yet unchanged? "
" Unchanged and unchangeable, " was the reply,
he proceeded to infonn us that his depai'ture from
waa now definitely fixed for the ensuing year.
" And Rosamond Oliver? " suggested Mary: the
seeming to escape her lips involnutarily; for no sooaer
she uttered them, than she made a gesture an if wishing
recall them. St. John had a book m his hand — it waa his
unsocial custom to read at meals — he closed it, and looked
up.
" Rosamond Oliver, " said he, " is about to be married
to Mr, Granby; one of the hest connected and most esti-
mable residents in S-^ — , grandson and heir to Sir Frede-
rick Granby: I had the intelligence from her father yester-
day. "
His sisters looked at each other; and at me; we all three
looked at him: he was serene as glass.
" The match mnet have been got up hastily, " stud
Diana: " they can not have known each other long. "
" But two months: they met in October at the county
ball at S . But where there are no obstacles to a
union, as in the present case, where the connection is in
every_ point desirable, delays are unnecessa^; they will be
married as soon as S Place, which Sir Frederick gives
up to them, can be refitted for their reception. "
The first time 1 foimd St, John alone after this
mnnication, I felt tempted to inquire if the event
tressed him: but he seemed so little to need sympathy,'
80 far from venturing to offer him more, I experif
Bome shame at the recollection of what I had already haz-
arded. Besides, I was out of practice in talking to him:
his reserve was again frozen over, and my frankness waa
congealed beneath it. He had not kept his promise of
treating me like his sisters; he continually mado little
ohilling differences between us; which did not at all tend
to the development of cordiality: in short, now that I wae
acknowledged his kins-woman, and lived under the same
roof with nim, I felt the distance between us to he far
greater than when he had known me only as the villaj
~ " iiV9l-»iBtrese, When I remembered how f «''" " ~

been admitteti to hia confidence, I could hardly compi
hend hia preeent frigidity. _,
Such being the case I felt not a little surprised wliei
he raised his head suddenlv from the desk over which he
waa stooping, and said, " You see, Jaue. the battle is
fonght and the victory won, "
Startled at being thns addressed, I did not immediately
reply : after a momeiit'e hesitation I answered, " But are
you sure you are not in the position of those conqaerers
whose triumphs have cost them too dear? Would not such
another niin youP "
" I think not ; and if I were it does not much signi^
I shall never be called upon to contend for such anothai
The event of the conflict is decisive ; my way is now clea "'
I thank God for it, " So saying, he retarned to hia pape
and his eilenoe.
As onr mutual hap[ > inesa (i. e,, Diana's Mary's i
mine) settled iuto a quieter character, and we reaum
onr usual habits and regular studies, St. John staid mt__
at home : he sat with us in the same room, sometiraea for
hours together.'While Mary drew, Diana pursued i
course of encjyclopedic reading she had (to my awe an
amazement) undertaken, and I fagged away at German, 1^
pondered a mystic lore of hia own : that of some Easter|
tongue, the acquisition of which he thought necessary ta'
hia plans.
Thus engaged, he appeared, sitting in his own rece
quiet and absorbed enough ; but that blue eye of hia had A
habit of leaving the outlandish-looking grammar, aa^L
wandering over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow-
etudents, with a curious intensity of observation : if
caught, it would be instantly withdrawn ; yet ever aud
anon it returned searchiiigly to our table. I wondered
what it meant ; I wondered, too, at the punctual satisifac-
tion he never failed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed
to me of small moment, namely, my weekly visit to Mor-
ton school ; and still more was I puzzled when, if the day
was unfavorable, if there was snow, or rain, or high wind,
and his sisters urged me not to go, he would .'nvariahly
make light of their solicitude, and encourage me to ac-
complish the task without regard to the elements. ~
" Jaue is not such a weakling as you would make her^*^
would say ; she can bear a mountain blast, orj
!W flakes of snow, as well as any of i



Hi JAME EYRE.
conatitution le both sound and elastic ; — better calculaiflif
to enOure variations of climate than many more robust. "
Aud when I returned, sometimes a good " ^ deal tireil, imd
not u little weather-beaten, I never dared coinjilain, be-
cause I saw that to murmur would be to vex htm : on lUl
ocoasious fortitude pleased him ; the ruverae was a special
annoyanco.
One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at I
because I really had a cold. His Bisters were gom
Morton in iny stead ; I sat reading Schiller ; he, docipM.
iug his crabbed Oriental ecrolla. Aa I cxclmngcd a trafli
latiOD for an exercise, I happened to look his way ; ther
I found myself under the influence of the cver-watchfnl
blue eye, llow bug it had been eearching me throuj'
and through, and over aud over, I can not tell : eo jT
was it, and yet eo cold, 1 felt for the momeiit superstifl
— as if I were sitting in the room with something u
" Jane, what are you doing? "
" Learning German,''
" I want you to give up German, and learn
etanee. "
" You are not in earnest? "
" In suoh earnest that I must have it so : and I will tcff
you why. "
He then went on to explain that Hindoostanee was the
language he was himself at present studying: that, as ho
advanced, he was apt to forget the commencement ; that
it would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he
might again and again ^o over the elements, and so Qx
them thoroughly in his mind ; that hie choice had hovere.;
for some time between me and his sisters ; but thut he hud
fixed on me, beeuuse he saw I could sit at a task the long-
est of the thi^ee. Would I do him this favor? 1 should
not, perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long ; as it wanted
now barely three months to his departure.
St, John was not a man to he lightly refused : you felt
that every impression made on him, either for pain or
pleasure, was deep-graved and permanent, I consented.
When Diana and Mai-y returned, the former found her
scholar tmiisferred fi'om her to her brother : ehe laughed ;
and both she and Mary agreed that St. John sliould never
have persuaded ihem to such a step. He answered, quietly
" I know it. "
I found him a very patient, very forbearing, andjj
.lAlfE ETRE.
an exaoting master: he expected me to do a great ded
and when I fulfilled his expectations, he, in his own way^
fiiUy testified his approbation. By degrees, he acquired r
certain influence over me that took away my liberty cr
tnind : his praise and notice were more restraining thiul
his indifference. I contd no longer tallt or laugh freoy^
when he waa by, because a tiresomely importunate instina
reminded me that vivacity (at least in me) was distastefai
to him. I was bo fully aware that only serious moods aug
occupations were acceptable, that in his presence eveiT
effort to sustain or follow any other became vain: I fea
nnder a freeaing spell. When he said " go, " I wenf
" oome, " I came; " do this, " I did it. But 1 did not loiflj
my eervitude: I wished, many a time, he had continued t
neglect niG.
One evening when, at bod-time, hia aiatera and I stood
round him, bidding him good-night, he kissed each of
them, as was his ouatom; and, as was equally his custom^
he gave me hia hand. Diana, who chanced to be in i
frolicsome humor (s/'f was not painfully controlled by hll
will; for hers, in auothcr way, was as stroug), exclaimeff
" St. John! you used to call Jane your third sister, bol
yon don't treat her as such: you should kiss her, too. " i
She pushed me toward him. I thought Diana ved|
provoking, and felt uncomfortably confused; and wliile^
was thus thinking and feeling, St. John bent hia head;
his Greek face waa brought to a level with mine, his eyea
qnestioned my eyes piercingly — he kissed me. There aj-e
[10 Buch things as marble kisses, or ice kisses, or I ahoul^
Biyf my ecclcsia^ical cousin's salute belonged to one (
thoee claasea; but there may be experiment kiaaes, and hfl
was an experiment kisa. When given, he viewed me W
learn the result; it waa not striking: I am sure I did ni^
blush; perhapa I might have tTirned a little pale, f or I f "
as if ibis kiss were a seal affixed to my fetters. He ncvq
omitted the ceremony afterward, and the gravity i
gUiescene* with which I underwent it seemed to invest i
lor him with a certain charm.
As for me, 1 daily wished more to please
do BO, I felt daily more and more that I must disown hoi
my nature, stifle half my fucultics, wrest my tastes frod
their original bent, force myaelf to the adoption of pud
snita for which 1 had no natural vocation, tie wanted (^
train me to an elevation I could never reach; it r,
410
JANE ETRE.
hourly to Mpire to tbe standaid he uplifted. The thin^
waa aa impossible as to mold my irregular features to hi8
correct and classic pattern, to ^ve to my chaiigeabl« g
eyes the sea-bhie tint aud eoleraii Inster of his own.
Not hiu ftseeudenoy alono, howeyer, held me in thralls
preseut. Of late it had been easy enough for me to lodi
sad: a ctiiikcring evil sat at my heart, and drained my faap^
pinesa at its aonreo — the evil of suspense.
Perhaps yon think I had forgotten Mr. RocheEter,
reaiier, amidst these changes of place and fortune. Not
for a moment. His idea vaa still with me; because it
was not a vapor sunshine could disperse, nor a sand-traced
effigy storms could wash away; it was a name graven on a
tttblet, fated to last aa long as the marble it inscribed.
The craving to know what had become of him followed
me everywhere,: when 1 was at Morton. I re-entered my
cottage every evening to think of that; and now i'
Moor House 1 sought my bed-room each nigiit to I
over it.
In the course of my necessary correspondence withj
Briggs about the will, 1 had inquired if he knew anytr
of Mr, Kochester'a pi-eseut residence and state of net
but, as St. John had conjectured, he waa quite ignoraail
all concerning him, 1 then wrote to Mrs, Pairfai, jf
treating information on the subject, I had calculate ._
with certainty on this step answering my end: I felt sure
it would elicit an early answer. I was astonisheil when a
fortnight parsed without reply; but when two months
wore away, and day after day the post arrived and broiu'*'
nothing for me, I fell a prey to the keenest anxiety. J
I wrote again: there was a chance of my firet leiterl
ing missed. Renewed hope followed renewed eflom
shone like the former for some weeks^ then, like it. it fal
flickered: not a lino, not a word reached me. Wheu ]
a year wasted in vain expectancy, my hope died out:'-
then I felt dark indeed.
A fine spring shone around me, which J could i
joy. .Summer approached; Diana tried to cheer nw:l
said I looked ill, aud wished to accompany me to theJ
side. This St, John opposed; ho said I did.not wantffl
pation, 1 wanted employment; my present life was too 1
poseless, I required an aim; and, I suppose, by way of ■
plying deficiencies, he prolongetl still further mjr \eJr
in Hwdoostanee, and grew more urgent in reqainng s
Bcconiplisliment: and I, like a fool, :
Elating him — I could not resist him.
One day I had come to my studies in lower spirits than
Qsual; the ebb was occasioned bj a poignantly felt disap-
pointment: Hannah had told me in the morning there was
a letter for me, and when I went down to take it, almost
certain that the long looked-for tidings were vouchsafed
me at lafit, I found only an unimportant note from Mr.
Briggs, on bnsinesa. The hitter check had wrung from
me aome tears; and now as I sat poring over the crabbed
characters and flourishing tropes of an Indian scribe, my
eyes filled again. j
St. John called me to his side to read; in attempting to
do this, my voice failed me: words were lost iu soba. He
and I were the only occupants of the parlor: Diana was
Sracticing her music in the drawing room, Mary was gar-
ening — it was a rery fine May-day, clear, sunny and
breezy. My companion expressed no surpriae at this
emotion, nor did he qnestion me as to its cause; he only
said, " We will wait a few minutes, Jane, till you are more
composed. " And while I smothered the paroxysm with all
haste, be sat calm and patient, leaning on his desk and
looking like a physician watching with the eye of science
an expected and fully understood crisis in a patient's mal-
ady. Having stifled my sobs, wiped, my eyes, and mut-
_ tered something about not being very well that morning,
'I resumed my task and suecee < 3ed iu completing it, St..
John put away my books and his, locked hia desk, and eai^
" Now, Jane, you shall take a walk and with me. "
" I will call Diana and Mary. "
" No. I want only one companion this morning, and
that must he yon; put on your things; go out % th»-
kitchen door; take the road toward the head of Marsh
Glen; I will join you in a moment. "
I know no medium: I never in my life have known any
medium in my dealings with positive hard characters,
antagonistic to my own, between abaolute submission and
determined revolt. I have always faithfully observed the
one np to the very moment of bursting, sometimes with
Tolcanic vehemence into the other; and as neither present
circumstances warranted, nor my present mood inclined
me to mutiny, I observed careful obedience to St. John's
directions; and in ten minutes I was treading the wild
''-^-^ of the glen, side by side with him.
I
418 JANE EVRE.
The breeze wae from the weat: it came over the liift,
sweet with scents oS health ami rush; the sky was of etaiti-
losa blue; the streams descending the ravine, swelled with
past apriiig rains, poured along, plentiful and clear, catch-
ing golden gleams from the sun, and sapphire tinU from
the tirmament. As we advanced and left the track, u*e
trod a soft turf, mossy, fine and emerald green, minutely
enameled vith a tiny white flower, and epangled with a
star-like yellow blossom: the hills, meantime, shut us quite
iu; for the gleo. toward its head, wound to their very core,
" Let us rest here, " said St. John, as we reached the
first stragglers of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of
pass, beyond which the beck rushed down a waterfall; and
where s'tiU a little further, the mountain shook off turf
and flower, had only heath for raiment, and craig for gem,
where it exaggerated the wild to the savage, and ex-
changed the fresh for the frowning— where it guarded the
folom hope of solitude and a last refuge for silence.
I took a seat; St. John stood near me. He looked up
the pass and down the hollow; his glance wandered away
with t!ie stream, and returned to traverse the unclouded
heaven which colored it: he removed his hat, let the breeie
stir his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed in communion
with the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade fare-
well to something,
" And I shall see it again, " he said aloud, " in dreams, __
when I sleep by the Ganges : and again, in a more remote'
hour — when another slumber overcomes me — on the shore
of a darker stream. "
Strange words of a strange love! An austere patriot's
passion for his fatherland ! He sat down : for half an hour
we never spoke: neither he to me, nor I to him: thatinter-
val past, he recommenced: " Jane, I go in sis weeks; I
have taken my berth in an East Indiamen which sails on
the twentieth of June. "
" God will protect you, for you have undertaken His
work, " I answered.
" Yes, " said he, " there is my glory and joy. I am the
servant of an infallible Master, I am not going out under
human guidance, subject to the defective laws and erring
control of my feeble fellow worms: my king, my lawgiver,
mv captain is the All-perfect. It seems strange to me that
all around me do not burn to enlist under the same banner,
to join in the same enterprise. "
" All have not your jiowera : and it would be folly
the feeble to wish to march with the strong. "
" I do not speak to the feeble, or think of them : I ad*
dresa only bucIi aa.are worthy of the work, and competent
to accomplish it. "
419 ^H
yfor^H
I ad'^B
" Those are few in number, and difficult to discover. "
" You say truly; but when found, it is right to stir
them up — to urge and exhort them to the effort — to show
them what their gifts are, and why they were given — to
speak Heaven's message in their ear — to oSer them, direot
from God, a place in the ranks of his chosen. "
" If they are really qualiiied for the task, will not ihea
own hearts be the first to inform them of it ? " _
I felt as if an awful charm was framing round and'
gathering over me ; I trembled to hear some fatal word
spoken which would at once declare and rivet the spell.
" And what does your heart say ? " demanded St, John.
" My heart is mute — my heart is mute, " I answered,
struck and thrilled.
" Then I must speak for it, " continued the deep, re^Jj
lentlesa voice. " Jane, come with me to India: come i
my helpmeet and fellow-laborer. "
The glen and sky spun round : the hills heaved 1
as if I had heard a summons from Heaven — as if a vision^
ary messenger, like him of Macedonia had enounced—
" Come over and help ub! " But I was no apostle-
I could not behold the herald — I could not receive his calL]
" Oh, St. John ! " I cried, " have some mercy ! "
I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what hfi
belived nis duty, knew neither mercy nor remorse. H^?
continued : " God and nature intended you for a niisaioa-^
ary's wife. It is not personal but mental endowment*.^
they have given you; yon are formed for labor, not for
love, A missionary'a wife you must — shall be. You shall
be mine : I claim you — not for my pleasure, but for my
Sovereign's service.
" I am not fit for it : I have no vocation, " I said.
He had calculated on these first objections ; he was nol > 4
irritatod by them. Indeed, as he leaned back against thtf^i
crag behind him, folded his arms on his chest, and fixed
hifl countenance, I saw ho was prepared for a long and
trying opposition, and had taken in a stock nf patience to
last him to its close — I'esolved, however, that that close
should be conquest for him.

480 JAKS SVRE,
" Humility, Jaue, " said be,''is the ground-work ol
Chriittian yirtues : you saj right tbat you are not fit for tlie
work. Who is fit for it ? Or who, that ever was truly
culleil belieyed himself worthy of the summnns? I, for
instance, am but duat and ashes. With St. Paul, I ac-
knowledge my gelf the chief est of sinners: but Idouot sufler
this SGiise of my personal vileuess to diiunt me. I knai
my Leader : that he is just as well as mighty ; and vri " *
be ha« chosen a feeble instrument to perform a great t
he will, from the boundlcsa stores of his providence, boj
the inadequacy of the meana to the end. Think like
Jane — trust like me. It is the Bock of Agea I ask
to lean on : do not doubt but it will bear the weigl
your human weakness. "
" I do not understand a missionary life : I have
studied missionary labors. "
" There, I, humble as I am, can give you the aid
want: I can set you your laek-from hour to hour; g'
by you always ; hulp you from moment to m.omeut, Tbi
1 could do in the beginning : soon (for I know your powers)
you would be as strong and apt as myself, and would not
require my help. "
" But my powers — where are they for this undurtak "
ing? I do not feel them. Nothing speaks or stirs in me
wnile 3|-ou talk. I am aenaible of no light kindling^— no
iife quickening — no voice eonnseling or cheering. Oh, I
wish I could make you see bow much my mind ia at this
moment like a rayless dungeon, with one shrinking fear
fettered in its depths — the fear of being persuaded by joititi
to attempt what I can not accomplish!'" ^ngg
" I have an answer for you — hoar it. I have nati
yon ever eince wo first met ; I have made you my Btndj
ten months. I have proved you in that time by bw
teats ; and what have I seen and elicited ? In the vi'
school I found you couid perform well, punctually, up-
rightly, labor uncongenial to your habits and inclinations;
I saw you could perform it with capacity and tact: yon
could win while you controlled. In the calm with which
you learned you had become suddenly rich, I read a mind
clear of the vice of Demas ; lucre had no undue power over
you. In the resolute readiness with which you cut your
wealth into four shares, keeping but one to yourself, and
relinquishing the three others to the claim of abstract
wJMtice, I recognized a soul that reveled in tl " " ^
; fear
JAKE BYRE,
exoitement of sacrifice. In the traotability with which, 1
my wish, you forsook a study in which you were interest^
and adopted another because it interested me — in the nrf
tiring assiduity with which yon have since persevered in
it — in the unflagging energy and unshaken temper with
which you have met its difficnltieB— I acknowledge the <
complement of the qualities I seek. Jane, you are docita
diligent, disinterested, faithful, constant and courageoi^
rery geutlo and very heroic : eeaee to mistrust yourself-J
can trust you unreservedly. As a conductress of Ind^
schools, and a helper among Indian women, your a
will be to me invaluable. "
My iron shroud contracted round mo ; persuasion *
Tanoed with slow, sure step. SJiut my eyes as I woiiL
*Jie8e last words of his succeeded in making the wfl
whieh had seemed blocked up, comparatively clear, M
work, which hud appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffiig
cond " insed itself as he proceeded and assumed a defini
form under his shaping liand. He waited for an answi
I demanded .1 quarter of an hour to think before I ags
hazarded a reply.
" Very willingly, " he rejoined : and rising, he strodi
little distance up the pass, threw himself down on a
of heath and there lay still.
" I can do what he wants me to do : I am forced _
see and a < ;knowledge that, " I meditated — " that is, if life
be spared me. But I feel mine is not the existence to he
long protracted under an Indian sun. — What then ? He,
does not care for that : when my time came to di
would resign me, in all serenity and sanctity, to the Gi
whr gave me. The case is very plain before me.
leaving England 1 should leave a loved but empty land-
Mr. Rochester is not thijrc : and if be were, what ia, whi
can that ever he to me ? My business is to live without
him now : nothing so absurd, 00 weak as to drag on from
day to day, as if I were waiting some impossible change in
circumstances which might reunite me to bim. Of course
(as St. John once said) I must seek another interest in life
to replace tlic one lost : is not the occupation he now offers
me truly the most glorious man can adopt or God assi
la it not, by its noble cares and sublime results, the
best ealcnialed to fill the void left byuptorn affections
demolished hopes? I believe I must say, Yes — and yi
ihndder. Alas! if I join St. .Tobn I nbRudon half

in
JANE EYBE.
eelf : if I go to Indm I go to premature death. And how
will the interval between leaving England for India, and
India for the grave, be filled ? Oh, I know well ! Tt
too, is very clear to my vision. By straining to eatief "
John tjU my sinews ache I sJiall satisfy him — to the I
central point and farthest outward circle of !iis expi
tions. li I do so with him — if I do make tlie sacrifice
nrges, I will mate it absolutely : I will throw all on the
altar — heart, vitaU, the entire victim. Ho will never love
me : but ho shall approve me : I will show him enei-giee he
has not yet seen, resources he has never suspected. Yi'
I can work a.s hard as — he can ; and with as little gru)
ing.
" Consent, then, to his demand is possible: but for
item— one dreadful item. It is — that he asks me to I
wife, and has no more of a husband's heart for me
that frowning giant of a rock, down which the streE
foaming in yonder gorge. He prizes me as a soldier v
a good weapon ; and that is all. Unmarried to him, this
would never grieve me; but can I let him complete Mb
calculations — coollyput into practice his plans — go through
the wedding ceremony ? Can I receive from him the bridal
ring, endure all the forms of love (which I doubt not he
would scrupulously observe), and know that the spirit was
quite absent ? Can I bear the consciousness that every
endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
No ; such a martyrdom would be monstrous. I will never
undergo it. As his sister, I might accompany him — not as
his wife : I will tell him so. "
" I looked toward the knoll: there he lay, still sa
prostrate column ; his face turned to me : his eye beamii
watchful, and keen. He started to his feet, and
proached me.
" I am ready to go to India, if I may go free. "
" Your answer requires a commentary,'he said; " if
not clear. "
" You have hitherto been my adopted brother ; I your'
adopted sister; let us continue as such: you and I had
better not marry. "
He shook his head.'■ Adopted fraternity will not do
in this case. If you were my real sister, it would be dif-
ferent : I should take you, and seek no wife. But as it is,
either our union must be consecrated and sealed by
marriage, or it can not exist : practical obstacles opj " "
t as
M
JANE EYRE.
theniaelves to any other plan. Do you not see it Jane?
Consider a moment — your strong sense will guide you. "
I did consider: and still my sense, snch as it was, di-
rected me only to the fact that we did not love each other
as man and wife should ; and therefore it inferred that we
ought not to marry. I aaid so. " St. John, " I returned,
" I regard you as a brother — you, me as a sister: so let ns
continue. "
" We can not — wo can not, " he answered, with short,
sharp determination: " it would not do. Yon have said
you will go with me to India: remember — you have
that. "
" Conditionally. "
" Well — well. To the main point — the depart!
me from England, the co-operation with me in my future
labors — you do not object. You have already as good as
put your hand to the plow; you are too consistent to with-
draw it. You have but one end to keep in view — how the
work you have undertaken can best be done. Simplify
your complicated interests, feelings, thoughts, wishes,
aims; merge all considerations in one purpose: that of ful-
filling with effect, with power, the mission of your great
Master. To do bo, you must have a coadjutor — not a
brother; that is a loose tier but a husband. I, too, do not
want a sister; a sister might any day be taken from me. I
want a wife: the sole helpmeet I can influence efficiently
in life, and retain absolutely nntil death. "
I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my
marrow — his hold on my limbs.
" Seek one elsewhere than in me, St. John: seek one
■fitted to you. "
" One fitted to my purpose, you mean — fitted to my vo-
cation. Again I tell you it ia not the insignificant private
individual — ^the mere man, with the man's selfish senses —
I wish to mate: it is the missionary. "
" And 1 will give the missionary my energies — it is all
he wants — but not myself: that would be only adding the
husk and shell to the kernel. For them be has no use: T
retain them. "
" You can not — ^you ought not. Do yon think God
will be satisfied with half an oblation? Will he accept a
mutilated sacrifice? It is the cause of God I advocate: it
launder His standard I enlist you. I cannot aecept on
" "'behalf a divided allegiance: it must be entijf'"'*** "
hort,
said I
M
iture H
4ii
JANE EYHE.
" Oh! I will giye my heart to God, " I said. " T'ou i
not want it. "
I will not swear, reader, that there was not somethin
of repressed sarcasm in the tone in which I uttered t'
sentence, and in the feeling that accompanied it. I 1
silently feared St. John till now, becanse I had not unddl
stood nim. He had held me in awe, becanse he had hd
me in doubt. How much of him was saint, how mot'
mortul, 1 tjould not hcrotoforp tell; hut revelations wa^
being made in this conference; the iinalysia of hia natn
■was proceeding before my eyes. I saw hia rallibilitiesi J
comprehended them. I understood that, sitting
where I did, on the bank of heath, and with that 1
eome form before me. I eat at tlie feet of a man, erring.
I. The veil fell from his hardness and despotism,
ingfelt in him the presence of these qualities, I felt 1
imperfection, and took cotiriige. I was with an eqaai
one with whom I might argue — one whom, if I saw goc
1 nnght resist.
He was silent after I had uttered the last sentence, a
I presently risked an upward glance at his countenan
Hia eye, wnt on me, expressed at once stern surprise a
keen infjuiry.''Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to tiie! "
seemed to say: " What does this signify? "
" Do not let us forget that thia la a solemn matter, "
Baid ere long: •■one of which we may neither think niS
talk lighlly without sin- I trust, Jane, .you are in earn-
eat when you say you will gi\-e your heart to God: it it
all I want. Once wrench your heart from man, and fix it
on your Maker, the advancement of that Maker's spiritiu
kingdom on earth will be your chief delight and endeavtS
you will be ready to do at once whatever furthers that eii
You will see what impetus would be given to your effoc
and mine by our physical aud mental union in marriage:
the only union that gives a character of permanent con-
formity to the destinies and designs of human beings; and,
passing^ over all minor caprices — all trivial difficulties aw'
delicauiea of feeling — all scruple about the degree, kim''
strength or tendernessa of mere personal inclination — jt
will hasten to enter into that union at once. "
" Shall I? " T said briefly; and I looked al hia features, "
beautiful in their hai-mony, hut strangely formidable in
their still aeverity; at his brow, commanding, bnt not
open ; at his eyes, bright aud deep and searching, but navgr'j
Boft; at his tall, imposiug figure ; and fancied myself in
ideal his wife. Ohl it would never do! As his eurate,
his comrade, all would be right: I would cross oceans with
him in that capacity; toil under Eastern suns, in Asian
deserts with hJm in that office; admire and emnlate liis
eonrage and devotion and vigor; accommodate quietly to
his maaterhood; smile undisturbed at his ineradicable am-
bition; discriminate the Cliristian from the man: pro-
foundly esteem the one, and freely forgive the other. I
should suffer often, no doubt, attached to him only in
this capacity: my body would be under a rather stringent
yoke, but my heart and mind would be free. I should
atill have my unblighted self to turn to: my natural nn-
enslaved feeling with which to communicate in momeute
of loneliness. There would be recesses iu my mind which
would be only mine, to which he never came; and senti-
ments growing there fresh and sheltei'ed, which his aus-
terity could never blight, nor his measured warrior-maroh
trample down: but as his wife — at his side always, and al-
ways restrained, and always checked — forced to keep the
fire of my nature continually low, to compel it to burn in-
wardly and never utter a cry, though the imprisoned
flame consumed vital after vital — fhis would be unendur-
able.
" St. John! " I exclaimed, when 1 had got so far in mjr„
meditation.
" Well? " he answered, icily.
" I repeat: I freely consent to go with you as your M-il
low-missionary, but not as your wife; I can not marry'
you, and become part of you, "
" A part of me you must become, " he answered, stead-
ilyj " otherwise the whole bargain is void. How can I, a
man not yet thirty, take but with me to India a girl of
nineteen, unless she be married lo me? How can we be
forever together — aoniotimOB in solitudes, sometimes amidst
savage tribes — and unwed? "
" Very well, " I said shortly; " under the circumstances
quite as well as if I were either your real sister, or a man
and n clergyman like yourself. "
" It is known that you are not ray sister; I can not in-
trodnco you as such: to attempt it would bo to fasten
injurious suspirions on us botli. And for the rest,
thottgh you hare a man's vigorous brain, joa have a
'e heart, and— it would not do. "
M
426 JAlfE EYKE.
'It vould do, " I afiBrmed, with some disdain,'^ __
fectly well. 1 have a woman's heart, but not where yoi
are ooncerned: for you have only a comrade's constHucn'
a tellow-soldior's frankness, tidulity, fraternity, if yoH Iiki
a neopliyte's resptjct and submisBion to his hierophan^
nothing more— don't fear. "
" It is what I want. " be said, speaking to himself;
ia just what I want. And there are obstacles in the wa^
they jniist be hewn down, Jane, yon would not rej
marrying me; be certain of that; we must be married.
repeat it: there is no other way; and undoubtedly enou^
or love would follow upon marriage to render the unioi
right even in your eyes.'
" I scorn your idea of love, " I could not help Bayingt-'
as I rose up and stood before him, leaning my back agaiust
the rock. " I scorn the counterfeit sentiment you offer;
yes, St. John, and I scorn you when you offer it, "
He looked at me fixedly compressing his well-cut lips
while he did so. Whether he was incensed or surprised,
or what, it was not easy to tell: he could command his
countenance thoroughly.
" I scarcely expected to hear that espreaaion from you, "
he said: " I think I have done and uttered notliing to d'
serve scorn. "
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by h
high, calm mien.
" Forgive me the words, St. John: but it is your owl
fault that I have been roused to speak so unguordedlj^
Ton have introduced a topic on which our natures are v
variance — a topic we shonld never discuss: the very nau^
of love is an apple of discord between ua — if the reatin^
were required, what shonld we do? How should we feetf
My dear cousin, abandon your scheme of marriage — for-
get it. "
'■ No. " said he; " it is a long-cheriahed scheme, and tho
only one which can secure my great end: but I shall urge
you no farther at present. To-morrow I leave home f
Cambridge: T have many friends there to whom I wou.
wish to say farewell, I shall be absent a fortnight — tri._.
that space of time to consider my offer: and do not forg^ *
that if yon reject it it, it is not me yon deny, but God.
Through my means He opens to yon a noble career: as my
wife o^ly can you enter upon it. Refuse to be my wife
and you limit yourself forever to a track of selfish e
JANE ETRE.
ban-en obscurity. Tremble lest in that case yon should
ntimbei'ed with those who have denied the faith, and
wurse than infidels! "
He had dona. Taming from me, he onoe mon
" Looked tc
-, looked to hill. "
But this time his feelings were all pent in liia hewt: I
not worthy to hear them uttered. As I walked by his side
homeward, I read well in his iron silence all he felt
toward me: the disappointment of an austere and despotic
nature, which has met resistance where it expected eub-
mission — the disapprobation of a cool, inflexible judgment,
which has detected in another feelings and views in which
it has no power to sympathize: in short, as a man, hq
wonid have wished to coerce me into obedience: it was
only as a sincere Christian he bore so patiently with my
perversity, and allowed so long a space for reflection and
repentance.
That night, after he had kissed his sisters, he thought
proper to forget even to shake hands with me; but left tho
room in silence. I — who, though I had no lovp, had much
friendship for him— was hurt by the marked omission: so
much hnrt that tears started to my eyes.
" I see you and St. John have been quarreling, Jane, "
said Diana, " during your walk on the moor. But go after
him; he is now lingering in the passage, expecting you —
he will make it up. "
I havo not much pride under such circumstances: I
would always ralber be happy than dignified: and I ran
after him^he stood at the foot of the stairs.
" Good-night, St. John, " said I. I
" Good-night, Jane, " he replied, calmly. *
" Then shake handsj " I added.
What a cold, loose touch, he impressed on my fingers!
He was deeply displeased by what had occurred that day:
cordiality would not warm; nor tears move bim. No
happy reconciliation was to be had with him — no cheering
smile or generous word: but still the Christian was patient
and placid; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he
answered that he was not in the habit of cherishing the
remembrance of vexation; that ho had nothing to forgive,
not having been offended.
And with I hat answer, he left me. I would much
ur he had knocked me do^
1
OHAPTBE XXXV.
He did not leave for Cambridge the next day, as he
liad eaid he would. He deferred !iis departure a vhtti
weeli; and during that I'ljoe he made me feel what i
vere punishment a good, yet etern. a conscientiotie, 5
implacuble. man van iuflint on one who has offended biB
Without one overt act of hostility, one upbraiding w(H'
he contrived to impress rae momently with the convicti
thill I was put heyfind the pale of his favor.
Not that St. John hai-bored a spirit of unchrietudj
vindictiveuesB— not that hu would have injured a hair j^
my head, if it had been fully in hia power to do 60. "
by nature and principle, he was superior to the ]
f ratification of veneeance: he bad forgiven me for bi_
scorned hirn und his love, but he hud not forgotten t
words; and as long aa be and I lived he iiever wonld «
get them. I saw by hia look, when he turned to me, (*
they were always written on the air betweeu me and 1
whenever I spoke, they Bounded in my voice to his 6
and their echo toned every answer he gave me.
He did not abstain from conversing with mi , ,_ .
called me as usual'each morning to pm him at his dcstt;
and I fear tlic corrupt man witlmi hiui had a pleasure un-
imparled to, aiul unaliared by, the pure Christian, in
evincing with what skill ho could, whdo acting and sneak-
ing apparently just aa usual, extract from every deed and
every phrase the spirit of interest and approval which had
formerly communicated a certain austere charm to his
language and manner. To me he was in reality hoconie
no longer flesh, but marble; hia eye was a cold, bright,
blue gem; his tongue, a, speaking instrument — nothitig
more.
All this was torture to me— refined, lingering tortuj%-™
It kept up a alow fire of indignation, and a trembligj
■ ible of
trouble
which hai'assed and crushed
grief,
altogether. Ifelt how, if I were his wife, this good I
pure as the deep sunless source, could soon killm .
out drawing from my veins a single drop of blood,
eeiving on his own crystal conscience t'"'''" "
JAN!! EVRE. 45!l)
to propitiate hira. No ruth met mj ruth. He esperi-
enced no snffering from estrangement — nn yearning after
reconcilmtioii.: and though, moro than once, my fast fall-
ing tears blistered the page over which we both benl, they
nroduiied no more effect on him than if hia hciirt had
been i-eally a matter of stone or metal. To hia aieters,
meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: as if
afraid that mere coldness wonid not sufficiently convince
me how completely I was banished and banned, he added
the force of contrast: and this I am sure he did, not by
malice, but on principle.
The night Before lie left home, happening to see him
walking in the ^rden about sunset, and, remembering,
as I looked at him, that this man, alienated a,s he now
was, had once saved my life, and that we were near rela-
tions, I was moved to make a last attempt to regain
his friendship. I went out and approached hini, as he
stood leaning over the little gate; I spoke to the point at
once.
" St. John, I am unhappy, because you are still angry
with me. Let us be friends. "
■ " I hope we are friends, " was the unmoved reply; while
he still watched the rising of the moon, which he had
been contemplating as I approached.
" No, St, John, we are not friends ae we were. You
know that. "
" Are we not? That is wrong. For my part, I wish
you no ill, and all good. "
" 1 believe yon, St. John; for I am sure yon are incap-
able of wishing any one ill: but, as I am your kina-
woraan, I should desire somewhat more of affection than
that sort of general philanthropy you extend to mere
strangers. "
" Of course, " he said, " Your wish is reasonable; and
I am far from regarding yoo as a stranger. "
This, spoken in a coo!, tranqnil tone, was mortifying
and baffling enough. Had I attended to the suggestions
of pride and ire, fshould immediately have left him: but
something worked within me more strongly than those
feelings could. 1 deeply venerated my cousin's talent and
priuciple. Hia friendship was of value to me; to lose it
tried me severely. I would not so soon relinquish the
attempt to reconquer it.
" Miiat we part in this way, St. John? And when yo« i
430
li KVRE.
go to India, will you Icnve me so, without a kinder i
than yo» have yet spoksn? "
He now turned oiiite from the moon iind faced mc-
" When I go to India, Jaue, will I leave you?
do yoH not go to India? "
" You said I could not unless I marrieJ you. "
" And you will not marry me? You adhere to that P
ointion? "
Reader, do yon know, as I do, what terror those c
people can put into the ice of their guestions? How e
of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger — of the bi
ing up of the frozen Bea. in their digpleasure?
" No, St. John, I will not marry you. I adhere to i
resolution. "
Tiie avalanoho had shaken and slid a little forward, fi
it did not yet craeh down.
" Once more, why this refusal? " he asked,
" Fonnerly. " I answered, " because you did not I
me; now I reply, because you almost hate me. If I w
to marry you, you would kill me. You are killing i
now. "
Hjs lips and cheeks turned white— quite white.
" / should kill you — Jam killiHg yOH? Your n _
are such as ought uot to he used: violent, unfemininc, fi
nntrue. They betray an unfortunate state of mind: tl
merit severe reproof: they would seem inexcusable: 1
that it is the duty of man to forgive his fellow, even un
seventy-and seven-times. " i
I hud finished the business now. While earnestly wia
ing to erase from his mind the trace of my former offetJ
1 had stamped on that tenacious surface another and |
deeper impression: I had burned it in.
" Now you will indeed hate me, " I said, " It is u
to attempt to conciliate you: I see I have made an etenfl
enemy of you. "
A fresh wrong did these words inflict: the worse I
cause they touched on the truth. That bloodless lip qij
«red to a temporary Bpasm. I knew the steely ire I 1'
whetted. I was heart wrung.
" You utterly misinterpret my words, " I said, at oi^
seiaing his hand: I have no intention togi'ieve or f
— indeed I have not, "
Most bitterly he smiled — moat decidedly he withdrew
JANE ETBB.
and will not go to India at all, I presume? " said he,
a considerable pause.
" Tee, I will, as your aasistant, " I answered.
A very long silence succeeded. What struggle
was in him between Nature and Grace in this interval, I
can not tell; only singular gleams scintillated in his eyes,
and strange shadows passed over his face. He spoke
last.
" I before proved to you the absurdity of a single v(
of your ago proposing to accompany abroad a single
of niine. I proved it to you iu such terms as, I sboi
have thought, would have prevented your ever again alli
ing to the plan. That you have done so, I regret — ^1
your sake. "
I interrupted him. Anything like a tangible, repro!
gave me courage at once. " Keep to common sense, St.
John: you are verging on nonsense. Yon pretend to be
shocked by what I have said. You are not really shocked;
for, with your superior mind, you can not be either so
dull or so conceited as to misunderstand my meaning. I
say again, I will be your curate, if you like, but never
your wife. "
Again he turned lividly pale: but, as before, control
his passion perfectly. He answered emphatically, I
calmly, " A female curate who is not my wife would nc
suit mo. With me, then, it seems, you can not go: l__
if you are sincere in your offer, I will, while in town, spealt
to a married missionary, wliose wife needs a coadjutor.
Your own fortune will make you independent of the
Society's aid; and thus you may still he spared the i "
honor of breaking your promise, and deserting the bi
you engaged to join. "
Now I never had, as the reader knows, either gi'
any formal promise, or entered into any engagement;
tliifl language was all much too hard, and much too
potic for the oceasioii. I replied, " There is no diahoi
no breach of promise; no desertion in the case. I am
under the slightest obligation to go to India: especially-
with strangers. With you I would have ventured much;
beoanso I admire, confide in, and, as a sister, I love you:.;
bnt I am convinced that, go when and with whom.
would, I should not live long in tliat climate. "
" Ah! yon are afraid of yourself, " he said, curling
1
theii ■
■al, I
eyes, ^^
m
St. ^
be
ked;
r so
■ ^
ever^^^
iZi
JANE EXtLS.

" I am. Ood did not girt* me my lifo to tbroiraM
and to do as }'on wigli me would. I begin to think, bW
moat c < jiiivalcnt to cLtfumittiiig suicide. Moreover, baf
I definitely resolve on quitting Englund, I wiU know'
certain whether I can not be of greater use by remaial
in it than by leaving it. "
" What do yon mean? "
" It would " be fruitless to attempt to explain: but there "
is a point on which I have long entlured painful doubt;
and I can go nowhere till by gome means that doubt la j
removed. "
" I know whei-e your heart turns, and to what it diH
The inlerest yon cherish is lawless and unconBecrsf
Long since you -ought to have crushed it: now yon ehfl
blush to allude to it. You think of Mr. Rochester? "
It was true. I confessed it by silence.
" Are you going to seek Mr. Rochester? "
" I must find out what has become of him. "
" It remains for me, then, " he said, " to remember]
in my prayers; and to entreat God for you, in all a .
ncss, that you may not indeed become a castaway. 1 1
thought 1 recognized in you one of the chosen. But |
flee« not as man sees: Nh will be done. "
He opened the gate, passed through it. and i
away down the glen. lie was soon out of sight.
On le-entering the parlor, I found Diana standini
the window, looking very thoughtful, Diana was a g^
deal taller than I: she put her hand on my shoulder^
stooping, examined my face. r
" Jane, " she said, " you are always agitated ftnd i
now. I am sure there is something tne matter. Terf
what business St. John and you have on hand. I r
watched you this half-hour from the window: you K
forgive my being such a spy, but for a long time I U
fancied I hardly know what. St. John is - - " —'
being "
She paused — I did not speak: soon she resume
brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some sort i
Bpecting you. I am sure: he has long distinguished y'
a notice and interest he never showed to any one
what end? I wish he loved you — does he, Jane? "
I put her cool hand to'my hot forehead: " No, %
not one whit. "
" Then why does he follow yon so with his eji
JANE EYRB.
get you BO frequently alone witb him, and keep yon s
linually at his side? Mary and I had both concluded j
vished you to marry him.'
" He does — he has asked me to be his wife. "
Diana clapped her hands. " That is just what i
hoped and thought! And you will marry him, Jane, wod
yon? And then he wUl stay in England. " 1
" Far from that, Diana; hia boTb idea in proposingjj
me ia to procure a fitting fellow-laborer in hia lacu*
toils. "
" What! He wishes you to go to India? "
" Yes. "
" Madness! " she exclaimed. " You would not 1
three months there, I am certain. You never shall j
you have not consented— have you, Jane?'
" I have refused to marry him "
" And have consequently displeased him? " she si^
gested.
" Deeply; he will never forgive me, I fear: y^ I <
fcred to accompany him as his sister. "
" It was frantic folly to do so, Jane. Think of tfl
task you undertook — one of incessant fatigue: where 8
tigue kills even the strong, and you are weak. St. Ji^
— you know him — would urge you to impossibilitiea: wiS
him there would be no permission to rest during the hoL
hours; and unfortunately I have noticed, whatever he ex-
acts, you force yourself to perform. I am astouished you
found courage to refuse hia hand. You do not love him,
then, Jane? "
" Not as a husband. "
" Yet he ia a handsome fellow. "
" And I am so plain, you see. Die. We should neW
suit. " L
" Plain! You? Not at all. You are much too prettj
as well as too good, to be grilled alive in Calcutta. " AiT
again she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts q
going out with her brother.
" I must, indeed, " I said: " for when just now I i
peated the offer of serving hira for a deacon, he expresafls
himself shocked at my want of decencv. Ho seemed'{'
think I had committed an Impropriety in proposing to ac-
company him unmarried— as if I had not from the first
hoped to find in him a brother, and habitually regarded
him as such. "
4di
JANE ETRE,
•• What makes you say he does not love you, Jane? "
" You should near liiinseU on the subject. He has
again and again explained that it is not himself, but his
omce he wishes to mate. He has told me I am formed for
labor — not for love: which is true, no doubt. But, in my
opinion, if I am not formed for love, it follows that I am
pot formed for marriage. Would it not be strange. Die-,
ta be chained for life to a man who regarded one but as a
useful tool? "
" Insupportable — unnatural — out of the qaeation! "
" And then, " I continued, " though I have only sisterly
affection fur him now, yet, if forced to be hia wiJe, I can
imagine the possibility of conceiving an inevitable, strange,
torturing kind of love for him, because he is bo talented ;
and there ie often a certain heroic grandeur iu his look,
manner, and conversation. In that case, my love would be-
come unspeakably wretched. He would not want me to
love him; and if I showed the feeling he would maken
eengibls that it was a superfluity unrequired by him, oilm
coming iu me. I know be would. "
" And yet St. John is a good man, " said Diana.
" He is a good nud a great mau: but he forgeta, {
leesly, the feeliiigB and claims of little people, in pi
hia own large views. It is better, therefore, for tat
niflcant to Keep out of his way, lest, in his progress,^
should trample them down. Here he comes! I will Im "
you, Diuna. " And I hastened up stairs, as I saw him (
tering the garden.
But I was forced to meet him again at supper,
ing that meal he appeared just aa composed aa usuaL'
had thought he would hardly speak to mo, and I was e
tain he had given up the pursuit of his matrimok
scheme: the sequel showed I was raiBtakcn on both poin
He addressed me precisely in his ordinary manner :m
what had, of late, been his ordinary manner; one aoTOM
louBly polite. No doubt he had invoked the helpoE^
Holy spirit to subdue the anger I had roused in him, if
now believed he had forgiven me once more.
For the evening reading before pravers he selected 1,
cwenty-firBt chapter of Revelation, tt was at all tlU
S'.easent to listen while from his lips fell the words of C
ible: never did his fine voice sound at once so bT«
and full — never did his manner become so impresHive I
its noble simplicity, as when he delivered the oracleq ^
JANE BTRE.
God: and to-night that voice took a more solemn tone—,
that manner a more thrilline meaning — as he sat in tha'
midst of his household circle (the May moon shining In
through the uncurtained window, and rendering almost
nnnecraaary the light of the candle on the table): as he
sat there, bending over the great old Bjble, and described
from its page the vision of the new heaven and the new
earth— told how God would come to dwell with men, how
he would wipe away all tears from their eyes, and prom-
ised that there should be no more death, neither sorrow
nor crying, nor any more pain, because the former things
were passed away.
The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spoke
them, especially as I felt, by the slight, indescribabla
alteration in sound that, in uttering them, his eye had
.turned on me.
" He that overcometh, shall inherit all things; and t
will be his (lod, and he shall be my son. Hut, " waff,
slowly and distinctly read, " the fearful, the unbelieving,
etc., shall have their part in the lake which bumeth wiS
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. "
Henceforward, I knew what fate St. John feared for me.
A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing ear-
nestness, marked his enunciation of the last glorious verses
of that cliapter. The reader believed his name was al-
ready written in the Lamb's book of life, and he yearned
after the hour which should admit him to the city to
which the kings of the earth bring their glory and honor;
which has no need of aun or moon to shine in it, because the
glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.
In the prajer following the chapter, all his energy
gathered, all hia stern zeal woke: he was in deep earnest,
wrestling with God, and resolved on a conquest. He sup-
plicated strength for the weak-hearted; guidance for
wanderers from the fold: a return, even at the eleventh
hour, for those whom the temptations of the world and
the flesh were luring from the narrow path. He asked,
he urged, he claimed the boon of a brand snatched from
the burning. Earnestness is ever deeply solemn. First,
as I listened to that prayer, I wondered at his; then,
when it continued and rose, I was touched by it, and at
last awed. He felt the greatness and goodness of his pur-
pose so sincerely; others who heard him plead for it could
not but feel it too.
tha-^H
I
430 J4SE l-VKK.
Tlie prayer over, we took leave of him; he was to ^
u Ten- eurly hour in the morioing, Diana and Mary _
ing fcisaed him, left the room — in compliance, I thii
with a wlkispered hint torn him. I tendered my li & nd,
and wished him a pleasant journey,
■'Thank you, Jane. As I said, I shall return from
Cambridge in a fortnight; that space, then, ia left you for
reSeetioD. If I liutenod to human pride I should say no
more to you of marriage with me: but IliEten to my duty,
and keep steadily in view my first aim — to do all things
to tlio glory of God. My Master was long-suffering; so
will I be. I cannot give you up to perdition as a vessel of
wratli; repent, resolve while there is yet time. Remem-
ber, we are bid to work while it is day — warned that'the
night coineth when no man shall work.'Remember the
fate of Dives, who had his good things in this life. God'
EUTo you strength to choose that better part which shall not
be taken from you! "
He laid bis hand on my head as he uttered the
words, He had spoken earnestly, mildly: his look
not, indeed, that of a lover beholding his mistreas; bal
was that of a pastor recalling his wandering sheep-
better, of a guardian angel watching the soul for wl
he is responsible. All men of talent, whether they be i
of feeling or not; whether they be zealots oraapiranta, _
de8) > otg — provided only they be sincere, have their sublime
moments: whoa they subdue and rule. 1 felt veneration
for St. John — veneration so strong that its impetus thrust
mo at once to the point I had so long shunned. 1
tempted to cease struggling with him — to rush down
forrent of his will into the gulf of hia existence, and *'
lose my own. I was almost as hard beset by hinl ni
I had been once before, in a different way, by another,
was a fool both times. To have vielded then would have
been an error of principle; to & ave yielded now would
have been an error of judgement. So I think at this hour,
when I look back to the crisis through the quiet medium
of time: I was nnconscious of folly at the instant,
I stood motionless under my nierophaiit's touch. My
refusals were forgotten, mv feara overcome, my wrestlii
Saralyzed. The Impossible — i. e. my marriage with
ohn-—waa fast becoming the possible. All was ohai
utterly, with a sudden sweep. Religion called — "
beokoned — God commanded — life rolled together
.. My
stling H
m
jase eyre.
flcroll — death's gates opening, showed eternity beyond:
seemed, that for safety and bliss there, all here might
saeriliced in a second. The dim room was full of visionf
" Could jou decide now? " asked the missionary. Tl
inquiry was put in genie tones: he drew me to liii
gently. Oh, that gentleness! how far more potent
than force! I could resist St. John's wrath; I grew plii
aa a reed under his kindness. Yet I knew all the time,
if I yielded now, I should not the less be made to repent
some day of my former rebellion. Hia nature was not
changed by one nour of solemn prayer; it was only elevated,
" I could decide if I were hut certain, " I answered.
" were I but convinced that it is God's will I should mar-
ry you, I could vow to marry you here and now — come
aiterward what would! "
" My prayers are heard! " ejaculated St. John.
pressed his hand firmer on my head, as if he claimed
he surrounded me with his arm, almost as if he loved
(I say alfnost-~-\ knew the difference — for I had felt what
it was to be loved ; but, like him* I had now put love out
o( tiie question, and thought only of duty): I contended
with my inward dimness or vision before which clouds vet
tolled. I sincerely, deeply, fervently longed to do what
was right, and only that. " Show me, show me the path! "
I entreated of Heaven. I was excited more than I had
ever been; and whether what followed was the effect of
citement, the reader shall judge.
All tile house waa still; foi I believe all, except _,
John and myself, were now retired to rest. The one candl
waa dying out: the room was full of moonlight. My heart
heat fast and thick: I heard its throb. Suddenly it stood
still to an inoxpfessible feeling that thrilled it through,
and passed at once to my head and extremities. The fet "
ing was not like an electric shock; but it was quite
sharp, as strange, as startling: it acted on my senses aa-
their utmost activity hitherto had been but torpor; fro
which they were now summoned, and forced to waki
They rose expectant: eye and ear waited, while the fleali
quivered on my bones.
" What have you heard? What do you see? " asked St.
John, I saw nothing; but I heard a voice somewhere ci
" Jane! Jane! June! nothing more.
" 0 Godl what is it? " I gasped,
might have said, " where is it? " for it did not
lar-
hat ^
438 JAKE EYRE.
in the room — ^nor in the hoiiBe — nor in the garden: it t
not come out of the air — nor from under the earth — ^nor
from overhead. I had heard it — where; or whence, forever
impoEEible to know! and it was the voice of u human be-
ing — a Itnown, loved, well-remembered voice — that of Ed-
ward Fairfax Rochester; and it spoke in pain and woe —
wildly, eagerilj', urgently.
'■J am coming! I cried, " Wait for me! Oil, I will
come!*'I flew lo the door, and looked into the passage:
it was dark. I ran out into the garden: it was void.
■■ Where are you? " I exclaimed.
The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly
back — " Where are you? " I liBtened. The wind eighed
low in the firs: all was moor-land loneliness and midnight
hush.
" Down, superstition! " I commented, as that specte,
rose up black by the black yew at the gate, " This la not
thy deception, nor thy witchcraft: it is the work of nature
She was roused, and did— no miracle^but her best. "
I broke from St. Jtftn; who had followed, and wonld
have detained me. It was wiy time to assiime ascendency.
My powers were in play, and m force. I told him to for-
bear question or remark; I desired him to leave me: I
must, and would be alone. He obeyed at once. Where
(here is energy to command well enough, obedience nevijr
fails. I mounted to my chamber; loclted myself in; foil
on my knees; and prayed in my way— a different way to St,
Johu s, but effective in its own fashion. I seemed to
penetrate very near a Mighty Spirit, and my soul rud
out in gratitude at His feet. I rose from the thankd "
iug. took a resolve, and lay down, unscared, enlightl
— eager for the daylight.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
The daylight came. I rose at dawn. I bosied mjL
for an hour or two with arranging ray things in my clfiB
ber. drawers, and wardrobe, in the order wherein I shouTo
wish fo leave them, during a brief absence. Meantime I
';d St. John quit his room. He stopped at my doori'"'
feared he woold knock — no, but a slip of paper wua paased
under the door. I took it up. It bore these words:
" Yon left me too suddenly last night. Hadyoustai^
bnt a little longer, you would have laid your hand on tliM
Christian's cross and the angel's crown, I shall expeofl
your clear decision when I return thia day fortnight. Mean4
time, watcli and pray that yon enter not Into temptationji
the spirit, I trust, is wifling, but the flesh, I see, is weak, .
shall pray for you hourly, — Yours, St. John. "
" My spirit, " I answered mentally, " is willing to dif]
what is right; aud my flesh, I hope, is strongh enough . . _.
eomplishihe will of Heaven, when once that will is distinct
ly known to nie. At any rate, it shall be strong enough i
search — inquire — to grope an outlet from thia cloud of doubw
and find the open day of certainty. "
It was the first of June; yet the morning was overcas
and chilly; rain heat fast on my casement, I heard the'
front door open, and St, John pass out. Looking through
the window, I saw him traverse the garden. He took the
way over the misty moors in the direction of Wbitcross —
there he would meet the coach.
" In a few more hours I shall succeed you in that track,
cousin, " thought I: " I too have a coach to meet at Whit-
cross, I too have aome to see and ask after in England,
before I depart forever. "
It wanted yet two hours of breakfast-time. I filled the
interval in walking softly about my room, and pondering
the visitation whicli had given my plans their present bent.
I recalled that inward sensation I had experienced, for I
could recall it, with all its unspeakable strangeness. I
recalled the voice I had heard; again I questioned whence
it came, as vainly as before: it seemed in me — not in the
external world. 1 asked, waa it a mere nervous impres-
sion — a delusion? I could not conceive or believe: it was
more like an inspiration. The wondrous shock of feeling
hiid come like the earthquake which shook the foundations
of Paul and Silas's prison; it had opened the doors of tb " "
soul's cell, and loosed its bands; it had wakened it out of ii
sleep, whence it sprang trembling listening, aghast; theaj
vibrated thrico a cry oii-my startled ear, and in my qnafc
ing heart, and through my spirit^ which neither feareq
nor Bjiook but exulted as if in joy over the success of t
effort it had beea privileged to make, iiide{)«idwt (^ . t
eumhroua body.
440
JAKE BTBB-
" Ere many days, " I said, m I terminated my mtiainga,
" I will know eomot.bing of him whose voice seemed I " " *
niglit to suitiiiion itie. Xetters have jiroved of no au
personal inquiry shiill replace them. "
At IjreakfuBt I announced to Diuna imd Mary 1
was going a journey, and ehould bo absent at leasts
days.
" Alone. Jano? " they asked.
" Yes; it was to see, or henrnews of a friend about H
I bad for some time been uneasy. "
They might have said, as I have no doubt they thoD^
that they had belieTed me to be without any friends save
tln'iii; for, indeed, 1 had often said so; but with their true
uuturid (lolicaoy, thoy abstained from comment: except
that Diana asked me if I was sure I was well enough to
travel. I looked very palo she observed. I replied, that
nothing ailed me save anxiety of mind, whicli I hoped
floon to alleviate.
It was easy to make my further arrangements; for I
was troubled with no inquiries — no surmises, having
once esplaine < l to them that I eould not now be espJ'
about my plans, tliey kindly and wisely acquiesced il~
silence with which I pursued them; according to i
privilege of free action I should, under similar c
stances, have accorded them.
I left Moor Uonae at three o'clock p. m.,
after four I stood at the foot of the sign-post at \
waitiug for the arrival of the coach wnieli was to tt^
to distant Thornfield. Amidst the silence of thoae
roads and desert hills, I heard it approach from
distiinGe. It was the. same vehicle, whence a year i
had alighted one summer evening on this verys] "
desolate, aud hopeless, and objectless ! It stoj
beckoned. I entered — not now obliged to part
whole fortune as the price of its accommodation,
more on the road to Thornfield, I felt like the met
pigeon flying home.
It was a journey of six-and-thirty honra. I hud
from WUitcroBs on a Tuesday afternoon, and early
succeeding Thui-sday morning the coach stopped to-^
the horses at a way-side inn, sitnsited in iho
aceuery whose green hedges, and large fields, and
toral hills (how mild of feature and verdant''
red with the stem north-midland
Jane etbe. 44]9
met my eye like the lineaments of a once familiar f»c^H
Yes, I knew the character of this landscape : I was stiro w^|
were uear my bourne. ■
" How far is Thornfield Hull from here? " I aakcd c^|
the hostler. jH
" Just two miles, ma'am, across the fields, " ■
" My journey is closed, " I thought to myself. I gow
out of the eoacli, gave the box I had into the hostleA
charge, to be kept till I called for it ; paid my fare ; satis-
fied the coachman, and was going : the brightening day
gleamed on the sign of the inn, and I read in gilt ]etterS|^
" The Rochester Arms. " My heart leaped up: I was iiUfl
ready on my mastei-'s very lauds. It fi'il again ; the thougl^H
struck it : ^M
" Your master himself msiy be beyond the British
Channel, for aught you know : and then, if he is at Thorn-
field Hall, toward which you hasten, who besides him is
there? His lunatic wife : and yon hare nothing to do with
him ; you dare not sneak to him or seek his presences
You have lost your labor — joii had better go no fartherj^B
urged the monitor. " Ask information of the people SM
the irm ; they can give you all you seek : they can eolvM
your doubts at onee. Go up to that man and inquire if
Mr. Rochester ia at home. "
The suggestion was sensible ; and yet I could not force
myself to act on It. I so di-eaded a reply that woul^_
crush me to despair. To prolong doubt was to prolonjfl
hope. I might yet once more see the Hull under " the I'f^M
el her star; There was the stile before me — the vei JB
fields through wliich I had hurried, blind, deaf, distraete^l
with a, revengeful fury tracking and scourging me, ou tb^^f
morning I fled from Thornfield. Ere I well knew wh^f
course fhad resolved to take, I was in the midst of therofl
How fast I had walked! How I ran sometimes! Howl
looked forward to catch the firet view of the well-kriowTi
woods! With what feelings I welcomed single trees 1
knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow and hill betwee^
tbomi S
At last the woods rose ; the rookery clustered dark ; fl
loud cawing broke the moi-ning stillness. Strange deliglfl
inspired nie; on I hastened. Another field crossed — a Ian™
threaded— and there were the conrt-yard walls^the back
oftloes — the house itself, the rookery still hid. " Myfirat
irtnrirttt rhnll b« ia front, " I determined, " There its.

)q[$ battlements will etrike t1)« eye nobly at once,
where I can BinKle out my mttstttre very window : perl
be will b« Htaiiilitig nt it — heriso^ ( < ar1y : pi'rhupa lie is
walking in tliu urchnrii, or un tin- pavonicnl in fi
Could I but see him! — but ii inuHioiil! Surely, it
caae, I should not be bo mad as to run to him! " J ft
tell — I am not certain. And if I did — what then?
hless him! What then? Who would be hurt by my
more tasting the lifo bis glance can give me? — I rave :
baps at this moment he ia watching the sun rise ovei
Pyrenees, or on the tideleae sea of the south. "
I had coasted along the lower wall of the orchi
turned its angle : there wiks a gate just there, opening
the meadow, between two etoiie pillars, crowned by i
balls. From behind one pillar I eonld peep round qt:
at the full front of the mansion, I advanced my heAd
precaution, desirous to ascertain if any bed-room urim
blinds were yet dnnni up: battlements, windows,
front — all from this sheltered station were at mycoi
The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me
I took this survey. I wonder what they thought :
must have considered I was very careful and timii
first, and that gradually I grew very bold and reoi "
A peep, and then a long stare ; and then a departure
my niohe and a straying out into the meadow, and a
den stop full in front of the great mansion, and a
tracted, hardy gaze toward it. " What uffectatjoi^
diflideuoe was this at first? " they might have detnaBi
" What stupid regard leasn ess now? "
Ileur an illustrntion, reader.
A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank
wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without'
her. He steals softly over the grass, careful to r
sound ; be pauses — fancying she has stirred ; he witbdra^
not for worlds would lie be seen. All is still;'
ailvanccs ; be bends above her ; a light veil rest
features ; he lifts it, bends lower ; now hie eyes anticij
the vision of beatity — warm, and blooming, and love!
rest. How hurried was their firet glance! But how
fix! How he starts! How he suddenly and vehem
clasps in both arms the form he dared nut, a mo
since, touch with his Snger! How be calls aloud a n
and drops his burden, and gazes on it wildly. He
— — and cries, and gazes, because he nolo]
JANE EYRE. 443
waken by any sound he can utter, by any movement he
can make. He thought his love slept sweetly: he finds
she is stone dead.
I looked with timorous joy toward a stately house: I
saw a blackened ruin.
No need to cower behind a gate-post, indeed I — to peep
up at chamber lattices, fearing life was astir behind them!
No need to listen for doors opening — to fancy steps on the
pavement or the gravel walk! The lawn, the grounds were
trodden and waste; the portal yawned void. The front
was, as I had once seen it in a dream, but a shell-like wi^ll
very high, and very fragile looking, perforated with i^ane-
less windows: no roof, no battlements, no chimneys — till
had crashed in.
And there was the silence of death about it; the soli-
tude of a lonesome wild. No wonder tliat letters ad-
dressed to people here had never received an answer: as
well dispatch epistles to a vault in a church aisle. The
grim blackness of the stones told by what fate the Hall
had fallen — by conflagration: but how kindled? What
story belonged to this disaster? What loss, besides mortar
and marble, and woodwork, had followed upon it? Had
life been wrecked, as well as property? If so, whose?
Dreadful question: there was no one here to answer it —
not even dumb sign, mute token.
In wandering round the shattered walls and through
the devasted interior, I gathered evidence that the calamity
was not of late occurrence. Winter snows, I thought,
had drifted through that void arch; winter rains beaten
in at those hollow casements: for, amidst the drenched
piles of rubbish, spring had cherished vegetation: grass
and weeds grew here and there between the stones and
fallen rafters. And oh! where, meantime, was the hap-
less owner of this wreck? In what land? Under what
auspices? My eyes involuntarily wandered to the gmy
church tow^er near the gates, and I asked,'^Is he with
Damer de Rochester, sharing the shelter of his narrow
marble house?'^
Some answer must be had to these questions. I could
find it nowhere but at the inn " , and thither, ere long, I
returned. The host himself brought my breakfast into
the parlor. I requested him to shut the door and sit
down: I had some questions to ask him. But when he
complied, 1 scarcely knew how to begin; such horror bad I
444 JANE EYRE.
of the possible answers. And yet the spectacle of desolation
I had lust left, prepared me in a measure for a tale of mis-
ery. The host was a respectable looking, middle aged man.
^^Yoii know Thornfield Hall, of course?'* I managed
te say at last.
" xes, ma'am; I lived there once.''
" Did you? " Not in my time, I thought; you are a
stranger to me.
" I was the late Mr. Rochester's butler, " he added.
The late I I seemed to have received with full force the
blow I had been trying to evade.
" The late! " I gasped. " Is he dead? "
" I mean the present gentleman, Mr. Edward's father,'
be explained.
I breathed again; my blood resumed its flow. Fully
assured by these words that Mr. Edward — my Mr. Roches-
ter (God bless him, wherever he was!) — was at least alive:
was, in short, the " present gentleman. " Gladdening
words! It seemed I could liear all that was to come —
whatever the disclosure might be — with comparative tran-
quility. Since he was not in the grave, I could bear, I
tnought, to learn that he was at the Antipodes.
" Is Mr. Rochester living at Thornfield Hall now? " I
asked, knowing, of course, what the answer would be, but
yet desirous of deferring the direct question as to where he
really was.
" No, ma'am — oh, no! No one is living there. I sup-
Eose you are a stranger in these parts, or you would have
card what happened last autumn — Thornfield Hall is
quite a ruin: it was burned down just about harvest time.
A dreadful calamity! such an immense quantity of valuable
property destroyed: hardly any of the furniture could be
saved. The fire broke out at dead of night, and before the
engines arrived from Milcote, the building was one mass of
flame. It was a terrible spectacle: I witnessed it myself. "
" At dead of night, " I muttered. Yes, that was ever
the hour of fatality at Thornfield. " Was it known how
it originated? " I demanded.
" They guessed, ma'am; they guessed. Indeed, I should
say it was ascertained beyond a doubt. You are not, per-
haps, aware, " he continued, edging his chair a little nearer
the table, and speaking low, " that there was a lady,
a lunatic kept in the house? "
" I have heard something of it. "
JANE Kl'KB.
le was kept in very close confinement,
EBoplo even for Bome years were not absoltitely certain o
er existence. No one saw her: they only knew by rum
that Buoh a person was at the Hall ; and who or what s
was it was difficnlt to conjecture. They aaid Mr. Edw!
had bronght her from abroad; and some believed she h
been his mistresB. But a queer thing happened a yes
Bince — a very queer thing, "
I feared now to hear my own story. I endeavored 1
reoall him to the main fact. "
" And this lady? "
" Thia lady, ma'am, " he answered, " turned out to h
Mr. Eochester's wife! The discovery was brought i
in the strangest way. There was a young lady, a goveni
esa at the Hall, that Mr. Rochester fell in- — -■ "
" But the fire, " I suggested
" I'm coming to that, ma'am — that Mr. Edward fell ii
;ove with. The servants eay they never saw anybody a
much in love as he was; he was after her continually.'The;
nsed to watch him — servants will, yon know, ma'am— a
he set store on her past evei^thing: for all, nobody but h
thought her so very handsome. She was a little, sm
thing, they say, almost like a child. I never saw her my-
self; but I've heard Leah, the housemaid, tell of her.
Leah liked her well enough. Mr. Rochester was about
forty, and his governess not twenty; and you see, wheit
gentlemen of his age fall in love with girls, they arfl
'often like as if they were bewitched: well, he would mar™
her. " J
" Yon shall tell me this part of the story another time, " !
I said; " bnt now I have a particular reason forwishing td
hear aJI about the fire. Was it Buapected that this UinatioJ
Mrs. Rochester, had any hand in it. "
" You've hit it, ma'am; it's quite certain that it waj
her, and nobody hut her, that set it going. She had i
woman to take care of her, called Mrs. Poole — an abia
voman in her line, and very trnatwortliy, but for one faula
fault common to a deal of them nurses and matrons-
she kept a private bottle of^in hy her, and now and thoJ
took a drop overmuch. It is cxcnsahle, for she had a har^L
life of it: hilt still it was dangerous; for when Mrs. Poole
was faat asleep after the gin-and -water, the mad lady, who
waa as cunning as a witch, would take the keys out of
'* ■ > igt herself out of her chamber, and go roam-
^^^^^^ JASTE lYBE. ^^^^H
ing ftboiit the hotiEe, doin^ any wild miGchief tliat (^^H
into her head. They say ^e had nonrly btirnorl her ^^|
baod in his bed once: but I dou'tkiiow about that. -^^H
ever, on this night, she set firo first to tho hangings of^H
roam next her own; and then she got down to a lo^H
etory, and made her way to the chamber that had been^^J
govemeBs'a — (she was like aa if she know aoinehow I^H
inatlet-3 had gone on, aud had a spite at her) — niid ^^M
kindled the bed there; but there was nobody sleeping lE^^I
fortunately. The govei-ness bad run awav two itiont.li3.^^|
fore; and for all Mr. Koobeetcr sought ^ler aa if she ^^|
been the most precious thing he had in the world, ^H
never could hear a word of hei'; aud he grow savage — qt^^|
Bavage on his disappointment: he uever wm a wild u^^|
but no got dangeroua after he lost her. He won]d'^^|
alono, too. He lient Mrs. Fairfas, the liousekeeper, &'^^|
to her friends at a distance; but he did it handsomely, ^^|
he settled an annuity on her for life: and slie deserved ^^|
she was a very good woman. Miss Adcle, a ward be 1^^|
waa put to school. He broke off acquaintance with all^^f
gentry, and shut himself up, like a tiermit, at the H^^H
" What! did he not leave England? " ^H
" Leave England? Bless you, no! He would not 4i^^|
the door-stones of the house — except at night, when^^f
walked just like a gboat about the grounds and > n ^^M
orchard as if be had lost his senses— which it is my opiniOtt3
he had; for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than
he was before that midge of a governess crossed him you
never saw, ma'am. Ho waa not a man given to winsj 1 " " " ^
cards, or racing, as some are, aud he was uot so very bad
some; but he Bad a courage and a will of his own, if »
man had. I knew bim from a boy, you see: and fori
part 1 have often wished that Afiss Eyre had been sunlff
the sea before she came to Thoriifield Hall. " ^
" Then Mr. Rochester waa at home when the firo faflj
out. "
" Tos, indeed was he; and he went up to the atd
when all was burning above and below, and got the e
ants out of theii- beds and helped them down him
and went back to get his mad wife out of her cell.
then they called out to him that she was on the roof, wlM^
she was standing, waving her arms, above the hattlemem
and shouting out till they could hear her a mile ofl: 1 1|
*■- " - -nd heaifd her with my own eyes. She r "
JANE ETRB.
■ff6man, and liad long black hair: we oonid see it stream'
ing against the flames as she stood. I witneesed. and K6V-
eral more witnessed Mr. Rochester aacend through the sky-
light on to the roof: we heard him call'BerthaP We sal " "
him approach her; and then, ma'am, she ytlled and ga'
a spring, and the next minute she lay smashed
pavement. "
" Dead? "
" Dead? Ay. dead as the stones on which her brai]
and blood were scattered, "
" Good God! "
" You iiiiiy well say so, ma'am: it was frightfull "
He shudderiid.
" And afterward? " I arged.
" Weil, ma'iim, afterward the house was burned
the ground; there ai-e only some bits of walla standi
now, "
" Were any other lives lost? "
" No — perhaps it would have been better if there had. "
" What do yon mean? "
" Poor Mr. Edwiu-d ! " he ejaculated, " I little thought
ever to hin'e soon it! Some aay it was a just judgment on
liira lor keeping his first marriage secret and wanting''''
take another wife while he had one living: but I pity ni:
for my part. "
" You said ho was alive? " I exclaimed.
" Yes, yea: he is alive; but many thiuk he had bet)
be dead. "
" Why? How? " My blood was again running cold.
" Where is he? " I demanded. " la he in Enghmd? "
" Ay — ay — he's in England; lie can't get out of Engi
land, I fancy — he's a flxture now. "
Wiiat agony was this! And the man seemed reeolved|
to pMlract it.
" He is stone blind, " he said at last. — " Yes — he
stone blind — is Mr. Edward. "
I dreaded worse. I had dreaded ho was mad. I sui
moned strength to ask what had caused this calamity. "
" It was all his own courage, and, a body may say, .
kindness, in a way, ma'am: he wouldn't leave the houi
till every one else was out before him. As ho came dowi
the gieat staii-caae at last, after Mrs. Rochester had flun|
herself from the battlements, there was a great crash— all
He yna taken out from under the ruins alive, but
P
448 JAifE trnt.
A?aJly hurt: a beam had fallen in such a way as to protect
nim partly; but one eye was knocked out and one hand so
crushed that Mr. Carter, the surgeon, had to amputate it
directly. The other eye inflamed: he lost the sight of that
aiso. He is now helpless, indeed — blind and a cripple.
'^ Where is he? Where does he now live?''
''At Ferndcan, a manor-house on a farm he has^ about
thirty miles off: quite a desolate spot.''
''Who is with him? "
" Old John and his wife: he would have n^ne else. He
is quite broken down, they say.
" Have you any sort of conveyance?
" We have a chaise, ma'am, a very handsome chaise.
" Let it be got ready instantly, and if your post-boy can
drive me to Ferndean before dark this day, I'll pay both
you and him twice the hire you usually demand. "
99
CHAPTER XXXVIL
The manor-house of Ferndean was a building of con-
siderable antiquity, modern size, and no architectural pre-
tensions, deep buried in a wood. I had heard of it before.
Mr. Rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes went there.
His father had purchased the estate for the sake of the
game covers. He would have let the house, but could
find no tenant, in consequence of its ineligible and insalu-
brious sight. Ferndean then remained uninhabited and
unfurnished, with the exception of some two or three rooms
fitted up for the accommodation of the squire when he
went up there in the season to shoot.
To tliis house I came, just ere dark, on an evening
marked by the characteristics of sad sky, cold gale and
continued small, penetrating rain. The last mile I per-
formed on foot, having dismissed the chaise and driver
" vith the double remuneration I had promised. Even when
within a very short distance of the manor-house, you
could see nothing of it, so thick and dark grew the timber
of the gloomy wood about it. Iron gates between granite
pillars showed me where to enter, and, passing through
JANB ESEE. 4*i
them, I found myself at once in the twiliglit of cloi
ranked trees. There waa a grass-grown track descend-'
ing the forest aisle, between hoar and knotty shafts
ana under branched arches, I followed it, expecting
soon to reach the dwelling; but it stretched on and on, it
wound far and farther: no sign of habitation or grounds
was visible.
I thought I had taken a wrong direction and lost my
way. The darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk
gathered over me. I looked round in search of another
raad. There was none: all waa interwoven stem, columnar
trunk, dense summer foliage — do opening anywhere.
I proceeded: at last my way opened, the trees thinned
a little; presently I beheld a " rading, then the house —
scarce, by this dim light, distinguishable from the trees;
so dank and green were its decaying walls. Entering a
portal, fastened only by a latch, I stood amidst a apace of
mclosed ground, from which the wood swept away in a
semicircle. There were no flowers, no garden-beds; only
abroad gravel-walk girdling a grass-plat, and this set in
the heavy frame of the forest. The house presented two
pointed gables in its front; the windows were laticed and
narrow; the front door was narrow, too; one step led up to
it. The whole looked, as the host of the Rochester Arms
had said, " quite a desolate spot. " It was as still as
churoh on a week-day: the pattering rain on the foi
leaves was the only sound audible in its vicinage.
" Can there be life here? " I asked.
Yes : life of some kind waa there : for I heard a move-^
ment— that narrow front door was unclosing, and some
shape was about to issue from the grange.
It opened slowly: a figure came out into the twilight
and stood on the step; a man without a hat: he stretched
forth his hand as if to feel whether it rained. Dusk as it
was, I had recognized him — it was my master, Edward
Fairfax Rochester, and no other,
I stayed my step, almost my breath, and stood to watch
him — -to examine him, myself unseen, and alasl to him
invisible. It was a sudden meeting, and one in which
rapture waa kept well in check by pain. I had no diffi-
cttlty in restraining my voice from exclamation, my step
from hasty advance.
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour
as ever: his port was still erect, hia hair was still ravi
ifta^^
rms
as a I
ome'
4M JAKE ETBS.
bU < :k; nor vere hU fntane allvral or mok: not in od6
rear's ;pace, hv anj tomw, could hi« Uhletic etrengtb be
qa«llcd, or hia TigortitiB prime blighted. Bat in his coun-
lenaocc I nw a change that ItmltMl ttpspcnte nnd brood-
ing — that reminded me of some wronged and rett«r«d
wild bcflst or bird, dangeroos to approacb in bis snll^
woe. The caged eagle, whow gofd-ringed eyes cruelty
haa ettingQiafa«d, might look sa looked that sightless
Sam peon.
And, reader, do yon think I feared him in his blind
femcitv? — if yon do, yon little knoir nie. A soft hope
blent with inv sorrow tlrnt soon I ahonid dare lo drapa
kiit* (lU that brow of rock, and on (hose lipe so sternly
sealed liL-iieitt)i it: but not y£t. ! wonid not accost htm vel.
lit'descended the one step, and advanced slowly and
gn > i)ingly toward the grass-plat. ffTiere was hia durinc
stride now? Then he paused, as if he knew not whiuh
way to turn. He lifted his hand and opened his eye-lids;
gased blank, and with a strained effort, on the 6tj, and
toward the ampitheater of trees; one saw that all to him
waa void darkness. Ue stretched his ri^ht hand (the left
arm, the mutilated one, he kept hidden in his bosom); he
ecemed to wish by touch to gain an idea of what lay
around him: he met but vacancy still; for the trees Were
Homp yards off where he atood. He relinquished Iho
endeavor, folded his arms, and stood qniet and mute in
the rain, now falling fast on hts uncovered head. At this
moment John approached him from some (jnarter,
" Will you tako my arm, air? " he said; " therekj
heavy ehowor coming on: had yon not better go in? "
" Let me alone. " was the answer.
John withdrew without having observed bia. ,
Kochester now tried to walk about: vainly — ail wa
nnL'< > rtain. He groped his way back to the honse, auc
entering it, closed the door.
I now drew near and knocked : John's wife openefl
me. " Mary, " I said, " how are yon? "
She Btarted as if she had seen a ghost: I calmed I
To lier hurried " Is it really you, Miss, come at ttuftfl
iiiiiir to this'only place? " I answered by taking her Im
Hiiil Iheii I followed her into the kitchen, whore John 9
»!it tiy a good lire. I explained to them, in few wordsj J
I had heard all which had happened since L left T|'
Geld, and that I was come to see Mr. Rochester. 1 1
John to go down to the turnpike-house, where I hail dis-
missed the chaise, and bring my trunk, which I had left
there: and then, while I removed my bonnet and shawl, 1
questioned Mary as to wliether I could be accommodated
at the Manor House for the night ; and finding that
arrangements to that eflfect, though difficult, would not be
impoagible, I informed her I should stay. Just at thian
moment the parlor-bell rang.
" When you go in, " said I, " toU your master thatd
parson wishes to speak to him, but do not give my na]
" I don't think he will see you, " she answered:
refoses every body. "
When she returned, I inquired what ho had said.
" You are to send, in your name and your busi
she replied. She then proceeded to fill a glass with wateij
and place it on a tray, together with candles.
" Is that what he rang for? " I asked.
" Yes: he always has candles brought In at darl^
though he is blind. "
" Give the tray to me, I will carry it in, "
I took it from her liand: she pointed me out the parl(^
door. The tray shook as I held it; the water spilled froi^
the glass; my heart struck my ribs loud and fast. Mai -
opened the door for me, and elint it behind mo.
This parlor looked gloomy: a neglected handful of t _
burned low in the grate; and, leaning over it with his
head supported against the high, old-fashioned innutel-
Siece, appeared the blind tenant of the room, Hia old
og. Pilot, lay on one side, removed out of the way, and
coiled up as if afraid of being inadvertently trodden upon.
Pilot pricked up his ears when I came in: then he jumped
up with a yelp and a whine, and bounded toward me;'
almost knocked the tray from my hands. I set it on t
table; then patted him, and said softly:
" Liedowiil " Mr. Rochester turned mechanically to «i
what the commotion was: but as he saw nothing, ho n
turned and sighed.
" Give mo the water, Mary, " he said.
I approached him with the now only half -filled glassfl
Pilot followed mc, still excited.
" What is the matter? " he inquired.
" Down Pilot! " I again siiid. He checked the %
its VK to bis lips, and seemed to listen: he drank, i
t^. _T — J — „'" " bis is yon, Mary, is it n

452 JAKK ETBB.
" Mary is in the kitchen, " I answered.
He put ont his hand with a quick gesture, bnt not seeing
where I stood, he did not touch me. " Who is this? Who
is this? " he demanded, trying, asitGeemed, to see with those
sigh tiess eyes — unavailing and distressing attempt! " An-
swer me — speak again ! " he ordered, imperiously and alond.
•'Will you have a little more water, sir? 1 spilled half
of what was in the glass,''I said.
" Who is it? What is it? Who speakB? "
" Pilot knows me, and John and Mary know I am here.
I dime only this eyening, " I answered.
" Great God! — what delusion has come over me? What
iweet madness haa seized me? "
" No delusion — no madness: your mind, sir, is too
strong for dehision, your health too sound for frenzy. "
" And where is tne speaker? Is it only a voice. "'Oh!
I can not see, but I must feel, or my heart will atop and
my brain burst. Whatever — whoever you are — be percepti-
ble to the touch, or I can not live! "
He groped; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned
it in both mine.
" Her very fingers! " he cried; " her small, slight fin-
gers! If so, there must be more of her. "
The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm
was seized, my shoulder — neck — waist — 1 was entwined
and gathered to him.
" la it Jane? Whal is it? This is her shape — this is
her size "
" And this her voice, " I added, " She is all here: her
heart too. God bless you, sir! I am glad to be so near
you again. "
" Jfluo Eyre! — Jane Eyre, " was all he said.
" My dear master, " I answered, " I am Jane Eyre: I
have found you out — I am come back to you. "
" In the " truth? — in the flesh? My living Jane? "
" You touch me, sir — yon hold me, and fast enough; I
am not cold like a corpse, nor vacant like air, am I F "
" My living darling! These are certainly her limbe,
and these her features; bnt I can not be so blessed, afte?
all my misery. It is a dream; such dreams as I have had
at night when I have clasped her once more to my heart,
as I do now; and kissed her, as thns — and felt tnat she
loved me, and trusted that she would not leave me. "
" Which I never will, sir, from this day, "
JANB EtBB.
" Never will, sajB the vision? But I always woke aojj
foutid it an empty mockery; and I was desolate and aban
doued — my life dark, lonely, hopeless— my soul athirsti'
and forbidden to drink — my heart famished, and never to
be fed. Gentle, soft dream, nestling in my arms now, yon
vrill fly, too, as your sisters have all fled before you: but
kiss me before you go — embrace me, Jane. "
" There, sir — and there! "
1 pressed my Hpa to his once brilliant and now raylej
eyes — I swept his hair from his brow, and kissed that toq
He suddenly seemed to arouse himself: the conviction o^
the reality of ail this seized him.
" It is you — ia it, Jane? You are come back to me,
then? "
" I am.
" And you do not lie dead in some ditch under some
stream? And you are not a pining outcast among stran-
gers? "
" No, sir; I am an independent woman now. "
" Independent! AVhat do you mean, Jane? "
" My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me fiyj
thousand pounds. "
" Ah. this is practical — this is real! " he cried:
should never dream that. Besides, there is that peoulia
voice of hers, so animating and piquant, as woll as soEt3
it cheers my withered heart; it puts life into it. — ^What,
Janet! Are yon an independent woman? A rich womau? "
" Quite rich, sir. If you won't let me live with you, I
can build a house of my own close up to your door, am'
yon may come and sit in my parlor wnen you want com
pany of an evening. "
" But as yon are rich, Jane, yon have now, no doubi
friends who will look after you, and not suffer you to d
vote yourself to a Wind lamenter like me? "
" I told yon I am independent, sir, as well as rich:
am mv own mistress. "
" And you will stay with me? "
" Certainly — unless you object. I will be your neigh-
bor, your nurse, your Iiousekeeper. I find you ionely: I
will bo your companion — to read to you, to walk witli you,
to eit with you, to wait on you, to be eyes and hands to
you. Oeaae to look so melaiiclioly, my dear master; yon
shall not be left desolate so long as I live. "
He replied not: he seemed seriouB — abstracted; h^
454 JJUTB STBB.
sighed; be tuU-opened hie lipc u if b > speak; he (
them agaiD. I felt a little embarraaeed. Perhaw 1 1.
too raem; overleaped coDTentiooalitiee; and he, like i
John, mv improprietj in my inconsidentteues^ I hud
indeed made my proposal from the idcu that he wished
and would aak me to be iiia wife: an ei)(ecbtti(iD not tbft
less certain becaaae unei pressed, had boojed me np, tb'
he would claim me at ont.-e us his own. But no hintLj
that effect escaped him, and his coantennnce becon
more overcast, I suddenly remembered that I might h_
been all wroiis, and was perhaps playing the fool uov._
tingly; and I hegan gently to witndraw myself & om bis
anna — ^bat he eagerly snatched me closer.
" No, no, Jane; you must not go. No — I have touched
yon, heard yon, felt the comfort of your presence — the
sweetness of yoor consolation : I can not give np these joys.
I have little left in myself — I must have yon. The world
may langh — ^may call me absurd, selfish — but it does
signify. My very soul demands you: it will be —•'-'
or it will take deadly vengeance on its frame. "
" Well, sir, I will stay with you: I have said so.
" Yes — but you understand one thing by staying
me; and I understand another. You, perhaps, could
make up your mind to be about my hand and chair — to
wait on me as a kind little nurse (for you have an affec-
tionate heart and a generous spirit, which prompt you to
make Bacrifices for those you pity), and that ought to
Buflice for me, no doubt. Isuppose I sliould not entertnin_
none but fatherly feelings for you: do yon think * "
Come — tell me. "
" I will think what you like, sir: lam contcDt
only vour nurse, if you tnink it better. "
" But you can not always be my nurse, Janet; you
young — you must marry one day, "
" I don't care about being married. "
" You should care, Janet: if I were what I onoe
would try to make you care, but — a sightless blook!
He relapsed agam into gloom. I, on the eontrwy,
came more cheerful, and took fresh courage; these
words gave me an insight as to wbere the difficulty .,
and as it was no difficulty with me. I felt quite relieTI
from my previous embarrassment. I resumed a li'"
vein »f conversation,
" It in time some one undertook to rehnmanize yi

JANE EXRE.
said I, parting hia thick and long uncnt locks; " for I e._
you are being metamorphosed into a lion or something of
that sort. You have a'faux air'of Nebuchadnezzar in
the fields about you, that is certain: your hair remindsjl
me of eagles'feathers; whether your nails aro grown lik < |
birds claws or not, I have not yet noticed. " T
" On this arm, I have neither hand nor nails, " ho said,'
drawing the mutilated arm from his breast, and showing
it to me. It is a mere stump — a ghastly sight! Don't
you thing so, Jane? "
" It is a pity to see it; and a pity to see your eyes — and
the Bcar of fire on your forehead: and the worst of it ia,
one is in danger of locine you too well for all this, and
making too much of you.'
" I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when yon
eaw my arm, and my cicatrized visage, "
*'Did youV Don't tell me so, least I should say some-
thing disparaging to your judgment. Now, let me leave _
you an instant, to make a better fire, and have the hearth,
swept up. Can you tell when there is a good fire?'
" Yes: with the right eye I see a glow — a ruddy haze. "
" And you see the caudles? "
" Very dimly — each is a luminous cloud. "
" Can you see me? "
" No, my fairy: but I am only too thankful to hear andj
feel you. "
" When do yoii take supper? "
" I never take supper. "
" But you shall have some to night. I am hungry: aa^
are you, I dare say, only you forget. "
Summoning Mary, I soon had the room in more cheer-
ful order: 1 prepared him, likewise, a comfortable repast.
iHy Bpirits were excited, and with pleasure and ease I
talked to him during suppor, and for a long time aftor^
There was no harassing restraint, no repressing of glM^
and vivacity with him; for with him I was at perfect eaaejL
because I knew I suited him: all 1 said or did seemeif "
■ either to console or revive him. Delightful consciousness!
It brought to life and light my whole nature: in his pres-
ence I thoroughly lived; and he lived in mine. Blind as
he was, smiles played over his face, joy dawned on his fore-
head; his lineaments softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions, of
where I had been, what I had been doing, how 1 1'


456 JANE EYRE.
found him out; but I gave him only very partial replies:
it was too late to enter into particulars that night. Be-
sides, I wished to touch no deep-thrilling cord — to open
no fresh well of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim
was to cheer him. Cheered, as I have said, he was: and
yet but by fits. If a moment's silence broke the conver-
sation, he would turn restless, touch me, then say, *^ Jane.*'
*'You am altogether a. human being, Jane? You are
certain of that? "
**I conscientiously believe so, Mr. Rochester. "
** Yet how, on this dark and doleful evening, could 3'ou
so suddenly rise on my lone hearth? I stretchel my hand
to take a glass of water from a hireling, and it was given
me by you: I asked a question, expecting John's wife to
answer me, and your voice spoke at my ear. "
*'Because I had come in, in Mary's stead, with the
tray. "
^'And there is enchantment in the very hour I am now
spending with you. Who can tell what a dark, drear}',
hopeless life I have dragged on for month's past? Doing
nothing, expecting nothing; merging night into day; feel-
ing but tlie sensation of cold when 1 let the fire go out, of
hunger when I forgot to eat: and then a ceaseless sorrow,
and, at times, a very delirium of desire to behold my Jane
again. Yes: for her restoration I longed, far more than
for that of my lost sight. How can it be that Jane is with
me, and says she loves me? Will she not depart as sud-
denly as she came? To-morrow, I fear, I shall find her
no more. "
A commonplace, practical .reply, out of the train of his
own disturbed ideas, was, I was sure, the best and most re-
assuring for him in this frame of mind. I passed my
finger over his eyebrows, and lemarked that they wero
scorched, and that I would apply something which should
make them grow as broad and as black as ever.
*'Where is the use of doing me good in any way, be-
neficent spirit, when at some fatal moment, you wiJl again
desert me — passing like a shadow, whither and how, to me
unknown; and for me, remaming afterward undiscover-
able? "
''Have you a pocket-comb about you, sir? "
^nVhatfor, Jane? "
^* Just to comb out this shabby black mane. I find
you rather alarming, when I examine you close at hand;
JANE EYRE.
j^ou talk of my being a fairy; but I am sure you a
like a brownie, "
" Am I hideous, Jane? "
" Very, air; you always were, you know. "
''HuDipli! The wiekednesa haB not been taken out \
yon, wherever yon have eojonrned. "
" Yet I have been with good people; fax better thi.
you: a hundred times better people: poaseeeed of idej
and views you never entertained in your life: quite mol
refined and exhalted. "
" Who the deuce have you been with? "
" If you twiat in that way you will make me pull I
hair out of your head; and then I think you will (
entertain doubts of my substantiality. "
" Who have you been with, Jane. "
" You shall uot get it out of me to-night,. eir; j
must wait till to-morrow; to leave mv tale half told, wit|
you know, be a sort of security that f shall appear at yoifl
breakfast table to finish it. Bj-the by, I must mind uot
to riBR on your hearth with only a glass of water, then: I
must bring an egg at the least, to say nothing of Erie'
ham "
" You mocking changeling — fairy horn and hum
bred! You make me feel as I have uot felt these twel^
months. If Saul could have had you for his David, i
evil spirit would have been exorcised without the aid t
the harp.'.
" Tliere, sit, you are redd up and made descant. N(W
I'll leave you: I hare been traveling these last three dayi
and I believe I am tired. Good night.
" Just one word, Jane; were there only ladies in the
house where you have been? "
I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I r^t
up stairs. " A good idea! "'1 thought, with glee. " Is
I Jiave the means of fretting him out of his melancholy f
some time to come. "
Very early the nost morning I heard him up and a & im
wandering from one room to another. As soon as Mai
came down 1 heard the question,'• Is Miss Eyre here?!
Then: " Which room did you put her into? Was it dry!
Is she up? Go and ask if she wants any thing; and whea
ahe will come down. "
I came down as soon as I thought there was a prospect
of breakfast. Catering the room very softly, I had a view

4SS 3kSe ETEB.
of him before he discovered my preaeoce. It yne monm-
ful, indeed to witntsa ihc subjugation of that rigoroag
spirit t(j n corporeul infinnitj-. He ant in his chair — elill
hot not at Kst: espeelaiit evideotlj: the Untx of dov
habitual swlness markiue hiaetrong features. Hie n > un-
teuftoce reminded one of a lamp quenched, waiting to be
relit — and, alafil it was not himself that coald now kindle
the luster of animated espression: he was dependent on
aootber for that officel I had meant to be gay and care-
IcBB. but the jKiwerlessiiii^ of ihe strong man t < iucbed my
heati to the qoick: still I accost^ bim with trhat vh'acitv
I could: " It is a bright, sunoy morning, sir, " 1 aai^.
" The raiu is over and gone, and tberu is a tender shining
after il: you shall liavc a walk soon. " * "
I bad wakened the glow: his featnres beamed,
" Oh, jou are indeed there, my ekylart! Come tOi
You ore not gone: not Taoigbed ? I heard one of yotir T
HD hour ago, singing high over the wood: but its song
no mugic for me, any more than the nBing aun had i__...
All the melody on earth is concentrate in my Jane'a
tongue to my ear (I am glad it is not naturally a silent
oneT; all the sunshine I can feel is in ber pi-oaence. "
The water stood in my eyea to hear this avowal of His
dependence: jnst aa if a royal eagle, chained to a perch,
should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become ita pwr-
Teyor. But I would not be lachrymoee; I dafihed off the
Baft drops, and busied myself with jireparing breakfast
Most of the morning was spent in the open air. I led
him out of the wet and wild wood into some cheerful
Selds: I described lo him how brilliautly green they were;
bow the flowers and betigee looked refreshed: how spark-
lingly blue was the sky. I sought a seat for him in a
hidden and lovely spot: a dry stump of a tree: nor did I
refuse to let him, when seated, place me on his knee: why
should I, when both he and I were happier near than
apart? Pilot lay beside ns: all was quiet. He broke ont
suddenly, while claepiug me in his arms: " Cruel, cruel
deserterl Oh Jjine, what did I feel when I discovered yon
had fled from Thorufield, and when I could nowhere find
you; and, after examining your apartment, ascertained
that you had taken no money, or a,nything which eoiild
serve as an eqnivalentl A pear! necklace I bad givon vou
lay untouched in its little casket: your trunks were Wt
OOTde^nd locked as they had been prepared foarth'* "'" "
inin g
JAlfE ETBE. 459
tour. What eonld my darling lio, I asked, loft deatitute^
andpennilesB ? And wliat did she do ? Let me hear now. "
Tiiua iirged, I hegau the narrative of my experience for
the last year. I softened considerably what related to the
three dajaof wandering and starvation, because to have
told him 9TI would have been to inflict unnecessary pain :
the little X lid say lacerated his faithful heart deeper than
I wished.
I should not have left him thus, he said, without an;
means of making my way. I should have told him *
intention. I should have confided in him : he would never
have forced me to be his miatresa. Violent as'he had
seemed in hia despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well
and too tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant : he would
have given me half his fortune, without demanding so
much as a kiss in return, rather than I should have flung
myself friendless on the wide world. I had endured, he
was certain, more than I had confessed to him.
" Well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very
short, " I answered, and then I proceeded to tell him how
I had been received at Moor House ; how I had obtained
the ofBce of school-mistress, etc. The accession of fortune,
the discovery of m^ relations, followed in due order. Of
course, St. John Rivers's name came in frequently in the
progress of my tale. When I had done, that name was'
mediately taken up.
" This St, John, then, is your consin ? "
" Yea. "
" You have spoken of him often : did you like him
" Ho was a very good man, sir : I could not help liking
him. "
" A good man ? " Does that mean a respectable, well-
conducted man of fifty ? Or what does it mean " "
" St. John was only twenty-nine, sir. "
"'Jeune encore,'as the French say. Is he a person ot'
low stature, phlegmatic, and plain ? A person whose good
neas consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice, than in his
prowess in virtue ? "
" He is untiringly active. G-reat and exalted deeds are
what he lives to perform. "
" But his bniin ! That is probably rather soft? He
means well : but you shrug voiir shoulders to hear him
talk ? "
He talks little, sir : what he does say is ever to ttia
i
m
ar ^1
le
JAKB KTRB.
point. His brwn U first-rste, I shoidd think not tmpn»-'
eibJe, but Tigorona. "
" He is an able man, tbon ? "
" Tniljable. "
" A thoroughly educated man ? "
" St. John IS an accoiuplished and profound scholar.
" His manners, I think you said, are not to yoi;''
—priggish and parsonic? "
" f never mentioned his'manners ; bat. onless I
verr bad taste, they muet suit it ; they are poUahed,
and Ewi tie man-like. "
'• Hia appearance — I forget vbat description you
of his appearance — a sort of raw curate, half strai
with his white neckcloth, and stilted up on his thick-
high-lows, ch ? "
" St. John dresses veil. He is a handsome man :
fair, with blue eyes, nod a Grecian profile. "
(Aside) " Damn him! " — {Tome) " Did you like
Jane ? "
" Ves, Mr. Rochester, I liked him : but you asked me
that before.
I perceived, of course, the drift of my interlocal
Jeutonsy had got hold of him : slie stung him ; bu^
sting was salutary : it gave him respite from the gnai
fang of melancholy. I would not, therefore, immedl
charm the snake.
" Perhaps yon would rather not sit ;
knee, Mies Eyre? " was the next somi
observation.
" Why not, Mr. Bochester ? "
" The picture you have just drawn
rather too overwhelming contrast. Yoi
lincuted very prettily a graceful Apollo
yonr imaeination — tall, wir, blue eyed, and with a Qi
Erofilc. Your eyes dwell on a Vulcan — a real blacksi
rown, broad shouldered ; and blind and lame,
bargain. "
" I never thought of it before; but you oertaii
rather like Vulcan, sir. "
'• Well, you can leave me, ma'am : but before
(and ho retained me by a firmer grasp than
will he pleased just to answer me a question or two.
paused.
'What questiouSj Ur. fiooh«ter ? "
4
IT longer on mf "
rnat unexpected
suggestive of a
words hnve de-
he is present t o \

JANE EYfiE.
Then followed thiscroBs-examinatton;
" 8t. John made you Hchool-mistreae of Morton beforel
he knew you were his cousin? "
" Yea. "
" You would often see him? He would visit the school
Bometimea? "
" Daily. "
" He would approve of your plans, Jane? I know then
would be clever, for you are a talented creature. "
" He approved of them— yea. "
" He would discover many things in you he could r
have expected to find? Some of your accomplishmenta are
not ordinary. "
" I don't know about that. "
" Yon had a little cottage near tlie school, you say: di^
he ever come there to Bee you? "
'■ Now aud then. "
■•Ofmovoiiog? "
" Onoe or twice. "
" How long did you reside with him and his sisten
after the couBinahip was discovered? "
" Five months,
" Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of hit
family ? "'
" Yes; the back parlor was both his study and ours:
eat near the window and we by the table. "
" Did he study much? "
" A good deal. "
" Wliat? "
" Hindoostanee. "
" And what did you do meantimef *
" I learned German at first. "
" Did he teach you? "
" He did not understand German. "
" Did he teach you nothing? "
" A little Hindoostanee, "
" Rivera taught you HindoOBtaneeP "
" Yes, sir. "
" And his siaterB also? "
" No. "
" Only you? "
" Only me, "
" Did you ask. to leamffL

^^ "
" No. "
" lie wished to teoob jfon? "
" Yes. "
A second pause.
" Why did he wish it? Of what use could ]
etaneo be to jou ? "
" He intended me to go with him to India. "
" Ah! here I reach the root of the matter. He want« <
yoD to marry him? "
" He asked me to marrj him. "
" That is a fiction — an impadent inventioii to vei
me. "
" I beg your pardon, it is the literal truth: he asked
me more than once, and was aa etifl about urging his point
as ever you could be. "
" Mi83 Eyre, I repeat it, yon can leave me. How often
am I to say the same thing? Why do you remain perti
naciougly perched on my knee, when 1 hare givt " ™
notice to quit? "
" Becanse I am comfortable there. "
" No, Jane, you are not comfortable there^ 1
your heart is not with me: it is with this cousin— 4
John. Oh, till this moment I thought mj little Jane f
all mine! I had a belief she loved nie even when she left
me: that waa an atom of sweet in much bitter. Long as
we have been parteil, hot tears as I have wept over our
separation, I never thought that while I was mounuog
her she was loving another! But it is useless grieving.
Jane, leave me: go and marry Rivers. "
" Shake me olT, then, sir — posh me away, for ni not
leave vou of my own accord. "
" Jane, lever like your tone of voice: it still renews
hopo, it sounds so truthful. When I hear it, it carri« " " ^
buck a year. I foi-get that you have formed i
But I am not a fool— go — — "
" Where must 1 go, sir? "
" Your own way — with the husband you have choi
" Who is that? "
" You know — this St. John Rivers. "
" He is not my husband, nor ever will be. He doc
love me: I do not lovo him. He lovea (as ho mn love.1
that is not as you love) a beautiful young lady called Rosa-
mond, He wanted to marry me only becanse he thougl'
J should make a suitable missionary's wife, which i

I renew^^
Lrri^^^H
neil^^^^l
cho^^l
doj^l
ove. tS^^I
d Rosa- I
hon ght I
icl^MH
Voiild not have done. He is good and p'eat. but serere:
and, for me, cold as an iceherg. He is not like yoii, sir;
1 am not happy at his side, nor near him, nor with hinij^
He has no imlulgeiice for nie — no fondness. He f "
nothing attractive in me; not even yonth — only a I
useful mental points. — Then I must leave you, eir, to gol
him. T
I shn < ]dored involuntarily, and clung instinctively cloai
to my blind but beloved master. He smiled. I
" What, Jaue ! Is this true? Is aueh really the stu
of matters between tou and Hivers ? "
" Absolutely, sir! Oh, yon need not he iealonall w
to tease yon a little to make yon less sad: I thought and
■would be better than grief. But if you wish me to lo J
yon, conld you see how much I do love you, you would t
proud and content. All my heart ia yours, eir: it belorM
to you: and with you it would remain, were fate to exl
the rest of me from your presence forever, "
Again, as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened hia
aBpect.
'■ My seared vision! My crippled atreugth! " he mur-
mured, regretfully,
I CBToased, in order to soothe him. I knew of what \
wus thinking, and wanted to epeak for him; but dared nd
Ashe turned aside his face a minute, I saw a tear slla
from under the sealed eyelid, and trickle down the mma
check. My heart swelled. 1
" I am no better than the old Hghtning-strnck chen
nut-tree in Thornficld orchard, " he remarked era lorn
" And what right would that rnin have to bid a buddiflj
woodbine cover its decay with freshnegs? "
" You are no ruin, sir — no lightning-struck t
are green and vigorous. Plants will grow about your rooti,
whether you ask them or not, because they take delight in
your bountiful shadow; and as they grow they will lean
toward you, and wind round you, because your strength
offers them so safe a prop. "
Asnin he smiled; 1 gave him comfort.
" You speak of friends, Jane? " he askf
" Yea: of friends, " I answered rather I
know I meant more than friends, but could not tetl whi
other word to employ. He helped mel
" Ah! Jane. But I want a wife. "
^—'IJo you, air. "

iU
JAXB etbk.
" Yes, is it news to yoo? "
" Ofconree, yon said nottung abont it before.''
" Ib H Tinwelcome news? "
" That depends on circamstRnces > wt— on yonr oh < 4
" Which yciB shall make for nie, Jane. I will »''*
jonr decisiou. "
" Choose then, sir — her trfiohves you best. "
" I will at leiut choose — her I lovt best. Jane wiD
marrv me? "
"'Yes, sir. "
" A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead 1
by the hand ? "
" Yes, sir. "
" A crippled man, twenty years older than yon.
" Trnly, Jane? "
•'Most truly, Bir. "
" Oh! my darling! God Wees you and reward yoofl
" Mr. Rochester, if ever I did a good deed in my w
if ever I thought a good thought — if ever I prayed I
cere and blameless prayer — if ever I wished a rigtf
wish — I am rewarded now. To be joar wife, is, iot W
1)6 as happy as I can be on earth. "
" Because vou delight in saciifice. "
" Sacrifice! What do I sacrifice? Famine J
expectation for content. To he privUigod to pnt u
round what 1 value — to press my lips to what I 1_
repose on what I trust: is that to malte a sacriGcef
then certainly I delight in sacrifice. "'
" And to bear with my infirmities, Jane: to overloc
deficiencies. "
" Which are none, sir, to me. I love you het
when I can really he useful to you, than I didin y
of proud independence, when you disdained every |
that of the giver and protector. "
" Hitherto 1 have hated to be helped — to be led 1
forth, I feel I shall hate it no more. I did not like i
my hand into a hireling's, but it is pleasant to feel it d
by Jane's little fingers. I preferred ntter h
to the constant attendance of servants; but Ja;
ministry will be a perpetual joy, Jane suits me; i
her? "
" To the finest fiber of my nature, air. "
" Tliecaae being ao, we have nothing in the world t
wait for : we must be Dimmed instantly.
He looked and apoke with oajferneBS : his old impetaofl
itji was riaiDg.
" We must become one fleah without any delay, Jane £
there is but the licenae to get — then we marry. "
" Mr. Eoohester, I have just discovered the aui
declined from ita meridian, and Pilot ia actually gone homM
to his dinner. Let me look at your watch. " i
" Fasten it into your girdle, Janet, and keep it hence-
forward : I have no use for it. "
" It ia nearly four o'clock in the afternoon, air. Don't
JOU fee! hungry? "
" The third day from this mnat be our wedding-day,
Jane. Never mind fine clothes and jewels, now : aH thaij
ia not worth a filiip. "
" The fiun has dried up all the rain-dropa, air. Thf
breeze ia still : it is quite hot. "
" Do you know, Jane, I have your little pearl necklac
at thia moment fastened round my bronze scrag under rajM
cravat P I have worn it since the day I loat my only treaa^g
nre, as a memento of her. " r
" We will go home through the wood : that will be thaj
ahadieat way.''
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me,
" Jane, you think me, I dare say, an irreligioua dog:'
Ibnt my heajt swells with gratitude to the benificent God
of thia eai-th just now. He sees not aa man sees, but far
clearer : judges not as man judges, but far more wisely, I
did wrong : I would have Bullied my innocent flower —
breathed guilt on ita purity : the Omnipotent snatched it
from me, I in my stiff-necked rebellion, almost cursed
the dispensation : instead of bending to the decree, I defied
it. Divine justice pursued ita course ; diaastera came thick
on me : I waa forced to pasa through the valley of the
shadow of death. His chas^iaements are mighty ; and one
smote me which hoa humbled me forever. You know I
was proud of my atrength ; but what is it now, when I
roust give it over to foreign guidance, aa a child does its
veakneBBp Of late, Jane — only — only of late— I begin to
see and acknowledge the hand of Qod in my doom. I be-
gin to experience remorse, repentance ; the wish for recon-
< nlement to my Maker. I began aometimes to pray : very
brief prayers they were, but very sincere.
466 Jake KtiiB.
" Some days ^hcg : nay, I can number them — toarl
Vfos hisl Monday iiiglit, a eiugular mood came oyer me :
one in which gnef replaced frenzy — sorrow Bullennesa. I
had long had the impresBion that since I conld nowkero
find jou, you must be dead. Ijate that night — perhaps ii
might be between eleven and twelve o'clock — ere I retired
to my dreary rest, I supplicated God that, if it seemed
good to Him, I might soon be taken from this life, and
admitted to that world to come, where there was atill hope
of rejoining Jane.
'■ I was in my own room, and sitting by the window,
which was open : it soothed me to feel the balmy night air ;
though I could see no etars, and only by a vague, Inmin-
ouH haze, knew the preeeuce of the moon. I longed for
thee, Janet! Oh, I longed for thee both with soul aod
tieshi I aeked of Ood, at once in anguish and humili^,
if I had not been long enough desolate, afflicted, torment-
ed, and might not Boon taste bliss and peace once more.
That I merited all I endured, I acknowledged — that I
conld Boarcely endure more, I jileaded ; and the alpha and
omega of my beart's wishes broke involuntarily from my
lipsmthe words —'Jane! Jane! Janel'"
" Did you sjieak these words aloud? "
" I did, Jane. If any listener had hoard me, he would
have thought me mad : I pronounced them vitb such
frantic energy. "
" And it was last Monday night, somewhere near-)
night? "
" Yes; but the time ia of no consequence : what foil
is the strange point. You will think me superstitf
some superstition I have in my blood, and alway-
neverthelesB, this is true — true'at least it is that!
what I now relate. " ^
" As I exclaimed'Jane! Jane! Jane!'a voice — I .
not tell whence the voice came, but I know whose roice
it was — replied,'I am coming : wait for me ;'and a mo-
ment after, went whispering on the wind, the words —
• Where are yon? "
" I'll tell you, if I can, the idea, the picture these words
opened te my mind : yet it is difficult to express what I
want to exproBH, Femdean is buried, as yon see, in a
heavy wood, where sound fulls dull, and dies nnreverber^
ating.'Where are jou?'seemed spoken among mount-
'''Ii i tial heard a hdl-sent echo repeat the words. " --'—
rith such.
near-o^H
Btit^^^H
> ti^^H
JANE ETRE.
and fresher at the moment the gale seemed to Tieit my 1
brow: I could have deemed that in some wild, lone scene, I
J. and Jane were meeting. In spirit, I believe we must I
hare met. Yon no doubt were, at that hour, in uncon- 1
scions sleep, Jane: perhaps your soul wandered from its J
ieall to comfort mine; for those were your accents — as cer-1
iain as I live — they were youra! *'I
Header, it was on Monday night — near midnight — that:!
_[ too had received the mysterioua summons: those were I
ifae very words by which I replied to it. I listened to Mr. "
(Rochester's narrative, but made no disclosure in return.
The coincidence struck me as too awful and inexplicable
to be communicated or discussed. If I told any thing,
y tale would be such aa must necessarily make a pro-
found impression on the mind of my hearer: and that'
imind, yet from its sufferings too prone to gloom, needed 1
inot the deeper shade of the supernatural, I kept fliese J
thiiLgs then, aud pondered them in my heart.
" Yon can not now wonder, " continued my master, " tt
when you rose upon me so onexpectedly last night, I h
^difficulty in believing you any other than a mere voice ai
vision: something that would melt to silence and annihl-J
lation, as the midnight whisper and mountain echo hadl
melted before. Now, I thank Godl I know it to be other- f
^ae. Yes, I thank God! "
He put me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting hia 1
hat from his hrow, and bending his sightless eyes to the I
earth, lie stood in mute devotion. Only the last words of |
■the worahip were audible.
" I thank my Maker, that in the midst of judgment he J
has remembered mercy. 1 humbly entreat my Redeemer I
to give me strength to lead henceforth a, purer'lile than I 1
have done hitherto! " I
Then he stretched his hand out to be led. I took that 1
dear hand, held it a moment to my lips, then let it pass I
found my shoulder: being so much lower of stature tnan 1
he, I served both for his prop and guide. We entered the ]
wood, and wended our way homeward,
CHAPTER XXSVnL
cosrcLueios.
Headbh, I married him, A qniet wedding we had: he
(iQd I, the parson and clerk, were alone present. When
we got back from cliuich, I went into tlio kitchen of tha
inauov-bouBe, where Mary waa cooking the dim
John cleaning the knives, and I aaid: " Mary, I haws li
married to Mr. Rochester this morning. " The hoi
keeper and faer husband were both of that decent pbtt
matic order of people to whom one may at an^ time aft
comifeuDicate a remarkable piece of news without af
ring the danger of having one's ears pierced by some m .
ejaculation, and snbEequeiitly Etunned by a torreut^fl
wordy wonderment. Marv did look up, and she did t^M
at me: the ladle with which she was baling a pUMJ
chickens roasting at the Are, did for some three miBi
hang enspended in air; and for the same space of t
John's knives also had rest from the polisbing process:
but Mary, bending again over the roa^, said only, " Have
jou. Miss? Wei!, for sure! "
A short time after she pursued: " I seed yon go c
with the master, but I didn't know yon were gooflU
church to be wed; " and slie basted away. John, vbi'
turned to him. was grinning from ear to ear.
" I telled Mary how it would be, " he said: " I knew
what Mr, Edward " (John was an old servant, and had
known his ina < ^ter when he was the cadet of the house.
therefore he often gave him hia Christian name) — " I
knew what Mr. Edward wonld do; and I waa certain he
would not wait long either: and he's done right, for anght
I know. 1 wish you joy, Missl " and he politely pulled liia
forelock.
'•Thank you, John. Mr, Rochester told me to give
yon and Mary this, " I pnt into his hand a live-pound
note. Without waiting to hear more, I left the kitchen.
In passing tlie door of that sanctum some time after, I
caaght the words: " She'll happen do better for him nor
onj o't'grand ladies. " And again, " If she beu't one o'

JANE BYRE.
'haadaomest, ehe'a noan t & il and varry good-natured;
hia een she's fair beautiful, onybody may sea
that. "
I wrote to Moor House and to Cambridge immediately,
to eay what I had done, foUy explaining also why I had
thus acted. Diana and Mary approved the step unreserv-
edly, Diana announced that she would just give me time
to get over the hoitey-moon, and then she would come and
see me.
3 had better not wait till then, Jane, " said Mr.
Rochester, when I read her letter to him; " if she doea,
she will be too late, for our honey-moon will shine otir
life-long : its beams will only fade over your grave or
How St. John receiTed the news, I don't know; he
never answered the letter in which I communicated it; yet
six months after he wrote to me, without, however, men-
tioning Mr. Rochester'a name, or alluding to my marriage.
His letter was then calm; and though very serious, kind.
He has maintained a reguJar, though not freqnent corre-
spondence ever since: he hopes I am happy and trusts I
am not one of those who live without God in the world,
and only mind earthly things.
Yo« have not quite forgotten little Adele, have you,
reader? I had not: I soon asked and obtained leave of
Mr, Bochester to go and see her at the school where he
had placed her. Her frantic joy at beholding me again
movM me much. She looked pale and thin: Sie said she
waa not happy. I found the rules of the establishment
were too strict, its coarse of study too severe, for a child
of her age: I took her home with me. I meant to become
her governess once more; but I soon found this impracti-
cable; my time and careawere no* required by another —
my hnsband needed them all. 80 I sought out a school
conducted on a more indulgent system, and near enough
to permit of my visiting her often, and bringing her home
sometimes. I took care she should never want for any
thing that could contribute to her comfort; she soon settled
in her new abode, became veir happy there, and made fair
progress in her Btndies. As she grew up, a sound English
education corrected in a great measure her French defects;
and when she left school I found her a pleasing and
'ng companion: docile, good-tempered, and well-
ipu " ^ ■ ■•''■

icipTed. By her grateful attention to me and mitu
liQe,^^^

470 JAKE Eint.
iaa !on^ since well repaid any little ktndoaM T «ver had it
» my power to ofler her.
My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my ex-
perience of married life, and one brief glonco at (he'fort-
ioet of thoae wliose names have most mqnently recurred
ib this narrative, and I have done.
I have now been married ten jean. I know what iti
to live entirely for and ivith what I love best on eatttu
faold myself supremelv blest — blest beyoiid what langua
can express; because 1 am my husband's life as folly aa
is mine. No woman was ever nearer to her mate tin "
am; ever more absolutely bone of his bone, and flesh ol
fleah. I know no weariness of my Edward's societyi
know8 noDfl of mine, any more than we eacli do of
puiaation of the heart that beats in our ^parate boBotnsj
couseaueatly, we siro ever together. To be together is for
na to oe at once ae free as in solitude, as gay as in com-
pany. We talk, I believe, all day long: to talk lo each
other is but a more animated and an midiblo thinking.
All my confidence is bestowed on him. all iii.v uonfideuce is
devoted to me; we are precisely suited in character — per-
fect concord is the result.
Mr, Rochester continued blind for the first two years of
onr union: perhaps it was that circumstance that drew ns
80 very near — that knit na bo very close! for I was ihon lua
vision, as I am still his right hand. Literally, I was
(what he often called me) the apple of his eye. He saw
:iatnre — he saw books t >'lugh me; and never did I weary
of gazing for his beh(.*,,%nd of putting into words tba
oSect of field, tree, town, river, cloud, sunbeam — of the
landscape before us; of the weather round us — and im-
pressing by sound on his esr what light could no longer
stamp on his eye. Never did I weary of reading to him;
never did I weary of conducting him where he wished to
go: of doing for him what he wished to be done. And
there was a pleasure in my services, most fall, most ex-
< ]uiBito, even though sad, because he claimed these service
without painful shame or damping humiliation. He
loved me so truly, that he knew no reluctance in profiting
by my attendance: ha felt I loved him so fondly, that
to yield that attendance was to indulge my sweetest
wishes.
One morning at the end of the two years, as I was wrtt
[ a letter to his dirtatioii, he came and bent c
7AKB BYKS.
and said, " Jane, have yon a gUttoriog ornament aroi
your neck? "
I liad on a gold watch-chain: I answered " Ym.
" And have you a pale-blue dresa on? "
I had. He informed me then, that for some tim» h*
had fancied the obscurity clouding one eye waa becoming
less dense; and that now he was sure of it.
He and I went up to Loudon. He had the advioe of
an eminent oculist, and he eventually recovered the sight
ot that one eye. He can not now see very distinctly; ho
can not read or write much: but he can find hia way with-
out being led by the hand: the sky is no longer a blank to
him, the earth no longer a void. When his first-born was
pnt into his arms, he could see that the boy had inherited
his own eyes, as they once were — large, brilliant and
black. On that oocasion, he again, with a full heart,
acknowledged thai; Qod had tempered judgment with
mercy.
My Edward and I, then, are happy: and the more
because those we most love are happy Hkewise, Dial
and Mary Rivere are both married: alternately, once evert
year they come to see us, and we go to see them. Diana'"
husband is a captain in the navy; a gallant t
good man. Mary's is a clergyman: a college friend of
nor brother's; and, from his attainments and principles,
worthy of the connection. Both Captain Fitzjames and
Mr. Wharton love tlieir wivfiSj^aiid are loved by them.
Aa to St, John Rivera, he " ^'t England: he went
India. He entered on the patl had marked for hii
self; he pursues it still. A more resolute, indefal
pioneer never wrought amidst rocks and dangers.
faithful and devoted; full of energy and zeal, and trai
he labors for hie race: he clears their painful way to i
provement: he hewa down like a giant the pi-ejudices oi
creed and caste that encumber it. He may be stem; h?
may be exacting: he may be ambitious yet; but his is the
sternness of the warrior Greatheart, who guards hie pil-
grim convey from the onslaught of ApoUyon; his is the
exaction of tlie apostle, who speaks but for Christ, when
he saya, " Whosoever will eome after me, let him denj
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. " His is
the ambition of the nigh master-spirit which aims to fill a
place in the first rank of those who are redeemed from the
'* " —who stand without faiUt before the throne of (i('
1
ith
^; 1
4,U Jake umiL
1
— ^who shste the last migiity victories of the Lamb — wii6 |
are called^ and chosen, and laithfal.
St. John is unmarried: he never will marry now.
Himself has hitherto safficed to the toil; and the toil
draws near its close: his glorious sun hastens to its setting.
The last letter I receiv^ from him drew from my eyes
human tears, and yet filled my heart with divine joy: he
anticipated his sure reward, his incorruptible crown. I
know that a stranger's hand will write to me next, to say
that the good and faithful servant has been c^ed at
length to tne joy of his Lord. And why weep for this.^
No fear of death will darken St. John's last hour: his
mind will be unclouded; his heart will be undaunted; his
hope will be sure; his faith steadfast. His own words are
a pledge of this:''My Master, " he says, " has forewarned
me. Daily he announces more distinctly,'Surely I come
quicklyl'and houriv I more eagerly respond,'Amen;
even so come. Lord Jesus I'''
nn iKB.
J
i
ll-
'i
:(
1 1|
i
'J
■I ■'■
;■
3 ;^
I 4
I
■ -.J
-■ ■ I .
■ ■ iV
•Ji
: t't!
J.*.


3 6105 044 955 982
STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
CECIL H, GREEN LIBRARY
STANFORD. CALIFORNIA 94305-6004
(4151 723-1493
All books may be recoiled ofrer 7 doys
mmumr
28D MARi^So
da'JUNlgi996

