


5-^

\


ll < v
mm
EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY
EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS
FICTION
JANE EYRE
WITH INTRODUCTION BY
MAY SINCLAIR

THIS IS NO. 487 OF €f^€1(r3fa: > CS
LIB7(t/f7^. THE PUBUSHERS WILL
BE PLEASED TO SEND PREELY TO ALL
APPLICANTS A LIST OF THE PUBLISHED
AND PROJECTED VOLUMES ARRANGED
UNDER THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS:
TRAVEL ^ SCIENCE ^ FICTION
THEOLOGY & PHILOSOPHY
HISTORY 9 CLASSICAL
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
ESSAYS ¥ ORATORY
^ETRY ft DRAMA
BIOGRAPHY
REFERENCE
ROMANCE
THE ORDINARY EDITION IS BOUND
IN CLOTH WITH GILT DESIGN AND
COLOURED TOP. THERE IS ALSO A
LIBRARY EDITION IN REINFORCE0 CLOTH
London: J. M. DENT & SONS Ltd.
New York: E. P. DUTTON & CO.

PHIUP'SIDNEY
JANE EYRE
gy CHARLOTTE
.ONTE-.!^
^ "
LONDON & .TORONTO
PUBUSHED BYJ M PENT
& .SONS DP & IN NEWYORK
BYEPDUTTON & .CO

First Issub ov this Boitiom 1908 -^
Reprihtkd 1909^ X9xx» 191 3» Z9 > 5»
i9 > 7t 1920, i9aa
PRINTED IM GREAT BBITAIK
INTRODUCTION
i There are a few novels that stand alane, without ancestry,
f without affinity in literature. One of the few is -■ Jane
Eyre/'a book that has had innumerable descendants,
'but no traceable descent,
Charlotte Bronte was not shaped by any influence that
we can discover among her predecessors aad contem-
poraries. Out of her curious and varied reading she formed
a style exclusively and inimitably her own, and sent forth
from her remote Yorkshire village a book only less wonder-
ful than " Wuthering Heights. "
To realise its unique and starthng quality it should
be remembered that " Jane Eyre " was written in 1846-7,
and published in the same year as *'Vanity Fair/'Mrs.
GaBkeU's'* Mary Barton " had not then appeared. George
Eliot did not begin to write till about ten years later.
A great gulf divided Charlotte Bronte from Jane Austen.
Jane Austen would probably not have appreciated Charlotte
Bronte. We know that Charlotte did not appreciate Jane.
She asks George Henry LeweSj " Why do you like Miss
Austen so very much ?''She cannot see why. She finds
her only " shrewd and observant ^^'and asks again r " Can
there be a great artist without poetry?'* There is some-
thing alien and unsympathetic to her in Jane Austen's
finish and reserve. She has no patience with her exquisite
art. For her it is finished because there is no more behind
it, and reserved because the best part of life is kept out
of it. For Charlotte Bronte the best part of life is the!
passion that exalts and transfigures it. Passion is poetry:!
poetry is passion. It is the truth of men and women.
Some people have none of this troth in them, such are
Jane Austen's ladies and gentlemen. To Charlotte ,thay J
were not real people. ^
To be sure there are in Jane Austen two exponents of
passioni Lydia Bennett and Mrs. Kush worth. She usei
vii
viii JANE EYRE
her Lydia very eflfectively to show what a vulgar thing
passion is. Of Mrs. Rushworth she says less, intimating
that the less said the better.
/ Passion was Charlotte Bronte's secret. She gave a new
'meaning to the word. She was the first novelist to handle
the thing, the real thing. Jane Austen was not alone in
her ignorance of it. None of the older novelists had treated
it adequately. For Scott it was simply a high, vague,
romantic feeling that hung round his characters like a dress.
Richardson got somewhere near it in " Clarissa Harlowe, "
without knowing it. His vision was impaired by the
damp fog of sentiment in which he loved to hve. To
Fielding passion meant animal passion, and as such he
rightly held it unimportant.
For Thackeray, tob, it is a sharp fever of the senses,
to be treated with tiie brevity its episodic and accidental
character deserves.
Nbne of these novelists understood by passion what
Charlotte BrontS understood. And the comfortable,
sentimental, thoroughly prosaic Early Victorians who
devoured " Jane Eyre " did not understand it either and
were shocked.
For, ais there was nothing to account for Jane E3n*e,
** Jane Eyre " refused to be accountable. It made havoc
of all literary tradition. It is hard to realise the enormity
of Jane's behaviour nowadajrs, when we take up the book
and find to our surprise that, when all is said and done,
the ten commandments remain mudi as they were before.
In f^t very little is said and nothing at all is doile which
we can take exceptioh to. Whether a man with a mad
wife may not marry another is not a problem stated by
Charlotte Bronte. It is a mere side issue raised by Rochester
in a moment of ungovernable fury. Jane's conscience
settles it at once with an uncompromising " No. "
It is not the* " ten commandments that are broken: it is
the unwritten Uws of literature. It was one of these laws
that a governess should know her place and that a plain
woman should know hers and be kept in it. Then Jane
Eyre came and made waste paper of this convention.
She put ideas into the heads of governesses and plain
women. In the novel of the past no woman with a face
and figure like Jane could hope for more than a mere
walking-on part, at best for the r61e of a very minor char*
ITRODUCTIOI
acter. Jane appears as leading lady, and sustains the
part with triumphant succe^, Blanche Ingram, the tall,
stately Early Victorian heroine, is a mere temporary foil
to littJe Jane. There is a shade too miich intention in
Charlotte Bronte^s treatment of Blanche. It is as if she
said to the reader; I will take your beautiful heroine and
show you how deadly dull, how ineffectual she is beside
my Jane. I will make you sick of her black eyes and her
swaa-like neck, of her raven locks and the silly rose she
wears in them, and of that eternal scarf which she drapes
about her sloping shoulders. So Blanche Ingram appears
in Mr. Rochester's drawing-room and talks like this (to
the footman, after having " ejaculated *GqI'" ): " Cease
that chatter, blockhead, and do my bidding. " For Blanche
IS nothing if not haughty.
Now this is hardly fair treatment, even for a foil, and
no wonder that Blanche Ingram dies of it, strangled by
the vindictive hands of her creator.
Blanche was not the only beautiful idol that Charlotte
Bronte broke. Not only was it established that a plain
woman should know her place, there was another more
ancient and formidable tradition. No woman should know
her own nature until some man (and he must be her
husband) rev^s it to her.
Over this superstition Jane Eyre really rode rough-
shod . She had the audacity to declare herself in love with
Rochester before Rochester had thrown the handkerchief.
She stole the handkerchief out of Rochester's pocket
while Rochester was sleeping. If she had smashed all the
ten commandments at once, the world (then in the first
blush of its Early Victoriaa propriety) could not have been
more horrified ^
Jane Eyre is milk and water to Catherine Eamshaw,
and Rochester a stage-puppet beside HeathcHff, But the
generation that shuddered over Jane was unmoved by
" Wuthering Heights.^* The tremendous success of " Jane
Eyre " overshadowed for a while the greater work. Char-j
lotte remained for her day the supreme novelist of passion J
That was unjust. But the Lnjustice has been mor^!
than righted. The tendency nowadays is to praise Emily
Bronte at her sister's expense. It has been said that
whereas Emily imagined and created, Charlotte merely
observed and reproduced. Mr* Clement Shorter goes so
X JANE EYRE
far as to stigggest that, if it had not been for her visit to
Brussels and the infln^ice of M. H6ger, she would not
even have done as much as that. There can be no < loubt
that M. H6ger woke her up an hour tt two before her
time for waking and that Brussels widened her view.
(It would have been odd if it hadn't.) It is preposterous
to sui^ose that the3r did anything more for her. If tiiere
had been no M. H6ger and no Bmssds, there would have
been no " Professor " and no " ViUette " and no Mr.
Louis Moor€i in " Shirley. " But to argue that because
Charlotte Bronte had written nothing of any value before
she went to Brussels and met M. H6ger, therefore. I^at
without M. Hdget there would have been no *'Jane Ejrre "
is really going too far. " Jane Ejnre " is a proof of the
contrary. It bears no likeness to the " Professor " or to
" Villette/'In its lesser way it draws its life manifestly
from the more anci^it and enduring powers that inspired
" Wuthering Heights. " It stands^ in its lower place, as
solitary and as unb^otten.
But while no theory or rumour desecrates the memory
of Emily Bronte, Charlotte has never ixx any length of
time been let alone. Attempts are alwa]^ being made to
account for her " knowledge of life. " It had been settied
that Charlotte only observed and could not imagine. There«
fore it was considered a mysterious, not to say sinister,
thing that a little unmarried lady living ih a parsonage on
the edge of a lonely mo6r should have understood passion
as she did. Mrs. Gaskell tried to account for and excuse it
by saying it was all the fault of her brother Brtowell. Then
some ingenious person (whose name I forget) raked up
poor old M. H6ger and burst upon the world with the
amazing information that Charlotte was in love with that
excellent schoolmaster. It was all M. H6ger. Then came
Mrs. Oliphant, who should have known better, in a high
state of indignation at the slur cast upon Branwell. In her
opinion it was not Branwell, it was not M. H6ger, it was all
Charlotte, who was dying to be married. Matrimony, Mrs.
Oliphant suggests, was a £ixed idea with Charlotte. Last
of all, Mr. Qement Shorter, while he disposes of M. H6ger,
once for all^ as the inspirer of passion, teUs us that ** her
mood was morbid, " that " she thought much on the ques-
tion of love, and dwelt continually on the proUem of the
ideal mate. "
INTRODUCTION
Nowp as for matrimony (to take Mrg. Oliphant's charge
first), the evidence from Charlotte Bronte's life, from her
letters, from her character aa revealed in her works, and
from her own marriage, all goes to prove that she dealt with
the prospect in an uncommonly detached, shrewd and
fiob^ spirit, and with an admirably light hand. In fact, she
may be said to have approached thia solemn subject with
what was, for that sentimental Early Victorian age, an
almost nn becoming levity.
As for M. H^ger, it was Charlotte Bronte's imagination,
not her heart, that occupied itself so fervently with
him. It shaped him to its own uses. Unfortunately, she
died before she could prove that he was not becoming an
obsession.
It is high time that all this nonsense shonld be dropped,
Charlotte Bronte's genins, her heroic goodness and her
sufferings should have placed her beyond its profanation.
She has given to the world men and women who will hve
with all that is enduring in English literature. Some of her
characters have been identified with some persons of her
actual experience. And this has done the mischief. The
man in the street, who loves biography, cannot realise the
unimportance of these identifications. He cannot see that
genius has httle need of actual experience as he under-
stands it; and that it owes no account to him. Of its
workings the world has no right to any other explanation
than that which Charlotte Bronte has given it herself in
her Ptefac© to " Wathering Heights/'" Be the work grim
or glorious, dread or divine, you have httle choice left but
quiescent adoption. As for you — the nominal artist — -
your share in it has been to work passively under dictates
you neither delivered nor could question^that would not
be uttered at your prayer nor suppressed nor changed at
your caprice/*
The world has accepted that explanation of Emily.
Before h^* the most irreverent critic uncovers his head
and passes on. No one has ever questioned her right to
understand the passion of Catherine and Heathcliff.
What, after aU, was the passion that Charlotte under-
stood? It is not their passion- It is not any blind, un-'i
spiritual instinct. Her Jane's upward gaze is ** the very,
sublime of faith, truth and devotion, " She has not only
shown in Jane the power of passion. She was the first tr
xii JANE EYRE
vindicate its essential purity; the first woman to divine
that a woman's i > assion, when complete, is twofoldj she
being destined supremely lor maternity. In Charlotte
Bronte's hands passion becomes a thing of strange inno^
cences and tendernesses and terrors, rejoicing in service
and the sacrifice of sdf . A thing superbly unaware of
animal instinct; a profound and tragic thing that beam at
its heart the i > rescience of suffering and of death.
Because of this quality in her, little Jane, in spite of
her quaint and somewhat alienating precision, and her
tendency to refer to herself as a " dependent, " remains
to this day young and sj^^idid and modem to her finger-
tips.
But Jane is not all ** passion. " She is a complex
person, a woman of " character. " Charlotte Bronti^ was,
like Jane Austen,''shrewd and observant, " and her
heroine is shrewd and observant toa Witty, moreover,
and with a merry devil in her which Rochester loves to
" draw. " We are not merely told that he found Jane
fascinating. We are made to realise every element of the
fascination.
f The earlier scenes of Rochester's love-making are not
only among the best in the book, they are unique in litera*
ture. They brought a new mood into the comedy of court-
ship. To those who are accustomed to think only of the
tragic quality of the Bronte it will be startling to hear
that Charlotte was great in comedy. But from the moment
when Rochester sa3rs, " You examine me, Miss Eyre, do
you think me handsome ? " and Jane says roundly " No^
sir, " it is all pure radiant comedy, up to the scene in tiae
orchard at Thomfield where Rochester asks her to marry
him. Nothing could be xiiore real, more alive than the
duologues of this teasing, tormenting, serio-c < »nic pair.
" How stem you look now, " sajrs Jane. " Your eyebrows
have become as thick as my finger, and 3rour forehead
resembles what, in some very astonishing poetry, I once
saw styled a'blue-piled thunderloft/ That will be your
married look, sir, I suppose ? " En ravanche, Rochester
presently remarks, " Janet, by the bye, it was you who
made me the offer; "
There are lapses from this high reality. The language
of Jane and Rochester occasionally defies the bounds of
actual speech. Rochester says, " Jane, come hither, " when
INTRODUCTION sdii
lie might have said " Come here. " Jane says, " The human
and fallible should not arrogate a power with which the
divine and perfect alone can be safely entnisted/'and her
style acts as no deterrent to Rochester.
And when Charlotte Bronte has to deal with fierce,
elemental, tragic passion she fails. Compare the scenes in
which Rochester asks Jane to be his wife with the scenes
in which he proposes that she shaU be his mistress. He
malces long speeches. " It is you, spirit/'he says — *'with
will and energy and virtue and purity — that I want: not
alone your brittle frame. Of yourself you would come with
soft flight and nestle against my heart if you would : seized
against your will you will elnde the grasp like au essence —
jrou will vanish ere I inhale your fragrance* Ohf come,
Jane, come. " This sounds like poetry, but it is not passion.
At its best a cri de casur comes struggling and strangling
through the verbiage, and there are sharp and simple notes
auch as ** Jane, my little darling ... If you were mad, do
yon think I should hate you ? " but th^ are lost as soon
as uttered. It doesn*t ring true. Th«fe is something wrong
about it.
Charlotte is still more unconvincing in the scene where
Rochester teUs Jane about his past.
The truth is that of brutal animal passion she under-
stood nothing. It was never real to her. The manifest
artificiality of the passages where she has tried to handle
it should have proved the absurdity of the charges brought
against her by Miss Rigby of the QuufUfly Review.
She has other lapses and other limitations. She does not
see, as Emily did, the tragic significance of beauty. She is
somewhat caUous to the charm of children. She never can
forget that a httle Sidgwick once threw a book at her.
That incident seems to have spoiled one side of hfe for her.
Her style is far from perfect. It has been praised for its/
simphcity. But it is by no means always simple. The
absolutely right phrase is too frequently to be found im-
bedded in a complicated paragraph. We know that she
loved the German of Schiller; we can hear her rolling out
the rugged and tremendous lines, and saying, like Diana
Rivers,'*I hke it. " Her own style has at times the Teu-
tonic quality of loaded power, of almost violent symbohsm.
Image follows upon image, and sentiment rushes in where
passion fears to tread. She is unequal. There will be wide
xiv JANE EYRE
stretcfaes of tiie light that never was on sea or land, and
then tiie ioothgfats aU in a idw; and the stage dnection is:
" Thnnder and lightning. Enter Rochester. "
She herself, in a letter to Geofge Heory Lewes^ pleads
gnilty to the charge of m^odiama. It is her ignonnoe
of the stage that makes her stagey. She comes to her
task with aU her wild moorland innocence abont her. It
raises her at times to the heig^its of heaven, and again
it lets her down shockingly. She knows notiiing of the
things that Nature has safEered at the hands of Art
Theref < Hre she does not know what e£toets bdoQg only to
the stage.
And so " her v^y errors lean to virtoe's side. " Her
sins are the sins of impulsive, coraberant yooth. Not even
Emily, whose style is sinless, excels her in pawages < ^
sheer descrq^on: in the power of creating the atmQ9 >
phere and spirit of a place. Take the < »Ghaid soene, or
Jane's flight from Thomfidd, her coming to Whttcroes
I and Marsh End, her return to Thomfield and the finding
I of Rochester at Femdean. It is impogribte to analyse
: these passages. Their colour, the mere appeal to the eyt»
is one with their poignancy. They are part and pared
of Jane's soul.
The faults of " Jane Eyre " were corrected in " Villette/*
which is an enormous advance in truth to actuality, in
finish and technique.
/ Judged by the tests of thoroughgoing realism, of fidelity
to detail, " Jane Eyre " is not a great book. Judged l^
/its author's own test, the quality id poetry, of passicm,
; it stands among the greatest
It is useless to speculate as to what Charlotte Bkonte's
work would have been had her life been different. It is
not possilde to write adequatdy of her life. The tragedy
of it is still too near and too intense to admit of
calm judgment. But it may be that we waste our |»ty.
We cannot tdl whether the work of the Brontes was
what it was because of their tragedy or in sptte of it.
For all we know, thdr cramped life may have offered
the resistance needed to give their power its aim and
impetus.
To know the secret of their genius you must go to the
country that nursed it with all the sternness and the
^less of the North. Mr. Halliwell Sutdiffe has insisted
INTRODUCTION xv
on the debt the Bronte owed to Hawortb and the moor,
" that mother of the harsh front and generous heart. " ^
Who can doubt that the mother was good to her children
when Haworth Moor laid upon them *'the consecration
of its loneliness ? "
MAY SINCLAIR.
Charlotte Bronte , . • 1816-1855
Emily Jane Bronte . . , 1818-1848
Anne Bronte . , , . 1820- 1849
" Poems by Currer, EUis, and Acton EeU, " 1846. Emily
Bronte's poems were published with introdnctioii by
A. Symons, igo6.
Prose Works of Charlotte Bronte (Currer Bell): —
" Jane Eyre, an Autobiography/'1847; " Shirley, a
Tale/'1849; *'Viliette/'1853; *'The Professor, a Tale/'
1857; " Emma/'a fragment, preceded by short preface
by W. M. Thackeray, Cornhill Magazine, April i860;
Unpublished Letters, " Hours at Home/'vol. ii.^ 1870; and
MacmiUan's MagaHne, vol. 64; Letters also given in voL ii.
Prose work by Emily Bronte (Ellis Bell):-- " Wuthering
Heights/'1847.
A revised edition of this novel and of *'Agnes Grey/'
with selections from the poems by the two sisters, was
publiBhed in 1850, with biographic^ notices of the authors
and preface by C* Bronte (Currer Bell).
Prose works by Anne Bronte (Acton BeU): — " Agne5
Grey/* 1847; " The Tenant of WildfeU Hall/'r848;
Collected works; In 7 vols., with Mrs. Gaskell's Life
of Charlotte Bronte, illustrated, 1872, etc.; Life and
Works of Charlotte Bronte and her Sisters, with intro-
ductions by Mrs» Humphrey Ward and C, K, Shorter,
1899, etc.; in 12 vols., Thornton Edition, 1901; in la
vols., Temple Edition, illustrated, 1901; in 6 vols-, with
'introduction to 6th vol. by Theodore Watts Dunton
(World*3 Classics), rpoi, etc. Lives r Charlotte Bronte,
by Mrs. Gaskell, 1857; with expunged passages, 1857;
3rd ed., revised and corrected, 1857; Charlotte ErontS:
a Monograph, by T. Wemyss Reid, 1877; Life of Charlotte
»'* By Moor and Fell, "
A
\vi JANE EYRE !
Uronti. by A. BintU, 1887; Life of Emily Bronte, by
A M. t > \ »sM»imx (Eminent Women Series), 1883; Oiar-
k > tW Broat^ and ber Circle, by a K. Shorter, 1896; The
iiiAt«r« BtQtxi^, by Mrs. OUphant (Women Novelists of
Uu«M^ Victoria's reign), 1897; Charlotte Bronti and her
SiaHn, by C. K. Shorter, 1905.
PREFACE
A PREFACE to the first edition of " Jane Eyre " being
nnnecessary, I gave none: this second edition demands
a few words both of acknowledgment and miscellaaeoua
remark.
My thanks are dne in three quarters.
To the Public, for the indulgent ear it has inclined
to a plain tale with few pretensions^
To the Press, for the fair field its honest suffrage has
opened to an obscure aspirant.
To my Publishers, for the aid their tact, their energy,
their practical sense, and frank liber ah ty have afforded
an unknown and unrecommended Author.
The Press and the Public are but vague personifications
for mej and I must thank them in vague terms; but my
Publishers are definite; so are certain generong critics
who have encouraged me as only large-hearted and high-
minded men know how to encourage a struggling stranger;
to them, i.e. to my Publishers and the select Reviewers,
I say cordially. Gentlemen, I thank you from my heart.
Having thus acknowledged what I owe those who have
aided and approved me, 1 turn to another class; a small
one, so far as 1 know, but not, therefore, to be overlooked.
I mean the timorous or carping few who doubt the ten-
dency of such books as'* Jane Eyre: *'in whose eyes
whatever is unusual is wrong; whose ears detect in each
protest against bigotry — that parent of crime — an insult
to piety, that regent of God on earth. 1 would suggest
to such doubters certain obvious distinctions; 1 would
remind them of certain simple truths.
Convention aUty is not morality. Self-righteousness
is not religion. To attack the first is not to assail the last.
To pluck the mask from the face of the Pharisee, is not to
lift an impious hand to the Crown of Thorns.
These things and deeds are diametrically opposed;
they are as distinct as ia vice from virtue. Men too often
xvii
xviii JANE EYRE
confound them; they should not be confounded: appear-
ance should not be mistaken for truth; narrow human
doctrines, that only tend to elate and magnify a few,
should not be substituted for the world-redeeming creed
of Christ. There is — I repeat it — a, difference; and it is
a good, and not a bad actioQ to mark broadly and clearly
the line of separation between them.
The world may not like to see these ideas dissevered,
for it has been accustomed to blend them; finding it
convenient to make external show pass for sterling worth
o^to let white-washed walls vouch for dean shrines, it
may hate him who dares to scrutinise and expose— ^o rase
the gilding, and show base metal under it — ^to petietrate
'^le sepulchre, and reveal chamel relics: but, hate as it
will, it is indebted to him.
Ahab did not like Micaiah, because he nev^ prophesied
good concerning him, but evil: probably he liked the
sycophant son of Chenaanah better; yet might Ahab
have escaped a bloody death, had he but stopped his
ears to flattery, and opened them to faithful counsel.
There is a man in our own da}^ whose words are not
framed to tickle dehcate ears: who, to my thinking, comes
before the great ones of society, much as the son of Imlah
came b^ore the throned Kings of Judah and Israel;
and who speaks truth as deep, with a power as prophet*
like and as vital — H mien as dauntless and as daring.
Is the satirist of " Vanity Fair " admired in high places f
I cannot tell; but I think if some of those amongst whom
he hurls the Gredk fire of his sarcasm, aiul over whom he
flashes the levin-brand of his denunciation, were to take
his warnings in time — ^they or their seed might yet escape
a fatal Ramoth-Gilead.
Why have I alluded to this man? I have alluded to
him. Reader, because I think I see in him an intellect
profounder and more unique than his contemporaries
have yet recognised; because I regard him as tilie first
social regenerator of the day — as the very master of that
working corps who would restore to rectitude the warped
system of things; because I think no commentjttor on his
writings has yet found the comparison that suits him,
the terms which rightly characterise his talent. They say
he is like Fielding: they talk of his wit, humour, comic
T > owers. He resembles Fielding as an eagle does a vulture t
PREFACE xlx
Fielding could stoop on carrion, but Thackeray never does.
His vnt is bright, his humour attractive, but both bear
the same relation to his serious genius, that the mere
lambent sheet-lightning pla3dng under the edge of the
summer-cloud, does to the electric death-spark hid in its
womb. Finally; I have alluded to Mr. Thackeray, because
to him — ^if he will accept the tribute of a total stranger —
I have dedicated this second edition of *'Jane Eyre. "
CURRER BELL.
Dee. 2ist, Z847.
NOTE TO THE THIRD EDITION
I AVAIL myself of the opportunity which a third edition
of ** Jane Ejnre " afiords me, of again addressing a word
to the Public, to explain that my claim to the title of
novelist rests on this one work alone. If, therefore, the
authorship of other works of fiction has been attributed
to me, an honour is awarded where it is not merited;
and consequently, denied where it is justly due.
This explanation will serve to rectify mistakes which
may already have been made, and to prevent future
errors.
CURRER BELL.
April 13th, 1848.
JANE EYRE
CHAPTER I
There was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had
been wandering, indeed^ in the leafless shnibbeiy an hour in
the morning; but since dinner (Mrs, Reed^ when there was
no company^ dined eariy) the cold winter wind had bniught
with it clouds so sombre, and a rain so penetrating, that
further out-door exercise was now oyt of the question,
I was glad of it: I never hked long walks^ especially on
chjlly afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in
the raw twilight, with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart
saddened by the chi dings of Bessie, the nurse, and humbled
by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to Eliza, John,
and Georgiana Reed.
The said Eliza, John^ and Georgiana were now clustered
round their mama in the drawing-room : she lay reclined on
a sofa by the fireside^ and with her darlings about her (for
the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly
happy. Me^ she had dispensed from joining the group ; sayings
** She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a
distance; but that until she heard from Bessie, and could dis-
cover by her own observation that I was endeavouring in
good earnest to acquire a more sodable and childlike disposi-
tion, a more attractive and sprightly manner, — something
lighter, franker, more natural as it were — she really must
exclude me from privileges intended only for contented,
happy, httle children. "
** What does Bessie say T have donei* *'I asked.
" Jane, I don't Uke cavillers or questioners r besides, there
is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders
in that manner. Be seated somewhere; and until you mix
speak pleasantly, remain silent,'*
A small breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room. I
slipped in there. It ccmtained a book*case r I soon possessed
2 JANE EYRE
myself of a volume^ taking care that it should be one stored
with pictures. I mounted into the window-seat: gathering
up my feet^ I sat cross-legged^ like a Turk; and, having
drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close, I was shrined in
double retirement.
Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand ;
to the left were the dear panes of ^ass, protecting, but not
separating me from the drear November day. At intervals,
while turning over the leaves of my book, I studied the aspect
of that winter afternoon. Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist
and cloud; near, a scene of wet lawn and storm-beat shrub,
with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly before a long and
lamentable blast.
I returned to my book— Bewick's History of British Birds :
the letter-press thereof I cared little for, generally speaking;
and yet there were certain introductory pages thkt, child a^
I was, I could not pass quite as a blank. They were those
which treat of the haunts of sea-fowl; of " the soUtajy rocks
and promontories " by them mily inhabited; of the coast of
Norway, studded with isles from its southern e^ctmmty, the
lindeness, or Naze, to the North Cape —
" Where the Northern Ocean, in vast whirls,
Boils round the naked, melancholy islei
01 farthest Thule: and the Atlantic snrge
Pours in among the stormy Hebrides. "
Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shcnres
of Lapland, Siberia, Spitsbergen, Nova Zembla, Iceland,
Greenland, with *^ the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone > and
those forlorn regions of dreary space,*^that reservoir of frost
and snow, where firm fields of ice, the accumulation of cen-
turies of winters, gla^d in Alpine heights above heights,
surround the pole, and concentre the multiplied rigors of
extreme cold. " Of these death-white realnEis I f(Mined an idea
of my own : shadowy, like all the half-comprehended notions
that float dim through children's brains, but strangely im^
pressive. The words in these introductcny pages conneoted
themselves with the succeeding vignettes, and gave signifi-
cance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billow and
spray; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast; to
the cold and ghastly moon glancing through bars of doud at
a wreck just sinking.
I cannot tell what sentiment haunted the quiet solitary
churchyard, with its inscribed headstone; its gats, its two
JANE EYRE 3
trees, its low horizon^ girdJed by a broken wall, and its newly-
risen crescent, attesting the hour of eventide.
The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea, I believed to be
noarine phantoms.
The fiend pinning down the thief's pack behind him, I
passed over quickly: it was an object of terror.
So was the blacky homed thing seated aloof on a rock|
surveying a distant crowd surrounding a gallows.
Each picture told a story; mysterious often to my un-
developed understanding and imperfect feelings j yet ever
profoundly interesting: as interesting as the tales Bessie some-
time narrated on winter evenings^ when she chanced to be in
good humour; and when^ having brought her ironing-tabte
to die nursery-hearthj she allowed us to sit about it, and while
she got up Mrs. Reed's lace frills, and crimped her night-cap
borders, fed our eager attention with passages of love and
adventure taken from old fairy tales and older ballads; or
(as at a later period I discovered) from the pages of Pamela,
and Henry, Earl of Moreland.
With Bewick on my knee, I was then happy: happy at
least in my way* I feared nothing but interruption, and that
came too soon. The breakfast-room door opened.
" Boh I Madame Mope! " cried the voice of John Reed;
then he paused : he found the room apparently empty,
" Where the dickens is she ? " he continued. " Iiz2y 1
Georgy I (calling to his sisters) Joan is not here : tell matna
she is run out into the rain — bad animal 1 ^'
" It is well 1 drew the curtain,'^ thought I; and I wished
fervently he mjght not discover my hiding-place : nor would
John Reed have found it out himself; he was not quick
either of vision or conception ; but Eliza just put her head in
at the door, and said at once : —
" She is in the window^seat, to be sure. Jack.**
And I came out immediately, for I trembled at the idea
ol being dragged forth by the aold Jack*
*'What do you want? ** I asked, with awkward diffidence,
" Say,'what do you want. Master Reed/ " was the answer.
*'I want you to come here; " and seating himself in an arm-
chair, he intimated by a gesture that I was to approach and
stand before him.
John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old; four
years older than X, for I was but ten ; large and stout for his
age, with a dingy and unwholesome skin ; thick lineaments
4 JANE EYRE
in a spacious visage^ heavy limbs and large extremities. He
gorged himself habitually at table^ which made him bilious^
and gave him a dim and bleared eye and & ibby cheeks. He
ought now to have been at school; but his mama had taken
him home for a month or two^ " cm account of his delicate
health. " Mr. Mles^ the master^ affirmed tint he would dq
very welHf he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from
home; but the mother's heart turned from an ofHnion so
harsh^ and inclined rather to the more refined idea that John's
sallowhess was owing to ovei^pplication and^ perhaps^ to
pining after home.
John had not much afiEection for his mother and sisteiSj
and an antipathy to me. He bullied and punished me; not
two or three times in the week^ nor once or twice in the day^
but continually: every nerve I had feared him, and every
m^xrsel of flesh on my bones shrank when he came near. There
were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he in*
sptred, bec^se I had no appeid whatever against either his
menaces or his inflictions; the servants did not like to off^d
their young master by taking'my pairt against him, attd'Mrs.
Reed was blind and deaf on the subject: she never saw him
strike or heard him abuse me, though he did both now and
then in her very presence; more frequaitly, however, behind
her back.
Habitually obedient to John, I came up to his chair: he
spent some three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me
as far as he could without damaging the roots: I knew he
would soon strike, and while dreading the blow, I mused on
the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would pre^
sently deal it. I wonder if he read that notion in my face;
for, all at once, without speaking, he struck suddenly and
strongly. I tottered, and on regaining my equilibrium
retired back a step or two from has chair.
" Hiat is for your impudence in answering mama awhile
since, " said he, " and for your sneaking way of getting behind
curtains, and for the look you had in your eyes two minutes
since, you rat ! "
Accustomed to John Reed's abuse, I never had an idea of
replying to it; my care was how to endure the How which
would certainly follow the insult.
*'What were you doing behind the curtain ? " he asked.
** I was reading. "
** Shew the book. "
JANE EYRE 5
I returned to the window and fetched it thence.
" You have no business to take our books j you arc a
dependant, mama says; you have no money; your father
left you none; you ought to beg, and not to live here with
gentJemen^s children like usj and eat the same meals we do,
and wear clothes at our mama's expense. Now, Fll teach you
to rummage ray book-shelves: for they are mine; all the
house belongs to me, or will do in a few years. Go and stand
by the door, out of the way of the mirror and the windows. "
I did so, not at first aware what was his intention; but
when I saw him hft and poise the book and stand in act to
hurl it, I instinctively started aside with a cry of alarm: not
soon enough, however; the volume was flung, it hit me, and
I fellj striHng my head against the door and cutting it. The
cut bled, the pain was sharp ; my terror had passed its climax;
other feeUngs succeeded,
" Wicked and cruel boy I " 1 said. " You are hke a murderer
— you are like a slave-driver — you are like the Roman
emperors I "
I had read Goldsmith's History of Rome^ and had formed
my opinion of Nero, Caligula^ etc. Also I had drawn parallels
in silence J which I never thought thus to have declared aloud.
" What! what! " he cried. " Bid you say that to me?
Pid you hear her, Eliza and Georgiana? Won't I tell mama?
but first " —
He ran headlong at me: I felt him grasp my hair and my
shoulder: he had closed with a desperate thing, I really saw
in him a tyrant: a murderer* 1 felt a drop or two of blood
from my head trickle down my neck, and was sensible of
somewhat pungent sufferings : these sensations for the time
predominated over fear^ and I received him in frantic sort,
I don*t very well know what I did with my hands ^ but he
called me " Rat 1 rat I " and bellowed out aloud. Aid was
near him : Eliza and Georgiana had run for Mrs, Reed, who
was gone upstairs ; she now came upon the scene^ followed
by Bessie and her maid Abbot. We were parted : I heard
the words : —
'* Dear 1 dear I What a fury to fly at Master John ! "
" Did ever anybody see such a picture of passion) "
Then Mrs. Reed subjoined: —
** Take her away to the red-room, and lock her in there. "
Fottr hands were immediately laid upon me, and I was borne
upstairs.
JANE EYRE
CHAPTER n
I RESISTED all the way: a new thing for me^ and a drcum^
stance which greatly strengthened the bad opinion Bessie
and Miss Abbot were disposed to entertain of me. The fact
is, I was a trifle beside myself; or rather out of myself, as the
French would say: I was conscious that a moment's mutiny
had already rendered me liable to strange penalties, and, like
any other rebel slave, I felt resolved, in my desperation, to go
all lengths.
" Hold her arms, Miss Abbot: she's like a mad cat. "
" For shame! for shame I " cried the lady's-maid. " What
shocking conduct. Miss Eyre, to strike a young gentleman,
your benefactress's son ! Your young master. "
" Master! How is he my master? Am I a servant? "
" No; you are less than a servant, for you do nothing for
your keep. There, sit down, and think over your wickedness. "
They had got me by this time into the apartment in-
dicated by Mrs. Reed, and had thrust me upon a stool: my
impulse was to rise from it like a spring; their two pair of
hands arrested me instantly.
" If you don't sit still, you must be tied down, " said Bessie.
" Miss Abbot, lend me your garters; she would break mine
directly. "
Miss Abbot turned to divest a stout leg of the necessary
ligature. This preparation for bonds, and the additional
ignominy it inferred, took a little of the excitement out of me.
" Don't take them off, " I cried; " I will not stir. "
In guarantee whereof, I attached myself to my seat by
my hands.
" Mind you don't, " said Bessie; and when she had ascer-
tained that I was really subsiding, she loosened her hold of
me; then she and Miss Abbot stood with folded arms, look-
ing darkly and doubtfully on my face, as incredulous of my
sanity.
" She never did so before, " at last said Bessie, turning to
the Abigail.
" But it was always in her, " was the reply. " I've told
Missis often my opinion about the child, and Missis agreed
with me. She's an underhand little thing: I never saw a giri
of her age with so much cover. "
JANE EYRE 5^
Bessie answered not; but ere long^ addressing me^ she
saidj--
'* You ought to be aware, Miss, that yoa are under obliga-
tions to Mrs. Reed; she keeps you; if she were to turn you
off, you would have to go to the poor-house. "
I had nothing to say to these words: they were not new to
me: my very first recollections of existence included hints
of the same kind. This reproach of my dependence had
become a vague sing-song in my ear; very painful and
crushing, but only half intelligible. Miss Abbot joined in: —
" And you ought not to think yourself on an equahty with
the Misses Reed and Master Reed^ because Missis kindly
allows you to be brought up with them. They will have a
great deal of money, and you will have none: it is your place
to be humbJej and to try to make yourself agreeable to them/*
'* What we tell you, is for your good/'added Bessie, in no
harsh voice: ** you should try to be useful and pleasant, then,
perhaps, you would have a home here; but if you become
passionate and rude, Missis will send you away, I am sure/*
" Besides,'^ said illss Abbot, " God wiU punish her: he
might strike her dead in the midst of her tantrums, and then
where would she go? Come, Bessie, we will leave her: I
wouldn't have her heart for anything* Say your prayers, Miss
Eyre, when you are by yourseJi; for if you don't repent,
something bad might be permitted to corae down the chimney
and fetch you away/'
They went, shutting the door^ and locking it behind them,
The red-room was a spare chamber, very seldom slept in *
I might say never, indeed^ unless when a chance influx of
visitors at Gateshead Hall rendered it necessary to turn to
account all the accommodation it contained i yet it was one
of the largest and stateliest chambers in the mansion* A bed
supported on massive pillars of mahogany, hung with curtains
of deep red damask^ stood out like a tabernacle in the centre;
the two lajge windowsj with their blinds always drawn down,
were half shrouded in festoons and falls of similar drapery;
the carpet was red; the table at the foot of the bed was
covered with a crimson cloth; the walls were a soft fawn
colour, with a blush of pink in it; the wardrobej the toilet*
table, the chairs were of darkly polished old mahogany. Out
of these deep surrounding shades rose high, and glared white,
the piled-up mattresses and pillows of the bed, spread with a
snowy Marseilles coonterpane. Scarcely less prominent w* " *
m
1
8 JANE EYRE
an ample^ cushioned easy-chair near the head of the bed^ also
white^ with a footstool before it; and looking^ as I thought^
like a pale throne.
This room was chilly because it seldom had a fire; it was
silent^ because remote from the nursery and kitchens; solenm^
because it was known to be so seldom entered. The house-
maid alone came here on Saturdays^ to wipe from the mirrors
and the furniture a week's quiet dust: and Mrs. Reed hersdf^
at far intervals^ visited it to review the contents of a certain
secret drawer in the wardrobe^ where were stored divers parch-
ments^ her jewel-casket^ and a miniature of her deceased
husband; and in those last words lies the secret of the bed-
room — the spell which kept it so lonely in spite of its grandeur.
Mr. Reed had been dead nine years : it was in this chamber
he breathed his last; here he lay in state; hence his coffin
was borne by the undertaker's men; and, since that day, a
sense of dreary consecration had guarded it from frequent
intrusion.
My seat, to which Bessie and the bitter Miss Abbot had
left me riveted, was a low ottoman near the marble chimney-
piece; the bed rose before me; to my right hand there was
the high, dark wardrobe, with subdued, broken reflections
varying the gloss of its panels; to my left were the muffled
windows; a great looking-glass between them repeated the
vacant majesty of the bed and room. I was not quite sure
whether they had locked the door; and, when I dared move,
I got up, and went to see. Alas I yes, no jail was ever more
secure. Returning, I had to cross before the looking-glass;
my fascinated glance involuntarily explored the depth it
revealed. All looked colder and darker in that visionary
hollow than in reality: and the strange little figure there
gazing at me, with a white face and arms specking the gloom,
and glittering eyes of fear moving where all else was stiU, had
the effect of a real spirit: I thought it like one of the tiny
phantoms, half fairy, half imp, Bessie's evening stories repre-
sented as coming up out of lone, ferny dells in moors, and
appearing before the eyes of belated travellers. I returned to
my stool.
Superstition was with me at that moment; but it was not
yet her hour for complete victory: my blood was still warm;
the mood of the revolted slave was still bracing me with its
bitt^ vigour; I had to stem a rapid rush of retrospective
thought before I quailed to the dismal present.
JANE EYRE
AIJ John Reed's violent tjo^anniesj al! his sisteis'proud
indifference^ alJ his mother's aversion, all the servants'
partiality, turned up in my disturbed mind like a dark deposit
in a turbid welL Why was I always sufferings always brow-
beatenj always accused, for ever condemned? Why could I
never please? Why was it useless to try to win any one's
favour? Eliza, who was headstrong and s elfish j was respected*
GeoiTgiana, who had a spoiled temper, a very acrid spite, a
captious and insolent carriage, was universally indulged.
Her beauty, her pink cheeks and golden curls, seemed to give
delight to all who looked at her, and to purchase indemnity
for every fault. John, no one thwarted, much less punished;
though he twisted the necks of the pigeons, killed the little
pea-chicks, set the dogs at the sheep, stripped the hothouse
vines of their fruit, and broke the buds off the choicest plants
in the conservatory: he called his mother " old giri, " too;
sometimes reviled her for her dark skin, similar to his own;
bluntly disregarded her wishes; not unfrequently tore and
spoiled her silk attire; and he was still''her owb darling.'* I
dared commit no fault: I strove to fulfil every duty; and I
was termed naughty and tiresome, suHen and sneaking^ from
morning to noon, ^id from noon to night.
My head still ached and bled with the blow and fall I had
received: no one had reproved John for wantonly striking
me; and because I had turned against him to avert farther
irrational violence, I was loaded with general opprobrium,
" Unjust I — unjust I *'said my reason, forced by the
agonising stimulus into precocious though tmnsitory power;
and Resolve, equally wrought up, instigated some strange
expedient to achieve escape from insupportable oppression —
as running away, or, ii that could not be effected, never eating
or drinking more, and letting myself die. *
What a consternation of soul was mine that dreary after-
noon I How all my brain was in tumult, and all my heart in
insurrection 1 Yet in what darkness, what dense ignorance,
was the mental battle fought I I could not answer the ceaseless
inward question — why I thus suffered; now, at the distance
of — I will not say how many years, I see it clearly.
I was a discord in Gateshead Hall; I was like nobody there;
I had nothing in hannony with Mrs. Reed or her children, or
her chosen vassalage. If they did not love me, in fact, as little
did I love them. They were not bound to regard with affection
a thing that could not sympathise with one amongst them ;
10 JANE EYRE
a heterogeneous thing, opposed to them in tempemment, in
capacity, in propensities; a useless thing, incapable of serving
their interest, or adding to their pleasure; a noxious thing,
cherishing the germs of indignation at ^eir treatment, of
contempt of their judgment. I know that had I been a san-
guine, brilliant, careless, exacting, handsome, romping child
— though equally dependent and friendless — Mrs. Reed
would have endured my presence more complacently; her
children would have entertained for me more of the cordiality
of fellow-feeling; the servants would have been less prone to
make me the scapegoat of the nursery.
Daylight began to forsake the red-room; it was past four
o'dodc, and the beclouded afternoon was tending to drear
twilight. I heard the rain still beating continuously on the
staircase window, and the wind howlii^ in the grove behind
the hall; I grew by degrees cold as a stone, and then my
courage sank. My habitual mood of humiliation, self-doubt,
forlorn d^ression, fell damp on the embers of my decaying
ire. All said I was wicked, and perhaps I might be so; what
thought had I been but just conceiving of starving myself to
death? That certainly was a crime: and was I fit to die? Or
was the vault under the chancel of Gateshead Church an
inviting bourne? In such vault I had been told did Mr. Reed
lie buried; and led by this thought to recall his idea, I dwelt
on it with gathering dread. I could not remember him; but
I knew that he was my own uncle— my mother's brother —
that he had taken me when a parentless infant to his house;
and that in his last moments he had required a promise of
Mrs. Reed that she would rear and maintain me as one of her
own children. Mrs. Reed probably considered she had kept
this promise; and so she had, I dare say, as well as her nature
would permit her; but how could she really like an interloper
not of her race, and unconnected with her, after her husband's
death, by any tie? It must have been most irksome to find
herself bound by a hard-wrung pledge to stand in the stead
of a parent to a strange child she could not love, and to see
an uncongenial alien permanently intruded on her own family
group.
A frjng^ikr notion dawned upon me. I doubted not — never
doubted — ^that if Mr. Reed had been alive he would have
treated me kindly; and now, as I sat looking at the white bed
and overshadowed walls— occasionally also turning a fssan-
ated eye towards the dimly gleaming mirror — I began to
tNE EYl
recall what I had heard of dead men, troubled in their graves
by the violation of their last wishes, revisiting the earth to
punish the perjured and avenge the oppressed | and I tliought
Mr. Reed's spirit, harassed by the wrongs of his sister^s child,
might quit its abode— whether in the church vault or in the
unknown world of the departed— and rise before me in this
chamber. I wiped my tears and hushed my sobs, fearful lest
any sign of violent grief might waken a preternatural voice
to comfort me, or elicit from the gloom some haloed face,
bending over me with strange pity. This idea, consolatory in
theory, I felt wouldfbe terrible if realised : with all my might I
endeavoured to stifle it — I endeavoured to be firm- Sh^dng
my hair from my eyes, I lifted my head and tried to look
boldly round the dark room : at this moment a light gleamed
on the wall* Was it, I asked mj^elf, a ray from the moon
penetrating some aperture in the blind ? No; moonlight was
still, and this stirred ; while I gazed, it glided up to the ceiling
and quivered over my head* I can now conjecture readily
that this streak of light was, in all hkelihood, a gleam from a
lantern, carried by some one across the lawn: but then, pre-
pared as my mind was for horror, shaken as my nerves were
by agitation, I thought the swift-darting beam was a heraJd
of some coming vision from another world, lly heart beat
thick, my head grew hot; a sound filled my ears, which I
deemed the rushing of wings : something seemed near me; I
was oppressed, suffocated: endurance broke downj I rushed
to the door and shook the lock in desperate effort. Steps came
running along the outer passage; the key turned, Bessie and
Abbot entered*
" Miss Eyre, are you ill ? " said Bessie,
*'What a dreadful noise 1 it w^it quite through me I "
exclaimed Abbot.
" Take me out I Let me go into the nursery i " was my cry*
'* What for ( Are you hurt 1 Have you seen something ? "
again demanded Bessie.
" Oh I I saw a light, and I thought a ghost would come. "
I had now got hold of Bessie's hand, and she did not snatch
it from me.
" She has screamed out on purpose/'declared Abbot, in
some disgust, " And what a scream 1 If she had been in
great pain one would have excused it, but she only wanted
to bring us all here. I know her naughty tricks/'
*'What is all this ? *'demanded another voice peremptorily;
12 JANE EYRE
and Mrs. Reed came along the corridor^ her cap flying wide^
her gown rustling stormily. " Abbot and Bessie^ I believe I
gave orders that Jane Eyre should be left in the red-room till
I came to her myself. "
** Miss Jane screamed so loud^ ma'am/'pleaded Bessie.
" Let her go, " was the cmly answer. " Loose Bessie's hand,
child: you cannot succeed in getting out by these means, be
assured. I abhor artifice, particularly in diildren; it is my
duty to show you that tricks will not answer: you will now
stay here an hour longer, and it is only on condition of perfect
submission and stillness that I shall liberate you then. "
" Oh aunt, have pity ! Forgive me ! I cannot endure it —
let me be punished some other way ! I shall be killed if "
" Silence! This violence is all most repulsive: " and so,
no doubt, she felt it. I was a precocious actress in her eyes :
she sincerely looked on me as a compound of virulent passions,
mean spirit, and dangerous duplicity.
Bessie and Abbot having retreated, Mrs. Reed, impatient
of my now frantic anguish and wild sobs, abruptly thrust me
back and locked me in, without farther parley. I heard her
sweeping away ; and soon after she was gone, I suppose I had
a species of fit: unconsciousness closed the scene.
CHAPTER III
The next thing I remember is, waking up with a feeling as if
I had had a frightful night-mare, and seeing before me a
terrible red glare, crossed with thick black bars. I heard
voices, too, spealong with a hollow soimd, and as if muffled
by a rush of wind or water: agitarion, uncertainty, and an
ail-predominating sense of terror confused my faculties. Ere
long, I became aware that some one was handling me ; lifting
me up and supporting me in a sitting posture, and that
more tenderly than I Imd ever been raised or upheld before.
I rested my head against a pillow or an arm, and felt easy.
In five minutes more, the cloud of bewilderment dissolved:
I knew quite well that I was in my own bed, and that the red
glare was the nursery fire. It was night: a candle burnt on
the table; Bessie stood at the bed-foot with a basin in her
hand, and a gentleman sat in a chair near my pillow, leaning
over me.

JANE EYRE
I felt an inexpressible relief^ a soothing conviction of pro-
tection and security I when I knew that there was a stranger
m the room^ an individual not belonging to Gateshead, and
not related to Mrs. Reed. Turning from Bessie (though her
presence was far less obnoxious to me than that of Abbot, for
instance J would have been), I scrutinised the face of the gentle-
man: I knew him; it was Mr. Lloyd, an apothecary, some*
times called in by Mrs. Reed when the servants were ailing:
for herself and the children she employed a physician.
" Well, who am I?''he asked.
I pronounced his name^ offering him at the same time my
hand: he took it^ smiling and saying, " We shall do very
weU by-and-by. " Then he laid me down, and addressing
Bessie^ charged her to be very careful that I was not disturbed
during the night. Having given some further directioiis, and
mtimated that he should call again the next day^ he departed ;
to my grief: I felt so sheltered and befriended while he sat in
the chair near my pillow; and as he closed the door after him,
aU the room darkened and my heart again sank ; inexpres-
sible sadness weighed it down.
** Do you feel as if you should sleep. Miss? " asked Bessie^
rather softly.
Scarcely dared I answer her; for T feared the next sentence
might be rough. " I will try, "
*'Would you like to drink, or could you eat anything p'*
" Noj thank you, Bessie. "
" Then I think I shall go to bedj for it is past twelve
o'clock; but you may call me if you want anything in the
night/'
Wonderful dvility this I It emboldened me to ask a
qu^tion.
** Bessie^ what is the matter with me ? Am I ill ? "
** Yon fell sick, I suppose, in the red-room with crying;
you*ll be better soon, no doubt. "
Bessie went into the housemaid's ap£^ment which was
near. I heard her say —
" Saiahj come and sleep with me in the nursery; I daren't
for my life be alone with that poor child to-night; she might
die; ifs such a strange thing she should have that fit: I
wonder if she saw anything. Missis was rather too hard/'
Sarah came back with her; they both went to bed; they
were whispering together for half an hour before they fell
asleep. I caught scraps of their conversation^ from which
^^^^^^^1^^^^^^^
14 JANE EYRE
I was able only too distinctly to inf^ the main subject
discussed.
" Something passed her, all dressed in white, and vanished ^'
— " A great bkck dog behind him " — " Three load raps cm Uie
chamber door " — " A light in the church-yard jtist ovtr his
grave " —etc., etc.
At last both slept: the fire and the candle went out. For
me, the watches of that long night passed in ghastly wakeful-
ness; ear, eye, and mind were alike strained by dread: such
dread as children only can feel.
No severe or prolonged bodily illness followed this incident
of the red-room: it only gave my nerves a shock, of which I
feel the reverberati < Ht to this day. Yes, Mrs. Reed, to you I
owe some fearful pangs of mental suffering. But I ought to
forgive you, for you ^ew not what you (£d: while rending
my heartstrings, you thought you were (mly up-rooting my
bad propensities.
Next day, by noon, I was up and dressed, and sat wrapped
in a shawl try the nursery hearth. I felt physically weak and
broken down: but my worse ailment was an unutterable
wretchedness of mind: a wretchedness which kept drawing
from me silent tears; no sooner had I wiped one salt drop
from my cheek than another followed. Yet I thought, I ought
to have been happy, for none of the Reeds were there; they
were all g(me out in the carriage with their mama: Abbot,
too, was sewing in another room, and Bessie, as she moved
hither and thither, putting away toys and arranging dmwers,
addressed to me every now and then a word of unwonted
kindness. This state of things should have been to me a
paradise of peaqe, accustomed as I was to a life of ceaseless
reprimand and thankless fagging; but, in fact, my racked
nerves were now in such a state that no calm could soothe,
and no {Measure excite them agreeably.
Bessie had been down into the kitchen, and she brought
up with her a tart on a certain brightly painted china plate,
whose bird of paradise, nestling in a wreath of convolvuli
and rosebuds, had been wont to stir in me a most en-
thusiastic seiise of admiration; aikd which plate I had
petitioned to be allowed to take in my hand in order to
examine it more closely, but had always hitherto been
deemed unworthy of such a privilege. This precious vessel
was now placed on my knee, and I was cordially invited
to eat the circlet of delicate pastry upon it. Vain fayourl
JANE EYRE 15
conimgj like most othor fEvooi:5 long deferred and oftea
wished for, too latel I could not cat the tart; and the
pliimage of the bird, the tints of the flowers, seemed
strangely faded: I put both plate and tart away. Bessie
asked if I would have a book: the word hook acted as a
transient stimulus, and I begged her to fetch Gulliver's
Travels from the library. This book I had again and again
perused with delight. I conddered it a narrative of facts, and
discovered in it a vein of interest deeper than what I found
in fairy tales; for as to the elves, having sought them in vain
among foxglove leaves and bells, under mushrooms and
beneath the ground-ivy mantling old wall-nooks, I had at
length made up my mind to the sad truth, that they were all
gone out of England to some savage country where the woods
were wilder and thicker, and the population more scant;
! whereas, Lilliput and Brobdignag being, in my creed, solid
parts of the earth's surface, I doubted not that I might one
day, by taking a long voyage, see with my own eyes the httle
fields, houses J and trees, the diminutive people, the tiny cowSj
fiheep, and birds of the one reahn; and the com -fields forest-
high, the mighty mastiffs, the monster cats^ the tower-like
men and women, of the other* Yet, when this cherished
volume was now placed in my hand — when I turned over its
leav^i and sought in its marvellous pictures the charm 1 had, J
tin oow, never failed to find — all was eerie and dreary; the
giants were gaunt goblins, the pigmies malevolent and fearful
^imps, Gulliver a most desolate wanderer m most dread and
Qgerous r^ons, I dosed the book, which I dared no longer
use, and put it on the table, beside the unta^ted tart,
Bessie had now finished dusting and tidying the room, and
iving washed her hands, she opened a certain little drawer,
all of splendid shreds of silk and satin, and began making a
Qcw bonnet for Georgiana*s doll. Meantime she sang; her
ong was —
" In the days when we weat gipsyiiigj
A long time ago. "
I had often heard the song before, and always with lively
jehght; for Bessie had a sweet voice,— at least, I thought
50* But now, though her voice was still sweet, I found in its
melody an indescribable sadness. Sometimes^ pre-occupied
with her work, she sang the refrain very low, very lingerly :
" A long time ago " came out like the saddest cadence of a
i6 JANE EYRE
funeral hymn. She passed into another ballad, this time a
really doleful one.
" My feet they are sore, and my limbs they are weary;
Long is the way, and the mountains are wild;
Soon will the twilight close moonless and dreary
Over the path of the poor orphan child.
" Why did they send me so far and so lonely,
up where the moors spread and grey rodcs are piled?
Men are hard-hearted,. and kind angels only
Watch'd o'er the st^s of a poor orphan child.
*'Yet distant and soft the night-breeze is blowing,
Clouds there are none, and clear stars beam mild.
God, in His mercy, protection is showing.
Comfort and hope to the poor orphan child.
" £v'n should I fall o'er the broken bridge passing.
Or stray in the marshes, by false lights beguiled,
Still will my Father, with promise and blessing.
Take to His bosom the poor orphan child.
'* There is a thought that for strength should avail me»
Thous[h both of shelter and kindred despoiled;
Heaven is a home, and a rest will not fail me;
God is a friend to the poor orphan child. "
" Come, Miss Jane, don't cry/'said Bessie, as she finished.
She might as well have said to the fire,'* don't bum I " but
how could she divine the morbid suffering to which I was a
prey? In the course of the morning, Mr. Lloyd came again.
''What, already up I " said he, as he entered the nursery.
" Well, nurse, how is she ? "
Bessie answered that I was doing very well.
''Then she ought to look more cheerful. Come here. Miss
Jane : your name is Jane, is it not ? "
" Yes, sir, Jane Eyre/'
" Weil, you have been crying, Miss Jane E)n:e, can you tell
me what about ? Have you any pain ? "
" No, sir/'
" Oh I I daresay she is oTJug because she could not go out
with Missis in the carriage, " interposed Bessie.
" Surely not! why, she is too old for such pettishness. "
I thought so too; and my self-esteem being wounded by
the false charge, I answered promptly, " I never cried for
such a thing in my life: I hate going out in the carriage. I
cry because I am miserable. "
" Oh fie. Miss I " said Bessie.
The good apothecary appeared a little puzzled. I was stand-
ing before him; he fixed his eyes on me very steadily: his

" ^JANE EYRE 17
eyes were small and grey; not very bright, but I daresay I
should think them shrewd now: he had a hard-featured yet
good-natured looking face. Having considered me at leisure,
he said—
** What made yon ill yesterday? "
" She had a fall/'said Bessie, again putting in her word,
" Fall I why that is like a baby again I Can't she manage
to walk at her age? She must be eight or nine years old. "
" I was knocked down/'was the blunt explanation jerked
out of me by another pang of mortified pride: " but that did
not make me ill/'I added; while Mr. Lloyd helped himself
to a pinch of snuff.
As he was returning the box to his waistcoat pocket, a loud
bell rang for the servants* dinner; he knew what it was,
" That's for you, nurse/'said he; " you can go down; I'll
give Miss Jane a lecture till you come back. "
Bessie would rather have stayed, but she was obliged to
'o, because punctuality at meals was rigidly enforce at
^teshead Halh
*'The fall did not make you ill; what did, then ? " pursued
Mr* Lloyd, when B^sie was gone.
*'I was shut up in a room where there is a ghost^ till after
.rk/'
I saw Mi. Lloyd smile and frown at the same time; " Ghost 1
tj you are a baby after all i You are afraid of ghosts ? "
Of Mr, Reed's ghost I am: he died in that room, and
was laid out there. Neither Bessie nor any one else will go
into it at night, if they can help it; and it was cruel to shut
me up alone without a candle,— so cruel that I think I shall
never forget it. "
" Nonsense! And is it that makes you so miserable? Are
you afraid now in daylight ? "
*'No ; but night will come again before long : and besides,
— I am unhappy, — very unhappy, for other things/'
" What other things ? Can you tell me some of them ? "
How much I wished to reply fully to this question 1 How
difficult it was to frame any answer 1 Children can feel^ but
'ey cannot analyse their feelings; and if the analysis is
'ally effected in thought, they know not how to express
le result of the process in words. F^rful, however, of losing
this first and only opportunity of relieving my grief by im-
parting it, I, after a disturbed pause, contrived to frame a
meagre, though, as far as it went^ true r^poose.

^I^ey
^Blartii
i« JANE EYRE
" For one thing, I have no fother or mother^ brotiiers or
" You have a kind aunt and cousins. "
Again I paused; then bunglingly enounced:
" But John Reed knocked me down, and my aunt shut me
up in the red-room. "
Hr4 Ltoyd a second time produced his snuff-box.
" Don't you think Gateshead Hall a very beautiful house ? -'
asked he*'* Are 3rou not very thankful to have such a fine
place to live at? "
" It is not my house, sir; and Abbot says I have less r^t
to be here than a servant. "
** Poohl you can't be silly enough to wish to leave such a
splendid place? "
" If I had anywhere else to go, I should be glad to leave
it; but I can never get away from Gateshead tiU I am a
woknan. "
'* Perhaps you may-^who knows ? Have you any relations
besides Mrs. Reed? "
" I think not, sir. "
" None belonging to your fother? "
''I don't know: I asked aunt Reed once, and she said
possibly I might have some poor, low relations called Eyre,
but she knew nothing about them. "
" If 3rou had such, would you like to go to them? "
I reflected. Poverty looks grim to grown people; still more
so to children : they have not much idea of industrious, work-
ing, respectaUe poverty; they think of the word only as con-
nected with ragged clothes, scanty food, fireless grates, rude
manners, and debasing vices: poverty for me was synonym
mous with the degradation.
''No; I should not like to belong to poor people/'was my
reply,
" Not even if they were kind to you? "
I shook my head : I could not see how poor people had the
means of bemg kind; and then to leani to speak like them,
to adopt their manners, to be uneducated, to grow up like
one of the poor women I saw sometimes nursing their children
or washing their dothes at the cottage doors of the village of
Gateshead: no, I was not heroic enough to purchase libnty
at the price of caste.
" But are your relatives so very poor? Are they working
I^ple? "
JANE EYRE
led
" I cannot teU ; aunt Rccd says if I hav€ any^ they must
beggarly set: I should not like to go a begging. "
** Would you like to go to school ? "
Again I reflected: I scarcely knew what sdiool was;
lessie somcUines spoke of it as a place where young ladies sat
the stockSj wore backboards^ and were expected to be
ixceedingly genteel and precise : John Reed hated his school^
d abused his mastery but John Reed's ta.stes were no rule
■rininej and if Bessie's accounts of school-discipline (gathered
■om the young ladies of a family where she had lived before
ming to Gateshead) were somewhat appalling, her details
I certain accomplishments attained by these same young
*ies were^ I thought, equally attractive* She boasted of
.utiful paintings of landscapes and flowers by them exe-
tedj of songs they could sing and pieces they could play,
purses they could net^ of French books they could trans-
Xe; till my spirit was moved to emulation as I listened*
lesid^^ school would be a complete change: it implied a long
umeyj an entire separation from Gateshead, an entrance
to a new life.
*'I should indeed like to go to school/'was the audible
inclusion of my musings.
'" Well, well; who knows what may happen? " said Mr,
ioyd^ as he got up: " The child ought to have change of air
d scene,*'he added, speaking to himself; " nerves not in
a good state/'
Bessie now returned; at the same moment the carriage
was heard rolling up the gravel-walk,
" Is that your mistress, nurse?'* asked Mr. Lloyd. " I
should like to speak to her before I go/*
Bessie invited him to walk into the breakfast-room, and
led the way out* In the interview which followed between
'm and Mrs, Reed, I presume, from after-occurrences, that
e apothecary ventured to recommend my being sent to
ool; and the recomraendation was no doubt readOy
lOUgh adopted ; for as Abbot saidj in discussing the subject
with Bessie when both sat sewing in the nursery one night,
after I was in bed, and, as they thought, asleep^ " Missis
was^ she dared say, glad enough to get rid of such a tire*
some, ill-conditioned child, who always looked as if she
w^e watching everybody, and scheming plots underhand. "
Abbot, I think, gave me credit for being a sort of infantine
Guy Fawkes*
List be ^^
20 JANE EYRE
On that same occasion I learned^ for the first time^ from
Miss Abbot's communications to Bessie^ that my father had
been a poor clergyman; that my mother had married him
against the wishes of her friends^ who considered the match
beneath her; that my grandfather Reed was so irritated at
her disobedience^ he cut her off without a shilling; that after
my mother and father had been married a year^ the latter
caught the typhus fever while visiting among the poor of a
laige manufacturing town where his curacy was situated^ and
where that disease was then prevalent; that my mother took
the infection from him^ and both died within a month of each
other.
Bessie^ when she heard this narrative^ sighed and said^
" Poor Miss Jane is to be pitied^ too, Abbot. "
" Yes/'responded Abbot; " if she were a nice, pretty
child, one might compassionate her foriomness; but one
really cannot care for such a little toad as that. "
" Not a great deal to be sure, " agreed Bessie: " at any
rate, a beauty like Miss Geoigiana would be more moving in
the same condition. "
" Yes, I doat on Miss Georgiana ! " cried the fervent Abbot.
" Little darling I— with her long curls and her blue eyes, and
such a sweet colour as she has ; just as if she were pamted I —
Bessie, I could fancy a Welsh rabbit for supper. "
** So could I — ^with a roast onion. Come, we'll go down. "
They went.
CHAPTER IV
From my discourse with Mr. Lloyd, and from the above
reported conference between Bessie and Abbot, I gathered
enough of hope to suffice as a motive for wishing to get well:
a change seemed near, — ^I desired and waited it m silence. It
tarried, however: days and weeks passed: I had regained my
normal state of health, but no new allusion was made to the
subject over which I brooded. Mrs. Reed surveyed me at
times with a severe eye, but seldom addressed me: since my
illness, she had drawn a more marked line of separation than
ever between me and her own children; appointing me a
small closet to sleep in by myself, condemning me to teke my
meals alone, and pass all my time in the nursery, while my
JANE EYRE
eausins were constantly in the drawing-room. Not a hint,
I however, did she drop about sending rae to tichooi : still I
felt an instinctive certainty that she would not long endure
I jne under the same roof with her; for her glance, now more
than ever, when turned on me, expressed an insuperable and
I jQOted aversion,
Eliza and Georgiana, evidently acting according to orders,
spoke to me as little as possible: John thrust his tongue in his
I dieek whenever he saw me^ and once attempted chastisement;
but as I instantly turned against him^ roused by the same
* sentiment of deep ire and desperate revolt which had stirred
[ my corruption before, he thought it better to desist, and ran
from me uttering execrations, and vowing I had burst his nose.
I had indeed levelled at that prominent feature as hard a blow
as my knuckles could inflict; and when I saw that either that
^ or my look daunted him, I had the greatest inclination to
follow up my advantage to purpose; but he was already with
his mama, I heard him in a blubbering tone commence the
tale of how " that nasty Jane Eyre " had flown at him like a
mad cat; he was stopped rather harshly —
'Don't talk to me about her, John: I told you not to go
near her; she is not worthy of notice; I do not choose that
either you or your sisters should associate with her* "
Here, leaning over the banister, I cried out suddenly, and
without at all d eh berating on my words, —
** They are not fit to associate with me. "
MrSi Reed was rather a stout woman; but, on hearing this
strange and audacious declaration, she ran nimbly up the
stair, swept me like a whirlwind into the nursery, and crush-
ing me down on the edge of my crib^ dared me in an emphatic
voice to rise from that place, or utter one syllable during the
remainder of the day.
** What would uncle Reed say to you, if he were alive? "
was my scarcely voluntary demand, I say scarcely voluntary,
lor it seemed as if my tongue pronounced words without my
will oonseuting to their utterance: something spoke out of me
over which I had no control.
** What? " said Mrs. Reed under her breath: her usually
cold composed grey eye became troubled with a look like
fmr; she took her hand from my arm, and gazed at me as if
she reaOy did not know whether I were child or fiend. 1 was
DOW in for it«
^'My uncle Reed ts in heaven, and can see all you do and
22 JANE EYRE
think; and so can papa and mama: they know how yon
ihnt me up all day long^ and how you wish me dead. "
Mrs. Reed soon rallied her spirits: she shook me most
soundly^ she boxed both my ears^ and then left me without
a word. Bessie supplied l^e hiatus by a homily of an hour's
lengthy in which she proved beyond a doubt tliat I was the
most wicked and abandoned child ever reared under a roof.
I half believed her; for I felt indeed only bad feelii^ surging
in my breast.
November^ December^ and hi^ of January passed away.
C3iristmas and the New Year had been celebrated at Gates-
head with the usual festive cheer; presents had been inter-
diai^ed, dinners and evening parties given. From ever|r
enjoyment I was^ of course^ excluded: my share of the gakty
consisted in witnessing the daily apparelling of £li2a lind
Georgiana, and seeing them descend to the drawing^tooin^
dressed out in thin muslin frocks and scarlet sashes^ Witii hair
elaborately ringletted; and afterwards^ in listening to the
sound of die piano or the harp played bdow^ to the passing
to and fro of the butler and footman^ to the jinglkg of glass
and china as refreshments were handed^ to the broken hum
of conversation as the drawing*Toom doors opened and dosed.
When tired of this occupation^ I would retire from the stair-
head to the solitary and silent nursery: there^ though some-
what sad^ I was not miserable. To speak the tmth^ I had not
the least wish to go into company, for in company I was very
rarely noticed; and if Bessie had been kind and companSbn-
able, I should have deemed it a treat to spend the evenings
quietly with her^ instead of passing them under the formid-
able eye of Mrs. Reed^ in a room full of ladies and gentiemen.
But Bessie^ as soon as she had dressed her youi^ ladies^ used
to take herself ofE to the lively regions of the kitchen and
housekeeper's room^ generally bearing the candle along with
her. I then sat with my doll on my baee, till the fire got low,
glancing rotmd occasionally to make sure that nothing worse
than myself haunted the shadowy toom; and when the
embers sank to a dull red, I undressed hastily, tugging at knots
and strings as I best might, and sought shelter from cold and
darkness in my crib. To this crib I always took my dcill;
human beings must love something, and in the dearth of
worthier objects of affection, I contrived to find a pleasure in
loving and cherishing a faded graven image, shabby as a
fniniature scarecrow. It puzzles me now to remember with
JANE EYRE a3
what absurd sincerity I doated on this little toy, half fancying
it alive and capable of sensation, I could not sleep unless it was
folded in my night-gown ; and when it lay there safe and wann ^
I was comparatively happy^ believing it to be happy likewise.
Long did the hours seem while I waited the departure of the
company^ and listened for the sound of Bessie's step on the
stairs : sometimes she would come up in the interval to seek
her thimble or her scissors, or perhaps to bring me something
by way of supper— a bun or a cheese-cake— then she would sit
on the bed while I ate it, and when I had finished^ she would
j tuck the clothes round me, and twice she kissed me, and saidj
" Good-nightj Miss Jane/* When thus gentle, Bessie seemed
to me the best, prettiest, kindest being in the world; and I
wished most intensely that she would always be so pleasant
and amiable, and never push me about, or scold^ or task me
unreasonably, as she was too often wont to do, Bessie Lee
I must, I think, have been a girl of good natural capacity, for
i she was smart in all she did, and had a remarkable knack of
narrative; so, at least, I judge from the impression made on
I me by her nursery tales. She was pretty, too^ if my recol-
lections of her face and person are correct. I remember her as
a slim young woman, with black hair, dark eyes, very nice
I features, and good, cle^ir complexion; but she had a capricious
> and hasty temper, and indifferent ideas of principle or justice:
still, such as she was, I preferred her to any one else at Gates-
head HalK
It was the fifte^xth of January, about mne o'clock in the
I morning: Bessie was gone down to breakfast; my cousins
had uot yet been summoned to their mama; Eliza was putting
on her bonnet and warm garden-coat to go and feed her
poultry, an occupation of which she was fond : and not less
I so of selling the eggs to the housekeeper and hoarding up the
money she thus obtained. She had a turn for traffic, and a
marked propensity for saving; shown not only in the vend-
I ing of eggs and chickens, but also in driving hard bargains
with the gardener about flower-roots, seeds, and slips of plants,
that functionary having orders from Mrs. Reed to buy of his
young lady all the products of her parterre she wished to sell :
and EHza would have sold the hair off her head if she could
have made a handsome profit thereby* As to her money, she
first secreted it in odd comers, wrapped in a rag or an old
curl-paper; but some of these hoards having been discovered
by the housemaidj Eliza, fearful of one day losing her valued

24 JANE EYRE
treasure^ consented to intrust it to her mother^ at a usurioufi
rate of interest — ^fifty or sixty per cent.; which interest she
exacted every quarter^ keeping her accounts in a little book
with anxious accuracy.
Geoigiana sat on a high stool^ dressing her hair at the glass^
and interweaving her curls with artificial flowers^ and faded
feathers^ of which she had found a store in a drawer in the
attic. I was making my bed^ having received strict orders
from Bessie to get it arranged before she returned (for Bessie
now frequently employed me as a sort of under-nurserymaid,
to tidy the room^ dust the chairs^ etc.). Having spr^ the
quilt and folded my night-dress^ I went to the windowHseat
to put in order some picture-books and dolFs house furniture
scattered there; an abrupt command from Geoigiana to let
her playthings alone (for the tiny chairs and mirrors^ the
fairy plates and cupsjwere her property) stopped my proceed-
ings; and then^ for lack of other occupation^ I fell to breatli-'
ing on the frost-flowers with which the window was fretted,
and thus clearing a space in the glass through whidi I might
look out on the grounds, where all was still and petrified
under the influence of a hard frost.
From this window were visible the porter's lodge and the
carriage-road, and just as I had dissolved so much of the
silver-white foliage veiling the panes, as left room to look
out, I saw the gates thrown open and a carriage roll through.
I watched it ascending the drive with indifference: carriages
often came to Gateshead, but none ever brought visitors in
whom I was interested; it stopped in front of the house, the
door-bell rang loudly, tiie new comer was admitted. All this
being nothing to me, my vacant attention soon found livelier
attraction in the spectacle of a little hungry robin, which
came and chirruped on the twigs of the leafless cherry-tree
nailed against the wall near the casement. The remains of my
breakfast of bread and milk stood on the table, and having
crumbled a morsel of roll, I was tugging at the sash to put
out the crumbs on the wixidow-sill, when Bessie came running
upstairs into the nursery.
" Miss Jane, take off your pinafore: what are you doing
there ? Have you washed your hands and face this morning ? "
I gave another tug before I answered, for I wanted the bird
to be secure of its bread: the sash yielded; I scattered the
crumbs, some on the stone sill, some on the cherry-tree bough,
then, closing the window, I replied: —
JANE EYRE
*'No, Bessie; I have only just finished dusting, "
" Troublesome, careless child! and what are you doing
now? You look quite red, as if you had been about some
mischief: what were you opening the window for? "
I was spared the trouble of answering, for Bessie seemed
in too great a hurry to listen to explanations; she hauled me
to the wash-stand^ inflicted a merciless, but happily brief
scrub on my face and hands with soap, water, and a coarse
towel; disciplined my head with a bristly brush, denuded me
of my pinafore, and then hurrying me to the top of the stairs,
bid me go down directly, as I was wanted in the breakfast-
room.
I would have asked who wanted me: I would have de-
manded if Mrs. Reed was there; but Bessie was already gone,
and had closed the nursery-door upon me: I slowly descended.
Por nearly three months, I had never been called to Mrs.
Reed*s presence: restricted so long to the nursery, the break-
fast, dining, and drawing-rooms were become for me awful
regions, on which it dismayed me to intrude.
I now stood in the empty hall ; before me was the breakfast-
room door, and I stopped, intimidated and trembling. What
E miserable little poltroon had fear, engendered of unjust
punishment^ made of me in those days ! I feared to return
to the nursery, and feared to go forward to the parlour; ten
mtEiutes I stood in agitated hesitation : the vehement ringing
• of the breakfast-room bell decided me; I must enter.
■ Who could want me ? " I asked inwardly, as with both
hands I turned the stiff door-handle which, for a second or
two, resisted my efforts. " What should I see besides aunt
Reed in the apartment? — a man or a woman? " The handle
turned, the door unclosed, and passing through and curtsey-
I ing low J I looked up at— a black pillar l-^uch, at least,
appeared to me, at first sight, the straight, narrow, sable-clad
shape standing erect on the rug : the grim face at the top was
like a carved mask, placed above the shaft by way of
capital.
Mrs, Reed occupied her usual seat by the fireside; she
made a signal to me to approach : I did so, and she intro-
duced me to the stony stranger with the words : " This is the
little girl r^pecting whom I applied to you, "
Hcf for it was a man, turned his head slowly towards where
I stood, and having examined me with the two inquisitive^
looking grey eyes which twinkled under a pair of bushy brows^

26 JANE EYRE
said solemnly^ and in a bass voice: ** Her size is small: what
b her age? "
" T«i years. "
" So much? " was the doubtful answer; and he prolonged
his scrutiny for some minutes. Presently he addressed me: —
" Your name, little girl? "
" Jane Eyre, sir. "
In uttering these words, I looked up: he seemed to me a
tall gentleman; but th^ I was very little: his features were
laige, and they and all the lines of his frame were equaHy
haish and prim«
" Well, Jane Eyre, and are you a good child ? **
Impossible to reply to this in the afi & rmative: my little
world held a contrary opinion: I was silent. Mis. Reed
answered for me by an expressive shake of the head, adding
soon,'* Perhaps the less said on that subject the better, Mr.
Brocklehurst. "
''Scmy indeed to hear it! she and I must have some talk; **
and bending from the perpendicular, he installed his person
in the arm-diair, opposite Mrs. Reed's. *'Come here, " he
said.
I stepped across the rug; he placed me square and straight
before him. What a face he had, now that it was almost on a
level with mine! what a great nose ! and What a mouth I and
what latge prominent teeth !
''No sight so sad as that of a naughty diild, " he began,
" especially a naughty little girl. Do you know \«iiere the
wicked go after death ? "
" They go to hell, " was my ready and orthodox answer^.
*'And what is hell? Can you tell me that? "
" A pit fuU of fire. "
** And should you like to fall into that pit, and to be burn-
ing there for ever ? "
" No, sir. "
" What must you do to avoid it ? "
I deliberated a moment; my answer, when it did come,
was objectionable: " I must keep in good health, and not
die. "
" How can you keep in good health ? Qiildren younger
than you die daily. I buried a little child of five years old 6hly
a day or two since, — a good little child, whose sotd is now in
heaven. It is to be feared the same could not be said of yoUj
were you to be called hence.^'
JANE EYRE 27
Not being in a condition to remove his doubts I only cast
my eyes down on the two large feet planted on the rug^ and
sighed J wishing myself far enough away.
*'I hope that sigh is from the heart, and that you repent
of ever having been tlie occasion of discomfort to your
excellent benefactress.**
'* Benefactress 1 benefactress 1 " said I, inwardly ^'* they
all call Mrs, Reed my benefactress j if so, a benefactress is a
disagreeable thing/'
" Do you say your prayeis night and morning? " con-
tinued my interrogator.
** Yes, sir. "
** Do you read yaut Bible? "
" Sometinaes, "
" With pleasure? Are you fond of it? "
*'I like Revelations, and the book of Daniel, and Genesis
and Samuel, and a little bit of Exodus, and some parts of
Kings and Chronides, and Job and Jonah. "
** And the Psalms? I hope you like them? "
" No, sir.''
.''No ? oh, shocking I I have a little boy, younger than 3^0 u,
wbo knows six Psalms by heart; and when you ask him which
he would rather have, a ginger-bread nut to eat, or a verse of
a Psalm to leam, he says ;'Oh I the verse of a Psalm I angels
sing Psalms; * says he, * I wish to be a little angel here below;'
he then gets two nuts in recompense for his infant piety.'*
** PsaSns are not interesting, " I remarked.
" That proves you have a wicked heart; and you must
pray to God to change it; to give you a new and clean one;
to take away your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. "
I was about to propound a question, touching the manner
in which that operation of changing my heart was to be per-
formed, when Mrs. Reed interposed, telling me to sit down;
she then proceeded to carry on the conversation herself.
*'Mr* Brockle hurst, I believe I intimated in the letter which
I wrote to you three weeks ago, that this httle girl has not
quite the character and disposition I could wish; should you
admit her into Lowood school, I should be glad if the super-
intendent and teachers were requested to keep a strict eye
on her, and above all, to guard against her worst fault, a
tendency to deceit. I mention this in your hearing, Jane, that
you may not attempt to impose on Mr. Erocklehurst;'*
Well might I dread, well might I dislike Mrs, Reed ; for it
28 JANE EYRE
was her nature to wound me cruelly: never was I happy in
her presence: however carefully I obeyed, however strenu-
ously I strove to please her, my efforts were still repulsed and
repaid by such sentences as the above. Now, uttered before
a stranger, the accusation cut me to the heart: I dimly per-
ceived that she was already obliterating hope from the new
phase of existence which she destined me to enter; I felt,
though I could not have expressed the feeling, that she was
sowing aversion and unkindness along my hiture path; I
saw myself transformed under Mr. Brocklehurst's eye into
an artful, noxious child, and what could I do to remedy the
injury?
''Nothing, indeed I " thought I, as I struggled to repress
a sob, and hastily wiped away some tears, the impotent
evidences of my anguish.
''Deceit is, indeed, a sad fault in a child, " said Mr. Brockle-
hurst; " it is akin to falsehood, and all Uars will have their
portion in the lake burning with fire and brimstone: she
shall, however, be watched, Mrs. Reed; I will speak to Miss
Temple and the teachers. "
''I should wish her to be brought up in a manner suiting her
prospects, " continued my benefactress; " to be made useful,
to be kept humble: as for the vacations, she will, with your
permission, spend them always at Lowood. "
" Your decisions are perfectly judicious, madam, " returned
Mr. Brocklehurst. " Humility is a Christian grace, and one
peculiarly appropriate to the pupils of Lowood; I, therefore,
direct that especial care shall be bestowed on its cultivation
amongst them. I have studied how best to mortify in them
the worldly sentiment of pride; and, only the other day, I
had a pleasing proof of my success. My second daughter,
Augusta, went with her mama to visit the school, and on her
return she exclaimed:'Oh, dear papa, how quiet and plain
all the girls at Lowood look; with their hair combed behind
their ears, and their long pinafores, and those little holland
pockets outside their frocks — ^they are almost like poot
people's children ! and,'said she,'they looked at my dress
and mama's, as if they had never seen a silk gown before.'"
" This is the state of things I quite approve, " returned
Mrs. Reed; " had I sought all England over, I could scarcely
have found a S3rstem more exactly fitting a child like Jane
Eyre. Consistency, my dear Mr. Brocklehurst; I advocate
consistency in all things. "
JANE EYRE 29
** Consistency, madam, is the first cf Christian duties; and
it has been observed in every arrangement connected with
the establishment of Lowood: plain fare^ simple attire, un-
sophisticated accommodations, hardy and active habits; such
'is the order of the day in the house and its inhabitants/'
^ " Quite right, sir. I may then depend upon this child being
received as a pupil at Lowood, and there being trained in
conformity to her position and prospects ?'*
^ Madam^ you may : she shall be placed in that nursery of
I chosen plants — and I trust she will show herself grateful for
the inestimable privilege of her election/'
" I will send her, then, as soon as possible, Mr* Brocklehurst ;
forj I assure you, I feel anxious to be relieved of a responsi-
bility that was becoming too irksome/*
*'No doubt, no doubt, madam, and now I wish you good
morning. I shall return to Brocklehurst Hall in the course of
a week or two: my good friend, the Archdeacon, will not
permit me to leave him sooner, I shaU send Miss Temple
notice that she is to expect a new girl^ so that there will be
no difficulty about receiving her. Good bye/'
" Good bye, Mr, Brocklehurst; remember me to Mrs. and
Miss Brocklehurst, and to Augusta and Theodore^ and Master
Broughton Brocklehurst/'
" I will, madam. Little girl, here is a book entitled the
* Child's Guide'; read it with prayer, especially that part
containing'an account of the awfully sudden death of
Martha G , a naughty child addicted to falsehood and
deceit/ "
With these words Mr, Brocklehurst put into my hand a
thin pamphlet sewn in a cover, and having rung for his
carriage, he departed.
Mrs, Reed and I were left alone: some minute passed
in silence; she was sewing, I was watching her, Mrs. Reed
might be at that time some six or seven and thirty; she
was a woman of robust frame, square-shouldered and strong-
limbed, not taD, and, though stout, not obese: she had a
somewhat large face, the under- jaw being much developed
and very solid; her brow was low, her chin large and pro-
minent, mouth and nose sufficiently regular; under her Hght
eye-brows ghmmered an eye devoid of ruth; her skin was
dark and opaque, her hair nearly flaxen; her constitution
was sound as a bell— illness never came near her; she was an
ocactj clever manager^ her household and tenantry were
^
30 JANE EYRE
thoroughly under her control; her children^ only, at times
defied her authority, and laughed it to scorn; she dressed
well, and had a presence and port calculated to set off hand*
some attire.
Sitting on a low stool, a few yards from her arm-^:hair, I
examin^ her figure; I perused her features. In my hand I
held the tract, containing the sudden death of the Liar: to
which narrative my att^tion had been pointed as to an
appropriate warning. What had just parsed; what Mrs.
R^ had said concerning me to Mr. Brocldehurst; the whole
tenor of their conversation, was rec^t, raw, and stinging
in my mind; I had felt every word as acutely as I had
heard it plainly, and a passion of resenttqent fomeatad now
within me.
Mrs. Reed looked up from her work; her e}re settled on
mine, her fingers at the same time suspended their nimble
movements.
*'Go out of the room; return to the nursery, " was her
mandate. My look or something dse must have struck her aa
offensive, for she spoke with extr^ne, though suppressed
irritatipn. I got up, I went to the door; I came bade again;
I walked to the window, across the room, then dose up
to her.
Speak I must: I had been trodd^ on severdy, and must
turn: but how? What strength had I to dart retaliation at
my antagonist? I gathered my energies and launched them
in this blunt sentence: —
" I am not deceitful: if I were, I should say I loved you ;
but I declare I do not love you: I dislike you the worst of
anybody in the world excq > t John Reed ; and this book about
the liar, you may give to your girl, Georgiana, for it is she
who tells lies, and not I. "
Mrs. Reed's hands still lay on her work inactive: her
eye of ice continued to dwell freezingly on mine.
" What more have you to say? " she ask^, rather in the
tone in which a perscm might address an opponent of adult
age than such as is ordinarily used to a child.
That eye of hers, that voice stirred every antipathy I had.
Shaking from head to foot, thrilled with ungovernable excite-
ment, I continued: —
" X am glad you are no relation of mine: I will never call
you aunt again as long as I live. I will never come to see you
when I am grown up; and if any one asks me how I Iflced
I
fANE EYRE ^^^ " ^ 31
you, and how you treated me, I will say the very thought of
you makes me sick, and that you treated me with miserable
cruelty/*
" How dare you affirm that, Jane Eyre? "
" How dare I, Mrs. Reed? How dare I? Because it is the
truth. You think I have no feelings, and that I can do without
one hit of love or kindness; but I cannot live so: and you
have no pity. I shall remember how you thrust me back-
roughly and violently thrust me back — into the red -room, and
locked me up there, to my dying day; though I was in agony ;
though I cried out, while suffocating with distress, * Have
mercy 1 Have mercy, aunt Reed !'And that punishment you
made me suffer because your wicked boy struck me— knocked
me down for nothing. I will tell anybody who asks me
questions^ this exact tale. People think you a good woman,
but you are bad; hard-hearted. You are deceitful ! "
Ere I had finished this reply, my soul began to expand, to
exult, with the strangest sense of freedom, of triumph, I
ever felt* It seemed as if an invisible bond had burst, and
that I had struggled out into unhoped-for liberty. Not with-
out cause was this sentiment: Mrs. Reed looked frightened;
her work had slipped from her knee; she was lifting up her
hands, rocking herself to and fro, and even twisting her face
as if she would cry.
'■ Jane, you are under a mistake : what is the matter with
you? Why do you tremble so violently? Would you like to
drink some water? "
'^ No, Mrs. Reed. "
" Is there anything else you wish for, Jane? I assure you,
I desire to be your friend/'
" Not you. You told Mr. Brocklehnrst I had a bad char-
Ectcrj a deceitful disposition; and I'll let everybody at
Lowood know what you are, and what you have done. "
** Jane, you don^t understand these things: children must
be corrected for their faults. "
" Deceit is not my fault I ** I cried out in a savage, high
voice,
** But you are passionate, Jane, that you must allow; and
now return to the nursery — there's a deat^-and lie down a
Uttle/'
** I am not your dear; I cannot he down: send me to
school soon, Mrs. Reed, for I hate to live here.'*
** I will indeed send her to school soon, " murmured Mis,
32 JANE EYRE
Reed^ sotto voce; and gathering up her work^ she abruptly
quitted the apartment.
I was left there alone — winner of the field. It was the
hardest battle I had fought^ and the first victory I had gained :
I stood awhile on the rug^ where Mr.. Brocklehurst had stood^
and I enjoyed my conqueror's solitude. First, I smiled to
myself and felt elate; but this fierce pleasure subsided in m^
as fast as did the accelerated throb of my pulses. A child
cannot quarrel with its elders, as I had done, < :amiot give its
furious feelings uncontrolled play, as I had given mime, with-
out experiencing afterwards the pang of remolse and the chill
of reaction. A ridge of lighted heath, alive, glancing, devour-
ing, would have been a meet emblem of my mind wIdqr ,I
accused and menaced Mrs. Reed : the same ridge, black siwi
blasted after the flames are dead; wouJd have r^resented as
meetly my subsequent condition, when half an hour's silepqe
and reflection had shown me the madness of my conduct,
and the dreariness of my hated and hating position.
Something of vengeance I had tasted for the first time;
as aromatic wine it seemed, on swallowing, warm aojd racy^
its after-flavour, metallic and corroding, gave me ibl sensatioo
as if I had been poisoned. Willingly woi^ld I now have gw^
and asked Mrs. Reed's pardon; bu^ I knew, partly frPQi
experience and partly from instinct, that was the way tp
make her repulse me with double scorn, thereby re-e^fiting
every turbulent impulse of my nature.
I would fain exercise some better faculty than that of fierce
speaking; fain find nourishment for some less fiendish, feel-
ing than that of sombre indignation. I took a book — 3(Hne
Arabian tales; I sat down and endeavoured to read. I cej^ild
make no sense of the subject; my own thoughts swam always
between me and the page I had usually found fascinating^ X
opened the glass-door in the breakfast-rpoi^* the shrubbery
was quite still: the black frost reigned, u^broken by sun or
breeze, through the grounds. I covered my head and arms
with the skirt of my frock, and went out to walk in a part of
the plantation which was quite sequestered: but I found no
pleasure in the silent trees, the falling fir-cones, the congealed
relics of autumn, russet leaves, swept by past wind§ in heaps,
and now stiffened together. I leaned against a gate^ and
looked into an empty field where no sheep were feeding, where
the short grass was nipped and blanched. It was a very gyey
day; a mps^, opaque sky, " ending on snaw,'! ^ai^pjed ^1;
I
JANE EYRE 33
thence flakes fell at intervals, which settled on the hard path
and on the hoary lea without melting. I stood, a wretched
child enooghj whispering to myself over and over again,
" What shall 1 do ?— what shall I do ? "
AH at once I heard a clear voice call^ *'Miss Jane I where
are you ? Come to lunch 1 "
It was Bessie, I knew well enough; but I did not stir; her
light step came tripping down the path.
" You naughty httle thing! " she said. " Why don't you
come when you are called? "
Bessie*s presence, compared with die thoughts over which
I had been brooding^ seemed cheerful; even though^ as usual,
she was somewhat cross. The fact is, after my confiict with
and victory over Mrs. Reed^ I was not disposed to care much
for the nursemaid's transitory anger; and I was disposed to
bask in her youthful lightness of heart. 1 just put my two
arms round lier, and said, *'Come, Bessie I don^t scold.'*
The action was more frank and fearless than any I was
habituated to indulge in i somehow it pleased her.
" You are a strange child, Miss Jane/* she said, as she
looked down at me : *'a little roving, solitary thing : and you
are going to school, I suppose? "
I nodded*
'* And won't you be sorry to leave poor Bessie? "
" What does Bessie care for me ? She is always scolding me. "
'* Because you're such a queer, frightened, shy, little thing.
You should be bolder. "
*'What I to get more knocks ? "
** Nonsense ! But you are rather put upon, that's certain.
My mother said, when she came to see me last week, that she
would not like a little one of her own to be in your place. —
Now, come in, and I've some good news for you "
" I don't think you have, Bessie. "
" Child I what do you mean ? What sorrowful eyes you fix
on me I Well 1 but Missis and the young ladies and Master
John are going out to tea this afternoon^ and you shall have
tea with me. rU ask cook to bake you a little cakCj and then
you shall help me to look over your drawers ; for I am soon
to pack your trunk. Missis intends you to leave Gateshead
in a day or two, and you shall choose what toys you hke to
take with you. "
"'Bessie^ vou must promise not to scold me any more till
I go. "
A
34 JANE EYRE
" Well, I will: but mind you are a very good girl, and
don't be afraid of me. Don't start when I chance to speak
rather sharply: it's so provoking. "
" I don't think I shall ever be afraid of you again, Bessie,
because I have got used to you; and I shall soon hAve another
set of people to dread. "
" K you dread them, they'll dislike you. "
" As you do, Bessie? "
" I don't dislike you. Miss; I believe I am fonder of you
than of all the others. "
" You don't show it. "
" You little sharp thing! you've got quite a new way of
talking. What makes you so venturesome and hardy? "
" Why, I shall soon be away- from you, and besides — — "
I was going to say something about what had passed between
me and Mrs. Reed; but on second thoughts I considered it
better to remain silent on that head.
" And so you're glad to leave me? "
" Not at all, Bessie; indeed, just now I am rather sorry. "
" Just now I and rather I How coolly my little lady says it I
I daresay now if I were to ask you for a kiss you wouldn't
give it to me: you'd say you'd rather not. "
" I'll kiss you and welcome: bend your head down. "
Bessie stooped; we mutually embraced, and I followed her
into the house quite comforted. That afternoon lapsed in
peace and harmony; and in the evening Bessie told me tome
of her most enchanting stories^ and sang me some of her
sweetest songs. Even for me life had its gleams of sunshine.
CHAPTER V^
FiVB o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of tiie Z9th
of January, when Bessie brought a candle into my Gk > 5et and
found me sJready up and neaiiy dressed. I had risen half an
hour before her entrance, and had washed my face^ and put
on my clothes by the light of a half^moon just setting, whose
rays streamed through the narrow window near my crib. I
was to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the
lodge gates at 6 a.h. Bessie was the only person yet risen;
she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now proceeded to
make my breakfast. Few diildren can eat when excited with
the thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed
I
h.
JANE EYRE 35
me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of tlie boiled milk and
bread she had prepared for m^ wrapped up some biscuits ra
a paper and put them into my bag; then she helped mc on
with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrapping heiself in a shawl,
she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs. Reed's bed*
EOom^ she said,'* Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye? "
" No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were
gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb her in the
morning, or my cousins either; and she told me to remember
that she had always been my best friend, and to speak of her
and be grateful to her accordingly.*'
" What did you say. Miss?'^
" Nothing: I covered my face with the bed-clothes^ and
turned from her to the walL "
** That was wrong. Miss Jane. "
** It was quite right, Bessie: your Missis has not been
my friend : she has been my foe. "
" Oh, Miss Jane! don't say sol "
*'Good-bye to Gat^head I " cried I, a^ we passed through
the hall and went out at the front door.
The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried
a lantemj whose light glanced on wet steps and gravel road
soddened by a recent thaw. Raw and chill was the winter
morning; my teeth chattered as I hastened down the drive*
There was a light in the porter's lodge: when we reached it,
we found the porter's wife just kindling her fire; my trunk,
which had been carried down the evening before^ stood corded
at the door. It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly
after that hour had struck, the distant roll of wheels an-
nounced the coming coach ; I went to the door and watched
its lamp^ approach rapidly through the gloom »
" Is she going by herseff ? " asked tlje porter's wife.
" Yes "
" And how far is it? "
*'Fifty miles.'^
*• What a long way ! I wonder Mrs, Reed is not afraid to
trust her so far alone/*
The coach drew up; there it was at the gates with its four
borses and its top laden with passengers: the guard and
coachman loudly urged haste; my trunk was hoisted up;
I was taken from Bessie*s neck, to which I clung with kisses.
** Be sure and take good c^re of her,*'cried she to the
guard, as he lifted me into the inside.
36 JANE EYRE
" Ay, ay I " was the answer: the door was slapped to, a
voice exclaimed, " All right, " and on we drove. Thus was I
severed from Bessie and Gateshead: tbu3 whirled away to
unknown, and, as I then deemed, remote and mysterious
regions.
I remember but little of the journey; I only know that the
day seemed to me of a preternatural length^ and that we
appeared to travel over hunckeds of miles of road. We passeci
through several towns, and in one, a very laige one > the coach
stopped; the horses were taken out, and the passeng^s
alighted to dine. I was carried into an inn, where the guard
wanted me to have some dinner; but, as I had no appetite,
he left me in an immense room with a fireplace at each
end, a chandelier pendent from the ceiling, and a little red
gallery high up against the wall filled wiSi musictU injstru-
ments. Here I walked about for a long time, feeling very
strange, and mortally apprehensive of some one coming ia
and kidnapping me; for I believed in kidnappers, their ex-
ploits having frequently figured in Bessie's fireside chronicles.
At last the guard retiuncd: once more I was stowed away
in the coach, my protector mounted his own seat, sounded
his hollow horn, and away we rattled over the " stony
street " of L .
The afternoon came on wet and somewhat misty: as it
waned into dusk, I began to feel that we were getting very
far indeed from Gateshead : we ceased to pass through townaj
the country changed; great grey hills heaved up round the
horizon: as twilight deepened, we descended a valley, dark
with wood, and long after night had overclouded the prospect,
I heard a wild wind rushing amongst trees.
Lulled by the sound, I at last dropped asleep: I had not
long slumbered when the sudden cessation of motion awoke
me; the coach-door was open, and a person like a servant
was standing at it: I saw her face and dress by the light of
the lamps.
" Is there a little girl called Jane Eyre here? " she asked.
I answered " Yes, " and was then lifted out; my trunk was
handed down, and the coach instantly drove away,
I was stiff with long sitting, and bewildered with the nojse
and motion of the coach: gathering my faculties, I looked
about me. Rain, wind, and darkness filled the air; nqyerthe^
less, I dimly discerned a wall before me and a door open in it.
Through this door I passed with my new guide: she shut and
tANE EYRE 37
locked it behind her. There was now visible & house or houses
— for the building spread far — with many windows, and lights
burning in some; we went up a broad pebbly path, splashing
wet, and were admitted at a door; then the servant led me
throogh a passage into a room with a firftj where she left me
alone.
I stood and warmed my numbed fingers over the blaze, tlien
I looked round; there was no candle, but the uncertain light
from the hearth showed, by intervals, papered walls, carpet^
curtainsj shining mahogany furniture: it was a parlour, not
so spacious or splendid as the drawing-room at Gateshead,
but comfortable enough. I was puzzling to make out the sub-
ject of a picture on the wall, when the door opened^ and an
mdividual carrying a light entered; another followed close
behind.
The first was a tall lady with dark hair^ dark eyes, and a
pale and large forehead ; her figure was partly enveloped in
a shawl J her countenance was grave, her bearing erect.
'* The child is very young to be sent alone/^ said she^
putting her candle do'wn on the table. She considered me
attentively for a minute or two, then further added, —
'* She had better be put to bed soon; she looks tired; are
you tired ? " she asked, placing her hand on my shoulder.
" A little, ma'am. "
" And hungry too, no doubt : let her have some supper
before she goes to bed. Miss Miller, Is this the first time you
have left your parents to come to school, my little girl ? "
I explained to her that I had no parents. She inquired how
long they bad been dead ; then how old I was, what was my
name, whether I could read^ write, and sew a littler then she
touched my cheek gently with her forefinger, and saying,
" She hoped I should be a good child, *^ dismissed me along
with Miss Miller.
The lady I had left might be about twenty-nine; the one
who went with me appeared some years younger; the first
impressed me by her voico, lookj and air. Miss Miller was
more ordinary; ruddy in complexion, though of a careworn
countenance; hurried in gait and action, like one who had
always a multipUcity of tasks on hand ; she looked, indeed ^
what I afterwards found she really wa% an under-tt^^her.
Led by her, I passed from compartment to compartment,
from passage to passage, of a large and irregular building;
tin, emei^ging from the total and somewhat dreary silence
^
3* JANE EYRE
pervading that portion of the bouse we bad traveiBed^ we
came upon the hum of many voices^ and (Mresently mtored
a wide^ long room^ with great deal tables, two at each end,
on each of which burnt a pair ot candles, and seated all
round on benches, a congregation of giria of every age, from
nine or ten to twenty^ Seen by the dim light of the dips,
their number tome appeared countless, though not in reality
exceeding eighty j they were uniformly dress^ in brown stuff
frodcs of quaint fashion, and long hoUand pinafoies < It was
tiiie hour of study; they wore engaged in conning over their
tor^orrow's task, and the hum I had heard was the combined
result of their whispered repetitions«
Mks Miller signed to me to sit on a bench near the door,
then walking up to the top of the k > ng room, she cried out, —
" Monitors, collect the lesson-books and put them away I "
Four tall girls arose from different tables, and going round,
gathered the books and removed them. Miss Miller again
gave the word of command, —
''Monitor;?, fetch the supper-trays t "
The tail girls went out and returned presently, each bear-
ing a tray, with portions of something, I knew not what,
aiiranged thereon, and a pitcher of water and mug in tibe
middle of each tray. The portions were handed roimd; those
who liked took a draught of the water, the mug being common
to a\l. When it came to my turn, I drank, for I was thirsty,
but did not touch the food, excitement and fatigue rendering
me incapable of eating: I now saw, however, that it was a
thin oaten cake, shared into fragments.
The meal over, prayars were read by Miss Miller, and the
classes filed off, two and two, upstairs. Overpowered by
this time with weariness, I scarcely noticed what sort of a
place the bed-room was; excq > t that, like the school-room, I
saw it was very long. To-night I was to be Miss Miller's bed-*
fellow; she helped me to undress: when laid down I glanced
at the long rows of beds, each of which was quickly filled with
two occupants; in ten minutes the single light was extin-
guished; amid silence and complete darkness, I fell asleep^
The night passed rapidly: I was too tired even to dream;
I only once awoke to hear the wind rave in furious gusts, and
the rain fall in torrents, and to be sensible that Miss Miller
had taken her place by my side. When I again unclosed my
eyes, a loud beU was ringing: the girls were up and dressing;
day had not yet b^gun to dawn, and a rushlight or two burnt

TANE EYRi
in the room* I too mse reluctantly ^^ it was bitter mid, and
I dressed as well as I could for shivering^ and washed when
there was a basin at liberty^ which did not occur soon, as there
was but one basin to six gtrlSj on the stands down the middle
of the room. Again the bell rang ; all formed in file^ two and
two J and in that order descended the stairs and entered the
cold and dimly-ht school-room: here prayers were read by
Miss MiUer; afterwards she called out; —
•* Form classes ! "
A great tumult succeeded for some minutes, during which
Miss Miller repeatedly exclaimed,'* Silencer* and " Order I "
When it subsided, I saw them all drawn up in four semi-
drcles, before four chairSj placed at the four mbles; all held
books in their hands, and a great book, like a Bible, lay on
^^ch table, before the vacant seat. A pause of some seconds
succeeded, filled up by the low, vague hum of numbers; Miss
MiUer walked from class to class, hushing this indefinite
sound.
A distant beU tinkled: immediately thtee ladies entered
the room, each walked to a table and took her seat; Miss
Miller assumed the fourth vacant chair, which was that
nearest the door^ and around which the smallest of the
children were assembled : to this inferior class I was calledj
and placed at the bottom of it.
Business now began: the day's Collect was repeated, then
certain texts of Scripture were said, and to these suoce^ed a
protracted reading of chapters in t^e Bible, which lasted an
hour 4 By the time that exercise was terminated, day had
fully dawned. The indefatigable bell now sounded for the
fourth time: the classes were marshalled and marched into
another room to breakfast: how glad I was to behold a
prospect of getting something to eat J I was now nearly sick
from inanition, having taken so little the day before^
The refectory was a great, low -ceiled, gloomy room; on
two long tables smoked basins of something hot^ which, how-
ever, to my dismay, sent forth an odour far from inviting* I
law a universal mamfestation of discontent when the fmnes
of the repast met the nostrils of those destined to swallow it;
from the van of the procession, the tall girls of the first dass,
fose the whispered words : —
*'Disgusting I The porridge is burnt again I "
^* Silence 1 " ejaculated a voice; not that of Miss Miller,
but one of the upper tca^eiB^ a little and dark peisonage.
4« JANE EYRE
»in«tly droned^ bat of somewhat morose aspect, who in-
stalled henelf at the top of one table, while a more buxom
lady pre:;ided at the other. I looked in vain for her I had first
seen the night before; she was not visible: Miss Miller occupied
tl\e foot of the table where I sat, and a strange, foreign look-
ing, elderly lady, the French teacher, as I afterwards found,
took the corresponding seat at the other board. A long grace
was said and a hynm sung; then a servant brought in some
tea for the teachers, and t±ie meal be^ui.
Ravenous, and now very faint, I devoured a spoonful or
two of my portion without thinking of its taste; but the first
«dge of hunger blunted, I perceived I had got in hand a
nauseous mess: burnt pomdge is aknost as bad as rotten
potatoes; famine itself soon sickens over it. The spoons were
moved slowly: I saw each girl taste her food and try to
swallow it ; but in most cases the effort was soon relinquished*
Breakfast was over, and none had breakfasted. Thanks being
returned for what we had not got, and a second hymn chanted,
the refectory was evacuated for the school-room. I was one
ol the la^t to go out, and in passing the tables, I saw one
teacher take a basin of the porridge and taste it; she looked
at the others; all their countenances expressed displeasure,
and one of them, the stout one, whispered: —
Abominable stuff I How shameful I "
A quarter of an hour passed before lessons again began,
during which the school-room was in a glorious tiunult; for
that space of time, it seemed to be permitted to talk loud and
more freely, and they used their privilege. The whole con-
versation ran on the breakfast, which one and all abused
roundly. Poor things 1 it was the sole consolation they had.
Miss Miller was now the only teacher in the room: a group
of great girb standing about her, spoke with serious and
sullen gestures. I heard the name of Mr. Brocklehurst pro-
nounced by some lips; at which Miss Miller shook her head
disapprovingly; but she made no great effort to check the
general wieUi: doubtless she shared in it.
A dock in the school-room struck nine; Miss Miller left
bet circle, and standing in the middle of the room, cried: —
** Silence! To your seats 1 "
DisdpliDe prevailed: in five minutes the confused throng
was resolved into order, and comparative silence quelled the
^bel clamour of tongues. The upper teachers now punctu-
**'y resumed their posts: but still, all seemed to wait.
JXne eyre ~4i
Ranged on benches down the sides of the room, the eighty
girls sat motionless and erect: a quaint assemblage they
appearedj all with plain locks combed from their faces^ not a
curl visible; in brown dresses, made high and surrounded by
a narrow tucker about the throaty with little pockets of
hoUand (shaped something like a Highlander's purse) tied in
front of their frocks, and designed to serve the purpose of a
work-bag: all too wearing woollen stockings and country-
made shoes, fastened with brass buckles. Above twenty of
those dad in this costume were full-grown girls, or rather
young women; it suited them ill, and gave an air of oddity
even to the prettiest.
I was still looking at them, and also at intervals examining
the teachers — none of whom precisely pleased me; for the
stout one was a little coarse^ the dark one not a httle fierce, the
foreigner harsh and grotesque, and Miss Miller, poor thing 1
looked purple^ weather-beaten, and over- worked— when, as
my eye wandered from face to face, the whole school rose
simultaneously, as if moved by a common spring.
What was the matter? I had heard no order given: I was
puzzled. Ere I had gathered my wits, the classes were again
seated: but as all eyes were now turned to one pointy mine
folk) wed the general direction, and encountered the personage
who had received me last night. She stood at the bottom of
the long room, on the hearth ; for there was a fire at each end :
she surveyed the two rows of girls silently and gravely. Miss
Miller approaching j seemed to ask her a question^ and having
received her answer, went back to her placCj and said aloud,—
»*'Monitor of the first class, fetch the globes 1 "
While the direction was being executed, the lady consulted
moved slowly up the room. I suppose I have a considerable
oigan of Veneration, for I retain yet the sense of admiring
ftwe with which my eyes traced her steps. Seen now, in broad
daylight, she looked tall, fair, and shapely; brown eyes, with
a benignant light in their irids, and a fine penciliing of long
lashes round, reheved the whiteness of her large front; on
each of her temples her hair, of a very dark brownj was
clustered in round curls, aca > rding to the fashion of those
times, when neither smooth bands nor long ringlets were in
vogue; her dress, also in the mode of the day, was of purple
doth, relieved by a sort of Spanish trimming of black velvet;
a gold watch (watches were not so common then as now)
ihone at her girdle. Let the reader addj to complete the
49 JANE EYRE
pfeture, refined features; a complexion^ if pale^ dear; and a
statdy air and carriage^ and he will have^ at least, as clearly
as words can give it^ a correct idea of the exterior of Miss
Temple — ^Bf aria T^nple^ as I afterwards saw the name written
in a prayer*book entrusted to me to carry to church.
The superintendent of Lowood (for such was this lady)
having taken her seat before a pair of g^bes placed on one of
the taUes^ summoned the first class round her, and com-
menced giving a lesson in gec^^ph^; the lower classes were
called by the teachers : repetitions m history, grammar, etc.,
went on for an hour; writing and arithmetic succeeded, and
music lessons were given by Miss Temple to some of the elder
giris. The duration of each lesson was measured by the dock,
which at last struck twelve. The superintendent rose: —
''I have a word to address to the pupils, " said she.
The tumult of cessation from lessons was already breaking
forth, but it sank at her voice. She went on: —
*^ You had this morning a breakfast which you could not
eat; you must be hungry: — ^I have ordered that a lunch of
bread and cheese shall be served to all.'^
The teadiers looked at her with a sort of suiprise.
" It is to be done on my responsibility,''she added, in an
explanatory tone to them, and immediately afterwaids left
the room.
The bread and dieese was presently brought in and dis*
tributed, to the high delight and refreshment of the whole
school. The order was now given ^'To the garden 1 " Each
put on a coarse straw bonnet, with strings of coloured calico,
and a cloak of grey frieze. I was similarly equipped, and,
folbwing the stream, I made my way into the open air.
l*he garden was a wide endosure, surrounded with walls
so high as to exdude every glimpse of prospect; a covered
verandah tan down one side, and broad walks bordered a
middle space divided into scores of little beds: these beds
were assigned as gardens for the pupils to cultivate, and each
bed had an owner. When full of flowers they would doubtless
look pretty; but now, at the latter end of January, idl was
wint^ blight and brown decay. I shuddered as I stood and
Idoked round me: it was an indement day for out-door
exerdse; not positivdy rainy, but darkened by a drizzling
ydbw fog; all underfoot was still soaking wet with the floods
of yesterday. The stronger among the giris ran about and
engaged in active games, but sundry pale and thin ones hexded
wii
■Ca
JANE EYRE
together lor shelter and warmth in the verandah; and amongst
these, as the dense mist penetrated to their shivering frames^
1 heard freqiiently the sound of a hollow cough.
; As yet I had spoken to no one^ nor did anybody seem to
take notice of me; I stood lonely enough: but to that feeling
of isolation I was accustomed; it did not oppress me much^
I leant against a pillar of the verandah^ drew my grey mantle
close about me, and, trying to forget the cold which nipped
me without, and the unsatisfied hunger which gnawed me
within, delivered myself up to the employment of watching
id thinking* My reflections were too undefmed and frag-
entary to merit record; I hardly yet knew where I was;
rateshead and my past life seemed floated away to an ira-
measurable distance; the present was vague and strange,
and of the future I couJd form no conjecture, I looked round
the convent-Hke garden, and then up at the house; a large
building, haJf of which seemed grey and old, the other half
quite new. The new part, containing the school-room and
dorniitory, was lit by muUioned and latticed windows, which
gave it a church-like aspect ; a stone tablet over the door, bore
this inscription; —
'* Lowood Institution. — ^This portion was rebuilt a.b.— — ,
ly Naomi Brocklehurst, of Brocklehurst Hall, in this county/^
Let your hght so shine before men that they may see your
id worksj and glorify 3^ur Father which is in heaven/'—
t* Matt. V. i6.
I read these words over and over again: I felt that an
escpknation belonged to them, and was unable fully to
penetrate their import. I was still pondering the signification
of " Institution,^'and endeavouring to make out a con-
nection between the first words and the verse of Scripture,
when the sound of a cough dose behind me, made me turn
my head, I saw a girl sitting on a stone bench near; she had
bent over a book, on the perusal of which she seemed intent :
from where I stood I could see the title — it was " Rasselas; "
a name that struck me as strange,and consequently attractive,
la turning a leaf she happened to look up, and I said to her
directly; —
" Is your book interesting ?'* I had already fonned the
intention of asking her to lend it to me some day^
" I like it, " she answered, after a pause of a second or two,
during which she examined me.
" What is it about? " I oontinued. I hardly know where
m
44 JANE EYRE
I found the hardihood thus to open a conversation with a
stiaoger; the step was contrary to my nature and habits: but
I thinJc her occupation touched a chord of sympathy some-
where; for I too liked readings though of a frivolous and
childish kind ; I could not digest or comprehend the serious or
substantial.
" You may look at it/'replied the girl^ offering me the
book,
I did so; a brief examination convinced me that the con-
tents were less taking than the title: " Rasselas " looked
dull to my triiOing taste; I saw nothing about fairies^ nothing
about genii; no bright variety seemed spread over the dosely-
printed pages. I returned it to her; she received it quietly^
and without saying an3rthing she was about to relapse into
her former studious mood : again I ventured to disturb her: —
''Can you tell me what the writing on that stone over the
door means? What is Lowood Institution? "
" This house where you are come to live. "
" And why do they call it Institution? Is it in any way
different from other schools? "
" It is partly a charity-school: you and I^ and all the rest
of us^ are chanty-children. I suppose you are an orphan: are
not either your father or your motha dead? "
" Both died before I can remember. "
" Well, all the girls here have lost either one or both parents,
and this is called an instituti(m for educating orphans. "
" Do we pay no money? Do they keep us for nothing? "
" We pay, or our friends pay, fifteen pounds a year for
each. "
" Then why do they call us charity-children? "
''Because fifteen pounds is not enough for board and teach-
ing, and the deficiency is supplied by subscription. "
'* Who subscribes? "
''Different benevolent-minded ladies and gentlemen in this
neighbourhood and in London. "
'^ Who was Naomi Brocklehurst ? "
" The lady who built the new part of this house as that
tablet records, and whose son overlooks and directs every-
thing here. "
" Why? "
" Because he is treasurer and manager of the establish-
ment«
" Then this house does not belong to that tall lady who
PiNE EYRE
wears a watch, and who said we were to have some br^d and
cheese. "
'* To Miss Tempk? Oh, nol I wish it did: she has to
answer to Mr. Brocklehurst for all she does, Mr, Brockle-
hurst buys all our food and all our clothes, "
" Does he hve here? "
** No — two miles off, at a IaT]ge hall, "
'* Is he a good man ? "
'* He is a clergyman, and is said to do a great deal of good. "
** Did you say that tall lady was called Miss Temple? "
*'Yes,'*
'* And what are the other teachers called ? "
" The one with red cheeks is called Miss Smith; she
attends to the work^ and cuts out— for we make our own
clothes, our frocks, and pelisses, and every thing; the little
one with black hair is Miss Scatcherd; she teaches histor}*^ and
grammaTj and heais the second class repetitions; and the
une who wears a shawl, and has a pocket-handkerchief tied
to her side with a yellow riband, is Madame Pierrot : she
comes from Lisle, in France, and teaches French/'
" Do you like the teachers P "
" Well enough,^'
*'Do you like the little black one, and the Madame ^?
—I cannot pronounce her name as you do,*'
*'Miss Scatcherd is hasty — you must take care not to offend
her; Madame Pierrot is not a bad sort of person, "
** But Miss Temple is the best — ^isn't she? "
" Miss Temple is very good, and very clever; she is above
the rest, because she knows far more than they do* "
'* Have you been long here? "
" Two years, "
"'Are you an orphan ? "
" My mother is dead. "
" Are you happy here ?'*
" You ask rather too many questions, I have given you
answers enough for the pr^ ent : now I want to read, "
But at that moment the summons sounded for dinner: all
re-entered the house. The odour which now filled the re-
fectory was scarcely more appetising than that which had
regaled our nostrils at breakfast : the dinner was served in two
huge tin-plated vessels, whence rose a strong steam redolent
of rancid fat* I found the mess to consist of indifferent potato^
and strange shreds of rusty meat, mixed and cooked together
4fr JANE EYRE
Of this preparation a tolerably abundant plateful was
apportioned to each pupil. I ate what I could, and wondered
within myself whether every day's fare would be like this.
After dinner, we immediately adjourned to the school-
room: lessons recommenc«lj and were oontMiiied till five
o'clock.
The only marked event of the afternoon «^, that I saw
the girl with whom I had conversed in the verandah, dis-
missed in disgrace, by Miss Scatcherd, ^m a history class,
and sent to stand in the middle of the large school*roonu The
punishment seemed to me in a high decree ignominious,
especially for so great a girl-— she looked thirteen or upwards.
I expected she would show signs of great distress and shame;
but to my surprUe she neither wept nor blushed: c^unposed,
though grave, she stood, the c^tral mask of all f3^es. " How
can she bear it so quietly— so firmly? " I asked^ of myself.
** Were I in her i^ace, it seems to me I should wish the earth
to open andswaUow me up» ^e looks 83 if s^e were thinking
of something beyond her piinishment-*4 > eyond iier situation:
of something not. round nor before her* I have heaxd of day-
dreams — is she in a day-dream now? H^ eyes are fixed on
the floor, but I am sure they do not see it~4ier sight seems
turned in, gone down into her heart: she is looking at what
she can remember, I believe; not at what is really {present.
I wonder what sort of a girl she is — ^wheth^ good or naughty. "
Soon after five p.ic we had another m^, consisting of a
small mug of cofiee^ and half a slice of brown bread. I de-
voured my bread and drank my coffee with relish; but I
should have bean glad of 83 mudi more — ^I was still hungry.
Half an hour's recreation succeeded, then study; then tiie
glass of water and the piece of oat-cake, prayers, and bed.
Such was my first day at Lowood.
CHAPTER VI
ToK next day commenced as before, getting up and dressing
by rushliigbt: but this morning we were obliged to dispense
with the ceremony of washing: the water in ^e pitchers was
frozen* A change had taken i^ace in the weatj^er the preced-
ing evening, and a keen north-east wind, whistling through the
crevices of our bed-room windows all night losi^, had made
JANE EYRE 47
us sliiver in our beds^ and turned the oont^ts of the ewers
to ice.
Before the long hour and a half of prayers and Bihle read-
ing was over, I felt ready to perish with co!d* Breakfast-time
came at last, and this morning the porridge was not burnt;
the quality was eatable, the quantity small; how small my
portion seemed ! 1 wished it had been doubled.
In the course of the day I was enrolled a member of the
fourth class J and regular tasks and occupations were assigned
iiie : hitherto, I had only been a spectator of the proceedings
at Lowood, I was now to become an actor therein. At fiist,
being little accustomed to learn by heart, the lessons appeared
to me both long and difficult: the frequent change from task
lo task, too, bewildered me; and I was glad, when, about
three o'clock in the afternoon, Miss Smith put into my hands
a border of muslin two yards long, together with needle,
thimble J etc., and sent me to sit in a quiet comer of the school-
room, with direction to hem the same. At that hour most of
the others were sewing likewise; but one class stil! stood
round Miss Scatcherd's chair reading, and as all was quiet,
the subject of their lessons could be heard, together with the
manner in which each girl acquitted herself , and the animad-
versions or commendations of Miss Scatcherd on the per-
formance. It was English history f among the readers, I
observed my acquaintance of the verandah: at the com-
mencement of the lesson J her place had been at the top of the
dass, but for some error of pronunciation or some inattention
to stops, she was suddenly sent to the very bottom. Even in
that obscure position. Miss Scatcherd continued to make her
an object of constant notice: she was continually addressing
to her such phrases as the following: —
** Bums ^'(such it seems was her name: the girls here
were all called by their surnames, as boys are elsewhere),
** Bums, you are standing on the side of your shoe, turn your
toes out immediately,** " Bums, you poke your chin most
unpleasantly, draw it in. " " Bums, I inskt on your holding
your head up; I will not have you before me in that attitude, "
etc*, etc.
A chapter having been read through twice, the books were
dosed and the girls examined. The lesson had comprised part
of the reign of Charles I., and there were sundry questions
about tonnage and poundage, and ship-money, which most
of them appeared unable to answer; still, every little diffi-
48 JANE EYRE
culty w|is 3olvcKi instantly when it reached Bums: h^
memory seemed to have retained the substance of the whole
lesson, and she was ready with answos on every point* I
kept esqpecting that Uiss Scateherd would praise her attention ;
but, instead of that, she suddenly cried out: —
" You dirty > disagreeaUe.girll you have never cleaned
your nails thisi momingl "
Bums made no, answer: I wondered at her silence.
''Why, " taught I,''does she not eiqplain that she oould
neither clean her nails nor wash her face, as the water was
frozen? "
My attention was now called off by Miss Smith.desiriqg me
to hold a skein of thread: while she was winding it, she t^ad
to n^e from time to time, asking whether I had ever bem at
school befpr^, whether I oouk} maik, stitdi, koit, etc.; tiU
she. dismissed me, I couldi not pursue my observations on
Miss ScatcheifdV mov^ments^ iWhen I returned to my seat,
that lady was just delivering an order, of which I did < not
cateh tht import; but Burns immediatdy left the class^ and,
going into l^e^mall inner room where the books were Inept,
returned in half a minute, carrying in her hand a bjutidl^ of
twigs tied t^geth^ at one end. I^ ominous to < ^ she pre-
sented to liiiss Scateherd with a respectful couiftesy; th^i
she quietly, and without being toM, unloosed hei: pinafcNre,
and the teajcher instantly and sharply inflicted on hei^ neck a
dozen strokes with the bunch of twigs. Not a tear: rose to
Bums'eye; and, while I paused from my sewing, because my
finge];s quivered at this spectacle with a sentiment of u^vait-
ing and impot^t ang^r, not Sr feature of her pensive lace
altered its ordinary expression.
''Hardened girl! " exclaimed Misjs Scateherd;''nothing
can correct you of your slatternly habits; carry the rod
away. "
Bums obeyed; I looked at her nairowly as she emeiged
from the book-clpset; she was just putting back her luuadr
kerchief into )ier pocket, and the trace of a tear glistened^ on
her thin cheek.
The play-hour in the evening I thought the pleasantest
fraction of the day at Lo wood : the bit of bread, t^e draught
of coffee swallowed at five o'clock had revived vitality, if it
had not satisfied hunger; the long restraint of the day was
slackened; the school-room felt wanner than in the momii^
— its fires being allowed to bum a little more brightly to
I
JANE EYRE 49
supply, in some measure^ the place of candles, not yet intro-
duced; the ruddy gloaniing, the licensed uproar, the con-
fusion of many voices gave one a welcome sense of liberty,
On the evening of the day on which I had seen Miss
Scatcherd flog her pupil j Bums, I wandered as usual among
the forms and tables and laughing groups without a com-
panioDj yet not feeling lonely: when I passed the windows,
I now and then lifted a blind and looked out; it snowed fast,
a drift was already forming aginst the lower panes; putting
my ear close to the window, I could distinguish from the
gleeful tumuJt within^ the disconsolate moan of the wind
outside.
Probably J if I had lately left a good home and kind parents_»
this would have been the hour when I should most keenly
have regretted the separation: that wind would then have
saddened my heart; this obscure chaos would have disturbed
my peace: as it was, I dedved from both a strange excite-
mentj and reckless and feverish, I wished the wind to howl
more wildly, the gloom to deepen to darkness, and the con-
fusion to rise to clamour.
Jumping over fomis, and creeping under tables, I made
my way to one of the fire-places; there, kneeling by the high
wire fender, I found Bums, absorbed, silent, abstracted from
aU round her by the companionship of a book, which she read
by the dim glare of the embers.
^'It is stil] Rasselas ? ** I asked, coming behind her.
'* Yes/^ she said, " and I have just finished it. "
And in five minutes more she shut it up. I was glad of this*
** Now/* thought I, ** I can perhaps get her to talk/'
I sat down by her on the floor,
'* What is your name besides Bums ? "
'* Helen/*
** Do you come a long way from here ? "
** I come from a place further north; quite on the borders
of Scotland/'
*'Will you ever go back ? "
'* I hope so; but nobody can be sure of the future/*
** You must wish to leave Lowood ? "
" No: why should 1? I was sent to Lowood to get an
education; and it would be of no use going away until I have
attained that object/'
But that teacher, MisS Scatcherd, is so cruel to you? "
Cruel? Not at all 1 She is severe: she disUkes my faults/*
so JANE EYRE
" And if I were in your place Ishould disUke her; I Ihoold
resist her; if she struck me with that rod^ I should get it
from her hand; I should break it under her nose/'
'* Probably you would do nothing of the sort: but if you
did^ Mr. Brocklehurst would expel you from the school; that
would be a great grief to your relations. It is te better to
endure patiently a smart which nobody feels but yomself^
than to commit a hasty action whose evil coasequencet will
extend to all ccmnected with you; and^ be^des, the Bible
bids us return good for evil. "
** But then it seems disgraceful to be flogged^ and to be
sent to stand in the middle of a room full of people ; and yott
are such a great girl: I am ft^ younger than you^ and I could
not bear it. "
** Yet it would be your duty to bear it^ if you could not
avoid it: it is weak and silly to say you cannat bear n^uit it
is your fate to be required to bear. "
I heiud her with wonder; I could not comprdiend this
doctrine of endurance; and still less could I understand or
sympathise with the forbearance die expressed for her
chastiser. Still I fdt that Helen Bums considered things by a
Ught invisible to my eyes. I suspected she might be right and
I wrong; but I would not ponder the matter deeply: Kke
Felix^ I put it ofiE to a more ccmvenient season.
''You say you have faults^ Helen: what ace they: To me
you seem very good. "
''Then learn from me^ not to. judge by appearances : I am,
as lifiss Scatcherd said, slatternly; I seldom put, and never
keep, things in order; I am careless; I forget rules; I read
when I should learn my lessons; I have no method; and
sometimes I say, like you, I cannot bear to be subjected to
systematic arrangements. This is all very provoking to
Miss Scatcherd, who is naturally neat, punctual, and
particular. "
''And cross and cruel, " I added; but Helen Bums would
not admit my addition; she kept silence.
" Is Miss Temple as severe to you as Miss Scatcheid? ?
At the utterance of Miss Temjde's name, a soft smile flftted
over her grave face.
" Miss Temjde is full of goodness: it pams her to be severe
to any one, even the worst in the school: she sees my emns,
and teUs me of them gently; and, if I do anything worthy of
praise^ she gives me my meed liberally. One strong proof of
JANE EYRE 5x
my wretchedly defective nature is, that even her cxpastula-
tions, so mild J so rationalj have no influence to cure me of my
faults ; and even her pmisCj though I value it most highly j
cannot stimulate me to continued care and foresight. "
" That is curious, " said I : " it is so easy to be careful, "
** For ym I have no doubt it is. I observed you in yotir
class this moming, and saw you were closely attentive: your
thoughts never seemed to wander while Miss Miller explained
the lesson and questioned you, Now^ mine continaalJy rove
away* when I should be listening to Miss Scatcherdj and
collecting all she says with assiduity^ often I lose the very
sound of her voice; I fall into a sort of dream. Sometimes I
think I am in Northumberland^ and that the noises I hear
round me are the bubbling of a little brook which nms through
Deepden^ near our house, — then^ when it comes to my turn
to reply, I have to be wakened ; and, having heard nothing
of what was read for listening to the visionary brook, I have
DO answer ready, "
'* Yet how well you replied this afternoon, "
** It was mere chance: the subject on which we had been
reading had interested me. This afternoon, instead of dream-
ing of Deepden, I was wondering how a man who wished to
do right could act so unjustly and unwisely as Charles the
First sometimes did ; and I thought what a pity it was thst^
with his integiity and conscientiousness, he could see no
farther than the prerogatives of the crown. If he bad but
been able to look to a distance, and see how what they call
the spirit of the age was tending! Still, I like Charles — I
respect him — I pity him^ poor murdered king I Yes^ his
enemies were the worst : they shed blood they had no right to
shed* How dared they kill him ! "
Helen was talking to herself now; she had forgotten I
could not very well understand her — that I was ignorant, or
nearly so, of the subject she discussed* I recalled her to my
level.
'* And when Miss Temple teaches you, do your thoughts
wander then? "
*'No, certainly, not often; because Miss Temple has
generally something to say which is newer than my own
reflections : her language is singularly agreeable to me, and
the information she communicates is often just what I wished
to gain "
" Well, then, with Miss Temple you are good? "
52 JANE EYRE
''Yes, in a passive way: I make no effort; I follow as
inclination guides me. Theze is no merit in such goodness/'
" A great deal : you are g^od to those who are good to you.
It is all I ever desire to be. It people were always kind and
obedient to those who are cruel axKl unjust^ the wicked people
would have it all their own way : they would never feel afraid,
and so they would never alter, but would grow worse and
worse. When we are struck at without a reason, we should
strike back again very hard; I am sure we should — so hard
as to teach the person who struck us never to, do it again. "
" You will change your mind, I hope, when yoi^groi^ older:
as yet you are but a Uttle untaught girl, "
'* But I feel this, Helen: I must dislike those wj^o^ wl^tt-
ever I do to please them, persist in dislikii^; me; I must
resist those who punish me unjustly. It is as natural as that
I should love those who show me afEection, (pr submit to
punishment when I feel it is deservied. "
" Heathens and savage tribes hold that doctiine; but
Christians and civilised nations disown it. "
" How? I don't understand. "
" It is not violence that best overcomes hate — m^ v^ige-
ance that most certainly heals injury. "
" What then? "
" Read the New Tes;tament, and observe what Christ says,
and how he acts; make his word your rule, and his conduct
your example. "
" What does tie say? "
" Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good
to them that hate you and despitefuUy use 3^11. "
" Then I should love Mrs. Reed, wljich I cannot do; I
should bless her son John, which is impossible. "
In her turn, Helen Bums asked me to explain; ^u^d I pro-
ceeded forthwith to pour out, in my own way, tl^e tale ol my
sufEerings and resentments. Bitter and truculent when ex-
cited, I spoke as I felt, without reserve or softening.
Helen heard n^e patiently to the end : I expected she would
then make a remark, but she said nothing.
" Well, " I asked impatiently, " is not Mrs. Reed a hard-
hearted, bad woman ? "
" She has been imkind to you > no doubt; because, you 3ee,
she djuslikes your cast of character, as Miss Scatcherd does
mine: but how minutely you remember all she has dojie and
said to you ! What ar^si^^gularly dicep impression her injustice
p
»
JANE EYRE 53
seems to have made on your heart I No ill-usage so brands its
record on my feelings, Woidd you not be happier if you tried
to foFjget her severity, together with the passionate emotions
it excited? Life appears to me too short to be spent in nursing
ammosity, or registering wrongs. We are, and must be, one
and all, burdened with faults in this world: but the time will
soon come when, I trusty we shall put them o£f in putting off
our comiptible bodies; when debasement and sin will fall
from us with this cumbrous frame of fleshy and only the spark
of the spirit wiU remain, — the impalpable principle of life and
thought^ pme as when it left the Creator to inspire the
creature: whence it came it will return; perhaps again to be
communicated to some being higher than man^perhaps to
pass through gradations of glory, from the pale human soul
to brighten to the seraph I Surely it will never^ on the con-
trary, be suffered to degenerate torn man to fiend? No; I
cannot believe that; I hold another creed; which no one ever
taught me, and which I seldom mention; but in which I
delight, and to which I cling: for it extends hope to all: it
makes Eternity a rest — a mighty home, not a terror and an
abyss. Besides, with this creed, I can so clearly distinguish
between the criminal and his crime; I can so sincerely forgive
the first while I abhor the last: with this creed revenge never
worries my heart, degradation never too deeply disgusts me,
injustice never crushes me too low : 1 live in calm, looking to
the end-'*
Helen's head, always drooping, sank a little lower as she
finished this sentence. I saw by her look she wished no longer
to talk to me, but rather to converse with her own thoughts*
She was not allowed much time for meditation ; a monitor, a
great rough girl, presently came up, exclaiming in a strong
Cumberland accent, —
'* Helen Bums, if you don't go and put your drawer in
order, and fold up your work this minute, 1*11 tell Miss
Scatcherd to come and look at it 1'^
Helen sighed as her reverie fled, and getting up, obeyed
the monitor without reply as without delay.

54 JANE EYRE
CHAPTER Vn
My fiist quarter at Lowood seemed an age; and not dw
golden age either: it comprised an iricsome stn^;^ with
difficulties in habituating myself to new rules and unwooted
tasks. The fear of failure in these pdnts harassed me worse
than the physical hardships of my lot; though these were no
tiifles.
During January, February, and part of March, the deep
snows, and^ after their melting, the almost impassible roads,
pterented our stirring be3rond the garden walls, except to go
to church; but within these limits we had to pass an hour
every day in the open air. Our clothing was insufficient to
protect us from the severe cold: we bad no boots, the snow
got into our shoes and melted ihexe; our ungloved hands
became numbed and covered with chilblains, as were our feet:
I remember well the distracting irritation I endured from t^
cause every evening, when my feet inflamed; aadthetortme
of thrusting the swelled, mw, and stiff toes into my shoes in
the morning. Then the scan^ supply of food was diistressing:
with the keen a^^tites of growing diildien, we had scaitdy
sufficient to keep alive a delicate invalid. From this deficiency
of nourishment resulted an abuse, which pressed hardly < m
the younger pupils: whenever the famished great girb had
an opportunity, they would coax or menace the little ones
out of their portion. Many a time I have shared between two
claimants the precious moisel of brown bread distributed at
tea-time; and after relinquishing to a third, half the contents
of my mug of coffee, I have swallowed the remainder with
an accompaniment of secret tears^ forced from me by tiie
exigency of hunger.
Smdays were dreary days in that wintry season. We had
to walk two miles to Brocklebridge Church, where our patron
officiated. We set out cold, we arrived at church colder:
during the morning service we became almost paralysed. It
was too far to return to dinner, and an allowance of cold meat
and bread, in the same penurious proportion observed in our
ordinary meals, was served round between the services.
At the close of the afternoon service we returned by an
exposed and hilly road, where the bitter winter wind, blow-
ing over a range of snowy summits to the north, almost flayed
the skin from our faces.
JANE EYRE
I can remember Mi & s Temple walking lightly and rapidly
along our drcjoping line, her plaid cloaks which the ftosty
wind fluttered, gathered close about her, and eacoumging usj
by precept, and example, to keep up our spirits j and march
forward, as she said, " like stalwart soldiers. " The other
teachers J poor things, were generally themselves too much
dejected to attempt the task of cheering others,
How we longed for the light and heat of a blazing fire when
we got back I Butj to the little ones at least, this was denied :
each hearth in the school-room was immediately surrounded
by a double row of great girb, and behind them the younger
children crouched in groups, wrapping their starved anns m
their pinafores.
A little solace came at tea-time^ in the shape of a double
mtion of bread — a whole, instead of a half, slice — with the
delidous addition of a thin scrape of butter: it was the heb-
domadal treat to which we all looked forward from Sabbath
to Sabbath. I generally contrived to reserve a moiety of this
bounteous repast for myself; but the remainder I was in-
variably obliged to part with.
The Sunday evening was spent in repeating^ by hearty the
Church Catechism^ and the fifth, sixthj and seventh chapters
of St« Matthew; and in listening to a long sermon, read by
Miss Miller^ whose irrepressible yawns attested her weariness.
A ^quent interlude of these performances was the enactment
of the part of Eutychus by some half dozen of little girls;
who, overpowered with sleep, would fall down, if not out of
the third loft, yet off the fourth form, and be taken up half
dead. The remedy was, to thrust them forward into the centre
of the schooler oom, and oblige them to stand there till the
sermon was finished. Sometimes, their feet failed them, and
they sank together in a heap; they were then propped up
with the monitors^ high stools*
I have not yet alluded to the visits of Mr, Brocklehurst;
and indeed that gentleman was from home during the greater
part of the first month after my arrival; perhaps prolonging
his stay with his friend the archdeacon: his absence was a
relief to me« I need not say that I had my own reasons for
dreading his coming: but come he did at last.
One afternoon (I had then been three weeks at Lowood)^
as I was sitting with a slate in my hand, puzzling over a sum
in long division, my eyes^ raised in abstraction to the window,
caught sight of a figure just passing: I recognised almc^t
56 JANE EYRE
InstiQctively that gauat outline; and whch^ two minutes
after^ all the school^ teachers included^ rose en masse, it was
not necessary for me to look up in order to ascertain whose
entrance they thus greeted. A long stride measured the school-
room^and presently beside Miss Temple, who hecself had risen^
stood the same black cohiam which had frowned on me so
ominously from the hearth'^g.of Gateshead.. I now glanced
sideways at this piece of architecture. Yes, I wa > right: it
was Mr. Brocklehucst, buttoned up in a surtont, and looking
longer^ narrower, and more rigid than eves*
I had my own reasons for being dismayed at this appari-
tion: too well I remembered the perfidious hints given by
Mrs. Reed about my disposition, etc.; the promise pledged
by Mr. Brockldmrst to apprise Ifis & Temple and the teachers
of my vicious nature. All along I had been dreading the fulfil-
ment of this prcHnise, — ^I had been lookii^; out daily Uxt the
*'Coming Man, " whose infonnatioB respecting .my past life
and conversation was to brand me as a bbd child for ever: now
there he was, He stood at iGss Temple's side ; be waa speak-
ing low in her ear: I did not doubt he was middng disdosures
of my villainy; and I watched her eye with painful anxiety,
expecting every moment to see its .dark orb* turn on me a
glance of repugnance and contieoipt. I listened too; and as
I hai^)ened to be seated quite at the topof the room > Icaug^t
most of what he said : its import relieved me from immediate
apprehension.
" I suppose, Miss Temple, thei thread I bought at Lowton
will do; it struck me that it would be just of the quidity for
the calico chemises, and I sorted the needles to match. You
may tell Miss Smith that I forgot, to make a memorandum
of the darning needles^ but she shall have some papas sent in
next week; and she is not, on any account, to give out more
than one at a time to each pupil : if they have more, they are
apt to be careless and lose thein. And, oh ma'am! I wish the
woollen stockings were better looked to! — when I was here
last, I went into the kitchen-garden and examined the clothes
drying on the line ; there was a quantity of black hose in a very
bad state of repair: from the size of the holes in them I was
sure they had not been well-mended from time to time. "
He paused. n
''Your directions shall be attended to, »r, " said Miss
Temple. . i
''And, ma'am, " he continued, " the laundress tells me
I
^JANE EYRE
some of the girls have two clean tuckers in the week: it is
too much; the rules limit them to one. "
^* I think I can explain that circumstance j sir. Agnes and
Catherine Johnstone were mvited to take tea with some
friends at Lowton last Thursday, and I gave them leave to
put on clean tuckers for the occasion, "
Mr. Brocklehurst nodded,
''Well, for once it may pass; but please not to let the cir-
cumstance occur too often. And there is another thing wliich
surprised me: I find^ in settling accounts with the house-
keeper, that a lunch J consisting of bread and cheese, has
twice been served out to the girls during the past fortnight.
How is this ? I look over the regulations, and I find no such
meal as lunch mentioned. Who introduced this innovation?
and by what authority? "
" I must be responsible for the circumstance ^ sir/'replied
Miss Temple: " the breakfast was so ill-prepared that the
pupils could not possibly eat it; and I dared not allow them
to remain fasting till dinner time.**
*'Madam, allow me an instant. — You are aware that my
plan in bringing up these girls is, not to accustom them to
habits of luxur > ^ and indulgence, but to render them hardy^
patient, self-denying. Should any little accidental disappoint*
ment of the appetite occur^ such as the spoiling of a mealj the
under or the over dressing of a dishj the incident ought not
to be neutralised by replacing with something more delicate
the comfort lost, thus pampering the body and obviating the
aim of this institution ; it ought to be improved to the spiritual
edification of the pupils, by encouraging them to e\ince
fortitude under the temporary privation. A brief address on
those occasions would not be mistimed, wherein a judicious
instructor would take the opportunity of referring to the
sufferings of the primitive Christians; to the torments of
martyrs; to the exhortations of our blessed Lord himself,
calling upon his disciples to take up their cross and follow
him ; to his warnings that man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God ;
to his divine consolarionSj * if ye suffer hunger or thirst for
my sake, happy are ye.'Oh, madam, when you put bread
and cheese, instead of burnt porridge, into these children's
mouthSj you may indeed feed their vile bodies, but you Uttle
think how you starve their immortal souls I *'
Mr, Brocklehurst again paused — perhaps overcame by his
58 JANE EYRE
feeUngs. Miss Temple had looked dpwn when he first begui
to s^GBik to her; but she now gaased straight before Ker, and
her face^ naturally pale as mart)le, appeared to be atsiiming
also the coldness and fixity of that materiid; especially her
mouth, closed as if it would have required a sculptor's chisd
to open it, and her brow settled gradually into petrified
severity.
Meantime, Mr. Brocklehurst, standing on liie hearth with
his hands behind bis back, majestically surveyed the whole
school. Suddenly his e3re gave a blink, as if it had met some-
thing that either dazded or shocked its pupil; tumii^, he
said in more rapid accents than he had hitherto used:^-
" Miss Temple, Miss Temple, what— idkal is that giil widi
curled hair? Red hair, ma'am, curled— cuiied all over? **
And extending his cane he pointed to the awful object, fail
hand shaking as he did so.
" It is Juka Severn, " replied Miss Temple, very quietly.
" Julia Severn, ma'am I And why has she, or any other,
curled hair? Why, in defiance of every precept and mindple
of this house, does she eonf oon to the worid so openly-^ere
in an evangelical, charitable establishment— as to wear her
hair one mass of curls ? "
" Julia's hair curls naturally, " returned Ifiss Temple, still
more quietly.
''Naturally! Yes, but we are not to conform to nature: I
wish these girls to be the children of Grace: and vdiy ihBt
abundance? I have again andagain intimated thati desire the
hair to be arranged closely, modestly, plainly* Miss Temple,
that giri's hair must be cut off entirely; I will send a barber
to-morrow: and I see others who have for too much of the ex-
crescence — that tall girl, tell her to turn round. Tdl all the
first form to xise up and direct their laoes to the wall. "
Miss Temple passed her handkerchief over her lips, as if
to smooth away the involuntary smile that cutled them; she
gave the order, however, and when the first dass could take
in what was required of them, tiiey obeyed. Leaning a little
back on my bendi, I could see the looks and grimaces with
whidi they commented on this manoeuvre: it was a pity Mr.
Brocklehurst could not see them too; he would perhaps have
felt that^ whatever he might do witii the outside of the cup
and platter, the inside was further beyond his interference
than he imagined.
He scrutinised the reverse el these living medi^ some five
JANE EYRE 59
minutes J tb^i pronounced sentence. These words fdl like
the knell of doom ;—
'* Al] those top-knots must be cut ofi- "
Miss Temple seemed to remonstrate.
" Madam, " he pursued, " I have a Master to serve whose
kingdom is not of this world: my mission is to mortify in
these girls the lusts of the flesh; to teach them to clothe them-
selves with shame-facedness and sobriety, not with braided
hair and costly apparel; and each of the young persons before
us has a string of hair twisted in plaits which vanity itself
might have woven; these, I repeat^ must be cat off; think of
the time wasted^ of "
Mr, Brocklehurst was here interrupted : three other visitors^
ladiesj now entered the room. They ought to have come a
httle sooner to have heard his lecture on dress, for they were
splendidly attired in velvet, silk, and furs. The two younger
of the trio (fine ^rls of sijcteen and seventeen) had grey beaver
hats, then in fashion, shaded with ostrich plumes, and from
under the brim of this graceful head-dress fell a profusion of
Ught tresses, elaborately curled; the eldedy lady was en-
veloped in a costly velvet shawl, trimmed with ermine, and
she wore a false front of French curls.
These ladies were deferentially received by Miss Temple,
as Mrs. and Misses Brocklehurst, and conducted to seats of
honour at the top of the room. It seems they had come in the
carriage with their reverend relative, and had been conduct-
ing a rummaging scrutiny ol the rooms upstairs, while he
transacted business with the housekeeper, qu^tioned the
laundress, and lectured the superintendent. They now pro-
ceeded to address divers remarks and reproofs to Miss Smith,
who was charged with the care of the Unen and the inspection
of tlie dormitories: but I had no time to hsten to what they
said; other matters called off and enchained my attention.
Hitherto, while gathering up the discourse of Mr. Brockle-
hurst and Miss Temple, I had not, at the same time, neglected
precautions to secure my personal safety; which I thought
would be ejected, if I could only elude observation. To this
end, I had sat well back on the form, and while seeming to be
busy with my sum, had held my slate in such a manner as to
conceal ray lace ; I might have escaped notice, had not my
treacherous slate somehow happened to shp from my hand,
and falling with an obtrusive crash, directly drawn every eye
upon me; I knew it was all over now, and, as I stooped to
60 JANE EYRE
pidc up the two ftagments of slate^ I fallied my ioites for the
worst. It came.
" A careless girl ! " said Mr. Brocklehmst^ and immediately
after — " It is the new pupil^ I perceive. " And b^re I could
draw breath, " I must not forget I have a word to say respect-
ing her. " Then aloud: how loud it seemed tome! " Let the
child if^^o broke her slate, come forward I "
Of my own accord, I could not have stirred; I was para-
lysed: but the two great giiis who sdt on each side of me,
Btt me on my legs and pushed me towaids the dread judge,
and then Miss Temple gent^ assisted me to his very feet, and
I caught her whispered counsel, —
" Don't be afraid, Jane, I saw it was an accident; you ^lall
not be punished. "
The kind whisper went to my heart like a dagger.
" Another minute, and she will despise me for a hypocrite, "
thought I ; and an impulse of fury against Reed, Brooklehuist,
and Co. bounded in my pulses at the conviction. I was no
Helen Bums.
" Fetch that stool, " said Mr. Brocklehurst, pointing to a
very high one from which a monitor had just risen: it was
brought.
" Place the child upon it. "
And I was placed there, by whom I don't know: I was in
no cttidition to note particulars; I was only aware that they
Imd hoisted me up to the height of Mr. Brocldehuist's nose,
that he was withm a yard of me, and that a spread of shot
orange and purple silk pelisses, and a cloud of silvery plumage
extended and waved below me.
Mr. Brocklehurst hemmed.
" Ladies, " said he, turning to his family; " Miss Temple,
teachers, and children, you all sec this girl? "
Of course they did; for iJfelt their eyes directed like burn-
ing-glasses against my scorched skin.
" You see she is yet yoimg; you observe she possesses the
ordinary form of childhood ; God has graciously given her the
shape that He has given to all of us ; no signal def oimity points
her out as a marked character, Who would think that the
Evil One had already found a servant and agent in her? Yet
such, I grieve to say, is the case. "'-
A pause — in wijich I began to steady the palsy of my nerves,
and to feel that the RuUcon was passed; and that the trial,
il6 longer to be shirked^ must be fi^ly sustainedw .
JANE EYRE
6i
** My dear children, " pursued the black marble clergyman,
with pathos J " this is a sad, a melattcholy occasion ; for it
becomes my duty to warn you, that this girl, who might be
one of God*s own lambs, is a little castaway: not a member
Qt the true flock, but evidently an interloper and an alien.
You must be on your guard against her; you must shun her
example: if necessary, avoid her company, exclude her from
your sports, and shut her out from your converse. Teachers,
you must watch her: keep your eyes on her movements^
weigh well her words , scrutinise her actions, punish her body
to save her soul: if, indeed, such salvation be possible^ for
(my tongue falters while I tell it) this girl, this child, the
native of a Christian landj worse than many a little heathen
who says its prayers to Brahma and kneeb before Juggernaut
—this girl is— a liar! "
Now came a pause of ten minutes; during which I, by
this time in perfect possession of my wits, observed all the
female BrockJehunts produce their pocket-handkerchiefs
and apply them to their optics, while the elderly lady swayed
herself to and fro, and the two younger ones whispered,
*'How shocking 1 "
Mr. Brocklehurst resumed.
" This I learned from her benefactress; from the pious and
charitable lady who adopted her in her orphan state, reared
her as her own daughter, and whose kindness, whose generosity
the unhappy girl repaid by an ingratitude so bad, so dreadful,
that at last her excellent patroness was obliged to separate
her from her own young ones, fearful lest her vicious example
should contaminate their purity: she has sent her here to be
healed, even as the Jews of old sent their diseased to the
troubled pool of Bethesda; and, teachers j superintendent, I
beg of you not to allow the waters to stagnate round her. "
With this sublime conclusion, Mr. Brocklehurst adjusted
the top button of his surtout, muttered something to his
family, who rose, bowed to Miss Temple, and then all the great
people sailed in state from the room. Turning at the door^ my
judge said:— *
'* Let her stand half an hour longer on that stool, and let
no one speak to her during the remainder of the day* "
There was I, then, mounted aloft: I, who had said I could
not bear the shame of standing on my natural feet in the
middle of the roomj was now exposed to general view on a
pedestal of infamy. What my sensations were, no language
62 JANE SYRB
can describe; but just as they all rose^ stifling my breath and
constricting my throaty a giri (iame up and passed me: in
passing, she lifted her eyes. What a strange li^t inspired
them ! What an extraordinary sensation that ray sent through
mel How the new feeling bcA« me up! It was as if a martyr,
a hero, had passed a slave or victim, and imparted strength
in the transit. I mastered the rising hysteria, lifted up my
head, and took a firm stand on the stod. Helen Bums asked
some slight question about her work of Miss Smith, was
chidden for the triviality of the inquiry, returned to her {dace,
and smiled at me as she again went by. What a smile! I
remember it now, and I know that it was the effluence of fine
inteUect, of true courage; it lit up her marked lineaments,
her thin face, her sunken grey eye, like a reflection from the
aspect of an angel. Yet at that moment Helen Bums wore on
her arm " the untidy badge " ; scarcely an hour i^o I had
heard her condenmed by Miss Scatcherd to a dinner of bread
and water on the morrow, because she had blotted an exerds^
in copying it out. Sudi is the imperfect nature of man ! such
spots are thert on the disc of the clearest planet ; and eyes like
}iiss Scatcherd's can only see those minute defects, and are
blind to the fuU brightness of iht orb.
CHAPTER Vm
Ere the half-hour ended, five o'clock struck; school was dis-
missed, and all were gone into the refectory to tea. I now
ventured to descend: it was deep dusk; I retired into a
comer and sat down on the floor. The spdl by which I had
been so far supported began to < Hssolve; reaction took place,
and soon, so overwhelming was: the grief that seized me, I
sank prostrate with my face to the grbund. Now I weptt
Helen Bums was not here; nothing sustained me; left te
myself I abandoned m3rself , and my tears watered the boards.
I had meant to be so good, and to do so much at Lowood: to
make so many ^ends, to earn respect, and win affection.
Already I had made visible prepress: that very mommg I
had reached the head of my class; Biiss Miller had praised me
warmly; JMQss Temple had smiled approbation; she had
pramis/ed to teach me drawing, and to let me leam French,
li I continued to make similar improvement two mon^
heii
JANE EYRE 63
longer: and then I was well-received by my fellow-pupOs;
treated as an eqnal by those of my own age, and not molested
by any; now, here I lay again crushed and trodden on; and
could I ever rise more ?
'* Never/* I thought; and ardently I wished to ^t. While
sobbing out this wish in broken accents, someone approached :
I started up— again Helen Bums was near me ; the fading fines
just showed her coming up the long^ vacant room; she
brought my coffee and bread.
" Come J eat something, " she said; but I put both away
from me, feeUng as if a drop or a crumb would have choked
me in my present condition. Helen regarded me, probably
with surprise: I could not now abate my agitation^ though I
tried hard; I continued to, weep aloud. She sat down on the
ground near me^ embraced her knees with her arms, and rested
her head upon them ; in that attitude she remained silent as
an Indian. I was the first who spoke: —
** Helen, why do you stay with a girl whom everybody
eves to be ahar? "
" Everybody, Jane? Why, there are only eighty people
who have heard you caHed so, and the world contains
hundreds of milUons- "
** But what have I to do with millions ? The eighty I know
despise me/*
" Jane, you are mistaken; probably not one in the school
either despises or dislikes you: many, I am sure, pity yoa
much. "
*'How can they pity me after what Mr, Brocklehurst said ? "
" Mr, Brocklehurst is not a god; nor is he even a great and
admired man: he is little Eked here; he never took steps to
make himself Uked, Had he treated you as Em especial
favourite^ you would have found enemiesj declared or covert,
all around you; as it is, the greater number would offer you
sympathy if they dared. Teachers and pupils may look
coldly on you for a day or two, but friendly feelings are con-
cealed in their hearts ; and if you persevere in doing weO, these
feelings will ere long appear so much the more evidently for
their temporary suppression. Besides, Jane, " she paused,
'* Well, Helen? " said I, putting my hand into hers: she
chafed my fingers gently to warm them, and went on : —
" If all the world hated you, and believed you wicked,
while your own conscience approved you, and absolved yon
from guilt, you would not be without friends. "
m
64 JANS EYRE
''No; I know I shbuld think Well of mysdf ; bat that is not
enough: if others don't love ine^ I would rather die than
live — ^I cannot bear to be solitary and hated, Helen. Look
here; to gain some real afEection from you; or ffiss Temple,
or any other whom I truly love, I would willingly submit to
have the bone of my arm brt^ken, or to let a bull toss me, or to
stand behind a kicking horse, and let it dash its hoof at my
chest, " — —
" Hush, Jane! you think too much of the love of human
beings; you are too impulsive, too vehement: the sovereign
hand that created youT frame, and put life into it, has pro-
vided you with other Resources than your feeble self, or than
creatures feeble as you. Besides this earth, «nd besides the
race of men, there is an invisible world and a kingdom of
spirits: that world is round us, for it is everywhere; and
those spirits watch us, for they are commissioned to guard
us; and if we were dying in pain and shame, if scorn smote
us on all sides, and hatred crushed us > angels see our tortures,
recognise our innocence (if innocent we be: as I know you are
of t^s charge which Mr. Brocklehurst has weakly and pomp-
ously repeated at second-hand frorti Mis. Reed; for I read a
sincere nature in your ardent eyes and < hi your dear front),
and God wait^ only the separation of spmt from flesh to
crown us with a full reward. Why, then, should we ever sink
overwhelmed with distress, w & en life is so soon over, and
death is so certain an entrance to happiness — ^to glory? "
I was silent: Helen had cahned me; but in the tranquillity
she imparted there was an alloy of inexpressible sadness. I
felt the impression of woe as she spoke, but I could not tell
whence it dEune; and when, havmg done speaking, she
breathed a little fast and coiighed a short cough, I momentarily
forgot my own sorrows to yield to a vague concem for her.
Resting my head on Helen's shoulder, I put my arms round
her waist; she drew me to her, and we reposed in silence. We
had not sat long thus, when another person came in. Some
heavy clouds, swept from the sky by a rising wind, \md left
the moon bare ; and her light, streaming in through a window
near, shone full both on us and on the approadiing figure,
which we at once recessed as Miss Temple.
" I came on purpose to fiiid you, Jane Eyre/'said she;
" I want you in my room; and as Helen Bums is with you,
she may come too. "
We went; following the superintendent's guidance, we had
lne eyre
to thread some intricate passages^ and mount a staircase
before we reached her apartment ; it contained a good fire^ and
looked cheerful. Miss Temple told Helen Bums to be seated in
a low arm-chair on one side of the hearth, and herself takmg
another, she called me to her side.
" Is it all over? " she askedj looking down at my face.
" Have you cried your grief away ? "
*'I am afraid 1 never shall do that. "
^, " Why? "
H " Because 1 have been wrongly accused j and you, ma'am,
and everybody else will now think me wicked, "
" We shall think you what you prove yourself to be, my
child. Continue to ^t as a good gklj aad you will satisfy
" Shall I, Miss Temple? "
" You will, " said she, passing her arm round me, " And
now tell me who is the lady whom Mr, Brocklehui^t called
your benefactress ? "
*'Mrs, Reedj my uncle's wife. My uncle is dead, and he
left me to her care. "
" Did she not, then^ adopt you of her own accord ? "
" No J ma*am; she was sorry to have to do it: but my
iindej as I have ofte^ heard the servants say, got her to
promise before he died, that she would always keep me. "
*'Well nowj Jane, you know, or at least I will tell you,
that when a criminal is accused, he is always allowed to speak
in his own defence. You have been charged with falsehood^
defend yourself to me as well as you can. Say whatever your
memory suggests as true ; but add nothing and exaggerate
nothing* "
I resolved, in the depth of my heart, that I would be most
moderate — most correct ; and, having reflected a few minutes
in order to arrange coherently what I had to say, I told her
all the story of my sad childhood. Exhausted by emotion,
my language was more subdued than it generally was when
it developed that sad theme; and mindful of Helai's wam-^
ings against the indulgence of resentment, I infused into the
narrative far less of gall and wormwood than ordinary. Thus
restrained and simplified, it sounded more credible r I felt as
I went on that Miss Temple fully beUeved me.
In the course of the tale I had mentioned Mr. Lloyd as
having come to see me after the fit : for I never forgot the, to
mCj frightful episode of the red-room ; in detailing which, my
66 JANE EYRE
excitement was sure, m some degree, to break bounds; tot
nothing could soften m my recollection the spasm of agony
which clutched my heart when Mrs. Reed spumed my wild
supplication for piurdcm, and locked me a second time in the
dark and haunted chamber.
Ihadfinkshed: Miss Temple r^arded me a i^ minutes in
silence; she then said —
" I know something of Mr. Doyd; I shall write to him;
if his reply agrees with your statement, you shall be publicly
cleared from every imputation: to me, Jane, yoti are dear
now/'
She kissed me, and still keeping me at her side (where I
was well contented to stand, for I derived a child's pleasure
from the contemplation of her face, her dress, her one or two
ornaments, her white forehead, her clustered and shining curls,
and beaming dark eyes}, she {Htxreeded to address Helen
Boms.
** How are you to-night, Helen ? Have you coughed mueh
to^y? "
" Not quite so much I think, ma'am/'
''And the pain in your chest ? "
" It is a little better.'*
Miss Temple got up, took her hand and examined her pulse;
then she retomed to her own seat: as she resumed it, I heard
her sigh low. She was pensive a f^ minutes, then rousing
bersdf, she said dieerftilly : —
" But you two are my visitors to-ni^t; I must treat you
assudi.''%e ruig her bell.
'* Barbara, " she said to the servant who answered it, ** I
have not yet had tea; bring the tray, and place cups for these
two young ladies. "
And a tray was soon brought. How {H:etty, to my eyes, did
the china and bright teapot lock, placed en the little round
table near the fire ! How fragrant was the steam of the bev^ >
age, and the scent of the toast ! of which, however, I, to my
dismay (for I was begimiing to be hungry), discemed only a
very small portkm: Miss Temple discemed it too :^ —
''Barbara, " said she, *'can you not bring a little more
bread and butter? There is not enough for three.*'
Barbara went out: she retumed soon: —
** Madam, Mrs. Httden says she has sent up the usual
quantity. "
Mrs. Harden, be it observed, was the hous^eeper: a
^^ JANE EYRE 6?
womaa after Mr. Brocklehunt's own heart, made up of equal
parts of whalebone and iron*
" Oh, very well ! " returned Miss T^nple; " we must make
it dOj Barbara, I suppose/* And as the girl withdrew, she
added, soiling, " Fortunately, I have it in my power to supply
defidencies for this once/'
Ha%Tng invited Helen and me to approach the table, and
placed before eadi of us a cup of tea with one delicious but
thin morsel of toast, she got up, unlocked a drawer, and taking
'Irom it a parcel wrapped in paper, disclosed presently to our
eyes a good-sized seed-cake,
" I meant to give each of you some of this to take with you, "
^d she;'* but as there is so little toast, you must have
it now, " and she proceeded to cut slices with a generous
hand.
We feasted that evening as on nectar and ambrosia; and
not the least delight of the entertainment was the smile of
giatification with which our hostess regarded us, as we satis-
fied oar famished appetites on the delicate fare she Hberally
sapplied. Tea over and the tray removed^ she again sum-
moned us to the fire; we sat one on each side of her, and now
a conversation followed between her and Helen, which it was
indeed a privilege to be admitted to hear.
Miss Tempi e had always something of serenity in her air,
of state in her mien, of refined propriety in her language,
which precluded deviation into the ardent, the excited, the
eager: something which chastened the pleasure of those who
looked on her and listened to her, by a controlling sense of
awe; and such was my feeling now: but as to Helen Bums,
I was struck with wonder*
The refr^hing rneaJ^ the biilhant fire, the presence and
kindness of her beloved instructress, or, perhaps, more than
aU these, something in her own unique mind, had roused her
powers within her. They woke, they kindled: first, they
glowed in the bright tint of her cheek, which till this hour I
had never seen but pale and bloodless ; then they shone in the
liquid lustre of her eyes, which had suddenly acquired a beauty
more singular than that of Miss Temple's — ^a beauty neither
of fine colour nor long eyelash, nor pencilled brow, but of
meaning, of movement, of radiance* Then her soul sat on her
lips, and language flowed, from what source I cannot tell : has
a girl of fourteen a heart large enough, vigorous enough to
hold the swelling spring of pure, full, fervid eloquence? Such
i^ . i
68 JANE EYRE
was the chamctemtic of Helen's < di8coiifi3^ on that, to me,
memorable evening; her spirit seemed hastening to live
within a very brief span as much as many live during a pro-
tracted existence.
They conversed of things I had never heard of ; of nations
and times past; of comitries far away: of secrets of nature
discovered or guessed'at: they spoke of books: how many
they had read! What stores of knowledge they possessed 1
Ttien they seemed so famiHair with French names and French
authors: but my amazement reached its climax when lifiss
Temple asked Helen if she sometimes snatched a moment to
recall the Latin her father had taught her, and taking a book
frcmi a shelf, bade her read and construe a page of *'Virgil " ;
and Helen obeyed, my organ of Veneration expanding at
every sounding line. She had scarcely finished ere the bell
announced bedtime: no delay could be admitted; Ifiss
Temple embraced us both, saying, as she drew us to her
heart: —
" God Wess you, my children ! "
Helen she held a little longer than me: she let her go more
reluctantly; it was Helen her eye followed to the door; it
was for her she a second time breathed a sad sigh; for her she
wiped a tear from her cheek.
On reaching the bed-room, we heard the voice of Ifiss
Scatcherd: she was examining drawers; she had just pulled
out Helen Bums's, and when we entered Hden was greeted
with a sharp reprimand, and told that to-morrow she should
have half a dozen'of untidily folded ttrticks pinned to her
shoulder.
" My things were indeed in shameful disorder, " nmrmured
Helen to me, in a low voice: " I intended to have arranged
them, but I forgot. "
Next morning. Miss Scatcherd wrote in conspcuous char-
acters on a piece of pasteboard the word " Slattern, " and
boimd it like a phylactery round Helen's large, mild, intelli-
gent, and benign-looking forehead. She wore it tiH evening^
patient, imresentful, regarding it as a deserved punishment.
The moment Miss Sottdberd withdrew after a£temoon-sdiod,
I ran to Helen, tore it off, and thrust it into the fire: the fury
of which she was incapable had been burning in my soul aU
day, and tears, hot and large, had continually been.scaldii^
my cheek; for the spectacle of her sad resignation gave me
an intolerable pain at the heart.
JANE EYRE
69
About a week subsequently to the incidents above narrated,
Miss Temple, who had written to Mr. Lloyd, received his
answer: it appeared that what he said went to corroborate
my account. Miss Temple, having assembled the whole school^
announced that inquiry bad been made into the charges
alleged against Jane Eyre, and that she was most happy to be
able to pronounce her completely cleared from every imputa-
tion. The teachers then shook hands with me and kissed
me, and a murmur of pleasure ran through the ranks of my
companions.
Thus relieved of a grievous load, I from that hour set to
work afresh, resolved to pioneer my way through every diffi*
culty : I toiled hard, and my success was proportionate to my
efforts; my memory, not naturally tenacious^ improved with
practice; exercise slkrpened my wits; in a few weeks I was
promoted to a higher class ; in less than two months I was
allowed to commence French and drawing. I learned the first
two tenses of the verb Eirtf and sketched my first cottage
(whose walls, by-the-by, outri vailed in slope those of the
leaning tower of Pisa), on the same day. That night, on going
to bed, I forgot to prepare in imagination the Barmecide
supper of hot roast potatoes, or white bread and new milk,
with which I was wont to amuse my inward cravings; I
feasted instead on the spectacle of ideal drawings, which I
saw in the dark; all the work of my own hands: freely pen-
cilled houses and trees, picturesque rocks and ruins, Cuyp-Uke
groups of cattle, sweet paintings of butterflies hovering over
unblown roses j of birds picking at ripe cherries, of wrens*
nests enclosing pearl-like eggs, wreathed about with young
ivy sprays. I examined, too, in thought, the possibihty of my
ever being able to translate currently a certain little French
story-book wliich Madame Pierrot had that day shown me;
nor was that problem solved to my satisfaction ere I fell
sweetly asleep*
Well has Solomon said— " Better is a dinner of herbs where
love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith. "
I would not now have exchanged Lowood with all ite
jirivations, for Gateshead and its daily luxuries.

JANE EYRE
CHAPTER IX
But the privations, or rather the hardships^ of Lowood
lessened. Spring drew oa, she was indeed already come;
the frosts of winter bad ceased j its saows were melted, its
cutting winds araeUorated. My wretched feetj flayed and
swollen to lameness by the sharp air of JannaTy, began to
heal and subside under the gentler breathings of April ; the
nights and mornings no longer by their Canadian tempcm-
ture froze the very blood in our veins; we could now enduTC
the play-hour in the garden : sometimes on a sumiy day it
began even to be pleasant and genial, and a greenness grew
over those brown beds, which, freshening daily, suggested
the thought that Hope traversed them at night, and left each
morning brighter traces of her steps. Floweis peeped out
amongst the leaves^ snow-drops, crocuses, purple anacuJas,
and golden-eyed pansies. On Thursday afternoons (half-
hohdays) we now took walks, and found still sweeter floweis
opening by the wayside, under the hedges.
I discovered, too^ that a great pleasure, an enjoyment
which the horizon only bounded, lay aU outside the high and
spike-guarded walls of our garden: this pleasure consisted
in prospect of noble summits girdhng a great hill-hollow, rich
in verdure and shadow: in a bright beck, full oi dark stones
and sparkling eddies. How difierent had this scene looked
when I viewed it laid out beneath the iron sky oi winterj
stiffened in frost, shrouded with snow I — when mists as chill
as death wandered to the impulse of east winds along those
purple pealcs, and rolled down " ing'- and holm till they
blended with the frozen fog of the beck I That beck itself yrm
then a torrent, turbid and curbless : it tore asunder the wood^
and sent a raving sound through the air, often thickened with
wild rain or whirling sleet ; and for the forest on its banks,
thai showed only ranks of skeletons.
April advanced to May : a bright, serene May it was ; days
of blue sky, placid sunshine, and soft western or southern
gales filled up its duration. And now vegetation matured
with vigour; Lowood shook loose its tresses; it became all
green, all flowery; its great elm, ash, and oak skeletons were
restored to majestic life ; woodland plants sprang up profusely
" n its recesses ; unnumbered varieties of moss filled its hoUows,
JANE EYRE
71
d it ma.de a strange ground-sunshine out of tke wealth of
its wild primrose plants : I have seai their pale gold gleam in
overshadowed spots like scatterings of the sweetest lustre. All
this I enjoyed often and fully ^ free, unwatchedj and almost
alone ^ for this unwonted liberty and pleasure there was a
cause, to which it now becomes my task to advert.
Have I not described a pkasant site for a dwelling, when I
speak of it as bosomed in hill and wood, and rising from the
verge of a stream? Assuredly^ pleasant enough: but whether
bealthy or not is another question.
That forest-dellj where Lowood lay, was the cradle of fog
and log-bred piestilence; which j quickening with the quicken-
ing spring, crept into the Orphan Asylum, breathed typhus
tluough its crowded school-room and dormitory, and, ei«
May arrived, transformed the seminary into an hospital.
Semi*starvation and neglected colds had predisposed most
of the pupils to receive infection; forty-five out of the eighty
girls lay ill at one time. Classes were broken up, rules relaxed.
The few who continued well were allowed almost unlimited
Ecence; because the medical attendant insisted on the neces-
sity of frequent exercise to keep them in health: and had it
been otherwise, no one had leisure to watch or restrain them.
Miss Temple's whole attention was absorbed by the patients:
she lived in the sick-room^ never quitting it except to snatch
a few hours* rest at night. The teachers were fully occupied
^th packing up and making other necessary preparations
for the departure of those girls who were fortunate enough to
have friends and relations able and willing to remove them
from the seat of contagion. Many, already smitten, went
home only to die; some died at the school, and were buried
quietly and quickly, the nature of the malady forbidding delay.
While disease had thus become an inhabitant of Lowood,
and death its frequent visitor; while there was gloom and
fear within its walls; while its rooms and passages steamed
with hospital smells, the drog and the pastille striving vainly
to overcome the effluvia of mortality, that bright May shone
onclouded over the bold hills and beautiful woodland out of
doors. Its garden, too, glowed with flowers; hollyhocks had
sprung up tall as trees, hhes had opened, tulips and roses
were in bloom; the borders of the little beds were gay with
|unk thrift and crimson double-daisies; the sweet-briars
gave out, morning and evening, their scent of spice and apples;
and th^e fragrant treasures were all useless for most of the
k.
JANE EYRE
inmates of Lowood^ except to furnish now and then a hand-
ful of herbs and blossoms to put in a cofRn.
But I, and the rest who continued well^ enjoyed fully the
beauties of the scene and season: they let us ramble in the
wood J like gipsiesj from morning till night; we did what we
Ukedj went where we liked : we lived better too, Mr. Brockle-
hurst and his family never came near Lowood now ; household
matters were not scrutinised into : the cross housekeeper was
gone, driven away by the fear of infection; her successor,
who had been matron at the Lowton Dispensary , unused to
the ways of her new abode, provided with comparative
liberality. Besides, there were fewer to feed: the sick could
eat little; our breakfast-basins were better filled r when there
was no time to prepare a regular dinner, which often happened,
she would give us a large piece of cold pie, or a thick slice of
bread and cheese, and this we carried away with us to the
wood, where we each chose the spot we liked best, and dined
sumptuously.
My favourite seat was a smooth and broad stone^ rising
white and dry from the very middle of the beck, and only to
be got at by wading through the water; a feat I accomplished
barefoot. The stone was just broad enough to accommodate,
comfortably, another girl and me, at that time my chosen
comrade— one Mary Ann Wilson; a shrewd observant
personage, whose society 1 took pleasure in^ partly because
she was witty and original^ and partly because she had a
manner which set me at my ease. Some years older than I^
she knew more of the world, and could tell me many things
I liked to hear: with her ray curiosity found gratifecation:
to my faults also she gave ample indulgence, never imposing
curb or rein on anything I said. She had a turn for narrative,
I for analysis; she liked to inform, I to question; so we got
on swimmingly together, deriving much entertainment, if
not much improvement, from our mutual intercourse.
And where, meantime, was Helen Bums ? Why did I not
spend these sweet days of liberty with her? Had I forgotten
her? or was 1 so worthless as to have grown tired of her pure
society ? Surely the Mary Ann Wilson I have mentioned was
inferior to my first acquaintance: she could only tell me
amusing stories, and reciprocate any racy and pungent gossip
I chose to indulge in ; while^ if I have spoken truth of Helen,
she was qualified to give those who enjoyed the privilege of her
converse, a taste of far higher things.
JANE EYRE
TmCj reader f and I knew and felt this: aad though I am
a defective being, with many faults and few redeeming points ,
yet I never tired of Helen Bums; nor ever ceased to cherish
for her a sentiment of attachment, as strongs tender^ and
respectful as any that ever animated my heart. How could
it be otherwise, when Helen j at all times and under all ciicum-
stances^ evinced for me a quiet and faithful friendship j which
ill-humour never soured, nor irritation ever troubled ? But
Helen was ill at present: for some weeks she had been removed
from my sight to 1 knew not what room upstairs. She was
not, I was told, in the hospital portion of the house \iith the
fever patients; for her complaint was consumption, not
typhus: and by consumption I, in my ignorance, understood
something mild, which time and care would be sure to
alleviate.
I was confirmed in this idea by the fact of her once or twice
coming downstairs on very warm surniy afternoons, and being
takea by Miss Temple into the garden : but, on these occa-
sions, I was not allowed to go aad speak to her; I only saw
her from the schoolroom window, and then not distinctly;
for she was much wrapped up, and sat at a distance under
the verandah.
One evening, in the beginning of June, I had stayed out
very late with Mary Ann in the wood; we had, as usual,
separated ourselves from the others, and had wandered far:
so far that we lost our way, and had to ask it at a lonely
cottage, where a man and woman lived, who looked after a
herd of half-wild swine that fed on the mast in the wood.
When we got back, it was after moon-rise: a pony, which
we knew to be the surgeon's, was standing at the garden door.
Mary Ann remarked that she supposed some one must be very
ill, as Mr. Bates had been sent for at that time of the evening.
She went into the house; I stayed behind a few minutes to
plant in my garden a handful of roots I had dug up in the
forest, and which I feared would wither if I left them till the
morning. This done, I lingered yet a little longer: the flowers
smelt so sweet as the dew fell; it was such a pleasant evening,
so serene, so warm ; the still glowing west promised so fairly
another fine day on the morrow; 3ie moon rose with such
majesty in the grave east. I was noting these things and en-
joying them as a child might, when it entered my mind as it
IJiad never done before:- —
k *'How sad to be lying now on a sick bed, and to be in
74 JANE EYRE
danger of d3ang t This world is pleasant^-^ would be dreary
to t^ called from it^ and to have to go who knows iriiere? "
And then my mind made its first earnest effort to compre-
hend what had been infused into it concerning heaven and
hell: and for the first time it reooiled^ baffled; and fen* the
first time glancing behind^ on each side^ and bdote it^ it saw
all round an unfathomed gulf : it felt the one point where it
stood— ^e present; all the rest was foimless ctoud and
vacant depth: and it shuddered at the thought of tottering^
and plunging amid that chaos. While pondering this new
idea^ I heaxd the front door open; Mr. Bates came out^ and
with him was a nurse. After she had seen him mount hii
boise and dqNurt, she was about to close the door, but I tan
up to her.
" How is Helen Bums? "
" Very poorly, " vras the answer.
" Is it her Mr. Bates has been to see ?'^
" Yes. "
'* And what does hesay about her? "
" He says she'll not be here long. "
This phrase, uttered in my hearing yesterday, would have
only conveyed the notion that she was about to be removed
to Northumberland, to her own home. I should not have
suspected that it meant she was dying; but I knew instantly
now; it opened dear on my comprehension that H«len Bums
was numbering her last days in this world, and that she was
going to be taken to the region of spirits, if such region there
were. I experienced a shock of hmror, then a strong thrill of
grief, then a desire— a necessity to see her; and I asked in
what room she lay.
" She is in Miss Temple's room, " said the nurse.
''May I go up and speak to her? "
''Oh, no, cbM ! It is not likely; and now it is time for
you to come in; you'll catch the fever if you stop out when
the dew is falling. "
The nurse closed the front door; I went in by the side
entrance whidi led to the schoo^room: I was just in time;
it was nine o'dock, and Miss Mill^ was calling the pupils to
go to bed.
It mi^t be two hours later, probably near eleven, when I
—not having been able to fall asleep, and deeming, frcnn the
perfect silence of the dormitory, that my companions were
all wrapt in profoimd rq)ose— rose softly, put on my frock
JANE EYRE 75
over my night-dress^ and, without shoes, crept from the apart-
ment, and set off in quest of Miss Temple's room. It was
quite at the other end of the house j but I knew my way ; and
the tight of the unclouded summer mooUj entering here and
there at passage windows^ enabled me to find it without
difficulty. An odour of camphor and burnt vinegar warned
me when I came near the fever room: and I passed its door
quickly, fearful lest the nurse who sat up all night should
hear me. I dreaded being discovered and sent t^ck; for I * >
must see Helen, — I must embrace her before she died, — I
must give her one last kiss, exchange with her one last word.
Having descended a staircase, traversed a portion of the
house below J and succeeded in opening and shuttings without
noise, two doors, I reached another flight of steps ; these I
mounted, and then just opposite to me was Rliss Temple's
room. A light shone through the key-hole, and from under
the door; a profound stillness pervaded the vicinity , Coming
near, I found the door slightly ajar; probably to admit some
fresh air into the dose abode of sickness. Indisposed to
hesitate, and full of impatient impulses — soul and senses
quivering with keen throes — I put it back and looked in. My
eye sought Helen, and feared to find death.
Close by Miss Temple's bed, and half co^'^red with its white
curtains, there stood a httle crib* I saw the outline of a form
under the clothes, but the face was hid by the hangings : the
nnise I had spoken to in the garden sat in an easy chair,
asleep ; an unsnuffed candle burnt dimly on the table. Miss
Temple was not to be seen: I knew afterwards that she had
been called to a delirious patient in the fever room, I ad\'ajiced ;
then paused by the crib side: my hand was on the curtain,
but I preferred speaking before I withdrew it, I still recoiled
at the dread of seeing a corpse.
" Helen I " I whispered softly; ^* are you awake? "
She stirred herself, put back the curtain^ and I saw her
face, pale, wasted, but quite composed : she looked so little
changed that my fear was instantly dissipated-
** Can it be you, Jane?''she asked in her own gentle voice*
*'0h!'^ I Uiought, **she is not going to die; they are
staken: she could not speak and look so calmly ii she
rwere/ "
I got on to her crib and kissed her; her forehead was cold,
and ber cheek both cold and thin, and so were her hand and
wrist; but she smiled as of old.
JANE EYRE
** Why are you come here, Jane? It is past elevoi a^dodcf
I beard it strike some minutes since. "
** I came to see you, Helen : I heard you were very illj and
I could not sleep till I had spoken to you.^
*'You came to bid me good-bye, then: you are just la
time probably, "
'* Arc you going somewhcrej Helen ? Are you going home ? **
'* Yte ; to my long home — my last home. "
" No, no, Helen ! " I stopped, distressed. While I tiied to
devour my tears, a fit of coughing seized Helen; it did oot^
however, wake tie nurse; when it was over, she lay scmte
minutes exhausted; then she whispered: —
" Jane, your little feet are bare; lie down and cover yoiir« <
self with my quilt,'^
I did so: she put her arm over me, and I nestled dose to
her. After a long silence^ she resumed ; still whispering, —
" I am very happy, Jane ; and when you hear that I am
dead, you must be sure and not grieve: there is nothing t0
grieve about. We all must die one day, and the illness whic^
is removing me is not painful; it is geatle and gradual: my
mind is at rest. I leave no one to regret me much: I have
only a father; and he is lately married, and will not miss me;
By dying young, I shall escape great sufferings. I had not
qualities or talents to make my way very well in the world :
1 should have been continually at fault. "
*'But where are you going to, Helen? Can you see? Do
you know ? "
*■ I believe; I have faith : I am going to God**'
*HVhereisGod? What is God? "
'* My Maker and yours, who will never destroy what he
created* I lely implicitly on his power, and confide wholly
in his goodness: I count the hours till that eventful one
arrives which shall restore me to him, reveal him to me < "
" You are sure, then, Helen, that there is such a place as
heaven; and that our souls can get to it when we die? "
" I am sure there is a future state; I believe God is good;
I can resign my immortal part to him without any misgiving*
God is my father; God is my friend: I love him; I believe
he loves me» "
** And shall I see you again, Helen, when I die ? *'
" You will come to the same region of happiness : be
received by the same mighty, universal Parent, no doubt,
dear Jane»'*

JANE EYRE
" ^ Again I questioned; but this time only in thought.
** Where is that region? Does it exist? " And I clasped my
arms closer round Helen; she seemed dearer to me thii ever;
I felt as if I could not let her go; I lay with my face hidden
on her neck. Presently she said in the sweetest tone, —
" How comfortable I ami That last fit of coughing has
tired me a little; I feel as if I could sleep; but don't leave
me, Jane ; I like to have you near me/'
ril stay with you, dear Helen: no oae shall take me
.way, "
*■ Are you warm, darling? "
" Yes/'
" Good-mght, Jane/'
" Good-night, Helen/'
She kissed me, and I her; and we both soon slumbered.
When I awoke it was day; an imusual movement roused
me; 1 looked up; I was in somebody's arms j the nurse held
me; she was carrying me through the passage back to the
dormitory, I was not reprimanded for leaving my bed;
people had something else to think about; no explanation
was aiorded then to my many questions; but a day or two
afterwards I learned that Miss Temple, on returning to her
own room at dawn^ had found me laid in a little crib; my
face against Helen Burns's shoulder, my arms round her
neck. I was asleep, and Helen was^ — dead.
Her grave is in Brocklebridge churchyard: for fifteen
years after her death it was only covered by a grassy mound ;
but now a gray marble tablet marks the spot, inscribed with
her name, and the word *'Resurgam/'
CHAPTER X
HiTHEBTO I have recorded in detail the events of my in-
sigliificant existence : to the first ten years of my life, I have
given almost as many chapters. But this is not to be a regular
autobiography; I am only bound to invoke memory where
I know her responses will possess some degree of interest;
therefore I now pass a space ol eight years almost in silence;
a few hnes only are necessary to keep up the links of con-
nection*
When the typhus fever bad fulfilled its mission of devasta-
L
> 287
^^ " JANE EYRE
tion at Lowood, it gradually disappeared horn thence; but
not till its virulence and the nuinber of its victims had drawn
public attention on the school > Inquiry was made intg the
origin of the scourge, and by degrees \mous facts came oat
which excited pubUc indignation in a high degree. The na-
healthy nature of the sitej the quantity atid quality of the
children's food ; the bmckishj fetid water used in its prepara-
tion; the pupils'wretched clothing and accommodations:
all these thmgs were discovered; and the discovery produced
a result mortifying to Mr. Brockkhurst^ but beneficial to tfee
institution,
Several wealthy and benevolent individuals in the ojunty
subscribed largely for the erection of a more convenient build-
ing in a better situation; new regulations were madej im-
pro vernal ts in diet and clothing introduced; the funds of
the school were ^trusted to the management of a committee.
Mr, Brocklehurstj whOj from his wealth and family ccnmee-
tionsj could not be overlooked^ still retained the post ci
treasurer; but he was aided in the discharge of his duties by
gentlemen of rather more enlarged and sympathising minds:
his office of inspector, too, was shared by those who komm
how to combine reason with strictness, comfort i^ith econonrf,
compassion with uprightness. The school, thus impn > ved,
became in time a truly useful and noble institution. I »*
mained an inmate of its walls, after its regeneration, for eight
yeans: sisc as pupil, and two as teacher; and in both capaci*
ties I bear my testimony to its value and importance.
During these eight years my hfe was uniform : but not ni»*
happy, because it was not inactive* I had the means of an
excellent education placed within my reach; a fondness for
some of my studies, and a desire to excel in all, together with
a great dehght in pleasing my teachers, especially such as I
loved, urged me on: I availed myself fully of the advantages
offered me. In time I rose to be the first girl of the first chss^
then I was invested with the office of teacher; which I dis-
charged with zeal for two years: but at the end of that time
I altered.
Miss Temple, through all changes, had thus far continued
superintendent of the seminary: to her instruction I owed
the best part of my acquirements ; her friendship and society
had been my continual solace; she had stood me in the stead
of mother, governess, ajid^ latterly, companion. At this
«^riod she married, removed with her husband (a elerg^tnan.
JANE EYRE 79
" an excellent man, almost worthy of such & wife) to a distant
county, and consequently was lost to me.
From the day she left I was no longer the same; with her
was gone every settled feeling, every association that had
made Lowood in some degree a home to me. I had imbibed
from her something of her nature and much of her habits;
more hannonious thoughts: what seemed better regulated
iesehngs had become the inmates of my mind. I had given in
aUegiante to duty and order; I was quiet; I believed I was
content: to the eyes of otherSj usually even to my own^ i
appeared a disciplined and subdued character.
But destiny^ in the shape of the Rev. Mr. Nasmyth, came
between me and Miss Temple: I saw her in her travelling
dxess step into a post-chaise, shortly after the marriage cere-
mony; I watched the chaise mount the hiU and ilisappear
beyond its brow; and then retired to my own room, and
there spent in solitude the greatest part of the half-holiday
granted in honour of the occasion.
I walked about the chamber most of the time. I imagined
myself only to be regretting my loss, and thinking how to
repair it; but when my reflections were concluded, and I
looked up and found that the afternoon was gone^ and even-
ing far advanced J another discovery dawned on me, namely j
that in the interval I had undergone a transforming process;
that my mind had put off all it had borrowed of Miss Temple
— or rather that she had taken with her the serene atmosphere
I had been breathing in her vicinity — and that now I was left
in my natuml element, and beginning to feel the stirring of
old emotions. It did not seem as if a prop were withdrawn,
but rather as if a motive were gone : it was not the power to be
tranquil which bad failed me^ but the reason for tranquillity
was no more. My world had for some years been in Lowood:
my experience had been of its rules and systems ; now I re-
membered that the real world was wide, and tl^t a varied
field of hopes and fears, of sensations and excitements, awaited
those who had courage to go forth into its expanse, to seek
real knowledge of life amidst its perils.
I went to my window, opened it ^ and looked ou^ There
were the two wings of the building; there was the garden;
there were the skirts of Lowood ; there was the hilly horizon.
My eye passed all other objects to rest on those most remote,
tiie blue peaks : it was those I longed to surmount; all within
thdr boundary of rock and heath seemed prison-ground, exi''
h
8p JANE EYRE
Hxnits. I traced the white load winding round the base of one
mountain^ and vanishing in a gorge between two: how I
longed to follow it further I I recalled the time when I had
travelled that very road in a coach ; I remembered descending
that hill at twilight: an age seemed to have elapsed since
the day which brought me first to Lowood^ and I had never
quitted it since. My vacatiiHis had all been spent at school:
Mrs. Reed had never sent for me to Gateshead; neither she
nor any of her family had ever be^ to visit me. I had had no
communication by letter or message with the outer world:
school-rules^ school-duties^ school-habits and notions^ and
voices^ and faces^ and phrases^ and costumes^ and preferences^
and antipathies: such was what I knew of existence. And
now I felt that it was not enough: I tired of the routine of
eight years in one afternoon* I desired liberty; for liberty I
gasped; for liberty I uttered a prayer; it seemed scattered
on the wind then i^iintly blowing. I abandoned it and framed
a humbler supplication; for diange > stimulus: that petition,
too, seemed swept ofE into vi^e space: ^'Then/'I crfed,
half desperate, *^ grant me at least a new servitude I "
Here a bell,ringing the hour of supper, called me downstaiis.
I was not free to resume the int^rupted chain of my
reflections till bedtime: even then a teaclier who occa(ued
the same room with me kept me from the subject to which
I longed to recur, by a prolonged effusion of small talk. How
I wished sleep would silence her ! It seemed as if, could I but
go back to the idea which had last entered my mind as I stood
at the window, some inventive suggestion would rise for my
relief.
Miss Gi^ce snored at last; she was a heavy Welshwoman,
and till now her habitual nasal strains had never been re-
garded by me in any other light than as a nuisance; to-night
I hailed the first deep notes with satisfacticm; I was de^
barrassed of interruption; my half-efi[aced thought instantly
revived.
" A new servitude 1 There is something in that, " I solilo-
quised (mentally, be it understood; I did not talk aloud).
'* I know there is, because it does not sound too sweet; is it
not like such words as Liberty, Excitement, Enjoyment:
delightful soundls truly; but no more than sounds for me;
and so hollow and fleeting that it is mere waste of time to
listen to them. But Servitude! .That must be matter of fact.
Any one may serve: I have served here eight years; now
JANE EYRE
8l
'all I want is to serve elsewhere. Can I not get so much of my
own will? Is not the thing feasible? Yes^ — yes — the end is
not so difficult; if I had only a brain active enough to ferret
out the means of attaining it. "
I sat up in bed by way of arousing this said brain: it was
a chilly night ; I covered my shoulders with ashawl^ and then
I proceeded to think again with all ray might.
** What do I want? A new place, in a new house, amongst
new faces J under new circumstances : I want this because it
is of no use wanting anything better. How do people do to
get a new place? They apply to friends, I suppose: I have
no friends. There are many others who have no friends, who
must look about for themselves and be their own helpers ;
and what is their resource ? "
1 could not tell : nothing answered me; I then ordered my
brain to find a response, and quickly. It worked and worked
faster; I felt the pulses throb in my head and temples ; but
for nearly ^m hour it worked in chaos, and no result came of its
efforts. Feverish with vain labour, I got up and took a turn
in the room; undrew the curtain, and noted a star or two,
shivered with cold, and again crept to bed.
A kind fairy, in my absence, had surely dropped the re-
quired suggestion on my pillow; for as I lay down it came
quietly and naturally to my mind :— ** Those who want
situations advertise; you must advertise in the shtrg
Herald. "
" How ? I know nothing about advertising,^*
Replies rose smooth and prompt now: —
" You must inclose the advertisement and the money to pay
for it under a cover directed to the Editor of the B^ald ;
you must put itj the first opportunity you have, into the post
at Lowton; answers must be addressed to J, E. at the post-
office there: you can go and inquire in about a week after
you send your letter, if any are come, and act accordingly, "
This scheme I went over twice^ thrice; it was then digested
ID my mind: I had it in a clear practical form; I felt satis-
fied, and fell asleep-
With earliest day, I was up: I had my advertisement
written, enclosed J and directed before the bell rang to rouse
the school; it ran thus: —
-** A young lady accustomed to tuition " (had I not been a
teacher two years ?) " is desirous of meeting with a situation
in a private family where the children are under fourteen (I
JANE EYRt
thought tiiat as I was barely eighteen, it would not do to
undertake the guidance of pupils nearer my own age). She m
qualified to teach the usual branches of a good English educar
tion, together with French^ Drawing, and Music'* (in those
days, reader^ this now narrow catalogue of accomplishments,
would have been held tolerably comprehensive). " Address
J. E,, Post-office, Lowton, —-shire, "
This document remained locked in my drawer all day:
after tea, I asked leave of the new superintendent to go tD
I^wton, in order to perfonn some small commissions for
myself and one or two of my fellow- teachers ; pennission was
feadily granted; I went. It was a walk of two mileSj and the
evening was wet, but the days were still lo»g; I visits a shop
or two, slipped the letter into the post-office, and came back
[through heavy rain, with streajning garments, but with a
'relieved heart.
The succeeding week seemed long: it came to an end at
last, however, like all sublunary things, and once more,
towards the dose of a pleasant autumn day, I found myself
afoot on the road to Lowton, A picturesque track it was, by
the way; lying along the side of the beck and thrcnigh the
sweetest curves of the dale: but that day I thought more of
the letter, that might or might not be awaiting me at the
little burgh whither I was bound, than of the channs of lei
and water.
My ostensible errand on this occasion was to get measured
for a pair of shoes; so I discharged that business fiist, and
when it was done, I stepped across the clean and quiet little
street from the shoemaker's to the post-offioe: it was kept
by an old dame, who wore bom spectacles on her nose, and
black mittens on her hands,
''Are there any letters for J. E,? " I asked.
She peered at me over hex spectacles, and then she opened
a drawer and fumbled among its contents for a long time, so
long that my hopes began to falter. At last, having hdd a
document before her glasses for nearly five minutes, she pre-
seated it across the counter, accompanying the act by another
inquisitive and mistrxastful glance— it was for J, E/
'* Is there only one?'* I demanded.
** There are no more, " said she; and I put it in my pocket
and turned my face homeward: I could not open it then;
rules obliged me to be back by eight, and it was aheady half,
past seven.
J
JANE EYRE 83
Vanous duties awaited me on my arrival : I had to sit with
the girls during their hour of study; then it was my turn to
read prayers; to see them to bed: afterwards I supped with
the other teachers. Even when we finally retired for the night,
the iiifi\i table Miss Gryce was still my companion; we had
only a short end of a candle in our candlestick, and I dreaded
lest she should talk till it was all burnt out; fortunatelyj
however J the heavy supper she had eaten produced a soporific
efiect: she was already snoring, before I had finished un-
dressing. There stiU remained an inch of candle: I now took
out my letter; the seal was an initial F*; I broke it; the
contents were brief*
p» " If J, E., who advertised in the skire Herald of last
^Thursday, possesses the acquirements mentioned; and if
she is in a position to give satisfactory references as to char-
acter and competency ; a situation can be offered her where
there is but one pupil , a little girl, under ten years of age;
and J where the salary is thirty pounds per annum. J, E. is
requested to send references, name, ad dresSj and all particulars
to the direction :—
" Mis. Fairfax^ Thomfield, near MilicotCj shire.*'
I examined the document long; the writing was old-
fashioned and rather uncertain^ like that of an elderly lady.
This circumstance was satisfactory: a private fear bad
haunted me^ that in thus acting for myself^ and by my own
guidance^ I ran the risk of getting into some scrape; and,
above all things, I wished the result of my endeavours to be
rrapectable, proper, m regie. I now felt that an elderly lady
was no bad ingredient in the business I had on hand, Mrs.
Fairfax! I saw her in a black gown and widow's cap; frigid,
perhaps^ but not undvil: a model of elderly English respecta-
bility, Thomfield f that^ doubtless, was the name of her
house: a neat, orderly spot, I was sure ; though I failed in my
efforts to conceive a correct plan of the premises. Millcote^
shire; I brushed up my recollections of the map of
England; yes, I saw it; both the shire and the town.
shire was seventy miles nearer London than the remote
county where I now resided: that was a recomm^darion to
me. I longed to go where there was life and movement:
Millcote was a large manufacturing town on the banks of the
A ; a busy place enough^ doubtless : so much the better;
it would be a complete change at least. Not that my fancy
was much captivated by the idea of long chimneys and clouds
h
JANE EYRE
of smoke—'* but/'I argued^ " Thomfield will, probably, be
a good way Irom the town* "
Here the socket of the candle dropped, and the wick went
out.
Next day new steps were to be taken : my plans could no
longer be confined to my own breast; I must impart them
in order to achieve their success. Having sought ^id abtainwi
an audience of the superintendent, during the noontide
recreation, I told her I had a prospect of getting a new situa-
tion where the salary would be double what I now received
(for, at Lowood, I only got £i^ per annum); and requested
she would break the matter for roe to Mr, Brocldehuist, or
some of the committee, and ascertain whether they would
permit me to mention them as references. She obligingly
consented to act as mediatrix in the matter. The next day
she laid the affair before Mr. Brocklehurst, who said that
Mrs, Reed must be written to^ as she was my natural guardian.
A note was accordingly addressed to that lady, who returned
for answer, that " I might do as I pleased: she had long
relinquished all interference in my affairs,'* This note went
the round of the committee, and at last, after what appeared
to me most tedious delay, formal leave was given me to better
my condition if I could ; and an assurance added, that as I
had always conducted myself weU, both as teacher and pupH^
at Lowoodj a testimonial of character and capacity, signed
by the inspectors of that institution, should forthwith be
furnished me.
This testimonial I accordingly received in about a months
forwarded a copy of it to Mrs, Fairfax, and got that lady's
reply, stating that she was satisfied, and fixing that day fort-
night as the period for my assuming the post of governess in
her house ♦
I now busied myself in preparations : the fortnight passed
rapidly, I had not a very large wardrobCj though it was
adequate to my wants ; and the last day sufficed to pack my
trunk, — the same I had brought with me eight years ago from
Gateshead,
The box was corded, the card nailed on. In half an hour the
carrier was to call for it to take it to Lowton, whither I mysdf
was to repair at an early hour the next morning to meet the
coach. I had brushed my black stuff travelling dress, prepared
my bonnet, gloves, and muff; sought in all my drawers to see
that no article was left behind; and now, having nothing
»
JANE EYRE S^
more to do, I sat down and tried to rest. I could not; though
[ had been oti foot all day^ I couM not now repose an instant;
I was too much excited, A phase of my life was closing to-
night, a new one opening to-morrow: impossible to slumber
b the interval; I must watdi feverishly while the change
was being accomplished*
" Mks/'said a servant who met me in the lobby, where I
was wandering hke a troubled spirit^'* a person below wishes
to see you.''
" The carrier, no doubt/* I thought, and ran downstairs
without enquiry, I was passing the hack parlour, or teachers'
sitting-roomi tie door of which was half open, to go to tit
kitchen, when some one ran out: —
" It's her, I am sure 1— I could have told her anywhere T'
cried the individual who stopped my progress and took my
hand.
I looked : I saw a woman attired like a well-dressed servant,
matronly, yet still young; very good-looking, with black hair
and eyes, and lively complexion.
*'Well, who is it? " she asked in a voice and with a smile
I half recognised; " youVe not quite forgottoa me, I think.
Miss Jane? "
In another second I was embracing and kissing her
rapturously: " Bessie I Bessie I Bessie! " that was all I said;
whereat she half laughs, half cried, and we both went into
the parlour* By the fire stood a little fellow of three years old,
in plaid frock and trousers.
** That is my little boy, " said Bessie, directly,
" Then you are married, Bessie P "
" Yes : nearly five years since, to Robert Leaven, tht
coachman; and I've a httle girl besides Bobby there, that
I've christened Jane, "
" ^d you don't hve at Gateshead ? "
** I live at the lodge ; the old porter has left. "
*'Well, and how do they all get on? TeU me everything
about them, Bessie: but sit down first; and, Bobby, come
and sit on my knee, wHl you? *'but Bobby preferred sidling
over to his mother.
" You*re not grown so very tall. Miss Jane, nor so very
stout, " continued Mrs Leaven.'* I dare say they've not kept
you too well at school: Miss Keed is the head and shoulders
taller than you are; and Miss Georgiana would make two of
you in breadth, "
s«
JANE EYRE

^* Gcorgiana is handsome^ 1 suppose, Bessie ?
** Very. She went up to London last wiato'with her majBa,
and there everybody admired her, and a young lord fell In
love with ber: but his irlatioos were ag^aiust the match; and
^what do you think?— he and Miss Gcoi^na made it tip
to mo away; but they were found out and stopped. It was
Miss Reed that found them out: I believe she was envious;
and now she and her sister I^d a cat and dog life togetheri
they are always quarrel h'ng. " M
" Well, and what of John Reed ? " |
'* Oh^ he is not doing so well as his mama could wish^ He
went to college, and he got— pluckedj I think they call it:
and then his uncles wanted him to be a barrister, and study
the law; but he is such a dissipated young man, they will
never make much of him, I think,''
** What does he look like? "
** He is very tall: some people call him a fine looking youi^
man; but he has such thick hps, "
" And Mis. Reed?*'
** Missis looks stout and well enough in the face, but I
think she's not quite easy in her mind: Mr. John's conduct
does Dot please her— he spends a deal of money. "
" Did %he send you here^ Bessie? "
** No J indeed ; but I have long wanted to see you* and wh <
I h^xd that ttiere had been a letter from you, and that
were going to another part of the country, I thought I*d jmt
set off, and get a look at you before you were quite out of my
reach. "
** I am afraid you are disappointed in me, Bessie. " I said
this laughing: I perceived that Bessie's glance, thou^ it
expressed regard, did in no shape denote admiration.
" No, Miss Jane, not exactly: you are genteel enough;
you look like a lady, and it is as much as ever I expected of
you : you were no beauty as a child. "
I smiled at Bessie^s frank answer: I felt that it was correct^
but I confess I was not quite indifferent to its import: at
eighteen most people wish to please, and the conviction that
they have not an exterior Ekely to second that desire brings
anything but gratification.
*^ I dare say you are clever, though, " continued Bessie^
by way of solace. *^ What can you do ? Can you play on the
piano? " I
** A Utile. " m
i
JANE EYRE 87
There was one in the room; Bessie went and opened it,
and then asked me to sit down and give her a tune: I played
m^ waltz or twOj and she was charmed.
^K'* The Miss Reeds coutd not play as well ! ** said she
exultingly, *'I always said you would surpass them in leam-
mg: and can you draw ? "
''That is one of my paintings over the chimney-pjece/*
It was a landscape in water colours^ of which I had made a
present to the superintendent^ in acknowledgment of her
obliging mediation with the committee on my behalf, and
winch she had framed and glazed.
** Wellj that is beautiful^ Miss Jane I It is as fine a picture
as any Miss Reed's drawing-nmster could paint, let alone the
young ladies themselves, who could not come near it: and
have you leamt French? "
»*'Yes, Bessie, I can both read it and speak it, "
" And you can work on muslin and canvass ?'*
" I can, "
" Oh» you are quite a lady, Miss Jane ! I knew you would
be: you will get on whether your relations notice you or not.
There was something I wanted to ask you. Have you ever
heard anything from your father's kinsfolk^ the Eyr^ ? "
" Never in my life, "
*'Well, you know Missis always said they were poor and
quite despicable: and they may be poor; but I believe they
are as much gentry as the Reeds are; for one day, nearly
seven years ago, a Mr. Eyre came to Gateshead and wanted
to see you ; Missis said you were at school fifty miles off ; he
seemed so much disappointed, for he could not stay: he was
going on a voyage to a foreign country, and the ship was to
sail from London in a day or two. He looked quite a gentle-
man ^ and I believe he was your father*s brother, "
^^ " What foreign country was he going to, Bessie? "
^p " An island thousands of miles oS, where they make wine
" —the butler did tell me " — —
I ** Madeira I'* I suggested.
^L " Yes, that is it-^tbat is the very word, "
■ " So he went?'^
" Yes ; he did not stay many minutes in the hau^r Mssis
was very high with him; she called him afterwards a * sneak-
ing tradesman.'My Robert believes he was a wine-merchant- "
** Very hkely, " I returned ; ** or perhaps clerk or agent to
a wine-ID erchioit/'
k

88 JANE EYRE
B^sLe and I conversed about old times an hour longer^ and
then she was obhged to leave me : I saw her again for a lew
minutes the next morning at Lowton^ while I was waiting
for the coach. We parted finally at the door of the Bmckle-
hurst Anns there: each went her separate way; she set ofi
for the brow of Lowood FeU to meet the conveyance which
was to take her back to Gateshead, I mounted the vehicle
wliich was to bear me to new duties and a new life m the
unknown environs of Millcote.
CHAPTER XI
A NEW chapter in a novel is something hke a new scene in a
play ; and when I draw up the curtain this time, reader, you
must fancy you see a room in the George Inn at MiUcotei
with such large figured papering on the walls as inn rooms
have; such a carpet, such furniture, such ornaments on the
mantel-piece, such prints; including a portrait of George the
Thirdj and another of the Prince of Wales, and a representa-
tion of the death of Wolfe, All this is visible to you by the
light of an oil lamp hanging from the ceiling, and by that of
mn excellent fire^ near which I sit in my cioak and bomiet;
my muff and umbreUa lie on the table^ and X am warming
away the numbness and cliill contracted by sixteen houis'
exposure to the rawness of an October day: I left Lowton at
four o'clock A.M., and the Millcote town clock is now jugt
striking eight.
Reader, though 1 look comlortably accommodated, I am
not very tranquil in my mind, I thought when the coach
stopped here there would be some one to meet me ; I looked
anxiously round as I descended the wooden steps the " boots'*
placed for my convenience, expecting to hear my name pro-
nounced, and to see some description of carriage waiting to
convey me to Thorn field. Nothing of the sort was visible;
and when I asked a waiter if any one had been to inquire
after a Miss Eyre, I was answered in the negative: so I had
no resource but to request to be shown into a private room:
and here I am waiting, while all sorts of doubts and fears aie
troubling my thoughts.
It is a very strange sensation to inexperienced youth to
feel itself quite alone in the worldj cut adrift from every con "
JANE EYRE
89
^^wEBB^mSitaiii whether the port to which it js bound can
be reachedj and prevented by many impediments from re-
turning to that it has quitted. The charm of adventure
sweetens that sensation^ the glow of pride warms it; but
then the throb of fear disturbs it; and fear with me became
predominant, when half an hour elafsed and still I was alone.
I bethought myself to ring the bell.
" Is there a place in this neighbourhood called Thomfield ? "
I asked of the waiter who answered the summons.
** Thomfield? I don*t know, ma'am j I'll enquire at the
bar. " He vanished, but reappeared instantly: —
I " Is your name Eyre^ Miss ? "
" Yes. "
" Person here waiting for you. "
I jumped up, took my mufE and umbrella, and hastened
into the inn -passage: a man was standing by the open door,
and in the lamp-lit street I dimly saw a one-horse conveyance.
" This wiU be your luggage, I suppose? " said the man
rather abruptly when he saw me, pointing to my trunk in
the passage.
" Yes, " He hoisted it on to the vehicle, which was a sort
of car, and then I got in : before he shut me up, 1 asked him
bow far it was to Thornfield,
** A matter of six miles. "
'* How long shall we be before we get there? "
** Happen an hour and a half "
He fastened the car door, climbed to his own seat outside,
and we set ofE. Our progress was leisurely, and gave me ample
time to reflect : 1 was content to be at leaigth so near the end
of my journey; and as I leaned back in the comfortable
though not elegant conveyance, I meditated much at my ease.
" I suppose,'* thought I,'* judging from the plainness of
the servant and carriage, Mrs, Fairfax is not a very dashing
person; so much the better; I never lived amongst fine
people but once, and I was very miserable with them. I
wonder if she lives alone except this httle girl ; if so, and if she
is in any degree amiable, I shall surely be able to get on with
her; I will do my best : it is a pity that doing one's best does
not always answer. At Lowood, indeed, I took that resolution,
kept it, and succeeded in pleasing; but with Mis. Reed, I
remember my best was always spumed with scorn* I pray
God Mrs. Fairfax may not turn out a second Mrs. Reed; but
if she does J I am not bound to stay with her: let the worst
go
rE EYRE

come to the worst, I can advertise again. How far B^wemT
OUT road now, I wonder?''
1 Jet down the window and looked out: Millcote was behind
us; judgbg by the number of its lights, it seemed a place of
considerable magnitude, much larger than Lowton, We were
now, as far as I could see^ on a sort of commoa; but there
were houses scattered all over the district; I felt we were in
a difieimt region to Lowood, more populous, less picturesque;
more stirriEg, less romantic.
The roads were heavy, the night misty; my conductor let
his horse walk all the way, and the hour and a half extended,
I verily believe, to two hours ; at last he turned in his scat and
said: —
" You*re noan so far fro'Thomfield now. "
Again I looked out: we were passing a church: I saw its
low broad tower against the sky, and its bell was tolling &
quarter; I saw a narrow galaxy of lights too, on a hill-side,
marking a village or hamlet. About ten minutes after, the
driver got down and opened a pair of gates; we pa^ed
through, and they clashed to behind us. We now slowly
ascended a drive, and came upon the long front of a house:
candle-light gleamed from one curtained bow- window; aEthe
rest were dark. The car stopped at the front door; it waft
opened by a maid-servant; I alighted and went in,
" Will you walk this way, ma'am/* said the girl: ajftd I
followed her across a square hall with high doors all round:
she ushered me into a room whose double illumination of fire
and candle at first dazzled me, contrasting as it did with the
darkness to which my eyes had been for two hours inured;
when I could see, however, a cozy and agreeable picture
presented itself to my view,
A snug, small room; a round table by a cheerful fire; aa
arm-chair high-backed and old -fas Honed j wherein sat the
neatest imaginable little elderly lady, in widow's cap, black
silk gown and snowy muslin apron ; exactly hke what I had
fancied Mrs, Fairfax, only less stately and milder looking.
She was occupied in knitting; a large cat sat demurely al
her feet; nothing in short was wanting to complete the beau-
ideal of domestic comfort, A more reassuring mtroductiott
for a new governess could s < ^rcely be conceived : there was
no grandeur to oveni^elm, no stateliness to embarrass; and
then, as I entered, the old lady got up, and promptly and
kindly came forward to meet me.
JANE EYRE 91
w
H'* How do you do, my dear? I am afmid you have had a
tedious ride j John drives so slowly; you must be cold^ come
^t ^ the fire. "
^b " Mrs. Fairfax J I suppose? " said I.
^^ " Yes > you are right: do sit down/*
She conducted me to her owo chair, and then began to
remove my shawl and untie my bomiet strings : I begged she
would not give herself so much trouble.
'* Oh, it is no trouble; 1 dare say your own hands are
almost nurabed with cold. Leah, make a Httle hot negus and
cut a sandwich or two : here are the keys of the store-room.**
And she produced from her pocket a most housewifely
bonch of keys, and delivered them to the servant.
*'Now, then, draw nearer to the fire/'she continued.
" YouVe brought your luggage with you^ haven^t yoUj my
4eaj?'*
^ " Yes,ma'ara/'
^^ " ** PD see it carried into your room, " she said, and bustled
out,
" She treats me like a visitor, " thought I. " I little ex-
pected such a reception; I anticipated only coldness and
stiffness : this is not like what I have heard of the treatment
of governesses ; but I must not exult too soon/'
She returned; with her own hands cleared her knitting
apparatus and a book or two from the table, to make room
for the tray which Leah now brought j and then herself handed
me the refreshments. I felt rather confused at being the
object of more attention than I had ever before received j
and that, too, shown by my employer and suf > erior; but as
she did not herself seem to consider she was doing anything
out of hei place^ 1 thought it better to take her civilities
quietly*
** Shall I have the pleasure of seeing Miss Fairfax to-night? "
I asked, when I had partaken of what she offered me,
^ " What did you say, my dear? I am a little deaf, " returned
he good iadyj approaching her ear to my mouth.
I repeated the question more distinctly,
*^ Miss Fairfax ? Oh, you mean Miss Varens \ Varens is the
name of your hiture pupil. "
*'Indeed! Then she is not your daughter? "
*• No, — I have no family. "
I should have followed up my first inquiry, by asking in
^hat way Miss Varens was oonnected with her; but I recol-
192
JANE EYRE
lecied it was not polite to ask too many questions : besides^
I was sure to hear in time.
" I am so gladj " she continued, as she sat down opposite
to me, and took the cat on her knee ; *'I am so glad fou are
come; it wil] be quite pleasant living here now with a com-
panion. To be sure it is pleasant at any time; for Thorn-
field is a fine old hallj rather neglected of late years perhaps,
but still it is a respectable place ; yet you know in winter time
one feels dreary quite alone, in the best quarters < I say alone
— ^Leah is a nice girl to be sure, and John and his wife are very
decent people ; but then you see they are only servants^ and
one can't converse with them on terms of equality: one must
keep them at due distance, for fear of losing one*s authority*
Fm sure last winter (it was a very severe one, if you recolleii,
and when it did not snow, it rained and blew), not a creature
but the butcher and postman came to the house, from
November till February; and I really got quite melancholy
with sitting night alter night alone j I had Leah in to read
to me sometimes ; but I don*t think the poor girl liked the
task much: she felt it confining. In spring and summer one
got on better: sunshine and long days make such a difference;
and then, just at the commencement of this autumn, little
Adela Varens came and her nurse: a child makes a house
alive all at once ; and now you are here I shall be quite gay. "
My heart really warmed to the worthy lady as I heard her
talk; and I drew my chair a httle nearer to her, and ex-
pressed my sincere wish that she might find my company as
agreeable as she anticipated,
" But I'll not keep you sitting up late to-night, " said she;
" it is on the stroke of twelve now, and you have been travel-
ling all day: you must feel tired. If you have got your feet
well wanned, I'll show you your bed-room. I've had the
room next to mine prepared for you; it is only a small
apartment, but I thought you would like it better than one of
the large front chambers : to be sure they have finer furniture,
but they are so dreary and soEtary^ I never sleep in them
myself. "
I thanked her for her considerate choice, and as I really
felt fatigued with my long journey, expressed my readiness
to retire. She took her candle, and I followed her from the
room. First she went to see if the hall-door was fastened;
having taken the key from the lock^ she led the way upstairs.
The steps and banisters were of oak; the staircase window
JANE EYRE
was high and latticed; both it and the long gallery into which
the bed-room doors openedj looked as if they belonged to a
church rather than a house. A very chill and vault-like air
pervaded the stairs and gallery, suggesting cheerless ideas
of space and solitude; and I was glad^ when finally ushered
into my chamber, to find it of small dimensions, and furnished
in ordinary modem style.
When Mrs. Fairfax had bidden me a kind good-night, and
I had fastened my door^ gazed leisurely round, and in some
measure effaced the eerie impression made by that wide hall,
that dark and spacious staircase, and that long, cold gallery,
by the livelier aspect of my little roomj I remembered that
after a day of bodily fatigue and mental anxiety, I was now
at last in safe haven. The impulse of gratitude swelled my
heart, and I knelt down at the bedside, and offered up thanks
where thanks were due; not forgetting^ ere I rose, to implore
aid on my further path, and the power of meriting the kind-
ness which seemed so frankly ofiered me before it was earned*
My couch had no thorns in it that night ; my solitary room
no fears. At once weary and content, I slept soon and soundly :
when I awoke it was broad day*
The chamber looked such a bright little place to me as the
sun shone in between the gay blue chintz window curtains,
showing papered walls and a carpeted floor, so unlike the bare
planks and stained plaster of Lowood, that my spirits rose at
the view. Externals have a great effect on the young: I
thought that a fairer era of life was beginning for me, one
that was to have its flowers and pleasures, as well as its thorns
and toils. My faculties, roused by the change of scene, the
new field offered to hope, seemed all astir, I cannot precisely
define what they expected, but it was something pleasant:
not perhaps that day or that month, but at an indefinite
future period.
I rose; I dressed myself with care: obhged to be plain —
for I had no article of attire that was not made with extreme
simplicity — I was still by nature solicitous to be neat. It was
not my habit to be disregardful of appearance^ or careless of
the impression I made: on the contrary, I ever wished to
look as well as I could, and to please as much as my want of
beauty would permit* I sometimes regretted that I was not
handsomer: I sometimes wished to have rosy cheeks ^ a
straight nose, and small cherry mouth; I desired to be tall,
stately, and finely developed in fi^re ; I felt it a misfortune
fANE EYRE
that I was so little, so pakj and had features so irregular i
so marked. And why had I these aspirations and these regrets?
It would be difficult to say : I could not then distinctly say it
to mj-self J yet I had a reason, and a logical, natural reason
too* Howeveij when I had brushed my hair very smooth,
and put on my black fiock — which, Quakerhke as it was, at
least had the merit of fitting to a nicety — and adjusted my
clean white tucker, I thought I should do respectably enough
to appear before Mrs. Fairfax; Mid that my new pupil would
not at least recoil from me with antipathy. Having opened
my chamber window, and seen that 1 left aU things straight
and neat on the toilet table ^ I ventured forth.
Traversing the long and matted gallery, I descended the
shppery steps of oak; then I gained the hall: I halted there
a minute; I looked at some pictures on the walls (one I re-
member represented a grim man in a cuirass, and one a lady
with powdered hair ^id a pearl necklace), at a bronze lamp
pendent from the ceiling, at a great clock whose case was of
oak curiously carved, and ebon black with time and rubbing.
Everything appeared very stately and imposing to me: but
then I was so little accustomed to grandeur. The hall-d(M > rj
which was half of glass, stood opai; I stepped over the
threshold . It was a fine autumn morning ; the early sun shone
serenely on embrowned groves ajid still green fields: ad-
vancing on to the lawn, I looked up and surveyed the front
of the mansion. It was three stories high, of proportions not
vast, though considerable: a gentleman's manorhouse, not
a nobleman's seat: battlements round the top gave it a
picturesque look. Its grey front stood out well from the back-
ground of a rookeryj whose cawing tenants were now on the
wing: they flew over the lawn and grounds to alight in ft
great meadow, from which these were separated by a simk
fence, and where an array of mighty old thorn trees, strong,
knotty, and broad as oaks, at onoe explained the etymology
of the mansion's designation. Farther off were hills : not so
lofty as those round Li wood, nor so craggy, nor so like barriers
of sepaiation from the living world ; but yet quiet and lonely
hills enough, and seeming to embrace Thomfield with a se-
clusion I had not expected to find existent so near the stirring
locality of Millcote, A little hamlet, whose roofs were blent
|*with trees, straggled up the side of one of these hills j the
diurch of the district stood nearer Thornfield : its old tower-top
looked over a knoll between the house and gates.
I was yet enjoying the calm prospect and pleasant fr^h
air J yet listening with delight to the cawing of the rooks , yet
surveying the widCj hoary front of the hallj and thinking
what a great place it was for one lonely little dame like Mrs.
Fairfax to inhabit, when that lady appeared at the door.
''What! out already? " said she.''I see you are an early
riser. " I went up to her, and was received with an affable
kiss and shake of the hand.
*'How do you like Thomfield?''she asked. I told her I
liked it very much.
" Yes/'she said, " it is a pretty place; but I fear it will be
getting out of order, unless Mr. Rochester should take it into
his head to come and reside here permanently; or, at least,
visit it rather oftener: great houses and fine grounds require
the presence of the proprietor.**
^ " Mr. Rochester r^ I exclaimed. " Who is he? "
^P " The owner of Thomfield,''she responded quietly. " Did
" you not know he was called Rochester? * "
Of course I did not— ^1 had never heard of him before; but
the old lady seemed to regard his esdstence as a universally-
understood fact, with which everybody must be acquainted
by instinct.
L^ ** I thought, " I continued, ** Thomfield belonged to you. "
^bi " To me? Bless you, child; what an ideaS To me? I am
^itaily the housekeeper — the manager. To be sure I am dis-
tantly related to the Rochesters by the mother's side ; or, at
least, my husband was : he was a clergyman, incumbent of
jjj^y — thSit little village yonder on the hill — and that church
near the gates was his. The present Mr. Rochester's mother
was a Fairfax, and second cousin to my husband; but I
never presume on the connection — in fact it is nothing to me ;
I consider myself quite in the light of an ordinary bouse-
keeper t my employer is always civil, and I expect nothing
more/*
K ** And the little girl— my pupil? "
^P ** She is Mr. Rochester's ward ; he commissioned me to find
a governess for her. He intends to have her brought up in
shire, I believe. Here she comes, with her * bonne,'as she
calls her nurse/* The enigma then was explained : this affable
and kind little widow was no great dame, but a dependant
hke mj-self ♦ I did not like her the worse for that ; on the con-
trary, I felt better pleased than ever. The equality between
her and me was real; not the mere result of condescension
1
96
JANE EYRi

on her part; so much the better — my position was all
freer.
As I WES meditating on this discovery, a little girl, followed
I by her attendant, came running up the lawn. I looked at my
I pupil, who did not at first appear to notice me: she was quite
[ft cliUdj perhaps seven or eight years old, slightly built, with
[m pale, smail-featured face, and a redundancy of hair fajling
'in curls to her waist.
" Good morning J Miss Adela/'said Mrs. Fairfax. " Come
and speak to the lady who is to teach you, and to make you
a clever woman some day/'She approached,
'* C'est \k ma gouvemante? " said she^ pointing to me,
addressing her nuisej who answered;
** Mais oui, certainement, "
" Are they foreigners? " I inquired, amazed at hearing the
French language.
" The nurse is a foreigner, and Adela was bom on the
Continent; and, I believej never left it till within six months
a^o. When she first came here she could speak no English;
now she can make shift to talk it a little : I don't understand
her, she mixes it so with French; but you will make out h^
meaning very well, I daresay, "
Fortunately I had had the advantage of being taught
French by a French lady; and as I had always made a point
of conversing with Madame Pierrot, as often as I could^ and
had, besides, during the last seven years, learnt a portion ol
French by heart daily — applying myself to take pains with
my accent, and imitating as closely as possible the pronunda*
id on of my teacher — I had acquired a certain degree of readi-
ness and correctness in the language^ and was not likely to be
much at a loss with Mademoiselle Adela. She came and shook
hands with me when she heard that I was her governess ; and
as I led her in to breakfast, I addressed some phrases to her in
her own tongue: she repUed briefly at first, but after we were
seated at the table j and she had examined me some ten
minutes with her large hazel eyes, she suddenly commenced
chattering fluently.
*^ Ah/* cried she, in French, " you speak my language as
well as Mr, Rochester does: I con talk to you as I can to him|
and so can Sophie. She will be glad: nobody here under-
stands her: Madame Fairfax Is all English, Sophie is my
nurse ; she came with me over the sea in a great ship with a
chimney that smoked— how it did smoke !— and I was sick,
JANE EYRE 97
and so was Sophiej and so was Mr. Rochester. Mr. Rochester
lay down oa a sofa in a pretty room called the salon ^ and
Sophie and I had little beds in another place. I nearly fell
out of mine; it was like a shelf. And, Mademoiselle ^what
your name? "
*'Eyre— Jane Eyre, "
'* Aire ? Bah I I cannot say it. Well : our ship stopped in
the morning, before it was quite daylight^ at a great city— a
huge cityj with very dark houses and all smoky; not at all
Uke the pretty clean town I came from; and Mr. Rochester
carried me in bis arms over a plank to the iand^ and Sophie
came after, and we all got into a coach, wliich took us to a
beautiful large house, larger than this and finer, called an
hotcL We stayed there nearly a week : 1 and Sophie used to
walk every day in a great green place full of trees, called the
Park; and there were many children there besides me^ and
a pond with beautiful birds in it, that I fed with crumbs. "
** Can you understand her when she nms on so fast? *'
asked Mrs. Fairfax,
I understood her very well, for I had been accustomed to
the fluent tongue of Madame Pierrot.
" I wish, " continued the good lady, " you would ask her a
qu estion or two about her parents ; I wonder if she remembers
them? "
" Ad^e, " I inquired, *'with whom did you live when you
were in that pretty clean town you spoke of ? "
** I lived long ago with mama; but she is gone to the Holy
Virgin. Mama used to teach me to dance and sing, and to say
verses » A great many gentlemen and ladies came to see mama,
and I used to dance before them^ or to sit on their knees and
sing to them: I hked it. Shall I let you hear me sing now? *'
She had finished her breakfast, so 1 permitted her to give
a sped men of her accomphshments* Descending from her
chair, she came and placed herself on my knee; then, folding
her little hands demurely before her, shaking back her cuds
and hfting her eyes to the cdUng, she commenced singing a
song from some opera. It was the strain of a forsaken lady,
who, after bewailing the perfidy of her lover, calls pride to
her aid; desires her attendant to deck her in her brightest
jewels and richest robes, and resolves to meet the false one
that night at a ball, and prove to him, by the gaiety of her
^-demeanour, how httle his desertion had affected her.
^
98
JANE EYRE
but I suppose the point of the cxhibitim ky in heanng the
Qates of love and jealousy warbled with the lisp of childhood ^
and in very bad taste that point was : at least I tliought so.
Ad^k sang the canionctte tunefully enough^ and with the
naivete of her age. This achieved, she jumped froin my toeft
and said, " Now, Mademoiselle, I will repeat you some poetry-
Assuming an attitude, she began *'La Ligue des Rats,
£able de La Fontaine: " She then declaimed the little piece
with an attention to punctuation and emphasis, a flesdbility
of voice and an appropriateness of gesture, very unusual
indeed at her age, and which proved she had been carefully
trained. . ^^
''Was it your mama who taught you that piece ? 1 asl^fi.
** Yes, and she just used to say it in this way; * Qu'aves
vous done? lui dit un de ces rats; parkzi * She made me
Eft my hand— so— to remind me to raise my voice at tM
question. Now shall I dance for you ? "
" No, that mil do: but after your mama went to the Holy
Virgin, as you say, with whom did you live then? "
" With Madame Fi^^ric and her husband: she took care
of me, but she is nothing related to me. I think she is poor,
for she had not so fine a house as mama. I was not long there,
Mr Rochester asked me if 1 would Eke to go and live with him
in England, and I said yes; for I knew Mr. Rochester before
1 knew Madame Fr6d^ric, and he was always kind to me and
gave me pretty dresses and toys: but you sec he has not kept
his word, for he has brought me to England, and now he ha5
gone back again himself, and I never see him.''
After breakfast, Ad^le and I withdrew to the Ubrary ; which
room, it appears, Mr. Rochester had directed should be used
as the school-room. Most of the books were locked up behind
glass doors ; but there was one bookcase left open contaimng
everv^hing that could be needed in the way of ekmentary
works and several volumes of light literature, poeti > % bio-
graphy, travels, a few romaac^j etc. I suppose he had cm-
adered that these were aU the governess would require for
her private perusal; and. indeed, they contented me amp^
for the present; compared with the scanty pickmgs I had
now and then been abk to glean at Lowood, they seemed to
offer an abundant harvest of entertainment and mformatioiL
In this room, too, there was a cabinet piano, quite new and «t
superior tone; also an ea^el for painting, and a pair of glote,
I found mv pupil sufficiently docile, though dismchned to
k
pplyj she bad not been used to regular occupation of any
kind, 1 felt it would be injudicious to confine her too much
at first; so, when 1 had talked to her a great deal, and got
her to learn a little, and when the morning had advanced to
noon J I allowed her to return to her nurse. I then proposed to
occupy myself tiU dinner-time in drawing some little sketches
> T her use.
As I was going upstairs to fetch my portfolio and prndls,
Mrs. Fairfax called to me: " Yoar morning school-hours are
over now J I suppose/'said she. She was in a room the folding-
doors of which stood open : 1 went in when she addressed me.
It was a large, stately apartment, with purple diairs and
curtains, a Turkey carpet, walnut-panelled wa]b, one vast
window rich in stained gla^^ and a lofty ceiling, nobly
moulded, Mrs. Fairfax was dusting some vases of fine purple
spar, which stood on a sideboard.
'* What a beautiful room [ *'I exclaimed, as I looked round;
for I h!id never before seen any half so imposing.
*'Yes; this is the dining-room. I have jiist opened the
window J to let in a little air and sunshine; for everything
gets so damp in apartments that are seldom inhabited : the
drawing-room yonder feels like a vault.*'
She pointed to a wide arch corresponding to the window,
and hung Eke it with a Tyrian-dyed curtain, now looped up.
Mounting to it by two broad steps and looking through, 1
thought I caught a glimpse of a fairy place, so bright to my
novice-eyes appeared the i.'iew beyond. Yet it was merely a
very pretty drawing-room, and within it a boudoir, both
spread with white carpets, on which seemed laid brilliant
garlands of flowers; both ceiled with snowy mouldings of
white grapes and vine-leaves, beneath which glowed in rich
contrast crimson couches and ottomans; while the ornaments
on the pale Parian mantel-piece were of sparkling Bohemian
glass, ruby red; and between the windows large mirrors
repeated the general blending of snow and fire.
** In what order you keep these rooms, Mrs, Fairfax [ " said
i; *'No dust, no canvass coverings : except that the air feels
chiUy, one would think they were inhabited daily. ^'
" Why, Miss Eyre, though Mr, Rochester's visits here are
rar«, they are always sudden and unexpected; and as I
observed that it put him out to find everything swathed up,
and to have a bustle of arrangement on his arrival, I thought
it best to keep the rooms in readiness. "
A
■^ANE EYRE
" Is Mr* Rochester an exacting, fastidious sort of man?'*
" Not particularly so; but he has a gentleman's tastes and
habits, and he expects to have things managed in confcmiit^r
to them/'
" Do you like him? Is he generally liked ?'*
*'Ohj yes; the family have always been respected herew
Almost all the land in this neighbourhoodj as far as you can
see, has belonged to the Roches ters time out of mind/'
" Well, but, leaving his land out of the question, do you
like him? Is he liked for himself? "
" / have no cause to do otherwise than Eke him; and I
believe he is considered a just and liberal kndlord by hifl
tenants; but be has never Uved much amongst them. "
" But has he no peculiarities? What, in short, is tus
character? "
" Oh I his character is unimpeachable, I suppose. He is
rather peculiar, perhaps: he has travelled a great deal, and
seen a great deal of the world, I should think, I dare say he
is clever: but I never had much conversation with him. "
'* In what way is he peculiar? "
" I don't know — it is not easy to describe — nothing strik-
ing, but you feel it when he speaks to you ; you cannot be
always sure whether he is in jest or earnest, whether be is
pleased or the contrary; you don't thoroughly understand
him, in short — at least, I don't: but it is of no consequemce,
be is a very good master/'
This was all the account I got from Mrs. Fairfax, of her
employer and mine. There are people who seem to have no
notion of sketching a character, or observing and describing
salient points, either in persons or things; the good lady
evidently belonged to this class; my queries puzzled, but
did not draw her out. Mr, Rochester was Mr. Rochester in
her eyes; a gentleman, a landed proprietor — no tiling more;
she inquired and searched no further, and evidently wondered
at my wish to gain a more definite notion of his identity.
When we left the dining-room, she proposed to show me
over the rest of the house; and I followed her upstairs and
downstairs, admiring as I went; for all was well-arranged
and handsome. The large front chambers I thought esped*
ally grand; and some of the third story rooms,'though dark
and low, were interesting from their air of antiquity. The
furniture once appropriated to the lower apartments had from
time to time been removed here, as fashions changed: and
JANE EYRE loi
[ic imperfect light entering by their narrow casements showed
bedsteads of a hundred years old ; chests in oak or walnut,
loo king J with their strange carvings of palm branches and
cherubs'heads, like types of the Hebrew ark; rows of vener-
abie chairs, high-backed and narrow; stools still more anti-
quated, on whose cushioned tops were yet apparent traces of
half -effaced embroideries, wrought by fingers that for two
generations had been coffin-dust. All these reUcs gave to the
third story of Thorn field Hall the aspect of a home of the past:
a shrine of memory. I Hked the hush, the gloom, the quaint-
ness of these retreats in the day; but I by no means coveted
a night's repose on one of those wide and heavy beds; shut
in, some of them with doors of oak; shaded, others with
wrought old English hangings crusted with thick work,
portraying effi^es of strange flowers^ and stranger birds, and
strangest human beings^ — all which would have looked
strange, indeed, by the pallid gleam of moonlight.
L " Do the servants sleep in these rooms? " I asked.
P ** No; they occupy a range of smaller apartments to the
back; no one ever sleeps here: one would almost say that,
if there were a ghost at Thomfield Hall, this would be its
haunt/*
** So I think: you have no ghost j then ? "
" None that I ever heard of/* returned Mrs. Fairfax,
smiling.
** Nor any traditions of one ? no legends or ghost stories ? "
*• I believe not. And yet it is said, the Rochesters have been
rather a violent than a quiet race in their time: perhaps,
though, that is the reason they rest tranquilly in their graves
now/*
** Yes —'after life*s fitful fever they sleep weU,'" I muttered.
** Where are you going now, Mrs* Fairfax? " for she was
moving away.
*'On to the leads; will you come and see the view from
thence ? " I followed still, up a very narrow staircase to the
attics, and thence by a ladder and through a trap-door to the
roof of the hall. I was now on a level with the crow colony,
and could see into their nests. Leaning over the battlements
and looking far down, I surveyed the grounds laid out like a
map: the bright and velvet lawn closely girding the grey
base of the mansion; the field, wide as a park, dotted with
its andent timber; the wood, dun and sere, divided by a
path visibly overgrown, greener with moss than the trees
102
JANE EYRE
were with foli«^e; the church at the gates, the road, tbe
tranquil hiUs, all reposing in the autumn da/s sun; the hori-
zon bounded by a propitious sky^ azure, marbled with pearly
white. No feature in the scene was extraordinary, but all was
pleasing. When I turned from it and repassed the trapnioor,
1 could scarcely see my way down the ladder; the attic
seemed black as a vault compared with that arch of blue air
to which I had been looking up, and to that sunlit scene of
grove, pasture, and green hill of which the hall was tbe centre,
and over which I had been gazing with delight.
Mrs. Fairfax stayed behind a moment to fasten the trap-
door; I, by dint of groping, found the outlet from the attic,
and proceeded to descend the narrow garret staircase. I
lingered in the long passage to which this led, separating the
front and back rooms of the third story: narrow, low^ and
dim, with only one little window at the far end, and looking,
with its two rows of small black doors all shut, like a corridor
in some Bluebeard's castle.
While I paced softly on, the last sound I expected to hear
in so still a region, a laugh, struck my ear. It was a curious
laugh; distinct, formal, mirthless. I stopped: the sound
ceased J only for an instant; it began again ^ louder: for at
first, though distinct, it was very low. It passed ofi in a
clamorous peal that seemed to wake an echo in every lonely
chamber; though it originated but in one, and I could have
pointed out the door whence the accents issued.
" Mrs. Fairfax I ** I called out: for I now heard her dc'
scending the great stalls -''Did you bear that loud laugh?
Who is it?**
" Some of the servants, very likely, " she answered;
** perhaps Grace Poole. *^
" Did you hear it ? " I again inquired,
** Yes J plainly: I often hear her; she sews in one of these
rooms. Sometimes Leah is with her; they are frequently
noisy together, "
The laugh was repeated in its low^ syllabic tone^ and
temainated in an odd murmur.
" Grace!'* exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax,
I really did not expect any Grace to answer; for tbe laugh
was as tragic, as preternatural a laugh as any I ever heard;
and 3 but that it was high noon, and that no circumstance of
ghostliness accompanied the cunaus cachinnation, but that
neither scene nor season favoured fear^ I should have been
JANE EYRE 103
'ttiperstitiously afraid. However, the event showed me I was
a fool for entertaining a sense even of surprise,
The door nearest me opened ^ and a servant came out^ — a
woman of between thirty and forty; a set, square-made
figure J red-haired J and with a hard, plain facet any appari-
tion less romantic or less ghostly could scarcely be conceived.
** Too much noise, Grace, " said Mrs, Fairfax. " Remember
directions 1'^ Grace curtseyed silently and went in,
" She is a person we have to sew and assist Leah in her
housemaid's work, " conrinued the widow; " not altogether
tmobjectionable in some points, but she does well enough,
By-the-bye, how have you got 00 with your new pupil this
morning ? "
The conversation, thus turned on Ad^le, continued till we
reached the light and cheerful region below. Addle came
running to meet us in the hall, exclaiming —
" Mesdamcsj vous ^tes servies ! " adding, " pai bien faim,
moi» "
We found dinner ready, and waiting for us in Mrs. Fairfax's
room*
k
CHAPTER XII
The promise of a smooth career ^ which my first calm intro-
duction to Thomfield Hall seemed to pledge, was not behed
on a longer acquaintance with the place and its inmates.
Mrs, Fairfax turned out to be what she appeared, a placid*
tempered, kind-natured woman, of competent education and
average intelhgence. My pupil was a lively child, who had
been spoilt and indulged, and therefore was sometimes way-
ward; but as she was committed entirely to my care^ and
no injudicious interference from any quarter ever thwarted
my plans for her improvement^ she soon forgot her little
freaks, and became obedient and teachable. She had no great
takntSj no marked traits of character, no peculiar develop-
nuant of feeling or taste which raised her one inch above the
ordinary level of childhood; but neither had she any de-
ficiency or vice which sunk her below it. She made r^sonable
progress, entertained for me a vivacious j though perhaps not
ver)^ profound J affection ; and by her simplicity ^ gay prattle,
and efforts to please, inspired me, in return, with a degree of
104
JAKE EYRE

attachment suJfident to make us both content in each otber'v
soaety.
This, par pmrmthise^ will be thought cool language by
persons who tntertain solemn doctrines about the angelic
nature of children j and the duty oi those charged with their
education to conceive for them an idolatrous devotion: but
I am not writing to flatter paternal egotismj to echo omt,
or prop up humbug; I am merely telling the truth, I felt a
conscientious solicitude for Adile's welfare and progress, and
a quiet liMng to her little self; just as I cherished towards
Mrs* Fairfax a thankfulness for her kindness^ and a pleasure
in her sodety proportionate to the tranquil regard she had
for mCj and the moderation of her mind and character.
Anybody may blame me who hkes^ when I add further,
thatj now and then, when I took a walk by myself in the
grounds ; when I went down to the gates and looked through
them along the road; or when^ while Ad^le played with her
nurse, and Mrs. Fairfax made jelHes in the store-room, I
dimbed the three staircases, raised the trap-door of the attiCj
and having reached the leads, looked out afar over sequestered
field and hiU, and along dim sky-line — that then I longed for
a power of vision which might overpass that Umit; which
might reach the busy world, towns, regions full of life I had
heard of but never seen; that then I desired more of practical
experience than 1 possessed; more of intercoui^e with my
kind J of acquaintance with variety of character, than wa^
here within my reach* I valued what was good in Mrs, Fair-
fax, and what was good in Ad^le \ but I beheved in the exist-
ence of other and more vivid kinds of goodness, and what I
believed in I wished to behold.
Who blames me? Many, no doubt; and I shall be called
discontented. I could not help it: the restlessness was in my
nature; it agitated me to pain sometimes. Then my sole
rehef was to walk along the corridor of the third story^ back*
wards and forwards, safe in the silence and solitude of the
spot, and allow my mind's eye to dwell on whatever bright
visions rose before it — ^and, certainly, they were many and
glowing; to let my heart be heaved by the exultant move-
ment, which, while it swelled it in trouble, expanded it with
life; and, best of all, to open my inward ear to a tale that
was never ended — ^ tale my imagination created, and narrated
continuously; quickened with aU of incident, hfe, fire, feeling,
that I desired and had not in my actual existence.
JAKE EYRl
It is in vain to say human beings ought to be satisfied with
tranquillity; they must have action j and they will make it
if they cannot Eind it. Millions arc condemned to a stiller
doom than mine, and millions are in silent revolt against their
lot. Nobody knows how many rebeUions besides pohtical
rebelhom ferment in the masses of life which people earth.
Women are supposed to be very calm generally; but women
feel just as men feel; they need exercise for their faculties,
and a field for their efforts as much as their brothers do; they
suHer from too rigid a constraint^ too absolute a stagnation,
precisely as men would suffer; and it is narrow*minded in
their more privileged fellow*creatures to say that they ought
to confine themselves to making puddings and knitting stock-
ingSj to playing on the piano and embroidering bags. It
is thoughtless to condemn them, or laugh at them, if they
seek to do more or learn more than custom has pronounced
necessary for their sex.
When thus alone, 1 not unfrequently heard Grace Poole's
laugh; the same peal, the same low^ slow ha I ha I which,
when first heard, had thrilled me; I heard, too, her eccentric
murmurs ; stranger than her laugh* There were days when
she was quite silent; but there were others when I could not
account for the sounds she made. Sometimes I saw her: she
would come out of her room with a has in j or a plate ^ or a tray
in her hand, go down to the kitchen and shortly return^
generally (oh, romantic reader, forgive me for telling the
plain truth !) bearing a pot of porter. Her appearance always
acted as a damper to the curiosity raised by her oral oddities;
hard-featured and staid, she had no point to which interest
could attach, I made some attempt to draw her into con-
versation, but she seemed a person of few words: a mono-
syllabic reply usually cut short ev^ry effort of that sort.
The other members of the household, viz,, John and his
wife, Leah the housemaid, and Sophie the French nurse, were
decent people; but in no respect remarkable: with Sophie I
used to talk French, and sometimes I asked her questions
about her native country; but she was not of a descriptive
or narrative turn, and generally gave such vapid and confused
answers as were calculated rather to check than encourage
inquiry-
October, November, December passed away. One after-
noon in January, Mrs, Fairfax had begged a holiday for
Ad^lej because she had a cold; and, as Addle seconded the
xo6
JANE EYRE
request with ao ardour that reminded me bow predoui
occasional holidays had been to me in my own childhood^ I
accorded it^ deeming that I did weU in showing pliability on
the point- It was a fine, calm day, though very cold ; I was
tired ol sitting stili in the library through a whole long morn-
ing; Mis, Fairfax had just written a letter which was waiting
to be posted J so 1 put on my bonnet and cloak and volunteered
to cany it to Hay; the distance^ two miles^ would be a
pleasant winter afternoon walk. Having seen Ad^le comfort-
ably seated in her little chair by Mrs. Fairfax's parlour firt-
side, and given her her best wax doll (which I usually kept
enveloped in silver paper in a drawer) to play withj and a
story-book for change of amusement ; and having replied t©
her *'Revener bient6t, ma bonne amie^ ma ch^re Mdlle,
Jeannette/* with a kiss, I set out.
The ground was hard^ the air was stilly my road was lonely;
I walked fast till I got warm, and then I walked slowly to
enjoy and analyse: the species of pleasure brooding for me in
the hour and situation. It was three o'clock; the church bell
tolled as 1 passed undo " the belfry; the charm of the hxmi
lay in its approaching dimness , in the low-gliding and pale^
beaming sun. I was a mile from Thonifield^ in a lane noted
for wild roses in summer, for nuts and blackberries in automii^
and even now possessing a few coral treasures in hips and
haws J but whose best winter delight lay in its utter solitude
and leafless repose. If a breath of air stirred j it made no
sound here; for there was not a holly, not an evergreen to
rustle J and the stripped hawthorn and hazel bushes were as
still as the white, worn stones which causewayed the middle of
the path. Far and wide^ on each side, there were only fields j
where no cattle now browsed; and the httle brown birds^
wMch stirred occasionally in the hedge, looked like single
russet leaves that had forgotten to drop.
This lane inclined up-hill all the way to Hay: having
reached the middle^ I sat down on a stile whidi led thence into
a field. Gathering my mantle about me, and sheltering my
hands in my mu£Ej I did not feel the cold, though it froze
keenly; as was attested by a sheet of ice covering the cause-
way, where a little brooklet, now congealed, had oversowed
after a rapid thaw some days since. From my seat I could
look down on Thomfield: the grey and battlemented hall was
the principal object in the vale below me ; its woods and dark
rookery rose against the west. I lingered till the sun
JANE EYRE I07
dovm amongst the trees^ and sank crimson and clear behind
them. I then turned eastward.
On the hill-top above me sat the rising moon; pale yet
as a cioudj but brightening momently: she looked over Hay^
whichj half lost in trees, sent up a blue smoke from its few
chimneys ; it was yet a mile distEmt^ but in the absolute hush
I couJd hear plainly its thin munnurs of life. My ear too felt
the flow of currents; in what dales and deptlis I could not
tell: but there were many hills beyond Hay, and doubtless
many becks threading their passes. That evening cahn
betrayed alike the tinkle of the near^t streams^ the sough
of the most remote.
A rude noise broke on these fine ripplings and whispermgs,
at once so far away and so clear: a positive tramp, tramp;
a metallic clatter^ which effaced the soft wave-wanderings;
as J in a picture, the solid mass of a cmg, or the rough boles of
a great oak, drav^n in dark and strong on the foreground,
eSace the aerial distance of azure hill, sunny horizon^ and
blended clouds, where tint melts into tint.
The din was on the causeway: a horse was coming; the
windings of the lane yet hid it, but it approached, I was just
leaving the stile ; yet, as the path was narrow, I sat stilJ to
let it go by. In those days I was young, and all sorts of fancies
bright and dark tenanted my mind; the memories of nursery
stories were there amongst other rubbish; and when they
recurred, maturing youth added to them a vigour and vivid-
ness beyond what childhood could give. As this horse
approached, and as I watched for it to appear through the
dusk, I remembered certain of Bessie*s tales, wherein figured
a North -of -England spirit, called a " Gytrash " j which, in
the form of horse, mule, or large dog, haunted solitary ways,
and sometimes came upon belated travellers, as this hotse
was aow coming upon me.
It was very near^ but not yet in sight; when, in addition
to the tramp, tramp, I heard a rush under the hedge, and
dose down by the hazel stems ghded a great dog, whose black
and white colour made him a distinct object against the trees.
It was exactly one mask of Bessie's Gytrash, — a lion-hke
creature with long hair and a huge head : it passed me, how-
ever, quietly enough^ not staying to look up, with strange
pretercanine eyes^ in my face, as I half expected it would.
The hoTse followed, — a tall steed, and on its back a rider.
The man J the human being, broke the speU at once. Nothing
A
loS
JANE EYRE
ever lode the Gy trash: it wm always alone; and goblinsj to
my notions, though they might tenant the dumb carcasses of
beasts J could scarce covet shelter in the common -place human
fonn. No Gytrash was thiSj — only a traveller taking the
short cut to Millcote, He passed j and I went on; a few steps,
and I turned : a sliding sound and an exclamation of ** What
the deuce is to do now ? ** and a dattering tumble, arrested
my attention. Man and horse were down; they had sUpped
on the sheet of ice which glazed the causeway. The dog came
bounding backj and seeing his master in a predit^inent, and
hearing the horse groan, barked till the evening hills edioed
the sound, which was deep in proportion to his magnitude.
He snuffed round the prostrate group, and then he ran up to
me; it was all he could do, — there was no other help at hand
to summon. I obeyed himj and walked down to the traveller,
by this time stmggUng himself free of his steed* His efforts
were so vigorous, I thought he could not be much hurt; but I
asked him the question:—
" Are you injured, sir? "
I think he was swearing, but am not certain; however,
he was pronouncing some formula which prevented him from
replying to me directly.
*'Can I do anything ? ** I asked again*
" You must just stand on one side,*'he answered as he n
first to his knees, and then to his feet. I did; whereupon
began a heaving, stamping, clattering process, accompanied
by a barking and baying which removed me effectually some
yards distance; but I would not be driven quite away till I
saw the event. This was finally fortunate; the horse was re^
established, and the dog was silenced with a " Down, Pilot! **
The traveller now, stooping, felt his foot and leg, as if trying
whether they were sound ; apparently something ailed them,
for he halted to the stile whence I had just risen, and
down.
I was in the mood for being useful, or at least ofEcious,
think, for I now drew near him again.
** If you are hurt, and want help, sir, I can fetch some one
either from Thomfield Hall or from Hay/*
" Thank you; I shall do: I have no broken bones, — only
a sprain; " and again he stood up and tried his foot, but tlie
result extorted an involuntary *'Ugh [ **
Something of daylight still lingered, and the moon was
waxing bright: I could see him plainly. His figure was
rotn
J
JANE EYRE 109
enveloped in a riding cioak^ fur coUaredj and steel clasped;
its details were not apparent, but I traced the general points
of middle height^ and considerable breadth of chest. He had
a dark face, with stem features and a heavy brow; his eyes
and gathered eyebrows looked ireful and thwarted just now ;
he was past youth, but had not reached middle age; perhaps
he might be thirty-five. 1 felt no fear of him, and but little
shyness. Had he been a handsome, heroic-looking young
gentleman, I should not have dared to stand thus questioning
him against his will, and offering my services unasked, I had
hardly ever seen a handsome youth; never in my hfe spoken
to one* I had a theoretical reverence and homage for beauty^
elegance J gallantry, fascination j but had I met those quah-
ties incarnate in masculine shape^ I should have known in-
stinctively that they neither had nor could have sympathy
with anything in me, and should have shunned them as one
would fire, lightning, or anything else that is bright hut
antipathetic.
If even this stranger had smiled and been good-humoured
to me when I addressed him; if he had put off my offer of
assistance gaily and with thanks, I should have gone on my
way and not felt any vocation to renew inquiries; but the
frown, the roughness of the traveller set me at my ease : I
retained my station when he waved to me to gOj and
announced ; —
'* I cannot think of leaving you, sir, at so late an hour^ in
^this sohtaiy lane, till I see you are fit to mount your horse. "
He looked at me when I said this : he had hardly turned
eyes in my direction before,
" I should think you ought to be at home yourself, " said
he, " if you have a home in this neighbourhood; where do
you come from ?'*
" From just below; and I am not at all afraid of being out
late when it is moonlight: I will run over to Hay for you with
pleasure, if you wish it; indeed, I am going there to post a
letter. "
** You live just below — do you mean at that house with
the battlements ? " — pointing to Thomfield Hall^ on which
the moon cast a hoary gleam , bringing it out distinct and pale
from the woods, that, by contrast with the western sky, now
seemed one mass of shadow.
*'Yes, sir/'
I " Whose bouse is it ? "

no
JANE EYRE

''Mr. Rochester's/'
" Do you know Mr. Rochester? "
** NOj I have never seen him/'
*'He is not resident^ then? "
" No/'
" Can you tell me where he is? "
** I cannot/^
" You are not a servant at the hall, of course, Yotl aie**
He stopped, ran his eye over my dress^ which, as usual,
was quite simple* a black merino doak^ a black beaver
bonnet; neither of them half fine enough for a lady's maid.
He seemed puzzled to decide what I was : I helped him*
" I am the governess/'
^* Ah, the governess I " he repeated ; " deuce take me, if
I bad not forgotten ! The governess ! " and again my mimeBt
underwent scrutiny. In two minutes he rose from the stile:
his face expressed pain when he tried to move,
" I cannot commission you to fetch help, " he said| " but
you may help me a httle yourself, if you will be so kind,'^
^* Yes, sir/'
" You have not an umbrella that I can use as a stick? *'
''No, "
" Try to get hold of my horse's bridle and lead him to me:
you are not afraid ? "
I should have been afraid to touch a horse when alone^ but
when told to do it, I was disposed to obey, I put down my
muff on the stile^ and went up to the tall steed; I endeavoured
to catch the bridle, but it was a spirited thing, and would not
let me come near its head ; I made effort on effort, though in
vain; meantime, I was mortaUy afraid of its trampling fore-
feet. The traveller waited and watched for some timcj and at
last he laughed.
" I see, " he §aid, " the mountain will never be brought to
Mahomet, so all you can do is to aid Mahomet to go to the
mountain; I must beg of you to come here. "
I came. " Excuse me,''he continued; ** necessity oompeis
me to make you useful/'He laid a heavy hand on my shoulder,
and leaning on me with some stress, limped to his horse.
Having once caught the bridle, he mastered it directly, and
sprang to his saddle ; grimacing grimly as he made the efioit^
for it wrenched his sprain.
" Now,''said he, releasing his under lip from a hard bite^
'* just hand me my whip; it lies there under the hedge/'
'Like heath that, in the wilderness,
TTie wUd wind whirls away* "
LKE EYRF III
'sought it and found it.
" Thank you ; now make haste with the letter to Hay^ and
return as fast as you can/'
A touch of a spurred heel made his horse first start and
rear^ and then bound away; the dog rushed in his traces;
^I took up my mufi and walked on. The inddeot had
occurred and was gone for me; it was an incident of no
moment, no romance, no interest in a sense; yet it marked
with change one single hour of a monotonous life. My help
had been needed and claimed; I had given it: I was pleased
to have done something ; trivial^ transitory though the deed
was J it was yet an active thing, and I was weary of an exist-
ence all passive. The new face^ too, was like a new picture
introduced to the gallery of memory; and it was dissimilar
to all the others hanging there; firstly, because it was mascu-
line; and, secondly, because it was dark, strong, and stem, I
had it still before me when I entered Hay, and slipped the
letter into the post-office; I saw it as I walked fast down hill
all the way home. When I came to the stile, I stopped a
minute^ looked round and listened, with an idea that a horse^s
hoofs might ring on the causeway again, and that a rider in a
cloak, and a Gy trash-like Newfoundland dog, might be again
apparent: I saw only the hedge and a pollard willow before
me, rising up still and straight to meet the moonbeams; I
heard only the faintest waft of wind roaming fitful among the
trees round Thomfield, a mile distant; and when I glanced
down in the direction of the murmur, my eye, traversing the
haU-front, caught a light kindhng in a window i it reminded
me that 1 was late^ and I hurried on,
I did not like re-entering Thomfield. To pass its threshold
was to return to stagnation; to cross the silent hall, to
ascend the darksome staircase, to seek my own lonely httle
room, and then to meet tranquil Mrs. Fairfax^ and spend the
long winter evening with her, and her only, was to quell
wholly the faint excitement wakened by my walk, — to slip
again over my faculties the viewless fetters of an uniform
and too still existence ; of an existence whose very privileges
of security and ease I was becoming incapable of appreciating »
What good it would have done me at that time to have been
II*
fNE EYl
tossed in the stonns ol an ud certain struggling Ufe^ aad to
Imve been taught by rough and bitter experience to long for
the calm amidst which I now repined! Yes, jost as much
good as it would do a man tired of sitting still in a ** too
Msy chair " to take a long walk: and just as natujral was
the wish to stir, under my circumstances, as it would be
under his,
I lingered at the gates; I lingered on the lawn; I paced
backwards and forwards on the pavement: the shutteis of
the glass door wei^ closed; I could not see into the mierior;
and both my eyes and spirit seemed drawn from the gloomy
house — from the grey hoUow filled with myless cells, as it
appeared to me — to that sky expanded before me, — a blue
sea absolved from taint of cloud; the moon ascending it in
solemn march ; her orb seeming to look up as she left the MB
topSj from behind which she had come, far and farther below
her, and aspired to the zenith, midnight-dark in its fathom-
less depth and measureless distance: and for those trembling
stars that followed her course ; they made my heart tremble,
my veins glow when I viewed them. Little things recall os to
earth; the clock struck in the hall; that sufficed; I turned
from moon and stars, opened a side-door, and went in.
The hall was not dark, nor yet was it ht, only by the high-
hung bronze lamp: a warm glow suffused both it and the
lower steps of the oak staircase. This ruddy shine issued
from the great dining-room, whose two-leaved door stood
open, and showed a genial fire in the grate, glancing on
marble hearth and brass fire-irons, and revealing purple
draperies and polished furniture, in the most pleasant
radiance. It revealed, too, a group near the mantelpiece: I
had scarcely caught it, and scarcely become aware of a cheer-
ful mingling of voices, amongst which I seemed to distinguish
the tones of Ad^le, when the door closed.
I hastened to Mrs. Fairfaxes room: there was a fire there
too, hut no candle, and no Mrs. Fairfax. Instead, all alone,
sitting upright on the rug, and gazing with gravity at the
bla^e, I beheld a great black and white long-haired dog, just
Hke the Gytrash of the lane. It was so hke it that I wfart
forward and said, —
" Pilot,*'and the thing got up and came to me and snuffed
me, I caressed him, and he wagged his great tail: but he
looked an eerie creature to be alone with, and I could not tell
whence he had come. I rang the bell, for I wanted a candle^
JANE EYRE
td I wanted f tooj to get an account of this visitant. Lcab
entered*
«'* What dog is this?'*
^B " He came with master/'
■- " With whom? "
Hi " With master— Mr, Rochester^ — he is just arrived,'*
^ " Indeed! and is Mrs, Fairfax with him? "
'* Yes, and Miss Adela; they are in the dining-room^ and
John is gone for a surgeon: for master has had an accident;
Jpi horse fell and his ankle is sprained, "
mm " Did the horse fall in Hay Lane? "
f^ " Yes, earning dowa hiilj it slipped on some ice? "
** Ah 1 Bring me a CEUidle, will you, Leah? "
Leah brought it; she entered, followed by Mrs. Fairfax,
who repeated the news; adding that Mr. Carter the surgeon
was come, and was now with Mr. Rochester; then she hurried
out to give orders about tea, and I went upstairs to take oB
my things.
b
CHAPTER XIII
Ms, Rochester, it seems, by the surgeon *s orders, went to
bed early that night; nor did he rise soon next morning.
When he did come down, it was to attend to business: his
ageot and some of his tenants were arrived, and waiting
to speak with him.
AdMe and I had now to vacate the Ubrary : it would be in
daily requisition as a reception-room for callers. A fire was
lit in an apartment upstairs, and there I carried our books,
and arranged it for the future school-room. I discerned in the
course of the morning that Thomfield HaU was a changed
place: no longer silent as a church, it echoed every hour or
two to a laiock at the door, or a clang of the bell; steps, too,
often traversed the hall^ and new voices spoke in different
keys below ; a rill from the outer world was flowing through
it; it had a master: for my part, I hked it better.
Ad^le was not easy to teach that day; she could not apply r
she kept running to the door and looking over the banisters
to see if she could get a glimpse of Mr, Rochester; then she
coined pretexts to go downstairs, in order, as I shrewdly sus-
ted, to visit the library, where I knew she was not wanted ;
*

JANE EYRE
then, when I got a little angryj and made her sit still, she
continued to talk incessantly of her " ami. Monsieur Edouard
FairfJax de Rochester/'as she dubbed him (I had not before
heard his prenomens), and to conjecture what presents h^
had brought her: for it appears he had intimated the nighi
before J that when his luggage came from Millcote, there would
be found amongst it a little box m whose contents she had an
interest.
" Et cela doit signifier, " said she, " qull y aura. \k dedans
un cadeau pourmoi^ et peutetre pour vous aussi, madenaoiselleH
Monsieur a parle de vous; il m*a demande le nom de ma
gouvemante, et si elle n'etait pas une petite personne, assez
mince et un peu pale. J'ai dit qu'oui: car c'est vmi, o'^t-ce
pas^ raademoiselle? "
I and my pupil dined as usual in Mrs. Fairfax's parlour j
the afternoon was wild and snowy, and we passed it in the
school-room. At dark I allowed Ad^le to put away hooks and
work J and to run downstairs; for, from the comparative
silence below^ and from the cessation of appeals to the door-
bell, I conjectured that Mr. Rochester was now at libert > ^
Left alone, I walked to the window; but nothing was to be
seen thence: twilight and snow-flakes together thickened the
air, and hid the very shrubs on the lawn. I let down the cur*
tain and went back to the fireside.
In the clear embers I was tracing a viewj not unlike a
picture I remembered to have seen of the castle of Heidelberg,
on the Rhine, when Mrs. Fairfax came in, breaking up by her
entrance the fiery mosaic I had been piecing together, and
scattering too some heavy unwelcome thoughts that were
beginning to throng on my solitude^
" Mr. Rochester would be glad if you and your pupil would
take tea with him in the drawing-room this evening/* said
she: " he has been so much engaged all day that be could
not ask to see you before/'
*'When is his tea-time? " I inquired*
" Oh J at six o'clock ; he keeps early hours in the oountry.
You had better change your frock now; I will go with you
and fasten it. Here is a candle. "
** Is it necessary to change my frock ? "
" Yes, you had better: I always dress for the evening when
Mr. Rochester is here. "
This additional ceremony seemed somewhat stately:
however, I repaired to my room, andj with Mrs. Fairfax's aidj
^H JANE EYRE 115
i^Iaced my black stuff dress by one of black silk; the best
and the only additional one I tiad^ except one of light grey^
whicb^ in my Lowood notions of the toilette^ I thought too
fine to be wom^ except on first-rate occasions,
** You want a brooch/'said Mrs, Fairfax. I had a single
little pearl ornament which Miss Temple gave me as a parting
keepsake: I put it on, and then we went downstairs. Unused
as I was to strangers^ it was rather a trial to appear thus
fonnally summoned in Mr, Rochester's presence. I let Mrs,
Fairfax precede me into the dining-room, and kept in her
shade as we crossed that apartment; and^ passing the arch,
whose curtain was now dropped, entered the elegant recess
beyond.
Two wax candles stood hghted on tht table^ and two on the
mantelpiece; basking in the light and heat of a superb fire,
lay Pilot — AdSle knelt near Um. Half rechned on a couch
appeared Mr, Rochester, his foot supported by the cushion;
he w^as looking at Adf^Ie and the dog: the fire shone fuU on his
face. 1 knew my traveller with his broad and jetty eyebrows ;
his square forehead, made squarer by the hori^ntal sweep
of his black hair, I recognised his decisive nose, more re-
markable for character than beauty; his full nostrils, de-
noting, I thought, choler; his grim mouth, chin^ and jaw —
yes > all three were very grim, and no mistake. His shape, now
divested of cloak, I perceived harmonised in squareness with
his physiognomy : I suppose it was a good figure in the athletic
s & ^e of the term — broad chested and thin flanked, though
neither tall nor grat^fuL
Mr. Rochester must have been aware of the entrance of
Mrs. Fairfax and myself; but it appeared he was not in the
mood to notice us, for he never hfted his head as we
approached.
'* Here is Miss Eyre, sir, " said Mrs, Fairfax, in her quiet
way. He bowed, still not taking his eyes from the group of
the dog and child.
'* Let Miss Eyre be seated, " said he : and there was some-
thing in the forced stiff bow, in the impatient yet formal
tone, which seemed further to express, ** What the deuce is
it to me whether Miss Eyre be there or not? At this moment
I am not disposed to accost her/'
I sat down quite disembarrassed. A reception of finished
politeness would probably have confused me: I could not
have returned or repaid it by answering grace and elegance
ri6
JANE EYRE
on my part; but harsh caprice laid me uader no obligatioii;
on the contrary, a decent quiescence, under the freak of
manner^ gave me the advantage. Besides, the eccentricity
of the proceeding was piquant: I felt inter^ted to see haw
he would go on.
He went on as a statue wo^ild, that is, he neither spoke nor
moved, Mrs, Fairfax seemed to thmk it necessary that some
one should be amiable^ and she began to talk- Kindly^ as
usual — and, as usual, rather trite-^he condoled with him on
the pressure of business he had had all dayj on the annoy-
ance it most have been to him with that painful sprain: then
she commended his patience and peiseverance in going through
with it,
" Madam, I should hke some tea,'* was the sole rejoinder
she got. She hastened to ring the bell; and, when the tray
came, she proceeded to arrange the cups, spoons, etc., with
assiduous celerity. I and Ad^le went to the table; but the
master did not leav^ his couch,
*'Will you hand Mr. Rochester's cup? " said Mrs. Fairfax
to me; " Ad^le might perhaps spill it- "
I did as requested. As he took the cup from my hand^
Ad^le, thinking the moment propitious for making a request.
in my favour, cried out r —
" M'est-ce pas, monsieur^ qu'll y a un < ^deau pour Made-
moiselle Eyre, dans votre petit coffre ?''
" Who talks of cadeaux? " said he, gruffly: " did yoa
expect a present, Miss Eyre? Are you fond of presents? **
and he searched my face with eyes that I saw were dark, irate^
and piercing.
" I hardly know, sir; I have little experience of them:
they are generally thought pleasant things.''
" Generally thought ? But what do you think ?'*
" I should be obliged to take time, sir, before I could give
you an answer worthy of your acceptance: a present has
many faces to it, has it not? and one should consider all^
before pronoun dng an opinion as to its nature/*
*'Miss Eyre, you are not so unsophisticated as AdMe: she
demands a * cadeau/ clamorously, the moment she sees me:
you beat about the bush.'*
" Because 1 have less confidence in my deserts than Ad^le
has 1 she can prefer the claim of old acquaintance, and the
right too of custom ; for she says you have always been in the
habit of giving her playthings ; but if I had to make out a
fANE EYRE
case I shoiild be puzzled, since I am a stranger^ and have
done nothing to entitle me to an acknowledgment. "
*'Oh^ don't fall back on over-modesty 1 1 have examined
Ad^le^ and find you have taken great pains with her: she is
not bright J she has no talents ; yet in a short time she has
made much improvement.'*
" Six, you have now given me my * cadeau * ; I am obhged
to you; it is the meed teachers most covet; praise of their
pupib'progress.*'
" Humph I ** said Mr. Rochester, and be took his tea in
silence.
'* Come to the fire/'said the master, when the tray was
taken away, and Mrs. Fairfax had settled into a comer with
her knitting; while Ad^le was leading me by the band round
the room, showing me the beautiful books and ornaments on
the consoles and chiffonni^res. We obeyedj as in duty bound;
Ad^le wanted to take a seat on my* knee, but she was ordered
to amuse herself with Pilot.
I " You have been resident in my house three months? "
*'Yes, sir/'
" And you came from ? "
" From Lowood school, in shire/'
'* Ahl a charitable concern. — How long were you there? *'
" Eight yeais.^*
" Eight years i you must be tenacious of life- I thought
half the time in such a place would have done up any constitu-
tion 1 No wonder you have rather the look of another world p
I marvelled where you had got that sort of face. When you
came on me in Hay Lane last nighty I thought unaccountably
of £alry tales, and had half a mind to demand whether you
had bewitched my horse : I am not sure yet. Who are your
parents ? "
^''I have none. "
^B'^Nor ever bad^ I suppose; do yon remember them? **
■.''No.''
^P ^^ I thought not. And so you were waiting for your people
when you sat on that stile? "
** For whom, sir?'*
** For the men in green: it was a proper moonlight evening
for them. Did I break through one of your rings, that you
spread that damned ice on the causeway ?'*
I shook my head. " The men in green all forsook England
iL hundred years ago^'^ said I, speaking as seriously as he bad
L
ii8
•JANE EYRE
done, ** And not even in Hay Lane^ or the fields about it,
could you find a trace of them. I don*t think either summer
or harvest, or winter moon, wiU ever shine on their revels
more/'
Mrs. Fairfax had dropped her knitting, and, with raised eye-
brows j seemed wondering what sort of talk this was.
'* WeU/* resumed Mr. Rochester, " if you disown parents,
you must have some sort of kinsfolk: uncles and aunts? "
" No; none that I ever saw,*'
'* And your home? "
" I have none/'
" Where do your brothers and sisters Uve? **
" I liave no brothers or sisters/'
" Who recommended you to come here? "
'* I advertised^ and Mrs. Fairfax answered my advertise^
mcot/'
'* Yes/'said the good lady, who now knew what ground
we were upon, " and 1 am daily thankful for the choice Pro-
vidence led me to make. Miss Eyre has been an invaluable
companion to me, and a kind and careful teacher to Addle/'
" Don't trouble yourself to give her a character/'returned
Mr, Rochester: ** eulogiums will not bias me; I shall judge
for myself. She began by felling my horse,'*
*'Sir?''said Mrs. Fairfax.
" I have to thank her for this sprain/'
The widow looked bewildered.
** Miss Eyre, have you ever lived in a town? "
" No, sir/*
** Have you seen much society? *'
** None but the pupils and teachers of Lowood ; and now
the inmate of ThomfieJd/'
*'Have you read much? " ,
*'Only such books as came in my way; and they have not
been numerous^ or very learned/*
" You have lived the life of a nun : no doubt you are well
drilled in religious forms ; — Brocklehurst, who I understand
directs Lowood ^ is a parson, is be not? *'
" Yes, sir/'
** And you girls probably worshipped him, as a convent
full of rehgieuses would worship their director/*
*'Oh, no/*
** You are very cool I No I What 1 a novice not worship her
priest ! That sounds blasphemous/*
i
JANE EYRET
'I disliked Mr, Brocklehurst; and I was not alone in the
feeling. He is a harsh man; at once pompous and meddling:
be cut off our hair; and for economy's sake bought us bad
needles and thready with which we could hardlj sew. "
** Hiat was very false economy/'remarked Mrs, FairfaXj
who now again caught the drift of the dialogue,
" And was that the head and front ol his offending ? "
demanded Mr* Rochester,
** He starved us when he had the sole superintendence of
the provision department^ before the committee was ap-
pointed; and he bored us with long lecttires once a week,
and with evening readings from books of his own inditing,
about sudden deaths and judgments, which made us afraid
to go to bed. "
" What age were you when you went to Lowood? "
'* About ten/'
" And you stayed there eight years : and are now, then,
eighteen ? "
I assented,
** Arithmetic, you see, is useful: without its aid, I should
hardly have been able to guess your age. It is a point diffi-
cult to fix where the features and countenance are so much at
variance as in your case* And now what did you learn at
Lowood ? Can you play? *'
" A httle, "
" Of course: that is the established answer. Go into the
library — I mean, if you please,— (Excuse my tone of com-
mand; I am used to say * Do this/ and it is done: I cannot
alter my customary habits for one new inmate*) — Go, then,
into the library ; take a candle with you ; leave the door open ;
sit down to the piano, and play a tune, "
I departed, obeying his directions.
" Enough 1 ** he called out in a few minutes, " You play
a hide, I see; like any other EngHsh school-girl: perhaps
imther better than some, but not well* "
I closed the piano, and returned* Mr. Rochester continued,
** Ad^le showed me some sketches this morning, which she
said were yours, I don*t know whether they were entirely of
your doing: probably a master aided you? "
'* No, indeed ! " I interjected,
" Ah 1 that pricks pride. Well, fetch me your portfolio, if
you can vouch for its contents being original; but don't pass
your word unless you are certain : I can recognise patchwork/'
A

JANE EYRE
*• Then 1 wiU say nothing, and you sbaU judge lor yourself
sir. "
I brought the portf blio from the libmry.
'* Approach the table/* said he; and I wheeled it to Um
couch. Ad^le and Mrs, Fairfax drew near to see the pictures.
*'No crowding/* said Mr. Rochester: " take the dmwings
from my hand as I finish with them ; but don't push your
faces up to mine.''
He deliberately scrutinised each sketch and painting.
Three he laid aside; the others^ when he had examined them^
he swept from him.
" Take them off to the other table, Mrs: Fairfax/* said ht^
" and look at them with Addle; — you " (gkncing at mt}
" resume your seat^ and answer my questions. I perodiw
these pictures were done by one hand: was that hand
yours? "
" Yes. "
" And when did you find time to do them ? They Imsm
taken much time, and some thought/'
''I did them in the last two vacations 1 spent at Lowood,
when I Imd no other occupauon. "
" Where did vou get yuur copies? "
" Out of my head, "
" That head I see now on your shoulders? "
" Yes, sir/'
" Has it other furniture of the same kind within ? "
" I should think it may have* I should hope — better/*
He spread the pictures before Mm, and again surveyed
them alternately.
While he is so occupied^ I will tell you, reader ^ what they
are : and first, I must premise that they lue nothing wonder*
fuh The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind* As
I saw them with the spiritual eye, before I attempted to
embody them, they were striking; but my hand would not
second my fancy, and in each case it had wrought out Ijut a
pale portrait of the thing I had conceived.
These pictures were in water colours. The first represent^
clouds low and livid, rolling over a swollen sear all the dti*
tance was in eclipse; so, too^ was the foreground; or, rather^
the nearest billows, jfor there was no land. One gleam of light
lifted into rehef a half-submerged mastj on which sat a cor-
morant, dark and large, with wings flecked with foam; iH
beak held a gold bracelet, set with gems, that I had touched
lANE EYRE t^
with as brilliant tints as my palette could yieTd, and as glitter-
ing distinctness as my pencil could impart. Sinking below the
'bard and mast, a droT^Tied corpse glanced through the green
water; a fair arm was the only limb dearly visible, whence the
bracelet had been washed or torn.
The second picture contained for foreground only the dim
peak of a hill^ with grass and some leaves slanting as if by a
breeze. Beyond and above spread an expanse of sky, dark
blue as at twilight: rising into the sky was a woman's shape
to the bust, portrayed in tints as dusk and soft as I could
combine. The dim forehead was crowned with a star; the
lineaments below were seen as through the suffusion of vapour;
the eyes shone dark and wild; the hair streamed shadowyj
like a beamless cloud torn by storm or by electric travaiL
On the neck lay a pale reflection like moonlight; the same
faint lustre touched the train of thin clouds from which rose
and bowed this vision of the Evening Star,
The third showed the pinnacle of an iceberg piercing a
polar winter sky: a muster of northern lights reared their
dim lances, close serried, along the horizon- Throwing these
into distance, rose^in the foreground, a head, — a colossal head,
inclined towards the iceberg, and resting against it. Two thin
hands, joined under the forehead, and supporting it^ drew up
before the lower features a sable veil ; a brow quite bloodless,
white as bone, and an eye hollow and fixed, blank of meaning
but for the glassiness of despair^ alone were visible. Above
the temples, amidst wreathed turban folds of black drapery,
vague in its chamcter and consistency as cloud, gleamed a
ring of white flame, gemmed with sparkles of a more lurid
tinge* This pale crescent was **The likeness of a Kingly
Crown " ; what it diademed was " the shape which shape
had none. "
** Were you happy when you painted these pictures ? **
asked Mr, Rochester, presently*
*'1 was absorbed, sir: yes, and 1 was happy. To paint
them^ in short, was to enjoy one of the keenest pleasures I
have ever known.*'
" That is not saying much. Your pleasures, by your own
account, have been few; but I daresay you did exist in a
kind of artist's dreamland while you blent and arranged th^c
stmnge tints. Did you sit at them long each day?'*
** 1 bad nothing dse to do, because it was the vacationj and
I sat at them from morning till noon, and from noon till night:
122
JANE EYRE
the length of the midsummer days favouned my indinatloii
to apply, "
'* And you felt self-satisfied with the rtsuit of yonr ardenJt
labours? "
" Far from it. I was tonnented by the contrast betweoi
my ideas and my handiwork: in each case I had iimigin^
something which I was quite powerless to realize. "
" Not quite ; you have secured the shadow of your thought;
but no more, probably. You had not enough of the art^s
skiH and science to give it full being: yet the drawings are,
for a school girl, peculiar. As to the thoughts, they are elfish.
These eyes in the Evening Star you must have seen in a
dream. How could you make them look so clear, and yet not
at all brilEant? for the planet above quells their rays* And
what meaning is that in their solemn depth ? And who taught
you to paint wind. There is a high gale in that sky^ and on
this hill-top. Where did you see Latmos ? For that is Latm€8»
There,— put the drawing away!''
I had scarce tied the strings of the portfoho^ when, looking
at his watch, he said abruptly —
" It is nine o'clock: what are you about. Miss Eyre^ to
let Ad^le sit up so long ? Take her to bed/*
Ad^le went to kiss him before quitting the room; be
endured the caress, but scarcely seemed to relish it more than
Pilot would have done, nor so much,
" I wish you all good-night, now, " said he, making a move-
ment of the hand towards the door, in token that he was
tired of our company, and wished to dismiss us. Mrs* Fairfax
folded up her knitting: I took my portfolio: we curtseyed to
him, received a frigid bow in return, and so withdrew,
" You said Mr. Rochester was not strikingly peculiar^ Mfs,
Fairfax, " I observed, when I rejoined her in her room, after
putting Addle to bed,
" Well, is he? "
" I think so : he is very changeful and abrupt. "
** True: no doubt he may appear so to a stranger, but I am
so accustomed to his manner, I never think of it; and thenj if
he has peculiarities of temper, allowance should be made, "
**Whyr'
** Partly because it is his nature — and we can none of us
help our nature; and, partly, be has painful thoughts, na
doubt, to harass him, and make his spirits unequal. "
" What about? "
L JANE EYRE^ 153
H " Family troubles^ for one thing; "
B " But he has no family. "
I " Not now, but he has had — or, at least, relatives. He lost
jhis elder brother a few yeais since. "
m'*Uis elder hToth^i?''
^ " Yes. The present Mr, Rochester has not been very long
in possession of the property; only about nine years/'
" Nine years is a tolerable time. Was he so veiy food of
his brother as to be still inconsolable for his loss? "
" Why, no — perhaps not. I believe there were some mis-
understandings between them. Mr. Rowland Rochester was
not quite just to Mr. Edward; and, perhaps, he prejudiced
his father against him. The old gentleman was fond of money^
and anxious to keep the family estate together. He did not
hkc to diminish the property by division, and yet he was
anxious that Mr, Edward should have wealth, too, to keep
up the consequence t)f the name; and, soon after he was of
I age, some steps were taken that were not quite fair^ and
I made a great deal of mischief. Old Mr, Rochester and Mr.
Rowland combined to bring Mr. Edward into what he con-
sidered a painful position j for the sake of making his fortune :
what the precise nature of that position was I never clearly
knew, but his spirit could not brook what he had to suffer in
it. He is not very forgiving: he broke with his family, and
now for many years he has led an unsettled kind of life. I
don't think he has ever been resident at Thomfield for a fort-
I night together, since the death of his brother without a will
1 left him master of the estate; and, indeed, no wonder he
shuns the old place. "
" Why should he shun it? "
" Perhaps he thinks it gloomy. "
The answer was evasive^I should have liked something
dearer; but Mrs. Fairfax either could not, or would not, give
me more explicit information of the origin and nature of Mr.
I Rochester's trials. She averred they were a mystery to her-
'self, and that what she knew was chiefly from conjecture.
It was evident, indeed, that she wished me to drop the sub-
jectj which I did accordingly.

124^
une eyre
CHAFTEE. XIV
For scver^ subsequent da}^ I saw little of Mr, Rochester.
In the mornings hfi seemed much engaged with business, an d,
in the aftemoon, gentlemen from MiUcote or the neighbour^
hood called, and sometimes stayed to dine with him. When
his sprain was well enough to admit of horse exercise, he rode
out a good deal; probably to return these visits, as he gener-
ally did not come back till late at night,
Dmdng this interval, even Adele was seldom seat for to^
his presence, and all my acquaintance with him was confined
to an occasional rencontre in the hall, on the stairs, or in the
gallery, when he would sometimes pass me haughtily and
coldly, just acknowledging my presence by a distant nod or
a cool glance, and sometimes bow and smile with gentleman^
I like affabiUty. His changes of mood did not oSend me, be-
I cause I saw that I had nothing to do with their altematian;
the ebb and flow depended on causes quite disconnected with
me.
One day he had bad company to dinner, and had sent ior
my portfolio : in order, doubtless, to exhibit its contents : the
gentlemen went away early, to attend a public meeting at
Xiilicote, as Mrs. Fairfax infonned me; but the night being
wet and inclement, Mr. Rochester did not accompany them«
Soon after they were gone, he rang the bell; a message came
that I and Ad^le were to go downstairs, I brushed Addle'*
hair and made her neat, and having ascertained that I wa«
myself in my usual Quaker trim, where there was nothing to
retouch — all being too close and plain, braided locks included,
to admit of disarrangement — we d^cended, Ad^le wonder-
iag whether the peiil £offte was at length come ; for, owing tn^
some mistake, its arrival had lutherto been delayed. She
was gratified: there it stood, a little carton, on the tabjt'
when we entered the dining-room. She appeared to know tl
by instinct.
*'Ma boite! ma boitet " exclaimed she, nmning t«rward£
it,
''Yes— there is your * boite'at last: take it into a comer,
you genuine daughter of Paris, and amuse yourself with dis-
embowelling it, " said the deep and rather sarostic voice of
Mr. Rochester, proceeding from the depths of an immeose
JANE etre:
r25
■«isy chairmt the fireside,'* And mind, " he contiiiued; *'doa't
bother me with any details of the anatomical process, or an 7
notice of the cM > ndition of the entrails : let your opeiation be
conducted in silence: tiens-toitranqmllej enfant; comprends-
tn? "
Adde seemed scarcely to need the warning j she had
already retired to a sofa with her treasure, and was busy
imtying the cord which secured the lid. Having removed this
impediment, and lifted certain silvery envelopes of tissue
paper, she merely exclaimed:—
" Oh del ! Que c*est beau I " and then remained absorbed
in ecstatic contemplation.
*'Is Miss Eyre there? " now demanded the masterj half
rising from his seat to look round to the door^ near which I
still stood.
" Ahl well; come forward: be seated here/'He drew a
chairnearhis own. ** I am not fond of the prattle of children "
he continued ;'* for, old bachelor as I am, I have no pleasant
associations connected with their lisp. It would be intolerable
to me to pass a whole evening Ute-a-iiie with a brat. Don't
draw that chair further off. Miss Eyre; sit down exactly
where I placed it — if you please, that is* Confound these
civilities I I continually forget them. Nor do I particularly
afiect simple-minded old ladies* By-the-by, I must have
mine in mind; it won't do to neglect her; she is a Fair-
fax, or wed to one; and blood is said to be thicker than
water. "
He rang and despatched an invitation to Mrs. Fairfax, who
soon arrived, knitting-basket in hand.
'* Good-evening, madam; I sent to you for a charitable
purpose: I have forbidden Addle to talk to me about her
presents, and she is bursting with repletion ; have the good-
ness to serve her as auditress and interlocu trice; it will be
one of the most benevolent acts you ever performed. "
AdMe, indeed, no sooner saw Mrs, Fairfax, than she sum-
moned her to her sofa and there quickly filled her lap with the^
porcelain, the ivory , the waxen contents of her " boite " ;
pouring out, meantime, explanations and raptures in such
broken English as she was mistress of.
** Now I have performed the part of a good host, " pursued;
Mr. Rochester, ** put my guests into the way of amusing each
other, I ought to be at liberty to attend to my own pleasure.
JUss Eyre, draw your ch^r still a little further forward : you

1^6
JANE EYRi
are yet too far back ; 1 cannot see you without disturbing
my position in this comfortable chairj which I have no mind
to do. "
1 did as 1 was bid, though I would much rather have
remained somewhat tn the shade; but Mr. Rochester had
such a direct way of gi ving orders, it seemed a matter of course
to obey him prompUy. j
We wercj as I have said^ in the dining-room r the lustre, J
which had been lit for dinner^ filled the room with a festal
breadth of Ught; the large fire was aU red and clear; the
purple curtains hung rich and ample before the lofty window
and loftier arch ; everything was still, save the subdued chat
of Ad^k (she dared not speak loud), and, filling up each
pause, the beating of winter rain against the panes.
Mr, Rochester, as he sat in his damask-covered chair,
looked different to what I had seen him look before; not
quite so stem — much less gloomy. There was a smile on his
lips, and his eyes sparkled, whether with wine or not, I am
not sure; but I think it very probable. He was, in short, in
his after-dinner mood; more expanded and genial, and also
more self-indulgent than the frigid and rigid temper of the
morning: still he looked preciously grim, cushioning his
massive head against the swelling back of his chair, and
receiving the light of the fire on his granite-hewn features,
and in lus great, dark eyes ; for he had great, dark eyes, and
very fine eyes, too — not without a certain change in their
depths sometimes, which, if it was not softness, reminded you,
at least, of that feeling. j
He had been looking two minutes at the fire, and I had'
been looking the same length of time at him, when, turning
suddenly, he caught my gaze fastened on his physiognomy.
*'You examine me. Miss Eyre, " said he: " do you thmk
me handsome? "
I should, if I had deliberated, have replied to this questioB
by something conventionally vague and polite; but the
answer somehow slipped from my tongue before I wa^ aware :
—''No, sir, "
" Ah ! By my word 1 there is something singular about
you, " said he : " you have the air of a little nonnette ; quamt,
quiet, grave, and simple, as you sit with your hands before,
you, and your eyes generally bent on the carpet (except,
by-the-by, when they are directed piercingly to my face; as
tust now, for instance); and when one asks you a question.
^
127
or makes a rertiark to which you are obliged to replyj you rap
out a round rejoinder, which, if not blunt, is at least bnisque.
What do you mean by it ? "
" Sir, I was too plain: I beg your pardon. I ought to have
nephed that it was not easy to give an impromptu answer to
a question about appearances; that tastes differ; that beauty
15 of little coQsequencej or something of that sort. "
'* You ought to have replied no such thing. Beauty of
little conscquencej indeed ! And so, under pretence of soften-
ing the previous outrage, of stroking and soothing me into
placidity^ you stick a sly penknife under my earl Go on:
what fault do you find with me, pray? I suppose I have all
my limbs and all my features like any other man? "
" Mr. Rochester J allow me to disown my first answer: I
intended no pointed repartee r it was only a blunder/'
" Just so: 1 think so: and you shall be answerable for it.
Criticise me: does my forehead not please you? "
He hf ted up the sable waves of hair which lay horizontally
over his brow, and showed a solid enough mass of intellectual
organs, but an abrupt deficiency where the suave sign of
benevolen*^ should have risen.
" Now, ma^am, am 1 *i fool? "
** Far from it, sir. You would, perhaps, think me nidc if
I Inquired in return whether you are a philanthropist ? *^
" There again ! Another stick of the penknife, when she
pretended to pat my head : and that is because I said I did
not like the society of children and old women (low be it
spoken !). No, young lady, I am not a general philanthropist;
but I bear a conscience ; *'and he pointed to the prominences
which are said to indicate that faculty, and whichj fortunately
for him, were sufficiently conspicuous; giving, indeed, a
marked breadth to the upper part of his head : " and, besides,
I once had a kind of rude tenderness of heart. When I was
as old as you, I was a feeling fellow enough; partial to the
unfledged J unfostered, and unlucky ; but fortune has knocked
me about since: she has even kneaded me with her knucklte,
and now I flatter myself I am hard and tough as an India-
rubber ball ; pervious, though, through a chink or two still,
and with one sentient point in the middle of the lump. Yes:
does that leave hope for me ? *'
'*Hopeof what, sir? "
*'Of my final re-trMJsformation from India-rubber back
toEesh? "
taS
JANE EYRE
*'Decidedly he has had too much wine " I thought; and
I did not know what answer to make to his queer question:
how could I tell whether he was capable of being re-trans-
f onned ?
" You look very much puzzled^ Miss Eyre; and though ynu
are not pretty any more than I am hands ome^ yet a puzzled
air becomes yon; besides, it is convenient, for it keeps those
searching eyes of yours away from my physiognomy, and
busies them with the worsted flowers of the rug; so puzzle oo.
Yoimg lady, I am disposed to be greg^ous and eommunic*-
tive to-night/'
With this announcement he rose from his chair » and stood,
leaning his arm on the marble mantelpiece: in that attitude
his shape was seen plainly os well as his face; his unusual
breadth of chest, disproportionate ahnost to his length of
limb. I am sure most people would have thought him an ugly
man; yet there was so much unconscious pride in his port:
so much ease in his demeanour; such a look of complete in-
difference to his own external appearance; so haughty a
reliance on the power of other quahties, intrinsic or adveu-
titiousj to atone for the lack of mere personal attractiveness,
that, in looking at him, one inevitably shared the indifference,
I and, even in a bhnd, imperfect sense^ put faith in the con-
fidence,
** I am disposed to be gregarious and communicative to-
night,** he repeated ; " and that is why I sent for you : the
fire and the chandelier were not sufficient company for me;
nor would Pilot have been, for none of these can talk, AdMe
is- a degree better, but still far below the mark; Mrs, Fairfax
ditto; you, I am persuaded, can suit me if you will: you
puzzled me the first evening I invited you down here. I have
almost forgotten you since; other ideas have driven yours
from my head; but to-night I am resolved to be at ease; to
dismiss what importunes, and recall what pleases. It would
please me now to draw you out — to learn more of you — there-
fore speak. "
Instead of speaking, I smiled; and not a very complacent
or submissive smile either^
** Speak, " he ui^ged.
** What about, sir? "
*'Whatever you like, I leave both the choice of subject
J and the manners of treating it entirely to yourself. "
Accordingly I sat and said nothing:'* If he expects me to
JANE EY!
talk for the mere sake of talking and showing off, he will & id
he has addressed himself to the wrong person, " I thought.
» " You are dumb. Miss Eyre, "
I was dnmb still. He bent his head a little towards me,
ajid mth a single hasty gknce seemed to dive into my
eyes,
" Stubborn ? " he said^ " and annoyed. Ah, it is consistent.
I put my request in an absurd, almost insolent fonn. Miss
Eyre, 1 beg your pardon. The fact is, once for all, I don't wish
to treat you like an inferiors that is {correcting himself )j I
claim only such superiority as most result from twenty years'
difference In age and a centur/s advance in experience.
This is legitimate, et j*y tiens, as Ad^le would say; and it is
by virtue of this superiority and this alone that I desire you to
hkim the goodness to talk to me a little now, and divert my
thoughts J which are galled with dwelling on one point-
cankering as a msty nail, "
He had deigned an explanation; almost an apology: I
did not feel insensible to bis condescension, and would not
seem so.
" I am willing to amuse you if I f»n, sir: quite willing; but
I cannot introduce a topic, because how do I know what will
interest you ? Ask me questions, and I will do my best to
answer them, "
'* Then, in the fint place, do you agree with me that I have
a right to be a little masterful, abrupt; perhaps exacting^
sometimes, on the grounds I stated ; namely, that I am old
enough to be your father, and that I have battled through
a varied experience with many men of many nations, and
roamed over half the globe, while you have lived quietly with
one set of people in one house ? "
** Do as you please, sir/*
" That is no answer; or rather it is a very irritating,
because a very evasive one ; reply clearly, "
" 1 don't think, sir, you have a right to command'me,
merely because you are older than I, or because you have
seen more of the world than I have; your claim to superiority
depends on the use you have made of your time and experi-
ence, "
" Humph 1 Promptly spoken. But I won't allow that,
seeing that it would never suit my case ; as I have made an
indifferent, not to say a bad, use of both advantages. Leaving
superiority out of the question theUj you must still agree to <
I30
JANE EYRE
receive my orders now and then, without being piqued or
hurt by the tone of command— will you?''
I smiled: I thought to myself Mr; Rochester is peculiar —
he seems to forget that he pays me £30 per annum for re-
ceiving his orders.
** The smile is very well/^ said hcj catching instantly the
passing expression ; " but speak too/*
" I was thinkings sir^ that very few masters would trouble
themselves to inquire whether or not their paid subordinates
were piqued and hurt by their orders. "
*'Paid subordinates! What^ you are my paid subordinate^
are you ? Oh yes, I had forgotten the salary I Well then^ on
that mercenary ground, will yon agree to let me hector a
little? "
" No J sir, not on that ground; but, on the ground that you
did forget it, and that you care whether or not a dependent
is comfortabie in his dependency, I agree heartily* "
" And will you consent to dispense witii a great many con-
ventional forms and phrases, without thinking that the
omission arises from insolence ? "
*'I am sure, sir, I should never mistake informality for
insolence : one I rather Uke, the other nothing free-bom would
submit to, even for a salary/*
" Humbug 1 Most things free-bom wiU submit to anything
for a salary; therefore, keep to yourself, and don't venture
on generalities of which you are intensely ignorant. However,
I mentally shake hands with you for your answer^ despite its
inaccuracy j and as much for the manner in which it was saidj
as for the substance of the speech : the manner was frank and
sincere; one does not often see such a manner: no, on the
contrary, affectation, or coldness, or stupid, coarse-minded
misapprehension of one's meaning are the usual rewards of
candour. Not three in three thousand raw school-girl
governesses would have answered me as you have just doiie»
But I don't mean to flatter you : if you are cast in a different
mould to the majority, it is no merit of yours : Nature did it*
And then, after all, 1 go too fast in my conclusions * for what
I yet knowj you naay be no better tiian the rest ; you may
have intolerable defects to counterbalance your few good
points/'
** And so may you/'I thought. My eye met his as the idea
crossed my mind: he seemed to read the glance, answering
as if its import had been spoken as weD as imagined : —
JANE EYRl
Yes, yes, you are right, " said he; " I have plenty of
faults of my own : I know it, and I don^t wish to palliate
them J I assure you. God wot I need not be too severe about
others J I have a past existence, a series of deeds, a colour of
life to contemplate within my own breast, which might well
call my sneers and censures from my neighbours to myself, I
started J or rather (for, like other defaulters, I like to lay half'
the blame on ill fortune and adverse circumstances) was
thrust on to a wrong tack at the age of one and twenty, and
have never recovered the right course since: but I might
have been very different; I might have been as good as you
— wiser— almost as stainless, I envy you your peace of mind,
your clean conscience, your unpolluted memory. Little girl,
a meniory without blot or contamination must be an exquisite
treasure — an inexhaustible source of pure refreshment : is it
not?^'
" How was your memory whoi you were eighteen, sir? "
" All right then; limpid, salubrious; no gush of bilge
water had turned it to fetid puddle. I was your equal at
eighteen — quite your equal. Nature meant me to be, on the
whole, a good man, Miss Eyre; one of the better end; and
you see I am not so. You would say you don't see it: at
least I flatter myself I read as much in your eye {beware,
by-the-by, what you express with that organ, I am quick at
interpreting its language). Then take my word for it^ — I am
not a villain : you are not to suppose that — not to attribute
to me any such bad eminence ; but, owing, I verily believe,
rather to circumstances than to my natural bent, I am a trite
conmion -place sinner, hackneyed in aO the poor petty dis-
sipations with which the rich and worthless try to put on life.
Do you wonder that I avow this to you ? Know, that in the
course of your future life you will often find yourself elected
the involuntary confidant of your acquaintances* secrets:
people will instinctively find out, as I have done^ that it is
not your forte to tell of yourself, but to listen while others
talk of themselves ; they will feel, too, that you hsten with
QO malevolent scorn of their indiscretion, but with a kind of
innate sympiathy; not the less comforting and encouraging
because it is very unobtrusive in its manifestations, "
" How do you know?— how can you guess all this,
sir? "
" I know it well; therefore I proceed almost as freely as if
I were writing my thoughts in a diary. You would say, I
«.3a
ANE EYRE
,f
£hauld have been superior to drcumstances : so I sboul^-*
so I should ; but you see I was not. When iat« wronged me,
1 had not the wisdom to remain cool: I turned despemte;
then I degenerated. Now, when any vicious fiimpleton exdtes
my disgust by his paltry ribaldry, I cannot flatter myself
that I am better than he: I am forced to confess that he and
I are on a level. I wish I had stood firm— God knows I dot
Dread remorse when you are tempted to err, Miss Eym
iremorse is the poison of life/*
** Repentance is said to be its cm^, sir/*
" It is not its cure* Reformation may be its cure; and
could reform — I have strength yet for that — if — but whefe
is the use of thinking of it, hampered, burdened, cursed as I
am? Besides, since happiness is irrevocably derued me, I
have a right to get pleasure out of life: and I wiU get it, cost
what it may. "
" Then you will degenerate still more, sir/'
*'Possibly: yet why should I, if I can get sweet, iiesh
pleasure ? And I may get it as sweet and fresh as the wild
honey the bee gathcis on the moor/'
** It will sting— it will taste bitter, sir. "
" How do you know? — ^you never tried it. How
serious — how very solemn you look ; and you are as ignorant
of the matter as this cameo head'* (taking one from the
mantelpiece). ^* You have no right to preach to me, yoa
neophyte, that have not passed the porch of life, and 4U«
absolutely unacquainted with its mysteries. "
" I only remind you of your own words, sir: you said error
brought remorse, and you pronounced remorse the poison of
existence/*
" And who talks of error now? I scarcely think the nuljiiii
that flittered across my brain was an error, I believe it was
an inspixation rather than a temptation : it was very genial,
very soothing,^ — I know that* Here it comes again i It is nil
devil, I assure you ; or if it be, it has put on the robes of m.
angel of light. I think I must admit so fair a guest when it
asks entrance to my heart/'
'* Distrust it, sir; it is not a true angel. "
** Once. more, bow do you know? By what instinct do y^
pretend to distinguish between a fallen semph of the abyst
and a messenger from the eternal throne — between a gunk
and a seducer? "
" I judged by your countenance, sir; which was tioubleft

JANE EYRE
when you said the suggestion had rctumed upon you^ I feel
sure it will work you more misery if you listen to it, "
** Not at all^t bears the most gracious message in the
world: for the rest^ you are not my conscience- kL*eper^
so don't make yourself uneasy. Here, come in, bonny
wanderer! "
He said this as if he spoke to a vision, viewless to any eye
but his own; then^ folding his arms, which he had half ex-
tended, on his chest, he seemed to enclose in their embrace
the invisible being:
" Now/'he continued, again addressing me, " I have
received the pilgrim — a disguised deity^ as I venly believe.
Already it has done me good: my heart was a sort of chamel ;
it will now be a shrine, "
" To speak truth, sir, I don't understand you at all: I
caimot keep up the conversation, because tt has got out of
my depth. Only one thing I know : you said you were not as
good as you should like to be, and that you regretted your
own imperfection; — one thing I can comprehend: you
intimated that to have a sullied memory was a perpetual
bane. It seems to me^ that if you tried hard, you would in
time find it possible to become what you yourself would
approve; and that if from this day you began with resolution
to correct your thoughts and actions, you would in a few years
have laid up a new and stainless store of recollections, to
which you might revert with pleasure, "
" Justly thought; rightly said, BSiss Eyre; and, at this
moment J I am paving hell with energy. "
»''Sir? "
" I am laying down good intentions, which I believe
durable as flint. Certainly, my associates and pursuits sbaU
be other than they have been, "
^ " And better?*^
^P " And better — so much better as pure ore is than foul dross ,
'You seem to doubt me; I don*t doubt myself: I know what
my aim is, and what my motives are; and at this moment I
pass a law, unalterable as that of the Medes and Persians^
that both are right. "
*'They cannot be, sir, if they require a new statute to
legalise them. "
" They are, Miss Eyre, though they absolutely require a
new statute: unheard-of combinations of circumstances
demand unheard-of rules, "
ft
JANE EYRl
'* That sounds a dangerous maxim, sir; because one can
5ee at once that it is liable to abuse "
*'Sententious sage I so it is: but I swear by my bousehold
gods not to abuse it/*
" You are human and fallible. "
" I am : so are you — what then ? "
" The human and fallible should not arrogate a power
with which the divine and perfect alone can be safely
entrusted.'*
" What power?**
" That of saying of any strange^ unsanctioned Hue
action^ —'Let it be right** "
"'Let it be right'— the very words : you have pronounced
them. "
** May it be right, then/* I said, as I rose, deeming it use-
less to continue a discourse which was all darkness to me;
and, iKsid^j sensible that the character of my interlocutor
was beyond my penetration; at least, beyond its present
reach; and feeling the uncertainty, the vague sense of in-
securit}^j which accompanied a conviction of ignorance,
" Where are you going?'*
" To put Adde to bed : it is past her bedtime.**
" You are afraid of me, because I talk hke a Sphynx/*
*'Your language is enigmatical^ sir: but though I
bewildered, I am certainly not afraid/*
" You are afraid — your self-love dreads a blunder, "
** In that sense I do feel apprehensive — I have no wish to
talk nonsense "
*'If you did, it would be in such a grave, quiet manner^ I
should mistake it for sense. Do you never laughj Miss Eyre?
Don't trouble yourself to answer — ^I see, you laugh rardy*
but you can laugh very merrily: believe me, you are not
naturally austere, any more than I am naturally vicious.
The Lowood constraint still clings to you somewhat; con-
trolling your features, muffling your voice, and restricting
your hmbs; and you fear in the presence of a man and a
brother — or father, or master, or what you will — to smile too
gaily, speak too freely, or move too quickly: but, in time, I
think you will learn to be natural with me, as I find it im-
possible to be conventional with you; and then your looks
and movements will have more vivacity and variety than
they dare offer now, I see at intervals the glance of a curious
sort of bird through the close-set bars of a cage: a vivid.
am'
^JANE EYRE 135
restless, resolute captive is there; were it but free^ it would
soar cloud-high. You are still bent on going? "
*'It has struck nine, sir/*
" Never mindj— wait a mmute: Ad^le is not ready to go
to bed yet. My position^ Miss Eyre, with my back to the fire,
and my face to the room, favours observation. While talking
to you, I have also occasionally watched Ad^le; (I have ray
own reasons for thinking her a curious study, — reasons that I
may, nay that I shall, impart to you some day;) she pulled
out of her box, about ten minutes ago, a little pink silk frock;
rapture lit her face as she unfolded it; coquetry mns in her
bloodj blends with her brains, and seasons the marrow of her
bones. * II faut que je Fessaiel'cried she;'et k Tinstarit
naemel'and she rushed out of the room. She is now with
Sophie, undergoing a robing process: in a few minutes she
will re-enter; and I know what I shall see, — a miniature of
Celine VarenSi as she used to appear on the boards at the
rising of : but never mind that. However, my ten de rest
feelings are about to receive a shock: such is my presenti*
ment ; stay now, to see whether it will be r^lised/'
Ere longj Ad^le's little foot was heard tripping across the
hall. She entered^ transformed as her guardian had predicted.
A dress of rose-coloured satin, very short, and as full in the
skirt as it could be gathered, replaced the brown frock she
had previously worn ; a wreath of rosebuds circled her fore-
head ; her feet were dressed in silk stockings and small white
satin sandals.
" Est-ce que ma robe va bien ? " cried she, bounding for-
wards; " et mes souliers? et mes bas? Tenez, je crois que
je vais danser! "
And spreading out her dress, she chasseed across the
room; till, having reached Mr. Rochester, she wheeled lightly
round before liim on tip-toe, then dropped on one knee at h^
feet, exclaiming: —
" Monsieur, je vous remercie mille fois de votn* bonte ;'■
then rising, she added, *'C'est comme cela que maman faisait,
n*est-ce pas, monsieur? "
" Pre-cise-ly I'* was the answer; *'and,'comme cela,*
she charmed my Enghsh gold out of my British breeches'
pocket, I have been green, too. Miss Eyre, — ay, grass green :
not a more vernal tint freshens you now than once freshened
me. My Spnng is gone^ however: but it has left me that
French floweret on my hands; whicb, in some moods t I
^ffr
JANE EYRE

^11 fee rid of. Not valQing naw the root whence it
[ ^fomg; having found that it was of a sort which nothing biit
dust could manure, I have but half a liking to tht
^ . especially when it looks so artificial as just oow. I
^ Issep it and rear it rather on the Roman Catholic prindpk of
expiating numerous sins, great or small^ by one good woi^
111 explam all this some day. Good-night, "
CHAPTER XV
Mr. Rochester didj on a future occasion, explain it.
It was one afternoon^ when he chanced to meet me and
t Ad^le in the grounds; and while she played with Pilot and
^her shuttlecock^ he asked me to walJc up and down a long
'beech avenue within sight of her.
He then said that she was the daughter of a French opera-
dancer, Celine Varens, towards whom he had once cherished
what he called a " grande passion.'* This passion Celine had
professed to return with even superior ardour. He thought
himself her idol ; ugly as he was r he believed^ as he said, that
she preferred his ** taille d'athlete " to the elegance of the
Apollo Belvidere.
'* And J Miss Eyre, so much was I flattered by this prefer-
ence of the Gallic sylph for her British gnome ^ that I installed
her in an hotel; gave her a complete establishment of servants,
a carriage, cashmeres^ diamonds, dentelles, etc. In short, I
^ began the process of rxiimng myself in the received style, like
Lany other spoony. I had not, it seems, the originality to
fchalk out a new road to shame and destnicrion, but trode
" be old track with stupid exactness not to deviate an inch
f*from the beaten centre. I had — as I deserved to have — the
^^fate of all other spoonies. Happening to call one evening,
when C^ine did not expect me, I found her out; but it was
a warm night, and I was tired with strolling through Paris, so
I sat down in her boudoir; happy to breathe the air craose-
^crated so lately by her presence. No, — I exaggerate; I never
thought there was any consecrating virtue about her: it was
r lather a sort of pastille perfume she had left; a scent of mu^
[and amberj than an odour of sanctity. I was just beginning
to stifle with the fumes of conservatory flowers and sprinkled
essences, when I bethought myself to open the window and


JANE EYRE 137
i^^uTon to the balcony* It was moonlight and gas-light
besides^ and very still and serene. The balcony was famished
with a chair or two ; I sat down , took out a cigar.— I will take
one now, if you will excuse me. "
Here ensued a pause, filled up by the producing and light-
ing of a cigar; having placed it to his lips and breathed a trail
of Havannah incense on the freezing and sunless air^ he went
on: —
** I hked bonbons too^ in those days, Miss Eyre, and I was
cro^ow^— (overlook the barbarism) croguant chocolate coxn-
fitSj and smoking alternately, watching meantime the equip-
age that Tolled along the fashionable streets towards the
neighbouring opera-house j when in an elegant close carriage
drawn by a beautiful pair of Enghsh horses, and distinctly
seen in the brilhant city-night, I recognised the * voiture'I
had given C^Hne- She was returning: of course my heart
thumped with impatience against the iron rails I leant upon.
The carriage stopped, as I had expected, at the hotel door;
my flame (that is the very word for an opera inamorata)
alighted: though muffled in a cloak — an unnecessary encum-
brance, by-the-byj on so warm a June evening — I knew her
instantly by her little foot^ seen peeping from the skirt of her
dress, as she skipped from the carriage-step. Bending over the
balcony I was about to murmur,'Mon ange'— in a tone, of
coucsCj which should be audible to the ear of love alone^
wbai a figure jumped from the carriage after her; cloaked
also; but that was a spurred heel which bad rung on the
pavement, and that was a hatted head which now passed
under the arched porie cochire of the hotel.
'* You never felt jealousy, did you. Miss Eyre? Of course
not: I need not ask you; because you never felt love. You
have both sentiments yet to experience; your soul sleeps;
the shock is yet to be given which shall waken it. You tlunk
all existence lapses in as quiet a flow as that in which your
youth has liitherto slid away. Floating on with closed eyes
and muffled ears, you neither see the rocks bristling not far
off in the bed of the flood j nor hear the breakers boil at their
base. But I tell you — and you may mark my words—you
will come some day to a craggy pass of the channel, where the
whole of Ufe*s stream will be broken up into whirl and tumult,
foam and noise ; either you will be dashed to atoms on crag
points, or lifted up and borne on by some master wave into a
calmer current — ^as I am now.
I3S
JANE EYRE
'* I like this day: 1 like that sky of steel; I like the stem-
ness and stilbess of the world under this frost, I like Thorn*
field; its antiquity; its retirement; its old crow-trees and
thorn -trees; its gr^y fa^ade^ and lines of dark windows re-
flecting that metal welkin : and yet how long have I abhorred
the very thought of it; shuimed it like a great plague-house!
How I do still abhor'*
He ground his teeth and was silent: be arrested his step
and struck hjs boot against the hard ground. Some hated
thought seemed to have him in its grip, and to hold Um so
tightly that he could not advance.
We were ascending the avenue when he thus paused; the
hall was before us. Lifting his eye to its battlements j be cast
over them a glare such as I never saw before or since.
Pain J shame, ire — impatience, disgust , detestation — seemed
momentarily to hold a quivering conflict in the large pupil
dilating under bis ebon eyebrow. Wild was the wrestle which
should be paramount ; but another feeling rose and triumphed :
something hard and cynical; self-willed and resolute: it
settled his passion and petrified his countenance: he went
on: —
" During the moment I was silent. Miss Eyre, I was arrang-
ing a point with my destiny» She stood there, by that bcecb-
trunk — ^a bag like one of those who appeared to Macbeth on
the heath of Forres, * You like Thomfield ?'she said, lifting
her finger; and then she wrote in the air a memento, which
ran in lurid hieroglyphics all along the house-front^ between
the upper and lower row of windows.'Like it if you can!'
'Like it if you dare !'
'*'1 will hke it/ said L'I dare hke it;'and (he sub-
joined moodily) I will keep my word: I will break obstacles to
happiness J to goodness — yes, goodness; 1 wish to be a better
man than I have been ; than I am — ^as Job*s leviathan broke
the spear, the dart and the habei^eon, hinderances which
others count as iron and brass, 1 will esteem but straw aad
rotten wood. "
Adt^le here ran before him with her shuttlecock. " Away I "
be cried bars lily; *^ keep at a distance, child; or go in to
Sophie I " Continuing then to pursue his walk in silence, I
vCTitured to recall him to the point whence he had abruptly
diverged:—
''Did you leave the balcony^ sir, " I asked, *'when MdUe*^
Varens entered ? "
r.
JANE EYRE 139
I almost expected a rebuff for this haidly weU-timed
question: but^ on the contrary^ waking out ol his scowling
abstraction, be turned his eyes towards me^ and the shade
seemed to clear off his brow. " Oh, I had forgotten tthne !
Well, to resume. When I saw my charmer thus come in accom*
panied by a cavalier, I seemed to hear a hiss, and the green
snake of jealousy, rising on undulating coiis from the moonlit
balcony, glided within my waistcoat, and ate its way in two
minutes to my heart's core. Strange i " he exclaimed, suddenly
starting again from the point, " Strange that I should choose
you for the confidant of all this^ young lady: passing strange
that you should listen to me quietly, as if it were the most
usual thing in the world for a man like me to tell stories of his
opera-niistresses to a quaint, inexperienced girl like you J
But the last singularity explains the first, as I intimated once
before: you, with your gravity, consideratenesSj and caution
were made to be the recipient of secrets. Besides, I know
what sort of a mind I have placed in communication with my
own: I know it is not one liable to take infection: it is a
peculiar mindj it is an unique one. Happily I do not mean
to harm it 1 but, if I did, it would not take harm from me.
The more you and I converse, the better; for while I cannot
blight you, you may refresh me. " After this digression he
proceeded ;—
" I remained in the balcony,'They will come to her
boudoir no doubt, " thought I :'let me prepare an ambush/
So putting my hand in through the open window, I drew
the curtain over it, leaving only an opening through which I
could take observations ; then I closed the casement, all but
a chink just wide enough to furnish an outlet to lovers*
whispered vows: then I stole back to my chair; and as I
resumed it the pair came in. My eye was quickly at the aper-
ture, Celine*s chamber-maid entered, lit a lamp, left it on the
table and withdrew. The couple were thus revealed to me
clearly: both removed their cloaks, and there was ^ the
Varens'shining in satin and jewels, — ^my gifts of course , —
and there was her companiSn in an officer's unifonn; and I
knew him for a young roue of a vicomte— a brainless and
vicious youth whom I had sometimes met in society, and had
never thought of hating because I despised him so absolutely.
On recognising him, the fang of the snake, jealousy, was
instantly broken ; because at the same moment my love for
Celine sank under an extinguisher, A woman who could

L
140
JANE EYRE
tray me for such a rival was not worth eontending for:
she deserved only scorn; less, however^ than I, who )wd been
her dupe*
*'They began to talk; their conversation eased me com-
^(pletely: frivolouSj mercenary, heartless, and senseless, it
i rather calculated to weary than airage a listener. A card
^of mine lay on the table; this being perceived brought my
name under discussion. Neither of them possessed energy or
wit to belabour me soundly; but they insalted me as coarsely
as they could in their little way I especially C6hne; who even
waxed rather brilliant on my personal defects — deformities
she termed them. Now it had been her custom to launch out
into fervent admiration of what she called my * beaut^ male':
wherein she differed diametrically from you, who told me
point blank, at the second interview^ that you did not think
me handsome- The contrast struck me at the time, and "
Ad^le here came running up again,
" Monsieur^ John has just been to say that your agent has
lied and wishes to see you, "
" Ahl in that case I must abridge. Opening the window,
I walked in upon them; liberated Celine from my protection;
gave her notice to vacate her hotel; offered her a purse for
immediate exigencies; disregarded screams, hysterics,
prayers, protestations, convulsions; made an appointment
with the vicomte for a meeting at the Bois de Boulogne.
Next morning I had the pleasure of encountering him ; left
a bullet in one of his poor, etiolated arms, feeble as the wing
of a chicken in the pip, and then thought I had done with
the whole crew* But unluckily the Varens, six months before,
had given me this fiiette Ad^le; who she affirmed was my
[jaughter; and perhaps she may be^ though I see no prioofs
of such grim paternity written in her countenance : Pilot is
more like me than she. Some years after I had brokai with
the mother, she abandoned her child and ran away to Italy
with a musician or singer. I acknowledged no natural claim
on Ad^le's part to be supported by me ; nor do I now acknow-
ledge any, for I am not her father; but hearing that she was
I quite destitute^ I e'en took the poor thing out of the slime
land mud of Paris, and transplanted it here, to grow up i^eioi
in the wholesome soil of an English country garden, Mrs,
Fairfax found you to train it; but now you know that it is
the illegitimate ofispring of a French opera-gitl, you will
perhaps think differently of your post and protegee: you
JANE EYRE
ill be coming to me some day with notice that you have
found another place— that you beg me to look for out a new
governesSj etc— eh? "
" No: Ad^le k not answerable for either her mother's
iaults or yours ; I have a regard for her, and now that I know
she is, in a sense, parentless — forsaken by her mother and
disowned by you, sir — I shall cling closer to her than before.
How could I possibly prefer the spoilt pet of a wealthy family,
who would hate her governess as a nuisance, to a lonely little
orphan, who leans towards her as a friend? "
'* Oh, tlut is the hght in which you view itl Well, I must
^^o in now ; and you too ; it darkens. "
But I stayed out a few minutes longer with Ad^le and
Hlot — ran a race with her, and played a game of battledore
tmd shuttlecock. When we went in and I had removed her
bonnet and coat, I took her on my knee ; kept her there an
houTj allowing her to prattle as she hked: not rebuking even
some httle freedoms and triviahties into which she was apt
to stray when much noticed ; and which betrayed in her a
superficiahty of characterj inherited probably from her
mother, hardly congenial to an EngUsh mind. Still she had
her merits; and 1 was disposed to appreciate all that was
good in her to the utmost. I sought in her countenance and
features a hkeness to Mr. Rochester, but found none: no
trait, 00 turn of expression announced relationship. It
was a pity! if she could but have been proved to resemble
him, he would have thought more of her.
It was not till after 1 had withdrawn to my own chamber
for the night J that I steadily reviewed the tale Mr. Rochester
had told me. As he had said, there was probably nothing at
all extraordinary in the substance of the narrative itself: a
wealthy Englishman's passion for a French dancer^ and her
treachery to hinij w^ere e very-day matters enough, no doubt,
in society; but there was something decidedly strange in the
paroxysm of emotion which had suddenly seized him, when
he was in the act of expressing the present contentment of
his mood, and his newly revived pleasure in the old hall and
its environs. I meditated wonderingly on this incident:
but gradually quitting it^ as I found it for the present inex-
pUcableT 1 turned to the consideration of my master's manner
to myself. The confidence he had thought fit to repose in
me seemed a tribute to my discretion: I regarded and accepted
It as such. His deportment had now for some weeks feeen
142
JANE EYRE
more uniform towards me than at the first, I never seemed
in his way; he did not take fits of chilling hauteur: when he
met me unexpectediyj the encounter seemed welcome; he
had always a word and sometimes a smile for me: when
summoned by formal invitation to his presence, I was
honoured by a cordiality of reception that made me feel I
really possessed the power to amuse him, and that these
evening conferences were sought as much for his pleasure as
for my benefit,
I, indeed, talked comparatively little; but I heard him
talk with relish. It was his nature to be communicative; he
Uked to open to a mind unacquainted with the world, glimpses
of its scenes and ways (I do not mean its corrupt scenes and
wicked waySj but such as derived their interest from the
great scale on which they were acted, the strange novelty by
which they were characterise d)j and I had a keen delight in
receiving the new ideas he offered, in imagining the new
pictures he portrayed , or followed him in thought through the
new regions he dis closed , never startled or troubled by one
noxious allusion.
The ease of his manner freed me from painful restraint:
the friendly frankness, as correct as cordial, with which he
treated rae^ drew me to him. I felt at times as if he were my
relation, rather than my master: yet he was imperious some-
times still; but I did not mind that; I saw it was his way.
So happy, so gratified did I become with this new interest
added to hfe^ that I ceased to pine after kindred: my thin
crescent-destiny seemed to enlarge; the blanks of existence
were filled up; my bodily health improved; I gathered flesh
and strength.
And was Mr, Rochester now ugly in my eyes? No, reader:
grutttudcj and many associations, all pleasurable and genialj
made his face the object I best liked to see; his presence in
a room was more cheering than the brightest fire. Yet I had
not forgotten his faults : indeedj I couid not, for he brought
them frequently before me. He was proud, sardonic^ harsh
to inferiority of every description : in my secret soul I knew
that his great kindness to me was balanced by unjust severity
to many others. He was moody, too; unaccountably so;
I more than once, when sent for to read to him, found him
sitting in his library alone, with his head bent on his folded
arms ; and, when he looked up, a morose, almost a malignanl
scowl J blackened his features* But I beUeved that his moodi-
JANE EYR
143
ntss^ his harshness J and his former faults of morality (1 say
former J for now he seemed corrected of them) liad their source
in some cruel cross of fate, I believed he was naturally a man
of better tendencies, liigher principles, and purer tastes than
such as drcumstances had developed, education ins tilled, or
destiny encouraged, I thought there were excellent materials
in him ; though for the present they hung together somewhat
spoikdi and tangled, I cannot deny that I grieved for his grief,
whatever that was, and would have given much to assuage it.
Though I had now extinguished my candle and was laid
down in bed, I could not sleep, for thinking of his look when
be paused in the avenue, and told how his destiny had risen
up before him, and dared him to be happy at Thorn field,
" Why not? " I asked myself, " What alienates him from
the house? Will he leave it again soon ? Mrs, Fairfax said he
seldom stayed here longer than a fortnight at a time ; and he
ha5 now been resident eight weeks. If he does go, the change
will be doleful. Suppose he should be absent, spring, summer^
and autumn : how joyless sunshine and fine days will seem I "
I hardly know whether I had slept or not after this musing;
at any rate, I started wide awake on hearing a vague murmur^
peculiar and lugubrious, which sounded, I thought, just
above me, I wished I had kept my candle burning : the night
was drearily dark; my spirits were depressed. 1 rose and sat
tip IB bed, hstening. The sound was hushed,
1 tried again to sleep; but my heart beat anxiously: my
inward tranquilhty was broken. The clock, far down in the
hallj struck two. Just then it seemed my chamber-door was
touched; as if fingers had swept the panels in groping a way
along the dork gallery outside. I said, " Who is there ? "
Nothing answered, 1 was chilled with fear.
All at once I remembered tbat it might be Pilot: who,
when the kitchen-door chanced to be left open, not unfre-
quently found his way up to the threshold of Mr. Rochester's
chamber; I had seen him lying there myself, in the mornings.
The idea calmed me somewhat: 1 lay down. Silence com-
poses the nerves; and as an unbroken hush now reigned
again through the whole house^ I began to feel the return of
slumber. But it was not fated that I should sleep that night.
A dream had scarcely approached my ear, when it fied
affrighted, scared by a marrow-freezing incident enough.
This was a demoniac laugh — low, suppressed, and deep —
uttered, as it seemedj at the very key-hole of my cbamber
JANE EYRE
door. The head o£ my bed was umr the door, and I thought
at & m the goblin-laughter stood at my bedside — or mtber,
crouched by my pillow : but 1 rose, looked round j and could
see nothing; while^ a:s 1 stiU gazed, the unnattiiul sound was
reiterated: and I knew it came from behind the panels. My
first impulse was to rise and fasten the bolt; my next, again
to cry out, *'Who is there? "
Something gurgled and moaned* Ere long, steps retreated
up the gaUery towards the third story staircase: a door hw^
lately been made to shut in that staircase; 1 heard it opoi
aad close, and all was stilL
'* Was that Grace Poole? and is she possessed with a
de\il? " thought L Impossible now to remaiii longer by
myself: I must go to Mis. Fairfax* 1 hurried on my frock and
a shawl; I withdrew the bolt and opened the door with a
trembling hand* There was a candle burning just outside,
left on the matting in the gallery, I was surprised at this cir-
cumstance: but still more was I amazed to perceive the air
quite dim, as if filled with smoke; and, while looking to the
right hand and left, to find whence these blue wreaths issued,
I became further aware of a strong smeU of burning.
Something creaked: it was a door ajar, and that door
was Mr. Rochester's ^ and the smoke rui^hed in a cloud from
thence* I thought no more of Mrs, Fairfax; I thought no more
of Grace Poole or the laugh : in an instant, I was within the
chamber* Tongues of flame darted round the bed: the
curtains were on fire. In the midst of blaze and vapour, Mr.
Rochester lay stretched motionless, m deep sleep,
" Wake! wake !'* I cried— I shook him, but he only mur^
mured and turned: the smoke had stupified him. Not a
moment could be lost: the very sheets were kindling. I
rushed to his basin and ewer; fortunately, one was wide and
the other deep, and both were filled with water, I heaved
them up, deluged the bed and its occupant, flew back to my
own room, brought my own water-jug, baptized the couch
afreshj and, by God^s aid, succeeded in extinguishing the
flames which were devouring it.
The hiss of the quenched element, the breakage of a pitcher
which I had flung from my hand when I had emptied it, and,
above all, the splash of the shower-bath I had liberally
bestowed, roused Mr. Rochester at last. Though it was now
dark, I knew he was awake ; because I heard him fulminating
strange anathemas at finding himself lying in a pool of water*
JANE EYRE T45
Is there a flwd ? " he cried-
*'NOj sir/'I answered; " but there has beoi a fire; get
up, doj you are quenched now; I will fetch you a candle. "
*'In ihe name of all the elves in Christendom, is that Jane
Eyre ?'* he demanded,'* W'hat have you done with me^ witchj
BQrcercss ? Wtio is in the room beside you ? Have you plotted
to dTown me? *'
** I will fetch you a candle, sir; and, in Heaven ^s naine,
get up. Somebody has plotted somethiiig: you cannot too
soon find out who and what it is/'
" There— I am up now; but at your peril you fetch a candle
yet ; wait two minutes till I get into some dry garments, if
any dry there be^ — yes, here is my dressing-gown. Now
I did run; I brought the candle which still remained in
the gallery. He took it from my hand^ held it up, and sur-
veyed the bed^ all blackened and scorched, the sheets
drenched J the carpet round swimming in water.
** Whsit is it ? and who did it ? " he asked.
I briefly related to him what had transpired : the strange
laugh I had heard in the gallery; the step ascending to the
third story; the smoke,— die smell of fire which had con-
ducted me to his room ; in what state I bad found matters
there J and how I had deluged him with all the water I could
lay hands on.
Hs listened very gravely; his face, as I went on, expressed
more concern than astonishment; he did not immediately
speak when I had concluded,
K, ** Shall I call Mr^. Fairfax? " I asked.
" Mrs. Fairfax ? No : what the deuce would 3rou call her
lOr? What can she do? Let her sleep unmolested, "
** Then I will fetch Leahj and wake John and his wife. "
*'Not at all: just be still. You have a shawl on? if you
are not warm enough, you may take my cloak jrander; wrap
it about you, and sit down in the arm-chair: there, — I will
put it on. Now place your feet on the stool, to keep them out
of the wet. I am going to leave you a few minutes. I shall
take the candle. Remain where you are till I return; be as
iiill as a mouse, I must pay a visit to the second story. Don't
move, remember, or call any one. "
He went : I watched the light withdraw. He passed up the
gallery very softly, unclosed the staircase door with as little
noise as possible, shut it after him, and the last ray vanish^.
^^uvis
JANE EYRE
I was left in total darkness, 1 listened for some notscj btit
heard nothing. A very long time elapsed. I grew w^ry: it
was coldj in spite of Uie cloak; and then I did not see the use
of staying J as I was not to rouse the house. I was on the point
of risking Mr, Rochester's displeasurej hy disobeying his
orders, when the light once more gleamed dimly on the gallery-
wall , and I heard his unshod feet tread the matting. ** I hope
it is he/* thought I, " and not something worse. "
He re-entered^ pale and very gloomy, ** I have found it
all out/'said he^ setting his candle down on the washstand;
" it is as I thought. "
''How, sir?'^
He made no reply, but stood with his arms folded, looking
on the ground. At the end of a few minutes^ he inquired iji
rather a peculiar tone: —
" I forget whether you said you saw anything when you
opened your chamber door, "
" Noj sir, only the candlestick on the ground. "
" But you heard an odd laugh ? You have heard that
laugh before, I should think^ or something like it? "
" Yes, sir: there is a wontian who sews here, called Grace
Poole,^he laughs in that way. She is a singular person, "
" Just so. Grace Poole — ^you have guessed it» She is, as
you say, singular^ — very. Well, I shall reflect on the subject.
Meantime J I am glad that you are the only person, besides
myself J acquainted with the precise details of to*night's
incident. You are no talking fool : say nothing about it. I
will account for this state of affairs (pointing to the bed):
and now return to your own room, I shall do very well on
the sofa in the hbrary for the rest of the night. It is near
four;^ — in two hours the servants will be up. "
" Good-night, then, sir/'said I^ departing.
He seemed surprised — ^very inconsistently so, as he had
just told me to go,
*'Whatl " he exclaim edj " are you quitting me already;
and in that way ? "
" You said I might go, sir.'*
" But not without taking leave ; not without a word or
two of acknowledgment and good will: not, in short, in that
brief, dr > ^ fashion* Why, you have saved my life !— snatched
me from a horrible and excmdating death]— and you walk
j^st me as if we were mutual strangers! At least shake
hands.*'
JANE EYRE
147
ht took it first in
He held out his hand; I gav€ him miiie
one J then in both his own.
" You have saved ray life: I have a pleasure in owing you
so immeose a debt, I cannot say more. Nothing else that
has being would have been tolerable to me in the character
oi creditor for such an obhgation : but you : it is different ;^-
I feel your benefits no burden, Jane, "
He paused; gazed at me; words almost visible trembled
on his lips J — but his voice was checked,
" Good-night again, sir. There is no debt^ benefitj burden,
obligation J in the case, "
** I knewj " he continued, ** you would do me good in some
way, at some time; — I saw it in your eyes when I first beheld
you : their expression and smile did not — (again he stopped)
—did not (he proceeded hastily) strike delight to my very
inmost heart so for nothing. People talk of natural s > Tn-
pathies; I have heard of good genii:— there are grains of
truth in the wildest fable. My cherished preserver, cood*
night I "
Strange energy was in Ms voice; strange fire in his look.
" I am glad I happened to be awake/'I said: and then I
was going*
^ ^^What! you will go?''
B " I am cold, sir. "
^^ " Cold ? Yes,— and standing In a pool I Go, then^ Jane ;
go I'^ But he still retained my liand, and I could not free it.
I bethought m3rself of an expedient.
" I think I hear Mrs. Fairfax move^ sir, " said I,
** Well J leave me:'* he relaxed his fingers, and I was gone.
I regained my couch, but never thought of sleep. Till
morning dawned I was tossed on a buoyant but unquiet sea,
where billows of trouble rolled under surges of joy, I thought
sometimes I saw beyond its wild waters a shore^ sweet as the
hills of Beulah; and now and then a freshening gale, wakened
by hope, bore my spirit triumphantly towards che bourne:
but I could not reach it, even in fancy, — a counteracting
breeze blew off land, and continually drove me back. Sense
would resist delirium: judgment would warn passion. Too
feverish to rest, I rose as soon as day dawned.

148 JANE EYRE
CHAPTER XVI
I BOTH wished and feared to see Mn Rochester on the dij
which followed this sleepless ntghtr I wanted to hear his
voice again, yet feared to meet his eye. During the early
part of the moming^ I momentarily expected his coming ; he
was not in the frequent habit of entering the school -room;
but he did step in for a few minutes sometimeSj and I hmd
the impression that he was sure to visit it that day*
But the morning passed just as usual: nothing happened
to interrupt the quiet course of Addle's studies; only, soon
after breakfast, I heard some bustle in the neighbourhood of
Mr, Rochester's chamber, Mrs, Fairfax's voice, and Leah's,
and the cook's — that is^ John's wife— and even J^ihn's own
gruff tones. There were exclamations of " What a meii:y
master was not bumt in his bedT'** It is always dangerous
to keep a candle lit at night, " ** How providential that he
had presence of mind to think of the water- jug I ** " I wonder
he waked nobody I " *^ It is to be hoped he will not take cold
with sleeping on the library sofa/'etc.
To much confabulation succeeded a sound of scjubbmg
and setting to rights ; and when I passed the room^ in going
downstairs to dinner, I saw through the open door that aU
was again restored to complete order; only the bed was
stripped of its hangings, Leah stood up in the window-seat,
rubbing the panes of glass dimmed laith smoke. I was about
to address her^ for I wished to know what account had been
given of the affairs but, on advancing, I saw a second
person in the chamber — a woman sitting on a chair by the
bedside, and sewing rings to new curtains- That woman was
no other than Grace Poole.
Ill ere she sat, staid and taciturn- looking, as usual, in her
brown stuff gown, her check apron, white handkerchief, and
cap. She was intent on her work, in whicli her whole thoti^la
seemed absorbed : on her hard forehead, and in her common-
place features, was nothing either of the paleness or despent*
tion one would have expected to see marking the counteoanoe
of a woman who had attempted murder; and whose intended
victim had followed her last night to her lair, and (as I
believed) charged her with the crime she wished to perpe-
JANE EYRE
trate. I was amassed— confounded. She look^ up, while I
still gazed at her: no starts no increase or failure of colour ]
betrayed emotion, consciousness of guilty. or fear of detection-
She said " Good morning. Miss/* in her usual phlegmatic
and brief manner; and taking up another ring and more
tape, went on with her sewing.
** I will put her to some test/* thought I: " such absolute
impenetrability is past comprehension. "
''Good mornmg, Grace/'I said. ** Has anything happened
here? I thought I heard the servants all talking together a
while ago. "
'* Only master had been reading in his bed last night; he
fell asleep with his candle lit, and the curtail^ got on fire;
but, fortunately, he awoke before the bed-clothes or the
wood-work caught, and contrived to quench the 0am e witii
the water in the ewer. "
'* A strange affair 1 " I said, in a low voice: then^ looking
at her fixedly,— " Did Mr. Kochester wake nobody? Did no
one hear him move ? "
She again raised her eyes to me; and this time tliere was
something of consciousness in their expression. She seined
to examine me warily; then she answered,—
" The servants sleep so far offj you knowj Miss^ they would
not be likely to hear. Mrs. Fairfax's room and yours are the
nearest to master's ; but Mrs. Fairfax said she heard nothing :
when people get dderly, they often sleep heavy. " She
paused, and then added, with a sort of assumed indifference,
but still in a marked and significant tone, " But you are
young, Miss; and J should say a light sieger: perhaps you
may have heard a noise? "
" I did, " said I, dropping my voice, so that Leah^ who
was stilt polishing the panes, could not hear me,''and at
first I thought it was Pilot: but Pilot cannot laugh; and I
am certain I heard a laugh, and a strange one.*'
She took a new needleful of tliread, waxed it carefully,
threaded her needle with a steady hand, and then observed,
with perfect composure, —
'* It is hardly likely master would laugh, I should think.
Miss, when be w^ lin su^ danger: you mu^^t have Ipeen
dr^ming. "
*'I was not dreaming, " I f aidj with some wannth, for her
br^jsea coo)pess pro^'oked iue. Agmi she.lookjed.^t me; and
with the same scnitinisii^g and consdpas^ye.
h
150
JANE EYRE
1
'* Have you told master that you heard a laugh? " she
inquired.
** I have not had the opportunity of speaking to him this
morning, "
'* You did not think of opening your door and looking out
into the gallery?'* she further asked.
She appeared to be cross -questioning me; attempting to
draw from me information unawares: the idea struck me
that if she discovered I knew or suspected her gxiilt, she
would be playing ofi some of her malignant pranks on m <
I thought it advisable to be on my guard.
*'On the contrary, " said I, " I bolted my door/*
'* Then you are not in the habit of bolting your door every
night before you get into bed ? "
" Fiend I she wants to know my habits, that she may lay
her plans accordingly! " Indignation again prevailed over
prudence; I replied sharply, " Hitherto I have often omitted
to fasten the bolt: I did not think it necessary, I was not
aware any danger or annoyance was to be dreaded at Thorn-
field Hall : but in future " (and I laid marked stress on the
words)'* I shall take good care to nmke all secure before I
venture to lie down.*'
** It will be wise so to do/'was her answer: " this neigh-
bourliood is as quiet as any I know, and I never heard of the
hall being attempted by robbers since it was a house; though
there are hundreds of pounds'worth of plate in the plate-
closet^ as h well known. And you see, for such a large house^
there are very few servants, because master has never lived
here much; and when he does come, being a bachelor, he
needs little waiting on: but I always think it best to err on
the safe side; a door is soon fastened, and it is as well to have
a drawn bolt between one and any mischief that may be
about. A deal of people. Miss, are for trusting all to
Providence; but I say Providence will not dispense with
the means, though he often blesses them when they
are used discreetly/* And here she closed her harangue:
a long one for her, and uttered with the demureness of A
Quakeress.
I still stood absolutely dumbfoundered at what appeared
to me her miraculous self-possession and most insctutabk
hypociisy, when the cook entered,
" Mrs, Poole, " said she, addressing Grace, " the servants^
dinner will soon be ready: will you come down? "
JAKE EYRE
X5I
" No; just put my pint of porter and bit of pudding on a
tray J and 111 carry it upstairs/*
'* You'll have some meat? *'
" Just a morselj and a taste of cheese, that's all. "
*^ And the sago? *^
** Never mind it, at pr^ent: I shall be coming down
before tea-time: I'll make it m}reelf. "
The cook here turned to rae, saying that Mrs, Fairfax was
waiting for me; so I departed,
I hardly heard Mrs. Fairfax's account of the curtain con-
flagration during dinner, so much was I occupied in puzzling
my brains over the enigmatical character of Grace Poole;
and still more in pondering the problem of her position at
Thomfield; in questioning why she had not been ^ven into
custody that morning; or, at the very least, dismissed from
her master*s service. He had ahnost as much as declared
his conviction of her criminality last night : what mysterious
cause withheld him from accusing her? Why had he en-
joined me, too, to secrecy? It was strange: a bold, vindic-
tivcj and haughty gentleman seemed somehow in the power
of one of the meanest of his dependants; so much in her
power, that even when she lifted her hand against his life,
he dared not openly charge her with the attempt^ much less
punish her for it.
Had Grace been young and handsome, I should have been
tempted to think that tenderer feelings than prudence or fear
influenced Mr* Rochester in her behalf; but, hard-favoured
and matronly as she was, the idea could not be admitted.
'* Yet/'I reflected, " she has been young once; her youth
would be contemporar > ^ with her master's : Mrs. Fairfax told
me once, she had lived here many years* I don't think she
can ever have been pretty; but, for aught I know, she may
possess originality and strength of character to compensate
for the want of personal advantages. Mr. Rochester is an
amateur of the decided and eccentric: Grace is eccentric at
least. What if a former caprice (a freak very possible to a
nature so sudden and h^dstrong as liis) has delivered him
into her power, and she now exercises over his actions a
secret influence, the result of his own indiscretion, which he
cannot shake off, and dare not disregard? " But, having
reached this point of conjecture^ Mrs. Poole's square, flat
figure, and uncomely, dry, even coarse face, recurred so
d^tinctly to my mind*s eye, that I thought, " No; impos-
fANE EYRE
siblcl my supposition cmnnot be < x)rrect. Yet/'suggested
the secret voice which talks to us in our hearts, " ym art
not beautiful either^ and perhaps Mr. Rochester approve
you: at any rate, you have often felt as if he did; and last
night—remember his words J remember his look; remember
his voice! "
I well remembered all; language^ glance, and tone seemed
at the moment vividly renewed* I was now in the school-
room ; Ad^ie was drawing; I bent over her and directed her
pencil. She looked up with a sort of start,
*'Qu*avez-vons, mademoiselle? " said she; ** Vos doigts
tremblent oomme la feuille, et vm joues sont rouges: mais,
rouges comme des cerises !*', *
** I am hot, km% with stooping!''She went on sketdi-
ing, I went on thinking.
I hastened to drive from my mind the hateful notion I had
been conceiving respecting Grace Poole: it disgusted me, I
compared myself with her, and found we were different.
Bessie Leaven had said I was quite a lady; and she spoke
truth: I was a lady. Arid now I looked much better than I
did when Bessie saw me: I had more colour and more flesh;
mote life, more vivacity; because I had brighter hopes and
keener enjoyments.
" Evening approaches/'said I, as I looked towards the
window. " I have never heard Mr. Rochester's voice or step
in the house to-day; but surely I shall see him before ni^t:
I feared the meeting in the morning: now I desire it, becat^e
expectation has been so long baffled that it is grown
impatient/'* ji, , t.
When dusk actually closed, and when Adele Jett me to go
and play in the nursery with Sophie, I did most keenly d^ire
it. r listened for the bell to ring below; I listened for Leah
coming up with a message; I fancied sometimes I heani
Mr. Rochester's own tread, and I turned to the door, expect
ing it to open and admit him. The donr remained shutl
darkness only came in through the window. Still it was not
late: he often sent for me at seven and eight o'clock, and it
was yet but six. Surely I should not be wholly disappointes*
to-night, when I had so many things to say to him I I wanted'
again to introduce the subject of Grace Poole, and to hear
what he would answer; I wanted to ask him plainl)r if hr
really believed it was she who had made last night's hideoui
attempt; and if so, why he kept her wickedness a secret. U
mm
JANE EYRE
little mattered whether my curiosity irritated him; I knew
the pleasure of vexing and soothing him by turns; it was
one I chiefly delighted in, and a sure instinct always pre*
vented me from going too far; beyond the verge of provoca-
tion I never ventured; on the eKtreme brink I liked well to
try my skill Retaining every minute form of respect^ every
propriety of my station^ I could still meet him in argument
without fear of uneasy restraint: this suited both him
and me.
A tread creaked on the stairs at last; Leah made her
appearance; but it was only to intimate liat tea wa?5 ready
in Mrs» Fairfax's room. Thither I repaired, ^lad at least to
go downstairs; for that brought me, I imagined^ nearer to
Mr, Rochester's presence.
** You must want your tea, " said the good lady^ as 1
joined her; ** you ate so little at dinner, I am afraid/^ she
continued J " you are not well to-day : you look flushed and
feverish/'
*'Oh, quite well ! I never felt better. "
^'Ttien you must prove it by evincing a good appetite;
will yon fill the tea-pot while I knit off this neeSle?'* Having
completed her task, she rose to draw down the blind which
she had hitherto kept up; by way, I suppose, of making the
most of daylight: though dusk was now fast deepening into
total obscurity.
" It is fair to-night, " said she, as she looked through the
panes, *'though not starlight; Mr, Rochester has, on the
whole, had a favourable day for his journey, "
" Journey! — Is Mr, Rochester gone anywhere? 1 did not
know he was out. "
'* Oh, he set oflf the moment he had breakfasted! He is
gone to the Leas ; Mr, Eshton's place, ten miles on the other
^de Millcote; I believe there is quite a party assembled
ttiere; Lord Ingram, Sir George Lynn, Gilonel Dent, and
others/*
" Do you expect him back to-night? "
'* No— nor to-morrow either; I should think he is very
likely to stay a week or more; when these fine, fasliionable
^people get together, they are so surrounded by elegance and
gaiety; so well provided with all that can please and enter-
tain, they are in no hurry to separate. Gentlemen, especially,
Are often in request on such occasions ; and Mr. Rochester b
MO talented and so lively in society, that I believe he is a
L
154 JKNITKTKE
general favourite: the ladies are very fond of him; tfaoi^
you would not think his appearance calculated to recommend
him particularly in their eyes: but I suppose his acquire-
ments and abilities^ perhaps his wealth and good blood, make
amends for any little fault of look. "
*'Are there ladies at the Leas ? "
" There are Mrs. Eshton and her three daughters^-very
elegant young ladies, indeed ; and there are the Honourable
Blanche and Mary Ingram; most beautiful women, I
suppose: indeed I have seen Blanche, six or seven years
since, when she was a girl of eighteen. She came here to a
Christmas ball and party Mr. Rochester gave. You should
have seen the dining-room that day^how richly it was
decorated, how brilliantly lit upt I should think there were
fifty ladies and gentlemen present — all of the first county-
families; and Miss Ingram was considered the belle of the
eveoing. "
" You saw her J you say, Mrs, Fairfax: what was she
like?'*
" Yes, I saw her. The dining-room doors were thrown
open; and, as it was Christmas-time, the servants were
allowed to assemble in the hall, to hear some of the ladies
sing and play, Mr. Rochester would have me to come in,
and I sat down in a quiet comer and watched them. I never
saw a more splendid scene: the ladies were magnific^tly
dressed; most of them — at least most of the younger
ones — looked handsome; but Miss Ingram was certainly fiie
queen.'*
" And what was she like ? "
" Tail, fine bust^ sloping shoulders; long, graceful neck;
olive complexion^ dark and clear; noble features; eyes
rather like Mr* Rochester's, large and black, and as brilliant
as her jewels. And then she had such a fine head of hair;
raven- black, and so becomingly arranged : a crown of thick
plaits behind, and m front the longest, the glossiest curb I
ever saw. She was dressed in pure white; an amber^oloured
scarf was passed over her shoulder and across her breast,
tied at the side, and descending in longj fringed ends below
her knee. She wore an amber-coloured flower, too, in her
hair: it contrasted well with the jetty mass of her curls/*
" She was greatly admired of course ? "
" Yes, indeed : and not only for her beauty, but for her
aca > mplishments. She was one of the ladies who sang: ft
lNE eyre
155
gentleman accompanied her on the piano. She and Mr.
Rochester sang a duet. "
'* Mr. Rochester? I was not aware he could sing. "
** Ohl he has a fine bass voicCj and an excellent taste for
music. "
'* And Miss Ingram : what sort of a voice had she?''
''A very rich and powerful one: she sang delightfully; it
was a treat to listen to her; — and she played afterwards* I
am no judge of music, but Mr. Rochester is; and I heard him
say her execution was remarkably good. "
*'And this beautiful and accomplished lady is not yet
married ? *'
" It appears EOt; I fancy neither she nor her sister have
very large fortunes. Old Lord Ingram*s estates were chiefly
entailed, and the eldest son came in for everything almost. "
** But 1 wonder no wealthy nobleman or gentleman has
taken a fancy to her: Mr. Roches ter, for instance. He is
ridi, is he not? "
** Ohi yes. But you see there is a considerable difference
in age: Mr, Roch^ter is near forty; she is but twenty-
five. "
" What of that? More unequal matches are made every
day/'
" True: yet I should scarcely fancy Mr. Rochester would
entertain an idea of the sort. But you eat nothing: 3rou
have scarcely tasted since you began tea.-'
*'No : I am too thirsty to eat. Will j-ou let me liave
another cup? "
I was about again to revert to the probability of a union
between Mr. Rochester and the beautiful Blanche; but
Ad^le came in, and the conversation was turned into another
channel.
When once more alone, I reviewed the information I had
got; looked into my heart, examined its thoughts and feel-
ings, and endeavoured to bring back with a strict hand such
as had been straying through imagination's boundless and
track] ^s waste, into the safe fold of common sense.
Arraigned at my own bar, Memory having given her
evidence of the hopes, wishes, sentiments I had been cherish-
ing since last night — of the general state of mind in which I
had indulged for nearh^ a fortnight past; Reason having
come forward and told in her own quiet way, a plain, un-
varnished tale, showing how I had rejected the real, and
i5 <
rE EYR^
rabidly devoured the ideal;— IptDnounced jildglheyil Icf dil
effect: —
Tliat a greater fool than Jane Eyre had never breathed
the breath of life: that a more fantastic idiot had never sur-
feited herself on sweet lies, and swallowed poison as if it
were nectar.
"'You " I said, " a favourite with Mr, Rochester? Ym
gifted with the power of pTeasing him? Yeu of importajice
to him in any way? Go! your folly sickens me. And you
have derived pleasure from occasional tokens of preference
— equivocal tokens, shown by a gentlentan of family, and a
man of the world, to a dependant and a novice. How dared
you? Poor stupid dupe 1— Could not even sdf-interest make
you wiser? You repeated to yourself this morning the brief
scene of last night ? — Cover your face and be ashamed ! He
said something in praise of your eyes, did lie? Blind puppy I
Open their bleared hds and look on your own accursed sense-
lessness ! It does good to no woman to be flattered by het
superior, who cannot possibly intend to marry her; and it is
madness in all women to let a secret love kindle within them,
which, if unretumed and unknown, must devour the life
that feeds it; and, if discovered and responded to, must
lead, igntS'fatuu$-\tke, into miry wilds whence there is no
extrication,
" Listen, then, Jane Eyre, to your sentence: to-mormwj
place the glass before you, and draw in chalk your own
picture, faithfully; without softening one defect: omit no
harsh line, smooth away no displeasing irregularity; write
under it, * Portrait of a Governess, disconnected, poor, aiid
plain/
** Afterwards, take a piece of smooth ivory^you have one
prepared in your drawing-box: take your pallette, mix your
freshet, finest, clearest tints; choose your most delicate
camel-hair pencils ; delineate carefully the loveliest face yoil'
can imagine; paint it in your softest shades and sweet^t
hues J according to the description given by Mrs. Fairfax of
Blanche Ingram; remember the raven ringlets, the oriental
eye; — what I you revert to Mr, Roch^ter as a fnodlil!
Order ! No snivel . — no sentiment I— no regret ! I will enduft'
only sense and resolution. Recall the august yet harmonioua
lineaments, the Grecian neck and bust: let the round and'
da^iiling arm be visible, and the delicate hand ; omit neitbfil'
diamond ring nor gold bracelet; portray faithfully the attire^

157
'atrial lace and glistening satin, graceful scarf and golden
rose; call it * Blanche^ an accomplished lady of rank.*
" \\lienever, in fature, you should chance to faacy Mr.
Rochester thinks well of yoUj take out tliese two pictures
and compare them : say^'Mr* Rochester might probably
win that noble lady's love, if he chose to strive for it; is it
likeJy he would waste a serious thought oq this indigent and
jiisi^ificant plebeian?'"
*'I'll do it/'I resolved; and having framed this deter-
miiiation, I grew cakoj and fell asleep.
I kept my word* An hour or two sufficed to sketch my
own portrait in crayons; and in less than a fortnight I had
completed an ivor > ^ miniature of an imaginary Blanche
Ingram. It looked a lovely face enough, and when compared
with the real head in chalk, the contrast was as great as
self*control could desire. I derived benefit from the task: it
had kept my head and hands employed, and had given force
and fixedness to the new impressions I wished to stamp
indelibly on my heart.
Ere long, I had reason to congratulate myseif on the course
of wholesome discipline to which I had thus forced my feel-
ings to submit: thanks to it^ I was able to meet subsequent
occurrences with a decent calm ; which, had they found me
unprepared, I should probably have been unequal to main-
tain, even externally^
I
K
(A WEEK passed, and no news arrived of Mr, Roch^ter: ten
days ; and still he did not come. Mis. Fairfax said site should
not be surprised if he were to go straight from the Leas to
London J and thence to the continent, and not show his face
again at Thorn field for a year to come: he had not unfre-
quently quitted it in a manner quite as abrupt and unex*
pfected* When I heard this I was beiginning to feel a strange
chin and failing at the heart. I wa^ actually permitting
myself to experience a sickening sense of disappointment:
but rallying my wits, and recollecting my principles, I at
once called my sensations to order; and it was wonderful
how I got over the temporary blunder— how I cleared tip
CHAPTER XYH
JAKE EYRI
the mistake of supposing Mr. Rochester's movements a
matter in which I had any cause to take a vital interest*
Not that I humbled myself by a slavi^ notion of inferiority:
on the contrary^ I just said—*
** You have nothing to do with the master of Thomfidd,
further than to receive the salary he gives you for teaching
his protegee, and to be grateful for such respectful and kind
treatment as^ if you do your duty, you have a right to expect
at his hands. Be sure that is the only tie he seriously acknow-
ledges between yoo and him : so don't make him the object
of your fine feelings^ your mptures, agonies^ and so forth.
He is not of your order: keep to your caste; and be too self-
respecting to lavish the love of the whole heart, soul, and
strength, where such a gift is not wanted and would be
despised. "
I went on with my day's business tranquilly; but ever
and anon vague suggestions kept wandering across my
brain of reasons why I should quit Thomfield ; and I kept
involuntarily framing advertisements and pondering con-
jectures about new situations : these thoughts I did not think
it necessary to check ; they might germinate and bear fruit
if they could <
Jlr, Rochester had been absent upwards of a fortnight,
when the post brought Mrs. Fairfax a letter.
" It is from the master/'said she, as she looked at the
direction.'* Now I suppose we shall know whether we are
to expect his return or not,'*
And while she broke the seal and perused the documentj I
went on taking my coffee (we were at breakfast): it was
hotj and I attributed to that circumstance a fiery glow which
suddenly rose to my face. Why my hand shook^ and why I
involuntarily spilt half the contents of my cup into my
saucer, I did not choose to consider,
''Well — I sometimes think we are too quiet; but we run
a chance of being busy enough now; for a little while at
least, " said Mrs. Fairfax, still holding the note before her
spectacles,
^j^i^P^^™**^^ myself to request an explanation, I
ing of Ad^le*s pinafore, which happened to be
! ing helped her also to another bun and refilled
.th milk, I said, nonchalantly: —
icbester is not likely to return soon, I suppose? ^*
ij he is — in three days, he says ; that will be next
J
Thursday; and not alone either, I don*t know how many
of the fine people at the L^s are coming with him : he sends
directions for all the best bed-rooms to be prepared; and
the library and drawing-rooms are to be cleaned out; and I
am to get more kitchen hands from the George Irm, at Mill-
cot e^ and from wherever else I can; and the ladies will bring
their maids and the gentlemen their valets: so we shall have
a full house of it. " And Mrs. Fairfax swatlowed her breakfast
and hastened away to commence operations.
The three days were^ as she had foretold^ busy enough. I
had thought all the rooms at Thomfield beautifully clean
and well arranged: but it appears I was mistaken. Three
women were got to help; and such scrubbing^ such brushing^
such washing of paint and beating of carpets, such taking
down and putting up of pictures^ such polishing of mirrors
and lustres J such lighting of fires in bed-rooms, such airing
of sheete and feather-beds on hearths, I never bdietd, either
before or since. Ad^le ran quite wild in the midst of it : the
preparations for company and tJie prospect of their arrival,
seemed to throw her into ecstasies. She would have Sophie
to look over all her " toilettes, " as she called frocks; to
furbish up any that were ** pass^es, " and to air and arrange
the new. For herself^ she did nothing but caper about in the
front chambers, jump on and off the bedsteads, and lie on
the mattresses and piled-up bobters and pillows before the
enormous fires roaring in the chimneys. From school duties
she was exonerated: Mrs. Fairfax had pressed me into her
service, and I was all day in the store-room^ helping (or
hindering) her and the cook; learning to make custards and
cheesecakes and French pastry^ to truss game and garnish
dessert-dishes.
The party were expected to arrive on Thursday afternoon,
in time for dinner at six. During the intervening period I
had no time to nurse chimeras ; and I believe I was as active
and gay as anybody — Ad^le excepted. Stilly now and then^
I received a damping check to my cheerfulness ; and was, in
spite of myself^ thrown back on the region of doubts and
portents, and dark conjectures. This was when I chanced to
see the third story staircase door (which of late had always
been kept locked) open slowly^ and give passage to the form
of Grace Poole, in prim cap, white apron, and handkerchief;
when I watched her glide along the gallery, her quiet tread
muffled in a list slipper; when I saw her look into the
x6o JANE EYRP
bustling, topsy-turvy bed-rooms,— just sfty n wor^, pe^i^aps,
to the charwomau about .the proper way to polish ^ grate,
[Or clean a marble ^antel^pieqe, or take stamps irom pap^e^
^walls, and then pass on. She would thus d^cond ;to .the
kitchen once a day, eat her dinner, smoke a mpderate pipe
on the hearth, and go back, qairymg her pot .of porter with
her, for her private solace, in her own gloomy, upper haunt.
Only one hour in the .twenty-fqur did she pa^s with h^
fellow-servants below; all the rest of her tiflfie was spent in
isome low-ceiled, oaken chamber of the third story : tli^Fe she
sat and sewed — and probably laughed drearily to herBdf^ —
as Gompanionless as a prisoner in his dungeon.
The strangest thing of all wa^, that not. a soul4u the hou3e,
except me, noticed her habits, or seemed ^ marvel at theip;
no one discussed her position orremployment; no one pitied
her solitude or isolation. I once, indeed, overheard part of a
dialogue between X > ^ and one of the charwomen, of .which
Grace formed the sul^ject, I-eah b*d been saying somethix]^
I had not caught, and the chairwoman remarjted:^^
" She gets good wages, I guess ? *'
" Yes, " said Ljeah; " I wish J had as good; not that mine
are to complain of, -^there's no stinginess ait Thomfield; but
they -re not one-fifUi of the sum Mrs. Poole reaves. And she
is laying by: she goes every quarter to the bfiwk at MiUco^?.
I should not wonder but she has ^aved enough to k^ep h^r
ind^endent if she liked to leave; but I ^pppse she's gqt
used to the place; and then she's not forty yet, and strc^
and abk for an3^tbing. It is too soon for her to give up
business. "
''She is a good hand, I daresay, " :said the charwoman.
" Ah! — ^she understands what she has to do, — nobody
better, " rejoined ,I-eah s%nificantly,; " and it is not every
.one could fill her shoes; not for all the money she gets. "
" That it is not! *'was the rqply. " I wonder whether
master "
The charwoman was going on; but here Ifieih turned and
perceived me, and she instantly gave her companion a nudge.
" Doesn't she know? " I heard the woman whisper.
I^eah shook her head, and the cpnversatipn w^ of .course
dropped. All I had gathered from it amounted to thi$,-r-
that there was a mystery at Thomfield; wd that from
participation in that mystery, I was purposely excluded.
Thursday came: ajl wprk-bftd been compl0:ed the previous
t
lNE eyre i6i
Stpets were laid down^ bed^hangings festooned,
nadiaiit white counterpanes spread, toilet tables arrangedj
furniture rubbed, flowers piled in vases : both chambers and
saJbons looked as fresh arid bright as hands could make them-
The hallj too, was scoured j and the great carved clock, as well
as the steps and banisters of the staircase^ were polished to
the brightness of glass : in the dintng-room, the side-board
flashed resplendent with plate; in the drawing-room and
boudoir J vases of exotics bloomed on all sides.
Afternoon arrived: Mrs. Fairfax assumed her best black
satin gown J her gloves, and her gold watch ; for it was her
part to receive the company,^to conduct the ladies to their
rooms, etc, Ad^le, too^ would be dressed : though I thought
she had little chance of being introduced to the party that
day at least. However, to please her, I allowed Sophie to
apparel her in one of her short, foil mush'n frocks. For
rays elf J I had no need to make any change ; I should not be
called upon to quit my sanctum of the school-room; for a
sanctum it was now become to me, — " a very pleasant
refuge in time of tmuble,'^
It had been a mild^ serene spring day; one of those dzys
which, towards the end of March or the beginning of Aprilj
rise shining over the earth as heralds of summer* It was
drawing to an end now; but the evening was even warm,
and I sat at work in the school-^room with the windo^'^ open.
" It gets late/'said Mrs, Fairfax, entering in rustling
state, " I am glad I ordered dinner an hour after the time
Mr, Rochester mentioned ; for it is past six now* I liave sent
John down to the gates to see if there is anything on the
road : one can see a long way from thence in the direction of
Mill cote; " She went to the window* " Here he iS !''said she.
" Well, John " (leaning out) " any news? ^*
'* They're coming, ma*am, " was the answer, " They'll be
here in ten minutes/'
Ad^le flew to the window, I followed; taking care to
stand on one side, so that, screened by the curtain^ I could
see without being seen*
The ten minutes John had given seemed very long, but at
I^ffit wheels were heard; four equestrians galloped up the
drivCj and after them came two open carriages. Fluttering
veils and waving plumes filled the vehicle ; tw6 of the cava-
liers were young, dashing -looking gentlemen; the third wa5
Mr, Rochester, on his black horse, Mesit > ur; Pilot bounding

i62 ^^r JANE EYRE
before him; at his side rode a lady, and he and she were
the first of the party. Her purple riding-habit almost swept
the ground, her veil streamed long on the breeze; mingling
with its transparent folds, and gleaming through them
shone rich raven ringlets*
" Miss Ingram r'exclaimed Mrs. Fairfax, and away she
hurried to her post below:
The cavalcade, following the sweep of the drive, quickly
turned the angle of the house, and I lost sight of it. Ad^le
now petitioned to go down ; but I took her on my knee and
gave her to understand that she must not on any account
think of venturing in sight of the ladies, either no v¥ or at any
other time, unless expressly sent for: that Mr. Rochester
would be veT > ^ angry, etc. " Some natural tears she shed **
on being told this; but as I began to look very gravej she
consented at last to wipe them,
A joyous stir was now audible in the hall: geotl emends
deep tones, and ladies^ silvery accents blent harmoniously
together, and distinguishable above aLl, though not loud,
was the sonorous voice of the master of Tliomfield HaU,
welcoming his fair and gallant guests under its roof* Then
light steps ascended the stairs; and there was a tripping
through the gallery, and soft dieerful laughs, and opening
and closing doors, and, for a time, a hush.
" Elles changent de toilettes, " said Ad^le; who, listening
attentively^ had followed eveiy movement; and she sighed.
" Chez maman, " said she, *'quand il y avait du mondc-
je le syivais partout, au salon et 4 leurs chambres ; sou vent
je regard ais les femraes de chambre coiHer et habiller 1^
dames, et c'^tait si amusant: comme cela on apprend.''
^^ Don't you feel hungry, Ad^le? "
'* Mais oui, mademoiselle: voilA cinq ou six heures que
nous n'avons pas mangd. "
" Well now, while the ladies are in their rooms, I will
venture down and get you something to eat. "
And issuing from my asylum with precaution, I sought a
back -stairs which conducted directly to the kitchen. AH in
that region was fire and commotion; the soup and fish were
in the last stage of projectior^, and the cook hung over her
crucibles in a frame of mind and body threatening spon-
taneous combustion. In the servants^ hall two coachmen
and three gentlemen's gentlemen stood or sat round the fire;
the Abigails, I suppose, were upstairs with their mistresses :
JANE EYRE 163
the new servants that had been hired from Millcote, were
bustling about everjwhere. Threading this diaos, I at last
reached the larder; there I took possession of a cold chicken^
a roll of bread, some tarts^ a plate or two and a knife and
fork : with this booty I made a hastv retreat. I had regained
the gallery, and was just shutting tne back-door behind me,
when an accelerated hum warned me that the ladies were
about to issue from their chambers. I could not proceed to
the school-room without passing some of their doors, and
running the risk of being surprised with my cargo of victual-
age; so I stood still at this end, which, being windowless,
was dark: quite dark now, for the sim was set and twilight
gagiering.
Presently the chambers gave up their fair tenants one
after another: each came out gaily and airily, with dress
that gleamed lustrous through the dusk. For a moment they
stood grouped together at the other extremity of the gallery,
conversing in a key of sweet subdued vivacity: they then
descended the staircase almost as noiselessly as a bright mist
rolls down a hill. Their collective appearance had left on me
an impression of high-bom el^ance, such as I had never
before received.
I foimd Ad^le peeping through the school-room door,
which she held ajar. " What beautiful ladies ! " cried she in
English. " Oh, I wish I might go to them I Do you think
Mr. Rochester will send for us by-and-by, after dinner? "
" No, indeed, I don't; Mr. Rochester has something else
to think about. Never mind the ladies to-night; perhaps
you will see them to-morrow: here is your dinner. "
She was really hungry, so the chicken and tarts served to
divert her attention for a time. It was well I secured this
forage; or both she, I and Sophie, to whom I conveyed a
share of our repast, would have run a chance of getting no
dinner at all: every one downstairs was too mudi engaged
to tiiink of us. The dessert was not carried out till after nine;
and at ten, footmen were still running to and fro with trays
and coffee-cups. I allowed Ad^le to sit up much later than
usual; for she declared she could not possibly go to sleep
while the doors kept opening and shutting below, and people
bustling about. Besides, she added, a message might possibly
come from Mr. Rochester when she was imdressed; " et
alors quel dommage ! "
I told her stories as long as she would listen to them ; and
i64
JANE EYRE
thm for a change I tctokher out into the gaJlery. The hall
lamp was now ht, and it amused her to look over the balu-
strade and watch the servant:^ passing backwards and for-
wards. When the evening was far advanced, a sound of music
issued from the drawing-roomj whither the piano had been
removed; Ad^le and 1 sat down on the top step of the stairs
to listen. Presently a voice blent with the rich tones of the
instrument; it was a lady who sang, and very sweet her
notes were. The solo over, a duet followed, and then a glee:
a joyous conversational murmur filled np the intervals* I
listened long: suddenly I discovered that my car was wholly
intent on analysing tlie mingled sounds^ and trying to dis-
criminate amidst the confusion of accents those of Mr,
Rodiester; and when it caught them^ which it soon didj it
found a further task in framing the tone^, rendered by
distance inarticulate, into words.
The clock struck eleven. I looked at Ad^le^ whose head
leant against my shoulder; her eyes were waxing heavy, so
I took her up in my arms and carried her ofi to bed. It was
near one before tfie gentlemen and ladies sought their
chambers.
The next day was a^ fine as its predecessor; it was devoted
by the party to an excursion to some site in the neighbour-
hood. They set out early in the forenoonj some on horse-
back, the rest in carriages; I witnessed both the departure
and the return. Miss Ingram j as before, was the only lady
equestrian; and, as ^^efo^eJ Atr. Roch^ter galloped at her
side; the two rode a little apart from the rest. I pointed
out this circumstance to Mrs. Fairfajtj who was standing at
the window with me: —
'* You said it was not hkely they should think of being
married,*'said I,''but you see Mr. Rochester evidently
prefers her to any of tlie other ladies. "
" Yes; I daresay: no doubt he admires her* "
*'And she him/'I added ;''look how she leans her head
towards him as if she were conversing confidentially; I
wish I could see her face; I have never had a glimpse of
it yet. "
" Vou will see her this evening/^ answered Mrs. Fairfax,
** I happened to remark to Mr, Ro chesty how much Ad^e
^wished to be introduced to the ladies, and he said: " Oh 1 let
her come into the drawing-room after dinner; ,aad request
Miss Eyre to accompany her.'"
JANE EYRE 165
** Y«s*^e said that fitMn mere p^teness: I need not go^
I am sure/'I answered*
" Weft*- I observed to him that as you were unused to
company^ I did not thkdc you would Hke appesLmg before
so gay a party — all strangers; and he replied, in ms quick
way:'Nonsensel If she objects > tell her it is my particular
wish; and if she resists; say I shall come and fetdi her in
case of contumacy.'"
" I will not give him that trouble/* I answered. " I will
go, if no better may be: but I don't like it. Shall'you be
there, Mrs. Fairfax? "
''No; I pleaded off, and he admitted'my plea. I'll tell
you how to manage'so^ as to avoid the embarrassment of
making a formal entrance, wiiich is the most disagreeable
part of the business. You must go into the drawing-room
^diile it is empty, before the ladies leave the dinner-table;
choose your seat in any quiet nook you Hke; you need not
stay long after the gentlemen come in, unless you please:
just let Mr. Rochester see you are there and then sKp away —
nobody will notice you. "
" Will these people remain long, do you think? "
" Perhaps two or three weeks; certainly not more. After
the Easter recess. Sir George Lynn, who ?ms lately elected
member for Milloote, will have to go up to town and take his
seat; I daresay Mr. Rochester will accompany him: it
surprises me that he has dready made so protracted a stay
at ThomfieldL "
It was with some trepidation that I perceived the hour
approach when I was to repair with my charge to the draw-
ing-room. Ad^le had been in a state of ecstasy all day, after
hearing* ^e was to be presented to the ladies in the evening;
atid irwas not till Sophie commenced'the operation of dress-
ing her; tliat she sobered down. Then the importance of the
process qui < ^y steadied her; and by the time she had her'
curls arranged in well-smoothed, drooping clusters, her pink
salJn frodc put on, her long'sash tied, and her kce mittens
adjusted, she looked as grave as any judge. No need to warn
her not to disarrange her attire: when she was dress^; she
sat demurely down in her little chair, taking care previously
to lift up the satin skirt for fear she should crease it, and
assured me she wouki not stir thence till I was ready. This
I quickly was: my best dress (the silver-grey one; purchased
for Miss Temple's wedding, and never worn since) was soo^
i66 JANE EYRE
put on; my hair was soon smoothed; my sole ornament,
the pearl brooch^ soon assumed. We descended.
Fortunately there was another entrance to the drawing-
room than ^t through the saloon where they were all
seated at dinner. We foimd the apartment vacant; a large
fire burning silently on the marble hearth, and wax candles
shining in bright solitude^ amid the ex(|uisite flowers with
which the tables were adorned. The crimson curtain hung
before the arch: slight as was the separation this drapery
formed from the party in the adjoining saloon, they spoke
in so low a key that nothing of their conversation could be
distinguished beyond a soothing murmur.
Ad^le, who appeared to be still under the influence of a
most solemnising impression, sat down, without a word, on
the footstool I pointed out to her. I retired to a window-
seat, and, taking a book from a table near, endeavoured to
read. Ad^le brought her stool to my feet; ere long she
touched my knee.
" Whatisit,Ad61e?';
** Est-ce que je ne puis pas prendre une seule de ces fleurs
magnifiques, liiademoiselle? Seulement pour completer ma
toilette. "
" You think too much of your * toilette,'Ad^le: but you
may have a flower. " And I took a rose from a vase and
fastened it in her sash. She sighed a sigh of ineffable satis-
faction, as if her cup of happiness were now full. I turned
my face away to conceal a smile I could not suppress : there
was something ludicrous as well as painful in the little
Parisienne's earnest and innate devotion to matters of dress.
A soft sound of rising now became audible; the curtain
was swept back from the arch; through it appeared the
dining-room, with its lit lustre pouring down light on the
silver and glass of a magnificent dessert-service covering a
long table; a band of ladies stood in the opening; they
entered, and the curtain fell behind them.
There were but dght; yet somehow as they flocked in,
they gave the impression of a much larger number. Some
of & em were very tall, many were dress^ in white, and all
had a sweeping amplitude of array that seined to magnify
their persons as a mist magnifies the moon. I rose and
curtseyed to them: one or two bent their heads in return;
the others only stared at me.
They dispersed about the room; reminding me, by the
JANE EYRE
lightness and buoyancy of their movements, of a flock of
white plumy birds- Some of them threw themselves in half-
reclining positions on the sofas and ottomans: some bent
over the tables and examiried the flowers and books: the
rest gathered in a group round the fire: all talked in a low
bat clear tone which seemed habitual to them. I knew their
names afterwardSj and may as well mention them now.
First, there was Mrs. Eshton and two of her daughters.
She had evidently been a handsome woman^ and was well
preserved still. Of her daughters, the elde.^t, Amy, was
rather little; n^ve^ and child-like in face and manner, and
piquant in form: her white muslin dress and blue sash
became her well. The second j Louisa, was taller and more
elegant in figure; with a very pretty face, of that order the
French term ** minois chiffonne " : both sisters were fair as
lilies.
Lady hynn was a large and stout personage of about forty ;
very erect, very haughty-looking, richly dressed in a satin
robe of changeful sheen; her dark hair shone glossily under
the shade of an azure plume^ and within the circlet of a band
of gems.
Mrs, Colonel Dent was less sho^-y; butj I thought, more
lady-Uke. She had a slight figure, a pale, gentle face, and
fair hair* Her black satin dress, her scarf of rich foreign lace,
and her pear! ornaments, pleased me better than the rain-
bow radiance of the titled dame.
But the three most distinguished-^artlyj perhaps, because
the tallest figures of the band — were the Dowager Lady
Ingram and her daughters, Blanche and Mary. They were
all three of the loftiest stature of woman. The dowager might
be between forty and fifty: her shape was still fine; her
hair (by candlelight at least) still black; her teeth, too, were
still apparently perfect. Most people would have termed her
a splendid woman of her age: and so she was, no doubt,
physically speaking; but then there was an expression of
almost insupportable haughtiness in her bearing and coun^
tenance. She had Roman features and a double chin^ dis-
appearing into a tiiroat like a pillar: these features appeared
to me not only inflated and darkened, but even furrowed
with pride; and the chin was sustained by the same prin-
ciple, in a position of almost preternatural erectness. She
had, likewise, a fierce and a hard eye: it reminded me of
Mrs. Reed's ; she mouthed her words in speaking ; her voic*^
JANE EYJRE
, vviui ilf't'fT, its inflections very pompouSj very dogmaticai^ —
(^i^ry iiiiulcmble^ m short. A crimson velvet robe^ and a
jlituLwl lurbtia of some gold-wrought Indian fabric, invested
l.li* r ^I suppose she thought) with a truly imperial dignity.
IJImiiiit* and Mary were of equal stature, — straight and
^, ill II 4^ poplars* Mary was too sUin lor her height; but
llbuclie WH & moulded like a Dian* I regarded her, of course^
¥fi{U Kptxial interest. First, I wished to see whether her
jiupimunmee accorded with Mrs, Fairfax's description;
mptoudly, whether it at all resembled the fancy miniature I
ilmil pmnted of her; and thirdly — it wiU out I — whether it
{mtxt mch m I should fancy likely to suit Mr. Rochester's
Aji fnr as person went^ she answered point for point, both
to tny picture and Mn > . Feirfax's description* The noble
Uu»t, the sloping shoulders, the graceful neckj the dark eyts
Jgnd bUjck ringlets were all there; — but her face? Her face
|iWa* like her mother's; a youthful unfurrowed Ukeness; the
[ifarnc low brow, tiie same high featiires, the same pride. It
fWBD fiot^ however, m saturnine a pride: she laughed con-
tinually; her laugh was satirical, and so was the babitual
.^expression of her arched and haughty lip.
Genius Is said to be self-conscious: I cannot tell whether
Mm Ingram was a geniuSj but she was self-conscious —
leniarkably self-conscious indeed. She entered into a dis-
course on botany with the gentle Mrs. Dent. It seems Mrs,
Dent had not studied that science; though, as she said, she
liked Eowers* ** especially wild ones; " Miss Ingram had, and
»he ran over its vocabulary with an air, I presently per-
ceived she was (what is vernacularly termed) trmling Mis.
Dent; dmt is, playing on her ignorance; her trail might be
clever, but it was decidedly not good-natured. She played;
her execution was brilliant; she sang : her voice was fine; she
talked French apart to her nmma; and she talked it weU >
with fluency and with a good accent »
Mary had a milder and more open countenance than
Blanche; softer features too, and a skin some shades fairer
(Miss Ingram was dark as a Spaniard) — but Mary was dei*
cient in life: her face lacked expression, her eye lustre; she
had notliing to say, and having once taken her seat, remalntd
fixed like a statue in its niche. The sisters were both attirid
in spotless white.
And did I now think Miss Ingram such a choice as Mr*
'EYRE
I
Rochester would be likely to make? I could not teU — I did
not know his taste in female beauty. If he liked the majesticj
she was the very type of majesty; then she was accom-
plishedj sprightly* Most gentlemen would admire her^ I
thought J and that he did admire her, I already seemed to
have obtained proof: to remove the last shade of doubt^ it
remained but to see them together.
You are not to suppose j reader, that Addle has all this
time been sitting motionless an the stool at my feet: no;
when the bdies entered^ she it > se, advanced to meet them,
made a stately reverence, and said, with gravity, —
** Bon jour, mesdames/'
And Miss Ingram had looked down at her with a mocking
air, and exclaim ed^ " Oh, what a little puppet ! "
Lady Lynn had remarked,'* It is Mr, Rochester's ward^
I suppose—the little French girl he was speaking of. "
Mrs. Dent had kindly taken her hand, and given her a
kiss. Amy and Louisa Eshton had cried out simultaneously—
** What a love of a child I "
And then they bad called her to a sofa, where she now sat,
ensconced between them, chattering alternately in French
and broken English; absorbing not only the young ladies'
attention, but that of Mrs, Eshton and Lady Lynn, and
getting spoilt to her heart's content.
At last coffee is brought in, and the gentlemen are sum-
moned. I sit in the shade — if any shade there be in thb
brilliantly-Iit apartment; the window-curtain half hides me*
Again the arch yawns : they come. The collective appearance
of the gentlemen, like that of the ladies, is very imposing:
they are all costumed in black; most of them are tall, some
young. Henry and Frederick Lynn are very dashing sparks,
indeed; and Colonel Dent is a fine soldierly man. Mr.
Eshton, the magistrate of the district, is gentleman-like: hia
hair is quite white, his eyebrows and whiskers still dark,
which gives him something of the appearance of a " p^re
noble de theatre.'Lord Ligiam, like iiis sisters, is very tall;
like them, also, he is handsome ; but he shares Mary's
apathetic and listless look: he seems to have more length of
limb than Wvacity of blood or vigour of brain.
And where is Mr, Rochester?
He comes in last : I am not looking at the arch, yet I see
him enter. I try to concentrate my attention on those net-
dng-needleSj on the meshes of the purse I am forming— I wish
JANE EYRE
to think only of the work I have in my hands, to see only the'
silver beads and silk threads that lie in my lap; whereas^ I
distinctly behold his figure, and I inevitably recall the
moment when I last saw it: just after I had rendered him,
what he deemed, an essential service— and he, holding my
hand, and looking down on my face, surveyed me with eyes
that revealed a heart full and eager to overflow; in whose
emotions I had a part. How near had I approached him at
that moment ! What had occurred since, calculated to change
his and my relative positions ? Yet now, how distant, how
far estranged we were! So far estranged, that I did not
expect him to come and speak to me. I did not wonder,
when, without looking at me, he took a seat at the other side
of Uie room, and began conversing with some of the ladies.
No sooner did I see that his attention was riveted on thera,
and that I might gaze without being observed, than my
ey^ were drawn involuntarily to his face: I could not keep
their lids under control; they would rise and the irids would
fix on him* I looked, and had an acute pleasure in looking, —
a precious, yet poignant pleasure ; pure gold^ with a steely
point of agony: a pleasure like what the thirst-perishing
man might feel who knows the well to which he has crept is
poisoned, yet stoops and drinks divine draughts nevertheless*
Most true it is that " beauty is in the eye of the gazer/'
My master's colourless, olive face, square, massive brow,
broad and jetty eyebrows, deep eyes, strong features, firm,
grim mouth, — all energy, decision, will,— were not beautiful,
according to rule; but they were more than beautiful to me:
they were full of an interest, an influence that quite mastered
me,— that took my feelings from my own power and fettered
them in his, I had not intended to love him: the reader
knows I had wrought hard to extirpate from my soul the
germs of love there detected ; and now, at the first renewed
view of him, they spontaneously revived, green and strong!
He made me love him without looking at me.
I compared him with his guests. What was the gallant
grace of the Lynns, the languid elegance of Lord Ingram, —
even the military distinction of Colonel Dent, contrasted
with his look of native pith and genuine power? 1 had no
sympathy in their appearance, their expression: yet I could
imagine that most observers would call them attractive,
handsome, imposing; while they would pronounce Mr.
Rochester at once harsh-featured and melancholy-looking*
i
^ J saw
JANE EYRE ^^^ 171
J saw them smile, laugh — it was nothing: the light of the
candles had as much soul in it as their smile; the tinkle of
the bell as much significance as their laugh. I saw Mr,
Rochester smile: — bis stern features softened; his eye grew
both brilliant and gentkj its ray both searching and sweet.
He was talking, at the moment, to Louisa and Amy Eshton.
I wondered to see them receive with calm that look which
seemed to me so penetrating : I expected their eyes to fall,
their colour to rise under it; yet I was glad when I found
they were in no sense moved. " He is not to them what he
is to me, " I thought: ** he is not of their kind, I believe he
is of mine;— I am sure he is,— I feel akin to him, — I under-
stand the language of his countenance and movements:
though rank and wealth sever us widely, I have something
in my brain and heart, in my blood and nerves, that assimi-
late me mentally to him* Did I say, a few days since, that
I had nothing to do with him but to receive ray salary at his
hands? Did I forbid myself to think of him m any other
light than as a paymaster? Blasphemy against nature!
Every good, true, vigorous feeling I have, gathers impul-
sively round him. I know I must conceal my sentiments : I
must smother hope; I must remember that he cannot care
mych for me. For when I say that I am of his kind, I do not
mean that I have his force to influence, and liis spell to
attract: I mean only that I have certain tastes and feelings
in common with him. I must, then, repeat continually that
we are for ever sundered: — and yet, while I breathe aiKl
think I must love him. "
Coffee is handed. The ladies, since the gendemen entered,
have become lively as larks; conversation waxes brisk and
merry. Colonel Dent and Mr, Eshton argue on politics; their
wives listen. The two proud dowagers. Lady Lvnn and Lady
Ingram, confabulate togetiier. Sir George — whom, by-the-by,
I have forgotten to describe, — a very big, and very fresh-
looking country gentleman, stands before their sofa, coffee-
cup in hand, and occasionally puts in a word. Mi. Frederick
Lynn had taken a seat beside Mary Ingmm, and is showing
her the engravings of a splendid volume: she looks, smiles
now and then, but apparently says little. The tall and
phlegmatic Lord Ingram leans with folded arms on the chair-
back of the httle and Evely Amy Eshton ; she glances up at
him, and chatters hke a wren: she likes him better than she
does Mr, Rochester, Henry Lynn has taken possession of an

1^2
JANE EYRE

ottoman at the feet of Louisa; Ad^e ahar^ it with liitn: he
is trying to talk French with her, and Louisa laughs at his
blunders. With whom will Blanche Ingram pair? She is
standing alone at the tabie^ bending gracefully over an
album. She seems waiting to be sou^t; but she wilJ not
wait too long : she herself selects a mate*
Mr. Rochester, having quitted the Eshtoos^ stands on the
hearth as solitary as she stands by the table : she confronts
him^ takijsg her station on the opposite side of the manid-
piece,
. " Mr. Rochester^ I thought you were oot fond of children ?
" Nor am L "
" Then J what induced you to take charge of such a U
doll as that? " (pointing to Adele). " Where did you pick
-her up? "
" I did not pick her up, she was left on my hands.
" You should have sent her to school,''
'* I could not afford it: schools are so dear.*'
" Why J I suppose you have a governess for her: I saw A
person with her just now — -is she gone? Oh, no! there siie
is still behind the windowKiurtain. You pay her^ of couise;
I should think it quite as cKpensivej — more so; for you
have them both to keep in addition. "
I feared^r should I say, hoped?— the allusion to roe
would make Mr. Rochester glance my way; and I involiin-
-tarily shrank further into the shade: but he never tuni«d
Uhis eyes.
" I have not considered the subject/* said he indiflfercntlyi
looking straight before him.
** Ko— you naen never do consider economy and common-
sense. You should hear mama on the chapter of governesses:
.Mary and I have had, I should thinks a do5sen at least in our
day; half of them detestable and the rest ridiculous^ and
incubi — were they not, mama ? "
" Did you sj > eak, my own ?'^
Tht young lady thus claimed as the dowager's special
property, reiterated her question with an explanation.
" My dearest, don't mention governesses; the word makei
I ime nervous. I have suffered a martyrdom from their incpm*
•petency and caprice; I thank Heaven T have. now done
iwith them I "
Mrs. Dent here bait over to the .pious iady^ and whisper^
something in her ear; I si,]^iipOBe from the answer elicited^ it

173
^^emmder that one of the anathematised race was
present,
" Tant pis ! *'said her ladyships ** I hope it may do her
good I'* Then J in a lower tone^ but still loud enough for me
to hear, " I noticed her; I am a judge of physiognonsyj and
in hers I see all the faults of her class/*
*'What are they, madam?** inquired Mr Rochester
^b ** 1 will tell yon in your private ear/* replied she^ wagging
^ner turban three times with portentous signiftcancy.
^B " But my curiosity wilJ be past its appetite; it craves food
Mow.''
^P'* Ask Bkndie; she is nearer you than I. "
" " Oh J don't refer him to me, mama I I have just one wofd
to say of the whole tribe- they are a nuisance. Not that I
ever suffered much from them; I took care to turn the
tables. What tricks Theodore and I used to play on our Miss
Wilsons, and Mrs, Greys, and Madame Jouberts ! Mary was
always too sleepy to join in a plot with spirit. The best fun
was with Madame Joubert : Miss Wilson was a poor sickly
thing, lachr) < Tnose and low-spirited: not worth the trouhle
of vanquishing, in short; and Mrs. Grey was coarse and
insensible: no blow took effect on her. But poor Madame
Joubert 1 I see her yet in her raging passions, when we had
driven her to extremities— spilt our tea, crumbled our
bread and butter, tossed our books up to the ceilings and
played a chariv^-ari with the ruler and desk, the fender
and fire-irons, Theodore, do you remember those merry
days?*'
" Yaas, to be sure I do/'drawled Lord Ingmm; " and
the poor old stick used to cry out'Oh you villains childs I *
— and then we sermonised her on the presumption of attempt-
ing to teach such clever bJades as we werCj when she was
herself so ignorant.'^
" We did; and Tedo^ you know, I helped you in prosecut-
ing (or persecuting) your tutor, whey-faced Mr. Vining— the
parson in the pip, as we used to call him. He and Miss Wilson
took the liberty of falling in love with each other— at least
Tedo and 1 thought so; we surprised sundry tender glances
and sighs which we interpreted as tokens of Ma belle passion/
and I promise you the public soon had the benefit of our
discovery: we employed it as a sort of lever to hoist our
d^d-weights from the house. Dear mama, there, as soon as
fc
A
174 JANE EYRE
she got am inkling of the business, found out that it was of
an immoral tendency. Did you not, my lady-mother? "
" Certainly, my best. And I was quite right; depend on
that: there are a thousand reasons why liaisons between
governesses and tutors should never be totorated a jnoment
in any well-r^ulated house; firstly "
''Oh gracious, raamal ^ > are us the enmneration! Au
reste, we all know them: danger of bad example to inno-
cence of childhood; distractions and consequei^ n^lact of
duty on the part of the attadied-Hmutual alliance and
reliance; confidence thence resulting — ^insolence accompany-
ing — ^mutiny and general blow-up. Am I right. Baroness
Ingram, of Ingram Park? "
" My lily-flow«:i you are r^t now, as always. "
''Then no more need be said: chai^ the subject. "
Amy Eshton, not hearing or not heeding this < & tum,
joined in wi^ her soft, infantine tone:''Lovosa and I used
to quiz our governess ^oo; but she was^ch a good creatuie,
she would bear anything: nothing put her oot. She was
never cross with us; was she, Louisa? "
" No, never: we might do what we pleased; ransack her
desk and her work-box, and turn her drawers inside out;
and she was so good-natured, she would give us anythii^;
we asked for. "
*'1 suppose, now, " said Miss Ingram, curling hssr ]ip
sarcastically,''we sball have an abstract of the memoirs of
all the governesses extant: in order to avert such a visitsr
tion, I again move the introduction of a new topic. Mr.
Rochester, do you second my motion? "
" Madaano, I support you on this point as on every other. "
''Then on me be the onus of bringing it forward. Signior
Eduardo, are you in voice to-night? "
''Donna Bianoa, if you command it, I will be. "
" Then, signior, I lay on you my sovereign behest to
furlnsh up your lus^ and oth^ vocal oigans, as they friH be
wanted on my royai service. "
" Who woM not be the Rizzio of so divine a Mary ? "
" A fig for Rizziol " cried she, tossing her head with aD its
curls, as she moved to the piano. " It is my opinion'liie
fiddler Davi4 must have been an insi[Hd sort of feltow: I like
black Bothwell better: to my miod a man is nothing without
a spice of the devil in him; and history n^y say what it will
of James Hepburn, hut I have a notion, he was just the sort
TANE EYRE
^«f wildj fierce^ bandit hero whom I ojuld have cons^ted to
^t with my hand* "
" GentJemenj you hear f Now which of you most resembles
Both well ? " cried Mr. Rochester.
** I should say the preference lies with you, " rraponded
Colonel Dent.
''On my honour, I am moch obliged to you/'was the
reply.
Miss IngiBmi who had now seated herself with proud grace
at the piano, spreading out her snowy robes in queenly
amplitude^ commenced a brilliant prelude; talking mean-
time. She appeared to be on her high horse to-night; both
her words and her air seemed intended to excite not only the
admiratioUj but the amazement of her auditors: she was
evidently bent on striking them as something very dashing
and daring indeed*
** Oh, I am so sick of the young men of the present day I "
exclaimed she, rattling away at the instrument. " Poor,
puny things not fit to stir a step beyond papa's park-gates :
nor to go even so far without mama*s permission and
guardianship! Creatures so absorbed in care about their
pretty faces and their white hands, and their small feet j as
if a man had an >'thing to do with beauty i As if loveliness
were not the special prerogative of woman — her legitimate
appanage and heritage 1 I grant an ugly woman is a blot on
the fair face of creation; but as to the ^mtlemm, let them
be sohcitous to possess only strength and valour: let their
motto be:— Hunt, shoot, and fight: the rest is not worth a
fillip. Such should be my device, were I a man* "
** Whenever I marry/'she continued after a pause which
none interruptedj " 1 am resolved my husband shall not be
a rival, but a foil to me. I will suffer no competitor near the
throne; I shall exact an undivided homage: his devotions
shaE not be shared between me and the shape he sees in
tiis mirror* Mr* Rochestefj now sing, and I will play for
" I am all obedience/'was the response,
'* Here then is a Corsair-song* Know that I doat on
Girsairs; and for that reason, sing it * oon spirito,'"
•* Commands from Miss Ingram's lips would put spirit
into a mug of milk and water. "
** Take care, then: if you don't please me, I will shame
you by showing how such things should be done. "
176
JANE EYRE
''That h ofifering a premium on incapacity: I shall now
cndeavxjur to fail. "
" Gardez-vous en bfenl If you err wilfully^ I shall devise
a proportionate punishment. "
" Miss Ingram ought to be clement, for she has it in her
power to inflict a chastisement beyond mortal endurance. "
'* Ha i explain ! " commanded the lady.
** Pardon me^ madam : no need of explanation j your own
fine sense must inform you that one of your frowns would be
a sufficient substitute for capital punishment. "
" Sing I " said she^ and again touching the piano, she
commenced an accompaniment in spirited style.
" Now h ray time to slip away, " tJiought I: but the tones
that then severed the air arrested me. Mre. Fairfax had
said Mr. Rochester possessed a fine voice : he did— a mellow,
powerful bass J into which he threw his own feeling, his own
force; finding a way through the ear to the heart, and there
waking sensation strangely, I waited till the last deep and
fuli vibration had expired — till the tide of talk, checked an
instant J had resumed its flow; I then quitted my sheltered
comer and made my exit by the side-door, wluch was
lortunately near. Thence a narrow passage led into th^ hall:
in crossing it, I perceived my sandal was loose; I stopped
to tie itj kneeling down for that purpose on the mat at the
foot of die staircase. I heard the dining-room door unclose;
a gentleman came outj rising hastily^ I stood face to face
with him: it was Mn Rochester.
** How do you do? " he asked*
" I am very well, sir.'^
" Why did you not come and speak to me in the room?'*
I thought I might have retorted the question on him who
put it: but I would not take that freedom. I answered:—
** I did not wish to disturb you, as you seemed engaged,
sin "
" What have you been doing during my absence ? "
'* No tiling particular j teaching Ad^Ie as usual.'*
'* And getting a good deal paler than you were — as I saw
at first sight. ^Tiat is the matter? "
" Nothing at all, sir. "
" Did you take any cold that night you half drowned me? "
" Not the least.''
** Return to the drawing-room: you are deserting too
early. "
INE EYR]
T77
What about? Tell
** I am tiredj sir/'
He looked at me for a minute.
*'And a Httle depressed/'he said.
me/'
I " Nothing — no thing J sir. I am not depressed/'
" But I affirm that you are: so mucli depressed that a
few more words would bring tears to your eyes — indeed j they
are there now, shining and swimming; and a bead has
slipped from the lash and fallen on to the flag. If I had time,
and was not in mortal dread of some prating prig of a servant
passing, T would know what all this means. Well, to-night I
excuse you; but understand that so long as my visitors
stay, I expect you to appear in the drawing-room every
evening; it is my wish; don*t neglect it. Now go, and send
Sophie for Ad^le. Good-night, my " He stopped^ bit his
lipj and abruptly left me.
CHAPTER XVm
Uerry days were those at Thomfield Hall; and busy days
too: how different from the first three months of stillness,
monotony, and solitude I had passed beneath its roof! All
sad feelings seemed now driven from the house, all gloomy
associations forgotten : there was life everywhere, movement
all day long. You could not now tmverse the galler > ^^ once
so hushed, nor enter the front chambers, once so tenantless,
without encountering a smart lady's maid or a dandy
valet*
The kitchen, the butler's pantry, the servants* hall, the
entrance hall, were equally alive j and the saloons were only
left void and still, when Uie blue sky and halcyon sunshine
of the genial spring weather called their occupants out into
the grounds* Even when that weather was broken, and con-
tinuous rain set in for some days, no damp seemed cast over
enjoyment: in-door amusements only became more lively
and varied, in consequence of the stop put to out-door
gaiety*
I wondered what they were going to do the first evening
a change of entertainment was proposed: they spoke of
" playing charades, ^^ but in my ignorance I did not under-

178
JANE EYRE
stand the term. The servants were called tD^ the dlnixig-
coom tables wheeled away^ the lights otherwise di^posed^
the chairs placed in a semicircle opposite the arch. While
Mr. Rochester and the other gentlemen directed these alt^^^
tions^ the ladies were mmiing up and down stairs iiDgiiig
lor their maids. Mrs. Fairfax was summoned to ^^t in*
lonnation respecting the resources of t^e house in shawls^
[dresses J draperies of any kind^ and certain wardrobes of
j the third story were ransacked, and their contents^ in the
[#hape of brocaded and hooped petticoats, satin sacqu^,
[ ^hck modes, kce lappets, etc.^ were brought down in ann-
fuls by the Abigaib; then a selection was made^ and such
things as were chosen were carried to the boudoir within tb^
drawing-room.
Meantime, Mr. Rochester had again summoned the kdies
round him, and was selecting certain of their number to be
of his party. *'Miss Ingram is mine, of course/* said he:
afterwards he named the two Misses Eshtouj and Mrs* Dent-
He looked at me: I happened to be near him^ as I had been
fastening the clasp of Mrs. Bent's bracelet^ which had got
loose.
'* Will you play? " he asked. I shook my head* He did
not insistj whidi I rather feared he would have done; be
allowed me to return quietly to my usual seat.
He and his aids now withdrew behind the curtain: tlic
other party, which was headed by Colonel Dent, sat down
on the crescent of chairs. One of the gentlemen, Mr. Eshton,
observing me, seemed to propose that I should be asked
to join them; but Lady Ingram instantly negatived the
notion.
" No, " I heard her say : " she looks too stupid for any
game of the sort, "
Ere long, a bell tinkled, and the curtain drew up. Within
the arch, the bulky figure of Sir George Lynn, whom Mr.
E.0 Chester had likewise chosen, was seen enveloped in a
white sheet; before him^ on a table, lay open a large book;
and at his side stood Amy Eshton, draped in Mr, Rochester's
cloak, and holding a book in her hand. Somebody, unseen^
rang the bell merrily; then Ad^le (who had insisted on being
one of her guardian's party), bounded forwardj scattering
round her the contents of a basket of flowers she carried on
her arm* Then appeared the magnificent figure of Miss
Ingram, clad in white, a long veil on her head, and a wreath

JANE EYRE 179
of roses round her brow: by her side walked Mr. Rochester,
and together they drew near the table. They knelt; while
Mrs. Dent and Louisa Eshton, dressed also in white, took
up their stations behind them. A ceremony followed, in
dumb show, in which it was easy to recognise tiie pantomime
of a marriage. At its termination. Colonel Dent and his
party consulted in whispers for two minutes, then the colonel
called out, —
" BrideJ " Mr. Rochester bowed, and the curtain fell.
A considerable interval elapsed befote it again rose. Its
second rising displayed a more elaborately prepared scene
than the last. The drawing-nxMn, as I have before observed,
was raised two steps above the dining-room, and on the top
of the upper step, placed a yard or two back within the room,
appeared a large marble basin, which I recognised as an
ornament of 3ie conservatory — where it usually stood,
surrounded by exotics, and tenanted by gold-fish — ^and
whence it must have been transported with some trouble,
on account of its size and weight.
Seated on the carpet, by the side of this basin, was seen
Mr. Rochester, costumed in shawls, with a turban on his
head. His dark eyes and swarth skin and Paynim features
suited the costume exactly: he looked the very model of an
eastern emir; an agent or a victim of the bowstrixig. Pre-
sently advanced into view Miss Ingram. She, too, was attired
in oriental fashion: a crimson sca^ tied sai^like round the
waist: an embroidered handkeiduef knotty about her
temples; her beautifully-moulded arms bare, one of them
up-raised in the act of supportmg a pitcher, poised grace-
fully on her head. Both her cast of form and feature, her
complexion and her general air, suggested the idea of some
Israelidsh princess of the patriarchal days; and such was
doubtless the character she intended to represent.
She approached the basin, and bent over it as if to fill her
pitcher; she again lifted it to her head. The personage on
the well-brink now seemed to accost her; to make some
request: — " She hasted, let down her pttdier on her hand
and gave him to drink.''From the bosom of his robe, he
then produced a casket, opened it and showed magnificent
bracelets and earrings : she acted astonidiment and admira-
tion; kneeUng, he laid the treasure at her feet; incredulity
and delight were expressed by her looks and gestures; the
stranger fastened the bracelets on her arms, and the rings in
1 89
JANE EYRE
her ears. It was EUezer and Rebecca: the camels only were
wanting.
The divining party again laid their heads together: ap*
patently they could not agree about the word or syUable
this scene illustrated* Colonel Dent, their spokesman,
I demanded ** the tableau of the Whole " ; whereupon the
curtain again descended.
On its third rising only a portion of the drawing-room
was disclosed; the rest being concealed by a screeo, hung
with some sort of dark and coarse drapery. The marble
basin was removed; in its place stood a deal table and a
kitchen chair: these objects were visible by a very dim light
proceeding from a horn lantem, the wax candles being all
extinguished.
Amidst this sordid scene, sat a man with his clenched
hands resting on his knees, and his eye^ bent on the ground.
I knew Mr, Rochester; though the begrimed face^ the dis-
ordered dress (his coat hanging loose from one arm, as if it
had been almost torn from his back in a scuffle), the desperate
and scowling countenance, the rough, bristling hair might
'well have disguised him. As he moved, a chain clanked; to
his wrists were attached fetters.
*'Bridewell! " exclaimed Colonel Dent, and the charade
was solved.
A sufficient interval having elapsed for the performers to
assume their ordinary costume, they re-entered the dining-
room. Mr* Rochester led in Miss Ingram; she was com-
plimenting him on his acting*
''Do you know, " said she, *'that, of the three characters,
I liked you in the last best? Oh, had you but lived a few
years earlier, what a gallant gentleman-highwayman you
would have made 1 "
" Is all the soot washed from my face?'* he asked^ tuimng
it towards her.
*'Alas, yes; the more*s the pity! Nothing could be more
becoming to your complexion than that ruffian *s rouge/*
** You would like a hero of the road then?''
" An English hero of the road would be the next best
thing to an Italian bandit; and that could only be surpassed
by a Levantine pirate. "
" Well, whatever I am, remember you are my wife; we
were married an hour since, in the presence of all these
witnesses, " She giggled, and her colour rose.
*
k.
'Now, Dent, " conrinued Mr. Rochester, " it is your turn. "
; And as the other party withdrew , he and his band took the
vacated seats. Miss Ingram placed hcTself at her leader^s
right hand ; the other diviners filled the chairs on each side
of him and her. I did not now watch the actors; I no longer
waited with interest for the curtain to rise; my attention
was absorbed by the spectators ; my eyes, ere while fixed on
the arch, were now irresistibly attracted to the semicircle of
chairs. What charade Colonel Dent and his party played,
what word they chose, how they acquitted themselves, I no
longer remember; but I still see the consultation which
followed each scene ; I see Mr. Rochester turn to Miss Ingram,
and Miss Ingram to him ; I see her incline her head towards
him, till the jetty curls almost touch his shoulder and wave
against his cheek; 1 hear their mutual whisperings; I recall
their interchanged glances; and something even of the
feeling roused by the spectacle returns in memory at this
moment.
I have told you, reader, diat I had learnt to love Mr.
Rochester: I could not unlove him now, merely because I
found that he had ceased to notice me^because I might
pass hours in his presence, and he would never once turn
his eyes in my direction — because I saw all his attentions
appropriated by a great lady, who scorned to touch me with
the hem of her robes as she passed; who, if ever her dark
and imperious eye fell on me by chance, would withdraw it
instantly as from an object too mean to merit observation.
I could not unlove him, because I felt sure he would soon
many this very lady — because I read daily in her a proud
security in his intentions respecting her — because I witnessed
hourly in him a style of courtship which, if careless and
choosing rather to he sought than to seek^ was yet, in its
very carelessness, captivatmgj and in its very pride^ irresis-
tible.
There was nothing to cool or banish love in these circom*
stances; though much to create despair. Mucli too, you will
think, reader, to engender jealousy: if a woman, in my
position, could presume to be jealous of a woman in Miss
Ingram's* But I was not jealous: or very rarely;— the
nature of the pain I suffered could not be explained by that
word. Miss Ingram was a mark beneath jealousy; she was
too inferior to excite the feeling. Pardon the seeming para-
dox; I mean what I say. She was very showy, but she w^^
m
i82 JANE EYRE
not genuine: she had a fine person^ many ImHiant attain-
ments; but her mind was poor, h^ heart barren by nature:
nothing bloomed spontaneously on that soil; no imfcmred
natural fruit delighted by its freshne^. She was not good;
she was not original: she used to repeat sounding {duases
from bqoks: she never ofiered, n(^ had^ an opinion of her
own. She advocated a high tone of sentiment; bu;t she did
not loiow the sensations of sympathy and pity; t^idemess
and truth were not in her. Too oft^ she betrayed this, by
the undue vent she gave to a spiteful antipathy she had
conceived, against little Ad^le: pushing her away with somte
contumelious ^ithet if she happened to approach her;
sometimes ordering her from the room, and always treating
her with coldness and acrimony* Oth^ e3res besides mine
watched these manifestations of character— watched them
closely, keenly, shrewdly. Yes: the future bridegroom, Mr.
Rochester himself, exercised over his intended a ceaseless
surveillance: and it was from this sagacity — ^this guarded-
ness of iiis — this perfect, clear consciousness of his £ur one's
defects— this obvious absence of passion in his sentimeoils
towards her, that m^ ever-torturing pain arose.
I saw he was gomg to marry her, for family, perhaps
political reasons; because her rank and connections suited
him; I felt he had not given her his love, and that h^ quali-
fications were ill adapted to win from him that ti^asure.
This was the pomt — this was where the nerve was touched
and teased— ^lis was where the fever was sustained and
fed: she could fwt charm him. ,
If she had managed the victory at once, and he had yielded
and sincerely laid his heart at her feet, I^ould have covered
my face, turned to the wall, and (figuratively) have died to
them. If Miss Ingram had been a good and noble woman,
endowed with force > fervour, kindness, sense, I should have
had one vital struggle with two tigers — ^jealousy and despair:
then, my heart torn out and devoured, I should have ad-
mired her — acknowledged her excellence, and been quiet for
the rest of my days: and the more absolute her superiority,
the deeper would have been my admiration — the more tn^
tranquil my quiescence. But as matters really stood, to
watch Miss Ingram's efforts at fajscinadng Mr. Rochester;
to witness their repeated failure, herself unconscious that
they did fail; vainly fancying that each shaft launched, bit
the mark, and infatuatedly pluming herself on success, when
TANE EYRE
her pride and self-complacency repelled further and further
what she wished to allure — to witness ikiSf was to be at once
under ceaseless excitation and ruthless restraint*
Because, when she failed^ I saw how she might have
succeeded. Arrows that continually glanced off from Mr.
Rochester's breast and fell harmless at his feet, might, I
knew, if shot by a surer hand, have quivered keen in his
proud h^jt — have called love into his stern eye, and soft-
ness into his sardonic face: or^ better stilly without weapons
a silent conquest might have been won.
''Why can she not influence him more^ when she is privi-
leged to draw so near to him ?'* I asked myself.'* Surely she
cannot truly like him; or not like him with tnie affection!
If she did, she need not coin her smilra so lavishly; flash her
glances so unremittingly; manufacture airs so elaborate^
graces so multitudinous. It seems to me, that she might, by
merely sitting quietly at his side^ saying little and looking
less, get nigher his heart. I have seen in his face a far different
expression from that which hardens it now while she is so
vivaciously accosting him; but then it came of itself: it was
not elicited by meretricious arts and calculated manoeuvres ;
and one had but to accept it— to answer what he asked
without pretension, to address him when needful without
grimace^ — and it increased and grew kinder and more genia!,
and warmed one like a fostering sxmbeam. How will she
manage to please him when they are married? I do not
think she will manage it; and yet it might be managed; and
his wife mighty I verily believe, be the very happiest woman
the sun shines on. "
1 have not yet said anything condemnatory of Mr.
Rochester's project of marrying for interest and connections.
It surprised me wh^ I first discovered that such was his
intention: I had thought him a maji unlikely to be in-
fluenced by motives so common-place in his choice of a wife;
but the longer I considered the position^ education, etc. of
the parties, the less I felt justified in judging and blaming
either him or Miss Ingram, for acting in confonmity to ideas
and principles instilled into them, doubtless^ from their
duJdhood. All their class held these principles: I supposed,
then, they bad reasons for holding them such as I could not
fathom. It seemed to me that, were I a gentleman like himj
I would take to my bosom only such a wife as I could love;
but the very obviousness of the advantages to the husband's
i ^
^
iS4
JANE EYRE
own happiness, offered by this plan^ convinced me that there
I must be arguments against its general adoption of which I
was quite ignorant: otherwise I felt sure all the world would
act a5 I wished to act.
But in other points^ as well as this, I was growing very
lenient to my master; I was forgetting all his faults, for
which I had once kept a sharp look-out* It had formerly
been my endeavour to study & \1 sides of his character: to
take the bad with the good ; and from the just weighing of
both I to form an equitable judgment. Now I saw no bad.
The sarcasm that liad repelled, the harshness that had
startled me once, were only like keen condiments in a choice
dish: their presence was pungent, but their absence would
be felt as comparatively insipid. And as for the vague some*
thing — was it a sinister or a sorrowful, a designing or a
desponding expression (*— that opened upon a careU
observer, now and then, in his eye, and closed again before
one could fathom the strange depth partially disclosaj;
that something which used to make me fear and shrink, as if
I had been wandering amongst volcanic *loo king hills, and
had suddenly felt the ground quiver, and seen it gape: that
something, I, at intervals^ beheld still; and with throbbing
heart, but not with palsied nerves. Instead of wishing to
shun, I longed only to dare — to divine it; and I thought
Miss Ingram happy, because one day she might look into
the abyss at her leisure, explore its s^rets and analy^
their nature*
Meantime, while I thought only of my master and his
future bride — saw only them, heard only their discourse,
and considered only their movements of importance — the
rest of the party were occupied with their own separate
interests and pleasures. Hie ladies Lynn and Ingram con-
tinued to consort in solenm conferences ; where they nodded
their two turbans at each other, and held up their four hands
in confronting gestures of surprise, or mystery, or horror,
according to the theme on which their gossip ran, like a pair
of magnified puppets. Mild Mrs. Dent talked with good-
natured Mrs- Eshton; and the two sometimes bestowed a
courteous word or smile on me. Sir George L^Tin, Colond
Dent, and Mr. Eshton discussed politics, or county affaiis,
Of justice business. Lord Ingram flirted with Amy Eshton;
Louisa played and sang to and with one of the Messrs. Lynn,
«^nd Mary Ingram listened languidly to the gallant speeches*

JANE EYR^
''of tjie other. Sometimes all, as with one conseiif. suspended
their by-play to observe and listen to the principal actors:
for J after aU^ Mr. Roches ter, and— because closely connected
wiih him— Miss Ingram ^ were the life and soul of the party.
If he were absent from the room an hour^ a perceptible
dulness seemed to steal over the spirits of his guests^ and his
re-entrance was sure to give a fresh impulse to the vivacity
of conversation.
The want of his animating influence appeared to be
peculiarly felt one day that he had been summoned to Mill-
cote on busioesSj and was not likely to return till late. The
afternoon was wet: a walk the party had proposed to take
to see a gipsy camp, lately pitched on a common beyond
Hay, was consequently deferred* Some of the gentlemen
were gone to the stables : the younger ones^ together with the
younger ladies, were playing billiards in the billiard-room.
The dowagers Ingram and Lynn sought solace in a quiet
game at cards. Blanche Ingram, after having repelled ^ by
supercilious taciturnity , some eflorts of Mrs. Dent and Mrs.
Eshton to draw her into conversation^ had first murmured
over some sentimental tunes and airs on the piano ^ and theuj
having fetched a novel from the library^ had flung herself in
haughty list! essn ess on a sofa, and prepared to beguile, by
the spell of fiction^ the tedious hours of absence. The room
and the house were silent : only now and then the merriment
of the billiard players was heard from above.
It was verging on dusk, and the clock had already given
warning of the hour to dress for dinner, when little Ad^le^
who knelt by me in the drawing-room window-seat,
exclaimed : —
'* Voil^ Monsieur Rochester, qui revientl *'
I turned, and Miss Ingram darted forwards from her sofa;
the others, too, looked up from their several occupations;
for at the same time a crunching of wheels, and a splashing
tramp of horse-hoofs became audible on the wet gravel. A
post-chaise was approaching.
" What can possess him to come home in that style? "
said Miss Ingram, " He rode Mesrour (the black horse), did
he not, when he went out? and Pilot was with him:— what
has he done with the animals? ^'
As she said this, she approached her tall person and ample
gannents so near the window^ that I was obliged to bend
back almost to the breaking of my spine: in her eagerness

i86 JANE EYRE
she did not observe me at & rst, but when she did, she curled
her Up and moved to another casement. The post-chaise
stopped; the driver rang the door bell, and a gentleman
ali^ted, attired in travelling garb; but it was not Mr.
Rochester; it was a tall, fa^onable- looking man, a
stranger.
*'Provoking r'exclaimed Miss Ingram:''you diescMne
monkey ! " (apostrophising Ad^le)''who perdud you up in
the window, to give false mtelligence? " and she cast on me
an angry glance^ as if I were in tolt.
Some parleying was audible in the haM, and soon the new
comer entered. He bowed to Lady Ingiam, as deeming her
the eldest lady preseat.
" It appears I come at an inopportune time, madam, "
said he;''when my friend, Mr. Rochester, is from home;
but I arrive from a very long journey, and I think I may
presume so far on old and intimate acquaintance as to instal
myself here till he returns. "
His manner was polite; his accent, in speaking, struck me
as being somewhat unusual, — ^not precisely foreign, but still
not altogether English ; his age might be about Mr.
Rochester's,— between thirty and forty; his complesdon
was singularly sallow: otherwise he was a fine^ookix^ man,
at first s^htespedally. On closer examination, you detected
something in his face that displeased; or rather, that fa^ed
to please. His features were r€|gular, but too relaxed: his
eye was large and well cut, but & e life looking out of it was
a tame, vacant life — at least so I thought.
The sound of thedressingrbeil dispersed the party. It was
not till after dinner that I saw him again: he then seemed
quite at his ease. But I Uked h|s physiognomy even less than
before: it struck me a3 being, at tiie same time, unsettled,
and inanimate. His eye waxidered, and had no meaning in
its wandeni^: this gave him an odd look, such as I never
remembered to have seen. For a handsome and not an un*
amiable-looking man, he repelled me exceedingly: th^e
was no power in that smooth-skinned face oi a full oval
shape; do firmness in that aquiline nose, and small, cherry
mouth; there was no thought on the k)w, even forehead; no
command in that blank, brown eye.
As I sat in my usual nook, and looked at him with the
light of the girandoles on the inantel-*piece beaming full
/\t/Ar him — ^for hie occupied an arm-chair, drawn dose to the
JANE EYRE 187
'fce, and kept shrinking still nearer^ as if he were cold— I
com pared him with Mr. Rochester. 1 think (with deference
be it spoken) the contrast could not be much greater between
a sleek gander and a fierce falcon: between a meek sheep
and the rough-coated keen-eyed dog, its guardian.
He had spoken of Mr. Rochester as an old friend. A curious
friendship theirs must have been: a pointed illustration
indeed, of the old adage that *'extremes meet,*'
Two or three of the gentlemen sat near him, and I caught
at times scraps of their conversation across the room. At
first I could not make much sense of what I heard ; for the
discourse of Louisa Eshton and Mary Ingram^ who sat nearer
to mCj confused the fragmentary sentences that reached me
at intervals. These last were discussing the stranger: they
both called him " a beautiful man* " Louisa said he was *'a
love of a creature/* and she ** adored him " : and Mary in-
stanced his *^ pretty little mouthy and nice nose, " as her
ideal of the charming »
" And what a sweet-tempered forehead he has! " cried
Louisaj —''so smooth — none of those frowning irregularities
I dislike so much; and such a placid eye and smile 1 "
And then J to my great relief, Mr, Henry Lynn summoned
them to the other side of tie room, to settle some point
about the deferred excursion to Hay Common.
I was now able to concentrate my attention on the group
by the fire, and I presently gathered that the new comer was
called Mr, Mason: then I learned that he was but just
arrived in England, and that he < mme from some hot country:
which was the reason, doubtless, his face was so sallow^ and
that he sat so near the hearth^ and wore a surtout in the
house. Presently the words Jamaica^ Kingston, Spanish
Town, indicated the West Indies as his residence; and it
was with no little surprise I gathered, ere long, that he had
there first seen and become acquainted with Mr. Rochester.
He spoke of his friend's dislike of the burning heats, the
hurricanes, and rainy seasons of that region. I knew Mr.
Rochester had been a traveller: Mrs, Fairfax Imd said so;
but I thought the continent of Europe had bounded his
wanderings ; till now I had never heard a hint given of visits
t0 more distant shores,
I was pondering these things, when an incident, and a
somewhat unexpected one, broke the thread of my musings.
Mr. Mason^ shivering as some on,e chanced to open the door,
L
i88
JANE EYRE
asked for more coal to be put on the fire, which had bymt
b out its flame, though its mass of cinder still shone hot and
r red. The footman who brought the coal, in gomg out, stopped
near Mr, Eshton*s chair, and said something to him in a low
voice, of which I heard only the words,''old woman/*—
" quite troublesome. "
*'Tell her she shall be put in the stocks if she does not
take herself off/* replied the magistrate.
I'* No— stop!'* interrupted Colonel Dent.''Don't send
Iker away, Eshton; we might turn tlie thing to account;
I better consult the ladies/'And speaking aloud, he con-
I tinued,''Ladies, you talked of going to Hay Common to
visit the gipsy camp; Sam, here, says that one of the old
Mother Bunches is in the servants'hall at this moment^ and
binsists upon being brought in before'the quality,* to tell
" them their fortunes. Would you like to see her? "
" Surely, colonel,'* cried Lady Ingram, ** you would not
encourage such a low impostor? Dismiss her, by all meaos^
at once ! *'
" But I cannot perstiade her to go away, my lady/* said
the footman; " nor can any of the servants: Mrs. Fairfax
is with her just now, entreating her to be gone; but she has
taken a chair in the chimney-comer, and says nothing shall
stir her from it till she gets leave to come in here. "
** What does she want? " asked Mrs, Eshton.
" * To tell the gentry their fortunes/ she says, ma'am j
and she swears she must and will do it, "
*'Wlmt is she like? ** inquired the Misses Eshton in a
breath.
" A shockingly ugly old creature, miss; almost as black
as a crock/*
'* Why, she*s a real sorceress 1 " cried Frederick Lynn*
" Let us have her in, of course/*
" To be sure,*'rejoined his brother; " it would be a
thousand pities to throw away such a chance of fun/*
'* My dear boys^ what are you thinking about? " ex-
claimed Mrs. Lynn,
" I cannot possibly countenance any such inconsistent
proceeding/* chimed in the Dowager Ingram.
" Indeed, mammae but you can — and will/'pronounced
^ haughty voice of Blanche, as she turned round on the
lo-stool; where till now she had sat silent, apparently
mining sundry sheets of music. " I have a curiosity to
JANE EYRE
hear my fortune told: therefore, Sam, order the beldame
forwards. "
► " My darling Blanche 1 recollect "
" I do — I recollect all you can suggest; and I must have
my will — quick J Sam I "
" Yes — yes — yes!** eried all the juvenilesj both ladies
and gentlemen. *'Let her come^t will be excellent
sport 1 "
The footman still lingered. ** She looks such a rough one/'
said he.
*'Go! ^^ ejaculated Miss Ingram^ and the man went.
Excitement instantly seized the whole party: a running
fire of raillery and jests was proceeding when Sam returned,
" She won't come now/'said he, " She sa > ^ it's not her
mission to appear before the * vulgar herd * (them's her
words). I must show her into a room by hers elf ^ and then
those who wish to consult her must go to her one by
one. "
** You see now, my queenly Blanche/'began Lady Ingram,
»f* she encroaches. Be advised, my angel girl — and **
" Show her into the library, of coulee/'cut in the " angel
girl/'** It is not my mission to listen to her before the vulgar
herd either: I mean to liave her all to myself. Is there a fire
theUbrary? "
" Yes, ma am— but she looks such a tinkler/'
" Cease that chatter, blockhead i and do my bidding. "
Again Sam vanished; and mystery, animation, expecta-
tion rose to full flow once more.
*'She's ready now,'* said the footman, as he reappeared.
'* She wishes to know who will be her first visitor. "
** I think I had better just look in upon her before any of
the ladies go/'said Colonel Dent.
" Tell her, Sam, a gentleman is coming. "
Sam went and returned*
** She says, sir, that she'll have no gentlemen; they need
not trouble themselves to come near her: nor, " he added,
with difficulty suppressing a titter^''any ladies either,
except the young and single.'^
4 *'By Jove, she has taste I " exclaimed Henry Lynn.
Miss Ingram rose solemnly: ** I go first,*'she saidj in a tone
which might have befitted the leader of a forlorn hope,
mounting a breach in the van of his men*
" Oh, my best! oh, my dearest! pau & e — reflect! " waj
he
r
^90
JANE EYRE
her mama^s cry; but she swept past her in stately silence,
passed throiigh the door which Colonel Dent held open^ aad
we heard her enter the library.
A comparative silence ensued. Lady Ingram thought it
*'!e cas *'to wring her hands: which she did accordingly*
Miss Mary declared she felt^ !or her part, she never dared
venture. Amy and Louisa Eshtcn tittered under their
breath, and looked a little hightened.
The minutes passed very slowly: fifteen were counted
before the library-door again opened. Miss Ingram returned
to us through the arch.
Would she laugh? Would she take it as a joke? All eyes
met her with a glance of eager curiosity, and she met all
eyes with one of rebufi and coldness: she looked neither
flurried nor meny; she walked stiffly to her seat, and toidt
it in silence.
** Well J Blanche? ** said Lord " Ingram.
*'What did she say, sister? " asked Mary.
" What do you think? How do you feel? Is she a real
fortune-teller? ^'demanded the Misses Eshton.
" Now J now, good people,''returned Miss Ingram,'* don't
press upon me. R^lly your organs of wonder and credulity
are easily excited : you seem by the importance you all— my
good mama included — ascribe to thh matter— absolutely
to believe we have a genuine witdi in the house, who is in
close alliance with the old gedQtleman, I have seen a gipsy
vagabond; she has practised in hackneyed fashion the
science of palmistry, and told me what such people usually
tell. My whim is gratified ; and now I think Mr. Eshtoo wiU
do well to put the hag in the stocks to-morrow monoing, as
he threatened/*
Miss Ingram took a book, leant back in her chair^ and so
declined further conversation. I watched her for nearly hall
an hour: during all that time she never turned a page, and
her face grew momently darker, more dissatisfied, and more
sourly expressive of disappointment. She had obviously not
heard anything to her advantage: and it seemed to me,
from her prolonged fit of gloom and taciturnity, that sht
herself, notwithstanding her professed indifferencej attached
undue importance to whatever revelations had been made
hen
Meantime J Mary Ingram , Amy and Louisa Eshton, 6^
I i they dared not go alone; and yet they all wished to
i
JANE EYRE
iqi
go* A negotiatloo was opened through the medium of the
ambassador^ Sam; and after much pacing to and fro, till, £
think J the said Sam^s calves must have ached with the
exercisCj permission was at last, with great difficulty, ex-
torted from the rigorous Sybil, for the three to wait upoa
her in a body.
Their visit was not so still as Miss Ingram's had been: we
heard hysterical giggling and little shrieks proceeding from
the library j and at the end of about twenty minutes they
burst the door open^ and came running across the hall, as if
they were half-scared out of their wits,
" I'm sure she is something not right I " they cried, one
and all. " She told us such things ! She knows all about us I "
and they sank breathless into the various seats the gentle-
men hastened to bring them.
Pressed for further explanation, they declared she had
told them of things they had said and done when they were
mere children ; described books and ornaments they had in
their boudoirs at home: keepsakes that different relations
had presented to them. They affirmed that she had even
divined their thoughts, and had wiiispercd in the ear of each
the name of the person she liked best in the wodd, and in-
formed them of what they most wi^ed for.
Here the gentlemen interposed with cam^t petitions to
be further enlightened on these two last-named points ; but
they got only blushes, ejaculations, tremors, and titters, in
return for dieir importunity. " Ilie matrons, meantime,
offered vinajgrettes and wielded fans; and again and again
reiterated the expression of their concern that their warning
had not been taken in time; and the elder gentlemen laughed,
and the younger urged their services on the agitated lair
ones.
In the midst of the tumult, and while my eyes and ears
were fully engag^ in the scene before me, I heard a hem
close at my elbow : I turned, and saw Sara.
*'If you please, Miss, the gipsy declares that there is
^lolher young single lady in the room who has not been to
her yet, and she swears she will not go till she has seen all,
I thought it must be you: there is no one ebc for it. What
shall I tell her? ^'
** Oh, I will go by all means,'* I answered j and I was glad
of the unexpected opportunity to gratify my much-excited
curiosity* I slipped out of the roomj unobserved by any eye
JANE EYRE
— for the company were gathered in one mass about _^
tTembling trio just returned — and I closed the door quietly
behind me.
** If you like, miss, " said Sam,'* I'll wait in the hall for
you; and if she frightens you, just call and FlI come in/'
*'No, Sam, return to the kitchen : I am not in the least
afraid/'Nor was I; but I was a good deal interested and
excited*
CHAPTER XIX
4
The library looked tranquil enough as I entered it^ and the
Sybil— if Sybil she were, was seated snugly enough in an
easy chair at the chimney-corner. She had on a red cloak
and a black bonnet^ or rather, a broad -brimmed gipsy bat,
tied down with a striped handkerchief under the chin. An
extinguished candle stood on the table; she was bendmg
over the fire, and seemed reading in a little black bookj like
a prayer-book, by the light of the blazer she muttered the
words to herself, as most old wom«i do, while she read; she
did not desist inomediately on my entrance; it appeared
she wished to finish a paragraph.
I stood on the rug and warmed my hands ^ which were
rather cold with sitting at a distance from the drawing-room
fire, I felt now as composed as ever I did in my life: there
was nothing indeed in the gipsy's appeamnce to trouble
one's calm. She shut her book and slowly looked up; her
hat-brim partially shaded her face, yet I could see^ as she
raised it, that it was a strange one. It looked all brown and
black; elf-locks bristled out from beneath a white band
which passed under her chin^ and came half over her cheeks^
or rather jaws; her eye confronted me at once, with a boU
and direct gaze.
" Well, and you want your fortune told? ** she said In m
voice as decided as her glance, as harsh as her features*
^* I don't care about itj mother; you may please yourself:
but I ought to warn you^ I have no faith, "
*'It's like your impudence to say so: I expected it of youl
I heard it in your step as you crossed the threshold/*
** Did you? YouVe a quick ear/*
JANE EYRl
'* I have; and a quick eye^ and a quick brain/'
** You need them all in your trade,**
" I do; especiaUy when I've customers like you to deal
with. Wily don't you tremble ? "
" Tm not cold. "
" Why don't you turn pale? "
" I am not sick, "
** WTjy don't you consult my art? "
^ " Tm not silly. "
^T The old crone " nichered " a laugh under her bonnet and
^bandage: she then drew out a short black pipe, and lighting
it began to smoke* Having indulged a while in this sedative,
she raised her bent body, took the pipe from her lips, and
I while gazing steadily at the fire, said very deliberately: —
I " You are cold; you are sick; and you are silly,'^
I " Prove it, " I rejoined*
1^, " I will ; in few words. You are cold, because jrou are
alone: no contact strikes the fire from you that is in you.
You are sick: because the best of feelings, the highest and
the sweetest given to man^ keeps far away from you. You
are silly, because, suffer as you may, you wiU not beckon it
to approach; nor will you stir one step to meet it where it
waits you.*'
She again put her short, black pipe to her lips, and renewed
her smoking with vigour,
" You might say all that to almost any one who, you
knew, lived as a solitary dependant in a great house, "
** I might say it to almost any one; but would it be true
•of almost any one? "
b " In my circumstances, "
" Yes ; just so, in ycmr circumstances: but find me another
precisely placed as you are, "
" It would be easy to find you thousands, "
" You could scarcely find me one. If you knew it, you
are peculiarly situated: very near happiness; yes; within
reach of it. The materials are all prepared; there only
wants a movement to combine them. Chance laid them
somewhat apart; let them be once approached and bliss
results, "
" I don't understand enigmas, I never could guess a
riddle in my life, "
" If you wUh me to speak more plainly^ show me your
pahn. "
194
JANE EYRE

*'And I must cross it mith silver^ I suppose? "
" To be sure. "
I gave her a shilling : she put it into an old stocking-fcxit
whidi she took out of her pockety and having tied it round
and returned it, she told me to hold out my hand. 1 did-
She approached her face to the palm^ and pored over it
without touching it.
** It is too fine/'said she.''I can make nothing oisucb a
hand as that; almost without lines; besides, what is in a
palm ? Degtiny is not written there/'
'* I believe you/'said L
" No/'she continued J " it is in the face: on the forefaeidj
about the eyeSj in the eyes themselves^ in the hnes of tfee
mouth. Kneel J and lift up your head. "
** Ah ! now you are coming to reahty, " I said as I obeyed
het. *'I shall begin to put some faith in you presently. "
I knelt within half a yard of her. She stirred the fire^ so
that a ripple of light broke from the disturbed coal: the
glare J however^ as she sat, only threw her face into deeper
shadow: mine, it illumined.
** I wonder with what feelings you came to me to-night, "
she said, when $he had examined me a while,'* I wonder
what thoughts are busy in your heart during all the hours yoo
sit in yonder room with ihe fine people flitting before you
like shapes in a magic lantern: just as little s^-mpathetic
communion passing between you and them, as if they were
really mere shadows of human forms^ and not the actual
substance. "
" I feel tired often, sleepy sometimes; but seldom sad, "
" Then you have some secret hope to buoy you up and
please you with whispers of the future ? "
'* Not I, The utmost I hope is, to save money enough out
of my earnings to set up a school some day in a little house
rented by myself. "
** A mean nutriment for the spirit to exist on; and sitting
ha that window-seat (you see I know your habits) " — — *
** You have learned them from the servants/'
** Ahf you think yourself sharp. Well^-perhaps I have:
to speak truth, I have an acquaintance with one of then]—
Mrs. Poole "
I started to my feet when I heard the name.
** You hav^-have you?'* thought I; ** diere is diablerie
in the business after all, then I "''**•»
JANE EYRE
" Don't be alarmed/^ continued the strange being; " she's
a 3af€ hand, is Mrs. Poole: dose and quiet: any one may
repose confidence in her. But, as I was saying: sitting in
that window-seatj do you think of nothing but your future
school ? Have you no present interest in any of the company
who occupy the sofas and chairs before you ? Is there not
ooe face you study? One figure whose movements you
follow with, at least j curiosity?''
^k *^ I like to observe all the faces^ and all the figures.''
^0 ** But do you never single one from the rest — or it may
be, two? "
** I do, frequently; when the gestures or looks of a pair
seem telling a tale; it amuses me to watch them,*'
" What tale do you like best to hear?'*
" Oh, I have not much choice I They generally run on the
same theme — courtship; and promise to end in the same
catas trophe — marriag e,''
*^ And do you like that monotonous theme? *'
** Positively^ I don't care about it: it is nothing to
me:*
" Nothing to you? When a lady, young and full of life
and health, charming with beauty and endowed with the
gifts of rank and fortune, sits and smiles in the eyes of a
gentleman you "
" I what?''
k " You know^and, perhaps, think well of. "
■ ** I don't know the gentlemen here. I have scarcely inter*
changed a syllable with one of them; and as to thinking
wdl of them, I consider some respectable and stately, and
middle-aged, and others young, dashing, handsome and
lively; but certainly they are all at liberty to be the re-
cipients of whose smiles they please, without my feeling
disposed to confer the transaction of any moment to
me,
" You don*t know the gentlemen here ? You have not
exchanged a syllable with one of them ? Will you say that
of the master of the house? "
*'He is ni > t at hoine/*
*^ A profound remark! A most ingenious quibble I He
went to Millcote this morning, and wiU be back here to-night,
or to-morrow; does that circumstance exclude him from
the list of your acquaintance — blot him, as it were, out of
existence?'*
i»
JANE EYRE
'* No : but I can scarcely see what Mr. Rochester has to
da with the theme you had introduced/'
** I was talking of ladies smiling in the eyes of gentlemeoj
and of late so many smiles have been shed into Mr. Rochester's
eyes that they overflow like two cups filled above the brim:
have you never remarked that? "
" Mr, Rochester has a right to enjoy the society of his
guests. "
" No question about his right: but have you never
observed that, of all the tales told here about matrimony,
Mr. Rochester has been favoured with the most Ovely and
the most continuous ? ^'
*^ Tiie eagerness of a listener quickens the tongue of &
narrator,*'I said this rather to mj*self than to the gipsy;
whose strange talk, voice, manner, had by this time wrapped
me in a kind of dream. One unexpected sentence came from
her lips after another^ till I got involved in a web of morti-
fication ; and wondered what unseen spirit had been sitting
for weeks by my heart watching its workings, and taking
record of every pulse.
*'Eagerness of a listener I " repeated die:'*yes; Mr,
Rochester has sat by Uie hour, his ear inclined to the fasci-
nating lips that took such delight in their task of communi-
cating; and Mr. Rochester was so willing to receive and
looked so grateful for the pastime given him: you have
noticed this ?'*
" Grateful ! I cannot remember detecting gratitude in his
face. "
" Detecting] You have analysed^ then. And what did you
detect, if not gratitude? "
I said nothing*
" You have seen love: have you not?— and, looking
forward, you have seen him married, and beheld his bride
happy? "
" Humph! Not exactly. Your witch's skill is rather at
fault sometimes.'*
" What the devil have you seen, then?'*
'* Never mind: I came here to inquire^ not to confess. Is
it known that Mr* Rochester is to be married ? "
** Yes; and to the beautiful Miss Ingram.**
'* Shortly? "
** Appearances would warrant that conclusion; and, no
doubt (though, with an audacity that wants chastising tm
JANE EYRE 197
of you^ you seem to question it)^ they will be a superlatively
happy pair. He must love such a handsome^ noblej witty^
accomplished lady; and probably she loves him; or^ if not
his person J at least his purse. I know she considers the
Rochester estate eligible to the last degree; though (God
pardon me!) I told her something on that point about an
hour agOj which made her look wondrous grave; the comers
of her mouth fell half an inch. I would advise her black-
a viced suitor to look out; if another comes j with a longer or
clearer rent^roll^ — ^he's dished "
" But J mother, I did not come to hear Mr. Rochester's
fortune; I came to hear my own; and you have told me
nothing of it, "
** Your fortune is yet doubtful; when I examined your
face^ one trait conti^dicted another. Chance has meted you
a measure of happiness: that I know. I knew it before I
came here this evening. She has laid it carefully on one side
for you, I saw her do it. It depends on yourself to stretch
out your hand, and take it up: but whether you will do so,
is the problem I study. Kneel again on the rug. "
" Don't keep me long; the fire scorches me. "
I knelt. She did not stoop towards me^ but only gazedj
leaning back in her chair. She began muttering, —
" The fiame flickers in the eye; the eye shines like dew;
it looks soft and fuO of feeling; it smiles at my jargon: it
is susceptible; impression follows impression through its
clear sphere; where it ceases to smile, it is sad ; an uncon-
scious lassitude weighs on the lid : that signifies melancholy
resulting from loneliness. It turns from me; it will not
sufier farther scrutiny; it seems to deny, by a mocking
glance, the truth of the discoveries I have already made, —
to disown the charge both of sensibility and chagrin: its
pride and reserve only confirm me in my opinion. The eye is
favourable*
** As to the mouth, it delights at times in laughter; it is
disposed to impart all that the brain conceives; though I
daresay it would be silent on much the heart experiences.
Mobile and flexible, it was never intended to be compressed
in the eternal silence of solitude: it is a mouth which should
speak much and smile often, and have human affection for
its interlocutor. That feature too is propitious,
'* I see no enemy to a fortunate issue but in the brow; and
that brow professes to say,—* I can live alone, if self-respect
^xg &
JANE EYRE
and circumstances require me so to do. I need not sell my
soul to buy bliss. I have an inward treasurej born with me^
which can keep me alive if all extraneous delights should be
withheld ; or oHered only at a price I cannot afford to give.*
The forehead declares j * Reason sits firm and holds the
reins J and she will not let the feelings burst away and hurry
her to wild chasms. The passions may rage furiously, like
true heathens J as they are: and the desires may imagine aQ
sorts of vain things: but judgment shall still have the last
word in every argument^ and the casting vote in eveiry
decision* Strong wind, earthquake-shock, and fire may pass
by : but I shaU follow the guidiJig of that still small voice
which interprets the dictates of conscience/
'^ Well saidy forehead ; your declaration shall be respected*
1 have formed my plans — right plans I deem them— and in
them I have attended to the claims of conscience, the counsels
of reason* I know how soon youth would fade and bloom
perish, if, in the cup of bliss offered, but one dreg of shame,
or one flavour of remorse were detected ; and I do not want
sacrifice, sorrow, dissolution — sucJi is not my taste. I ^ish
to foster^ not to blight — to earn gratitude, not to wring
tears of blood — no, nor of brine: my harvest must be in
smiles, in endearments, in sweet— Tliat will do, T think I
rave in a kind of exquisite delirium. I should wish now to
protract diis moment ad infinitum ; but I dare not. So far
I have governed myself thoroughly. I have acted as I in-
wardly swore I would act; but farther might try me beyond
my strength. Rise, Miss E > Te: leave me;'tiie pky b
played out/'*
Where was I? Did 1 wake or sleep? Had I been dream-
ing ? Did I dream still ? The old woman's voice had changed :
her accent, her gesture^ and all were familiar to me as my
own face in a glass^ — as the speech of my own tongue. I got
up J but did not go, I looked; I stirred the fire, and I looked
again: but she drew her bonnet and her bandage closer
about her face, and again beckoned me to depart* The
flame illmnmated her hand stretched out; roused now^ and
on the alert for disco veri^, I at once noticed that hand. It
was no more the withered limb of eld than my own ; it was
a rounded supple member, witli smooth fingers, symmetri-
cally turned; a broad ring flashed on the little finger, and
stooping forward^ I looked at it^ and saw a gem I had seen a
hundred times before. Again I looked at the facej which

JANE EYRE 199
wa? na longer turned from me — on th« contrar}^ the
boiHiet was doffed, tbe bandage dispiaced, the head
advanced.
" Well, Jane, do you know me?'^ asked the familiar
voice.
*'Only take off the red cloak, sir, and then "
'* But the string is in a knot — help me J'
'* Break it, sir/'
" TherCj tlien— * 03, ye [endings 1'" And Mr. Kochester
stepped out of his disguise.
" Now, sir, what a strange idea 1 *'
P " But well carried out, di ? Don^t you think so ? *'
** With the ladies you must have managed well/'
" But not with you? "
*'You did not act the character of a gipsy with me. "
** What character did I act ? My own ? "
*'No; some unaccountable one. In shorty I believe you
have been tr3dng to draw me out— or in; you have been
talking nonsense to make me talk nonsense. It is scarcely
fair J sir.''
" Do you forgive me, Jane? **
" I cannot tell till I have thoughb it all over. If, on reflec-
tion, I find I have fallen into no great absurdity, I shall try
to forgive you; but it was not right, "
'*0h! yon have been very correct — very careful, very
sensible. "
I reflected J and thought, on the whole, I had. It was a
comfort; but, indeed, I had been on ray guard almost from
the beginning of the interview. Sometliing of masquerade I
suspected, I knew gipsies and fortune-tellers did not express
themselves as this seemiog old woman had expressed herself;
besides, I had noted her feigned voice, her anxiety to conceal
her features. But my mind had been running on Grace Poole
— that living enigma, that mystery of mysteries^ as I con-
sidered her. I had never thought of Mr. Rochester,
** WeU/'said he, " what are you musmg about? What
does that grave smile signify? "
" Wonder and self -congratulation, sir, I have your
permission to retire now, I suppose?'*
** No; stay a moment; and tell me what the people in
the drawing-room junder are doing. "
L " Discussing the gipsy, I daresay. "
'* Sit down !--Let me hear what they said about me, "
200
'* I had better not stay long, sir; it must be near elewl
o'clock. Oh I are you aware, Mr. Roches ter^ that a stranger
has arrived here since you left this morning ? "
*'A stranger 1— no; who can it be? I expected no one; h
he gone? "
*'No; he said he had known you ioog, and that he
could take the liberty of insUOing himself here tilJ you
returned/^
" The devil he did! Did he give his name? "
" His name is Mason, sir; and he comes from the West
Indies; from Spanish Town, in Jamaica, I think/-
Mr, Rochester was standing near me; he had taken my
hand, as if to lead me to a chair. As 1 spoke, he gave
my wrist a convulsive grip; the smile on his lips froze:
apparently a spasm caught hjs breath.
*'Mason 1— the West Indies ! *'he said^ in the tone one
might fancy a speaking automaton to enounce its single
words; " Masoni— the West Indies! " he reiterated; and
he went over the syllables three times, growing, in the
intervals of speaking, whiter than ashes: he hardly seemed
to know what he was doing.
" Do you feel ill, sir? " I inquired,
" Jane, I've got a blow;— IVe got a blow, JaneT'He
staggered,
** Oh I — lean on me, sir, "
''Jane, you offered me your shoulder once before; let me
have it now.'*
" Yes, sir, yes; and my arm. "
He sat down, and made me sit beside him. Holding my
hand in both his own^ he chafed it; gazing on me, at the
same time, with the most troubled and dreary look,
" My httle friend !''said he, ** 1 wish I were in a quiet
island with only you; and trouble^ and danger, and hideous
recollections removed from me. "
** Can I help you, sir?— I^d give my life to serve you/'
" Jane, if aid is wanted. 111 seek it at your bands; I
promise you that. "
" Thank you, sir; tell me what to do, — I^ll try, at least,
to do it. " :
" Fetch me now, Jane, a glass of wine from the dining'
room; they will be at supper there; and tell me if Masonli
with them, and what he is doing. "
I went. I found aU the party in the dining-room at suppe^^
m
hi
k
JANE EYRE " " " • 201
Mr- Rochester had said; they were not seated at teble^ —
the supper was arranged on the side-board ; each had taken
what he chose^ and they stood about here and there In
groups, their plates and glasses in their hands. Every one
seemed in high glee; laughter and conversation were general
and animated. Mr. Mason stood near the fire, talking to
Colonel and Mrs. Dent, and appeared as merry as any of
them. I filled a wine-glass {I saw Miss Ingram watch me
frowningly as I did so; she thought I was taking a liberty, I
daresay )j and I returned to the library-
Mr. Rochester's extreme pallor had disappeared, and he
looked once more firm and stem. He took the glass from
my hand,
'* Here is to your health, minis trant spirit! " he said: he
swaOowed the contents and returned it to me. " What are
they doingj Jane ? "
" Lpaughing and talking, sir/*
" They don't look grave and mysterious^ as if they had
heard something strange ? "
" Not at all : — they are full of jests and gaiety/'
" And Mason? "
** He was laughing too. "
" If all these people came in a body and spat at me^ what
would you do, Jane? *'
" Turn them out of the room, sir, if I could* "
He half smiled. ** But if I were to go to them, and they
only looked at me coldly, and whisper^ sneeringly amongst
each other, and then dropt ofi and left me one by onej what
then ? Would you go with them ? "
" I rather think not, sir: I should have more pleasure in
starring with you. "
" To comfort me? "
** Yes, sir, to comfort you, as well as I could, "
" And if they laid you under a ban for adhering to
me? "
" I, probably, should know nothing about their ban; and
if 1 did, I should care nothing about it. "
*'Then, you could dare censure for my sake? "
" I could dare it for the sake of any friend who deserved
my adherence; as you, I am sure^ do. "
** Go back now into the room ; step quietly up to Mason,
and whisper in his ear that Mr. Rochester is come and
wishes to see him: show him in here and then leave me. "
2oa
JANE EYRE
" Yes, skJ'
I did his behest. The company all stared at me as I passed
strai^t amung them, I sought Mr* Mason^ ddiveTsd tfiti
message J and preceded him from the room: I ushered him
into the fibrary^ and then I went upstairs.
At a late hour, after I had been in bed some time^ I heard
the visitors repair to their chambers: I distinguished Mr,
Kodi ester's voice, and heard him say, *'This way. Mason;
this is your room, "
He spoke cheerfully : the gay tones set my heart at ease.
I wiS soon asleep.
CHAPTER XX
I HAD forgotten to draw my curtain^ which I usually did;
and also to let down my window -blind* The consequence
was J that when the moon^ which was full and bright (for the
night was fine), came in her course to that space in the sky
opposite my casement^ and looked in at me through the
unveiled panes, her glorious ga^e roused me. Awaking
in the dead of night, 1 opened my eyes on her disk—
silver-white and crystal*clear. It was heautiful, but too
solemn: I half rose^ and stretched my arm to draw l^e
curtain.
Good God I What a cry !
The night — its silence — its rest, was rent in twain by a
savage, a shaTp, a shrilly sound that ran from end to end of
Thomfield HalJ.
My pulse stopped: my heart stood still; my stretched
ann was paralysed. The cry died^ and was not renewed*
Indeed, whatever being uttered that fearful shriek could not
soon repeat it: not the widest-winged condor on the Andes
could J twice in successionj send out such a yell from the cloud
shrouding his eyrie. The thing delivering such utterance
must rest ere it could repeat the effort
It came out of the third story; for it passed overhead.
And overhead — ^yeSj in the room just above my chamber-
ceiling— I now heard a struggle: a deadly one it seemed
from the noise | and a half-smothered voice shouted —
" Help! help I help! " three times rapidly.

JANE EYKE 203
'Will tub one come? "'it cried; and then, while the
staggering and stamping went on wildly, I distinguished
through plank and plaster: —
" Rochester 1 Rochester I for God's sake, come t'*
A chamber-door opened: some one ranj or rushed^ along
the galk^ > ^ Another step stamped on tie flooring above
and sometjiing fell; and there was silence.
I put on some clothe, though horror shook all my limbs :
I issued from my apartment. The sleepers were all aroused:
ejaculations J terrified murmurs sounded in every room ; door
after door unclosed; one looked out and another looked
out; the gallery filled. Gentlemen and ladies alike had
quitted their beds; and " Oh! what is it?*'— " Who is
hurt?'— " What has happened ? ^*— " Fetdi a li^t!*'—
" Is it fire? " — "'Are there robbem?'*— " Where shaU we
nin ? ** was demanded confusedly on all hands. But for the
moonlight they would have been in complete darkness.'Hiey
ran to and fro; they crowded together: some sobbed, some
stumbled: the confusion was mextricable.
" Where the devil is Rochester? " cried Colonel Dent,
" 1 cannot find him in his bed,''
" Herel here!''was shouted in return, " Be composed,
ftll of you: Fm coming. "
And the door at the end of the gallery opened, and Mr,
Rochester advanced with a candle; he had just descended
from the upper story* One of the ladies ran to him directly;
she seized his arm: it was Miss Ingram.
" WTmt awful event has taken place?''said she. " Speak I
let us know the worst at oncel "
** But don*t pull me down or strangle me/'he replied:
for the Misses Eshton were clinging about him now; and
the two dowagers, in vast white wrappers^ were bearing
down on him like ships in full sail.
" Airs right]— airs right! " he cried. " It's a mere re-
hearsal of Much Ado About Nothing. Ladies^ keep off; or I
shall wax dangerous* "
And dangerous he looked; his black eyes darted sparks.
^Cahning himself by an effort, he added:—
** A servant has had the nightmare; that is all. She's an
Ecitable^ nervous person: she construed her dream into an
apparition, or something of that sort, no doubt; and has
taken a fit with fright. Now then, I must see you aU back
into your rooms ; for^ till the hotise is settled, she cannot be
204 JANE EYRE
looked after. Gentlemen^ have the goodness to set the ladies
the example. Miss Ingiam^ I am sure you will not fail in
evincing superiority to idle terrors. Amy and Louisa^ return
to your nests like a pair of doves^ as you are. Mesdames "
(to the dowagers), " you will take cold to a dead certainty,
if you stay in this chill gaUery any longer. "
And so, by dint of alternate coaxing and commanding, he
contrived to get them all once more enclosed in their separate
dormitories. I did not wait to be ordered back to mine; but
retreated unnoticed: as unnoticed as I had left it.
Not, however, to go to bed: on the contrary, I began and
dressed myself carefully. The sounds I had heard after the
scream, and the words diat had been uttered, had probably
been heard only by me; for they had proceeded from the
room above mine: but they assured me that it was not a
servant's dream which had thus struck horror through the
house; and that the explanation Mr. Rochester had given
was merely an invention framed to pacify his guests. I
dressed, then, to be ready for aneigencies. When dressed, I
sat a loi^ time by the window, looking out over the silent
grounds and silvered fields, and waiting for I knew not what.
It seemed to me that some event must follow the strange
cry, struggle, and call.
No: stillness returned: each murmur and movement
ceased gradually, and in about an hour Thomfield Hall was
again as hushed as a desert. It seamed that sleep and night
had resumed their empire. Meantime the moon declined:
she was about to set. Not liking to sit in the cold and dark-
ness, I thought I would lie down on my bed, dressed as I
was. I left the window, and moved with little noise across
the carpet; as I stooped to take off my shoes, a cautious
hand tapped low at the door.
" Am I wanted ? " I asked.
" Are you up? " asked the voice I expected to hear, viz.,
my master's.
" Yes, sir. "
^* And dressed? "
" Yes. "
" Come out, then, quietly. "
I obeyed. Mr. Rodiester stood in the gallery, holding a
light.
• " I want you, " he said: " come this -way: take your time,
and make no nois6. "
JANE EYRE
205
My slippers were thin: I could walk the matted floor as
oftly as a cat. He glided up the gallery and up the stairs,
and stopped in the dark, low corridor of the fateful third
story: I had followed and stood at his side.
''Have you a sponge iti your room?^'he asked in a
wliisper,
^''Yes, sir/'
^K *'Have you any salts — volatile salts ? "
K " Yes/*
r- " Go back and fetch both, "
I returned J sought the sponge on the wash-stand, the salts
in my drawer^ and once more retraced my steps. He stlW
waited; he held a key in his hand: approaching one of the
small, black doors, he put it in the lock; he paused and
addressed me again*
" You don't turn sick at the sight of blood? **
" I think I shall not; I have never been tried yet/'
I felt a thrill while I answered him; but no coldness, and
no faintness.
** Just give me your hand/* he said ; " it will not do to
risk a fainting fit/'
I put my fingers into his*'* Warm and steady/'was his
remark: he turned the key and opened the door.
I saw a room I remembered to have seen before; the day
Mrs. Fairfax showed me over the house: it was hung with
tapestry ; but the tapestry was now looped wp in one part,
and there was a door apparent, which had then been con-
cealed. This door was open; a light shone out of the room
within: I heard thence a snarling, snatching sound, ahnost
like a dog quarrelling. Mr. Rochester, putting down his
candle J said to me,''Wait a minute/'and he went forward
to the inner apartment, A shout of laughter greeted his
entrance; noisy at first, and terminating in Grace Poole's
own goblm ha I ha 1 She then was there. He made some sort
of arrangement, without speaJcing: though I heard a low
voice address him: he came out and closed the door behind
him.
''Here, Jane I " he said; and I walked round to the other
side of a large bed, which with its drawn curtains concealed
a considerable portion of die chamber. An easy-chair was
near the bed -head: a man sat in it, dressed with the excep-
tion of his coat; he was still; his head leant back; his eyes
were dosed. Mr, Rochester held the candle over him; I
i2o6 JANE EYRE
xecognised in his pale and seemin^y lifeless lace-^^e
stranger^ Masoa: I saw too that his linen on one side^ and
f^e arm^ was almost soaked in blood.
''Hold the candle/'said Mr. Rodiester^ and I took, it; he
letched a basin of water from the wmshnstand :'* Hold that/'
said he. I obeyed. He took the sponge^ dipped it in axid
moistened the corpse-like face: he asked for my smdling-
bottle^ and applied it to the nostrals; Mr. Mason shortly tm-
closed his eyes; he groaned. Mr. Rochester opened the shirt
of the womided man^ whose arm and shouMer were bandaged :
he sponged away blood, trickling fast down.
''Is " diere immediate dango-? " murmured Mr« Mason.
''Poohl No— a mere scratdi. DpnH be so overcome^
man: bear up! I'U fetch a suigeon lor you now, m3rsdf:
you'll be able to be removed by morning, I hope. Jaae/^ he
continued.
" Sir? "
" I shaU have to leave you in this irodm wsdi this gentle-
man, for an hour, or perhaps two hours; you wifl spaagt
the blood as I do whto it returns: if he feeU faint, yom wiU
put the glass of water on that stand to his 1^ and your
salts to his nose. You will not speak to him. on any pipetext
-—and — Richard-T-it will be at tibie pen! of your life if you
apeak to her: open your Ups— *i^tate yoniself-^and I'ti not
answOT for the consequences. "
Again the poor man gvoaned: he tooked as if he dared not
move: fear, either of death or of somediing •else, apf^eand
almost to faralyse him. Mr. Rochester put the now bloody
spodoge into my hand, and I (nroceeded to use it as he had
done. He watched me a second, then saying, ^ Remember!
— ^No conversation, " he left the room. I experienced a strange
feeling as the key grated in the lock, and the sei»d joI Us
retreating step ceased to be heard.
Hero then I was in the third story, fastened into one of its
mystk cells; ni^t around me; a pale and btoody speotade
under my eyes and hands; a naxurderess hardly sepaxatsA
from me by a single door: yes — ^that was appalling — the
rest I •oould bear; but I shuddered at the thought nf Grace
Pov^ bursting out upon me.
I mucft keq > to my post, however. I must watdi tiiis
g^bastfy CDUnitenaiice— ^tbese blue, still ^ps forbidden to
unobse — ^these eyes now shot, now opening, now wandering
through the room, now & dng on me, and tever glazed with

JANE EYRE
207
dulness of horror* 1 must dip my hand again and again
in the basin of blood and water, and wipe away the trickling
gore, I must see the light of the unsnuffed candle wane on
my cmplo^Tnent; the shadows darken on the wrought,
antique tapestry round me, and grow black under the hang-
ings of the vast old bed, and quiver strangely over the doors
of a great cabinet opposite — whose front, divided into twelve
panels, bore, in grim design, the heads of the twelve apostles,
each inclosed in its separate panel as in a frame; while
above them at the top rose an ebon crucifix and a dj-ing
Christ.
According as the shifting obscurity and flickering gleam
hovered here or glanced there, it was now the bearded physi^
cmn^ Luke, that bent his brow; now St. John's long hair
that waved ; and anon the devilish face of Judas, that grew
out of the panel J and seemed gathering life and threatening
a revelation of the arch-traitor— of Satan himself^in his
subordinate's form.
Amidst all this, I had to listen as well as watdi: to listen
for the movements of the vdl6 beast or the fiend in yonder
side den. But since Mr. Rochester's visit it seemed spell-
bound: all the night I heard but three sounds at three long
intervals^— a step creak, a momentary renewal of the snarl-
ing, canine noiscj and a deep human groan.
Then my own thoughts worried me. What crime was thiSj
that lived incarnate in this sequestered mansion, and could
neither be expelled nor subdued by the owner?— What
mystery, that broke out, now in fire and now in blood, at the
deadest houis of night? What creature was it, that, masked
in an ordinary woman's face and shape, uttered the voice,
now of a mocking demon, and anon of a carrion-seeking
bird of prey?
And this man I bent over— this common-place, quiet
stranger— how had he become involved in the web of horror ?
and why had the Fury flown at him? What made him seek
this quarter of the house at an untimely season, when he
should have been asleep in bed? I liad heard Mr, Rochester
assign him an apartment below^ — what brought him here?
And why, now, was he so tame under the violence or
treacher > ^ done him ? Why did he so quietly submit to the
concealment Mr, Rochester enforced ? Why did Mr, Rochester
enforce this concealment? His guest had been outraged, his
own life on a former occasion had been hideously plotted
^08 JANE EYRE
against; and both attempts he smothered in secrecy and
sank in ojl^livionl Lastly^ I saw Mr. Mason was submissive
io Mr. Rochest^; that the impetuous will of the latter held
complete sway over the inertness of the former: the few
words which had passed between them assured me of this.
It was evident that ixx their former intercourse^ the passive
disposition of the qne had been habitually influenced by the
active energy of the other: whence then had arisen Mr.
Rochester's dismay wh^ he heard of Mr. Mason's arrival?
Why had, the mere name of this unresisting individual —
whom his word now sufficed to control like a child — isAken
(^ iam, a few hours since^ as a thunderbolt might. fall on
a^oak?
. Oh! I could not foiget his look and bis paleness when be
Jrhispered: " Jane, I have ^ot a blow — I liave got a bbw,
azie.,''I could not foiget how the arm had trembled whidi
he rented on my shoulder: and it was no light matter which
could thus bow the resolute spirit and thrill the vigorous
fi^me pf Fairfax Rodiester.
, " When will he come? When will he come? " I cried in-
wardly, ^ the night lingered and Ungered— as my bleeding
patient ^rooped^ moaned > sickened: and neither day nor
aid arrived. I had > a^ain and again^ held the water to
Mason's white lips ; again and again offered him the stimu-
lating salts: my efforts seemed ineffectual: either bodily or
mental suffenng, or loss of bloody or all three combined, were
fast prostrating his strength. He moaned so, and looked so
weak, wild, and lost, I feared he was dying; and I aught
not even speak to him I
The candle, wasted at last, went out; a^ it eaqiired, I per-
ceived streaks of grey light edging the window curtains;
dawn was then approaching. Presently I heard Pilot bark
far below, out of his distant kennel in the court-yard: hope
revived. Nor was it unwarranted: in five minutes more the
grating key, the yielding lock, warned me my watch was
reliev^. It could not have lasted more than two hours:
many a week has seemed shorter.
Mr. Rochester entered, and with him the surgeon he had
been to fetch.
" Now, Carter, be on the alert, " he said to this last: " I
give you but half an hour for dressii^ the wound, fastening
the bandages, getting the patient downstairs and aU. "
" But is he fit to move, sir? "
JANE EYRE
209
** No doubt of it ; it is nothing serious : he is nervous, his
spirits must be kept up. Come, set to work. "
Mr* Rochester drew back the thick curtain^ drew up the
hoUand blind, let in all the daylight he could; and I was
surprised and cheered to see how far dawn was advanced:
what rosy streaks were beginning to brighten the east. Then
he approached Mason, whom the surgeon was already
handling,
" Now, my good fellow, how are you ? " he asked.
" She's done for me, I fear,*'was the faint reply.
** Not a whit 1— courage 1 This day fortnight you'll hardly
be a pin the worse of it: you've lost a little blood; that's all.
Carter, assure him there's no danger, "
'* 1 can do that conscientiouslyy " said Carter, who had
now undone the bandages; " only I wish I could have got
here sooner: he would not have bled so much — but how is
this? The flesh on the shoulder is torn as well as cut. This
wound was not done with a knife: there have been teeth
here! "
*'She bit me, " he murmured* ** She worried me like a
tigress, wh^ Rochester got the knife from her. "
*^ You should not have yielded: you should have grappled
with her at once, " said Mr, Rochester,
*'But under such circumstances what could one do? "
returned Mason. " Oh, it was frightful I " he added, shudder-
ing, " And I did not expect it: she looked so quiet at
** I warned you, " was lus friend's answer;'* I said^be
on your guard when you go near her. Besides, you might
have waited till to-morrow, and had me with you; it
was mere folly to attempt the interview to-night^ and
alone, "
Br« ** I thought I could have done some good* "
" ** You thought! you thought] Yes; it makes me im-
patient to hear you: but, however, you have suffered, and
are likely to suffer enough for not taking my advice; so TE
say no more. Carter— hurry 1 — hurry 1 The sun will sooii
rise, and I must have him off. "
** Directly, sk; the shoulder is just bandaged. I must
look to this other wound in the arm: she has had her teeth
here too, I think. "
" She sucked the blood ; she said she'd drain toy heart/*
said MasoHi
210 JANE EYRE
I saw Mr. Rochester shudder: a singularly maiked ex-
pression of disgust^ horror^ hatred^ warped Hs countmance
almost to distortion; but he only said: —
** Come, be silent, Richard, and never mind her gibbexish:
don't r^eat it. "
*'I wish I eouki foiget it " was the answer^
" You will when you are out of the coiantry: whea
you get back to Spanish Town, you may think of her as
dead and buried — or rather, you need not diink of her at
all. "
" Impossible to foiget diis night ! "
" It is not impbssiUe: have some energy, man. Ytm
thought you were as dead as a herring two hours since, and
you are all alive and talking now« There! — Carter has done
with you or nearly so; I'll make you decent in a trice.
Jane " (he turned to me for the first time since his re-eDtrance)
^'take this key: go down into my bed^coom, and walk
straight forwsod into my dressing-room; open the Uff
drawer of the wardrobe and take out a clean shirt and neck-
handkerchief: bring t^em here; and be nimble. "
I went; sought the rq)ository he bad mteitioned, found
the articles nailed, and returned with thenu
" Now, " said he, " go to tiae other side of the bed while I
order his toilet; but don't leave the room: yom may he
wanted again. "
I retired as directed.
" Was anybody stirring below when you went down,
Jane? " inquired Mr. Rochester, piesently.
• " No, sir; aSl was very stiM. "
" We shall get you off cannily, Dick: and it wiU be better,
both for your sake, and for that of the poor creature m
yonder. I have striven long to avoid exposure, and I should
not like it to come at last. Here, Carter, hdp him on with
las waistcoat. Where did you leave j^our furred doak? Yoa
can't travel a mile without that, I know, in this damned
cold climate. In your room? — Jane,run.downtoMr.lifl5oa's
loom,— the one next mine, — and fetch a doak ym wfll see
there. "
Again I ran, and again returned, bearing an immense
mantle lined wd edged wkh fur.
" Now, I've anouier errand for you, " said my smtning
master; " youmustaway to my room again. Whatamercy
you are shod with vdvet, Jane! — a dod-hoppmg :
»
JANE EYRE
would oever do at this juncture. You must open the middle
drawer of my toiJet*table and take out a little phial and a
little glass ygu will find there, — quick \ "
I flew thither and back, bringing the desired vessels,
" That's well I Now^ doctor^ 1 shall take the liberty of
administering a dose myself; on my own responsibility, I
got this cordial at Rome, of an Italian charlatan~-a fellow
yotJ would have kicked. Carter, It is not a thing to be used
indiscriminately J but it is good upon occasion: as now, for
instance, Jane, a little water, "
He held out the tiny glass, and I half filled it from tiie
water bottle on the wash-stand.
** That will do ; — now wet the lip of the phial,**
I did so: he measured twelve drops of a crimson liquid,
and presented it to Mason.
" Drmk, Richard: it will give yon the heart ymi lack, for
an hour or so. "
I *'But will it hurt me? — is it inflammatory? "
^'* Drink! drink! drink! "
Mr. Mason obeyed, because it was evidently useless to
resist. He was dressed now; he still looked pale, but he was
no longer gory and sullied, Mr. Rochester let him sit three
minutes after he had swallowed the liquid; he then took
his arm: —
**Now I am sine you can get on your feet/* he said:
— " try, "
The patient rose,
" Carter^ take him under the other shoulder. Be of good
cheer, Richard ; step out: — that's it 1 "
''I do feel better, " remarked Mr. Mason*
" I am sure you do. Now, Jane, trip on before us away to
the backstairs; unbolt the side-passage door, and tell the
driver of the post-chaise you wiU see in the yard — or just
outside, for I told him not to drive his latthng wheels over
the pavement — to be ready; we are coming: and, Jane,
if any one is about, come to the foot of the stairs and
hem. "
It was by this time half -past five^ and the sun was on the
point of rising ; but I found the kitchen stilJ dark and silent^
The side-passage door was fastened ; I opened it with as little
noise as possible: all the yard was quiet j but the gates
stood wide open, and there was a post-chaise, with horses
ready harnessed, and driver seated on the box, stationed
^12 JANE EYRE
Qutsdde.. I approached him, and said the gentlem^i were
capnng;. be nodded: and then I looked carefully round and
listened. The stillness of early morning slumbered every-
where; the curtains were yet drawn over the servants'
chamber windows; little binis were ju^t twittering in the
blossom-blanched orchard trees, whose bou^ drooped like
white garlands over the wall enclosing one side of the 3^ard;
the carnage horses stamped from time to time in their dosed
stables: all else was stil).
The gentlemen now appeared. Mason, supported by Mr.
Rochester and the surgeon, seemed to walk with toler-
able ease: they assisted him into the chaise; Carter
followed.
" Take care of him, " said Mr. Rochester to the latter,
" and keep him at your house till he is quite well: I shall
ride over in a day or two to see how. he gets on. Richard,
how is it with you? "
" The fresh air revives me, Fairfax. "
" Leave the window open on his side. Carter; there is no
wind— good-bye, Dick. "
" Fairfax "
" Well, what is it?'^
" Let her be taken care of; let her be treated as tenderly
as may be: let her " ^he stopped and burst into
tears. r
" I do my best; and have done it, and will do it, " was the
answer: he shut up the chaise door, and the vehicle drove
away. ; > .
" Yet would to God there was an end of all this ! " added
Mr. Rochester, as. he closed and barred the heavy yard-
gates. This done, he moved with slow step and abstracted
air towards a door in the wall bordering the orchard. I,
supposing he had done with me, prq > ared to return to the
house; again, however, I heard hun call " Janel " He had
opened the portal and stood at it, waiting for me.
" Come where there is some freshness^ for a few moments, "
he said; " that house is a mere dungeon: don't you fed
itSO? " ;v
" It seems to me a splendid mansion,. sir. "
" The glamour of inexperience is over your eyes, " he
answered; " and you see it through a charmed medium:
you cannot discern that the gilding is slime and the silk
draperies cobwebs; that the marble is sordid slate, and the
r
JANE EYRE
^
^:
b
lis bed woods mere refuse chips and scaly bark. Now here
(be pointed to the leafy enclosure we had entered) all is real,
sweety and pure, "
He strayed down a walk edged with box; with apple
trees, pear trees ^ and cherry trees on one side, and a border
on the other, full of all sorts of old-fashioned flowers, stocks^
sweet-wilhamSj primroses^ pansies, mingled with southem-
woodj sweet-briar^ and various fragrant herbs. They were
fresh now as a succession of April showers and gleams, fol*
lowed by a lovely spring morning, could make them : the sun
was just entering the dappled east, and his light illumined the
wreathed and dewy orchard trees and shone down the quiet
walks under them.
" Jane, will you have a flower? "
He gathered a half-blown rose, the first on the bush, and
offered it to me.
" Thank you, sir, "
" Do you like this sunrise, Jane ? That sky with its high
and light clouds which are sure to melt away as the day
waxes warm — this placid and balmy atmosphere ? "
'* I do, very much. "
'* You have passed a strange night, Jane? "
*^ Yes, sir. "
*'And it has made you look pale — were you afraid when I
left you alone with Mason ? "
" I was afraid of some one coming out of the inner
room/'
'* But I had fastened the door — I had the key in my
pocket: I should have been a careless shepherd if I had left
a lamb — ^my pet lamb— so near a wolfs den, unguarded:
you were safe/'
" Will Grace Poole live here stilJ, sir?'*
" Oh, yes I don't trouble your head about her^-put the
thing out of your thoughts. "
** Yet it seems to me your hfe is hardly secure while she
stays/*
** Never fear^I will take care of myself/*
" Is the danger you apprehended last night gone by now,
? "
I cannot vouch for that till Mason is out of England:
nor even then. To Uve, for me, Jane, is to stand on a crater-
crust wtiich may crack and spue fire any day. "
But Mr* Mason seems a man easily led. Your influence.
314 JANE EYRE
sir, is evidently potent with him: he will never set you at
defiance, ot wilfiSjy injure you. "
" Oh, no ! Mason will not defy me; nor, knowiog it, wiU
he hurt roe— but, unintentionally, he might in a momeat, by
one careless word, deprive me, if not of life, yet for ever ol
happmess. " , , . ,
" Tell him to be cautious, sir: let turn know what you
fear, and show him how to avert the danger* "
|Ie laughed sardonically, hastily took my hand, and as
hastily threw it from him.
" If I could do that, simpleton, where wouU the dang^
be? Annihilated in a moment. Ever since I have knowa
Mason, I have only had to say to him, * Do that,'and the
thing has been done. But I o^not give him orders in this
case: I cannot say * Beware of harming me, Ridiard;'for it
is imperative that I should keep him ignorant that harm to
me is possible. Now you look puzzled; and I will puzzle you
ferther. Yopa^e i^y little friend, are 3« > u not? "
" I like to serve you, sir, and to obey )«)u in afl that is
right. " , . .
" Precisely: I see you do. I see genmne conten^ent m
your gait, and mi^, your eye and face, when you are helping
me and pleasing me— working for me, and witii me, in, as
you characteristically say, * aU thM is ^ght :'for if I laid you
do what you thought wrong, there would be no light-footed
running, no neat-handed alacrity, ne lively glance and
animated complexion. My friend would then turn to me»
quiet and pale, and would say, * No, sir; that is impossible:
I cannot do it, because it is wrongs'and would become im-
mutable as a fixed star. Well, you too have power over me,
and may injure me: yet I dare not show you where I am
vulnerable, lest, faithful and friendly as you ar^, you should
txansfix me at once. "
'^ If you have no more to fear from Mr. Mason than yon
haveJErom me, sir, you are very safe, "
" God grant it may be so! Here, Jane, is an arbour; sit
down. "
The grbour was an aich in the wall, lined with ivy; it
contained a rustic seat. Mr. Rochester took it, leaving room,
however, for me: but I stood before him.
''Sit, " he said; ** the bench is long enough for two. You
don't hesitate to take a place at my side, do you? Is that
wrong, Jane? "
N
JANE EYRE sfi
I amwered iiim by assuming it: to refuse would, I felt,
have been unwise.
" Now^ my little friend, while the sun drinks the dew —
while all the flowers in this old garden awake and expand ^
and the birds fetch their y < }ung ones'breakfast out of the
Thomfieldj and the early bees do their first spell of work^
III put a case to you ; which you must endeavour to suppose
your own: but firstj look at mtj and tell me you are at ease^
and not fearing that I err in detaining you, or that you err
in staying/^
** No, sir; I am content "
" Wei), then, Jane, call to aid your fancy: — suppose you
were no longer a girl well reared and disciplined, but a wild
boy indulged from childhood upwards ; imagine yourself in
a remote foreign land; conceive that you there commit a
capital error, no matter of what nature or from what motives,
but one whose consequences must follow you through life and
taint all your existence. Mind, I don't say a crime ; I am
not speaking of shedding of blood or any other guilty act,
which might make the perpetrator amenable to the law: my
word is crrpt. The results of what you have done become in
time to you utterly insupportable* you take measures to
obtain relief: unusual measures, but neither unlawful nor
culpable. Still you are miserable; for hope has quitted you
on the very confines of lifer your sun at noon darkens in an
eclipsej which you feel will not leave it till the time of setting.
Bitter and base associations have become the sole food of
your memory; you wander here and there, seeking rest in
exile: happiness in pleasure — I mean in heartless, sensual
pleasure — such as dulls intellect and blights feeling. Heart-
weary and soul- withered, you come home after years of
voluntary banishment; you make a new acquaintance — how
or where no matter : you find in this stranger much of the good
and bright qualities which you have sought for twenty years,
and never before encountered ; and they are aH fresh, healthy,
without soil and without taint. Such society revives, regen-
erates : you feel better days come back— higher wishes, purer
feelings ; you desire to recommence your life, and to spend
what remains to you of days in a way more worthy of an
immortal being. To attain this end, are you justified in over-
leaping an obstacle of custom— a mere conventional im-
pediment, which neither your conscience sanctifies nor your
judgment approves?'*
ti6
JANE EYRE
He paused for an answer: and what was I to say? Okj for
some good spirit to suggest a judicious and satisfactory
response 1 Vain aspiration t The west wind whispered in the
ivy round me; but no gentle Ariel borrowed its breath as a
medium of speech : the birds sang in the tree*tops; bi4_
their song^ however sweet, was inarticulate- ^|
Again Mr. Rochester propounded his query: ^
" Is the wandering and sinfulj but now rest-seekiiig and
repentant, man justified in daring the world *s opinion, in order
to attach to him for ever this gentle, gracious ^ geniaJ stranger;
thereby securing his owu peace of mind and regeneradoo of
life?';
'* Sir/'I answered J " a wanderer*s repose or a sinner*s
reformation should never depend on a fellow-creature, Mea
and women die; philoi^ophers falter in wisdom^ and ChristiaiB
in goodness : if any one you know has suffered and erred, let
him look higher than his equab for strength to amend, and
sokce to heal, "
**-But the instrument — the instrument 1 God, who does
the work, ordains the instrument, I have myself — I tell it
you without parable— been a worldly, dissipated, restless
man; and I believe I have found the instrument for my cure,
in "
He paused; the birds went on carolling, the leaves lightly
rustling- I almost wondered they did not check their songs
and whispers to catch the suspended revelation: but they
would have had to wait many minutes— so long was the silence
protracted. At last I looked up at the tardy speaker: he was
looking eagerly at me,
" Little friend/* said he, in quite a changed tone— while
his face changed too ; losing all its softness and gravity, and
becoming harsh and sarcastic —''you have noticed my tender
penchant for Miss Ingram: don't you think if I married her
she would regenerate me with a vengeance ? "
He got up instantly, went quite to the other end of
the walk, and when he came back he was humming a
tune,
''Jane, Jane/'said hc^ stopping before me, " you are
quite pale with your vigils : don't you curse me for disturb-
ing your rest? "
*'Curse you? No, sir,**
" Shake hands in confirmation of the word. What cold
fingers I They were warmer last night when I touched them

w
JAKE EYRE ai7
t the door of the mysterious chamber- J4ne, whfen will you
watch with me again ? "
** Whenever I can be useful j sir. "
** For instance J the night before I am married ! I am sure
I shall not be able to sleep. Will you promise to sit up with
me to bear me company ? To you I can talk of my lovely one:
for now you have se«n her and know her/'
" Yes, sir, "
" She's a rare one, is she notj Jane? "
^'Yes, sir. "
** A strapper — a real strapper, Jane; big, brown^ and
buxom ; with hair just such as the ladies of Carthage must
have had. Bless me ! there's Dent and Lynn in the stables 1
Go in by the shrubbery, through that wicket, "
As I went one way^ he went anotheTj and I heard him in
the yard J saying cheering] y:—
" Mason got the start of you all this morning; he was gone
before sunrise; I rose at four to see him off. "

CHAPTER XXI
PiESENTiMENTs are Strange things I and so are sympathies;
and so arc signs: and the three combined make one mystery
to which humanity has not yet found the key. I never laughed
at presentiments in my life; because I have had strange ones
of my own. Sympathies, I believe, exist: (for instance,
between far-distantj long-absent, wholly estranged relatives ;
asserting J notwitlistanding their alienation, the unity of the
source to which each traces his origin) whose workings baffle
mortal comprehension. And signs^ for aught we know, may
be but the sympathies of Nature with man.
When I was a little girl^ only six years old, I^ one night,
heard Bessie Leaven say to Martha Abbott that she had been
dreaming about a little child ; and that to dream of children
was a sure sign of trouble, either to one's self or one*s kin.
The saying might have worn out of my memory, had not a
circumstance immediately followed which served indelibly
to fix it there- The next day Btesie was sent for home to the
deathbed of her little sister.
L
^
sj$ JANE EYRE
Of late I had often recalled this sttyiof and this incident;
lor dming the past week scarcely a mgfat had gone over
mr couch that lud not biopght with it a dream of an infant :
wbiA I Wfrnttimm hushed in my anns, some ti mes dandled on
my knee, sometimes watdied playing with daisies on a lawn;
or a^sin, daWiKng its hands in running water. It was a
waflmg dnld this n%bt, and a laughing one the neact: now it
nestled dose to me, and now it ran from me; txit whateva
mood the apparition evinded, whatever aspect it woie, it
faOed not for seven successive nights to meet me the moment
I enteied the land of slumber.
I did not like this iteration of one idea— this stiapge
recunence of one image; and I grew nervous as bodtirae
approached and the hour of the vision drew near. It was
iwom ceo^anionship with thb baby-phantom I had been
roused on that nKX > nlight night when I heard the cry; and
it was on the afternoon of the day following I was summoned
downstairs by a message that some one wanted me in Mrs.
Fairfax's room. On repairing thither, I found a man waiting
for me, having the appearance of a gentleman's servant: he
was dressed in deep mourning, and the hat he held in his
hand was surrounded with a crape band.
" I daresay you hardly rem^nber me, miss, " he said, rising
as I entered;''but nky name is Leaven; I lived coachman
with Mrs. Reed when you were at Gateshead eight or nine
years «ince, and I live there still. "
''Oh,Riri > ertl howdoyoudo? I remember you v«y well:
you used to give me a tide sometimes on Mi^ GeeK^iana's
bay pony. And how is Bessie? You are mamed to
''Yes,miss: my wifo is very hearty, thank you; she brought
me another litde one about two months since — we have iimt
now— «nd both mother and child are thriving. "
'* And are the family wdl at the house, Robert? "
''I am sorry I can't give you better news of them, miss:
tiiey are vei!y badly at present — ^in great trouble. "
''I hope no one is dead, " I said, glasicing at his t^ack
dress. He too looked down at the cmpe round his hat and
rq)liod,—
^'Mr. John died yesterday was a week, at his cfaambets
in London. "
" Mr. John?''
" Yes.^'
fANE EYRE
2^9
seir
k
And how does his mother bear it? "
" Why you see. Miss Eyre, it is not a common mishap; his
life has been very wild i these last three years he gave him-
self up to strange ways ; and his death was shocking/*
** I heard from Bessie he was not doing well. "
*^ Doing welU He could not do worse: he ruined his
Ith and his estate amongst the worst men and the worst
women. He got into debt and into jail : his mother helped
him oat twice, but as soon as he was free he returned to his
old companions and habits. His head was not strong: the
knaves he lived amongst fooled him beyond anything I ever
heard > He came down to Gateshead about three weeks ago
and wanted missis to give up all to him. Missis refused : her
means have long been much reduced bf his extravagance;
so he went back again » and the next news was that he
was dead* How he died, God knows! — ^they say he killed
himseJf. "
I was silent: the tidings were frightful, Robert Leaven
resumed : —
** Missis had been out of health herself for some time: she
had got very stout, but was not strong with it; and the loss
of money and fear of poverty were quite breaking her down.
The information about Mr. John's death and the manner of
it came too suddenly: it brought on a stroke. She was three
days without speaking; but last Tuesday she seemed rather
better: she appeared as if she wanted to say something, and
kept making signs to my wife and mumbling. It was only
yesterday morning, however, that Bessie understood she
was pronouncing your name; and at last she made out the
words J * Bring Jane — ^fetch Jane Eyre: I want to speak to
her*'Bessie is not sure whether she is in her right mind, or
means anything by the words ; but she told Miss Reed and
Miss Georgiana, and advised them to send for you. The
young ladies put it off at first; but their mother grew so
resttes, and said,'Jane, Jane/ so many times, that at last
they consented* I left Gateshead yesterday; and if you can
get ready. Miss, I should like to take you back with me
eariy to-morrow morning, "
** Y^, Robert, I shall be ready: it seems to me that I
ought to go/*
" I think so too, Miss. Bessie said she was sure you would
not refuse; but I suppose you will have to ask leave before
you can get off ? "
^
220
rANE EYRE
'* Yes; and I will do it now; " and having directed him to
the servants'hall, and recommended him to the care of
John^s wife, and the attentions of John himself, I went b
search of Mr. Rochester.
He was not in any of the lower rooms ; he was not in the
yard, the stables^ or the grounds. I asked Mrs, Fairfax if
she had seen him ; — yes : she believed he was playing biUiards
with Miss Ingram- To the billiard-room I hastened: the click
of balls and the hum of voices resounded thence; Mr.
Rochester, Miss Ingram, the two Misses Eshton, and their
admirers^ were all busied in the game. It required some
courage to disturb so interesting a party ; my errand, how-
ever, was one I could not defer, so I approached the master
where he stood at Miss Ingram's side- She turned as I drew
neaFj and looked at me haughtily: her eyes seemed to
demand, " What can the creeping creature want now? "
and when I said, in a low voice, " Mr. Rochester,*'she
made a movement as if tempted to order me away, I
remember her appearance at the moment, — it was very
graceful and very striking: she wore a morm*ng robe ol
sky-blue crape; a gauzy azure scarf was twisted in her
hair* She had been all animation with the game, and
irritated pride did not lower the expression of her haughty
lineaments.
" Does that person want you ? " she inquired of Mr.
Rochester; and Mr, Rochester turned to see who the
" person " was. He made a curious grimace,— one of his
strange and equivocal demonstrations — threw down bis cue
and followed me from the room*
" Well, Jane? *'he said, as he rested his back against the
school -room door, which he had shut.
" If you please, sir, I want l^ve of absence for a week or
two. "
" What to do?— Where to go? "
" To see a sick lady who has sent for me/'
" What sick lady?— Where does she live? "
" At Gatesh^d, in shire. "
" shire? That is a hundred miles off I Who may she
be that sends for people to see her that distance ? "
" Her name is Reed, sir, — Mrs, Reed. "
'* Reed of Gateshead? There was a Reed of Gateshead, a
magistrate/'
** It is his widow, sir.*'
JANE EYRE 221
" And what have you to do with her? How do yoa know
her? "
'* Mr. Reed was my undQ—my mother's brother. "
''The deijce he was! Yoo never told me that before: yon
alwa\*s said you had no relations, " ^ ^ . ^ j j i,-.
- None that would own me, sir. Mr. Reed is dead, and his
wife cast me off/
^'Be < Iuse I was poor, and burdensome, and she disliked
''But Reed left children?— you must have cousins? Sir
George Lv-nn was talking of a Reed of Gateshead, yesterday
-who he said, was one of the venest rascals on town; and
ln < iT^ was mentioning a Georgiana Reed of the same place,
who was much admired for her beauty, a season or two ago,
T Ann'^
" ^ " John Reed is dead, too, sir: he ruined himself and half-
niinid his family, and k supposed to l^ve comnntted suicide.
The news so shocked his mother that it brought on an
"'^'^SVlSt'giiod can you do her? Nonsense, Jane! I
would never think of running a hundred miles to see an old
Tudy who will, perhaps, be dead before you reach her:
besides, you say she cast you oft. " ^ , . •
•'Ye^, sir, but that is long ago; and when her circum-
stances were very different: I could not be easy to neglect
her wishes now. " ^^
" How long will you stay? , ^^
" As short a time as possible, sir-
" Promise me only to stay a week " - — ;
«• I had better not pass my word: I might be obliged to
hreak it " l'
" At all events you mU come back: you will not be in-
duced under any pretext to take up a permanent residence
with her? " ^ , .. „ , .. „
*^ Oh no I I shall certamly return if aU be welL
- And who goes with youP You don't travel a hundred
miles alone. " u » >
** No, sir, she has sent her coachmanp
'* A person to he trusted? " ,
*'Yes* sir. he has Uved ten year^ m the family,
Mr, Rochester meditated,''When do you wish to go?
'* Early to*morrow morning, sir/
^
I
222
JANE EYRE
" WelJ, you must have same money; 5«)u can't txav^el
without money J and I daresay you have not much : I have
given you no salary yet. How much have you in the world,
Jaoe?''he asked j smiling.
I drew out my purse; a meagre thing it was, ** Five
shillings, sir/'He took the pune^ poured the hoard into his
palm and chuckled over it as if its scantiness pleased hira.
Soon he produced his pocket-book : ** Herej " said he, offer-
ing me a note; it was fifty pounds, and he owed me but
fifteen. I told him I had no change.
*'I don't want change: you know that. Take your
wages/'
I dedmed accepting more than was my due. He scowled
at first; then^ as if recollecting somethingj he said: —
*'Rightj right 1 Better not give you all nowt you wouJdj
perhaps J stay away three months if you had fifty p > ounds.
There are ten: is it not plenty? "
** Yes, sir, but now you owe five/*
**Come back for it then: I am your banker for forty
pounds.'*
" Mr, Rochester, I may as well mentioD another matter of
business to you while I have the opportunity/'
*^ Matter of business ? I " m curious to hear it.''
" You have as good as informed me, sir, that you are
going shortly to be married? "
" Yes: what then? ^*
" In that case, sir, Ad^Ie ought to go to school: I am sure
you will perceive the necessity of it/'
" To get her out of my bride's way; who might otherwise
walk over her rather too emphatically. There's sense in the
suggestion; not a doubt of it: Ad^le, as you say, must go to
schooh and you, of course, must march straight to— the
devil? "
" I hope notj sir: but I must seek another situation
somewhere.*'
" In course I " he exclaimed, with a twang of voice and a
distortion of features equally fantastic and ludicrous. He
looked at me some minutes.
*'And old Madam Reed, or the Miss^, her daughters, will
be solicited by you to seek a place^ I supfKise ? "
'* Noj sir; I am not on such terms with my relatives as
would justify me in asking favours of them — but I shall
advertise/'
JANE EYRE
823
I
'* You shall walk up the pyramids of Egypt ! " he growled.
** At your peril you advertise I I wish I had only offered you
a sovereign instead of ten pounds. Give me back nine
poundSj Jane; Vve a use for it/^
" And so have I, sir/'I returned, putting my hands and
my purse behind me* " I could not spare the money on any
account,*'
" Little fiiggardr* said he, **'refusing me a pecuniary
fequest! Give me five pounds, Jane/'
" Not five shillings J sir; nor five pence/*
** Just let me look at the cash. "
" No, sir; you are not to be trusted/'
" Jane! "
''Sir? "
'* promise me one thing/'
** 1*11 promise you anything, sir, that I think I am likely
to perform/*
'* Not to advertise: and to trust this quest of a situation
to me. I'll find you one in time/^
" I shall be glad so to do^ sir^ if you, in your turn, will
prombe that I and Ad^le shall be both safe out of the house
before your bride enters it.*'
" Very well I very weUi FU pledge my word on it. You
go to-morrowj then? "
" Yes, sir; early. "
*'Shall you come down to the drawing-room after
dinner? "
" No, sir, I must prepare for the journey/'
" Then you and I must bid good-bye for a Jittle
while?*'
*'I suppose so, sir/*
" And how do people perform that ceremony of parting,
Jane? Teach me; I'm not quite up to it/'
** They say, Farewell; or any other form they prefer. "
" Then say it. "
" Farewell, Mr. Rochester, for the present. "
*'What must I say?**
'* The same, if you like, sir. "
*'Farewell, Miss Eyre, for the present: is that all? "
•'Yes. "
** It seems stingyj to my notions, and dry, and unfriendly.
1 should like something else: a little addition to the rite. If
one shook hands, for instance; but no, — that would not
224
JANE EYRE
content me either. So voull do no more than say Farewell,
Jane?^'
''It is enoughj sit: as much good-will may be conveyed
in one hearty word as in many/'
** Very likely; but it is blank and cool — ^* farewell/ "
" How long is he going to stand with his baclc against
that door?'* I asked myself; ** I want to commence my
packing/'The dinner-bell rang^ and suddenly away he
bolted J without another syllable: I saw him no more
during the dayj and was off before he had risen in the
morning,
I reached the lodge at Gateshead about five o'dock in the
afternoon of the first of May: I stepped in there before
going up to the hall. It was very dean and neat: the orna-
mental ^^■indows were hung with httle white curtains; the
floor was spotless ; the grate and fire-irons were burnished
brightj and the fire burnt clear. Bessie sat on the hearth^
nursing her kst-bom^ and Robert and his sister played
quietly in a comer,
" Bless you I — I knew you would come I " exclaimed
Mrs. Leaven, as I entered.
" Yes, Bessie/'said I, after I had kissed her; ** and I
trust I am not too late. How is Mrs. Reed ? — Alive still, I
hope/'
" Yk, she is alive; and more sensible and collected than
she was. The doctor says she may linger a week or two yet|
hot he hardly thinks she will finally recover/'
" Has she mentioned me lately? "
" She was talking of you only this morning, and wishing
you would come: but she is sleeping now; or was ten
minutes ago, when I was up at the house. She generally lies
in a kind of lethargy all the afternoon, and wakes up about
six or seven. Will you rest yourself here an hour^ miss, and
then I will go up with you ?'*
Robert here entered^ and Bessie laid her sleeping child in
the cradle and went to welcome him: afterwards she in-
sisted on my taking off my bonnet and having some tea; for
she said I looked pale and tired. I was glad to accept her
hospitality; and I submitted to be relieved of my travelling
garb just as passively as I used to let her undress me when a
child.
Old times crowded fast back on me as I watched het
bustling about— setting out the tea-tray with her best chinaj
JANE EYRE 235
^cutting bread aad butter, toastmg a tea-cake^ and, between
whiles, giving little Robert or Jane an occasional tap or
push, just us she used to give me in former days. B^sie had
retained her quick temper as well as her light foot a ad good
looks.
Tea ready, I was going to approach the table; but she
desired me to sit still, quite in her old^ peremptory tones, I
must be served at the fireside, she said ; and she placed before
me a little round stand with my cup and a pkte of toast^
absolutely as she used to accommodate me with some
privately purloined dainty on a nursery chair: and I smiled
and obey^ her as in bygone days*
She wanted to know if I was happy at Thorn field Hall,
and what sort of a person the mistress was ; and when I told
her there was only a master^ whether he was a nice gentle-
man, and if I liked him. I told her he was rather an ugly
man^ but quite a gentleman ; and that he treated me kindly^
and I was content. Then I went on to describe to her the
gay tympany that had lately been staying at the house; and
to these details Bessie listened with interest; they were
precisely of the kind she relished*
In such conversation an hour was soon gone: Bessie
restored to me my bonnet^ etc., and, accompanied by her^ I
quitted the lodge for the hall. It was also accompanied by her
that I had, nearly nine years ago, walked down the path I
was now ascending. On a darkj misty^ raw morning in
January, I had left a hostile roof with a desperate and em-
bittered heart — a sense of outlawry and almost of reproba-
tion — to seek the chilly harbourage of Lowood : that bourne
so far away and unexplored. The same hostile roof now
again rose before me: my prospects were doubtful yet; and
I had yet an aching heart. I still felt as a wanderer on the
face of the earth; but I experienced firmer trust in myself
and my own powers, and less withering dread of oppression*
The gaping wound of my wrongs, too, was now quite healed;
and the flame of resentment extinguished.
^* You shall go into the breakfast-room first, " said Bessie,
as she preceded me through the liall ; ** the young ladies will
be there/'
In another moment I was within that apartment. There
was every article of furniture looking just as it did on the
morning I was first introduced to Mr. Brocklehurst : the very
rug be had stood upon still covered the hearth. Glancing <'*■
«6 JANE EYRE
the book-caises^ I thought I could distinguish the two volumes
of Bewick's British Birds occupying tibeir old place on the
third sh^^ and Gulliver's Travels and the Avabian Nights
ranged just above. The inanimate objects were not changed:
but the living things had altered past recognition.
Two young ladies appeared before me; one very tall,
almost as tall as Miss Ingnun^— very thin too, with»a sallow
face and severe mien. There was someUung ascetic in her
look, which was augmented by the extrone plaiiiiiess of a
straight-skirted, t^k, stu0 dress, k stardied linen colkr,
hair combed away from the temf^es, and the nun-like orna-
ment of a string of ebony beads and a cmdix. This I f ^t sure
was Eliza, though I ooukl trace little resemblanoe to her
fbrmer self in that dongated aoid colourless visage.
The other was as certainly Geoi^giana: but not the
Georgiana I remembered— the slim and f airy-Kke g^ < rf
eleven. This was a full-Mown, very plump damsd, fair as waoc^
work; with handsome and regular features, hmf^hing blue
c^, and ringleted yelk) w hair. The hue o$ her dress was black
too; but its fashion was so different fnmi her iter's — so
much more flowing and becoming— 4t looked as stylish as tbe
other^s looked puritanieal.
In each of the sisters t^ifere was'one trait of the mother
— and only < me : the thin and pallid dder daughter had
her parent's Cairngorm eye : the blooming and luxuriant
youi^r girl had her contour of jaw and chiA,- < *pei4iaps m
Httle softened, but still imparting an indescribable hard«
ness to the countenance, otherwise so voluptuous and
buxom.
Both ladies, as I advanced, rose to welcome me, and both
addressed me by the name of " Ifiss Eyre.^'Elba's grectmg
was delivered in a short, abrupt voice, without a nn§e; imd
then she sat down again, fixed her eyes on the fire, and seemed
to forget me. G^rgisma added to her ^'How d'ye do? "
several commonplaces about my journey, the weather and
so on, uttered in rather a drawhng tone: and accon^)anMd
by sundry skle-glances that measured me from bead to foot —
now traver^ng the folds of my drab merino pelisse, and now
lingering on the plain trimming of my cottage bonnet. Young
ladies have a remarkable way of letting you know that tbey
think you a " quiz, " without actually saying the words. A
certain superdfiousness of look, codness of manner, non« >
(balance of tone, express fdilly their sedtiioents on the point.
JANE EYRE 427
wtthiHiJt commilitiiig them by any positive rudeness in word
or deed.
A sneer, however, whether covert or open, had now no
kmg^ that power over me it once possessed: as I sat between
my cousins, I wassurprised to find how easy I felt under the
total n^ledt of the «ne and the semi-sarcastic attentions of
the othor— £liia did not mortify, jK > r Georgiana ruffle me.
The fact was, I had other things to think about; within the
last lew months feeling^ had been stirred in jfte ^ much mote
potent than acy th^ ooiald caise--pains and pkasmres so
much more acute and exquisite had been e^ddted, than any it
was in their power ^ inffict'or bestow— ^that their airs gave
me no concern eithm* for igood or bad.
** (How is Mrs. Reed? " I asked soon, lookii^ calmly at
Geoij^ajia; who thought fit to bridle at the4tzect address^
as if It were an unexpected liberty.
" Mrs. £eedP Ahl mama you mean; she is extremely
poorly: I doubt if you. can see her to-night. "
** li, " said I, " you would just step upstairs and tell her I
am come, I should be miioh ob%ed to yon/'
Georgiana ahnost started, and she opened her blue «yes
wild and wide.''I know she had a particular ^h to see me, "
I added, " and I wouM fM > t 4tisr attending to her desire
longer than is absolutely necessary. "
''JMama dislikes being disturbed in an evening, " remarked
Eliza. I socMn rose, quietly took off my bonnet aod glov^
uninvited, and said I would just step out to Besaie--who was^
I dared say, in tbe kkchen — and ask her to ascertam whether
Mrs. Reed was disposed to receive me or not to-night. I went,
and having found Bessie and despatched her on my errand,
I proceeded to take further measures. It had heretofore been
my habit always to shrink from atroganee: received as I had
b^ to-day, I should, a year ago, hav^ resolved to quit Gates-
head the very next morning; now, it was disdosed to me all
at onoe, that that would be a foolish, plan. I had talcen a
journey of a hnndi»d miles to^ee my aunt, and I mnst stay
with bier till she was better—or dead: as to her daughters'
pride and foUy, Z must pot it on one side; midce myseH
independent of it. So I addressed the housdse^er; asked
ber to nbaw me a ioom, told her I should iprobaUy ibe a
visitor lor a week or two, had my trunk conveyed to my
chamber, and feUowed it thithn myself: I met Bessie on
tlMlandmg.
JANE EYRE
'* Missis is awake/'said she ; *'I have told her yon are here:
eome aod let tis see if she will know you, "
I did not need to be guided to the weU-known BOom: to
which I had so often been summoned for chastisement or
reprimand in lonner days. I hastened before Bessie, I softly
I Opened the door: a shaded light stood on the table, for it was
now getting dark. There was the great four-post bed with
amber hangings as of oldj there the toilet -table, the ann-
chair^ and the foot-stool : at which I had a hundred times
[been sentenced to kneelj to ask pardon for offences^ by me,
fimcommitted. I looked into a certain comer near, half-
'expecting to see the slim outline of a once-dreaded switch ;
which used to lurk there, waiting to leap out imp-like and
lace my quivering palm or shrinlang neck* I approached the
bed ; I opened the njrtains and leant over the high-piled
pillows.
Well did I remember Mrs. Reed's face, and I eagerly sought
the familiar image. It is a happy thing that time quells the
longings of vengeance, and hushes the promptings of rage and
aversion : I had left this woman in bitterness and hate, and
I came back to her now with no other emotion than a sort of
nith for her great sufferings, and a strong yeamiag to forget
and for^give all injuries — ^to be reconciled aiid clasp hands in
amity.
The well-known face was there: stem, relentless as
ever — there was that peculiar eye which nothing could
melt; and the somewhat raised, imperious, despotic eyebrow.
How often had it lowered on me menace and hate) and how
the recollection of childhood*s terrors and sorrows revived as
I traced its harsh line now! And yet I stooped down and
kissed her: she looked at me.
" Is this Jane Eyre? " she said.
" Yes, aunt Reed. How are you, dear aunt ? "
I had once vowed that I would never call her aunt again:
I thought it no sin to forget and break that vow now. My
fingers had fastened on her hand which lay outside the sheet:
had she pressed mine kindly, I should at that moment have
experienced true pleasure. But unimpressionable natures
are not so soon softened, nor axe natural antipathies so readily
eradicated : Mrs. Reed took her hand away, and^ turning her
face rather from me, she remarked that the night was wann.
Again she regarded me, so icily, I felt at once that her opinion
of me — her feeling towards me — was unchanged^ and ua*
JANE EYRE Z2g
changeable, I knew by her stony eye — opaque to tendemesSj
indissoluble to tears — that she was resolved to consider me
bad to the last; because to believe me good^ would give her
no generous pleasure: only a sense of mortification.
I felt pain, and then I felt ire; and then I felt a determina-
tion to subdue her — to be her mistress in spite both of her
nature and her will. My tears had risen^ just as in childhood:
I ordered them bade to tlieir source, I brought a chair to
the bed'head : I sat down and leaned over the pillow,
''You sent for me^^'I said, " and I am here ; and it is
my intention to stay till I see how you get onJ*
" Oh, of course I You have seen my daughters ? "
^ " Yes, "
" Wellj you may tell them I wish you to stay till I can
talk some things over with you I have on my mind: to-
night it is too late, and I have a difficulty in recalling them.
But there was something I wished to say — let me see''- — -
The wandering look and changed utterance told what
wreck had taken place in her once-vigorous frame. Turning
restlessly, she drew the bed-clothes round her; my elbow,
resting on a comer of the quilt^ fixed it down: she was at
once irritated.
*'Sit upT'said she; " don't annoy me with holding the
clothes fast— are you Jane Eyre? **
" I am Jane Eyre. "
*'I have had more trouble with that child than any one
would beUeve, Such a burden to be left on my hands — and
so much annoyance as she caused me, daily and hourly^
with her incomprehensible disposition, and her sudden
starts of temper, and her continualj unnatural watchings of
one's movements 1 I declare she talked to me once like some-
thing mad, or like a fiend — no child ever spoke or looked as
she did ; I was glad to get her away from the house. What
did they do with her at Lowood ? The fever broke out there,
and many of the pupils died* She, however, did not die: but
I said she did— I wish she had di©d !'*
L, " A strange wish, Mn, Reed: why do you hate her so? "
r " I had a dislike to her mother always; for she was my
husband's only sister, and a great favourite with lum: he
opposed the family's disowning her when she made her low
marriage; and when news came of her death, he wept like
a simpleton. He would send for the baby; though I entreated
him rather to put it out to nurse and pay for its maintenance.
230 JANE EYRE
I hated it tfae'first time I set my eyes on it — a sickly, wtmnng,
pining thing ! It would wall in its cradle all n%ht long — not
screaming heartily 13ce any other child, but whimperii^ and
moaning. Reed pitied it; and he used to nurse it and notice
it as if it had been his own: more, indeed, than he ever
noticed his own at that age. He would try to make my
children friendly to the little beggar: the darlings could not
bear it, and he was angry witii tiiem when they showed their
dislike. In his last illness, he had it brought contmuaDy to
his bedside; and but an hour before he died, he bound me
by vow to keep the creature. I would as soon have been
charged with a pauper brat out of a workhouse: but he was
weak, naturally weak. J[ohn does not at all resemble his
father, and I'm glad of it: John is Uke me and like my
brothers — ^he is quite a Gibson. Oh, I wish he would cease
tormenting me with letters for money! I have no more
money to give him: we are getting poor. I must send away
half the servants and shut up part of the house; or let it off.
I can never submit to do that — ^yet how are we to get on?
Two-thirds of my income goes in paying the interest of
mortgages. John gambles dreadfuHy, and always loses —
poor boy! He is beset by sharpers: John is sunk and de-
graded — ^his look is frightful — I feel ashamed for him when
I see him. "
She was getting much excited. " I think I had better
leave her now, " said I to Bessie, who stood on the other side
of the bed.
" Perhaps you had. Miss: but she often talks in this way
towards mght— in the morning she is calmer. "
I rose. " Stop ! " exclaimed Mrs. Reed, " There is anotiier
thing I wished to say. He threatens me — ^he continuaBjr
threatens me with his own death, or mine: and I dream
sometimes that I see him laid out with a great wound in his
throat,^ or with a swollen and blackened face. I am come to
a strange pass: I have heavy troubles. What is to be done?
How is the money to be had ? "
Bessie now endeavoured to persuade her to take a sedative
draught; she succeeded witii difficulty. Soon after, Mrs.
Reed grew more composed, and sank into a dozmg state. !
then left her.
More than ten days elapsed before I had again any con^
versation with her. She continued cither delirious or lethar-
tici and the doctor forbcide everythmg whidi could painfuDy
^^^^ JANE EYRE 231
^Txcite her, Meantimej I got on as well as I could with Geor-
giana and Eliza. They were very cold, indeed^ at first.
Eliza would sit half the day sewing, reading, or writing, and
scarcely utter a word dther to me or her sister, Georgiana
would chatter nonsense to her canary bird by the hour, and
take no notice of me. But I was determined not to seem at a
loss for occupation or amusement: I had brought my draw-
ing materials with me, and they served me for both^
Provided with a case of pencils, and some sheets of paper^
I used to take a seat apart from them, near the window^ and
busy myself in sketching fancy vignettes, representing any
scene that happened momentaniy to shape itself in the ever-
shifting kaleidoscope of imagination: a gtimpse of sea
between two rocks ; the rising moon, and a ship crossing its
disk; a group of reeds and water-flags, and a naiad's head,
crowned with lotus-fiowers, rising out of them; an elf
sitting in a hedge-sparrow's nest, under a wreath of hawthorn-
bloom*
One morning I fell to sketching a face: what sort oi a
face it was to be, I did not care or know. I took a soft black
pencil, gave it a broad point, and worked away. Soon I had
traced on the paper a broad and prominent forehead^ and a
square lower outline of visage; that contour gave me
pleasure; my fingers proceeded actively to fill it with
features. Strongly-marked horirontal eyebrows must be
traced under that brow; then followed, naturally, a well-
defined nose, with a straight ridge and full nostrils; then a
flexible-looking mouth, by no means narrow; then a firm
chin, with a decided cleft down the middle of it: of course,
some black whiskers were wanted, and some jetty hair,
tufted on the temples, and waved above the forehead* Now
for the eyes: I had left them to the last, because they
required the most careful working. I drew them large; I
shaped them well: the eyelashes I traced long and sombre;
the irids lustrous and large* *'Goodi but not quite the
thing,''I thought, as I surveyed the effect: ** They want
more force and spirit; " and I wrought the shades blacker,
that the lights might flash more brilliantly— a happy touch
or two secured success. There, 1 had a friend's face under
my gaze; and what did it signify that those young ladies
turned their backs on me? I looked at it; I smiled at the
speaking likeness: I was absorbed and content*
'* Is that a portrait of some one you know? " asked Ehza,

232 JAN£ EYRE
who had approached me unnoticed. I responded that it was
merely a fancy head, and hurried it beneath the other sheets.
Of course, I lied : it was, in fact, a very faithful represaita-
tion of Mr. Rochester. But what was tiiat to her, or to any
one but myself? Georgiana also advanced to look. The
other drawings pleased her much, but she called that'^ an
ugly man.'^ They both seemed surprised at my skill. I
offered to sketch their portraits; and each, in turn, sat for a
pencil outline. Then Geoigiana produced her album. I
promised to contribute a water-colour drawing: this put
her at once into good humour. She proposed a walk in the
grounds. Before we had been out two hours, we were deep
in a confidential conversation: she had favoured me with a
description of the brilliant winter she had spent in London
two seasons ago — of the admiraticm she had there excited —
the attention she had received; and I even got hints of the
titled conquest she had made. In the course of the afternoon
and evening these hints were enlarged on: various soft con-
versations were reported, and sentimental scenes repre-
sented; and, in short, a volume of a novel of fashionable life
was tlmt day improvised by her for my benefit. The com-
munications were renewed from day to day: they always
ran on the same theine — ^herself, her loves, and woes. It was
strange she never once adverted either to her mother's illness^
or her brother's death, or the present gloomy state of the
family proispects. Her mind seemed wholly taken up with
reminiscences of past gaiety, and aspirations after dissipa-
tions to tx > me. She passed about five minutes each day in
her mother's sick-room and no more.
Eliza still spoke little: she had evidently no time to talk.
I never saw a busier person than she seemed to be; yet it
was difficult to say what she did: or rather, to discover any
result of her diligence. She had an alarum to call her up
early, I know not how she occupied herself before breakfast,
but aft^ that meal she divided her time into regular por-
tions ; and each hour had its allotted task. Three times a
day she studied a little book, which I found, on inspection,
was a Common Prayer Book. I asked her once what was the
great attraction of that voKune, and she said " the Rubric. "
Three hours she gave to stitchitig, • ^th gold thread, the
border of a square crimson cloth, almost large enough for a
caiDCt. In answer to my inquiries lifter the use of this
" ^formed me it was a covering for t^e altar of a
" oew chi
JANE EYRE
233
ew church lately erected near Gateshead. Two hours she
devoted to her diary; two to working by herself in the
Jdtchen^garden; and one to the regulation of her accounts.
She seemed to want no company; no conversation* I
believe she was happy in her way: this routine sufficed to
her; and no tiling annoyed her so much as the occurence of
any incident which forced her to vary its clock-work
regularity.
She told me one evenings when more disposed to be com-
municative than usual, that John's conduct^ and the
threatened ruin of the family^ had been a source of profound
aflSictioD to her; but she had now, she said, settled her
mind J and formed her resolution. Her own fortune she had
taken care to secure; and when her mother died^ — and it
was wholly improbable^ she tranquilly remarked, that she
should either recover or linger long, — she would execute a
long -cherished project: seek a retirement where punctual
habits would be permanently secured from disturbance, and
place safe bameis between herself and a frivolous world, I
asked if Georgiana would accompany her.
** Of course not, Georgiana and she had nothing in
common: they never had had* She would not be burdened
with her society for any consideration, Georgiana should
take her own course; and she, Eliza, would take hers.''
Georgiana, when not unburdening her heart to me, spent
most of her time in lying on the sofa^ fretting about the
dulness of the house, and wishing over and over again that
her aunt Gibson would send her an invitation up to town.
** It would be so much better, " she said, " if she could only
get out of the way for a month or two, till all was over. " I
did not ask what she meant by " all being over/'but I
suppose she referred to the expected decease of her mother
and the gloomy sequel of funeral rites. Eliza generally took
no more notice of her sister's indolence and complaints than
if no such murmuring, lounging object had been before her.
One day, however, as she put away her account*book, and
unfolded her embroidery, she suddenly took her up thus : —
" Georgiana, a more vain and absurd animal than you,
was certainly never allowed to cumber the earth. You Imd
no right to be born; for you malce no use of life. Instead of
living for, in, and with yourself, as a reasonable being ought,
you seek only to fasten your feebleness on some other
person's strength: if no one can be found willing to burden
h.
234 JANE EYRE
her or himself with such a fat, weak, pttffy > usetess tiling, 3fOQ
cry out that you are iH^treated, n^lected, miserable. Then,
too, existence for you must be a scene of continual change
and excitement, or dse the worid is a dungeon: you must
be admired, you must be courted, you must be flattered—
you must have music, dancing, and society — or you languish,
you die away. Have you no sense to devise a system whidi
will make you independent of all efforts, and all wills, but
your own? Take one day; share it into sections; to each
section apf)ortion its task: leave no stray unemployed
quarters of an hour, ten minutes, five minutes, include all;
do each piece of business* in its turn with method, witi) rigid
negularity. The day wfli close almost before you are aware
it has begun; and you are indebted to no one for helping yott
to get rid of one vacant moment: you have had to sedc no
one's company, conversation, sympathy, forbearance; yon
have lived, in short, as an'independent being ought to do.
Take this advice: the first and last I shall olfer you; then
you will not want me or any one else, happen what may.
Neglect it — go on as heretofore, craving, whining, and idfi^
— Zad sufiFer the results of your idiocy, however bad and
insufferable they may be. Ttell you this plainly; and Isten:
^r though I shall no more repeat what I am now about to
say, I shsXL steadily act on it. After my mother's death, I
wash my hands of you: from the day her coffin is carried to
the vault in Oateshead duich, you and I will be as separate
as if we had never known eadi other. You need not think
that because we dmnced to be bom of the same parents, I
shall suffer you to fasten me down by even the feeblest
claim: I can tdl you this — ^if the whole human race, our-
selves excepted, were swept away, and we two stood alone
on the earth, I would leave you in the old world, and betake
myself to the new.*'
She closed her lips.
" You mi^t have spared yoursdf the trouble of delivermg
that tirade, " answered Georgiana. " Everybody knows you
are the most selfish heartless creature in exstence: and I
know your spiteful hatred towards me: I have had a speci-
men of it before in the trick you played me about Lord
Edwin Vere: you cotdd not bear me to be raided above you,
to have a titk, to be received into circles where you dare
'"'^w your face, and so you acted the spy and informer,
m my pn > s|)eets for ever. " Gecngiana to^ out her
JANE EYRE
235
handkerchief and bJew her nose for an hour afterwards;
Eliza sat cold, impassablej and assiduously industrious.
Tniej generous feeling is made small account of by some;
but here were two natures render edj the oue intolerably
acrid J the other despicably savourless for the want of it.
Feeling without judgment is a washy draught indeed; but
judgment un tempered by feeling is too bitter and husky a
morsel for human degbtition.
It was a wet and windy afternoon : Georgiana had fallen
asleep on the sofa over the perusal of a novel; Eliza was
gone to attend a saint's -day service at the new church — ^for
m matters of religion she was a rigid formalist: no weather
ever prevented the punctual discharge of what she con-
sidered her devotional duties ; fair or foul^ she went to church
thrice every Sunday, and as often on week-days as there
were prayers.
I bethought myself to go upstairs and see how the dying
woman spedj who lay there almost unheeded; the very
servants paid her but a remittent attention : the hired nurse,
being httle looked after, would slip out of the room whenever
she could. Bessie was faithful ; but she had her own family
to mind, and could only come occasionally to the hall. I
found the sick-room un watched, as I had expected: no
nurse was there ; the patient lay still, and seemingly lethargic ;
her hvid face sunk in the pillows: the fire was dying in the
grate. I renewed the fuel, re-arranged the bed-cbthes,
gazed awhile on her who could not now gaze on me, and
then I moved away to the window.
The rain beat strongly against the panes, the wind blew
tempestuously : ^* One lies there/'I thought, ^'who will soon
be beyond the wax of earthly elements* Whither will that
spirit— now struggling to quit its material tenement— flit
when at length released ? "
In pondering the great mystery, I thought of Helen Burns:
recalled her dying words — her faith — her doctrine of the
equality of disembodied souls, I was still listening in thought
to her well -remembered tones — still picturing her pale and
spiritual aspect, her wasted face and sublime gaze, as she lay
on her placid deathbed, and whispered her longing to be
restored to her divine Father*s bosom— when a feeble voice
murmured from the couch behind: " Who is that? ^'
I knew MrSi Reed had not spoken for days: was she^
reviving ? I went up to her*
236 JANE EYRE
" It is 1, aunt Reed/'
" Who — I? *'was her answer. •* Who arc you? " looking
at me with surprise and a sort of alarm^ but still not wildly.
" You are quite a stranger to me — ^where is Bessie? "
" She is at the lodge, aunt. "
" Auttt/'she repeated. *^ Who calls me Aunt? You are
not one of the Gibsons; and yet I know you — ^that face, and
the eyes and forehead are quite familiar to me: you are like
— ^why, you are like Jane Eyre!'*
I said nothing: I was afraid of occasioning some shock
by declaring my identity. =
" Yet, " said she, ** I am afraid it is a mistake: my thoughts
deceive me. I wished to see Jane Eyre, and I fancy a likeness
where none exists: besides, in eight years she must be so
changed. " I now gently assured her that I was the person
she supposed and desired me to be: and seeing that I was
understood, and that her senses were quite collected, I
explained bow Bessie had sent her husband to fetch me
from Thomfield.
" I am very ill, I know, " she Said ere long.'* I was trying
to turn myself a few minutes since, and find I cannot move
a limb. It is as well I should ease my mind before I die:
what we think little of in health, burdens us at such an hour
as the present is to me. Is the nurse here? or is there no
one in the room but you? "
I assured her we were aloncw
" Well, I have twice done you a wrong which I r^ret
now. One was in breaking the promise which I gave my
husband to bring you up as my own child; the other "
she stopped. " After all, it is of no great importance, per-
haps, " she murmured to herself: " and then I may get
better; and to humble myself so to her is painftil. "
She made an effort to alter her position, but failed: her
face changed; she seemed to experience some inward sen-
sation — the precursor, perhaps, of the last pang.
" Well: I must get it over. Eternity is before me: I had
better tell her. — Go to my dressing-case, open it, and take
out a letter you will see there. "
I obeyed her directions. " Read the letter, " she said.
It was short, and thus conceived: —
" Madam,
you have the goodne^ to send me " the address
JANE EYRE
IT
^%f my mece, Jane Eyre, and to tell me how she is ; it is my
iDtention to write shortly and desire her to come to me at
Madeira. Providence has blessad my endeavours to secure
a competency; and as I am unmarried and childless, I
wish to adopt her during my life^ and bequeath her at ray
, death whatever I may have to leave.
" I amj Madam, etCj etc.
*'John Ettre, Maddia. "

k
It was dated three yeais back.
" Why did I never hear of tliis ? ** I asked,
''Because I disliked you too fixedly and thoroughly ever
to I^id a hand in lif dug you to prosperity. I could not forget
your conduct to mej Jane — the fury with which you once
turned on me; the tone in which you declared you abhorred
me the worst of anybody in the world; the imehildlike
look and voice with which you affirmed that the very thought
of me made you sickj and asserted that I had treated you
with miserable cruelty. I could not forget my own sensations
when you thus started up and poured out the venom of your
mind : I felt fear, as if an animal that I had struck or pushed
had looked up at me with human eyes and cursed me in a
man's voice. — Bring me some water! Ofal make baste 1 "
** Dear Mrs, Refrf/'said Ij as I offered her the draught
she required^ " think no more of alt this, let it pass away
from your mind. Forgive me for my passionate language:
I was a child then; eight, nine years ha^ve passed since that
day. "
She heeded nothing of what I said; but when she had
tasted the water and drawn breath, she went on thus:—
^* I tell you I could not forget it; and I took my revenge:
for you to be adopted by your uncle, and placed in a state
of ease and comfort^ was what I could not endure. I wrote
Eo him; I said I was sorry for his disappointment, but Jane
E3?Te was dead: she had died of typhus fever at Lowood*
Now act as you please: write and contmdict my assertion —
eiqxjse my falsehood as soon as you like. You were bonij I
dunk, to be my torment: my last hour is racked by the
recollection of a deed, which, but for you, I should never
have been tempted to commit/*
'* If you could but be pei^uaded to think no more of it
aunt, and to regard me with kindness and forgiveness " -
" You have a very bad dbposition, " said she, " and
238
7ANE EYRE
to this day I feel it impossible to understand ; how for nine
y^rs you could be patient and quiescent under any treat-
ment, and in the tenth break out all fire and violence, I can
never comprehend. "
'^ My disposition is not so bad as you think : I am pas-
sionatej but not vindictive, ilany a time, as a little chUd,
I should have been glad to love you if you would have let
me; and I long earnestly to be reconcil^i to you now: kiss
me, aunt* "
I approached my cheek to her lips: she would not touch
it. She said I oppressed her by leaning over the bed; and
again demanded water. As I laid her down — for I raised
her and supported her on my arm while she drank^I covered
her ice-cold and clammy hand with mine: the feeble fingers
shrank from my touch— the glazing eyes shunned my gaze,
" Love me, then, or hate me, as you will, " I said at last,
*'you have my full and free forgiveness: ask now for God's;
and be at peace .'^
Poor, suffering woman 1 it was too late for her to make
now the elEort to change her habitual frame of mind: living,
she had ever hated me — dying, she must hate me stilL
The nurse now entered, and Besie followed, I yet lingered
half an hour longer, hoping to see some sign of amity: but
she gave none. She was fast relapsing into stupor; nor
did her mind again rally: at twelve o'clock that night she
died, I was not present to close her eyes; nor were either
of her daughters. They came to tell us the next moming
that all was over. She was by that time laid out, Eliza and
I went to look at her: Georgiana, who had burst out into
loud weeping, said she dared not go. There was stretched
Sarah Reed^s once robust and active frame, rigid and still :
her eye of flint was covered with its cold lid ; her brow and
strong traits wore yet the impress of her inexorable souL
A strange and solemn object was that corpse to me. I gazed
on it with gloom and pain: nothing soft, nothing sweety
nothing pitying, or hopeful, or subduing, did it inspire;
only a grating anguish for her woes^ — ^not my loss — and a
sombre tearless dismay at the fearfulness of death in sudi a
form,
Eliza surveyed her parent calmly. After a sEence of some
minutes she observed,—
" With her constitution she should have lived to a good
r > ld age: her life was shortened by trouble. " And then a
JANE EYRE
^39
spasm constricted her mouth for an instant; as it passed
a^^y she turned and left the roomj and did I. Neither of
us had dropt a tear.
i.
CHAPTER XXII
Me. Rochester had given me but one week's leave of
absence: yet a month elapsed before I quitted Gateshead,
I wished to leave immediately after the funeral ^ but
GeoTgiana entreated me to stay tiU she could get off to
London : whither she was now at last invited by her uncle,
Mr. Gibson; who bad come down to direct his sistcr*s
interment, and settle the family affairs. Georgiana said
she dreaded being left alone with Eliza; from her she got
neither sympathy in her dej action , support in her fears^
nor aid in her preparations; so I bore with her feeble-
minded quailings, and selfish lamentations^ as well as I
could, and did my best in sewing for her and packing her
dresses. It is true, that while I worked, she would idle;
and I thought to myself,'* If you and I were destined to
live always together, cousin, we would conunence matters
on a different footing. I should not settle tamely down into
being the forbearing party; I should assign you your share
of labour, aod compel you to accomplish it, or else it should
be left undone: I should insist, also, on your keeping some
of those drawling, half-insincere complaints hushed in your
own breast. It is only because our connection happens to
be very transitory, and comes at a peculiarly tnoumful
season, that I consent thus to render it so patient and
compliant on my part. "
At last I saw Georgiana ofi; but now it was Elim's turn
to request me to stay another week. Her plans required all
her time and attention^ she said: she was about to depart
for some unknown bourne; and all day long she stayed in
her own room, her door bolted within, filling tninksj empty-
ing drawers, burning papers^ and holding no communication
with any one. She wished me to look after the house, to see
callers, and answer notes of condolence.
One morning, she told me I was at liberty. " And/'she
added, ** I am obliged to you for your valuable services an^
240 JANE EYRE
discreet conduct 1 Tliere is s(»ne difference between fiving
with such a one as you, and with Geoigiana: you perfona
your own part in life, and burden no one. To-monow, " she
continued, " I set out for the Continent. I shall take up my
abode in a religious house, near lisle — a nunnery you would
call it: there I shall be quiet and unmolested. I shall devote
myself for a time to the examination of the Roman Catholic
dogmas, and to a careful study of the workings of their
system; if I find it to be, as I half suspect it is, the one best
(^culated to ensure the doing of aH things idecendy and in
order, I shall embiaoe the tenets of Rome and probabky take
the veil. "
Ineitiier expressed surprise at this resolution nor attempted
to dissuade her from it,''Hie vocation will fit yon to a
hair, " I thought: " much good may it do you ! "
When we parted, she said : ** Good-bye, cousin Jane Eyie;
I wish you well: you have some sense. "
I then returned: ** You are not without sense, cousin
Eliza; but what you have, I siqypose in another year wiU be
walled up alive in a Frendi convent. However, it is not my
business, and so it suits you — ^I donH; much care. "
" You are in the right, " said she: and with these wonis
we each went our separate way. As I shall not have occasion
to refer either to her or her sister again, I may as well mentioa
here, that Geozgiana made an advantagooos match with a
wealthy worn-out man of fashion; and that Eliza actually
took the veil, and is at this day superiortrf the convent where
she passed the period oef her novitiate: and which she
mdowed with her fortune.
How people feel when they are returning home inaa an
absence, long or short, I did not know: I had never experi-
enced the sensation. I had known what it was to come back
to Gateshead when a child, after a long walk — ^to be scolded
for looking cold or gloomy; and later, what it was to come
back from church to Lowood — ^to bng for a plenteous meal
and a good fire, and to be unat^ to get eidier. Neither of
these retumings were very pleasant or desinible: no magiKt
drew me to a given point, increasing in its strength of attrao-
tion the nearer I came. The return to Thomfidd was yet to
be tried.
My journey seemed tedious — very tedious: fifty miles one
day, a night spent at an inn; fifty miles the next day.
Dunng the first twelve hours I thought of Mrs. Reed in hei

JANE EYHE
241
Iftst inoments : I saw her disfigured and discoloured face, and
h^rd her strangely altered voice, I mused on the fuoeral
dayj the coffin^ the hearse, the black tmin of tenants and
servants — few was the number of relatives — ^the gaping
vault H^ the silent churchy the solemn service. Then I thought
of Eliza and Georgiana ■ I beheld one the cynosure of a ball-
nDom^ the other the inmate of a convent cellj and I dwelt on
and analysed their separate peculiarities of person and
character. The evening arrival at the great town of
scattered these thoughts; night gave them quite another
turn: laid down on my tmveller's bed^ I left reminiscence
for anticipation.
I was going back to Thomfield: but how long was I to
stay there? Not long; of that I was surg, I had heard from
Mrs* Fairfax in the interim of my absence; the party at the
hall was dispersed ; Mr. Hoc h ester had left for London three
weeks ago, but he was then expected to return in a fortnight.
Mts* Fairfax surmised that he was gone to make arrange-
ments for his weddings as he had talked of purchasing a new
carriage: she said the idea of his marrying Miss Ingram still
seemed strange to her; but from what everybody said, and
from what she had herself seen, she could no longer doubt
that the event would shortly take place, " You would be
strangely incredulous if you did doubt it/'was my mental
comment. ** I don't doubt it/'
The question followed,'* Where was I to go? " I dreamt
of Miss Ingram all the night: in a vivid morning dream I
saw her closing the gates of Thomfield against me and point-
ing me out another road ; and Mr. Rochester looked on with
his arms folded— smiling sardonically^ as it seemed^ at both
her and me.
I had not notified to Mrs. Fairfax the exact day of my
retnm; for I did not wish either car or carriage to meet me
at Mill cote. I proposed to walk the distance quietly by
myself; and very quietly, after leaving my box in the ostler's
care, did I slip away from the George Inn, about six o'clock
of a June eveningj and take the old road to Thomfield: a
road which lay ciuefly through fields, and was now little
frequented.
It was not a bright or splendid summer evening, though
feir and soft: the haymakers were at work all along the
road; and the sky, though far from cloudless, was such a«
pfomised well for the future; its blue — where blue'
JANE EYRE
visible— was mild and settled, and its cload stmta high and
tlun. The west, tooj was warm: no watery gl^m ctuUed it
—it seemed as if there was a fire lit, an altar burning behind
Its screen of marbled vapour j and out of apertures shone a
golden wdness.
I felt glad as the road shortened before me : so gkd that
I stopped once to ask myself what that joy meant: and to
remind reason that it was not to my home I was goings or
to a permanent resting-place^ or to a place where fond
friends looked out for me and waited ray anival. " Mis.
Fairfax will smile you a calm welcome, to be sure/'said I;
" and little Ad^Ie will clap her hands and jump to see you;
but you know very well you are thinking of another than
they; and that he is not thinking of you/'
But what is so headstrong as youth? What so blind as
inexperience? These affirmed that it was pleasure enough to
have the privilege of again looking on Mr. Rochester, whether
he looked on me or not; and they added^*'Hasten I hasten !
be with him while you may: but a few more days or weeks
at most, and you are part©! with him for ever l " And then
I strangled a new- bom agony— a deformed thing which I
c^uld not persuade myself to own and rear — and ran on*
They are making hay, too, in Thomfield meadows; or
rather, the labourers are just quitting their work, and return*
ing home with their rakes on their shoulders : now, at the
hour I arrive. I have but a field or two to traverse, and then
I shall cross the road and reach the gates. How full the
hedges are of ros^I But I have no time to gather any; I
want to be at the house, I passed a tall briar, shooting
leafy and flowery branches across the path ; I see the narrow
stile with stone steps; and I see— Mr, Rochester sitting
there, a book and a pencil in his hand : he is writing.
Well, he is not a ghost; yet every nerve I have is un-
strung; for a moment I am beyond my own mastery. What
does it mean? I did not think I should tremble in this way
when I saw him — or lose my voice or the power of motion in
his presence. I will go back as soon as I can stir: I need not
make an absolute fool of myself* I know another way to the
house* It does not signify if I knew twenty ways; for he
has seen me.
" Hillo!*'he cries; and he puts up his book and his
pencil.'* There you are! Come on, if you please. "
I suppose I do come on; though in what fashion I know
^tot; I
JANE EYRE
t; being scarcely cognisant of my movements^ and solici-
tous only to appear < ilm; and^ above allj to control the
working muscles of my face — which I feel rebel insolently
against my will, and struggle to express what I had resolved
to conceal. But I have a veil^t is down: 1 make shift yet to
behave with decent composure.
** And this is Jane Eyre? Are you coming from Millcote,
and on foot? Yes — just one of your tricks; not to send
for a c^mage^ and come clattering over street and road
like a common mortal, but to steal into the vicinage of your
borne along with twilight, just as if you were a dream or a
shade. What the deuce have you done with yourself this
last month?*'
" I have been with nay aunt, sir, who is dead. "
** A true Janian reply ! Good angds be my guard 1 She
com^ from the other world — from flie abode of people who
are dead ; and tells me so when she meets me alone here in
the gloaming! If I dared I^d touch you to see if you are
substance or shadow, you eU I— but I'd as soon offer to take
hold of a blue ignis faiuus light in a march » Truant i truant I "
he added, when he had paused an instant* " Absent from
me a whole month : and forgetting me quite, 1*11 be sworn 1 "
I knew there would be pleasure in meeting my master
again; even though broken by the fear that he was so soon
to cease to be my master, and by the knowledge that I was
nothing to him: but there was ever in Mr. Rochester {so
at least I thought) such a wealth of the power of communi-
cating happiness, that to taste but of the crumbs he scattered
to stray and stranger birds like me, was to feast genially*
His last words were balm: they seemed to imply that it
imported something to him whether I forgot him or not.
And he had spoken of Thomfield as my home — wotild that
it were my home!
He did not leave the stile, and I hardly liked to ask to
go by. I inquired soon if he had not been to London.
'* Yes : I suppose you found that out by second-sight ? "
" Mrs. Fairfax told me in a letter. "
** And did she inform you what I went to do ? "
" Ohj yes, sirl Everybody knew your errand. "
" You must see the carriage^ Jane, and tell me if yoa
don*t think it will suit Mrs* Rochester exactly; and whether
?he won't look like Queen Boadicea, leaning back against
those purple cushions. I wish, Jane, I were a trifle bette* "

244
JANE EYRE
adapted to match with her externally. Tell me^ now^ fairy
as you argj^ — can^t you give me a chann, or a philter, or
something of tliat sort, to make me a handsome man? **
*'It would be past the power of magicj sir; " and, io
thought, I added, *'a loving eye is all the charm needed:
to such you are handsome enough; or rather, your steroness
has a power heyond beauty/^
Mr. Roch^ter had sometimes read my unspoken thoughts
with an acumen to me incomprehensible; in the present
instance he took no notice of my abrupt vocal response;
but he smiled at me with a certaio smile he had of his own,
and which he used but on rare occasions. He seemed to
think it too good for common purposes ; it was the real sub-
sliine of feeling— he shed it over me now*
*'Pass, Janet,*'said he, making room for me to cross the
stile: " go up home, and stay 3rour weary Httie wandering
feet at a friend^s thr^hold. "
All I had now to do was to obey him in silence: no need
for me to colloquise further* I got over the stile without a
word, and meant to leave him cahnly. An impulse held me
fastj^a force turned me round, I said—Hjr something in
me said for me, and in spite of me: —
*'Thank you, Mr. Rochester, for your great kindness.
I am strangely glad to get back again to yon; and wherever
you are is my home— my only home,''
I walked on so fast that even he could hardly have ov*er-
taken me had he tried. Little Ad^le was half wild with
delight when she saw me, litis. Fairfax received me with
her usual plain friendliness, Leah smiled; and even Soipbie
bid me *'bon soir''with glee. This was very pl^sant;
there is no happiness like that of being loved by your fellow-
creatures j and feeling that your presence is an addition to
their comfort,
1, that evening, shut my eyes resolutely against the
future; I stopp^ my ears against the voice that kept
warning me of near separation and coming grief. When tea
was over and Mrs, Fairfax had taken her knitting, and I
had assumed a low seat near her, and Ad^le, kneeling oa
the carpet, had nestled close up to me, and a sense of mutual
afiection seemed to surround us with a ring of golden peace,
I uttered a silent prayer that we might not be parted far
or soon; but when, as we thus sat, Mr, Rochester entered,
miannounced, and looking at us, seemed to take pleasure
JANE EYRE
245
in the spectacle of a group so amicable-^^when he said he
supposed the old lady was all right now that she had got her
adopted daughter back again, and added that he saw Ad^le
was ** prete h croquer sa petite maman Anglaise'*^I half
ventured to hope that he wo old ^ even after his marriage,
keep us together somewhere under the shelter of his pro-
tection, and not quite exiled from the sunshine of his presence.
A fortnight of dubious calm succeeded my return to
Thomfield Hall, Nothing was said of the master's niarriage,
and I saw no preparation going on for such an event. Almost
every day I asked Mrs. Fairfajc if she had yet heard anything
decided r her answer was always in the negative. Once,
she said J she had actually put the question to Mr. Rochester
as to when he was going to bring his bride home; but he
had answered her only by a joke, and one of his queer looks,
and she could not tell what to make of him.
One thing specially surprised me^ and that was, there
were no joumeyings backward and forward, no visits to
Ingram Park: to be sure it was twenty miles off, on the
bonders of another county; but what was that distance to
an ardent lover? To so practised and indefatigable a horse-
man as Mr. Rochester, it woutd be but a moming*s ride.
I began to cherish hopes 1 had no right to conceive: that
the match was broken off; that rumour had been mistaken;
that one or both parties had changed their minds. I used
to look at my master's face to see if it were sad or fierce;
but I could not remember the time when it had been so
uniformly clear of clouds or evil feelings. If, in the moments
I and my pupil spent with hinij I lacked spirits and sank
into inevitable dejection^ he became even gay. Never had
he called me more frequently to his presence; never been
kinder to me when there— and^ alas I never had I loved him
so welU

JANE EYRE

CHAPTER XXIII
A SPLETfDm Midsummer shone over England: skies so pure,
sum so radiant as were then seen in long succession, seldom
favour, even singly, our wave-girt land. It was as if a band
of Italian days bad come from the South, like a flock of
glorious passenger birds, and lighted to rest them on the
clifis of Albion. The hay was all got in; the fields round
Thornfield were green and shorn; the roads white and
baked; the trees were in their dark prime; hedge and wood,
full-leaved and deeply tinted, contrasted well with the sunny
hue of the clear meadows between.
On Midsummer-evej Ad^le, weary with gathering wild
strawberries in Hay Lane half the day, had gone to b & l with
the sun. I watched her drop asleep, and when I left her I
sought the garden.
It was now the sweetest hour of the twenty-four: — " Day
its fervid fir^ had wasted, " and dew fell cool on panting
plain and scorched summit. Where the sun had gone down
in simple state — pure of the pomp of clouds-^spread a solemn
purple, burning with the light of red jewel and furnace
flame at one point, on one hill-peak, and extending high and
wide, soft and still softer, over half heaven. The ^st had
its own charm of fine, deep blue, and its own modest gem,
a rising and solitary star: soon it would boast the moonj
but she was yet beneath the horizon.
I walked a while on the pavement; but a subtle, well-
known scent — that of a cigar — ^stole from some window;
I saw the library casement open a hand-breadth; I knew
I might be watched thence; so I went apart into tiie orchard.
No nook in the grounds more sheltered and more Eden-hke;
it was full of trees, it bloomed with flowers: a very high
wall shut it out from the court, on one side; on the other,
a beech avenue screened it from the lawn. At the bottom was
a sunk fence; its sole separation from lonely fields: a
winding walk, bordered with laurels and terminating in a
gtant horse-chesnut, cirded at the base by a seat, led down
to the fence. Here one could wander unseen. While such
honey-dew fell, such silence reigned, such gloaming gathCT^,
I felt as if I could haunt such shade for ever: but in threading
the flower and fruit-parterres at the upper part of the in-
c

JANE EYRE
closure J enticed tht;re by the light the now-rising moon casta
on this more open quarterj my step is stayed — not by sound,
not by sightj but once more by a warning fragrance.
Sweet briar and southernwood, jasminej pink, and ros e, have
long been yielding their evening sacrifice of incense; this new
scent is neither of shrub nor fiower; it is — I know it well —
it is Mr, Rochester's cigar. I look round and I listen. I see
trees laden with ripening fruit, I hear a nightingale warbling
in a wood half a mile oE; no moving form is visible, no
coming step audible; but that perfume increases: I must
flee, I make for the wicket leading to the shrubber}'^ and I
see Mr, Rochester entering* I step aside into the ivy recess,
he will not stay long : he will soon return whence he came^
and if I sit still he will never see me.
But no — eventide is as pleasant to him as to me, and this
antique garden as attractive; and he strolls on, now lifting
the gooseberry-tree branches to look at the fruit, large as
pluntiSj with which they are laden; now taking a ripe cherry
from the wall ; now stooping towards a knot of flowers, dther
to inhale their fragrance or to admire the dew-beads on their
petals, A great moth goes humming by me; it alights on a
plant at Mr, Rochester's foot: he sees it, and bends to
examine it.
** Now, he has his back towards me/* thought I, ** and
he is occupied too ; perhaps, if I walk softly ^ I can slip away
unnoticed,**
I trode on an edging of turf that the crackle of the pebbly
gravel might not betray me: he was standing among the beds
at a yard or two distant from where I had to pass ; the moth
apparently engaged him, " I shall get by very well, " I
meditated. As I crossed his shadow, thrown long over the
garden by the moon, not yet risen high, he said quietly with-
out turning:-*
" Jane, coine and look at this fellow. "
I had made no noise: he had not eyes behind — could his
shadow feel ? I started at first, and then I approached him,
** Look at his wings,** said he, " he reminds me rather of
a West Indian insect; one does not often see so large and gay
a night-rover in England: there I he is flown. "
The moth roamed away, I was sheepishly retreating also;
but Mr, Rochester followed me, and when we reached the
|^» wicket, he said; —
^H'* Turn back : on so lovely a night It is a shame to sit in
248
JANE EYRE
the house; And surely no one can wish to go to bed while
sunset is thus at meeting with mo on rise,'^
It is one of my faults, that though my tongue is sometimes
prompt enough at an answer, there are times when it sadly
iaiis me in framing an excuse; and always tbe lapse o < xurs
I* at some crisis, when a facile word or plausible pretext is
-Specially wanted to get me out of painful embarrassment. I
did not like to walk at this hour alone with Mr, Rochester in
the shadowy orchard ; but I could »ot find a reason to allege
for leaving him. I followed with lagging step^ and thoughts
I busily bent on discovering a means of extrication; but he
I himself looked so composed and so grave also, I became
^ ashamed of feeling any confusion: the evil^if evil existent or
prospective there was — seemed to he with me only; his mind
was unconscious and quiet.
'^ Jane/'he recommenced^ as we entered the laurel walk,
I and slowly strayed down in the direction of the sunk fence
and the horse-chesnut, " Thomfield is a pleasant place in
summer, is it not? ■'
" Yes, sir. "
I " You must have become in some degree attached to the
bouse^—you, who have an eye for natural beauties, and a
good deal of the organ of Adhesiveness? "
" I am attached to it, indeed. "
'* And though I don't comprehend how it is^ I perceive you
have acquired a degree of regard for that foolish little child
Addle^ too; and even for simple dame Fairfax? "
I " Yes, sir; in different ways, I have an afifa^don for
both/'
** And would be sorry to part with them? "
" Yes/'
I ** Pityl " he said, and sighed and paused. " It is always
the way of events in this life, " he continued presently: *'uo
sooner have you got settled in a pleasant rating-place^ than
a voice calls out to you to rise and move on, for the hour of
repose is expired.'"
I *'Must I move on, sir? " I asked, " Must I leave Thorn -
'field? "
" I believe you must, Jane, I am sorry, Jan^, but I
believe indeed you must. "
I This was a blow: but I did not let it prostrate me,
'* Wellj sir, I shall be ready when the order to march comes/'
" It is come now — I must give it to-night. "
JANE EYRE
" Th«i yon are going to be married, sir? "
" Ex-act-Iy^pre-cise-Iy: with your usual acutenesSj you
have hit the nail straight on the head/'
''Soon, sir? "
** Very soonj my that iSj Miss Eyre: and you*ll re-
member, Jane J the first time I, or Rumour, plably intimated
to you that it was my intention to put my old bachelor's neck
into the sacred noosCj to enter into the holy estate of matri-
mony — to take Miss Ingram to my bosom , in short {she's an
esctensive armful : bat that's not to the point^ — one can't have
too much of such a very excellent thing as my beautiful
Blanche): well, as I was saying — ^h'sten to me, Jane! You're
not turning your head to look after more moths ^ are you?
That was only a lady-clock, child,'flying away home.'I
wish to remind you that it was you who first said to me^ T\4th
that discretion I respect in you — with that foresightj prudence
and humility which befit your responsible and dependent
position — that in case I married Miss Ingram— both you and
little Ad^le had better trot forthwith, I pass over the sort of
slur conveyed in this suggestion on the chamcter of my be-
loved; in deed J when you are far away, Janet^ 111 try to forget
it: I shall notice only its wisdom; which is such that I have
made it my law of action. Ad^le must go to school; and you.
Miss Eyrtj must get a new situation* "
" YeSj sir, 1 will advertise immediately; and meantime,
'suppose " ^I was going to say^'* I suppose I may stay
" Ijercj till I find another shelter to betake myself to: " but I
stopped, feeling it would not do to risk a long sentence, for
my voice was not quite under command.
" In about a month I hope to be a bridegroom/'continued'
Mr. Rochester; " and in the interim I shall myself look out
for employment and an asylum for you/'
'* Tlmnk you, sir; I an sorry to give "
** Oh, no need to apologise! I consider that when a
dependent does her duty as well as you have done yours, she
has a sort of claim upon her employer for any little assistance
he can conveniently render her; indeed I have already^
through my future mother-in-law, heard of a place that I
think will suit: it is to undertake the education of the five
daughters of Mrs. Dionysius O^Gall of Bittemutt Lodge,
Connaught, Ireland. You'll like Ireland, I think: they're
such warm-hearted people there, they say.'*
** It is a long way off, sir. "

3$o JANE EYRE
" No matter — a girl of your sense will not object to the
voyage or the distance. "
" Not the voyage, but the distance: and then the sea is
a barrier "
" From what, Jane? "
** From England and from Thomfield: and " —
" Well? "
" From you, sir. "
I said this almost involuntarily; and, with as little sanction
of free will, my tears gushed out. I did not cry so as to be
heard, however; I avoided sobbing. The thought of Mrs.
O'Gall and Bittemutt Lodge struck cold, to my heart; and
colder the thought of all the brine and foam, destined, as it
seemed, to rush between me and the master at whose side I
now walked ; and coldest the remembrance of the wider ocean
— ^wealth, caste, custom intervened between me and what I
naturally and inevitably loved.
" It is a long way, " I again said.
" It is, to be sure; and when you get to Bittemutt Lodge,
Connaught, Ireland, I shall never see you again, Jane:
that's morally certain. I never go over to Ireland, not having
myself much of a fancy for the country. We have been good
friends, Jane; have we not? "
" Yes, sir. "
" And whoi friends are on the eve of sq > aration, they like
to spaMl the little time that remains to them dose to eadi
oth^. Come— we'll talk over the voyage awi the parting
quietly, hiJf an hour or so, while the stars enter into their
shining life up in heaven y < (MKler: hoe is tiie chesnut tree:
here is the beach at its old roots. Come, we will sit there in
peace tOHiight, thou^ we should never more be destined to
sit there together. " He seated me and himsdf.
** It is a ku)g way to Irelaixi, Janet, and I am sony to send
my little friend on sodi weary tiavds: but if I can't do
bHtCT, how is it to be helped? Are you anything akin to me,
do you think, Jane? "
I coukl risk no soit of answer by this time: my heart was
fuQ.
^'Becajuse^*'he said, ^ I somccimes have a < |iieer feeling
widi re^ud to yon— especially when yon aie near me, as
now: itisasif I had a string somewhere under my kft ribs,
tjghtly and inextricably kvmed to a similar striqg situated
in the c oti e spundiug qoaiter of yewr littk feame. And if
JANE EYRE 251
that boisterous channd, and two hundred miles or so of
land come broad between us, I am afraid that cord of com-
munion frill be snapt; and then I've a nervous notion I
should take to bleedmg inwardly. As for you, — ^you'd forget
me.
" That I never should, sir: you know " ^impossible to
proceed.
** Jane, do you hear that nightingale singmg in the wood ?
Listen! "
In listening, I sobbed convulsively; for I could repress
what I endured no longer; I was obliged to yield, and I was
shaken from hestd to foot with acute distress. When I did
speak, it was only to express an impetuous wish that I had
never been bom, or never come to Thomfield.
" Because you are sorry to leave it? "
The vehemence of emotion, stirred by grief and love
within me, was claiming mastery, and strugglihg for full
sway; and asserting a right to predominate: to overcome,
to hve, rise, and reign at last; yes, — and to speak.
" I grieve to leave Thomfield: I love Thomfield: — ^I love
it, because I have lived in it a full and delightful life, —
momentarily at least. I have not been trampled on. I have
not been petrified. I have not been buried with inferior
minds, and excluded from every glimpse of communion with
what is bmht and energetic, cmd high. I have talked, face
to face, with what I reverence; wit£ what I delight in, —
with an original, a vigorous, aA expanded mmd. I have
known you, Mr. Rochester; and it strikes me with terror ^
and anguish to feel I absolutely must be tom from you for
ever. I see the necessity of departure; and it is like looking
on the necessity of death. "
" Where do you seethe necessity? " he asked, suddenly.
" Where? You, sir, have placed it before me. "
" In what shape? "
" In the shape of Miss Ingram; a noble and beautiful
woman, — your bride. "
" My bride! What bride? I have no bride! "
" But you will have. "
" Yes :— I will !— I will ! " He set his teeth.
" Then I must go: — ^you have said it yoiuiself. "
" No: you must stay! I swear it — and die oath shall be
kept. "
" I tell you I must go ! " I retorted, roused to something
^252
JANE EYRE
like passion. *'Do you think I can stay to become aothiog
to you? Do you think I am an automaton ?— -a machme
without feeling ? and can bear to have my morsel ol bread
snatched from my lips, and my drop of living water dashed
from my cup? Do you think, because I am poor, obscure,
plain, and little, I am soulless and heartless? You think
wrong] — I have as miich soul as you, — and full as much
heart! And if God had gifted me with some beanty, and
much wealth, I should have made it as hard for you to leave
roe, as it is now for me to leave you. I am not talking to you
now through the medium of custom, conventionalities, or
even of mortal flesh: — it is my spirit that addresses your
spirit; just as if both had passed through the grave^ and we
stood at God's feet^ equal, — as we are I "
^'As we are ! " repeated Mr. Rochester — " so, " he added*
eaclosing me in his armSj gathering me to his breast, pressing
\ his lips on my lips : " so, Jane 1 "
''Yes, so, sir/'I rejoined: " and yet not so; for you are
a married man — or as good as a married man, and wed to
one inferior to you — to one with whom you have no sym-
pathy — whom I do not believe you truly love; for I ha\^
seen and heard you sneer at her. I would scorn such a uaisa:
therefore I am better than you~let me go I "
''Where, Jane ? To Ireland ? "
" Yes — to Ireland. I have spoken my mind, and can go
anywhere now. "
" Jane, be still; don't struggle so, like a wild^ frantic bird
that is rending its own plumage in its desperation. "
*M am no bird; and no net ensnares me; I am a free
1 human being mth an independent will; which I now exert
to leave you. "
Another effort set me at liberty, and I stood erect before
him,
** And your will shall decide your destiny,''he saidt *'I
offer you my hand, my heart, and s. share of all my posses-
sions. "
" You play a i & tcZj which I merely laugh at, "
" I ask you to pass through hfe at my side — to be my
second self and best earthly companion. "
*'For that fate you have alr^y made your cboioe^ and
must abide by it. "
*- Jane, be still a few moments: you are over-excited: I
will be still to©. "
- JANE EYRE 253
Pa waft of wind came sweeping do.™ the " ^- " f " ^I^'!^
\:L7£ trgh the houghs of the d.«nut = ^^^^^^
• aightbgalc's song was th^ ^^^ °Sch«ttr sat quiet, look-
'" ^S.^: ^^'Sj ^': J-e, and let u. explain and under-
'^? S " v^'aglin ™ to your side: I ^ torn away
Mw, and cannot return. " . ^ ^ I
" But, Jane, I summon you as my wite. tt is you j
btend to marry. " 1 .j „-
1 y,^ silent: I thought he mocked me.
" Come, Jane— come hither. ^^
" Your bride stands between us.
He rose,.and tl^ft''sdd 1?ar < irawing me to him.
\ . < S^m^VaHshira^5'm1li.enerfane,willyo«
marry me?'* .,, , writhed myself from his
Still I did not answer, and still i wnmeu ui/
jriasp: for I was still incrediibus.
" po you doubt me, Jane?
" Entirely. "
*'You have no faith m me r
'.'a™ ri^ Ikr in your eyes? " he asked passionately.
■^ ^ ^. ™ .Hu he convinced. What love have I
" Little sceptic, y™ f^ J=, " " ^^^ toow. What love has
''^ ?rJfr vi Slh^ve tKLs to prove: I caused
she for me? None. ^J " ^ j^ ,^ not a third of
a rumour to reach l'" *^'f I " T oresented myseU to see
»n. Will you be mine? Say yes, quickly.
k
ANE EYRl
** Mr. Socliester, let me look at your face: turn to thm
moonlight, "
''Why? "
** Because I want to read your countenance; tum!'*
" There: yoti will find it scarcely more legible than a
crumpled J scratched page. Read on: only make haste, for
I suffer, "
His face was very much agitated and very moch flushed^
and there were strong workings in the features^ and strange
gleams in the eyes,
" Ohj Jane, you torture me ! " he exclaimed. " With that
searching and yet faithful and generous look, you torture
me I
" How can I do that ? If you are true and your offer
real, my only feeUngs to yoa must be gratitude and de-
votion — they cannot torture. "
" Gratitude! " he ejaculated; and added wildly— *'Jane,
accept me quickly. Say Edward — give me my name — Ed-
ward — I will marry you, "
'* Are you in earnest?— Do you truly love mc? — Do you
sincerely wish me to be your wife? "
" I do; and if an oath is necessary to satisfy you, I swear
it, "
" Then, sir, I will marry you,'*
" Edward— my little wifeT*
" Dear Edward r'
" Come to mc^— come to me entirely now, " said he: and
added, in his deepest tone, speaking in my ear as his chede
was laid on mine, "'Make my happiness— I will make youis. "
'*God pardon me! " he subjoined ere long, *'and man
meddle not with me; I have her, and will hold her, "
" There is no one to meddle, sir* I have no kindred to
interfere, "
" Ho— that is the best of it/* he said. And if I had loved
him less I should have thought bis accent and look of exulta-
tion savage: but sitting by him, roused from the nightmare
of parting— called to the pamdise of union- 1 thought only
of the bliss given me to drink in so abundant a flow. Again
and again he said, " Are you happy, Jane? " And again
and again I answered,''Yes, " After which he murmured^
" It will atone— it will atone. Have I not found her friendless^
and cold, and comfortless? Will I not guard, and cherish,
find solace her? Is there not love in my heart, and constancy
iftE EYRE 255
^Id my resolve? It will expiate at God's tribunal. I know
my Maker sanctions what I do. For the world's judgment —
I wash nty hands thereof. For man's opinion — I defy it.'*
But what had befallen the night? The moon was not yet
setj and we were all in shadow: I couid scarcely see my
master's face^ near as I was. And what ailed the chesnut
tree? it writhed and groaned; while wind roared in the
Lmrel walk, and came sweeping over us*
*'We must go in/'said Mr, Rochester: " the weather
changes, I could have sat with thee till morning, Jane.**
** And s!o/'thought I^ " could I with you, " I should have
said so, perhaps, but a livid^ vivid spark leapt out of a cloud
at which I was looking, and there was a crack, a crash, and
a close rattling peal ; and I thought only of biding my dazzled
eyes against Mr. Rochester's shoulder.
The rain rushed down. He hurried me up the walk^
through the grounds, and into the house; but we were
quite wet before we could pass the threshold. He was taking
off my shawl in the hall, and shaking the water out of my
loosened hairj when Mrs. Fairfax emerged from her room,
I did not observe her at first, nor did Mr* Rochester. The
lamp was lit. The dock was on the stroke of twelve,
** Hasten to take off your wet things/'said he: " and
before you go, good-night — good-night, my darling I "
He kissed me repeatedly. When I looked upj on leaving
his arms, there stood the widow, pale, grave, and amazed,
I only smiled at her, and ran upstairs, ** Explanation will
do for another tune, " thought I. Still, when I reached my
chamber, I felt a pang at the idea she should even temporarily
misconstrue what she had seen. But joy soon effac^ every
other feehng; and loud as the wind blew, near and deep
as the thunder crashed^ fierce and frequent as the lightning
gleamed, cataract-like as the rain fell during a storm of two
hours'duration, I experienced no fear, and little awe, Mr,
Rochester came thrice to my door in the course of it, to ask
if I was safe and tranquil: and that was comfort, that was
strength for anything*
Before I left my bed in the morning, little Ad^le came
running in to tell me that the great horse-chcsnut at the
bottom of the orchard had been struck by lightning in the
nightj and half of it split away.
155 TANE EYRE

GHAPTER XXIV
As I rose and dressed, I thought over what had happened^
and wondered if it were a dream. I could not be certain of
the reality till I had seen Mr, Rochester again, and heard
him renew his words of love and promise.
WhDe armnging my hair, I looked at my face in the glass,
and feit it was no longer plain : there was hope in its aspetrt,
and life in its colour: and my eyes seemed as if they had
beheld the fount of fruition, and borrowed beams from the
lustrous ripple, I had often been im willing to look at m^r
master, because I feared he could not be pleased at my
look; but I was sure I might lift my face to his now^ and
not coot his affection by its expression, I took a plain but
clean and light summer dress from my drawer and put it onr
it seemed no attire had ever so well become me; because
none had I ever worn in so blissful a mood,
I WES not surprised, when I ran down into the hall, to see
that a brilliant June morning had succeeded to the tempest
of the night; and to feel, through the open glass door^ the
breathing of a fresh and fragrant breeze. Nature must be
gladsome when I was so happy. A beggar-woman and her
Bttle boy— pale, ragged objects both — were coming up the
walkj and I mn down and gave them all the money I happened
to have in my purse — some three or four shillings : good or
had, they must part^e of my jubilee. The rooks cawed^
and blither birds sang; but nothing was so merry or so
musical as my own rejoicing heart,
Mrs. Fairfax surprised me by looking out of the window
with a sad countenance, and saying gravely: — ** Miss Eyre,
will you come to breakfast? " During the meal she was
quiet and coo! : but I could not undeceive her then, I must
wait for my master to give explanations ; and so must she.
1 ate what I could, and then I hastened upstairs. I met
Adile lea\'ing the school-room <
'* Where are you going? It is time for lessons, "
** Mr. Rochester has sent me away to the nursery.*'
" Where is he? "
" In there, " pointing to the apartment she had left; and
I went in J and there he stood.
** Come and hid me good-moming, " said he. I gladly
Fane eyre
¥
vanced ; and it was not merely a cold word now, or even
a shake of the hand that I received, but an embrace and a
kiss. It seemed natural: it seemed genkl to be so well-
loved, so caressed by him.
'* Jane^ you look blooming, and smiling, and pretty, "
aaid he; " truly pretty this morning. Is this my pale little
elf? Is this my mustard-seed? This little sunny-faced girl
with the dimpled cheek and rosy hpsj the satin^mooth
hazel bair, and the radiant hazel eyes ? " (I had green eyes,
reader; but you must excuse the mistake: for him they
were new-dyed, I suppose.)
" It is Jane Eyre, sir. "
" Soon to be Jane Rochester/'he added:'* m four weeks,
Janet; not a day more. Do you hear that? "
I did, and I a > uld not quite comprehend it: it made me
giddy. The iei & Ungt the announcement sent through me,
was something stronger than was consistent with joy —
something that smote and stunned : It was, I think, almost
** You blashed, and now you are white, Jane: what is
that for?'*
'* Because you gave me a new name — Jane Rochester;
and it seems so strange. "
" Yes- Mrs. Rochester, " said he; ** young Mrs. Rochester
—Fairfax Rochester's girl-bride. "
" It can never be, sir; it do^ not sound likdy. Human
beings never enjoy complete happiness in this world. I was
not bom for a different destiny to the rest of my species;
to imagine such a tot befalling me is a fairy tale — a day--
dream. "
'* Which I can and will reahse. I shall begin to-day. This
morning I wrote to my banker in London to send roe certain
jewels he has in his keeping,— heirlooms for the ladies oi
Thomfield, In a day or two I hope to pour them into your
lap: for every privilege, every attention shall be yours,
that I would accord a peer's daughter if about to marry
her. "
" Oh, sir!— never mind jeweb! I don*t like to hear them
spoken of. Jewels for Jane Eyre sounds unnatural and
strange: I would rather not have them. "
*'I will myself put the diamond chain round your neck,
and the circlet on your forehead , " -which it will become:
for nature, at least, has stamped her patent of nobility'^
k
258 JANE EYRE
this brow^ Jane; and I will clasp the bracelets on these fine
wrists, and load these fairy-like fingers with rings. "
** No, no, sir! think of other subjects, and speak of other
things, and in another strain. Don't address me as if I were
a beauty; I am your plain, Quakerish governess. "
" You are a b^uty, in my eyes; and a beauty just after
the desire of my heart, — delicate and aerial. "
" Puny and insignificant, you mean. You are dreaming,
sir, — or you are sneering. For God's sake, don't be ironical I "
** I will make the world acknowledge you a beauty, too, "
he went on, while I really became uneasy at the strain he
had adopted ; because I felt he was either deluding himself,
or trying to delude me. " I will attire my Jane in satin and
lace, and she shall have roses in her hair; and I will cover
the head I love best with a priceless veil. "
" And then you won't know me, sir; and I shall not be
your Jane Eyre any longer, but an ape in a harlequin's
jacket, — a jay in borrowed plumes. I would as soon see 3rou,
Mr. Rochester, tricked out m stage-trappings, as myself clad
in a court-lady's robe; and I don't call you handsome, sir,
though I love you most dearly: far too dearly to flatter you.
Don't flatter me. "
He pursued his theme, however, without noticing my
deprecation. " This very day I shall take you in the carriage
to Millcote, and you must choose some dresses for yourself.
I told you we shall be married in four weeks. The wedding
is to take place quietly, in the church down below yonder;
and then I shall waft you away at once to town. After a
brief stay there, I shall bear my treasure to regions nearer
the sun: to French vineyards and Italian plains; and she
shall see whatever is famous in old story and in modem
record: sheshall taste, too, of tiie life of cities; and she shall
learn to value herself by just comparison with others. "
" Shall I travel?— and with you, sir? "
" You shall sojourn at Paris, Rome, and Naples: at
Florence, Venice, and Vienna: all the ground I have
wandered over shall be re-trodden by you: wherever I
stamped my hoof, your sylph's foot shall stq) also- Ten
years since, I flew through Europe half mad ; with disgust,
hate, and rage, as my companions: now I shall revisit it
healed and cleansed, with a very angel as my comforter. "
I laughed at him as he said this. " I am not an angel, " I
asserted; " and I will not be one till I die: I will be myself.
i:
JANE EYRE

^y^
T. Roches ter^ you must neither expect nor exact anything
celestial of me— for you will not get it^ any more than I shaU
get it of you: which I do QOt at all anticipate/'
** What do you anticipate of me? *'
" For a little while you will perhaps be as you are noWj—
a very httle while; and then you will turn cool; and then
you will be capricious; and then you will be stem, and I
shall have much ado to please you : but when you get well
used to me, you will perhaps like me agab, — like me, I say,
not Ime me, I suppose your love wiU efEervesce in six months,
or less. I have observed in books written by men, that
period assigned as the farthest to which a husband's ardour
ejd:ertds. Yet, after all, as a fdend and companion^ I hope
never to become quite distasteful to my dear master/'
" Distasteful I and hke you again ! 1 think I shall like you
again and yet again : and I will make you confess I do not
only likgf but lave you — with truths fervour^ constancy. "
*'Yet are you not capricious, sir?'*
'* To women who please me only by their faces, I am the
very devil when I find out they have neither souls nor
hearts— when they open to me a perspective of flatness,
triviality, and perhaps imbecility, coarseness, and ill-
temper: but to the clear eye and eloquent tongue^ to the souJ
made of fire, and the character that bends but does not
break — at once supple and stable, tractable and consistent —
I am ever tender and true- "
" Had you ever experience of such a character, sir? Did
you ever love such an one ? *'
*'I love it now, "
" But before me: if I, indeed, in any respect come up to
^our difficult standard ? "
I never met your likeness. Jane: you please me, and
yoy master me™you seem to submit, and I like the sense of
pliancy you impart; and while I am twining the soft, silken
skein round my finger, it sends a thrill up my arm to my
heart. I am influenced — conquered; and the influence is
sweeter than I can express ; and the conquest I undergo has
a witchery beyond any triumph / can win. Why do you
smile, Jane? What does that inexphcable, that uncanny
turn of countenance mean ? "
" I was thinking, sir (you will excuse the idea; it was in-
voluntary), I was thinking of Hercules and Samson with
their charmers "
26o
JANE EYRE
" You wcre^ you little elfish'*— —
*'Hush, sir l You don't talk very wisely just now ; any
more than those gentlemen acted very wisely. However, had
they been married^ they would no doubt by their severity as
husbands have made up for their softness as suitors; and so
will you J I fear. I wonder how you will answer me a year
hence^ should I ask a favour it does not suit your convenience
or pleasure to grant, "
" Ask me something noWj Janet — the least thing: I desire
to be entreated'*
** Indeed, I will^_ sir; I have my petition all r^dy, "
" Speak ! But if you look up and smile with that coun-
tenance, I shaU swear concession before I know to what, and
that will make a fool of me. "
" Not at all, sir; I ask only this : don't send for the jewels,
and don't crown me with roses: 3^u might as well put a
border of go!d lace round that plain pocket handkerchief
you have there. "
** I might as well * gild refined gold,'I know it: your
request is granted then — for the time, I will remand the
order I despatched to my banker. But you have not yet
asked for anything: you have prayed a gift to be with*
drawn: try again/'
" Wellj then, sir, have the goodness to gratify my curiosity^
which is much piqued on one point,*'
He looked disturbed. " What? what? " he said hastily.
** Curiosity is a dangerous petition : it is weO I have not
taken a vow to accord every request'*
" But there can be no danger in complying with this,
sir. "
" Utter it, Jane: but I wish that instead of a mere in-
quiry into, perhaps, a secret, it was a wish for half my
estate/'
''Now, king Ahasuems \ What do I want with half your
estate? Do you think I am a Jew-usurer, seeking good
investment in land? I would much rather have all your
confidence. You wiD not exclude me from your confidence,
if you admit me to your heart? "
" You are welcome to all my confidence that is worth
having, Jane: but for God*s sake, don't desire a useless
burden! Don*t long for poison — don*t turn out a down-
right Eve on my hands 1 *'
''Why not, sir? You have just been telling me how mticb

JANE EYRE 261
you liked to be conquered j and bow pleasant over-persuasion
is to you. Don't you think I had better take advantage of
the confession J and begin and coax and entreat — even cry
and be sulky if necessary — for the sake of a mere essay of my
power?'^
** I dare you to any auch expenmeat. Encroach^ pre-
sume^ and the game is up/'
*'Is itj sir? You soon give in. How stem you look now I
Your eyebrows have become as thick as my finger^ and your
forehead resembles^ what, in some very astonishing poetry,
I once saw styled, * a blue-piled thunderloft/ That will be
or married look, sir, I suppose? **
" If that will be your married look^ I^ as a Christian, will
soon give up the notion of consorting with a mere sprite or
salamander. But what had you to ask, thing?— out with it 1 "
" There, you are less than civil now; and I like rudeness
a great deal better than flattery. I had lather be a iking
than an angel. This is what I tiave to ask, — Why did you
take such pains to make me believe you wished to marry
Miss Ingram? "
** Is that all ! Thank God, it is no worse I * * And now he
rniknit his black brows; looked down, smiling at me, and
stroked my Imr, as if well pleased at seeing a danger averted-
'* I think I may oinfess,*'he continued,'* even\lthough I
should make you a little indignant, Jane — and I have seen
what a fire-spirt you can be when you are indignant. You
glowed in the cool moonlight last night, when you mutinied
against fate, and claimed your rank as my equal. Janet,
by-the-by, it was you who made me the offer/'
*'Of course, I did. But to the point if you please, sir —
Miss Ingram ? "
1 " Well, I feigned courtship of Miss Ingram, because I
wished to render you as madly in love with me as I was with
you ; and I knew jealousy would be the best ally I could call
in for the furtherance of that end. "
" Excellent! — Now you are small — ^not one whit bigger
than the end of my little finger* It was a burning shame, and
a scandalous disgrace to act in that way. Did you think
nothing of Miss Ingram *s feelings, sirl "
** Her feelings are concentrated in one — pride; and that
needs humbling- Were you jealous, Jane? "
** Never mind, Mr, Rochester: it is in no way interesting
to you to know that. Answer me truly once more. Do yo*-
fANE EYRE
think Miss Ingram will not suffer from your dishone
coquetry? Won^t sbe feel forsaken and deserted? "
" Impossible I — ^when I told you how she, on the contraryi
deserted me: the idea of my insolvency cooled, or rather
extinguished J her flame in a m omenta*'
" You have a curious^ designing mind, Mr, Rochester. I
am afraid your principles on some points are eccentric. "
" My principles were never trained^ Jane: they may have
grown a Httle awry for want of attention, "
*'Once agaiBj seriously; may I enjoy the great good that
has been vouchsafed to roe^ without fearing that any one
else is suffering the bitter pain I myself felt a while ago ? "
" That you may^ ray good Httle girl : there is not another
being in the world has the same pure love for me as yourself
^for I lay that pleasant unction to my soul^ Jane, a belief
in your affection. "
I turned my lips to the hand that lay on my shoulder* I
loved him very much— more than I could trust myself to
say— more than words had power to express,
''Ask something more/* he said presently; **it is my
delight to be entreated ^ and to yield/-
I was again ready with my request. " Communicate your
intentions to Mrs. Fairfax^ sir; she saw me with you last
night in the hallj and she was shocked. Give her some
explanation before I see her again. It pains me to be
judged by so good a woman. "
im & ^
'* Go to your room, and put on your bonnet/'he repE
" I mean you to accompany me to Millcote this mornings
and while you prepare for the drive, I will enlighten the old
lady's understanding. Did she think, Janet, you had given th«
world for love, and considered it well lost? **
*'I believe she thought I had forgotten my station, aiad
yours, sir. "
** Station ! station 1— your station is in my heart, and on
the necks of those who would insult you, now or hereafter.—
Go. "
I was soon dressed ; and when I heard Mr. Rochester quit
Mis. Fairfax's parlour, I hurried down to it. The old lady
had been reading her morning portion of Scripture— ^thc
lesson for the day; her Bible lay open before her, and her
spectacles were upon it. Her occupation, suspended by Mr,
Rochester's announcement, seemed now forgotten: her
eyes, fixed on the blank wall opposite, expressed the sur-
JANE EYR]
prise of a quiet mind, stirred by unwonted tidings. Seeing
me, she roused herseli; she made a sort of effort to smile,
and framed a few words of congratulation; but the smile
expired, and the sentence was abandoned unfinished. She
put up her spectaclesj shut the Bible, and pushed her chair
back from the table.
** I feel so astonished/'she began, *'I hardly know what to
say to you J Miss Eyre. I have surely not been dreaming, have
I? Sometimes I half fall asleep when I ara sitting alone, and
fancy things that have never happened. It has seemed to
me more than once when I have been in a dozej that my dear
husband, who died fifteen years since, has come in and sat
down beside me; and that I have even heard him call rae by
my name, Alice^ as he used to do. Now, can you tell me
whether it is actually true that Mr. Rochester has asked you
to marry him ? Don't laugh at me* But I really thought he
came in here five minutes ago, and said^ that in a month you
would be his wife/'
" He has said the same thing to me, " I replied.
L " He has i Do you believe him ? Have you accepted him ? "
r'^ Yes/'She looked at me bewildered,
*'I could never have thought it. He is a proud man: all
the Rochesters were proud: and his father, at least, liked
money. He, too, has always been called careful. He means
I to marry you? "
I " He tells me so. "
" She surveyed my whole person: in her eyes I read that
they had there found no charm powerful enough to solve the
enigma.
" It pass^ mel " she continued: " but no doubt it is true
since you say so. How it will answer, I cannot tell: I really
don't know. Equality of position and fortune k often advis-
able in such rases; and there are twenty years of difference
in your ages. He might almost be your father.''
" No, indeed, Mrs. Fairfax! " exclaimed I, nettled: " he
is nothing like my father! No one, who saw us together,
would suppose it for an instant. Mr. Rochester looks as
young, and is as young as some men at five-and-twenty. "
** Is it really for love he is going to marry you? " she
asked.
I was so hurt by her coldness and scepticism, that the
tears rose to my eyes,
** I am sorry to grieve you, " pursued the widow; " but
'you are so young, and so little acquainted with men^ I wishea
I to put you on your guard. It is an old saying that * all is oot
[gold t!mt glitters*; and in this case I do fear there will be
f something found to be difierent to what either you or I
expect/'
'^Whyl — am I a monster? " I said: " is it impossible
that Mr. Rochester should have a sincere affection for me?'*
" No: you are very well; and much improved of late;
and Mr, Rochester, I daresay^ is fond of you. I have always
noticed that you were a sort of pet of his. There are times
when, for your sakCj I have been a httle uneasy at his marked
preference, and have wished to put you on your guard : but
I did not like to suggest even the possibiHty of wrong. I
knew such an idea would shocks perhaps offend you; and
you were so discreet, and so thoroughly modest and seosiblej
I hoped vou might be trusted to protect yourself. Last n^ht
I cannot tell you what I suffered when I sought all over the
house, and could find you nowhere, nor the master either;
and then J at twelve o'clock, saw you come in with him/'
" Well, never mind that now/^ I interrupted impatiently;
" it is enough that all was right/'
" I hope afl will be right in the end, " she said : " but,
believe me, you cannot be too careful Try and keep Mr.
Rochester at a distance: distrust yourself as well as him.
Gentlemen in his station are not accustomed to marry tJieif
governesses/'
I was growing truly irritated : happily, Ad^lie ran in.
" Let me go,^ — let me go to Mi 11 cote too J " she cried*
•* Mr, Rochester won't; though there is so much room in the
new carriage. Beg him to let me go, mademoiselle/'
I " That I win, AdMe; ** and I hastened away with her,
glad to quit my gloomy mo ni tress. The carriage was ready;
they were bringing it round to the front, and my master was
pacing the pavement. Pilot following bin backwards
forwards.
*'Ad^le may accompany us, may she not, sir? "
" I told her no, 1*11 have no brats l—ril have only you/'
" Do let her go, Mr. Rochester, if you please: it would be
better/'
" Not it; she will be a restraint/*
He was quite peremptory, both in look and voice.
chiU of Mrs, Fairfaxes warnings, and the damp of her rfonbts "
Lwere upon me: something of unsubstantiaUty and tmcer-
«l
JANE EYRE 1163
taint J had beset my hopes, I half lost the sense of power over
him* I was about mechaDically to obey him, without
further remonstrance : but as he helped me into the carriage)
he looked at my face.
*'What is the matter?''he a-iked; " all the stmshiae is
gone. Do you really wish tht halm to go? Will it annoy
you if she is left behind ? "
** I would far rather she wentj sir, "
" Then oS for your botmetj and back, like a flash of
lightning ! " cried he to Adile.
She obeyed him with what speed she might,
" After a 11 J a single morning ^s interruption will not matter
much/'said he, ** when I mean shortly to claim you —
your thoughts, conversation, arw! company — for life,'*
Ad Me, when lifted in, commenced kissing me, by way of
expressing her gratitude for my intercession; she was
instantly stowed away into a comer on the other side of him^
She then peeped round to where I sat; so stem a neighboui
was too restrictive: to him, in his present fractious mood,
she dared whisper no observationSj nor ask of him any
information,
" Let her come to me/* 1 entreated: *'she will, perhaps,
trouble you, sir: there is plenty of room on this side. "
He handed her over as if she had been a lap-dog : " Til
send her to school yet/'he said^ but now he was smiHng,
Ad^le heard him, and asked if sbe was to go to school
" sans mademoiselle?'*
i. " Yes/* he replied, " absolutely sans mademoiselle; for
" t am to take mademoiselle to the moon, and there I shall
seek a cave in one of the white valleys among tiie volcano-
tops, and mademoiselle shall hve with me there and only mtJ^
" She will have nothing to eat: you will starve her/'
observed Ad^le.
" I shall gather maima for her morning and night : the
plains and hillsides in the moon are bleached with manna,
AdMe,''
'* She will want to warm herself: what will she do for a
fire? "
** Fire rises out of the lurjar mountains : when she is cold,
ril carry her up to a peak and lay her down on the edge of
a crater, "
" Oh, qu'eUe y sera mal— peu comfortable I And her
dothes, they will wear out: how can she get new ones? "
266 JANE EYRE
Mr. Rochester professed to be puzzled. " Hem!''said
he. " What would you do^ Ad^le? Cudgel your brains for
an expedient. How would a white or a pink cloud answer
for a gown, do you think? And one could cut a pretty
enough scarf out of a rainbow. "
" Stke is far better as she is, " concluded Ad^le, after musing
some time:''besides, she would get tired of living wi^
only you in the moon. If I were mademoiselle, I would never
consent to go with you. "
" She has consented: she has pledged her word. "
''But you can't get her there: there is no road to the
moon: it is all air; and neither you nor she can fly. "
" Ad^le, look at that field. " We were now outside Thorn-
field gates, and bowling lightly along the smooth road to
Millcote, where the dust was well laid by the thunder-storm,
and where the low hedges and lofty timber trees on each
side glistened green, and rain-refreshed.
** hi that field. Addle, I was walking late one evening
about a fortnight since— the evening of the day you helped
me to make hay in the orchard meadows; and as I was
tired with raking swaths, I sat down to rest me on a stile;
and there I took out a little book and a pencil, and began
to write about a misfortune that befell me long ago, and a
wish I had for happy days to come: I was writing away
very fast, though daylight was hiding from the leaf, when
something came up the path and stopped two yards ofE me.
I looked at it. It was a little thing with a veil* of gossamer
on its head. I beckoned it to come near me: it stood soon
at my knee. I never spoke to it, and it never spoke to me in
words: but I read its eyes, and it read mine; and our
speechless colloquy was to this effect: —
" It was a fairy, and come from Elf-land, it said; and its
errand was to make me happy: I must go with it out of the
common world to a lonely place — suc£ as the moon, for
instance — ^and it nodded its head towards her horn, rising
over Hay-hill: it told me of the alabaster cave and sflver
vale where we might live. I said I should like to go: but
reminded it, as you did me, that I had no wings to fly. "
" * Oh,'returned the fairy, * that does not signify! Here
is a talisman will remove aU difficulties;'and she held out
a pretty gold ring.'Put it,* she said, * on the fourth finger
of my left hand, and I am yours, and you are mine; and we
-*— 11 leave earth, and make our own heaven yonder.* She
^ JANE EYRE 267
nodded again at the moon* The ringj Ad^le, is in my breeciies-
pocketj under the disguise of a sovereign: but I mean soon
to change it to a ring again. "
** But what has mademoiselle to do with it? I don't care
for the fairy: you said it was mademoisdle you would take
to the moon? " — --
" Mademoiselle is a fairy, " he saidj whispering mys-
teriously. Whereupon I told her not to mind his badinage;
and she, on her part, evinced a fund of genuine French
scepticism: denominating Mr. Rochester " un vrai menteur, "
and assuring him that she made no account whatever of his
** Contes de fee, " and that'^ du reste, il n^ avait pas de
fte, et quand mime il y en avait: " she was sure they
would never appear to him, nor ever give him rings^ or offer
to live with him in the moon.
The hour spent at Millcote was a somewhat harassing one
to me > Mr. Rochester obliged me to go to a certain silk
warehouse: there I was ordered to choose half a dozen
dresses, I hated the business, I begged leave to defer it:
no — it should be gone through with now. By dint of en^
treaties expressed in energetic whispers , I reduced the
half-dozen to two: these, however, he vowed he would
select himself. With anxiety I watched his eye rove over
the gay stores: he fixed on a rich silk of the most brilliant
amethyst dye, and a superb pink satin* I told him in a new
series of whispers, that he might as well buy me a gold gown
and a silver bonnet at once; I should certainly never venture
to wear his choice. With infinite difficulty, for he was stub-
bom as a stone^ I persuaded him to make an exchange in
favour of a sober black satin and pearl-grey silk.'* It might
pass for the present, " he said;'* but he would yet see me
glittering like a parterre, "
Glad was I to get him out of the silk warehouse, and
then out of a jeweller's shop : the more he bought me, the
more my cheek burned with a sense of annoyance and
degradation. As we re-entered the carriage, and I sat back
feverish and fagged, I remembered what in the hurry of
events, dark and bright, I hiid wholly forgotten — the letter
of my uncle, John Eyre, to Mrs, Reed: his intention to
adopt me and make me his legatee. " It would, indeed, be
a relief, " I thought, " if I had ever so small an independency;
I never can bear being dressed like a doll by Mr. Rochester,
or sitting like a second Danae with the golden shower fallinf'
268
JANE EYRE
daily round me. 1 will write to Madeira the momeat I get
home, and tell my uncle John I am gomg to be married,
and to whom : if I had but a prospect of one day bringing
Mr. Rochester an accession of fortune^ I could better endure
to be kept by him now,'* And somewhat relieved by this
idea (which I failed not to execute that day)^ I ventured once
more to meet my master's and lover's eye; which most
pertinaciously sought minCj though I averted both face
and gaze. He smiled; and I thought his smile was such aft
a sultan mighty in a blissful and fond moment, bestow on &
slave his gold and gems bad enriched: I crushed his hand,.
which waa ever hunting mine, vigorously > and thrust it \mtk
to him red with the passionate pressure^ —
'^ You nt & d not look in that way, " I said:'* if you do,
ril wear nothing but my old Lowood frocks to the end < d
the chapter. I'll be married in this lilac gingham — you may
make a dressing-gown for yourself out of the pearl-grey
silk, and an infinite series of waistcoats out of the black
sarin/*
He chuckled; he rubbed his hands: " Oh, it is rich to
see and hear her I " he exclaimed- " Is she original ? Is she
piquant? I would not exchange this one Uttle EogUsh gW
for the grand Turk's whole seraglio; gazelle-eyes, houii
forms and alll "
The eastern allosion bit me again: " 1*11 not stand you ao
inch in the stead of a seraglio/* I said; " so don't consider
me an equivalent for one; if you have a fancy for anything
in that Ime, ajway with you^ sir, to the bazars of Stambotil
without deky; and lay out in extensive slave-purchases
some of that spare cash you seem at a loss to spend satis-
factorily here/*
" And what will you do, Janet, while I am bargaining
for so many tons of flesh and such an assortment of black
eyes? "
" I'll be preparing myself to go out as a missionEry to
preach hberty to them that are enslaved — your harem
inmates amongst the rest. I'll get admitted there, and I*il
stir up mutiny; and you, three-tailed bashaw as you are,
sir, slmU in a trice find yourself fettered amongst our hands:
nor will I, for one, consent to cut your bonds till you have
signed a charter, the most liberi that despot ever yet
conferred***
" I would consent to be at your mercy, Jane.**
JANE EYRE
269
^^ " I wrould have no mercy* Mr < Roches tefj if you supplicated
for it with an eye like that. While you Jooked so, I should
be certain that whatever charter you might grant under
coercion, your first act^ when released, would 1^ to violate
its conditions. "
*'Why, Jane, what would you have? I fear you will
compel me to go through a private marriage ceremony,
besides that performed at the altan You will stipulate,
I see, for peculiar terms — what will they be? **
** I only want an easy mind, sir; not crushed by crowded
ob%ations. Do you remember what you said of C^Une
Varens? — of the diamonds, the cashmeres you gave her?
I will not be your English Celine Varens. I shall continue
to act as Ad^le's governess; by that I shall earn my board
.-nd lodging, and thirty pounds a year besides. Til furnish
my own wardrobe out of that money, and you shall give
me nothing but'*
». " Well, but what?'^
" Your r^ard: and if I give you mine in return, tliat debt
will be quit. "
" Well, for cool native impudence, and pure innate pride,
you haven't your equal, " said he. We were now approaching
Thomfield, " Will it please you to dine with me to-day? "
he asked, as we re-entered the gates.
** No, thank you, sir. "
** And what for * no, thank you * ? if one may inquire/'
** I never have dined with you, sir: and I see no reason
why I should now: till**
" Till what? You delight in half-phrases. "
'^ Till I can't help it, "
*'Do you suppose I eat like an ogre, or a ghoul, that you
dread being the companion of my repast ? "
** I have formed no supposition on the subject, sir; but
I want to go ou as usual for another month/'
» " You will give up your govemessing slavery at once. "
*'Indeed I begging your pardon, sir, I shall not. I shall
just go on with it as usual. I shall keep out of your way all
day, as I have beeo accustomed to do: you nmy send for
me in the evening, when you feel disposed to see me, and I'll
come then, but at no other time* "
" I want a smoke, Jane, or a pinch of snuffy to comfort
me under all this * pour me dormer une contenance,'as
Ad^le would say; and unfortunately I have neither my
irW7
270 jan:e eyre
cigar-case, oor my snufi-box. But listen — ^whisper^t is
your time now^ little tyrant, but it will be mine presently:
and whoi once I have ^tiriy seized you, to have and to hold,
I'll just — figuratively speaking— attach you to a chain
like this " ^uching his watch-guard). " Yes, bonny wee
thing, I'll wear you in my bosom, lest my jewel I should
tyne. "
He said this as he helped me to alight from the carriage:
and while he afterwards lifted out Addle, I entered the
house, and made good my retreat upstairs.
He duly summoned me to his presence in the evening.
I had prepared an occupation for hmi; for I was determined
not to spend tiie whole time in a iiU'd-Ute conversation.
I remembered his fine voice: I knew he liked to sing — good
singers generally do. I was no vocalist myself, and, in his
fastidious judgment, no musician, either; but I de]%hted
in listening when the performance was good. No sooner
had twilight, that hour of romance, b^an to lower her
blue and starry banner over the lattice, ihan I rose, opened
the piano, and entreated him, for the love of heaven, to give
me a song. He said I was a c^ridous witch, and that he
would ratiier sing another time; but I averred that no time
was like the present.
" Did I like his voice? " he asked. .
''Very much. " I was not fond of pampering that sus-
ceptible'vanity of his; but for once, and from motives of
expediency, I would e'en soothe and stimulate it.
''Then, Jane, you must play the accompaniment.''
" Very weU, sir, I win tij/r. "
I did try, but was presently swept o£E the stool and de-
nominated,''a little bungler.''Being pushed uncer^noni-
ously to one side — ^which was predsely what I wished — ^he-
usuiped my place, and proceeded to accompany himself:
for he could play as wdl as sing. I hied me to the window-
recess; and while I sat there and looked out on the still
trees and dim lawn, to a sweet air was sung in mellow tones^
the foUowing strain: —
The truest love that ever heart
Felt at its kindled core
Did through each vein, in quickened start,
The iide of being pour.
'Her coming was my hope each day,
Hier patting was my pain;
JANE EYRE zft
The chauce that did her steps delay
Was ice in every vein.
I dreamed it would be nameless bliss^
As 1 loved p loved to be;
nAnd to this object did 1 press
As blind as eagerly.
But wide as pathless was the space
That lay, our hves, between.
And dang^ous as the foamy race
Of ocean-surges green.
And hauctted as a robber path
Through wilderness or wood;
For Might and Right, and Woe and Wrath,
Betweea our spirits stood.
I dangers dareiU I hiod'rance scorned;
I omens did defy;
Whatever menaced, harassed, waroed,
I passed impetuous by.
On sped my rainbow, fast as light;
I new as in a dreamy
For glorious rose upon my sight
That child of Shower and Gleam,
Still bright on clouds o£ suffering dim
Shines that soft, solemn joy;
Nor care I now^ how dense and grim
Disasters gather nigh,
J care not in this moment sweet.
Though all I have rushed o'er
Should come on pinion, strong and fieet^
Proclaiming vengeance sore:
Though haughty Hate should strike me down.
Right, bar approach to me.
And grinding Might, with furious & own«
Swear endless enmity.
My tove has placed her little hand
With noble faith in mine,
And vowed that wedlock^s sacred band
Our nature shall entwiiie.
My love has sworn, with sealing kiss.
With me to live— to die;
I have at last my nameless bliss:
As I Jove — loved am I[
He rose and came towards me, and I saw his face all
kindled, and his ftjJl falcon-eye Sashing, and tenderness
and passion in every lineament, I quailed momentarily^ —
Uien I rallied. Soft sceoe. daring demoa^tration, I would
a72 JANE EYRE
not have* and I stood in peril of both: a weapon of defence
must be piepared— I whetted my tongue; as he reached
mcj I asked with asperity, *'whom be was going to many
now?'*
" That was a strange question to be put by his darting
Jane/'
** Indeed 1 I considered ft a very natural and necessary
one: he had talked of his future wife dying with him. What
did he mean by such a pagan idea? / had no intention of
dying with him— he might depend on that/'
*'Ohj all he longed, all he prayed for^ was that 1 might
live with him 1 Death was not for such as I, "
" Indeed it was: I had as good a right to die when my
time came as he had: but I should bide that time, and not
be hurried away in a suttee/'
" Would I forgive him for the selfish idea, and prove my
pardon by a reconciling kiss ? "
" No: I would rather be excused/*
Here I heard myself apostrophised as a *'hard little
thing " ; and it was added, " any other woman would have
been melted to marrow at hearing such stanzas crooned in
her praise/'
I assured him I was naturally hard— very flinty, and
that he would often find me so; and that, moreover, I was
determined to show him divers rugged points in my chamcter
before the ensuing four weeks elapsed: he should know
fully what sort of a bargain he had made, while there was
yet time to rescind it.
" Would I be quiet, and talk rationally? "
" I would be quiet if he liked ; and as to talking rationally »
I flattered myself I was doing that now/'
He fretted, pished, and pshawed* " Very good, " 1 tho^ught ;
" you may fume and fidget as you please : but this is the
best plan to pursue with you, I am certain. I like you more
than I can say; but I'll not sink into a bathos of sentiment;
and with this needle of repartee I'll keep yon from the edge
of the gulph too; and, moreover, maintain by its pungent
aid tlmt distance between you and myself most conducive
to our real mutual advantage/*
From less to more, I worked him up to cocuidemble
irritation; then, after he had retired, in dudgeon, quite to
the other end of the room, and I got yp, saying, " I
wish you good -nighty sir, " in my natural and wonted

JANE EYRE
m
respectful manner,! slipped out by the side-door and got
away*
The system thus entered on, I pursued dunng the whole
season of probation; and with the best success. He was
kept, to be sure^ rather cross and crusty: but on the whole
I could !=;ee he was excellently entertained ; and that a lamb-
like submission and turtle-dove sensibility, while fostering
his despotism more^ would have pleased his judgment, satis*
fied his common-sense, and even suited his taste, less.
In other people's presence I was, as formerly j deferential
and quiet 5 any other line of conduct being uncalled for: it
was only in the evening conferences I thus thwarted and
aflfiicted him. He continued to send for me punctually the
moment the clock struck seven; though when I appeared
before him now, he had no such honeyed terms as " love "
and''darling " on his hps: the best words at my service
were ** provoking puppet, " " mahcious elf, "'* sprite, "
'* changeling/* etc. For caresses, too, I now got grimaces;
for a pressure of the hand, a pinch on the arm ; for a kiss on
the cheek, a severe tweak of the ear. It was aU right: atr
present I decidedly preferred these fierce favours to any-
thing more tender* Mrs- Fairfax, I saw, approved me: her
anxiety on my accoimt vanished ; therefore I was certain I
did well. Meantime, Mr. Rochester affirmed I was wearing
hitn to skin and bone^ and threatened awful vengeance for
my present conduct at some period fast coming, I laughed
in my sleeve at his menaces; " I can keep you in reasonable
check now,*^ I rejected ; " and I don't doubt to be able to
do it hereafter; if one expedient loses its virtu*, another
must be devised, "
Yet after all my task was not an easy one- often I would
rather have pleased than teased him* My future husband
was becoming to me my whole world; and more than the
world: almost my hope of heaven. He stood between me
and every thought of religion, as an eclipse intervenes betwe«?n
man and the broad sun, I could not, in those days^see God
for his creature: of whom I had made an idoh

274 JANE EYRE
CHAPTER XXV
The month of courtship had wasted: its very last hours
were being numbered. There was no putting off the day
that advanced — ^the bridal day; and all preparations for its
arrival were complete* 1, at least, bad nothing more to do:
there were my trunks, packed, locked, corded, ranged in a
row along the wall of my little chamber; to-morrow, at this
time, they would be far on their road to London: and so
should I (D.V.), — or rather, not I, but one Jane Rochester,
a person whom as yet I knew not. The cards of address alone
remained to. nail on: they lay, four little squares on the
drawer. Mr. Rochester had himself written the direction,
" Mrs. Rochester, -- — Hotel, London, " on each: I could
not persuade myself to affix them, or to have them affixed;
Mrs. Rochester I She did not exist: she would not be bom
till to-morrow, some time after eight o'clock a,m.: and I
would wait to be assured she had come into the world alive,
before I assigned to her all that ^property. It was enough
that in yonder closet, opposite my dressing-table, garments
siaid to be h^rs had already displa^ my Mack stuff Lowood
frock and straw bonnet: for not to me appertained that suit
of wedding raiment; the pearl-coloured robe^ the vapoury
veil, pendent from the usurped portmanteau. I shut the
ck}set, to conceal the strange, wraith-like apparel it contained ;
which, at this evening hour— nine o'dodc— gave out cer-
tainly a most ghostly shinuner through the shadow of my
apartment. " I will leave you by yourself, white dream, " I
said.'* I am feverish: I heard the wind blowing: I will go
out of doors and feel it. "
It was not only the huny of preparation that made me
feverish; not only the anticipation of the great change — the
new life which was to commence to-morrow; both these
circumstances had their share, doubtless, in producing that
restless, excited mood which hurried me forth at this late
hour into the darkening groimds: but a third cause in-
fluenced my mind more than they.
I had at heart a strange and anxious thought. Something
had happened which I could not comprehend; no one knew
of or had seen the event but myself: it had taken place the
preceding night. Mr. Rochester that night was absent from
JANE EYRE 275
home; nor was he yet returned: business had called him to
a snmll estate of two or three fanns he possessed thirty miles
off— business it was requisite he should settle in person,
previously to his meditated departure from England. I
waited now his return ; eager to disburthen my mind^ and
to seek of him the solution of the enigma that perplexed me.
Stay tali he cx)mes, reader; and, when I discla^e my secret
to him J you shaO share the confidence.
I sought the orchard: driven to its shelter by the wind,
which atJ day had blown strong and full from the south;
without J however, bringii^ a speck of rain. Instead of sub-
siding as night drew on, it seemed to augment its rush and
deepen its roar: the trees blew stedfastly one way, never
writhing round, and scarcely tossing back their boughs once
in an hour; so continuous was the strain bending their
branchy heads northward — the clouds drifted from pole to
pole, fast foHowingj mass on mass : no glimpse of blue sky
had been visible that July day.
It was not without a certain wild pleasure I ran before the
wind delivering my trouble of mind to the measureless ajr-
torrent thundering through space. Descending the laurel
walk, I faced the wreck of the chcs nut-tree; it stood up,
black and riven: the trunks split down the centre, gasped
ghastly. The cloven halves were not broken from each otberj
for the firm base and strong roots kept them unsundered
below; though community of vitality was destroyed — the
sap could flow no more; their great boughs on each side were
dead, and next winter^s tempests would be sure to fell one
or both to earth: as yet, however, they might be said to
form one tree — b. ruin, but an entire ruin.
" You did right to hold fast to each other, " I said: as tf
the monster-splinters were living things, and could hear me.
'* I thinkj scathed as you look, and charred and scorched,
there must be a little sense of life in you yet: rising out of
that adhesion at the faithful^ honest roots: you will never
have green leaves more — never more see birds making nests
and singing idylls in your boughs; the time of pleasure and
love is over with you: but you are not desolate: each of
you has a comrade to s^mipatbise with him in his decay. "
As I looked tap at them, the moon appeared momentarily in
that part of the sky which filled their fissure; her disk was
blood-red, and half overcast; she seemed to throw on me
one bewildered J dreary glance, and buried herself agai "
3
276 JANE EYRE
instantly in the de^ drift of dood. The wind f ell, for a second^
xoiind Thornfidd; but hi away av & c wood and water,
poured a wild, melancholy wail: it was sad to listen to, and
I ran off again.
Here and there I strayed through the orchard, gathered
up the apples with which the grass round the Uee roots was
thickly strewn: then I employed myself in dividing the ripe
from the unripe; I carried them into the house and put
them away in the store-room. Then I repaired to the library
to ascertain whether the fire was lit; for, though summ^, I
knew on such a gk)omy evening, Mr. Rodiester would l & e
to see a cheerful heartk when he came in: yes, the fire had
been kindled some time, and burnt wdl, I placed his arm-
chair by the chimney-comer: I wheeled the table near it:
I let down the curtain, and had the candles brought in ready
for lighting. More restless than ever, when I had completed
these arrangements I could not sit stiU, nor even remain in
the house: a little time-piece in the room and the okl ckx:k
in the hall simukaneonsly struck ten.
''How late it grows! " I said: " I will run down to the
gates: it is moonUght at intervals: I can see a good way on
the road. He may be coming now, and to meet him wiD
save some minutes of suspense/'
The wind roared hi^ in the great trees which embowered
thegates; but the road as far as I could see > to the right hand
and the left, was all still and solitary: save for the shadows
of douds crossing it at intervals, as the moon locked out, it
was but a long pile line^ unvaried by one moving specks
A puerile tear dimmcxl my eye while I looked*— a tear of
disappointment and impatience: ashamed of it, I wiped it
away. I lingered; the moon shut herself wholly within her
chamber, and drew dose her curtain of daisedoud: the night
grew dark; rain came driving fast on the gale.
" I wish he would cornel I wish he would cornel " I
exdaimed, seized with hypochondriac foreboding. I had
e3q > ected his arrival before tea; now it was dark: whatoould
keep him? Had an accident happon^? The event of last
night again recurred to me, I interpreted it as a warning of
disaster. I feared my hopes were too bright to be realised;
" * ^ had enjoyed so much Uiss ktdy tlmt I imagined my
^ had passed its meridian, and must now decUne.
il, I cannot return to the house, " I thought;''I
sit by the fireside, while he is abroad in mdement
JANE EYRE
weather; better tire my limbs than strain my heart;
go forward aiid meet him/*
I set out; I walked fast, but not far : ere I had measured a
quarter of a mile, I heard the tramp of hoofs; a horseman
came on, full gallop; a dog ran by his side. Away with evil
presentiment I It was he : here he was, mounted on Mesroui,
followed by Pilot. He saw me; for the moon had opened a
blue field in the sky, and rode in it watery bright: be took his
hat oEf and waved it round fiis head. 1 now ran to meet
Mm.
" There 1 " he exclaimed, as he stretched out his hand and
bent from the saddle: ** You can't do without me, that is
evident. Step on my boot-toe; giv^e me both hands: mount 1 "
I obeyed; joy made me agile : I sprang up before him.
A hearty kissing I got for a welcome; and some boastful
triumph, which I swallowed as weU as I could. He checked
fiimself in his exuttation to demand, " But is there anything
the matter, Janet, that you come to meet me at such an hour:
Is there anything wrong ? "
** No; but I thought you would never come. I could not
bear to wait in the house for you, especially with this rain
and wind.^'
" Rain and wind, indeed I Yes, you are diippong Hke a
meimaid; pnll my doak round > xju: but I think you are
feverish, Jane : both your cheek and hand are burning hot, I
ask again, is there anything the matter? "
*'Nothing, now: I am neither afraid nor unhappy,**
" Then you have been both? "
'^ Rather: but I'll tell you all about it by-ajid-by, sir;
aiid I daresay you will only laugh at me for my pains, "
** I'll laugh at you heartily when to-morrow is past; till
then I dare not: my prize is not certain. This is you; who
have been as slippery as an eel this last month, and as thorny
as a briar-rose? I could not lay a 6nger anywhere but I was
pricked; and now I seem to have gathered up a stray lamb
in my arms: you wandered out of the fold to seek your
shepherd, did you, Jane? "
** I wanted you, but don't boftst. Here we are at Thorn-
field: now let me get down* "
He landed me on the pavement. As John took his horse,
and he followed me into the haU, he told me to make haste and
put something dry on, and then return to him in the hbrary ;
and he stopped me, as I made for the staircase, to extort a

L
278
/ sat down near k- ^nwnifiefclM
" ^» " /sir I«^,r'^^^''tial enough ^
. ^« held out ius han^ , *''• yo " »«■
;y«,Jane. "'^'*«« you foisS
^'^^o^^UhJ^.^ ««Jered a^ay th. .
„ AJl. sir. "'^ " Seraents complete? "
^d on my Dftrf i;t
an hour after our retaS f ^^^nifield to-mo^rr, ^ " ^ ^«tl < d
.',Y«y v^ell, s/r " ^ " ^ church. " " ^ "''* > « > « b^
" ^'th what Of.
m

JANE EYRE
279
3 < :if4 > this present hour woQld never end: who knows with
j'.tatx.fc fete the next may come char^ged ?'*
i^'a^aTfeis is hypochondria^ Jane, You have been over-excited
^f^^ ,t j < ter*fatigued .'*
Do you, SIT J feel calm and happy ? **
f glj'i Calm ?— no : but happy — to tlie heart's core;'*
fjf^_ looked up at him to read the signs of bliss in his face:
^ll'_ fas ardent and flush^.
'Give me your confidence^ Jane/^ he said: " reheve your
ly^ bd of any weight that oppresses it, by imparting it to n^e.
^^,-, hat do you fear? — that I shall not prove a good husband ? "
'" It is the idea farthest from my thought^/'
j^gj^. " Are you apprehensive of the new sphere you are about
f enter?— of the new life into which you are passing? **
" No. "
" You puzzle me, Jane: your look and tone of sorrowful
udacity perplex and pain me, 1 want an explanation/'
^g, " Then, sir, — listen. You were from home last night ? "
^[^ ** I was: — I know that; and you hinted a while ago at
lething which had happened in my absence:— nothings
)bably, of consequence; but, in short, it has disturbed you,
; me hear it. Mrs. Fairfax has said somethingj perhaps ? or
m have overheard the servants talk ? — your sensitive self-
respect has been wounded ? "
" No, sir.*'It struck twelve— I waited till the time-piece
concluded its silver chime, and the clock its hoarse,
iting stroke, and then I proceeded,
" All day, yesterday, I was very busy, and very happy in
ly ceaseless bustle; for I am not^ as you seem to tJunk,
> ubled by any haunting fears about the new sphere, et
etera: I think it a glorious thing to have the hope of living
th you, because I love you. Noj sir, don't caress me now^ —
let me talk undisturbed. Yesterday X trusted well in Pro-
videncCj and beHeved that events were working together for
feu^ good and mine; it was a fine day^ if you recollect — ^the
!mness of the air and sky forbade apprehensions regarding
your safety or comfort on your journey. I walked a httle while
on the pavement alter tea, thinking of you; and I beheld
you in imagination so near me, I scarcely missed your actual
presence, I thought of the life that lay before me — your life,
sir — an existence more expansive and stirring than my own :
as much more so as the depths of the sea to which the brook
nms, are than the shallows of its own strait channel.

28o JANE EYRE
wondered why moralists call this world a dreary wibkmess:
for me it blossomed like a rose. Just at sunset, the air turned
Gold and the sky cloudy: I went in. Sophie caUed me upstairs
to look at my wedding-dress, which they had just brought;
and under it in the box I found your present — ^the veil wfaich^
in your princely extiavaganoe, you sent for from London:
resolved, I suppose, since I would not have jewels, to cheat
me into accepting something as costly. I smiled as I imfolded
it, and devised how I would tease you about your aristocratic
tastes, and your efforts to masque your plebaan bride in the
attributes of a peeress. I thought 1k)w I would carry down t»
you the square of unembioideDsd Uond I had mysdf prepared
as a covering for my low-bom head, and ask if that was not
good enough for a woman who could bring her husband neither
fortune, beauty, nor connections. I saw plainly how 3^u
vrovM look; and heard your impetuous republican answers,
and your haughty disavowal of any necessity (m your part to
augment your wealth, or elevate your standing, by marrying
either a pune or a coronet. "
''How well you read me, you witch I " interposed Mr«
RochBster: -'but what did you find in the veil besides its
embroidery ? Did you find poison or a daggcnr that you look so
mournful now? "
''No, no, sir; besides the deUcacy and richness of the
fabric, I found nothing save Fairfax Rochester's pride; and
that did not scai^ me, because I am used to the sight of the
demon. But, sir, as it grew dark, the wdnd rose: it Uew yester-
day evening, not as it Mows now—^ild and hi^*— but
'with asuUen, moBmng sound'farmore eerie. I wi£^bed you
were at home. I came into this room, and the sight of the
^npty chair and fireless hearth chilled me. For some time
after I went to bed, I could not ,sleq > ^ sense of anxious
excitement distressed me. The gale atill rising, seemed tp
my ear to muffle a mournful under-sound; whether in the
house or abroaxi I could not at first teU, but it recurred,
doubtful yet dcMuI at every hiM: at last I made out it must
be some dog howling at a distance. I was ^Jiad when it ceased.
Oil sleeping, I continued in dreams the ^ea of a dark and
gusty night. I continued also the wish to be with you > and
experi^iced a stiange, regretful consciousness, of some barzii»r
dividing us« During all my fimt sle^, I wa9 toBsmhag the
windings of an unknown road; total obscurity eaviioned me;
rain pelted me; I was burdened with the chaqfe of a Httle
»
JANE EYRE 2S1
cliild : a very small creature^ too young and feeble to walk,
and which shivered in my cold armSj and wail^ piteously in
my ean I thought, sir, that you were on the road a long way
before me; and I strained every nerve to overtake you, and
made effort on effort to utter your name and entreat you to
stop^but my movements were fettered; and my voice still
died away inarticulate; while you, I felt, withdrew farther
and farther every moment. "
" * And these dreams weigh on your spirits now, Jane, when
I am dose to you? Little nervous subject 1 Forget visionary
woe, and think only of real happiness I You say you love me,
Janet: yes— I wiU not forget that; and you cannot deny it.
Thase words did not die inarticulate on your lips. I heard
them clear and soft : a thought too solemn perhaps, but sweet
as music—* I think it is a glorious thing to have the hope
of living with you, Edward, because I love you/ — Do jrao
love me, Jane ? repeat it.'"
** I do, sir.— I do, with my whole heart, "
'* Well, " he said, after some minutes'silence, " it is strange;
but that sentence has penetrated my breast painfully. Why ?
1 think because you said it with such an earnest, religious
energy; and because your upward gaze at me now is the very
sublime of faith, truth, and devotion : it is too much as if
some spirit were near me. Look wicked, Jane; as you know
well how to look : coin one of your wild, shy, provoking smiles ;
tell me you hate me— tease me, vex me; do anjrthing but
move me; I would rather be incensed than saddened* "
" I will tease you and vex you to your heart's content,
when I have finished my tale; but hear me to the end/'
" I thought, Jane, you had told me all < 1 thought I Imd
found the source of your melancholy in a dream ! "
I shook my head- " What! is there more? But I will not
believe it to be anything important, I warn you of in-
creduHty beforehand . Go on . "
The disquietude of his air, the somewhat appreh^sive
impatience of his manner, surprised me; but I proceeded,
** I dreamt another dream, sir: that Thorn field Hall was a
dreary ruin, the retreat of bats and owls* I thought that of
all the stately front nothing remained bat a shdl-iike wall,
very high, and very fragile-looking, I wandered, on a moon-
light night, through the grass-grown enclosure within : here
I stumbled over a marble hearth, and there over a fallen frag-
ment of cornice. Wrapped up in a shawl, I still carried t'
aSa JANE EYRE
unknown little child : I might not lay it down anywhere^ how-
over tired were my arms — ^however much its weight impeded
my progress, I must retain it. I heard the gallop of a horse at
a distance on the road: I was sure it was you; and you were
departing for many years, and for a distant country. I climbed
the thin wall with frantic peribus haste, eager to catch one
?[limpfte of you from the top: the stones rolled from under my
eet, the ivy branches I grasped gave way, the child dung
round my neck in terror, and almost strangled me: at last I
ffained the summit. I saw you like a speck on a white track,
lessening every moment. Tlie blast blew so strong I could not
stand. I sat down on the narrow ledge; I hush^ the scared
infant in my lap: you turned an angle in the road; I bent
forward to takea last look; the wall crumbled; I was shaken;
the child rolled from my knee, I lost my balance, fell^ and
woke. "
" Now, Jane, that is all. "
" All the preface, sir; the tale is yet to come. On waking,
a gleam dazzled my eyes: I thought — oh, it is daylight!
But I was mistaken: it was only candle^ht. Sophie, I
supposed, had come in. There was a light on the dressing
table, and the door of the closet, where, before going to
bed, I had hung my wedding dress and veil, stood open: I
heard a rustling ^ere. I asked, * Sophie, what are you doing ?'
No one answered; but a form emerged from the closet: it
took the light, held it aloft and surveyed the garments pendent
from the portmanteau.'Sophie! Sophie!'I again cried:
and still it was silent. I had risen up in bed, I bent forward:
first, surprise, then bewilderment, came over me; and then
my blood ccepticold through my veins. Mr, Rochester, this
was not Sophie, it was not Leah, it was not Mn. Fairfax: it
was not — no,. I was sure of it, and am still— it was not even
that strange woman, Grace Poole. "
" It must have been one of them, " interrupted my master.
" No, sir, I. solemnly assure you to the contrary. The
shape standing before me had never crossed my eyes within
the i^edncts of Thomfield Hall before; the height, the con-
tour were new to me. "
" Describe it, Jane. "
" It seemed, sir, a woman, tall and large, with thick and
dajdc hair hanging long down her back. I know not what
dress she had on : it was white and straight ; but whether gown,
sheet, or shroud,. I cannot tdl. "
JANE EYRE 283
" Did you s^ her fac€? "
'* Not at first. But presently she took my veil from its
place; she held it up; gazed at it long, and then she threw
it over her own head^ and turned to the mirror. At that
moment I saw the reflection of the visage and features quite
distinctly in the dark oblong glass. "
" And how were they ? "
" Fearful and ghastly to me— oh, sCr, I never saw a face
like it I It was a discoloured face— it was a savage face, I
wish 1 could forget the roll of the red eyes and the fearful
blackened inflation of the lineaments I "
*'Ghosts are usually pale, Jane/'
'^ This J sir, was purple: the lips were swelled and dark;
the brow furrowed; the black eyebrows widely raised over
the blood -shot eyes. ShaU I tell you of what it reminded
|^_ vjuusus arc usually pttJCj janc. m
^P'^ This J sir, was purple: the lips were swelled and dark; I
^^the brow furrowed; the black eyebrows widely raised over I
»
" You may. "
** Of the foul German spectre — the Vamp3rTe/*
" Ahl— what did it do? "
" Sir, it removed my veil from its gaunt headj rent it in
two parts, and flinging both on the floor^ trampled on thero.'^
'* Afterwards? "
" It drew aside the window-curtain and looked out:
perhaps it saw dawn approaching^ for, taking the candle, it
retreated to the door. Just at my bedside the figure stopped :
the fiery eye glared upon mc — she thrust up her candle close
to my face, and extinguished it under my eyes. I was aware
her lurid visage flamed over mine, and I lost consciousness :
for the second tirae in my life — only the second time — I
became insensible from terror.*^
** Who was with you when you revived ? "
*'No one, sir; but the broad day, I rose, bathed my head
and face in water, drank a long draught; felt that though
enieebled I was not ill^ and determined that to none but you
would I impart this vision. Now, sir, tell me who and what
that woman was? "
" The creature of an over-stimulated brain; that is certain,
I must be careful of you, my treasure: nerves like yours
were not made for rough handling. "
*'Sir, depend upon it, my nerves were not in fault; the
thing was real: the transaction actually took place/'
" And your previous dreams : were they real too ?'"'
Thomfield Hall a ruin ? Am I severed from you by ins u
284 JANE EYRE
able obstacles ? Am I leaving you without % tear — without
a ki?s— ^without a wofd ?''
" Nat yet;'
*'Am I about to do it?--^Wby, the day is alieady oom*
< aeuce4 which is to bind u$ indi & soluUy; and when we are
once united, there shall be no recurrence of these mental
terrors: I guarantee that. "
''Mental terrors, sirl I wish I could believe th^n to be
only such: I wish it more than ever; siace even you canAol
explam to me the mystery of that a^ul visitajat.''
" And since I cannot do it, Jaue, it piust have been uiireai. "
" But, sir, when I said so to inysdl on rising this mozuing,
and when I looked round the room to gather courage and
comfort from the cheerful aspect of each fam$ar object in
full daytight, there — on the, carpet-*-! saw what gave the
distinct lie to my hypothesis, — ^the veil, torn from top to
bottom in two halves I "
I felt Mr. Rochester ^tart and shudder; he hastily flunja;
his arms round me: *'Thank God 1 " be exclaimed, ^'that u
any^hu^ malignant did come^ 9/e^x you last night, it was
only the veil that wf^ iianB9d.-^ < )h > to think what might
have happened ! "
He drew his breath short, and strained me so dose to him,
I could scarcely pant. Aftec some minutes'silence, he
OMitinued, cheerily: —
'* Now > Janet, I'll e^qdain to you all aliout it. It was half
dream, b^lf reality: a woman did, I doubt not, enter your
room: a^d that woman was — ^must have b^n — Grace Poole.
You call her a strange being yourself: from all you know»
you have reason so to call her — ^what did she do to me?
what to Mason? In a state between sleeping and waking,
you noticed her entrance and her acticms; but feverish,
almost delirious as you were, you ascribed to her a goblin
ai^ear^nce different from her own: the long dishevelled
haiTi the swelled black face, the exaggerated stature, were
figments of imagination; results of nightmare: the spiteful
tearing of the veil was real: and it is like her. I see you
would ask why I keep such a woman in my house: when we
have been married a year and a day, I will tell you: but
not now. Are you sat^fied, Jane? Do you accq > t my solu-
tion of the mystery? " ,
I reflected, and in truth it appeared to me the only possible
one: satisfied I was not^ but to please him I endeavoured to
JANE EYRE
285
^appear so — relieved, I certainly did feel; so I answered him
with a conteoted smile. And noWj as it was long past one, I
prepared to leave him,
*'Does not Sophie sleep mth Ad^le in the nursery? " he
askedj as I lit my candle,
'^ Yes, sir.'*
** And there is room enough in Ad die's little bed for you.
You must share it with her to-night^ Jane: it is no wonder
that the incident you have related should make you nervous,
and I would rather you did not sleep alone : promise me to
go to the nursery.-^
" I shall be very glad to do sOj sir/'
*^ And fasten the door securely on the inside. Wake Sopiiie
when you go upstairs, under pretence of requesting her to
rouse you in good time to-morrow; for you must be dressed
and have finished breakfast before eight. And now, no more
sombre thoughts: chase dull care away, Janet. Don't you
bear to what soft whispers the wmd has fallen? and there 13
no more beating of rain against the window-panes; look
here " (he lifted up the curtain) — *'it is a lovely night! "
It was* Half heaven was pure and stainless: the clouds,
now trooping before the wind, which had shifted to the west,
were filing ofi eastward, in long, silvered columns. The mooo
shone peacefully.
** Well, " said Mr. Rochester, gazing iaquiringly into my
eyes, ** how is my Janet now?'*
^** The night is serene, sir; and so am I. "
" And you will not dream of separation and sorrow to-
mght; but of happy love and blissful union .'^
This prediction was but half fulfilled: I did not indeed
dream of sorrow, but as little did 1 dream of joy; for I never
slept at all. With little Ad^le in my anns, I watched the
slumber of childhood— so tranquil, so passionless, so inno-
cent — and waited for the coming day: all my life was awake
and astir in my frame : and as soon as the sun rose I rose too.
I remember Ad^le clung to me as I left her; I remember I
kissed her as I loosened her little hands from my neck ; and
I cried over her with strange emotion, and quitted her
because I feared my sobs would break her still sound repose.
She seemed the emblem of my past life; and he, I was now
to array myself to meet, the dreadj but adored, type of my
unknown future day.
JANE EYRE
CHAPTER XXVI
SoPHJE came at seven to dress me; she was irery long i
in accomplishing her task; so long that Mr. Rochester,
growoj I suppose^ impatient of my delay, sent up to ask why
I did not come. She was just fastening my veil (the plain
square of blond after all) to my hair with a brooch ; I hurried
from under her hands as soon as I could.
'* Stop!''she cried in French, ** Look at yourself in the
mirror: you have not taken one peep/'
So I turned at the door; I saw a robed and veiled figure,
so unlike my usual self that it seemed almost the image of
a stranger.'* Jane 1 " called a voice, and I hastened down. I
was received at the foot of the stairs by Mr, Rochester,
" Lingerer/* he said, " my brain is on fire with impatience;
and you tarry so long I'*
He took me into the dining-room, surveyed me keenly aJl
over, pronounced me'* fair as a lily, and not only the pride
oi his hfe, but the desire of his eyes/'and then telling me be
n^oold give me but ten minutes to eat some breakfast, he
rang the bell. One of his lately hired servantSj a footma
answered it.
" Is John getting the carriage ready?'*
" Yes, six.^^
" Is the luggage brought down? "
" They are bringing it down, sir.'*
** Go you to the church: see if Mi. Wood (the clerg^BS
and the clerk are there: return and tell me, "
The church, as the reader knows, was but just beyond the
gates; the footman soon returned,
*'Mr. Wood is in the vestry, sir, putting on his surplice.**
*'And the carriage? *^
" The horses are harnessing, "
" We shall not want it to go to church; but it must be
ready the moment we return; all the boxes and luggage
arranged and strapped on, and the coachman in his seat. "
*'Yes, sir,**
*'Jane, are you ready? "
I rose. There were no groomsmen, no bridesmaids, do
relatives to wait for or marshal: none but Mr, Rochester
and I, Mrs, Fairfax stood in the hall as we passed. I would

JANE EYRE 287
ffein have spoken to her^ but my hand was held by a grasp
of iron: I was hurried along by a stride I could hardly
follow; and to look at Mr. Rochester's face was to feel
that not a second of delay would be tolemted for any purpose,
I wonder what other bridegroom ever looked as he did—
so bent up to a purpose, so grimly resolute: or who, under
such stedfast brows j ever revealed such flaming and flashing
eyes.
I know not whether the day was fair or foul ; in des-
cending the drive, I gazed neither on sky nor earth: my
heart was with my eyes; and both seemed migrated into
Mr. Rochester's frame. I wanted to see the invisible thing
on which, as we went along, he appeared to fasten a glance
fierce and felL I wanted to feel the thoughts whose force
he seemtid breasting and resisting.
At the churchyard wicket he stopped; he discovered I
was quite out of breath. " Am I cruel in my love? ** he
aid, ** Delay an instant: lean on me^ Jane, "
And now I can recall the picture of the grey old house of
God rising calm before me, of a rook wheeling round the
steeple J of a ruddy morning sky beyond. I remember some-
thing, too, of the green grave*mounds; aad I have not
forgotten, either, two figures of strangers, straying amongst
the low hillocks, and reading the mementoes graven on the
H few mossy head -stones, I noticed them, because, as they
I saw us, they passed round to the back of the church; and
I doubted not they were going to enter by the side-aisle
door, and witness the ceremony; By Mr, Rochester they
were not observed; he was earnestly looking at my face,
from which the blood had, I daresay^ momentarily fled:
for I felt my forehead dewy, and my cheeks and lips cold.
When I rallied, which I soon did, he walked gently with me
up the path to the porch.
We entered the quiet and humble temple; the prirat
waited in liis white surphce at the lowly altar, the clerk
beside him, AU was still: two shadows only moved in a
remote comer. My conjecture had been correct : the
strangers had slipped in before us, and they now stood by the
vault of the Roches ters, their backs towards us, viewing
through the rails the old time-stained marble tomb, where
a kneeling angel guaided the remains of Darner de Rochester,
slain at Mars ton Moor in the time of the civil wars ; and of
Eli^beth, his wife.
:
L
TE EYJ
Our place was taken at the communion tails, Hearmg j
cautious step behind me^ I glanced over my shoulder: ooe
of the strangers^-a gentleman, evidently^ — was advancing
op the chancel. The service began. The explanation of th«
intent of matrimony weis gone through; and then the
clergyman came a step further forwardj and^ bending slightly
towards Mr. Rochester, went on,
''I require and charge you both (as ye will answer at
the dreadful day of judgment, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed), that if either of you know any impediment
why ye may not lawfully be joined together in matrimony,
ye do now conf^s it; for be ye weU assured that so many
as are coypled together otherwise than God's word doth
allow, are not joined together by God^ neither is thdr
matrimony lawful. "
He paused^ as the custom is. When is the pause after
that sentence ever broken by reply? Not, perhaps^ once in
a hundred years. And the clergyman, who had not lifted
his eyes from his book, and had held his breath but ioT a
moment^ was proceeding: liis hand was already stretched
towards Mr. Rochester, as his lij^ unclosed to ask^'* WUt
thou have this woman for thy wedded wife? " — when a
distinct and near voice said;—
** The marriage cannot go on: I declare the exbtence
of an impediment.**
The clergyman looked up at the speaker, and stood mute;
the clerk did the same; Mr. Rochester moved slightly, as
if an earthquake had rolled under his feet; taking a firmer
footing, and not turning his head or eyes, he said,'* Proceed,'^
Profound silence fell when he had uttered that word,
with deep but low intonation* Presently Mr, Wood said : —
" I cannot proceed without some investigation into what
has been asserted^ and evidence of its truth or falsehood. "
'* The ceremony is quite broken off, " subjoined the voice
behind us,''1 am in a condirion to prove my ali^ation:
an insuperable impediment to this marriage exists, "
Mr. Rochester h^rd, but heeded not: he stood stubborn
and rigid: making no movement^ but to possess himself
of my hand. What a hot and strong grasp he had! — and
how hTie quarried marble was his pale, firm, massive front
at this moment I How his eye shone, still, watchful, and yet
wild beneath!
Mr. Wood seemed at a loss. " What is the nature of the
JANE EYRE 289
impediment? " be asked. " Perhaps it may be got over-
explained away ? ^^
'* Hardly, " was the answer: " I have called it insuperable,
aad I speak advisedly/'
The speaker came forward s^ and leaned on the rails*
He continued, uttering each word distinctly^ calmly, steadily,
but not loudly*
** It simply consists in the existence of a previous marriage.
Mr Rochester has a wife now living "
My nerves vibrated to those low-spokeo words as they
had never vibrated to thunder — my blood felt their subtle
violence as it had never felt frost or fire : but I was collectedj
and in no danger of swooning, I looked at Mr. Rochester:
I made him look at me. Hk whole face was colourless rock;
his eye was both spark and flint. He disavowed nothing;
be seemed as if he would defy all things. Without speaking;
without smiling; without seeming to recognise in me a
human being, he only twined my waist with bis arm, and
riveted me to liis side.
" Who are you? " he asked of the intruder,
" My name is Briggs— a solicitor of Street, London/*
" And you would thrust on me a wife? *'
'* I would remind you of your lady's existence j sir; which
the law recognises, if you do not.*'
** Favour me with an account of her — ^with her name,
her parentage, her place of abode. "
" Certainly. "'Mr» Briggs calmly took a paper from his
pocket, and read out in a sort of ofhcial, nasal voice : —
" * I affirm and can prove that on the 30th of October,
A.D,, , (a date of fifteen years back) Edward Fairfax
Rochester, of Thomfield Hall, in the county of , and
of Femd^n Manor, in shire, England, was married
to my sister, Bertha Antoinetta Mason, daughter of Jonas
Mason, merchant, and of Antoinetta bis wife, a Creole —
at church, Spanish Town, Jamaica. The record of the
foarriage will be found in the register of that churchy
copy of it is now in my possession i Signed, Richard
Mason.'"
** That — if a genuine document^ — may prove I have been
married, but it does not prove that the woman mentioned
therein as my wife is still hving. "
^^ ** She was living three months ago,*'returned the lawyer,
^A " How do yoti know? "'
290 JANE EYRE
" I have a witness to the fact; whose testimony even
you, sir, will scarcely controvert. "
" Produce him— or go to heU. "
'^ I will produce him first — ^he is on the spot: Mr. Mascm,
have the goodness to stq > forward/'
Mr. Rochester, on hearing the name, set his teeth; he
experienced, too, a sort of strong convulsive quiver; near
to him as I was, I felt the spasmodic movement of fury or
despair run through his frame. The second stranger, who
had hitherto lingered in the background, now di^ near;
a pale face look^ over the solidtc^s shoulder— yes, it was
Mason himself. Mr. Rochester turned and glared at him«
His eye, as I have often said, was a black eye: it had now a
tawny, nay a bloody light in its gloom; and his face flushed
— olive cheek, and hueiess foreh^ul received a glow, as from
spreading, ascending heart-fure: and he stirred, lifted his
strong arm — he could have strucflt Mason — dashed him on
the church-floor — shocked by ruthless blow the breath
from his body — ^but Mason shrank away, and cried faintly,
" Good God ! " Contempt fell cool on Mr. Rochester— his
passion died as if a blight had shrivelled it up: he only
asked, " What have you to say? ^'
An inaudible re^ly escaped Mason^ white lips.
*'The devil is in it if you cannot answer distinctly. I
again demand, what have you to say? "
" Sir — sir " — ^btemipted the clergyman, " do not foiget
you are in a sacred place. " Then addressing Mason, be
inquired gently, ** Are you aware, sir, whether or not this
gentleman's wife is still living? "
" Gnirage, " ur^ed the lawyer,—-* speak out. "
*'She is now Hving at Thornfield Hall; " said Mason,
in more articulate tones : *'I saw her there last April. I am
her brother. "
" At Thornfield Hall I " ejaculated the deigyman. " Im-
possible! I am an ok) resident in this neighbourhood, sir,
and I never heard of a Mvs. Rochester at Iliomfldd EbXI "
I saw a grim smile contort Mr. Rochester's lip, and be
muttered : —
" No — by God ! I took care that none should hear of it—
or of her under that name. " He mused — ^for tcb minutes
he held counsel with himself: he formed his resolve, and
annoimced it: —
" Enough— all shall bolt out at once, like'^e bullet from
JAKE EYRE
he barreL— Wood^ close your book, and take off your
smplice; John Green (to the clerk X leave the church:
tho'e will be no wedding to-day; *'the man obeyed.
Mr* Rochester continued, hardily and recklessly : " Bigamy
is an ugly word I— I meant, however^ to be a biganxist: but
fate has out-manceuvred me; or Providence has checked
me, — perhaps the last, I am little better than a devil at
this moment; and^ as my pastor there would tell me^ deserve
no doubt the sternest judgments of God,^ven to the
quenchless fire and deathless worm. Gentlemen, my plan
is broken up!— what this lawyer and his chent say is true:
I have been married ; and the woman to whom I was married
lives ! You say you never heard of a Mis. Rochester at the
house op yonder. Wood: but I daresay you have many a
time inclined your ear to gossip about the mysterious lunatic
kept there under watch and ward. Some have whispered
to yon that she^ k my bastard half-sister: some, my cast-off
mistress; I now inform you that she is my wife, whom I
married fifteen years ago, — Bertha Mason by name; sister
of this resolute personage, who is now, with his quivering
Umbs and white cheeks, showing you what a stout heart
men may bear. Cheer up, Dick 1— never fear me ! — Fd almost
as soon strike a woman as you* Bertha Mason is mad ; and
she came of a mad family; — idiots and maniacs through
three generations 1 Her mother, the Creole, was both a mad
woman and a drunkard * — as I found out after I had wed the
daughter: for they were silent on family secrets before.
Bertha, like a dutiful child, copied her parent in both points.
I had a charming partner—pure, wise, modest: you can
fancy I was a happy man, — I went through rich scenes!
Oh ! my experience has been heavenly, if you only knew it !
But I owe you no further explanation* Briggs, Wood, Mason j
— I invite you all to come up to the house and visit Mrs,
Poole's patient, and my wife /—You shall see what sort of
a being I was cheated into espousing, and judge whether
or Qot I had a right to break the compact, and seek sym-
pathy with something at least human. This girt/'he con-
tinued, looking at me, ** knew no more than you. Wood,
of the disgusting secret: she thought all wa^ fair and legal;
and never dreamt she was going to be entrapped into a
feigned union with a defrauded wretch, already bound to
a l^d, mad, and embruted partner I Come all of you, follow ! "
Still holding me fastj he left the church: the three g^
I
.
292 JANE EYRB
men came after. At the front door of thetlMfl we found the
carriage.
''Take it back to the coftch^booie, Jdm/'ia5d Mr*
Rochester, coolly; " it will not be wanted to-day.**
At our entrance, Mis. Fairfax, Addle, Sc^)hie!y Leah,
advanced to meet and greet us.
" To the right about--every sdull " cried the iiaasten
" away with your congnatuktioDS I Who wants them?
— ^Not I!— they are fiiteoi years tooJatei "
He passed on and ascended the stairs, «tffl hdkyng my
hand, and still beckoning the gemdemen to follow faim;
which they did. We mounted the fisst staircase, passed- q >
the gallery, proceeded to the ikaid /stoiy: thb^ hff^ black
door, opened by Mr. RncheSter'd miastei? key, admitted m
to the tapestried room, with its great bed, toad its pictcdai
cabinet.
" You know this place, llason, " said oor guide; " she
bit and stabbed you here. "
He lifted the faaagings from the wall, uneovering the
second doc^^: tliis, too, he opened. In b aroonl'without a
window, there burnt a fire, guarded by a high and stniog
f^der, and a bump suspended from the ceilmg, by a chain.
Grace Poole bent over the fire, appai£nt%- cookmg something <
in a satrc^xm. In the deep shade, it the further ^end of the
it > om, a figure lan backwards and lonirards. What it was,
whether b^t or human being, one ^^6u]d not, at'first -sight,
teH: it grovelled, seemingly, on ail fours; it snatched and
growled like some strange wild animid^: but it wbb covered
with clothing; and a quantity'of dasdc, grizzled hair, wild as
a mane, hid its head and face.
" Good-ittorrow, Mrs. Podlei " said Mr. ^Rochester.
" How are you? and how is your > ciMUCge to-day? "
" We're toteable, sir, I thank you, " veplied Grase, hftibg
tte boiling mess carefully on to the hobt " ra;tiierisna|q)isb,
but not'rageous. "
A fierce cry seemed to give the lie to. her fitvounUe
report: the clothed hyena rose Mp^ and stood tall on ils
hind feet.
" Ah, sir^ she sees you! " esedaimed Qmce: " you'd
better not stay. "
" Only a few moments, Grace; you tnust allowrme a
few moments* "
" Take care then, sirl— lor God^s sake, take care! "
w
JANE EYRE zgs
The maniac bellowed: she parted her shaggy locks from
her visage, and gaxed wildly at her visitors. I rccogmsed
wefl that purple facej— those bloated features. Mrs, Poole
advanced,
''Keep out of the way/'said Mr, Rochester, thrusting
her aside: " she has no knife, now, I suppose? and I'm on
my guard.*'
** One never knows what she has, sir: she is so cunning:
is not in mortal discretion to fathom her craft/'
'* We had better leave her/'whispered Mason,
** Go to the devill " was his brother^n-law^s recom-
mendation.
" Ware! " cried Grace, The three gentlemen retreated
itmultaneously^ Mr. Rochester flimg me behind him: the
lunatic sprang and gmppled his throat viciously, and kid
her teeth to his cheek: they struggled. She was a big woman,
in statue almost equalling her husband, and corpulent
besides: she showed virile force in the contest — more than
once she almost throttled him, athletic as he was. He cotild
have settled her with a well -planted blow ; but he would not
strike: he would only wrestle. At last he mastered her
aims; Grace Poole gave him a cord, and he pinioned tliera
behind her: with more rope, which was at hand, he bound
her to a chair. The operation was performed amidst the
fiercest yelk, and the most convulsive plunges. Mr. Rochester
then turned to the spectators: he looked at them with a
smile both acrid and desolate.
" That is my w// > , " said he. " Such is the sole conjugal
embrace I am ever to know-^uch are the endearments
which are to solace my leisure hours 1 And J^ts is what I
wished to have " (la >'ing his hand on my shoulder): " this
young girl, who stands so grave and quiet at the mouth of
hell, kx > kijig collectedly at the gambols of a demon. I wanted
her just as a change after that fierce ragout. Wood and
Briggs, look at the difierencel Compare these clear eyes
with the red balb yonder — this face with that mask — this
forai with that bulk; then judge me, pri^t of the gospel
and man of the law, and remember, with what judgment
ye judge ye shall be judged I Off with you now. I must
shut up my prize "
We all withdrew, Mr* Rochester stayed a moment behi; "'
us J to give some further order to Grace Poole. The soli <
addressed me as he descended the stair.
L
294 JANE EYRE
'* YoU| madam/'said he, " are deared from all blame:
your uncle will be glad to hear it--Hi, indeed, he should be
still living — when Mr. Mason returns to Madeira. "
" Myimclel What of him? Do you know him? "
" Mr. Mason does: Mr. Eyre haa been the Funchal corre-
spondent of his house for some years. When your unde
received your letter intimating the contemplated union
between yourself and Mr. Rochester, Mr. Mason, who was
staying at Madeira to recruit his healtii, on his way back to
Jamaica, happened to be with him. Mr. Eyre mentioned
the intelligence; for he knew that my client here was ac-
quainted with a gentleman of the name of Rochester. Mr.
Mason, astonish^ and distressed as you may suppose,
revealed the real state of matters. Your unde, I am sorry
to say, is now on a sick bed; from which, considering the
nature of his difiiease— decline — and the stage it has reaiched,
it is imlikdy he will ever rise. He oould not then hasten to
England himself, to extricate you from the snare into which
you had fallen, but he imploied Mr. Mason to lose no time
in taking steps to prevoit the false marriage. He referred
him to me for assistance. I used all despatch, and am thank-
ful I was not tdo late: as you, doubtless, must be also.
Were I not morally certain that your uncle will be dead ere
you reach Madeira, I would advise you to accompany Mr.
Mason back: butas it is, I think you had better remain in
England till you can hear further, dther from or of Mr. Eyre.
Have we anything else to stay for? " he inquired of Mr.
Mason.
" No, no — ^let us be gone, " was the anxious reply; and
without waiting to take leave of Mr. Rochester, they made
their exit at the hall door. The de];g3mian stayed to ex-
change a few sentences, dther of admonition or reproof,
with his haughty parishioner; this duty done, he too
departed.
I heard him go as I stood at the half open door of my own
room, to which I had now withdrawn. The house desired, I
shut myself in, fastened the bolt that none might intrude,
and proceeded — not to weep, not to mourn, I was jret too
calm for that, but — mechanically to take off the wedding
dress, and replace it by the stuff gown I had worn yesterday,
as I thought for the li^t time. I then sat down: I fdt wecJc
and tired. 1 leaned my arms on a table, and my head dropped
on them. And now I thought: till now I had only heard,
JANE EYRE 295
seen, moved — ^followed up and down where I was led oc
dragged — ^watched eveat rush on event, disclosure open
beyond disclosure: but now, I thought.
The morning had been a quiet morning enoi^h — ^all except
the brief scene with the lunatic: the transaction in the
church had not been noisy; there was no explosion of
passion, no loud altercation, no dispute, no defiance or chal-
lenge, no tears, no sobs: a few words had been spoken, a
calmly pronounced objection to t^e marriage made; some
stem short questions put by Mr. Rochester; answers, ex-
planations given, evidence adduced; an open admission of
the truth had been uttered by my master; then the living
proof had been seen: the intruders were gone, and all was
over.
I was in my own rpom as usual — ^just myself, without
obvious change: nothing had smitten me, or scathed me, or
maimed me. And yet where was the Jane Eyre of yester-
day? — ^where was her life? — ^where were her prospects?
Jfane Eyre, who had been an ardent, expectant woman —
afanost a bride— was a cold, solitary girl again: her life was
pale, her prospects were desolate. A Christmas frost had
come at midsmnmer; a white December storm had whirled
over Jime; ice glazed the ripe apples, drifts crushed the
blowing roses; on hay-field and corn-field lay a frozen
shroud: lanes which last night blushed full of flowers, to-
day were pathless with untrodden snow; and the woods
which twelve hours since waved leafy and fragrant as groves
between the tropics, now spread, waste, wild and white as
pine-forests in wintry Norway. My hopes were all dead —
struck with a subtle doom, such as, in one night, fell on all
the first-bom in the land of Egypt. I looked on my cherished
wishes, yesterday so blooming and glowing; they lay stark,
chill, livid corpses, that could never revive. I looked at my
love: that feeling which was my master's — ^which he had
created; it shivered. in my heart, like a suffering child in a
cold cradle; sickness and anguish had seized it; it could not
seek Mr. Rochester's arms — ^it could not derive warmth
hrom his breast. Oh, never more could it tum to him; for
^th was blighted — confidence destroyed! Mr. Rochester
was not to me what he had been; for he was not what I had
thought him. I would not ascribe vice to him; I would not
say he had betrayed me: but the attribute of stainless truth
was gone from his idea; and from his presence I must g < ^
296 JANE EYRE
0uU I perceived wdl. When — how — ^whither, I conld not yet
discern: hot he himself, I doubted not, would hurry me
from Thomfield. Real affection, it seemed, he could not
have for me; it had been only fitful passimi, that was balked;
he would want me no more. I should fear even to doss his
path now: my view must be hateful to him. Oh, how blind
had been my e3res ! How weak my conduct!
My eyes were covered and closed: eddying darkness
seemed to swim round me, and reflection came m as black
and confused a flow. Self-Abandoned, relaxed, and effort-
less, I seemed to have laid me down in the dried-up bed of a
great river; I heard a flood loosened in remote mountains,
and felt the torrent come: to rise I had no wifl, to flee I had
no strength. I lay faint; longing to be dead. One idea only
still throbbed life-like within me — a remembrance of God:
it begot an muttered prayer: these words went wandering
up and down in my rayless mind, as something that should
be whispered; but no ena:gy was found to express them: —
" Be not far from me, for trouble is near: there is none
to help. "
It was near: and as I had lifted no petition to Heaven to
avert it — as I had neither joined my hands, nor bent my
knees, nor moved my lips — ^it came: in full, heavy swing the
torrent poured over me. The whole consciousness of my life
lorn, my love lost, my hope quenched, my faith death-
struck, swayed full and mighty above me in one sullen mass.
That bitter hour cannot be described : in truth, " the waters
came into my soul; I sank in deq) mire: I felt no standing;
I came into deep waters; the floods overflowed me/'
CHAPTER XXVn
Some time in 1^ afternoon I raised my head, and looking
Toxmd and seeing liie western sun gilding the sign of its
decline on the wsdl, I asked, " What am I to do? "
But the answer my mind gave — " Leave Thomfield at
once " — ^was so prompt^ so dread, that I stopped my ears:
I said, I could not bear such words now. " ThaX I am not
Edward Rochester's bride is the least part of my woe, " I
alleged : " that I have wakened out of most glorious dreams,
JANE EYRE
297
and found them all void and vain, is a horror I could bear
and master; but that I must leave him deddedlVj mstantly,
entirelyj is intolerable. I camiot do it,**
But J then, a voice within me averred that I could do it;
and foretold that I should do it, I wrestled with my own
resolutioti: I want^ to be weak that I might avoid the
awful passage of further suffering I saw laid out for me j and
conscience J turned tyrant j. held passion by tlie throat, told
her tauntiiigly, she had yet but dipped her dainty foot in
the slough J and swore that with that arm of iron, he would
thrust her down to unsounded depths of agony.
" Let me be torn away, then I " 1 cried. " Let another
help mel "
" No; you shall tear yourseU away, none shall hdp you
you shalJ, yourself ^ pluck our your right eye: yourself cut
off your right band : your heart shaU be the victim \ and
you, the priest^ to transfix it, "
I rose up suddenly, terror-struck at the solitude which so
ruthless a judge haunted > — at the silence which so awful a
voice filled. My head swam as I stood erect: 1 perceived
that I was sickening from excitement and inanition; neither
meat nor drink had passed my lips that day, for I had taken
no breakfast. Andj with a strange pang^ I now^ reflected
that, long as I had been shut up here, no message had been
sent to ask how I waSj or to invite me to come down i not
even little Addle had tapped at the door; not even Mrs.
Fairfax had sought me. " Friends always forget those whom
fortune forsakes, " I murmured, as I undrew the bolt and
passed out. I stumbled over an obstacle : my head was still
di^zy, my sight was dim, and my limbs were feeble. I could
not soon recover myself, I fell, but not on to the ground;
an out -stretched arm caught me; I looked up—I was
supported by Mr. Roches ter^ who sat in a chair across my
chamber thr^hold*
" You have come out at last, " he said. " Well, I have
been waiting for you long, and hstening : yet not one mo^^e-
ment have I heard, nor one sob: five minutes more of that
de & th^like bush, and I should have forced the lock like a
burgtar. So, you shun me? — you shut yourself up and
grieve alone I I would rather you had come and upbraided
me with vehemence. You are pjassionate: I expected a
scene of some kind. I was prepared for the hot rain of tears ;
only 1 wanted them to be shed on my breast: now asensel'
ii
L
298 JANE EYRE
6oor has r^eived them^ or your drenched handkerchiefs
But I err: you have not wept at all ! I see a white cheek and
a faded eye^ but no trace of tears. I suppose^ thea, your
heart has been weeping blood?
** Well, Jane; not a word of reproach? Nothing bitter —
nothing poignant? Nothing to cut a feeling or sting a
passion? You sit quietly where I have pla^ you, and
regard me with a weary, passive look.
" Jane, I never meant to wound you thus. If the man
who had but one little ewe lamb that was dear to him as a
daughter, that ate of his bread and drank of his cup, and
lay m his bosom, had by some mistake slaughtered it at the
shambles, he would not have rued his bloody blunder more
than I now rue mine. Will you ever forgive me? "
Reader . < — ^I forgave him at the moment, and on the spot.
There was such deep remorse in his eye, such true pity in his
tone, such manly eneigy in his manner; and, besides, there
was such unchanged love in his whole look and mien — ^I for-
gave him all: yet not in words, not outwardly; only at my
heart's core.
" You know I am a scoundrel, Jane? " ere long he in-
quired wistfully — ^wondering, I suppose, at my continued
silence and tameness: the result ratiier of wodkness than
of will.
" Yes, sir. "
" Then tell me so roundly and sharply — don't spare me. "
** I cannot: I am tired and sick. I want some water.''
He heaved a sort of shuddering sigh, and taking me in his
arms, carried me downstairs. At first I did not know to what
room he had borne me; all was cloudy to my glazed sight:
inresently I felt the reviving warmth of a fire; for, sununer
as it was, I had become icy cold in my chamber. He put
wine to my lips; I tasted it and revived; then I ate some-
thing he offered me, and was soon myself. I was in the
Hbrary — sitting in his chair— he was quite near: ** K I could
go out of life now, without too sharp a pang, it would be
well for me, " I thought; " then I shoi^d not have to make
the effort of cracking my heart-strings in rending than from
among Mr. Rochester's. I must leave him, it appears. I do
not want to leave him — ^I cannot leave him. "
" How are you now, Jane? "
" Much better, sir: I shall be wdl soon. "
" Taste the wine again, Jane. "
JANE EYRE 2gg
I obeyed him; then he put the glass on the table, stood
before me, and looked at me attentively* Suddenly he turned
away, with an inarticulate exclamation, full of passionate
emotion of some kind; he walked fast through the room
and came back: he stooped towards me as if to kiss rae;
but I remembered caresses were now forbidden. I turned
my face away^ and put his aside,
" What I—how is this? " he exclaimed hastily. " Oh, I
know! you won't kiss the husband of Bertha Mason? You
consider my arms filled, and my embraces appropriated ? *'
" At any rate, there is neither room nor claim for me^ sir.''
" Why, Jane? I will spare you the trouble of much talk-
ing: I will answer for you— because I have a wife already,
you would reply,— I guess rightly ? "
" Yes/'
" If you think so, you must have a strange opixiion of me;
you must regard me as a plotting profligate— a base and low
rake who has been simulating disinterested love in order to
draw you into a snare deliberately laid, and strip you of
honour, and rob you of self-respect. What do you say to
that? I see you can say nothing; in the first place, you are
faint, still, and have enough to do to draw your breath; in
the second place, you cannot yet accustom yourself to
accuse and revile me; and, besides, the flood-gates of tears
are opened, and they would rush out if you spoke much;
and you have no desire to expostulate, to upbraid, to make
a scene: you are thinking how ta act — talking, you consider,
is of no use. I know you — I am on my guard. "
" Sir, I do not wish to act against you/'I said; and my
unsteady voice warned me to curtail my sentence.
*'Not in yaur sense of the word but in tmne^ you are
schemiiig to destroy me, You have as good as said that I am
a married man — as a married man you will shun me, keep
out of my way : just now you have refused to Idss me. You
intend to make yourself a complete stranger to me; to Uve
under this roof only as Ad^le's governess; if ever I say a
frigidly word to you; if ever a friendly feeling inclines you
again to me, you will say, — * That man had nearly made me
lus mistress : I must be ice and rock to him ;'and ice and
rock you will accordingly become. "
I cleared and steadied my voice to reply: " All is changed
about me, sir ; I must change too — there is no doubt of that :
and to avoid fluctuations of feeling, and continual comb'*'
I.
)^ JANE EYRE
iNilh TteoUections and associatioiis, ther^ is only one way—
A < MAt must have a new governess, sir. "
'^ Oh» Adtie will go to school--I have setded that already;
nor do I mean to torment you with the hideous associatioos
and recollections of llioRifield Hall — ^this accursed place-
Ik^ tent of Achan—this insolent vault, ofienng the ghastli-
Hfss of livin{[ death to the light of the open sky--*this narrow
ttone hell, with its one real €end, worse than a legion of such
as we imagine^ — ^Jane, 3^u shall not stay here, nor will L I
was wrong ever to brmg you to Thomfidd HaJl, knowing as
I did how it was hamited. I charged them to conceal from
you, before I ever saw you, all knowltdgd of tiie cuise of the
place; merely because I feared Ad^le nevor would have a
Kvemess to stay if she knew with what inmate she was
used, and my plans would not permit me to remove the
maniac elsewhere— though I possess an old house, Femdean
Manor, tvea more retiral and hidden than this, where I
could have lodged h^ safely ^ough, had not a scruple
about the unhealthiness of the situation, in the heart of a
wood, made my conscience recoil from the arrangement.
Probably those damp walls would soon have eased me of
her cha^e: but to eaich villain his own vice; and mine is
not a tendency to indirect assassination, even of what I
nK > st hate.
** Concealing t)ie leiad-woman's neighbourhood, from you,
however, was something like covering a child whh & cloak,
and ktying it down near a upas-tree: that demon's vicinage
is poisoned, and always was. But T\\ shut up Thomddd
HaJl: I'll naO up the front door, and board the lower
windows; I'll give Mrs. Poole two hundred a year to live
here with my wifty as you term that fearful hag: Grace will
do much for money, aiid she shall have her s < »i, the keeper
at Grimsby Retreat, to bear her company and be at hand
to give her aid, in the paroxysms, when my wife is prompted
by her familiar to bum people in their beds at night, to stab
them, to Ute their flesh from their bones, and so on "
" ^, " I interrupted him, " you are inexorable f < ^ that
unfortunate lady: you speak of her with hat & ^with vin-
dictive antipathy. It is cruel — she cannot hdp being mad. "
" Jane, my little darling (so I will call you, for so you are),
you don't know wiiat you are talking about; you misjudge
me again: it is not because she is mad I hate her. If you
mad, do you think I should hate you? **
JANE EYRE 301
" I do indeed, sir: "
''Then you are mistakea, and you know nothing about
me, and nothing about the sort of love of which I am capable.
Every atom of youi flesh is as dear to me as my own'in
pam and sickness it would stiii be dear. Your mind is my
treasure, and if it were broken, it would be my treasure
still; if you raved, my arms should confine you, and not a
strait waistcoat^your grasp, even in fury, would have
a dmrm for me: if you flew at me as wildly a^ that woman
did this morning, I should receive you in an embrace, at
least as fond as it would be restrictive. I should not shrink
from you with disgust as I did from her: in your quiet
momenta you should have no watcher and no nurse but me*
and I could hang over you with untiring tenderness, though
you gave me no smile in return; and never weary of gazing
mto your eyes, though they had no longer a ray of recog^
mtion for me.— But why do I follow that tram of ideas ?
I was talking of removing you from Tbomfield, AD, you
know, IS prepared for prompt departure: to-morrow'you
shall go. I only ask you to endure one more night under this
roof, Jane: and then, farewell to its miseries and terrors for
ever! I have a place to repair to, wHch will be a secure
sanctuary from hateful reminiscences, from unwelcome
intrusion — even from falsehood and slander. "
**And take Ad^le with you, sir, " I inter^pted; " she
will be a compamon for you.^^
j^^What do you mean, Jane? 1 told you I would send
Adfile to school: and what do I want with a child for a
companion? and not my own child,— a French dancer's
bastard. Why do you importune me about her? I say why
do you assign Adele to me for a companion? "'
** You spoke of a retirement, sir; and retirement and
solitude are duU: too dull for you. "
^ *'Sohtudel solitude r* he reiterated, with irritation.
I see I must come to an explanation. I don't know what
sphynx-hke expression is forming in your countenance.
Ym are to share my solitude. Do you understand? "
I shook my head: it required a d^ree of courage, excited
as be was becoming, even to risk that mute sign of dissent*
He had been walking fast about the room, and he stopped
as if suddenly rooted to one spot. He looked at me lo—
and hard : I turned my eyes from him, fixed them on thr
and tried to assume and maintain a quiet, collected asj
L
302 JANE EYRE
" Now for the hitch in Jane's characta?/'he said at last^
speaking more calmly than from his look I had expected
lum to speak. " The reel of silk has xmi smoothly enough
so far; but I always knew there would ^oome a haat and a
puzzle: here it is. Now for vexation^ and exasperatkni^ and
endless trouble! By God! I long to exert a fraction of
Samson's strength^ and biieak the entonglemait like ttow I *'
He recommenced his'walk: but soon again stopped j
and this time just before me.
^^ Jane! will you hear r^uson? " (he .stooped and ap-
proached his lips to my ear) " because^ if you won% Fli
try violence. " His voice iwas hoarse; his look lAxat of a man
who is just abotut to biust an insufferable bond and phmge
headlong into wild licenioe. Z-saw tiiat in another momoit,
and with one impetus of irenzy more^ 1 shoidd be al^ to
do nothing with ihim. The presemt — the passii^ siBOond ^
time-^-was .all I had'in which to > ccmtzrol and restnaai turn:
a movement of i«ptilsaon > flight, fear, would have sealed
my doom > — ^and hisw But I wa^ nxft afraid : not m the least.
I felt an inward power; a sense of inffioence, whidi supported
me. The crisis was perilous; but not without its charm:
such as the Indian, perbs^s, feels when he sHps over the
rapid in his canoe^ I tookhoid of his denched hand ; loosened
the contorted fingers; and said to him, sootiungly^*^
" Sit-down; I'll taUc to you as long as you l & e, and'hear
all you have to say, whether reasonable or imireasons^bie. "
.He sat down: but he did txotget ieafve to speak dii^ectly.
I had been^struggling with ttears ^ some time: I had taken
great painn to iiepress them, because I knew he would not
like to see me weep. Now, howevw, I considered it w^ to
let them flow as ^eely and as* long as they liked. If the
flood annoyed him,^so much the foetterr. Sb I gave way and
cried heartily.
Soon I heard him earnestly entreating ime to be composed.
I said I could not while ^ was in such a passion.
" But I am not angry, Jane: I only love you too wett;
and you had steeled your little pale faee with sudi a resolute,
frosKn look, I could not endu» it. Hush, naw, and w^e
youT eyes.^'» .
His softened: voice announced that he was subdued; so I,
in my turn, became calm. Now he made an effort to vest
^ead 4m my shoulder: but I would not permit it. Then
mid dcaw me toihim: no«
r
f
JANE EYRE 303
'*Janel Janel''he said — in such an accent of bitter
sadness it thrilled along every nerve I had; " you don^t
love m€j then? It was only ray station, and the rank of
my wife, that you valued? Now that you think me dis-
qualified to become your husband, you recoil from my touch
as if I were some toad or ape. "
These words cut me: yet what could I do or say? I ought
probably to have done or said nothing : but I was so tortured
by a sense of remorse at thus hurtijig his feelingSj I could
not control the wish to drop bairn where I had wounded,
** I do love you/* I said^ " more than ever; but I must
not show or indulge the feeling; and tliis is the last time
I must express it/'
" The last dmCj Jane! What I do you think you can Uv^
with me, and see me daily, and yet, if you still love me, be
always cold and distant ? **
** Koj sir; that I am certain I could not; and therefore
I see there is but one way: but you will be furious if I
mentioD it. "
" Oh, mention it I If I storm, you have the art of weeping. "
'* Mr, Rochester, I must leave you/'
" For how long J Jane? For a few minutes, while you
smooth your hair — ^which is somewhat dishevelled; and
bathe your face — which looks feverish?'*
" I must leave Ad^le and Thomfield. I must part with
you for my whole life : I must begin a new existence amongst
strange faces and strange scenes. "
** Of course: I told you you should* I pass over the
madness about parting from me. You mean you must become
a part of me. As to the new existence, it is all right: you
shall yet be my wife: I am not married. You shall be iirs*
Rochester — both virtually and nominally. I shall keep
only to you so long as you and I live. You shall go to a place
I Imve in the south of France ; a white- washed \^lla on the
shores of the Mediterraoean. There you shall hve a happy,
and guarded, and most innocent life. Never fear that I wish
to lure you into error — to make you my mistress. Why do
you shake your head ? Jane, you must be reasonable; or in
truth I shall again become frantic/*
His voice and hand quivered: his large nostrils dilated:
his eye blazed: still I dared to speak: —
'* Sir, your wife is living: that is a fact acknowl "
this morning by yourself. If I lived with you os you (
304 JANE EYRE
I should then be your mistress : to say otherwise is sophistical
— is false.'*
" Jane, I am not a gentle*tempered man — ^you forget
that: I am not long-enduring; I am not cool and £s-
passionate. Out of pity to me and yourself, put your finger
on my pulse, feel how it throbs, and — beware! "
He bared his wrist, and ofPer^ it to me: the blood was
forsaking his cheek and lips, they were gro?nng livid; I
was distressed on all hands. To agitate him thus deeply,
by a resistance he so abhorred, was cruel: to yield was out
of the question. I did what human beings do instinctively
when they are driven to utter extremity— looked for aid
to one higher than man: the words " God help me! " burst
invohmtaiily from my lips.
''I am a fool ! " cried Mr. Rochester, suddenly.''I keep
telling her I am not married, and do not explain to her why,
I forget she knows nothing of the character of that woman,
or of the circumstances attending my infernal union with
her. Oh, I am certain Jane will agree with me in opinion,
when she knows all that I know! Just put 3^ur hand in mine,
Janet — ^that I may have the evidence of touch as well as
sight, to prove you are near me — and I will in a few words
s^w you the real state of the case. Cftn you listen to me? "
" Yes, sir; for hours if you will. "
" I ask (mly minutes. Jane, did you ever hear, or know
that I was not the eldest son of my house: that I had once
a brother older than I ? "
" I remember Mrs. Fairfax told me so once. "
" And did you ever hear that my fother was an avaridous,
grasping man? "
" I have understood something to that effect. "
" Well, Jane, being so, it was his resolution to keep the
property together; he could not bear the idea of dividing his
estate and leaving me a fair portion: all, he resolved, sl^uld
go to my brother, Rowland. Yet as little could he endure
that a son of his should be a poor man. I must be provided
for by a wealthy marriage. He sought me a partner betimes.
Mr. Mason, a West India planter and merclumt, was his old
acquaintance He was certain his possessions were real and
vast: he made inquiries. Mr. Mason, he foimd, had a son
and daughter; and he learned from him that he could and
would give the latter a fortune of thirty thousand pounds:
that sufficed. When I left college, I was sent out to Jamaica,
w
s^ to espouse
JANE EYRE 305
Spouse a bride already courted for me. My father said
nothing about her money; but he told me Miss Mason was
the boast of Spanish Town for her beauty; and this was no
lie. I found her a fine woman, in the style of Blanche Ingram ;
tall, dark, majestic* Her family vnshed to secure me because
I was of a good race; and so did sht. They showed her to
me in parties ^ splendidly dressed. I seldom saw her alone, and
had very little private conversation with her. She flattered
me, and lavishly displayed for my pleasure her charms and
accomplishments. All the men ux her drcle seemed to admire
her and envy me, I was dazzled, stimulated: my senses
were excited ; and being ignorant, raw, and inexperienced, I
thought I loved her. There is no folly so besatted that the
idiotic rivalries of society, the prurience^ the rashness, the
blindness of youth,will not hurry a man to its commission. Her
relatives encouraged me; competitors piqued me; she allured
me: a marriage was achieved almost before I knew where I
was. Oh, I have no respect for m >'self when I think of that act !
—an agony of inward contempt masters me, I never loved,
I never esteemed, I did not even know her, I was not sure
of the existence of one virtue in her nature: I had marked
neither modesty, nor benevolence, nor candour, nor refine-
ment in her mind or manners— and, I married her: — gross,
grovelling, mole-eyed blockhead that I was I With less sin I
might have — but let me remember to whom I am speaking.
" My bride's mother I had never seen; I understood she
was dead* The honey-moon over, I learned my mistake;
she was only mad, and shut up in a lunaric asylum. There
was a younger brother, too; a complete dumb idiot. The
elder one, whom you have seen (and whom I cannot hate,
whilst I abhor alt his kindred, because he has some grains of
affection in his feeble mind ; shown in the continued interest
he takes in his wretched sister and also In a dog-like attach-
ment he once bore me), vviU probably be in the same state one
day. My father and my brother Rowland, knew all this ; bat
they thought only of the thirty thousand pounds, and joined
in the plot against me.
*^ These were vile discoveries ; but, except for the treachery
of conceahnent, I should have made them no subject of
reproach to my wife : even when I found her nature wholly
ahen to mine; her tastes obnoxious to me; her cast of mind
common, low, narrow, and singularly incapable of being k'
to anything higherj expanded to anything larger— whf
3o6 JANE EYRE
found that I could ^not pass a single evening nor a single ibour
of the day with her in comfort; Idust kindly conveisation
ooald not ibe sustained between u & ^ because whatever topic
I started^ immediately received from ;her a turn at once casust
and trite, perverse wid imbecile— when I ^penoerved that I
should never'have a quiet or settled household, because no
servant would bear the continued outbreaks of her violent
and unreasonaMe temper, or the vexatioiaB of her absurd,
contradictory, exacting ordeis— «ven then I restrained my-
self: I eschewed upholding, I curtailed ranonstrance; I
tried to devotir my reptotanoe «nd disgust in. secret; > I
repiiessed the deep antipathy I ie^
*'Jane, I will not trouble you with a^minable detaik:
some strong woids shall express what I ha^ to say. I lived
wilih that woman ispstairs four years, and before tb«t tune
she had tried me indeed : her character ripened and devel < ^ > ed
widi frightful rapidity; her vices sprang upi & u & t and rank:
they were so strong, only cruelly could ch«:k liiem; And I
would not use cruelty. What a pigmy intellect she had —
and what giant propensities J How fearful were the ctnses
those propensities Wtailed on met Bertha Mason,— ^e true
daughter of sn inifamous .mother,--dragged me thsough a^
the hideous and degmdinjg agonieswhich < must attend a man
bound to a wife at once intiai^ierate and unchaste.
'^ My brother in the interval was dead ; and at the end of
the foor years my father died tdo. I was rich enough now —
yet poor to hideous incfigence: a nature the most gross, im-
pure, depraved I ever saw, was associated with mine, and
called by the law and by society < a part of me. And I could
not rid myself of it by any legal proceedings : for the doctors
now discovered that my wtfe was mad — ^her'excesses had
prematurely develc^ed the germs of insanity: — ^Jane, you
don't like my narrative; you look'almost sidc^-^hjdl I defer
the rest to another day? "
" No, sir, finish it now^ I pity you— I do earnestly pity
you. "
" Pity, Jane, from some people is a noxious and insulting
sort of tribute, whkh one is justified in huiiling back in the
teeth of those wto offer it; but that is a sort of pity native
to callous, selfish hearts^ it is a hyl»id, egotistioal pam at
hearing of woes^ crossed with ignorant contempt for those
who have endured them* GButthatis not your pity^ Jane: it
it not the feeling oif which your whode ^e is faH at this
JANE EYR?: 3Q7
momesxit — ^with which your eyea are ik)w almost averflowing
— ^with which your heart is heaving— with which your hand is
trembling in mine. Your pity^ my daiHug, is the sufEering
mother of love: itSt anguish is the very natal psuig of the
divine passion. I accept it^ Jane; let the da«ug^ter have free
adveatp— my arms wait to receive her.*'
" Now, sir, proceed : what did you do when you^found she
was mad?'*
" Jane — ^I approached the verge of despair: a remnant of
sdklri!espect was all that inteirvened between .me and the gulf.
In the eyes} of the world, I was doubtless, covcared with grimy
dishonour : but I resolved to be clean in my own sight —
and to the last I repudiated the contamination of her crimes,
and wrenched myself from connection with her mental defects.
Stilly society associated my name a^xd person with hers; I
> fet saw her. and heard her dallyi something: of her breath
(faugh I) mixed with the air I. breathed; an^ besides, I re-
membered: I had once been her husbandr-that: recollection
was then, and is now, ineaq)res$ibly odious to me;, moreover,
I. knew tiat while sfaie^ lived. I could never, be the, hus3i)and of
another and better wife;, apd, though five years my senior
(b/srfami)y aiid hwiatherhadlied.to me even ia.the particular
of hec a^),,she was likdy tolive as long astl^ beipg as robust
in frame^as she was infirm in mind. Thus, at tjie agjs of twenty-
six, I was hopeless.
" One^ night I had be^ > awakened by hes ye]lsr~(since
the med & calimeQ had i»ronounced bar mad, she had of coursje
been.shut up)-4t was. & fiery West It^iai^ night; one of tl^
descr^on that frequency precedes; the'hurricanes of those
dimates; being unable to sleep in. bed, I got up and opened
the: window. The air was like suJphur-^teams^-I could & id
na refreshment anywh^e. Mosquitoes came huzzapg in and
hununed sullenly iK3!undi the roomr; the sea, whidi I could
hear from thence, rumbled dull l & e; an earthquake — black
doiids were casting up- over it; the mpon. was setting in the
waves^ bcoad; aad red, like a bot caniK > n-ballrHshe threw
her Isit, bloody glance over a^ woiW, quivermg with tbe
{oonent of tempest. I was piiiysically influeoced by the
atmosphere and scene, and my ears were filloii with the
curses the mianiac still shrieked out; whereiifishamQm^tarily
mingled my name mtk such a tone of demonrhate, with
such language It— no professed harlot, ever had. a fouler
vocabulary than, she: though. twO'rooms off, I heard every
308 JANE EYRE
word — ^the thin partitions of the West India house opposing
but slight obstruction to her wolfish cries.
" * This life/ said I at last, * is hell I this is the air — ^thosc
are the sounds of the bottomless pit ! I have a right to deliver
myself from it if I can. The sufferings of this mortal state
will leave me with the heavy flesh that now cumbers my
soul. Of the fanatic's burning eternity I have no fear: there
is not a future state worse than this present one — ^let me
break away and go home to God I *
'^ I said this whilst I knelt down at, and unlocked a trunk
which contained a brace of loaded pistols: I meant to
shoot myself. I only entertained the intention for a moment;
for, not being insane, the crisis of exquisite and unalloyed
despair which had originated the wish and design of self-
destruction, was past in a second.
" A wind fresh from Europe blew over the ocean and
rushed through the open casement : ^e storm broke,
streamed, thundered, blazed, and the air grew pure. I then
framed and fixed a resolution. While I walked under the
dripping orange-trees of my wet garden, and amongst its
drenched pomegranates and pine-apples, and while the
refulgent dawn of the tropics kindled round me — ^I reasoned
tiius, Jane: — ^and now listen; for it was true Wisdom that
consoled me in that hour, and showed me the right path to
follow.
. " The sweet wind from Europe was still whispering in
the refreshed leaves, and the Atlantic was thundering in
glorious liberty; my heart, dried up and scorched for a long
time, swelled to the tone, and filled with living blood —
my being longed for renewal— my soul thirsted for a pure
draught. I saw Hope revive — and felt Regeneration poissible.
From a flowery arch at the bottom of my garden I gazed
over the sea — ^bluer than the sky; the old worid was beyond;
clear prospects opened thus: —
" * Go,'said Hope, * and live again in Europe: there it
is not kiiown what a sullied name you bear, nor what a
filthy burden is bound to you. You may take the maniac
with you to England; confine her with due attendance arai
precautions at Thornfield: then travel yourself to what
clime you will, and form what new tie you like. That woman,
who has so abused your long-suffering— so sullied your
name; so outraged your honour; so blighted jrour youth —
is not your wife; nor are you her husbemd. See that she
JANE EYRE 309
is cared for as her condition demands^ and you have done
all that God and Humanity require of you. Let her identity,
her connection with yourself, be buried in oblivion: you
are bound to impairt them to no living being. Place her in
safety and comfort: shelter her degradation with secrecy,
and leave her.'
" I acted precisely on this suggestion. My father and
brother had not made my marriage known to their acquain-
tance; because, in the very first letter I wrote to apprise
them of the union — ^having already begun to experience
extreme disgust of its consequences; and from the family
character and constitution, seeing a hideous future opening
to me — ^I added an urgent chaige to keep it secret: and
very soon, the infamous conduct of the wife my father had
selected for me, was such as to make him blush to own her
as his daughter-in-law. Far from desiring to publish the
connection, he became as anxious to conceal it as myself.
" To England, then, I conveyed her; a fearful voyage
I had with such a monster in the vessel. Glad was I when
I at las^ got her to Thomfield, and saw her safely lodged in
that third story room, of whose secret inner cabinet she has
now for ten years made a wild beast's den — sl goblin's cell.
I had some trouble in finding an attendant for her: as it
was necessary to select one on whose fidelity dependence
could be placed; for her raving would inevitably betray
my secret: besides, she had luad intervals of days — some-
times weeks— which she filled up with abuse of me. At
last I hired Grace Poole, from the Grimsby Retreat. She
and the suigeon. Carter (who dressed Mason's wounds that
night he was stabbed and worried), are the only two I have
ever admitted to my confidence. Mrs. Fairfax may indeed
have suspected something; but she could have gained no
precise Imowledge as to facts. Grace has, on the whole,
proved a good keeper; though, owing partly to a fault of
her own,^ of which it appears nothii^ can cure her, and
which is incident to her harassing profession, her vigilance
has'been more than once lulled and bafiled. The lunatic
is both cunning and malignant; she has never failed to take
advantage of her guardian's temporary lapses; once to
secrete & e knife with which she stabbed her brother, and
twice to possess herself of the key of her cell, and issue
therefrom in the night-time. On the first of these occasions,
she perpetrated the attempt to bum me in my bed; on the
310 JANE EYRE
second she paid that ghastly visit to you. I thank Providence^
who watched over you^ that she then spent her fury on your
wedding apparel; which perhaps brought bode vs^giM
reminiscences of her own bridal dwys^: but on what m^t
have happened, I camiot eodure to reflect. When I thmk
of the thmg which flew at my throat this morning, hanging
its black and scarlet visage over 1^ nest of my dove, my
blood curdles "
'* And what, sir,'M asked, while he paused, " did you d»
when you, had settled her here? Where did you go?'*
''What did I do, Jane? I transformed myself into a
Will-o'-the-wisp. Where did I £^? I pursued wanderings
as wild as those of the March-spirit. I sought the Gontinenl^
and went devious through all its iands. My EauA desire ^was
to sedc and find la good €uid intelligent woman, whcmi .1
could love: a contiast to the fury I left at Thomfield "
" But you could not marry, sic* "
" I had determined, and was convinced that ItGoukt and
ought. It was not my original intention to deceive, as I
have deceived you. I/meant to tell my tale plainly, attd^make
my proposals openly: and it appeared to me.so absplutdy
rational that I should be considered free to love and he
bved, I never doubted some w(Hcnaa might be found willing
and aUe to underst^id my case and > ««oept me» in ^te of
the curse with which I ^as burdened. "
" Well^sir? "
" When you. are inquisitive, |ane > you always otake me
smile. You open yoiar e^ Uke ^ «Eiger biid, and make
every now and tl^ a restless jmo^^ient; as if «Aswei$
in speech 4id not flow fast enough for you, and ypu wanted
to read the tablet of one's heart. But before I go on, tel]
me what you mean by your'Well, sir?'It is a sm^ phrase
very frequent withyou; and which many a time has4rawn
me < m and on throiigh interminable talk: I don't very well
know why* "
" I mean, — What next? How did you proceed? ,What
came of siidi an event? "
" Precisely: and what do you wish to knowr»ow? "
" Whether you found any one you liked: whether you
asked her to'marry you; and what she said, "
'* 1 can tell you whether I found any one I liked,, and
wheth^ I asked her to marry me: but what she said is- yet
to be recorded in the book of Bate, For ten long y^ars I
JANE EYRE 311
roved abeut^ living first in oot capital, then another: scone-
times ih St. Peteisbtii^gh; oftener in Paris; occasionally
in Rome, Naples, and Florence. Provided with plenty of
money, and the passport of nn old name, I could choose
my own society: no circles were closed against me, I sought
my ideal of a woman amongst English ladies, Fraich conn-
tesses, Italian signora^^ and German giftfinnen. I'could not
find her. Sometimes, for a fleeting moment, I draught I
caught a gliance, heard a tone, beheld a form, which aa-
QOUBceti the rei£sation of my dream : but i was^ presently
undeceived. You are not to suppose that I desired perfection,
either of mind or person. I longed only for what suited me*^
lor the antipodes of the Creolie : imd I longed vainly. Amongst
them all I found not one, whom,^ had I been ever so free, I
—warned as I was of the risks, the horrors, the loathings
of incongruous unions — ^would have asked to marry me.
Dbappointment made me- reckless^. I tried dissipation —
never debauchery: that I hated, and hate. That was my
ImSan Messalina's attribute: rooted disgust at it and her
restrained me much, even in pdieamire. Any enjoyment
that bordered on riot seemed'to appeoach me to her and her
vfces, and I eschewed it.
** Yet I could not live alone; so^ I tried the companionship
of mistresses. The first I chose was C61ine Vaitens — anothw
of those steps whidi make a man spurn himsdf when he
recalls them. You already know what she was, and how
my Kaison with her terminated. She had two successors:
an Italian, Giacinta, and a German, Qara; both considered
singularly handsome. What was dieir beauty to me in a few
weeks? Giacinta was unprincipled and vblent: I tired of
her in three months. Clara was honest and quiet; but
heavy, mindless, unknpres^ble: not one whit to my taste^
I was glad to give her a sufikient sum to set her up in a good
Kne of business, and so get decently rid of her. But, Jane,
1 see by your face you are not forming a very favourable
opinron of me just now. You tiiink me an imfeeMng, loose*
principled rake: don't you?''^
''I don't like you sa well as I have done sometimes,
indeed, sir. Did it not seem to you in the least wrong to live
m that way: first with one mistress and then another?
You talk of it as a mere matter of course. "
''It was with me; and I did not like it. It was a g^ veiling
fesfaion of existence: I should never lakt to return to ^
312 JANE EYRE
Hiring a mistress is the next worse thing to baying a slave:
both are often by nature^ and always by position, inferior:
and to live familiarly with inferiors is degrading. I now
hate the recollection of the time I passed with Ciline^ Gia-
cinta, and Clara. "
I felt the truth of these words; and I drew from them the
certain inference, that if I were so far to forget myself and
all the teaching that had ever been instilled into me, as —
under any pretext — with any justification — ^through any
temptation— to become the successor of these poor girls,
I he would one day regard me with the same feeling which
'. now in his mind desecrated their memory. I did not give
1 utterance to this conviction: it was enough to feel it. I
'impressed it on my heart, that it might remain there to
serve me as aid in the time of trial.
" Now, Jane, why don't you say * Well, sir?'I have not
done. You are looking grave. You disapprove of me still,
I see. But let me come to the point. Last January, rid of
all mistresses — in a harsh, bitter, frame of mind, the result
of a useless, roving, bnely life — corroded with disappoint-
ment, sourly disposed against all men, and especially against
all womankind (for I began to regard the notion of an in-
tellectual, faithful, loving woman as a mere dream), recalled
by business, I came back to England.
" On a frosty winter afternoon, I rode in sight of Thorn-
field Hall. Abhorred spot ! I expected no peace — no pleasure
there. On a stile in Hay Lane I saw a quiet little figure
sitting by itself. I passed it as negligently as I did the
pollard willow opposite to it: I had no presentiment of what
it would be to me; no inward warning that the arbitress of
my life— my genius for good or evil — ^waited there in humble
guise. I did not know it, even when, on the occasion of
Mesrour's accident, it came up and gravely offered me
help. Childish and slender creature ! It seemed as if a linnet
had hopped to my foot and proposed to bear me on its tiny
wing. I was surly; but the thing would not go: it stood
by me with strange perseverance, and looked and spoke
with a sort of authonty. I must be aided, and by that
hand: and aided I was.
" When once I had pressed the frail shoulder, something
new — a fresh sap and sense — stole into my frame. It was
well I had learnt that this elf must return to me — ^that it
belonged to my house down below — or I could not have
TE EYRE 313
'felt it pass away from under my hand, and seen it vanish
behiiid the dim hedge, without singular regret* I heard
you come home that nighty Jane: though probably you were
not aware that 1 thought of you, or watched for you. The
next day I observed you^-myself unseen— for half an hour,
while you played with Ad^le in the gallery. It was a snowy
day, I recollect, and you could not go out of doors, I was in
my room; the door was ajar: I could both listen and watch.
Addle claimed your outward attention for a while; yet I
fancied your thoughts were elsewhere: but you were very
patient with her, my little Jane; you talked to her and
amused her a long time. When at last she left you, you
lapsed at once into deep reverie: you betook yourself slowly
to pace the gallery. Now and then, in passing a casement,
you glanced out at the thick-falling snow ; you listened to the
sobbing wind, and again you paced gently on and dreamed*
I think those day visions were not dark: there was a pleasur-
able illumination in your eye occasionally, a soft excitement
in your aspect, which told of no bittetj biliouSj hypochondriac
brooding: your look revealed rather the sweet musings of
youth, when its spirit follows on willing wings the flight of
Hope, up and on to an ideal heaven. The voice of Mrs.
Fairfax, speaking to a servant in the hall, wakened you:
and how curiously you smiled to and at yourself, Jane!
There was much sense in your smile: it was very shrewd,
and seemed to make Ught of your own abstraction. It seemed
to say — * My fine visions are ail very well, but I most not
forget they are absolutely unreal, I have a rosy sky, and a
green fiowery Eden in my brain; but without, I am perfectly
aware, hes at my feet a rough tract to travel, and around
me gather black tempests to encounter,^ You ran downstairs
and demanded of Mrs. Fairfax some occupation: the weekly
house accounts to make up, or something of that sort, I
think it was. I was vexed with you for getting out of my
sight.
** Impatiently I waited for evemng, when I might summon
you to my presence. An unusual — to me — a perfectly new
character I suspected was youre: I desired to search it
deeper, and know it better. You entered the room with a
look and air at once shy and independent : you were quaintly
dressed— much as you are now. I made you talk: ere long
I found you full of strange contrasts. Your garb and manner
were restricted by rule; your air was often diffident; and
314 JANE EYRE
altogether that of one refined by nature^ but ^bsohitdy
unused to society, and a good deal afraid of making heraelf
disadvantageoosly conspicuous by some solecism or tUundsr;
yet when addre^ed^ you lifted a keen, a daring, and a
glowing eye to your interlocutor's face: there iwas pene-
tration and power in each glance you gave; when plied by
close questions, you found ready and round answers. V«ry
soon, you seemed to get used to me: I believe you fdt tbs
existence of sympathy between you and your grim and
cross master, Jane; for it was astonishing to see how quicld^
a certain pleasant ease tnmquilliscd your manner: snari
as I would, you showed no surprise, fear, annoyance, or
displeasure at my moroseness; yvni watched me, and now
and then smiled at me with a simple yet sagacious grace I
cannot describe. I was at once content and stimtilated with
what I saw: I liked what I had seen, and wished to see more.
Yet, for a long time, I treated you distantly, and sou^t
your company rarely. I was an intelleotual epioure, amd
wished to prolong the gratificarion of making this novd and
piquant acquaintance: besides, I was lor a while troubled
with a haunting fear that if I handled ^at floAver fredy its
bloom would kde — ^the sweet charm of freshness woM
leave it. I did not then know that it was no transitory
blossom; but rather the ladiant resemblance of one, out in
an indestructible gem. Moreover, I wished to see whether
you would seek me if I shunned you-^but you did not;
you kept in the sdiool-i?oom as stiU as your own desk and
easd; if by chance I met you, you passed me as soon, and
with as little token ol neoognition, as was consistent wkh
respect. Your habitual fexpression in those days, Jane, was
a thoughtful look; not desponitent, to you were not siddy;
but not buoyant, lor you had bttk irape, and no actual
pleasure. I wandered what you thou^ of me — or if you ever
thought of me; to find this out, I resumed my notice of you*
There was something glad in your glance, and genial in your
manner, when you conversed: Iisaw you hlid a social heart;
it was the silent sdaod-room — it mas the tedium of -your
life — ^that made you moimiful. I pennitted myself tibe
delight of being kind to you; kindness stirred amotion isoon:
your face beoime :9oft in expression, your tones gende:
I liked my namepvonouiiced by your lips in a grateful happy
accent. I used to enjoy a doance meeting with you, Jane,
atthis^tkne: there was a curious hesitarion in ^^our manner:

JANE EYRE 515
you glanced at me with a slight trouble — a hovering doubt:
you did not know what my caprice might be^^wiiethet I
was going to play the master and be stem, or the friend and
be benignant. I was now too fond of you oftfen to simulate
the first whim ; and, when I stretched my hand out cordially^
5uch bloom and light and bliss rose to your yonng, wistful
features, I had much ado often to avoid straining you then
and there to my heart, "
** Don*t taiJc any more of those days^ sir/'I interrupted,
furtively dashing away some tears from my eyes; his lan-
guage was torture to me^ for I knew what I must do — and
do soon — and aU these reminiscence, and these revelations
of his feehngs only made my work more difficult.
" Noj Jane/* he returoed: " what necessity is there to
dwell on the Past, when the Present is so much surer—
the Future so much brighter? "
I shuddered to hear the infatuated assertion,
" You see now how the case stands^nio you not? " he
continued. ** After a youth and manhood passed half in
wmtt & SLhh misery and half in dreary solitude^ I have for
the first time found what I can truly love — I have found
you^ You are my sympathy — my better self — my good
angel — I am bound to you with a stmng attachment. I
thmk you good^ gifted^ lovely: a fervent, a solemn passion
IS conceived in my heart; it leans to you, draws you to my
centra and spring of life, wraps my existence about you —
and, kindling in pure, powerful EamCj fuses you and me
in one.
** It was because I felt and knew this, that I resolved to
marry yon. To tell me that I had already a wife is empty
mockery: you know now that I had but a hideous demom
I was wrong to attempt to deceive you; but I feared a
stubbornness that exists in your character, I feared early
instilled prejudice : I wanted to have you safe before hazard-
ing confidences. This was cowardly : I should have appealed
lo your nobleness and magnanimity at firstj as I do now —
opened to you plainly my life of agony-— described to you
my hunger and thirst after a higher and worthier existence
— shown to you J not ray rt solution, (that word is weak), but
my resistless heni to love faithfully and well, where t am
faithfully and well loved in return. Then I should have asked
you to accept my pledge of fidelity, and to give me yoiir='
Jane — give it me now/'
3i6 JANE EYRE
A pause.
" Why are you silen^ Jane? "
I was experiencing an ordeal: a hand of fiery iron grasped
my vitab. Terrible moment: full of struggle^ blfu^ess^
burning I Not a human being that ever lived could wish
to be loved better than I was loved ; and him who thus loved
me I absolutely worshipped: and I must roiounce love and
idol. One drear word comprised my intolerable duty —
" Depart! "
" Jane, you understand what I want of you? Just this
promise — * I will be yours, Mr. Rochester.'"
" Mr. Rochester, I will not be yours. "
Another long silence.
" Jane I " recommenced he, with a gentleness that broke
me down with grief, and turned me stone-cold with ominous
terror — ^for this still voice was the pant of a lion rising —
" Jane, do you mean to go one way m the world, and to let
me go another? "
" I do. "
" Jane " (bending towards and embracing me), " do you
mean it now? "
" I do. "
" And now? " softly kissing my forehead and chedt.
" I do " — extricating myself from restraint rapidly and
completely.
" Oh, Jane, this is bitterl This— this is wicked. It would
not be wicked to teve me. "
" It would to obey you. "
A wild look raised his brows— crossed his features: he
rose; but he forbore yet. I laid my hand on the back of a
chair for support: I shook, I feared— but I resolved.
" One instant, Jane. Give one glance to my horrible
life when you are gone. All happiness will be torn away
with you. What then is left? For a wife I have but the
maniac upstairs: as well might you refer me to some corpse
in yonder churchyard. What shall I do, Jane? Where turn
for a companion, and for some hope? "
" Do as I do: trust in God and yourself « Believe in
Leaven. Hope to meet again there. "
" Then you will not yield? "
" No. "
" Then you condemn me to live wretched, and to die
accursed? " His voice rose.
JANE EYRE
'* I advise you to live sinless: and I wish you to die
tmnquil/'
** Then you snatch love and innocence from me? Yoa
fling me back on lust for a passion— vice for an occupation ? "
*'Mi, Rochester, I no more assi^ this fate to you than I
grasp at it for myself. We were bom to strive and endure —
yon as well as I ; do so. You will forget me before I forget
you. "
** You make me a liar by such language: you sully my
honour* I declared I could not change: you tell me to my
face I shall change soon* And what a distortion in your
judgment^ what a perversity in your ideas, is proved by your
conduct! Is it better to drive a fellow-creature to despair
than to transgress a mere human law — no man being injured
by the breach? for you have neither relatives nor acquaint-
ances whom you need fear to offend by limvig with me. "
This was true: and while he spoke my very conscience
and reason turned traitors against me, and charged me
with crime in resisting him. They spoke almost as loud as
Feeling: and that clamoured wildly, " Ob, comply T* it
said* ^'Think of his misery; think of his danger — look at
his state when left alone; remember his headlong nature;
consider the recklessness following on despair— soothe him;
save him; love him; tell him you love him and will be his.
Who in the world cares for you f or who will be injured by
wKat you do? "
Still indomitable was the reply — ** / care for myself.
The more solitary, the more friendless, the more unsustaincd
I am, the more I will r^pect myself. I will keep tlie law
given by God ; sanctioned by man* I will hold to the prin-
ciples received by me when I was sane, and not mad — as
I am now. Laws and principles arc not for the times when
there is no temptation: they are for such moments as this,
when body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigour;
stringttit are they; inviolate they shall be» If at my in-
dividual convenience I might break them, what would be
their worth ? They have a worth — so I have always believed ;
and if I cannot believe it now, it is because I am insane —
quite insane: with my veins running fire, and my heart
beating faster than I can count its throbs. Preconceived
opinions, foregone determinations^ are all I have at this
hour to stand by: there I plant my foot, "
I did, Mr, Rochester, reading my countenance, saw I had
h
jrS JANE EYRE
done 90. His fury was wrotight to the highest: he must
yield to it for a moment^ whatever followed; he crossed the
floor and seized my arm^ and gvasped'my wftist. He seemed
to devour me wilii his flamii^ glano): phy & icaHy^ I fell^
at the moment, poweriess as stubble exposed to the draught
and glow of a furnace — mentaifly, I still possessed my aool,
and with it the certainty ef ultimate safety. The soal^
fortunately, has an interpreter — often an unconsdois^
but still a truthful interpreter— 4n the* oyei My eye rose to
his ; and while I looked in his fierce f a€e > I gave an involuntary
sigh: his gripe was'painful, and my over-^tasked strength^
almost exlmusted;.
** Never/'said he; as he ground his teeth, " never was
aoiything at once so frail and so indomitablet A mere reed
she feels in my hand l*^ (And he shook me with the force
of his hold.) ^ I couki'bend her with my finger and tibumb^
imd what good* would it do if I bent, il luptore, if I cmi^ied
her? Consider that eyer consider the Msokvte, wiki, fi?»
thing looking out (^ it, dd3ring me, mth more ti^icmiFage
— ^with a{ stam triumph. Whatever I do^ with its cage, I
cannot get at it— the savage, beautifiil ereaiturel If I tear,
if I r^d the slight prison, my outrage will only let the*
captive loose. C^ & queror i aright be^ol tiie house; but the
inmate would'escape to heaven beiore I could calli myself
possessor of its day dweUin^-ploice; And it is you, spirit —
with will and eneigy, and vutue and purity — ^that I waot:
not alone yowr brittle frame. Of youiself, you could oome
with soft flight and nestle against my heart, if you would:
seized against your will you wiU dude'- the grasp Ike an
essence — ^you will vanish ere I mhale yo«af fragrance. 6hL
come, Jaaie, come I "
As he said this, he released me from his dutdi, and only
looked at me. The look was ka worse to resist thatn the
frantic strain: only an idiot, howie^r^I^ wimkl have suc^
cumbed now. I had dared aoid baffled his fury; imust dude
his sorrow: I retired to the door,
" You are going, Jane? "
" I am going, sir. "
" You are leaving me?'*
" Yes; "
" You will not come? — ^You will irot be'my eomfortevj^
my rescuer? — ^My deep love^ my wikfc woe, my frantic!
pray^, are all aothhig to you]?^'^
^Psii
JANE EYRE
Wbat unutterable pathos was in his voice I How hard it
was to reiterate finnly, " I am going. "
^* Janel "
^*Mr, Rochester I "
" Withdraw^ then,— I consent — but remember^ you leave
e here in anguish. Go up to your own room ; think oyer
all I have said, Jane, cast a glaiee on my sufierings^think
of me/'
He turned away; he threw himself on his face on the
sofa. " Oh, Jane! my hope — my love — my lifel " broke
in anguish from his lips. Then came a deep, strong sob*
I had already gained the door; but, reader^ I walked back
—walked back as determinedly as I had retreated, I knelt
down by him; I turned his face from the cushion to mej
I kissed his cheek; I smoothed his hair with my hand.
** God bless you, my dear master I " I said. " God keep
you from barm and wrong — direct you, solace you^reward
youwdl for your past kindness to me. "
" Little Jane's love would have been my best reward, "
he answered: " without it, my heart is broken. But Jane
will give me her love: yes— nobly, generously/'
Up the blood rushed to his face; forth flashed the fire
from his eyes; erect he sprang; he held his arms out; but
I evaded the embrace, and at once quitted the room.
" Farewell 1 " was the cry of my heart as I left him.
Despair added,'* Farewell, for ever! "
* 4e * * » « ♦
That night I never thought to sleep; but a slumber fell
on me as soon as I lay down in bed, I was transported in
thought to the scenes of childhood: 1 dreamt I lay in the
red-room at Gateshead; that the night was dark, and my
mind impressed with strange fears. The light that long ago
had struck me into syncope, recalled in this vision^ seemed
glidingly to mount the wall, and tremblingly to pause in
the centre of the obscured ceiling, I lifted tip my head to
k)ok: the roof resolved to clouds, high and dim; the gleam
was such as the moon imparts to vapours she is about to
sever, I watched her come — watched with the strangest
anticipation; as though some word of doom were to be
written on her disk. She broke forth as never moon yet
borst from cloud: a hand first penetmted the sable folds
and waved them away; then, not a moon, but a white human
form shone in the azure, inclining a glorious brow earth-

320 JANE EYRE
ward. It gazed and gazed on me. It spoke to my^ spirit:
immeasurably distant was the tone, yet so near, it whispered
in my heart —
" My daughter, flee temptation I "
" Mother, I wiU. "
So I answered after I had waked from the trance-like
dream. It was yet night, but Tuly nights are short: soon
after midnight, dawn comes. It cannot be too early to
commence the task I have to fulfil, " thought I. I rose:
I was dressed; for I had taken off nothing but my shoes.
I knew where to find in my drawers some Unen, a locket, a
ring. In seeking these articles, I encountered Uie beads of
a pearl necklace Mr. Rochester had forced me to accept a
few days ago. I left that; it was not mine: it was the
visionary bride'^, who had melted in air. The other articles
I made up in a parcel; my purse, containing twenty shillings
(it was all I had), I put in my pocket: I tied on my straw
bonnet, pinned my shawl, took the parcel and my slippers,
which I would not put on yet, and stole from my room.
" Farewell, kind Mrs. Fairfax I " I whispered, as I glided
past her door. " Farewell, my darling Ad^le! " I said as
I glanced towards the nursery. No thought could be admitted
of entering to embrace her. I had to deceive a fine ear:
for aught I knew, it might now be listening.
I would have got past Mr. Rochester's chamber wit^ut
a pause; but my heart momentarily stopping its beat at
that threshold, my foot was forced to stop also. No sleep
was there: the inmate was walking restlessly from wall to
wall ; and again and again he sighed widle 1 listened. There
was a heaven*— a temporary heaven-^ this room for me,
if I chose: I had but to go in and to say —
" Mr. Rochester, I will love you and live with you through
life till death, " and a fount of rapture would spring to my
lips. I thought of this.
That kind master, who could not sleep now, was waiting
with impatience for day. He would send for me in the
morning; I should be gone. He wodd have me sought for:
vainly. He would feel himself forsaken; his bve rejected:
he would suffer; perhaps grow desperate. I thought of this
too. My hand moved towards the lock: I caught it bade,
and glided on.
Drearily I wound my way downstairs: I knew what I
had to do, and I did it mechanically. I sought the key of
JANE EYRE
3^1^
the side-door in the kitcheaj I sought, too, a phiat of oil
and a feather; I oiled the key and the lock. I got some
waterj I got some bread: for perhaps I should have to walk
far; and my strength, sorely shaken of late^ must not
bre^ik down* All this I did without one sound, I opened the
door, passed out, shut it softly. Dim dawn glioimered in
the yard. The great gates were closed and locked; but a
wicket in one of them was only latched. Through that 1
departed: it, too, I shut; and now I was out of Thornfield-
A mile ofi, beyond the fields, lay a road which stretched
in the contrary direction to Millcx»te; a road I had never
travelled, but often noticed, and wondered where it led:
thither I bent my steps. No reflection was to be allowed
now; not one glance was to be cast back; not even one
forward. Not one thought was to be given either to the
past or the future. The first was a page so heavenly sweet^
so deadly sad — that to read one line of it would dissolve
my courage and break down my energy. The last was an
awful blank: something hke tie world when the deluge
was gone by.
I skirted fields, and hedges, and lanes^ till after sunrise.
I believe it was a lovely summer morning: I know my shoes,
which I had put on when I left the h^use, were soon wet
with dew. But 1 looked neither to rising suiij nor smiling
sky, nor wakening nature. He who is taken out to pass
through a fair scene to the scaffold, thinks not of the flowers
tliat smile on his roadj but of the block and axe-edge; of
the disseverment of bone and vein; of the grave gaping at
the end; and I thought of drear flight and homeless wan-
dering^ — and, ohl with agony I thought of what I left.
1 could not help it, I thought of him now^ — in his room —
watching the sunrise; hoping I should soon come to say
I would stay with him, and be his. I longed to be his; I
panted to return: it was not too late; I could yet spare
him the bitter pang of bereavement- As yet my flight, I
was sure, was undiscovered. I could go back and be his
comforter^his pride; his redeemer from misery; perhaps
from ruin* Ohj that fear of his self-abandonment — far worse
than my abandonment — how it goaded me 1 It was a barbed
arrow -head in my breast; it tore me when I tried to extract
it; it sickened me when remembrance thrust it further in.
Birds began singing in brake and copse : birds were faithful
to their mates; birds were emblems of love. What was.
323 JANE EYRE
I? La the midst < i > f my pain of ht & rt, and frantie effort of
principle, I abhorred myself. I had no solace from sdf-
approbation: none eyen fnnn self-respect. I had injured —
wtMmded— left my master. I was hateful in my own eyes.
Still I could not turn, nor retraee one step. God must Ymwt
led me on. As to my own will or conscience^ impassioned
grief had trampled one and stifled the other. I was weeping
wildly as I waUced along my solitary way: fast, fast I went
like one defiiious; A wetness, bqginiHng inwardly, exten < fing
to the limbs, seized me^ and I fell'.* I lay on t^ ground some
minutes, pressmg my face to the wet turf. I had some fear
—or hopes-that here I should diet bttt I was socm up;
(Qswling forwards on my hands and knees, and then'again
raised to* my feet— as eager and as^ determined ais ever to
reach the road«
When I got therel was loneed to sri to rest me under iht
hedge; and while I sat, I heard wheefe, and saw a ooadi
come on. I stood up and ^ed my hand; it stopped. I
asked where it was going: the (bivernckmed a place a long
way off, and where I was sure Mr. Rochester had no con*
nections. I asked for what sinn he wo^ld take me there;
he said thirty shflUngs; I answered I had but twenty;
well, he would try to make it do. He'further gave me leave
tx > get into the inside, as the vehicle was anpty: I entered,
was shut ira, and it rolled on its way.
Gentle reader, may you never fed what I th«i felt 1 May
your eyes never shed such stormy, scalding, heart-wrung
tears as poured from mine; May you never a^^eal to Heaven
in prayers so hopeless and so agonised as in that hour Idt
my lips : for never may you, Hke me, diread- to be- the instru-
ment of evil to what you wholty love.
CHAPTER XXVIII
Two days arr passed. It is a summer evening; the ooach^
man has set me down at a place ci^ed Whitci^oss; he codd
take me no farther for the sum I had given, and I was not
possessed of another shcilling in the* wodd. The coaeh is a
mile ofE by this time; I am alone. At this moni < ai« I discover
that I foigot to take my pmtcd otit of the poeket of the
^ JANE EVRE ^ 323
coach, where I bad placed it for safety j there it remains,
there it must remain^ and now, I am absolutely destitute.
Wiiitcross is no townj nor even a hamlet; it is but a stone
pillar set up where four roads meet: white-washedj I suppose
to be more obvious at a distance and in darkness. Four
arms spring from its summit: the nearest town to which
these point is^ according to the ins crip tion^ distant ten
miles; the farthest, above twenty. From the well known
names of these towns I learn in what county 1 have lighted ;
a north-midland shire, dusk with moorland, ridged with
mountain: this I see* There are great moors behind and on
each hand of me ; there are waves of mountains far be3«jnd
that deep valley at my feet* The population here must be
thJB, and I sec no passengers on these roads: they stretch
out east, west, north, and south— white, broad, lonely;
they are all cut in the moor, and the heather grows deep
and wild to their very verge. Yet a chance traveller m^ht
pass by; and I wish no eye to see me now: strangers would
wonder what I am doing, lingering here at the sign-post,
evidently objectless and Sost- I m%ht be questioned: I
could give no answer but what would sound incredible,
and excite suspicion. Not a tie holds me to human society
at this moment— not a charm oa* hope calls me where my
fellow-creatures are — none that saw me would have a kind
thought or good wish for me, I have no relative but the
uni%'ersal mother, Nature; I will seek hex breast and ask
repose,
I struck straight into the heath; I held on to a hollow
I saw deeply furrowing the brown moorside; I waded
knee-deep in its dark growth ; I turned with its turnings,
and finding a moss-blackeoed granite cmg in a hidden
angle, I sat down under it. High banks of moor were about
me ; the crag protected my head : the sky was over that*
Soijne time passed before I felt tranquil even here; I had
a vague dread that wild cattle might be near, or that some
sportsman or poacher might discover me* If a gust of wind
swept the waste^ I looked up, fearing it was the rush of a
bull; if a plover whistled, I imagined it a man. Finding my
appr^eosions unfounded, however, and calmed by the
deep silence that reigned as evening declined at nightfall,
I took confidence. As yet I had not thought; I had only
listened^ watched, dreaded j now I regained the faculty of
reflectioRi
324 JANE EYRE
What wa5 I to do ? Where to go ? Oh, intolcmble
questions, when I could do nothing and so nowhere! —
when a iong way must yet be measured by my weary,
trembling limbs, before I could readi human habitation —
when cold charity must be oitreated before I could get a
lodging: reluctant sympathy importuned: almost certain
repulse incurred: before my tale could be listened to, or
one of my wants relieved !
I touched the heath: it was dry, and yet warm with the
heat of the summer-day. I looked at the sky; it was pure:
a kindly star twinkled just above ^the cha^ ridge. The
dew fell^ but with propitious softness; no Ixreeze whispered.
Nature seemed to me benign and good; I thought she loved
me, outcast as I was ; and I, who from man could anticipate
only mistrust, rejection, insult, clung to her with filial
fondness. To-night, at least, I would be her guest — as I
was her child: my mother would lodge me without money
and without price. I had one morsel c^ bread yet: the
remnant of a roll I had bought in a town we passed throa^
at noon with a stray penny-*^my last coin. I saw ripe
bilberries gleaming here and there, like jet beads in the
heath: I gathered a handful and ate them with the bread.
My hinder, sharp before, was, if not satisfied, iq > peased by
this hermit^s meal. I said my evening prayers at its con*
elusion, and then diose my couch.
Beside the crag, the heath was very deep: wh^ I lay
down my feet were buried in it; rising high on each side,
it left only a narrow space for the night-air to invade.
I folded my shawl double, and spread it over me for a
coverlet ; a low, mossy swell was my pillow. Thus locteed,
I was not, at least at the commencement of the night, cold.
My rest might have been blissful enough, only a sad
heart broke it. It plained of its gaping wounds, its inward
bleedbg, its riven chords. It tremblol for Mr. Rochester
and his doom: it bemoaned him with Utter pity; it de-
manded him with ceaseless longit^: and, impotent as a bird
with both wings broken, it stm quivered its shattered
pinions in vain attempts to seek him.
Worn out with this torture of thought, I rose to my knees«
l^ht was come, and her planets were risen: a ssft, stUl
night; too serene for the companionship of fear. We know
that God is everywhere; but certainly we fed His presence
most when His works are on the grandest scale spread before
^^^ JANE EYRE 325
us : and it is in the unclouded night-skyj where His worlds
wheel their silent course, that we read clearest His infinitude,
Fits omnipotence, His omnipresence, I had risen to my
knees to pray for Mr, Rochester^ Looking up, I, with tear-
dimmed eyesj saw the mighty Milky- way. Remembering
what it was— what countless systems there swept space
like a soft trace of light— I felt the might and strength of
God. Sure was I of His efficiency to save what He had
made: convinced I grew that neither earth should perish,
nor one of the souls it treasured. I turned my prayer to
thanksgiving: the Source of Life was also the Saviour of
spirits, Mr* Rochester was safe: he was God's and by God
would he be guarded. I again nestled to the breast of the
hill; and ere long, in sleep, forgot sorrow*
'But next day, Want came to me, pale and bare. Long
after the little birds had left their nests; long after bees had
come in the sweet prime of day to gather the heath honey
before the dew was dried—when the long morning shadows
were curtailed^ and the sun filled ^rth and sky^I got up,
and I looked round me.
What a still, hot, perfect day I What a golden desert
this spreading moor! Everywhere sunshine. I wished I
could live in it and on it* I saw a lizard run over the crag ;
I saw a bee busy among the sweet bilberries, I would fam
at the moment have become bee or lizard, that I might
have found fitting nutrimentj permanent shelter here. But
I was a human being, and had a human being's wants:
I must not linger where there was nothing to supply them.
I rose^ I looked back at the bed I had left. Hopeless of the
future, I wished but this — that my Maker bad that night
thougM good to require my soul of me while I slept; and that
tbis weary frame^ absolved by death from further conflict
with fate J had now but to decay quietly, and mingle in
peace with the soil of this wilderness. Life, however, was
yet in my possession: with all its requirements, and pains,
and responsibilities. The burden must be carried ; the want
provided for; the suffering endured; the responsibility
fultilled, I set out,
Whitcross regained, I followed a road which led from the
sun, now fervent and high. By no other circumstance had I
will to decide my choice. I walked a long time^ and when I
thought I had nearly done enough, and might conscientiously
yield to the fatigue that almost overpowered me— might
^

Zz6 JANR EYRE
relax this forced action^ and^ sitting down os a stone I saw
near^ snfamit resistlessLy to ^e apathy tiiaifc cogged heart
and limb — ^I heacd a bell chime^— a. church bc^.
I turned in the dxrocfcion o£ the sound, and th & », amimgst
Idle rosnantic hills^ whose changes and aspect I had cea^
to note an/ hour ago^. I saw a hamlet and a spire. All the
vall^ at my right hand was folll of pasture^dds^ ai^ com-
fields^ and wood;; and a glittering stream raazig-zag through
the varied shades of green^ the meUowinff gmin^ tbs s < »nbre
wood-land^ the dear and sunny lea. RecaUed by the rumbling
of wheels to the road before me^ I saw ahes^y-laden waggon
liEiixmring up tiie hiU; and. not lai: beyond wei» two cows
and their drover. Human Ufe-and human > labouc were near.
I must struggle on: strive toHve aiid.beiid to toil like the
rest^
About two o'dock^ pac., I entered the village. At the
bottom of its coie* street^ them was a little shop with scone
cakes of bread in the ^imxlow; I cometed a ca^ of bread.
With that refreshment I could perhaps cegain a d^ee of
eneigy; without it^ it would be difficult to proceed. The
wish to have some strength and some, viggur returned to
me as soon as I was amongst my feUow-beiogs. I felt it
would be degrading to faint with hunger oa the causeway
ol a hamkti Had I nothing about me I could < ^r. in ex-
change forone of tiaesfi: rolls? I ccmsidered. I had a.amall
silk handkerchief tied ixrand my throat; I had my gloves^
I could baldly tell how men and woBMn in extnemities of
destitutbn proceeded I did not know whether either of
liiese aaiddes would be accepted: probably they would net;
but I must try.
I entered the shop: a woman, was these. Sedng a re-
spectablyniressed person^ a lady^ as she sui^K > sed^ she came
forward with dvility. How* could she serve me? I was
seoed'widi shame: my tongue, would: not utter the request
I had prepared. I daied not offer her thi^ half-w(»mi gloves^
the creasol handkeichief : besides^ I felt it would be absurd.
I onfy begged permission to > sit (fewn a moment^ as I was
tired. Disappointed in the expectation of a customer, she
coolly acceded to my request. She pointed to a seat; I
sank into it. I feit st3^y urged to weep; but conscious how
unseasonable such a mamfestation would be, I restrained
it. Soon I a^ced her,. " if there were any dressmaker or
plain-work- woman in 1^ village? "
JANE EYRE 327
" Yts; two or three. Quite as many as there was employ-
ment for/'
I reflected, I was driven to the point now, I was brought
face to face with Necessity, I stood in the position of one
without a resource : without a friend ; without a coin. I
must do something. What? I must apply somewhere.
Where?
" Did she know of any place in the neighbourhood where
a servant was wanted? "
*'Nay^ she couldn^t say. "
*- What was the chief trade in this place? What did most
of the people do? *'
''Some were farm labourers; a good deal worked at Mr.
Oliver's needle-factory, and at the foundry. "
'* Did Mr. Oliver employ women? "
" Nay; it was men's work. "
" And what do the women do? "
" I knawn't/'was the answer,'*Some does one thing,
and some another. Poor folk mun get on as they can/*
She seemed to be tired of my questions r and, indeed,
what claim had I to importune her? A neighbour or two
came in; my chair was evidently wanted, I took leave,
I passed up the street, looking as I went at all the houses
to the light hand and to the left: but I could discover no
ptatext, nor see an inducement, to enter any, I rambled
Knind the hamlet, going sometimes to a little distance and
tctuming again, for an hour or more. Much exhausted,
md sufiering greatly now for want of food, 1 turned aside
bto a lane and sat down under the hedge. Ere many minutes
had elapsed, I was again on my feet, however, and again
searching something — a resource, or at least an informant,
A pretty Mttle house stood at the top of the lane, with a
fwSden before it; exquisitely neat, and brilliantly blooming.
I stopped at it. Wliat business had I to appioadi the white
door, or touch tlie gUttering knocker? In what way could
it possibly be the interest of the inhabitants of that dwelHng
to serve me? Yet I drew near and knocked. A mi Id -looting,
deanly-attired young woman opened the door. In such a
voice as might be expected from a hopeless heart and fainting
frame — a voice wretchedly low and faltering^ — I asked if a
sen^nt was wanted here?
" No, " said she;'* we do not keep a servant/*
''Can you tell me where I could get employment of

328 JANE EYRE
any kind? " I continued. " I am a stranger^ without
acquaintance^ in this place. I want some work: no matter
what. "
But it was not her business to think for me^ or to seek a
place for me: besides^ in her eyes^ how doubtful must have
appeared my character^ position^ tale. She shook her head^
she " was sorry she could give me no information/'and the
white door closed^ quite gendy and civilly: but it shut me
out. If she had held it open a little longer^ I believe I
should have begged a piece of bread; for I was now brought
low.
I could not bear to return to the sordid village; where,
besides^ no prospect of aid was visible. I should have Icmged
rather to deviate to a wood I saw not far off, which appeared
in its thick shade to offer inviting shelter; but I was so sick,
so weak, so gnawed with nature's cravings, instinct kept
me roaming round abodes where there was a chance of food.
Solitude would be no solitude — ^rest no rest — ^while the
vulture, himger, thus sank beak and talons in my side.
I drew near houses; I left them, and came back again,
and again I wandered away: always repelled by the con-
sciousness of having no claim to ask — no right to expect
interest in my isolated lot. Meantime, the afternoon ad-
vanced, while I thus wandered about like a lost and starving
dog. In crossing a field, I saw the church spire before me:
I hastened towards it. Near the churchya^^ and in the
middle of a garden, stood a well-built though small house,
which I had no doubt was the parsonage. I remembered
that strangers who arrive at a place where they have no
friends, and who want employment, sometimes apply to the
cleigyman for introduction and aid. It is the cleigyman's
function to help — at least with advice— those who wished
to help themselves. I seemed to have something like a right
to sedc counsel here. Renewing then, my courage, and
gathering my feeble remains of strength, I pushed on. I
reached the house, and knocked at the kitchen-door. An
old woman opened: I asked was this the parsonage?
" Yes. "
" Was the dergyman in? "
" No. "
" Would he be in soon? "
" No, he was gone from home.'*
" To a distance? "
JANE EYRE 329
** Not so far— happen three mile. He had been called
away by the sudden death of his father : he was at Marsh
End now, and would very likely stay there a fortnight
bnger/^
''Was there any lady of the house? "
" Nayj there was naught but her, and she was house-
keeper; " and of her^reader, I could not bear to ask the relief
for want of which I was sinking; I could not yet beg; and
again I crawled away-
Once more I took off my handkerchief^ — once more I
thought of the cakes of bread in the little shop > Oh, for but
a crust I for but one mouthful to allay the pang of famine !
Instinctively I turned my face again to the village; I found
the shop again, and I went in ; and though others were there
besides the woman, I ventured the requ^t: " Would she
give me a roll for this handkerchief?'*
She looked at me with evident suspicion: *'Nay, she never
sold stuff i'that way/*
Almost desperate^ I asked for half a cake; she again refused.
''How could she tell where I had got the handkerchief, " she
laid.
" Would she take my gloves? "
** No! what could she do with them?'*
Reader J it is not pleasant to dwell on these details. Some
say there is enjoyment in looking back to painful experience
past ; but at this day I can scarcely bear to review the times
to which I allude: the moral degradation, blent with the
physical suffering, form too distressing a recollection ever
to be willingly dwelt on* I blamed none of those who repulsed
me. I felt it was what was to be expected, and what could
Dot be helped: an ordinary beggar is frequently an object of
suspicion; a well-dressed beggar inevitably so. To be sure
what I begged was employment : but whose business was it
to provide me with employment ? Not, certainly, that of
persons who saw me then for the first time, and who knew
Dothing about my character. And as to the woman who
would not take my handkerchief in exchange for her bread,
why, she was right ; if the offer appeared to her sinister* or
the exchange unprofitable. Let me condense now. I am sick
of the subject*
A little before dark I passed a farm-house, at the open
door of which the farmer was sitting, eating bis supper of
bread and cheese ; I stopped, and said ; —
330 JANE EYRE
''Will you give me a piece of bread? te I ^n. ye^ hxfligry« "
He cast on me a glaiice of surpdse; but wit^nt answeiii^,
he cut a thick slice from bis baf^ and gave it tame., iimagine
he did not think I was a beggar^ but only an eccentiic sort
of lady^ who had taken a fancy to his bsown^ loaf. As soon as
I was out of sight of lus houses I sat down and ate it.
I could not hope to get a kx^mg imder a roof, and sought it
in the wood I have before alluded to. But my n^;ht was
wretched^ my rest broken: the ground: was damp, the air
eoki: besides, intruders passed neas me more than once, and
I had again and again to change my quarters; no sense of
safety or tntnguiHity b^riended me. Towauods moixiiiig > it
rained ; the wibK)le of ^e following day was wet. Do not ask
me^ reader^ to give a minute account oif that day; as hebx^ I
sought YfOfrk; as before^ I was repulsedi; as before^ I starved;
but once did food pass my tips* At the door ol a cottage I
saw a little girl about to tiirow a mess of coM porrid|ge into
a pig trough. " Will you give me that? " I ask^.
She stared at me. " l£i > ther I''she exdaimed; **^ there is
a woman, wants me to gh^e her these porridge. "
" Well, lass, " replied a voice within, " give it her if sihc^s
a beggar. T'pig doesn't want it. "
The girl emptied the stif ened mould inta my hand, and I
devoured it xa^enously.
As the wet twilight deepened, I stopped io a solitary bruBe-
path, which I had been pursuing an hour or morev
" My stmngth is quite fiaih^ mey " I said, in soliloquy
''I fed I cannot go much further. ShaE I be an outcast agam
this night? While the rain descends so, must I lay my head
on the cold, drenched ground 1 I kar I cannot do otherwise:
for who will receive me? But it will be very dreadful: with
this feeling of hunger, faintness, diiil, and this sense of
desolation — ^this total pcostration of hq > e. In all likdihood,
though, I should die befbre morning. And ii^y cannot I
reconcile myself to the prospect of death? Why do I struggle
to retain a valueless life? Because I know, or beliesve, Mn
Rochester is stMl Uving: and then, to die of want and cold,
is a faXe to which nature cannot submit pas»vdy. Ob^
Providence 1 sustain me a tittik longer! Aid— direct me I "
My glazed eye wandered over the dim and misty landsa^
I saw I had strayed fiar from the viUaj^^: it was quits out of
sight. The very cultivation sunoundiag it had dssap^ared
I had, by cross-ways and by-paths, oncemore drawn near the
JANE EYRE
tra€t of moorland; and now, only a few fields, almost as wild
and unproduGtive as the heath from which they were scarcely
reclaimed J lay between me and the dusky hill.
" Well J I would rather die yonder than in a street, or on
a frequented road,*'I refiected,'^ And far better that crows
and ravens^ — if any ravens there be in these regions — should
pick my flesh from my bones, than that they should be
prisoned in a workhouse coffin and moulder in a pauper's
grave. "
To the hill, then, I turned. I r^u:hed it. It remained now
only to find a hollow where I could lie down^ and fee! at least
bidden, if not secure: but all the surface of the waste looked
level- It showed no variation but of tint: green, where rush
and moss overgrew the marshes; black, where the dry soil
bore only heath. Dark as it was getting, I could still see these
changes : though but as mere alterations of light and shade:
for colour had faded with the daylight-
My eye still roved over the sullen swell, and along the
moor-edge J vanishing amidst the wildest scenery ; when at one
dim point, far in among the marshes and the ridges, a light
sprang up. " That is an ignis Jatum,'^ was my first thought;
and I expected it would soon vanish. It burnt on, however,
quite steadily; neither receding nor advancing, ** Is it, then,
a bonfire just kindled? " I questioned, I watched to see
whether it would spread: but no; as it did not diminish, so
it did not enlarge.'* It may be a candle in a house/* I then
conjectured : " but if so, I can never reach it* It is much too
hi away: and were it within a yard of me, what would it
avail ? I should but knock at the door to have it shut in my
face.'^
And I sank down where I stood, and hid my face against
the ground, I lay still a while: the night- wind swept over
the hill and over me, and died moaning in the distance; the
rain fell fast, wetting me afresh to the skin. Could I but have
stiffened to the still frost — the friendly numbness of death —
it might have pelted on; I should not have felt it; but my
yet living flesh shuddered to its ctiilling influence, I rose ere
long. ...
The light was yet there: shinmg dim, but constant, through
the rain. I tried to walk again: I dragged my exhausted limbs
slowly towards it. It led me aslant over the hill, through a
wide bog; which would have been impassable in winter^ and
was splashy and shaking even now^ in the height of summer
I.
332 JANE EYRE
Here I fell twice; but as often I rose and rallied my faculties.
This li^ht was my forlorn hope: I must gain it.
Having crossed the marshy I saw a trace of white over the
moon I approached it ; it was a road or a track : it led straight
up to the light; which now beamed from a sort of knoll^ amidst
a clump of trees — ^firs, apparently, from what I could distin-
guish of the character of their forms and foliage through the
^loom. My star vanished as I drew near: some obstacle had
mtervened between me and it. I put out my hand to feel the
dark mass before me; I discriminated the rough stones of a
low wall — above it, something like palisades, and within, a
high and prickly hedge. I groped on. Again a whitish object
gleamed before me: it was a gate — a wicket; it moved on its
hinges as I touched it. On eadi side stood a sable bush — holly
or yew.
Entering the gate and passing the shrubs, the silhouette
of a house rose to view; black, low, and rather long; but the
^iding light shone nowhere. All was obscurity. Were the
mmates retired to rest? I feared it must be so. In seeking
the door, I turned an angle: there shot out the friendly
gleam again, from the lozenged panes of a very small latticed
window, within a foot of the ground ; made still smaller by
the growth of ivy or some other creeping plant, whose leaves
clustered thick over the portion of the house wall in which it
was set. The ap^ture was so screened and narrow, that curtain
or shutter had been deemed unnecessary; and when I stooped
down and put aside the spray of foliage shootixig over it, I
could see all within. I could see clearly a room witibi a sanded
floor, clean scoured; a dresser of walnut, with pewter plates
ranged in rows, reflecting the redness and radiance of a glow-
ing peat-fire. I could see a clock, a white deal table, some
clmirs. The candle, whose ray had been my beacon, biunt on
the table; and by its light an elderly woman > scnnewhat rou^h-
looking, but scrupulously clean, like all ^x > ut her, was knittuig
a stocking.
I noted these objects cursorily only— in than there was
nothing extraordinary. A group of more interest appeared
near the hearth, sitting still amidst the rosy peace and warmth
suffusing it. Two young, graceful women — ladies in every
point — sat, one on a low rocking-chair, the other on a lower
stool; both wore deep mourning of crape and bombazeen,
which sombre garb singularly set off very fair necks and
faces : a large old pointer dog rested its massive head on the
JANE EYRE
333
knee of one girl— in the lap of the other was cushioned a.
black cat.
A strange place was this humble kitchen for such occu-
pants 1 Who were they ? They could not be the daughters of the
elderly person at the table; for she looked like a rustic, and
they were all delicacy and cultivation, I had nowhere seen
such faces as theirs; and yet, as I gazed on thenij I seemed
intimate ¥rith every lineament, I cannot call them handsome
—they were too pale and grave for the word : as they each
bent over a book, they looked thoughtful almost to severity-
A stand between them supported a second candle and two
great volumes, to which they frequently referred ; comparing
them seemingly with the smaller books they held in their
hands J like people consulting a dictionary to aid them in the
task of translation. This scene was as silent as if all the
figures had been shadows, and the fire-lit apartment a picture:
so hushed was it, I could hear the cinders fall from the grate,
die clock tick in its obscure comer; and I even fancied I
could distinguish the click-click of the woman's knitting-
needles. When, therefore, a voice broke the strange stilbess
at last, it was audible enough to me.
'* Listen, Diana, " said one of the absorbed students :
" Fran^ and old Daniel are together in the night-time, and
Franz is telling a dream from which he has awakened in
terror — hsten !''And in a low voice she read something, of
which not one word was intelligible to me; for it was in an
unknown tongue — neither French nor Latin. Whether it
were Greek or German I could not tell,
'* That is strong, " she said, when she had finished : " I
relish it. " The other girl, who had hfted her head to listen to
her sister, repeated, while she gazed at the fire, a line of what
had been read. At a later day, I knew the language and the
book; therefore I will here quote the fine: though when I
first heard it, it was only like a stroke on sounding brass to
tne— conveying no meaning : —
" * Da trat hervor Einer, anzusehen wie die Stem en Nacht.'
Good t good ! " she ex claim ed^ while her dark and deep eye
jsparkled. *^ There you have a dim and mighty archangel,
fitly set before you I The line is worth a hundred pages of
fastian. * Ich wage die Gedanken in der Schale meines
Zomes und die Werke mit dem Gewichte meines Grimms,'I
like it 1 "
Both were again silent.
334 JANE; EYiRE
< < Js there oi^ a > tmt]y where they (^ i'that way? "
asked the old woman^ looking up from her knitting.
''Yes > H^nnahr-^ far larger country than England;
where they talk in nQ other ws^. "
'* Well^ for sureicasiQy I Jknawn't how they csui understand
t'one t* other: and if either o'ye went , there^ ye could tdl
wl\at they said, I guess ? "
''We could probably telL aomethi^g of what they said^ but
not all-^for we are not as (clever as you think us^^ Hannah.
We don't ^peak Genncui^ and we c^imot read it without a
dictionary tohelp us. "
" And what good does it dojfiott? "
''We.mean to teachit some timer^r at least the el^nents,
as they say; andtthen we shall get more money than we do
now. "
" Varrylik^: but give ower studying: ye've done enough
for to-n^;ht, "
*M thmk we,havei at least Z'm tired. Mary^ are you? "
" Mortally: after all^ it's tough wx)rk ifagging away at a
language w^ no master but a lexicon/',
'* It is : especially such a language ^as this crabbed but
glorious Deutsch. I wondeo: when St. John iroU come home. "
''Surely he will not belong now: it is just ten " (lookmg
at a little gold watch she drew from her girdle). " It rains
fast. Hannah^ will you have the goodness to look at the
fire in the padour? "
The woman rose : isbe opencfd a door, throqg^h which I
dimly saw a passage: soon I heard her stir a & e in cMH.inner
foom; she presently came back.
" Ah, childer ! " said she^ *'it iair troubles me to go into
yond'room now; it looks so lonesome, wi'the«hair empty
and set back in a come):. "
She wiped her eyes with her apian: the two girls, grave
before, looked sad now.
" But he is in a better place, " continued Hannah: " we
shouldn't wish him Jbere again. And t^en, nobody .need to
have a quieter death nor.he had. "
" You say he never mentioned i|sf " inquiised one of the
ladies.
" He hadn't time, bairn: he was gone in a minute— was
your father. He had been a bit ailii^ like the day before, but
naught to signify; and when Mr. St. John asked if he would
like either o'ye to be sent for, he fair laug^hed at him. Bt
JAKE EYRE 355
began again with a bit of a heaviness in his head the nesrt day
— that is, a fortnight sin'— and he went to sleep and niver
wakened; he wor almost stark when your brother went into
t* chamber and fand him. Ah^ childer l that*s t* last 0* t* old
stock— for ye and Mr. St, John is like of a different soart to
them'at's gone; for all your mother wor mich i'your way;
and almost as book-learned. She wor the picttir'o'ye^ Mary:
Diana is more like your father. "
I thought them so similar I could not tell where the old
servant {for such I now concluded her to be) saw the differ-
ence. Both were fair complexioned and slenderly made;
both possessed faces full of distinction Emd intelligence. One,
to be sure, had hair a shade darker than the other, aad there
was a difference in their style of wearing it: Mary's pale
brown locks were parted and braided smooth; Diana's duskier
tresses covered her neck with thick cnrls. The clock struck
ten.
■'You'll want your supper^ I am sure/'observed Hannah;
** and so will Mr, St John when he comes in. "
And she prroceeded to prepare the meal. The ladies rose;
they seemed about to withdraw to the parlour. Till this
moment^ I had been so intent on watcliing them, their appear-
ance and conversation had exdted m me so keen an interest,
I had half -forgotten my own wretched position : now it re-
curred to me. More desolate, more desperate than ever, it
seemed from contrast. And how impossible did it appear to
touch the inmates of this house with concern on my behalf;
to make them believe in the truth of my wants and woes —
to induce them to vouchsafe a rest for ray wanderings ! As I
groped out the door, and knocked at it hesitatingly, I felt that
last idea to be a mere chimera. Hannah opened.
** What do you want ? " she inquired, in a voice of surprise^
as she surveyed me by the light of the candle she held.
** May I speak to your mistresses ? " I said.
" You had better tell me what you have to say to them.
I Where do you come from ? "
^L " I am a stranger. "'
^T'* What is your business here at this hour? "
'* I want a night " s shelter in an out-house or anywhere,
and a morsel of bread to eat. "
Distrust, the very feeling I dreaded, appeared in Hannah's
face. " I'll give you a piece of bread,*'she said, after a pause;
''but we can't take in a vagrant to lodge. It isn't hkely/*
iitt
1
56
JANE EYRE

"'Do kl me speak to your raislresscs. "
''No; not L What can they do for you? You should
QOt be njving about now; it looks very iU,**
'• But where shaU I go if you drive me away? What shall
** Oh, rU wurmnt you know where to go, and what to do.
liiod JWJ don't do wrong, that's aU* Ho-e is a penny;
B0W go **
*'A [ > enny cannot feed me, and I have no strength to go
fd^nher. Don't shut the door:— oh, don't, for God's sake!'*
*'I must; the rain is driving in "
**TcII the young ladies.— Let me see them''
'* Indeed, I will not. You are not what you ought to be^
OC you wouldn't make such a noise* Move oflf,^'
,''But I must die if I am turned away, "
" Not you. I'm fear'd you have some ill plans agate, that
bring you about folk's houses at this time o'night, " if you'v*
liny foUowers— housebreakers or such like— an3rwhere near,
you may tell them we are not by ourselves in the house j
We have a gentleman, and dogs, and guns/'Here the honest
but inflexible servant clapped the door to and bolted it
within.
This was the climax, A pang of exquisite suffering—*
throe of true despair— rent and heaved my heart, Woni
out, indeed, I was; not another step could I stir, I sank
on the wet door-step r I groaned^I wrung my hands —
I wept in utter anguish. Oh, this spectre of death ! Oh, this
last hour, approaching in such horror ! Alas, this isolation—
this banishment from my kind 1 Not only the anchor of
home, but the footing of fortitude was gone— at least for a
moment: but the last I soon endeavoured to regain*
** 1 can but die,'^ I said, " and I believe in God, Let me
try to wait His will in silence.'^
These words I not only thought, but uttered ; and thnistii^
back all my misery into my heart, I made an effort to compel
it to remain there— dumb and stilL
** AH men must die,''said a voice quite close at hand;
" but all are not condemned to meet a lingering and pre-
mature doom, such as yours would be if you perished here
of want. "
" Who or what speaks? " I askedj terrified at the nn-*
'xted sound, and incapable now of deriving from any
ence a hope of aid. A form was near — what form, tht
JANE EYRE
337
pitch-dark night and my enfeebied vision prevented me
horn distinguishing. With a loud long knock, the new
comer appealed to the door,
** Is it youj Mr* St, John? " cried Hannah.
** Yes — yes; open quickly,'^
'* Well, how wet and cold you must be, such a wild night
as it is ! Come in — your sisters are quite uneasy about you^
and I beheve there are bad folks about. There has been
a beggar-woman— I declare she is not gone yet !— laid down
there. Get up I for shame 1 Move off, I say!''
'* Hush, Hannah 1 I have a word to say to the woman.
Vau have done your duty in excluding, now let me do mine
in admitting her. I was near, and listened to both you and
her. I think this is a peculiar case — I must at least exam me
into it. Young woman, rise^ and pass before me into the
liouse. "
With difficulty I obeyed him. Presently I stood within
that cleaUj bright kitchen — on the very hearth — trembhng,
sickening; conscious of an aspect in the last degree ghastly,
wild J and weather-beaten. The two ladies, their brother,
Mr. St. John; the old servant, were all gazing at me,
" St. John, who is it? ** I heard one ask.
" I cannot tell : I found her at the door/* was the reply,
" She does look white,''said Hannah.
^* As white as clay or death/* was responded. " She will
fall: let her sit.'*
And indeed my head swam; I dropped; but a chair
received me. I still possessed my senses ; though just now
I could not speak.
''Perhaps a little water would restore her. Hannah, fetch
some. But she is worn to nothing. How very thin, and how
very bloodless 1 ^'
" A mere spectre!'*
" Is she ill, or only famished ? "
" Famished J I think, Hannah, is that milk? Give it me,
and a piece of bread. "
Diana (I knew her by the long curls which I saw drooping
between me and the fire as she bent over me) broke some
bread, dipped it in milk, and put it to my lips. Her face
was near mine: I saw there was pity in it^ and I felt sjmipathy
ID her hurried breathing* In her simple words, too, the same
balm -like emotion spoke: " Try to eat, "
*'Yes — tty,*'repeated Mary gently; and Mary*s ha^-
33«
JANE EYRE
1
removed my sodden bonoet and lifted my head. I tasti
what they offered me: feebly at firsts eagerly soon.
** Not too much at first— restrain her,''said the brother;
'*she has had enough. " And he withdrew the cup of milk
and the plate of bread.
''A htde morcj St, John^look at the avidity in her eyes "
*'No more at present, sister. Try if she can speak now—
ask her her name,*'
I felt I could speakj and I answered^ — " My name is Jane
Elliott/'Anxious as ever to avoid discovery, I had before
resolved to assume an alias*
" And where do you live? Where are your friends? "
I was silent,
*'Can we send lor any one you know? "
I shook my head,
" What account can you give of yourself? "
Somehow, now that I had once crossed the thr^hold of
this house, and once was brought face to face with its owners,
I felt no longer outcast, vagrant, and disowned by the
wide world. I dared to put off the mendicant— to resume my
natural manner and character. I began once more to know
mjrself; and when Mr, St^ John demanded an account —
which at present I was far too weak to render— I said afte^
a brief pause, — j^l
" Sir, I can give you no details to-night* " ^^
"'But what, then, " said he, " do you expect me to do for
you?'*
" Nothing, " I replied. My strength sufficed for but short
answers. Diana took the word : —
" Do you mean, " she asked, " that we have now given
you what aid you require? and that wc may dismiss you
to the moor and the rainy night ? "
I lookal at her. She had, I thought, a remarkable coun-
tenance; instinct both with power and goodness. I took
sudden courage. Answering her compassionate gaze with
a smilej I said: ** I wiU trust you. If I were a masteries*
and stray dog, I know that you would not turn me from
your hearth to-night; as it is, I really have no fear. Do
with me and for me as you like; but excuse me from much
discourse — ^my breath is short — I fed a spasm when I speak. "
All three surveyed me, and all three were silent,
*'Hannah, " said Mr. St. John, at last, " let her sit there
■•t pr^ent, and ask her no questions; m ten minutes more.
539
ber tlie remainder of that milk and bread. Mary and
a, let us go into the parlour and talk the matter over.*'
They withdrew. Very soon one of the ladies returned^
I could not tell which, A kind of pleasant stupor was stealing
over me as I sat by the genial fire. In an under tone she
gave some directions to Hannah. Ere bng^ with the ser-
vant's aid, I contrived to mount a staircase j my dripping
clothes were removed; soon, a warm, dry bed received mc-
I thanked God— experienced amidst unutterable exhaustion
glow of grateful joy— and slept*

i
CHAPTER XXIX
HE recollection of about three days and nights succeeding
this is ver > ^ dim in my mind* I can recall some sensations
felt in the interval ; but few thoughts framed^ and xm actions
performed. I knew I was in a small room, and in a narrow
bed* To that bed I seemed to have grown; I lay on it motion-
less as a stone; and to have torn me from it would have
been almost to kill me. I took no note of the lapse of time —
of the change from morning to nooUj from noon to evening,
I observed when any one entered or left the apartment;
I couH even tell who they were; I can Id, understand what
was said when the speaker stood near to me; but I could
not answer; to open my lips or move my limbs was equally
impossible. Hannah^ the servant, was my most frequent
visitor. Her coming disturbed me. I had a feehng that she
wished me away: that she did not understand me or my
circumstances: that she was prejudiced against me. Diana
and Mary appeared in the chamber once or twice a da,y^
They wouki whisper sentences of this sort; at my bedside > —
*'It IS very well we took her in. "
" Yes; she would certainly have been found dead at the
door in the mornings had she been left out all night. I
wonder what she hoB gone through? "
" Stmnge hardships^ I imagine — ^poor, emaciated, pallid
wanderer 1 "
'* She is not an uneducated peison, I should think, by hex
manner of speaking; her accent was quite pure; and t^
A
340 JANE EYRE
clothes she took off^ though splashed and wet, were little
worn and fine. "
** She has a peculiar face; fleshless and haggard as it is^
I rather like it; and when in good health and animated, I
can fancy her physiognomy would be agreeable. "
Never once in their dialogues did I hear a syllable of
regret at the hospitality they had extended to me; or of
suspicion of, or aversion to, myself. I was comforted.
Mr. St. John came but once: he looked at me, and said
my state of lethargy was the result of reaction irom excessive
and protracted fatigue. He pronounced it needless to send
for a doctor: nature, he was sure, would manage best, left
to herself. He said every nerve had been overstrained in
some way, and the whole system must sleep torpid a while.
There was no disease. He imagined my recovery would be
rapid enough when once comm^ced. These opinions he
ddivered in a few words, in a quiet, low voice; and added,
after a pause, in the tone of a man little accustomed to
e3q > ansive comment,''ratiier an unusual physiognomy;
certainly, not indicative of vulgarity or degradation. "
" Par otherwise, " responded Diana. " To spcadc truth,
St« John, my heart rather warms to the poor little soul.
I wish we may be able to benefit her permanently. "
" That is hardly likely, " was the reply. " You will find
she is some young lady who. has had a misunderstanding
with her friends and has probably injudiciously left them.
We may, perhaps, succeed in restoring her to them, if she
is not obstinate: but I trace lines of force in her face whidi
make me scq > tical of her tractability . " He stood considering
me some minutes; then added, *^ She looks sensible, but not
at all handsome. "
" She is so iU, St. John. "
" HI or well, she would always be plain. The grace and
harmony of beauty are quite wanting in those features. "
On the thmi day, I was better; on the fourth, I could
speak, move, rise in bed, and turn. Hannah had brought
m^ some gruel and dry toast, about, as I supposed, the dinner
hour. I had eaten with rel^h: the food was good— void of
the feverish flavour which had hitherto poisoned what 1
had swallowed. When she left me, I felt comparatively
strong and revived: ere long satiety of repose, and desire
for action stirred me. I wished to rise; but what could I
t on? Only my damp and bemired appard; in wbkh I
JANE EYRE ^4^
bad slept on the ^ound and fallen in the marsh, I felt
ashamed to appear before my benefactors so dad. I was
spared the humiliation,
On a chair by the bedside were aU my own things, clean
and dry. My black silk frock hung against the wall. The
traces of the bog were removed from it; the creases left
by the wet smoothed out: it was quite decent. My very
shoes and stockings were purified and rendered presentable.
There were the means of washing in the room, and a comb
and brush to smooth my hair. After a weary process, and
resting every five minutes^ I succeeded in dressing myself.
My clothes hung loose on me; for I was much wasted^ but I
covered deficiencies with a shawl, and once more^ clean and
respectable-looking — no speck of the dirt, no trace of the
disorder I so hatedj and which seemed so to degrade m(\
Ml — I crept down a stone staircase with the aid of ihe
banisterSj to a narrow low passage, and found my way
presently to tlie kitchen*
It was full of the fragrance of new breads and the warmth
of a generous fire, Hannah was baking. Prejudices^ it is
well known, are most difficult to eradicate from the heart
whose soil has never been loosened or fertiHsed by education:
they grow there, firm as weeds among stones, Hannah had
been cold and stiff, indeed, at the first: latterly she had
begun to relent a little; and when she saw me come in tidy
and well-dressed, she even smiled.
" Whatj you have got up? " she said. " You are better,
then. You may sit you down in my chair on the hearthstone,
if you wilL*'
She pointed to the rocking chair: I took it. She bustled
aboutj examining me every now and then with the comer of
her eye. Turning to me, as she took some loaves from the
oven, she asked ^ bluntly —
** Did you ever go a-begging afore you came here? "
I was indignant for a moment; but remembering that
anger was out of the question, and that I had indeed appeared
as a beggar to her 3 I answered quietly; but still not without
a certain marked firmness —
*'You are mistaken in supposing me a beggar. I am no
beggar; any more than yourself or your young ladies.''
After a pause, she said, " I dunnut understand that:
I you've like no house, nor no brass, I guess ? "
[ " The want of house or brass (by which I suppose
34^ JANE EYRE
m^Q money) does not mabeis^ beggar .in yourisense of the
word/* . -':..::.'" •«.•:•, .•
" Are you book-learned? " she inquired^ [presently.
" Yes, very, " ,.,
" But you've never b^n to a boarding^schodll "
" I was at a boardiogr^chool eight y«ars- "
She .^ened her eyes. wide. / " Whatevier cannot ye keep
yourself for^ then? " - /.
.''I hay^ kept myself; and^ I truat, shall Jksep myself
again. What are you going to do with .these :gos > seberries? **
i inquiredj.assbe jb > rought out a basket, of the fruit,
" Mak'em into pies. " ,
" Give them to me and J'U pick them. "
" Nay; I du^nut waat ye to. do nought. " >
" £iut I mus^t dp som#thu^», !Let)me iutve them. "
Sh^ consented; and she evenrbmught me a dean towel
tp spread lOver my dress, " lest, " as she said^ " I shodd
mucky it. "
" Ye've not been used totaarvant's iwaik^ I see by your
$an < ^ " she r^narkedi., " Happen ye've been a dressmaker. "
'',No^ youare wToi:ig. And^^tiDw^ never mind what I have
been: dop't trouble your (head further'about .me; but tdl
me t^ie ijiame of the house where iwe are. "
" Some calls it Marsh £nd^ and sa^oe calls itiMoor House. "
" And ih & gentleman, who lives hsre is called iiir. St^
Jfohn? "
** Nay; he doesn't liive here: be is only staying a whiles
tVhen he is at, home^. he is ill this own parishi at Morton. "
" That village a few miles off ? "
" Aye " r
" ,And whatish^? " ; ;
" He is a pai:son. " , r , r
I remembered the answer of the old housekeq > er at " die
parsonage^ wh^ I bad asbed to see the dergyman.'"'ThiS|
then, was his father's resiienee? "
" Aye; old Mr. Kivers lived here, and his father, and
gprandfather, apd gurt.{^;i:ieftt),grandfatheJ: arfore him. "
" The name, then, of that gentleman; is Mr, St, John
Riveis?''
" Aye; St. Johur^ like) his kirstened name*'*
" And his sisters are called Diana and Mary Kivers ?''
" Yes. "
" Tbeir father is dead?'*
JANE EYRE
3^^3
r " Dead three weeks sin'of a stroke. "
" They have no mother?''
" The mistress has been dead this mony a year. "
** Have you lived with the family long? "
'* IVe lived here thirty year. I nursed them all three.'*
" That proves you must have been an honest and faithful
servant., I wil! say so much for you, though you have had
the incivility to call me a beggar. "
She again regarded me with a surprised stare, *'I believe,**
she said, *'I was quite mistaken in my thoughts of you: but
there is so mony cheats goes about^ you mun forgie me. "
** And though,''I continued , rather severely^'^ you wished
to turn me from the door, on a night when you should not
have shut out a dog. "
" Well, it was hard: but what can a body do? I thought
more o'th'childer nor of mysel: poor things 1 They've like
aobody to tak'care on *em but me. Tm like to look sharpish. "
I maintained a grave silence for some minutes p
" You munnut think too hardly of me, " she again
remarked.
" But I do think hardly of you/'I saidj *'and Til teU
you why — not so much because you refused to give me
shelter, or r^arded me as an impostor, as because you just
now made it a species of reproach that I had no * brass^* and
no house* Some of the best people that ever lived have been
as destitute as I am ; and if you are a Christian, you ought
not to consider poverty a crime, "
" No more I ought, " said she: " M^. St. John tells me so
too; and I see I wor wrang — but I've clear a different notion
on you now to what I bad. You look a raight down dacoit
little cmter* "
" That will do — I forgive you now. Shake hands, "
She put her floury and homy hand into mine; another
and heartier smile illumined her rough face; and from that
moment we were friends.
Hannah was evidently fond of talking. While I picked the
fruit, and she made the paste for the pies, she proceeded to
give me sundry details about her deceased master and
mistr^s, and *Hhe child er, " as she called the young people.
Old Mr > Rivers, she ^aid^ was a plain man enough; but a
gentleman J and of as ancient a family as could be found.
Marsh End had belonged to the Rivers'ever since it wf
house: and it was, she afiirmed, " aboon two hundred
344 JANE EYRE
old — for all it looked but a small^ humble pla^^ naught to
compare wi* Mr. Oliver's grand hall down i* Morton Vale.
But she could remember Bill Oliver's father a journeyman
needle-maker; and th'Rivers wor gentry i'th* owd days
o'th'Henrys^ as onybody might see by k > oking into th'
registers i'Morton Church vestry. " Still, she aUowed, " the
owd maister was like, other folk — ^naught mich out o't*
common way: stark mad o'shootings and formings and sich
like. " The mistress was different. She was a great reader^
and studied a deal; and the *'bairns " had taken after her.
There was nothing like them in these parts^ nor ever had
been; they had liked learnings all three^ almost from the
time they could speak.; and they had always been " of a
Tiak'of their own. " Mr. St. John, when he grew up, would
go to college and be a parson; and the girls, as soon as they
kft school, would seek places as governesses: for they had
told her their father had some years a^ lost a great deal of
money, by a man he had trusted tummg bankrupt; and as
he was now not rich enough to give them fortunes, they tnust
provide for themselves. They had lived very little at home
for a long while, and were only come now to stay a few weeks
on account of their father's death: but they did so like
Marsh End and Morton, aad all these moors and hills about.
They had been in London, and many other grand towns;
but they always said there was no place like home; and
then they were so agreeable with each other— never fell out
nor " threaped. " She did not know where there was such a
family for being united,
. Having finished my task of gooseberry picking, I asked
where the two ladies and their brother were now.
" Gone over to Morton for a walk; but they would be back
in half an hour to tea. "
They returned within the time Hannah had allotted them:
they entered by the kitchen door. Mr. St. John, when he
saw me, merely bowed and passed through; the two ladifes
stopped: Mary, in a few words, kindly and calmly expressed
the pleasure ^e felt in seeing me well enough to be able to
come dowa; Diana took my hand: she shook her he^d
at me.
. " You should have waited for my leave to descend, " she
said. " You still look very pale— and so thin ! PooT child !—
poor girl! "
Diana had a voice ton^, to my ^ar, like the cooing of A
JANE EYRE 345
dove, Slie possessed eyes whose gaze I delighted to encounter^
Her whole face seemed to me full of charm. Mary's counten-
ance was equally intelligent — her features equally pretty:
but her expression was more reserved; and her manners,
though gentle, more distant. Diana looked and spoke with
3 certain authority: she had a will, evidently. It was my
nature to feel pleasure in yielding to authority supported
like hers; and to bend, where my conscience and self-
respect permitted, to an active will.
I'*And what business have you here? " she continued.
pflt is not your place. Mary and I sit in the kitchen some-
times, because at home we like to be free, even to licence —
but you are a visitor^ and must go into the parlour/*
" 1 am very well here. "
" Not at all — with Hannah bustling about and covering
yon with flour. "
'* Besides, the fire is too hot for you, " interposed Mary.
''To be sure, " added her sister. " Cbme, you must be
obediem. " And still holding my hand she made me rise, and
led me into the inner room,
''Sit there, " she said, placing me on the sofa^ ** while we
take our things off and get the tea ready; it is another
privilege we exercise in our little moorland home — to prepare
our own meals when we are so inclined ; or when Hannah is
baking, brewing, washing, or ironing/^
She closed the door, leaving me solus with Mr. St, John^
who sat opposite; a book or newspaper in his hand, I
examined, first, the parlour, and then its occupant.
The parlour was rather a small room, very plainly
furnished; yet comfortable, because clean and neat» The
old-fashioned chairs were very bright, and the walnut-wood
table was like a looking-glass. A few strange, antique por-
traits of the men and women of other days decorated the
stained walls; a cupboard with glass doors contained some
books and an ancient set of china. There was no superfluous
ornament in the room— not one modem piece of furniture,
save a brace of work-boxes and a lady*s desk in rosewood,
which stood on a side-table; everything — including the
carpet and curtain " ? — looked at once well worn and well
saved.
Mr, St, John — sitting as still as one of the dusky pictures
on the wails ; keeping his eyes fixed on the page he peruse*^
and his lips mutely sealed — was easy enough to exam/
94« JAN£ EYRE
lUd be been astatue instead of a man^ he could aot have
b«ea casiv • He was young — ^perhaps from twenty-eight to
thiity — tall^ slendecj his face riveted the eye; it was like a
Graek lace, very pure in outline: quite a straight, iclassic
aose; quite an Athenian mouth and chin. It is seldom^
iiKked > an English face comes so near the antique modds as
didhi^ He m^ht well be a little shocked at the irregularity
of my lineaments, his own being so harmonious. His eyes
were large and blue, with brown lashes; his high^reh^id,
ceiouriess as ivory, wa3 partially streaked over by careless
locks of iairboir.
This is a gentle delineaticm, is it inot, reader? Y^ he
whom it describes soareely impressed one with the idea .of
a gentle, a yielding, an impressible^ or even of a placid
nature. Quiescent as henowisat, there was something about
his nostril, his mouth, his brow, which, to my perceptions,
indicated elements within either restless, or hard, or eager.
He did not speak to > me one word nor leven dmct to me one
glance, till his sisteis returned. Diana, as she passed in and
out, in the course of preparing tea, brought me ;a little cake,
baked on the top of the oifen.
'* £at that no%''she said :'* you must be hungry. -Hannah
sa^ ypu have had inothing 4)Ut some giiuel since breakfast. "
I did not r^use it, for my appetite was awakened and keen.
Mr. Rivers now dosed bis book, approached the table,
and, as he took a/sea1^ fiiced his blue pictorial-k > okiageyes
^11 on me. There was > an .unceremonious directness, a
searching, decided steadfastness in his gase now, iwhich told
that intenibion, and not diffidence, had /hitherto k^ it
av^ed from the stranger,
i " You (fire very hungry, " he said*
" I am;, sir. " It. is my i«ay--it always was.m;y way, by
instinct — ever to meet the > l»!ief with brevity, tiie dureot
with plaianess.
" It ris well for you that a low fever has iarced you to
abstam ,for the last tbnee daysr: theie woM have been
danger in yielding to the csravings of your appetite at first.
Now you may eat; though still not immoderatdy. " ^
■ " J trust I shall not > eat bog at your expense, sir, " was
my very clumsily-contrived, unpolished answer.
; " No, " he said, cool^ " When you have indicated to us
tj)e res & dence of your iariesids, we oan write to thsm, and you
mftv be sestored ito home. "

JANE EYRE 34^
" ^TTiat, I must plainly tell you, is out of my power to do;
being absolutely without home and friends. "
The three looked at me; but not distrustfully; I felt there
was no suspicion in their glances : there was more of curios ity^
I speak particularly of the young ladies* St. John^s eyes,
though clear enough in a hteral sense^ in a figurative one
were difficuJt to fathom* He seemed to use them rather as
iiistmnients to search other people's thoughtSj than as
agents to reveal his own : the which rambination of keenness
and reserve was considerably more calculated to embarrass
than to encourage.
''Do you mean, to say/* he asked, " that you are com-
pletely isolated from every connection? "
" I do. Not a tie links me to any living thing: not a claim
do I possess to admittance under any roof in England. "
" A most singular position at your age! *^
Here I saw his glance directed to my hands, which were
folded on the table before me- I wondered what he sought
there: his words soon e3q > lained the quest.
" You have never been married? You area spinster? "
Diana laughed. ** Why, she can't be above seventeen or
eighteen years old, St. John/'she said.
''I am near nineteen: but I am not married. No. "
I felt a burning glow mount to my face; for bitter and
agitating recollections were awakened by the allusion to
marriage. They all saw the embarrassmentj and the emotion.
Diana and Mary relieved me by turning their eyes elsewhere
than to my crimsoned visage; but the colder and sterner
brother continued to gaze^ till the trouble he had excited
forced out tears as well as colour,
^ " Where did you last r^ide? " he now asked.
" You are too inquisitive, St, John; " murmured Mary,
in a low voice; but he leaned over the table and required
an answer, by a second firm and piercing look.
*'The name of the place where, and of the person with
whom I lived, is my secret/ " I replied, concisely.
" Which, if you like^ you have^ in my opinion^ a right
to keep, both from St. John and every other questioner/'
remarked Diana.
" Vet if I know nothing about you or your history, I cannot
help you,'* he said* " And you need help: do you not? "
** I need it, and I seek it; so far^ sir, that some true ph^''
anthropist will put me in the way of getting work wh-'

348 JAKE EYRE
can do, and the remuneration for which will keep me^
but in the barest necessaries of lifCi'^
" I know not whether I am a true philanthropist j yet I
am wilhng to aid you to the utmost of my power^ in a purpose
so honest. First, then* tell me what you have been accustomed
to doj and what you can do/^
I had now swallowed my tea. I was mightily refreshed by
the beverage; as much so as a giant with wine: it gave new
tone to my umtmng nervei?, and enabled me to address this
penetrating young judge steadily.
" Mr, Rivers/'I said, turning to him, and looking at hinij
as he looked at me^ openly and witliout diffidence^'^ you and
your sisters have done me a great service — the greatest
man can do his feOow^being; you have rescued me, by your
noble hospitality, from d^th. This benefit conferred gives
jTDu an unlimited claim on my gratitude; and a claim to a
certain extent^ on my confidence. I will tell you as much of
the history of the wanderer you have harboured^ as I cm
tell without compromising my own peace of mind — my own
security, moral and physical, and that of others.
" I am an orphan ; the daughter of a clergyman. My
parents died before I could know them. I was brought up
a dependant; educated in a charitable institution. I will
even tell you the name of the estahlishmentj where I passed
six years as a pupil, and two as a teacher— Lo wood Orphan
Asylum^ - — -shire: you will have heard of it, Mr. Rivers?—
the Rev. Robert Brocklehurst is the treasurer, "
" I have heard of Mr, Brocklehurst, and I have seen the
icbooh "
" I left Lowood nearly a year since to become a private
governess. I obtained a good situation, and was happy.
This place I was obhged to leave four days before I came
here. The reason of my departure I cannot and ought not
to explain : it would be useless— dangerous ; and would
sound incredible. No blame attached to me: I am as free
from culpability as any one of you three. Miserable I ara,
and must be for a time; for the catastrophe which drove
me from the house I had found a paradise was of a strange
and direful nature. I observed but two points in planning
my departure — speed, secrecy: to secure these, I had to
leave behind me everything I possessed except a small
parcel; which, in my hurry and trouble of mind, I forgot
to take out of the coach that brought me to VVhitcto^
JANE EYRE
549
To this neighbourhood, then, I came^ quite destitute. I
slept two nights in the open air, and wandered about two
days without crossing a threshold: but twice in that space
of time did I taste food ; and it was when brought by hunger,
exhaustion, and despair, almost to the last gasp, that you,
Mr, RiverSj forbade me to perish of want at your door, and
took me under the shelter of your roof. I know all your
sisters have done for me since-^for I have not been insensible
during my seeming torpor— ^and I owe to their spontaneous,
genuine J genial compassion, as lai^e a debt as to your evan-
gelical charity. "
*'Don't make her talk any more now, St. John, " said
Diana, as I paused ; *'she is evidently not yet fit for excite-
ment. Come to the sofa, and sit down now. Miss Elliott/'
I gave an involuntary half-start at hearing the altas:
l had forgotten my new name. Mr, Rivers, whom nothing
seemed to escape^ noticed it at once,
L, *'You said your name was Jane Elliott? " he observed,
r " I did say so ; and it is the name by which I think it
expedient to be called at present: but it is not my real name,
and when I hear it, it sounds strange to me. "
*'Your real name you will not give? ^*
" No: I fear discovery above all things; and whatever
disclosure would lead to it^ I avoid, "
** You are quite right, I am sure/'said Diana, " Now
doj brother, let her be at peace awhile. "
But when St. John had mused a few moments, he re-
commenced, a5 imperturbably, and with as much acnmen
as ever.
** You would not like to be long dependent on our hos-
pitality — you would wish, I see, to dispense as soon as may
be with my sisters'compassion; and, above all, with my
charity (I am quite sensible of the distinction drawn^ nor do
I resent it — it is just): you desire to be independent of us? "
" I do : I have already said so. Show me how to work,
or how to seek work; that is all I now ask; then let me go,
if it be but to the meanest cottage — but till then^ allow me
to stay here: I dread another essay of the horrors of homeless
destitution/'
*'Indeed, you shall stay here, " said Diana^ putting her
white hand on my head. " You shall,''repeated Mary, in the
tone of undemonstrative sincerity, which seemed natu'"
her.

fANE EYRE
''My sisters, you see, have a pleasure in keeping yau/* smd
Mr, St- John J'* as they would have a pleasure ija keeping and
cherishing a haU-frozen birdj some wintry wind might have
driven through their casement, I feel more mclination to put
you in the way of keeping yourself: and shall endeavour to
do so; but observe, my sphere is narrow, I am but the in-
cumbent of a poor country parish : my aid must be of the
humblest sort. And if you are inclined to despise the day of
small thingSj seek some marc efficient succour than such as I
can offer/'
" She has already said that she is willing to do anything
honest she can do/* answered Diana^ for me; " and you know,
St. John, she has no choice of helpers: she is forced to ptit up
with such crusty people as you. "
** I will be a dressmaker: I will be a plain work-woman;
I win be a servant, a nurse-girlj if I can be no better, " I
answered.
'* Right,** said Mr* St, John, quite coolly. " If such is your
spiritj I promise to aid you; in my own time and way. "
He now resumed the book with which he had been occupied
before tea. I soon withdrew- for I had talked as much, and
sat up as long, as my present strength would permit.
CHAPTER XXX
The more I knew of the inmates of Moor House^ the better
1 liked them. In a few days X had so far recovered tny health
that I could sit up all day, and walk out sometimes. I could
join with Diana and Mary in all their occupations; converse
with them as much as they wished, and aid them when and
where they would allow me. There was a reviving pleasure
in this intercourse, of a kind now tasted by me for the first
time — the pleasure arising from perfect congeniality of tastes,
sentiments, and principles.
I liked to read what they liked to read : what they enjoyed,
delighted me; what they approved, I reverenced. They loved
their sequestered home. I, too, io the grey, small, antique
structure, with its low roof ^ its latticed casements, its moulder*
inp- walls J its avenue of aged firs — all grown aslant under the
A
JANE EY'i^E 351
stress of jaaountain winds ; its garden^ dark with yew and hoUy
— «md where no flowie^ but of the hardiest species would
bloom — ^found a charm both potent and permanent. They
dung to ,the purple onoozs behind and around their dwelling
— to the hollow vale into which the pebbly bridle-path lead-
ing fEom their gate descended; and which wound between
fern-banks firsts and then amongst a few of the wildest little
pasturerfields tjuit ever bordered a wilderness of heath, or
gave sustenance to a flock of grey moorland sheep, with their
nttle mossy-faced lambs: — they clung to this scene, I say,
with a peiiect enthusiasm of attachment. I could con^)re-
hend the feeling, and share both its strength and truth. I
saw the fascination iof the locality. I ielt the consecration oi
its loneliness : my eye feasted on the outline of swell and sweep
—on the wild colouring conmiunicated to ridge and dell, by
moss, l^ heath-bell, by flower-sprinkled turi^ by brilliant
bracken, and mellow granite crag. These details .were just to
9ie what they were to them— so many pure and sweet sources
of pleasure. The strong blast and the soft breeze; the rough
and the halcyon day; the hours of sunrise and sunset; t]be
moon%ht and the clouded night, devebped for me, in these
regions, the same attraction as for them — wound round my
fifties thesame ^pell that entranced theirs.
In-doors we agreed equally well« They were both more
accomplished and better read than I was: but with eager-
ness I followed in the path of knowledge they had trodden
before me. I devoured the books they lent me: then it was
full satisfaction to discuss with them in the evening what I
had perused during the day. Thought fitted thought; opinion
met opinion : we coincided, in short, perfectly.
If in our trio ther^ was a sqperior and a leader, it was I > iana,
Pb^ically, she far excelled me: she wa3 handsome; she was
vigorous. In her, animal spirits, there was an affluence of lif^,
and certain^ of flow, such as excited my wonder, while it
baffle my comprehension. I could talk a while when the
evening commenced : ^but the first gush of vivacity and fluency
gone, I mas fain to sit on a stool at Diana's feet, tp rest my
bead on her kneie, and listen ahemately to her and Mary;
while they sounded thoroughly the topic on which I had but
touched. Diana offered to teacU me German. I liked. to
learn ol h^; I saw thepart of in & tructtess pleased and suited
her; that of scholar pleased and suited me no less
aaturesidovetailed : imutual affection — of the strongest
35^
7ANE EYRE
was the result. They discovered I could draw: their pencils
and colour-boxes were immediately at my service. My skill,
greater in this one point than theirs, surprised and ctmrmed
them. Mary would sit and watch me by the hour together r
then she would take lessons; and a docile^ intelligent^ assidu*
ous pupil, she made. Thus occupied, and mutually enter-
tainedj days passed like hours, and weeks like days.
As to Mr. St. John, the intimacy which had arisen so
naturally and rapidly between me and his sisters, did not
extend to him. One reason of the distance yet observed
between us was, that be was comparatively seldom at home:
a large proportion of his time appeared devoted to visiting
the sick and poor among the scattered population of his
paritih.
No weather seemed to hinder him in these pastoral ex-
cursions: rain or fair, he would j when his hours of morning
study were over, take his hat, andj followed by his father's
old pointer, Carlo, go out on his mission of love or duty — I
scarcely know in which light he regarded it. Sometimes,
when the day was very unfavourable, his sisters would
expostulate. He would then say^ with a peculiar smile, more
solemn than cheerful^—
''And if I let a gust of wind or a sprinkling of rain turn me
aside from these easy tasksj what preparation would such
sloth be for the future I propose to myself ? "
Diana and Mary^s general answer to this question was a
sigh, and some minutes of apparently moomfui meditation*
But besides liis frequent absences, there was another barrier
to friendship with him ; he seemed of a reserved, an abstracted,
and even of a brooding nature. Zealous in his ministerial
labours, blameless in his life and habits, he yet did not appear
to enjoy that mental serenity, that inward content, which
should be the reward of every sincere Christian and practical
philanthropist. Often^ of an evening, when he sat at the
window, his desk and papers before him, he would cease read-
ing or writing, rest his chin on his hand, and deliver himself
up to I know not what course of thought: but that it was
perturbed and exciting might be seen in the frequent flash
and changeful dilation of his eye.
I think, moreover, that Nature was not to him that treasury
of delight it was to his sisters. He expressed once, and but
'n my hearing, a strong sense of the rugged charm of the
d an inborn affection for the dark roof and hoary walls
^fieca!
JANE EYRE 353
;e called liis home : but there was more of gloom than pleasure
in the tone and words in which the sentiment was manifested j
and never did he seem to roam the moors for the sake of their
soothing silence— never seek out or dwell upon the thousand
peaceful delights they could yield*
Incommunicative as he was, some time elapsed before I
had an opportunity of gauging his mind . I first got an idea of ^
its calibre when I heard him preach in his own church at
Morton , I wish I could describe that sermon : but it is past my
power, I cannot even render faithfully the effect it produced
on me.
It began calm — and indeed, as far as delivery and pitch
of voice weut, it was calm to the end ; an earnestly f eltj yet
strictly restrained zeal breathed soon in the distinct accents,
and j)rompted the nervous language. This grew to force —
compress^^ condensed, controlled. The heart was thrilled,
the mind astonishedj by the power of the preacher: neither
were softened. Throughout there was a strange bitterness j
an absence of consolatory gentleness; stern allusions to
Calvinistic doctrines — election, predestination, reprobation
—were frequent; and each reference to these points sounded
like a sentence pronounced for doom- When he had done,
instead of feeling better, calmer, more enlightened by his
discourse, I experienced an inexpressible sadness; for it
seemed to me — I know not whether equally so to others —
that the eloquence to which I had been listening had sprung
from a depth where lay turbid dregs of disappointment —
where moved troubling impulses of insatiate yearnings and
disquieting aspirations. I was sure St. John Rivers— pure-
lived^ conscientious, zealous as he was^had not yet found
tliat peace of God which passeth all understanding : he had
no more found it, I thought, than had I ; with my concealed
and racking regrets for my broken idol and lost elysium —
regrets to which I have latterly avoided referring; but which
possessed me and tyrannised over me ruthlessly.
Meantime a month was gone- Diana and Mary were soon
to leave Moor House, and return to the far different life and
scene which awaited them, as governesses in a large, fashion-
able, south-of-England city; where each held a situation in
families j by whose wealthy and haughty members they were
regarded only as humble dependants, and who neither knew
nor sought one of their innate excellences, smd apprecip'" ^
only their acquired accomplishments as they appreciat-
i.
334 JANE EYRE
skill of their cook^ or the taste of their waittng-woman. Mr.
St. John had said nothing to me yet about the einpk)yment
he had promised to obtain for me; yet it became -urgent that
I should: have a vocation of £x > me kmd. One mornings being
left alone with him a few minutes in the parlour^ I ventured
to approach the windowHrecess— which- his table^ chair^ and
desk consecrated as a: kind of study — and I was^ going to
speak; though not very well knowing in what words to fmme
my kiquiry—for it is at all times difficult to break liie fee
of reserve glassing over such natures as his-H^rhen he saved
me the trouble, by being the first to commence a dialogue.
Lqoking up as I drew near — " You have a questicm to ask
of me? " he sard-
" Yes; I wish to know whether you* have heard of any
ser!V3ce I can ofiermyseH to undertake. "
" I fomid; or devised something for you three we^s ago;
but as you seemed both useful and happy here— as my sisters
hadievidenUy become attached toyou, and your^odety gave
them unusual pleasuFe^^I deemed it inexpedient to break
in on your mutual comfort, till their af^oaching departure
froDcn Marsh End shoidd render yours necessary. "
" And they will go in three days now? " I said.
** Yes; and when they go, I shall return to the parsonage
at Morton: Hannah wfllacoompany me; and this old house
willbeshutiQ}. "
I waited! a few moments, expeotmg he would go on with
the subject first broached: but he seemed to have entered
another train of r^ection : his look:denoted < abstraction from
me and my business. £ was obliged to recall him to a theme
which was of necessity one of closeand anxious interest to me;
" What is the employment yem.had in view, Mr. Rivers?
I hope this delay will not have iiicreased the difficulty ol
securing it. "
" Oh, no; since it is an empk > yment which depends only
on me to give, and you to accept. "
He again paused: there seemed a reluctance to continue.
I grew impatient: a restless movement or two, and an eager
ami exacting glance ^tened on his face, conveyed t^e f eelmg
to Um as effectually as words coukihave done^ and'with les»
trouble.
" You need be in no hurry to hear, " he said: " let me
frankly tell you, I have nothing digible or profitaUe to sug^
west. Biefore I explain, recall, if'you please; my notice, deariy
JANE EYRE 355
Jlpveiij that if I helped you, it must be as the blind man would
help the lame, 1 am poor; for I find that^ when I have paid
my father's debts, all the patrimony remaining to me will be
this cnimbhng grange, the row of scathed fc behind, and
the patch of moorish soil, with the yew-trees and holly-bushes'
in front. I am obscure: Rivers is an old name; but of the
three sole descendants of the race, two earn the dependant^s
crust among B t range rs^ and the third considers Mmself an
alien from his native country — not only for life, but in death.
Yes J and deems, and is bound to deem, himself honoured
I by the lot, and aspires but after the day when the cross of
separation from fleshly ties shall be laid on his shoulders, and
when the Head of that church-militant of whose humblest
members he is one, shall give the word,'Rise, follow met'"
St, John said these words as he pronounced his sermons,
with a quiet, deep voice; with an unflushed cheek, and a
coruscating radiance of glance. He resumed : —
*'And since I am myself poor and obscure, I can offer you
but a service of poverty and obscurity. You may even tlunk
it degrading— for I see now your habits have been what the
world calls refined; your tastes lean to the ideal; and your
society has at least been amongst the educated — but / con-
sider that no service degrades which can better our race, I
hold that the more arid and unreclaimed the soil where the
Christian labourer's task of tillage is appointed him — the
I scantier the meed his toil brings — the higher the honour* His,
f under such circumstances, is the destiny of the pioneer; and
the first pioneers of the Gospel were the Apostles — their
captain was Jesus, the Redeemer himself-'^
" Well ? " 1 said, as he again paused — " proceed/*
He looked at me before he proceeded ; indeed, he seemed
teisurely to read my face, as if its features and lines were char-
acters on a page. The conclneions drawn from this scrutiny
he partially expressed in his succeeding observations >
" I believe you will accept the post I offer you/'said he;
*'and hold it for a while : not permanently, though; any
more than I could permanently keep the narrow and narrow-
in g^ — the tranquil, hidden office of English country incumbent:
for in your nature is an alloy as detrimental to lepose as that
in mine; though of a difEerent kind, "
»** Do explain/'I urged , when he halted once more*
" I will; and you shall hear how poor the proposal v^ —
how trivial— how cramping. I shall not stay long at ¥
l»
356 JANE EYRE
now that my father is dead^ and that I am my own master.
I shall leave the place probably in the course of a twelve-
month : but while I do stay^ I will exert myself to the utmost
for its improvement. Morton, when I came to it two years
ago, had no school: the childem of the poor were excluded
from every hope of progress. I established one for boys: I
mean now to open a second school for girls. I have hired a
building for the purpose, with a cottage of two rooms attached
to it for the mistress's house. Her salary will be thirty pounds
a year: her house is already furnished, very simply, but
sufficiently, by the kindness of a lady. Miss Oliver; the only
daughter of the sole rich man in my parish — ^Mr. Oliver, the
proprietor of a needle^factory and iron-foundry in the valley.
The same lady pays for the education and clothing of an
orphan from the workhouse; on condition that she shall aid
the mistress in such menial offices connected with her own
house and the school, as her occupation of teaching will
prevent her having time to discharge in person. Will you be
this mistress? "
He put the question rather hurriedly; he seemed half to
expect an indignant, or at least a disdainful rejection of the
ofier: not knowing all my thoughts and fedmgs, though
guessing some, he could not tell in what light the lot would
appear to me. In truth it was humble — ^but then it was
sheltered, and I wanted a safe asylum: it was plodding—
but then, compared with that of a governess in a rich house,
it was iiul^endent; and the fear of servitude with strangers
entered my soul like iron: it was not ignoble— not imworthy
— ^not mentally degrading. I made my decision.
" I thank you for the proposal, Mr. Rivers; and I accept
it with all my heart. "
" But you comprehend me? " he said. " It is a village
school: your scholars will be only poor girls — cottagers'
children — at the best, farmers'daughters. Knitting, sew-
ing, reading, writing, cyphering, wiU be all you will have to
teach. W^t will you do with your accomplishments?
What, with the largest portion of your mind — sentiments-
tastes? "
" Save them till they are wanted. They will keep. "
" You know what you undertake, then ? "
" I do. "
He now smiled? not a bitter or a sad smile; but one well
pleased and deeply gratified.
JANE EYRE 357
And when will you commence the e? & ercise of your
function ? "
" I will go to my house to-morrow; and open the school^
if you like, Dext week. "
'* Very well; so be it, "
He rose and walked through the room. Standing stillj he
again looked at me. He shook his head,
k*'What do you disapprove of^ Mr. Rivers? " I asked,
'* You will not stay at Morton long: nOj no I''
*'Why ! What is your reason for saying so ? "
'* I read it in your eye; it is not of that description which
t^romises the maintenance of an even tenor in life. "
** I am not ambitious, "
He started at the word *'ambitious. " He repeated, ** No.
What made you think of ambition ? Who is ambitious ? I
know I am : but how did you find it out ? "
'* I was speaking of myself. "
''Welij if you are not ambitious^ you are " He
paused,
" What? "
** I was going to say, impassioned : but perhaps you would
have misunderstood the word, and been displeased, I mean
that human affections and sympathies have a most powerful
hold on you* I am sure you cannot long be content to pass
your leisure in solitude^ and to devote your working hours
to a monotonous labour wholly void of stimulus; any more
than I can be content/* he added, with emphasisj *^ to live
here buried in morass , pent in with mountain — ^my nature,
that God gave me, contravened; my faculties^ heaven-
bestowed, paralysed — ^made useless. You hear now how I
contradict myself. I^ who preached contentment with a
humble lot, and justified the vocation even of hewers of
wood^ and drawers of water =» in God's service — Ij his ordained
minis ter^ almost rave in my restlessness. Well, propensities
and princip!es must be reoondled by some means. "
He left the room. In this brief hour I had learnt more of
him than in the whole previous month : yet still he puzzled me,
Diana and Mary Rivers became more sad and silent as the
day approached for leavmg their brother , and their home.
They both tried to appear as usual ; but the sorrow they had
to struggle against was one that could not be entirely con*
qiiered or concealed, Diana intimated that this would be a
different parting from any they had ever yet known. It
358 JANE EYRE
would probably^ as fkr as St^ John was ooncemed; be a part-
ing for years : it might be a parting for life.
*'He will sacrifi^ all to his long^ramed resolves/'she
said: *'natural affection and feelings more potent stiU. St
John looks quiet^ Jane; but he hides a lever in bis vitab.
You would iiank him gentle, yet in some thii^ he is in-
exorable as death; and the worst of it is, my conscience will
hardly permit me to dissuadklnm from his severe dedsicm:
certainly, I cannot for a > inomeiit blame him; for it. It is
right, noble, Guistian: yet it bi«ai£S my heart. " And the
tears gushed, to her fine eyes. Mary bent her head low over
her work.
" We are now without father: we shall soon be without
hom« and brother, " she murmuredl
At that moment a Htde axccnlent supervened, whidi
seemed decreed by ^e, purposely tO'prove the truthf of the
adage, that " misfortunes never comie i^inglyr^ and to add
to: their distcessei the vexiog one of the ^p between the cup
and the lip. St. John passed the window reading a letted
He entered.
^'Our uiHde John: is dead, " saddihe.
Both the sisters seemed struck: not shocked of i^palled;
the tidings appeared in their eyes rather momentous than
afflicting.
" Dead? " repeated Dianaw
" Yes. "
She riveted a searching gaze om her bzotber's face. " And
what then ? " s & e demand^, in a low voio^
'* What then,. Die? " be replied, mahitaining a marble
Immobility of feature. " \WMUt th^? Wiy — nothing.
Read. "
He threw the letter into her lkp < She glanced over it^ and
handed it to Mary. Mary perused it in silence, and returned
it to her brother. All 1du«e lookedtat eaoh^other, and all three
smiled — a dreary^ pensive smile enoughs
" Amen I We cam yet live, " said Ukim, at last.
" At any mte, it makes^ us no wosse c^ iban we were
before, " remarked Mary;.
'* Only it forces radier strongly^on themind liie picture of
what tnigki have been^'said Mr. Rivers; " and contrasts it
somewhsub too vividly with what is "
He folded the ktter, and locked it in his desi^ and again
'\tOUti^
jan:e: eyre
559
For some minutes no one spoke. Diana then turned to me.
" Janc^ you will wonder at us and our mjsterieSj " she
said; " and think us hard-hearted heings not to be mofe
moved at the death of so near a relation as an uncle; but we
have never seen him or known him. He was my mother*s
brother. My father and he quarrelled long ago. It was by
his advice that my father risked most of \Ss property in the
speculation that ruined him. Mutual recriminatiou pa^ed
between them : they parted in anger, and were never recon«
ciled. My uncle engaged afterwards in more prosperous
imdertakings : it appears he realised a fortune of twenty
thousand pounds. He was never marriedj and had no oear
kindred but ourselves^ and one other person^ not more dosely
related than we. My father always cherished the idea that
he would atone for his error, by leaving his possessions to
us; that letter informs us that he has bequeathed every
penny to the other relation; with the exception of thirty
guineasj to be divided between St. John, Diana, and Mary
Rivers, for the purchase of three mourning rings. He had a
right, of course, to do as he pleased; and yet a momentary
damp is cast on the spirits by the receipt of such news. Mary
and I would have esteemed ourselves rieh with a thousand
pounds each; and to St. John such a sum would have been
valuable, for the good it would have enabled him to do. "
This explanation given, the subject was dropped, and no
further reference made to it, by either Mr. Rivers or his
sisters* The next day, I left Marsh End for Morton. The day
after, Diana and Mary quitted it for distant B . In a week,
Mr. Rivers and Hannah repaired to the parsonage: and so
the old grange was abandoned.
CHAPTER XXXI
My home, then,— when I at last find a home, — is a cottage:
a little room with white-washed walls, and a sanded floor;
containing four painted chairs and a table, a clock, a cup-
board, with two or three plates and dishes, and a set of tea-
things in delf. Above, a chamber of the same dimensions as
the kitchen, with a deal bedstead, and chest of drawers^
small, yet too large to be filled with my scanty waidrob

36o
JANE EYRE
though the kindness of my gentle and generous friends has
incre-ased that, by a modest stock of such things as are
necessary.
It is evening. I have dismissed^ with the fee of an orangCi
the little orphan who serves me as a handmaid. I ara sitting
abne on the hearth* This morning, the village school opened*
I had twenty scholars* But three of the number can read:
none write or cypher. Several knit, and a few sew a little.
They speak with the broadest accent of the district- At
present^ they and I have a difficulty in understanding ^ch
other's language. Some of them are unmanneredj rough, in-
tractable, as well as ignorant; but others are docile, have a
wish to learn, and evince a disposition that pleases me. I
must not foiTget that these ooaxsely-clad little peasants are
of flesh and blood as good as the scions of gentlest genealogy;
and that the germs of native excellence^ refinementj intelli-
genccj kind feeling, are as likely to exist in their hearts as in
those of the best-bom. My duty will be to develop these
germs: surely I shall find some happiness in discharging
that office. Much enjoyment I do not expect in the life ojaea*
ing before me: yet it wilj, doubtless, if I regulate my mind^
and exert my powers as I ought, yield me enough to live coi
from day to day.
Was I very gleeful, settled, content, during the hoiin I
passed in yonder bare^ humble school-room this morning
and afternoon ? Not to deceive myself, I roust reply — No: I
felt desolate to a degree. I felt — yes^ idiot that I am — I felt
degraded. I doubted I had taken a step which sank instead
of raising me in the scale of social existence. I was weakly
dismayed at the ignorance, the poverty, the coarseness of aU
I heard and saw round me. But let me not hate and despise
myself too much for these feelings: I know them to be
wrong — that is a great step gained ; I shall strive to over-
come them. To-morrow^ I trust, I shall get the better of
them partially; and in a few weeks^ perhaps, they will be
quite subdued. In a few months, it is possible, the happiness
of seeing progress, and a change for the better in my scholars,
may substitute gratification for disgust.
Meantime, let me ask m3^elf one question— Wliicb is
better? — To have surrendered to temptation; listened to
passion; made no painful effort— no struggle; — but to have
sunk down in the silken snare; fallen asleep on the flowers
^wr^ring it; wakened in a southern clime, amongst the
JANE EYRE
36i
luxuries of a pleasure villa: to have been now living in
France, Mr. Rochester's mistress; delirious with his love
half my time — for he would— oh, yes, he would have loved
me weU for a while. He did love me— no one will ever love
rne so again, I shall never more knew the sweet homage
given to beauty, youth, and grace — for never to any one
else shall I seem to possess these channs. He was fond and
proud of me — it is what no man besides will ever be, — But
where am I wandering, and what am I sayingj and, above
aU, feeling? Whether is it better^ I ask, to be a slave in a
fool's paradise at Marseilles— fevered with delusive bliss one
hour — suffocating with the bitterest tears of remorse and
shame the next^r to be a village-schoolmistress, free and
honest, in a breezy mountain nook in the healthy heart of
England ?
Yes ; I feel now that I was right when I adhered to prin-
ciple and law, and scorned and crushed the insane promptings
of a frenzied moment. God directed me to a correct choice:
I thank His providence for the guidance!
Having brought my eventide musings to this point, I rose,
went to my door, and looked at the sunset of the harvest-
day, and at the quiet fields before my cottage j which, with
the school j was distant half a mile from the village. The
birds were singing their last strains —
" Tbe air was tniid; ^e dew was balm. "
While I looked, I thought myself happy, and was surprised
to find myself ere long weeping — and why? For the doom
which had reft me from adhesion to my master: for him I
was no more to see; for the desperate grief and fatal fury —
consequences of my departure— which might now, perhaps,
be dragging him from the path of right, too far to leave hope
of ultimate restoration thither. At this thought, I turned
my face aside from the lovely sky of eve and lonely vale of
Morton — I say lonely j for m that bend of it visible to me^
there was no building apparent save the church and the
parsonage, half -hid in treCsS; and, quite at the extremity,
the roof of Vale Hall, where the rich Mr, Oliver and his
daughter lived, I hid my eyes, and leant my head against
the stone frame of my door; but soon a shght noise near the
wicket which shut in my tiny garden from the meadow
beyond it, made me look up, A dog — old Carlo, Mr. Rivers*
pointer, as I saw in a moment — was pushing the gate vtith
k
a6a JANE EYRI
his nose^ and St Jolm himself leant upoii it with fdded
anns; his brow kiHt,,his gaze^ gistve almost to displeasiue,
fixed on me. laskedihim.tooomein.
'* No^ I cannot stay; I have, onlyi brought yoa a little
parcel my sisters left for ymi4 I think it contains a colour-
box, pencils, and. paper. "
I approached to take itr a. welcome gift it was < . He
examined my foce^ I thought^ with austjerity, as I came
nean the tracesr of tears were doubtless very visible upon it
'* Have yoa found yom- first day's work, harder th^ you
es^ected ? " he asked*.
''Oh, nol On the contrary,.! think in, time I shall get on
with my scholars veiy welL "
''But perhaps your acoommodations^—your cottage—
your furniture — ^have disappointed your expectatiiHis?
They are, in tnith, scanty- enough; but " I interrupted:
''My cottage is deaa and weat^her^roof;, my fimiituie
sufficient and commodioua. AH I see has made me thmikfiiy
not despondent. I am not absolutely sudt a^ lool and sen*
sualist as to r^et the abseaoce of a caif > et, a sola^ smd silver
pkite: besides, five weeks agp I had nothing — ^I was an outp
cast, a beggar, a vagrant; now I have'aoqufantuice,,a home,
a business. I wondm; at tbe. goodness of G^; the ^^larosity
of my friends; theboimt^.of mylot. I do not )Eq)me.''
" But you feel solitude an oppression? The little house
there behind you is dark and empty. "
" I have hardly had time yet to ^njoy a sense of tran-
quillity, much less to grow impatient under one of londineas. "
" Very wdl; I hope you feel the content you express: at
any rate, your good sense will tell you that it is too soon yet
to yidd to the vacillating fears of Lot's wife. What you had
left before I saw yoo, of course I do not know; butlcounsd'
you ta resist, firmly, every temptation which woidd indine
you to look back:, pursue yowc present career steadily, for
some months at least. "
" It is ^\duit I mean to do, " I answered* St. Jd^
continued: —
" It is hand work to control tiie* workings of inclination,
and turn the bent of nature: but that it may be done, I know
from experience. God has given u^ in a measure, the power
to make our own^ fete; andi when our energies seem tO'
demand a sustenance they cannot get — ^^i^ien our wiU strains
after a. path we may^ not follow — ^we need'neither starve
JANE EYRE
363
from inanition, nor stand still in despair: we have but to
seek anothCT nourishment lor the mind, as strong as the for-,
bidden food it longed to taste — and perhaps purer; and to
hew out for the adventurous foot a road as direct and broad
as the one Fortune has blocked up against usj if rougher
than it.
*'A year ago, I was myself intensely nuserable, because I
thought I had made a mistake in entering the ministry: its
aniform duties wearied me to death. I burnt for the more
active Ufe of the world— for the more exciting toils of a
literary career — for the destiny of an artist, author, orator;
anythmg rather than that of a priest: yes, the heart of a
politician, of a soldier^ of a votary of glory^ a lover of re-
nowiij a luster after power, beat under my cumte's surplice.
I considered 5 jny life was so wretched, it iDUst be changed,
or I must die. After a season of darkness and struggUng,
light broke and rehef fell: my cramped existence all at once
spread out to a plain without bounds — my powers heard a
call from heaven to rise, gather their full strength, spread
their wings, and mount beyond ken. God had an errand for
me; to bear which afar, to deliver it well, skill and strength,
courage and eloquence, the best qualifications of soldier,
statesman, and orator^ were all needed : for these all centre
in the good missionary.
" A missionary I resolved to be. From that moment my
state of miod changed j the fetters dissolved and dropped
from every faculty, leaving nothing of bondage bat its
galling soreness — which time only can heal. My father,
indeed, opposed the determination, but since his death, I
have not a legitimate obstacle to contend with; some affairs
settled, a successor for Morton provided, an entanglement
or two of the feelings broken through or cut asunder — a last
conflict with human weakness, in which I know I shall
overcome, because I have vowed that I will overcome —
and I leave Europe for the East. "
He said this, in his peculiar, subdued, yet emphatic
voice; looking, when he had ceased spealong, not at me,
but at the setting sun, at which I looked too. Both he and
I had our backs towards the path leading up the field to
the wicket. We had heard no step on that grass -grown
track; the water running in the vale was the one lulling
sound of the hour and scene; we might well then start, when
a gay voice, sweet as a silver bell, exclaimed; —
364 JANE EYRE
" Good evenmg, Mr. Rivers. And good evening, old
Carlo. Your dog is quicker to recognise hSs friends thwi you
are, sir; he pridced his ears and wagged his tail when I was
^t the bottom of the field, and you have your back towards
me now. "
It was true. Though Mr. Rivers had started at the first
of those musical accents, as if a thunderbolt had split a
cloud over his head, he stood yet, at the dose of the sentence,
in the same attitude in which the speaker had surprised him
— ^his arm resting on the gate, his face directed towards the
west. He turned at last, with measured deliberation. A
vision, as it seemed to me, had risen at his side. There
appeared, within three feet of him, a form clad in pure
white — a youthful, graceful form: full, yet fine in contour;
and when, after bending to caress Carlo, it lifted up its head,
and threw back a long veil, there bloomed under his glance
a face of perfect beauty. Perfect beauty is a strong expres-
sion; but I do not retrace or qualify it: as sweet features
as ever the t«nperate clime of Albion moulded; as pure
hues of rose and lily as ever her humid gales and vapoury
skies generated and screened, justified, in this instance, the
term. No charm was wanting, no defect was perceptible;
the young girl had regular and delicate lineaments; eyes
shaped and coloured as we see them in lovely pictures,
large, and dark, and full; the long and shadowy eyelash
which encirdes a fine eye with so soft a fascination; the
pencilled brow which gives such clearness; the white,
smooth forehead, which adds such repose to the livelier
beauties of tint and ray; the cheek, oval, fresh and smooth;
the lips, fresh too, ruddy, healthy, sweetly formed; the
even and gleaming teeth without flaw; the small dimpled
chin; the ornament of rich, plenteous tresses — ^all advan-
tages, in short, which, combined, realise the ideal of beauty,
were fully hers. I wondered, as I looked at this fair creature:
I admired her with my whole heart. Nature had surely
formed her in a partial mood; and, forgetting her usual
stinted step-mother dole of gifts, had endowed this, her
darling, with a granddame's bounty.
What did St. John Rivers think of this earthly angel?
I naturally asked myself that question as I saw him turn
to her and look at her; and, as naturally, I sought
the answer to the inquiry in his countenance. He had
*^lready withdrawn his eye from the Peri, and was
JANE EYRE 365
looking at a bumble tuft of daisies which grew by the
wkket.
" A lovely eveningj but late for you to be out alone/^ he
said J as he crushed the snowy heads of the closed flowers
with his foot.
''Oh, I only came home from S " (she mentioned
the name of a large town some twenty miles distant) " this
afternoon* Papa told me you had opened your school^ and
that the new mistress was come; and so I put on my bonnet
after tea, and ran up the valley to see her: this is she? "
pointing to me.
** It is/'said St, John.
'* Bo you think you shall like Morton ? " she asked of
me, with a direct and naive simplicity of tone and manner,
pleasing J if child -like,
^ " I hope I shalL I have many inducements to do so.''
H» " Did you find your scholars as attentive as you expected ? "
^ " Quite. "
" Bo you like your house ? "
" Very much/'
" Have I furnished it nicely? "
*'Very nicely , indeed.'^
*'And made a good choice of an attendant for you in
.\HceWood? "
" You have, indeed. She is teachable and handy,'* (ThiSj
then, I thoughtj is Miss Oliver, the heiress; favoured, it
seems, in the gifts of fortune, as well as in those of nature !
Wfiat happy combination of the planets presided over her
birth, I wonder?)
*'I shall come up and help you to teach sometimes, " she
added.'" It will be a change for me to visit you now and
then ; and I like a change, Mr, Rivers, I have been so gay
during my stay at S , Last night, or rather this morning,
I was dancing tiU two o*clock. The th regiment are
stationed there since the riots ; and the officers are the most
agreeable men in the world: they put all our young knife-
grinders and scissor merchants to shame. "
It seemed to me that Mr. St. John's under lip protruded,
and his upper hp curled a moment. His mouth certainly
looked a good deal compressed, and the lower part of his
face unusually stem and square, as the laughing girl gave
hun this information. He lifted his ga^e, too, from the
daisies, and turned it on her. An unsmiling, a searching
887
JANE EYRE
a meaning gaze it was. She answered it with a second laugh,
and laughter well became her youth, her roses, her dimples,
her bright eyes*
As he stoodj mute and grave, she again fell to caressinf
Carlo, " Poor Carlo loves me/* said she. " He is not stem
and distant to his friends ; and if he could speak^ he would
not be silent**'
As she patted the dog's head, bending with native grace
before his young and austere master, I saw a glow rise to
that master's face. I saw his soJemn eye melt with sudden
fire, and flicker with resistless emotion. Flushed and kindled
thus, he looked nearly as beautiful for a man as she for a
woman. Hb chest heaved once, as if his large heart, weary
of despotic constriction, had expanded, despite the will,
and made a vigorous bound lor the attainment of liberty*
Bat he curbed it, I think^ as a resolute rider would curb a
rearing steed. He responded neither by word nor movement
to the gentle advances made him.
" Papa says you never come to see us now, " continued
Miss Oliver, looking up, ** You are quite a stranger at Vale
Hall. He is alone this evening, and not very well: wiH yon
return wi£h me and visit him? "
*^ It is not a seasonable hour to intrude on Mr. Oliver, "
answered St* John.
" Not a seasonable hour 1 But, I declare, it is. It is just
the hour when papa most wants company: when the woib
are closed, and he has no business to occupy Mm. Now,
Mr. Rivers, do come. Why are you so very shy, and so veiy
sombre ? " She filled up the hiatus his silence left by a reply
of her own,
" I forgot ! " she exclaimed, shaking her beautiful curled
head, as if shocked at herself. *'I am so giddy and thought-
less t Do excuse me. It had slipped my memory that jm
have good reasons to be indisposed for joining in my chatter*
Diana and Mary have left youj and Moor House is shut up,
and you are so lonely. I am sure I pity you. Do come
see papa.* " ^
** Not to-night, Miss Rosamond, not to -night J*
Mr. St, John spoke almost like an automaton: hims^
only knew the effort it cost him thus to refuse*
** Well, if you are so obstinate, I will leave yoni for I
dare not stay any longer: the dew begins to fall* Good
evttung I "
up,
1
JANE EYRE
367

She held out her hand. He just touched it, " Good even-
ing!*'he repeated, in a voice low and hollow as an echo*
She turned; but in a moment returned,
" Are you welJ? " she asked. Well might she put the
question: his face was blanched as her gown.
''Quite well/'he enunciated; and^ with a bow, he leit
the gate. She went one way; he another. She turned twice
to gaze after him, as she tripped fairy-like down the field;
he, as he strode firmly across, never turned at all.
This spectacle of another's suffering and sacrifice^ rapt
my thoughts from exclusive meditation on my own. Diana
Rivers had designated her brother'* inexorable as death. "
She had not exaggerated.
CHAPTER XXXir
cownf^TED the labours of the village-school as actively
and faithfully as I could. It was truly hard work at first.
Some time elapsed before, with all my efforts, I could com-
prehend my scholars and their nature. Wholly untaught,
with faculties quite torpid, they seemed to me hopelessly
dull; and, at first sight, all dull alike: but I soon found
I was mistaken. There was a difference amongst them as
amongst the educated ; and when I got to know them, and
they me, this difference rapidly developed itself. Their
amazement at me, my language, my rules, and waj-s, once
subsided, I found some of these heavy-looking, gaping
rustics wake up into sharp-witted girls enough. Many
showed themselves obliging, and amiable too; and I dis-
covered amongst them not a few examples of natural polite-
ness, and innate self-respect, as well as of excellent capacity,
that won my good- will and my admiration. These soon
took a pleasure in doing their work well; in keeping their
persons neat; in learning their tasks regularly; in acquiring
quiet and orderly manners. The rapidity of their progress,
in some instances, was even surprising; and an honest and
happy pride T took in it: besides, I b%an personally to like
some of the best girls; and they liked me, I had amongst
my scholars several farmers'daughters: young women
grown J ahnost. These could already read, write, and sew
t
JANE EYRE
and to them I taught the elements of grammar, geography,
history, and the finer kinds of needlework. I found ^timable
characters amongst them — characters desirons of infonn-
ation^ and disposed for improvement—with whom I passed
many a pleasant evening hour in thetr own homes* Their
parents then (the farmer and his wife) loaded mt m^
attentions- There was an enjoyment in accepting their
simple kindness J and in repaying it by a consideratioa— a
scrupulous regard to their feelings—to which they were
notj perhaps, at all times accustomed^ and which both
charmed and benefited them; because j while it elevated
them in their own eyes^ it made them emulous to merit the
deferential treatment they received,
I felt I became a favourite in the neighbourhood. When-
ever I went out J I heard on all sides cordial salutations,
and was welcomed with friendly smiles. To live amidst
general regard^ though it be but the regard of working-
peoplej is like " i^itting in sunshinej calm and sweet: "
serene inward feelings bud and bloom under the ray. At
this period of my life, my heart far oftener swelled with
thankfulness than sank with dejection: and yet, reader^
to tell you all, in the raidst of this cska, this useful exist^ice
^fter a day passed in honourable exertion amongst my
scholars, an evening sph^t in drawing or reading contentedly
alone — I used to rush into strange dreams at night: dreams
many-coloured, agitated, full of the idea!, the stirring, the
stormy^ — dreams where, amidst unusual scenes, charged
with adventure, with agitating risk and romantic chance,
I still again and again met Mr. Rochester, always at some
excitii^g crisis; and then the sense of being in his aims,
hearing his voice, meeting his eye, touchmg his hand and
cheek, loving him, being loved by him — the hope of passiiig
a lifetime at his side, would be renewed, with all its fiist
force and fire. Then I awoke. Then I recalled where I waSp
and how situated. Then I rose up on my curtainless bed,
trembling and quivering; and then the still, dark night
witnessed the convulsion of despair, and heaid the burst
of passion. By nine o^clock the next morning I was punctually
opening the school; tranquil, settled, pr^ared for the steady
duties of the day.
Rosamond Oliver kept her word in coming to visit mi.
Her call at the school was generally made in the course of
her morning ride. She would canter up to tJie door on her
^01
JANE ETfUE 369
ny, followed by a mounted livery servant. Anything
more exquisite than her appearance^ in her purple habit ^
with her Amazon^s cap of black velvet placed gracefully
above the bng curls that kissed her cheek and floated to
her shoulders, can scarcely be imagined: and it was thus
she would enter the rustic build ing, and glide through the
dazzled ranks of the village children. She generally came at
the hour when Mr, Rivers was engaged in giving his daily
catechising lesson. Keenly^ I fear, did the eye of the visi tress
pierce the young pastor's heart. A sort of iastinct seemed to
warn him of her entrance, even when he did not see it; and
when he was looking quite away from the door, if she appeared
at it, his cheek would glow, and his marble-seeming features,
though they refused to relax, changed indescribably; and
in their very quiescence became expressive of a repressed
fervour, stronger than working muscle or darting glance
could indicate.
Of course, she knew her power- indeed, he did not^ because
he could not, conceal if from her. In spite of his Christian
stoicism, when she went up and addressed him^ and smiled
gaily, encouragingly^ even fondly in his face, his hand
would tremble, and his eye bum. He s^med to say, with
his sad and resolute look, if he did not say it with his lips,
" I love you, and I know you prefer me. It is not despair
of success that keeps me dumb > If I offered my heart, I
believe you would accept it. But that heart is already kid
f^n a sacred altar: the fire is arranged round it. It will soon
be no more than a sacrifice consumed/*
And then she would pout like a disappointed child; a
pensive cloud would soften her radiant vivacity; she would
withdraw her hand hastily from hiSj and turn in transient
petulance from his aspect as once so heroic and so martyr-
Kke. St* John, no doubtj would have give:i the world to
follow, recallj retain her, when she thus left him; but he
would not give one chance of Heaven; nor relinquishj for
the el >'sium of her love, one hope of the true, eternal Paradise,
BesideSj he could not bound all that he had in his nature —
the rover, the aspirant^ the poet, the priest — in the limits
of a single passion. He could not— he would not — renounce
his wild field of mission warfare for the parlours and the
peace of Vale HalL I learnt so much from himself, in an
inroad I once, despite his reserve, had the daring to make
on his confidence.
|y
JANE EYRE
& Iiss Oliver already honoured me with frequent visits to
my cottage, I had leamt her whole character; which was
without mystery or disguise: she was coquettish, but not
heartless; exacting^ but not worthlessly selfish* She had
been indulged from her birth, but was not absolutely spoilt.
She was hasty, but good-humoured ; vain (she could not
help it^ when every glance in the glass showed her such a
flush of lovehness), but not affected; liberal-handed; inno-
cent of the pride of wealth; ingenuous; sufficiently intelli-
gent; gay, Hvely, and unthinking; she was very charming^
in short, even to a cool observer of her own sex like me;
but she was not profoundly interesting or thoroughly im-
pressive. A very different sort of mind was hers from thatj
for instance, of the sisters of St* John, Sril!, I liked her
almost as I liked my pupil Ad Me; except that, for a child
whom we have watched over and taught^ a closer affectipfl
k engendered than we can give an equally attractive adult
acquaintance.
She had taken an amiable caprice to me. She said I was
like Mr* Rivers (only, certainly, she allowed,'* not one-tenth
so handsome, though I was a nice neat little soul enough,
but he was an angel''), I was, however, good, clever, com-
posed, and firm, like him. I was a lusus natuTm, she afl & rmedj
as a village schoolmistress: she was sure my previous
history, if known, would make a delightful romance.
One evening, while, with her usual child-like activity, and
thoughtless yet not offensive inquisitivenesSj she was rum-
maging the cupboard and the table-drawer of my little
kitchen, she discovered first two French books, a volume
of Schiller, a German grammar and dictionary; and then
my drawing-matenals and some sketches, including a
pencil-head of a pretty, little cherub-like girl, one of my
scholars, and sundry views from nature, taken in the Vale
of Morton and on the surrounding moors. She was first
transfixed with surprise, and then electrified with delight,
'^ Had I done these pictures ? Did I know French and
German? What a love — what a miracle I was! I drew
better than her master in the first school in S • Would
I sketch a portrait of her, to show to papa? "
*'With pleasure/'I replied; and I felt a thrill of artist-
delight at the idea of copying from so perfect and radiant
a mod eh She had then on a dark*blue silk dress; her amis
and her neck were bare; her only ornament was her chestnut
n
JANE EYRE
es, which waved over her shoulders with all the wild
grace of natural curls. I took a sheet of fine card-board,
and drew a careful outline, I promised myself the pleasure
of colouring it; and, as it was getting late then^ I told her
she must come and sit another day.
She made such a report of me to her father , that Mr. OHver
himself accompanied her next evening — a tall, massive-
featured ^ middle-aged, and grey-headed man, at whose side
his lovely daughter looked like a bright flower near a hoary
turret. He appeared a taciturn, and perhaps a proud per-
sonage; but he was very kind to me. The sketch of Rosa-
mond's portrait pleased him highly; he said I must make a
finished picture of it. He insisted, too, on my coming the
next day to spend the evening at Vale HalL
I went. I found it a large, handsome residence, showing
abundant evidences of wealth in the proprietor, Rosamond
was full of glee and pleasure all the time I stayed. Her
father was affable; and when he entered into conversation
with me after tea, he expressed in strong terms his appro-
bation of what I had done in Morton school; and said he
only feared, from what he saw and heard, I was too good
for the place, and would soon quit it for one more suitable.
" Indeed ! " cried Rosamond^ " she is clever enough to be
a govemess in a high family, papa. "
I thought — I would far rather be where I am than in any
high family in the land. Mr, Ohver spoke of Mr* Rivers — of
the Rivers family— with great respect. He said it was a
very old name in that neighbourhood; that the ancestors
of the house were wealthy; that all Morton had once be-
longed to them; that even now he considered the represen-
tative of that house might, if he liked, make an alliance with
the best. He accounted it a pity that so tine and talented a
young man should have formed the design of going out as a
missionary; it was quite throwing a valuable life away. It
appeared, then, that her father would throw no obstacle in
the way of Rosamond's union with St. John, Mr, Oliver
evidently regarded the young clergyman's good birth^ old
name, and sacred profusion, as sufficient compensation for
the want of fortune.
It was the 5th of Novemberj and a holiday. My little
servant, after helping me to clean my house, was gone, well
satisfied with the fee of a penny for her aid. All about me was
spotless and bright— scoured floor, polished grate^ and we'^
b
372
JANE EYRE
rubbed chairs. I bad also made myself neat, and had now tke
afternoon before me to spend as I would*
The trans ta tic n of a few pages of Gennan occupied an
hour; then I got my palette and pencils, and fell to tbft
more soothing » because easier occupation^ of completmg
Rosamond Oliver's miniature. The head was finished
abeady; there was but the background to tintj and the
draper)''to shade off; a touch of carmine, toOj to add to the
ripe lips-— ^ soft curl here and there to the tresses — a deeper
tinge to the shadow of the lash under the azure eyelid. I
was absorbed in the execution of these nice details, whe & j
after one rapid tap, my door unclosed, admitting St. John
Rivers*
" I am come to see how you are spending ynur holiday,'*
he said, *'Not, I hope, in thought i* NOj that is well: while
you draw you will not feel lonely. You see, I mistrust you
still: though you have borne up wonderfully so far. I bav*
brought you a book for evening solace, " and he laid on the
table a new publication — a poem: one of those genuine
productions so often vouchsafed to the fortunate public of
those days — the golden age of modem literature. Alas ! the
readers of our era are less favoured. But, courage I I will
not pause either to accuse or repine, I know poetry is not
dead, nor genius lost; nor has Mammon gained power ovei
either, to bind or slay: they will both assert their existence,
thetr presence, their liberty and strength again one day*
Powerful angels, safe in heaven I they smile when sordid
souls triumph, and feeble ones weep over their destruction*
Poetry destroyed? Genius banished? Nol Mediocrity, no:
do not let envy prompt you to the thought. No ; they not
only live, but reign, and redeem: and without their divin«
influence spread everywhere, you would be in heU — the hdl
of your own meanness.
While I was eagerly glancing at the bright pages of Mar-
mion (for Marmion it was), St, John stooped to examine my
drawing. His tall figure sprang erect again with a start: he
said nothing, I looked up at him: be shunned my eye, I
knew his thoughts weU, and could read his heart plainly; at
the moment I felt calmer and cooler than he; I had then
temporarily the advantage of him; and I conceived ui
inclination to do him some good, if I could.
" With at! his firmness and self-control, " thought I, " be
tasks himself too far: locks every feeling and pang within—
h,
JANE EYRE 373
Expresses J confess eSj imparts nothing. I am sure it would
benefit him to talk a little about this sweet Rosamond,
whom he thinks he ought not to marry: I will make him
talk, " ^
I said fijst:''Take a chairj Mr. Rivers, " But he answered,
as he always did, that he could not stay. " Very well/* I
responded mentally^ " stand U you like; but you shaU not
go just yet, I am determmed ; solitude is at least as bad for
you as it is for me. I'll try if I cannot discover the secret
spring of your confidence, and find an aperture in that
marble breast through which 1 can shed one drop of the
balm of sympathy, "
" Is this portrait like? " I asked bluntly.
''Like! like whom I I did not observe it dosely, "
*'You did, Mr, Rivers. "
He almost started at my sudden and strange abruptness :
he looked at me astonished, " Ohj that is nothing yet/'I
muttered within, ** I don't m^n to be bafiied by a Httie
stiffness on your part; I'm prepared to go to considerable
lengths/* I continuedj " You observed it closely and dis-
tinctly: but I have no objection to your looking at it again^ "
and I rose and placed it in his hand,
" A well-executed picture/'he said; " very^ soft, clear
(flouring; very graceful and correct drawing. "
" Yes^yes; I know aU that. But what of the resemblance?
Who is it like? "
Mastering some hesitation^ he answered, " Miss Oliver, I
presume. "
" Of course. And now, sir, to reward you for the accurate
guess, I will promise to paint you a careful and faithful
duplicate of this very picture, provided you admit that the
gift would be acceptable to you. I don*t wish to throw
away my time and trouble on aa offering you would deem
worthless. "
He continued to gaze at the picture; the longer he looked,
the iirmer he held it, the more he seemed to covet it, " It is
like ! " he murmured ; " the eye is well managed : the colour,
lightj espression^ are perfect. It smiles t "
" Would it comfort, or would it wound you to have a similar
painting? Tell me that. When you are at Madagascar, or at
the Cape, or in India, would it be a consolation to have that
memento in your possession? or would the sight of it bring
recollections calculated to enervate and distress? "
'jane ey
He now furtively raised his eyes: he glanced at me^
irresolute J disturbed : he again surveyed the picture*
* " That I should like to have it, is certain: whether it
would be judicious or wise is another question/*
Since I had ascertained tlmt Rosamond really preferred
hinij and that her father was not likely to oppose the match,
I — less exalted in my views than St. John — had been
strongly disposed in my own heart to advocate their union.
It seemed to me that^ should he become the possessor of Mr.
Oliver's large fortune^ he might do as much good with it as
ii he went and laid his genius out to wither^ and his strength
to wastej under a tropical sun. With this persuasion I now
answered : —
*^ As far as I can see, it would be wiser and more judicious
if you were to take to yourself the original at once/'
By this time he had sat down: he had laid the picture on
the tabic before him, and with his brow supported on botb
hands, hung fondly over it. I discerned he was now neither
angry nor shocked at my audacity, I saw even that to be
thus frankly addressed on a subject he had deemed un-
approachable — to hear it thus freely handled — was beginnin|
to be felt by him as a new pleasure — an unhoped-for relief-
Reserved people often really need the frank discussion of
their sentiments and griefs more than the expansive. The
sternest-seeming stoic is human after all; and to ** burst*'
with boldness and good will into'* the silent sea " of their
souls, is often to confer on them the first of obligations.
" She Hkes you, I am sure, " said I, as I stood behind his
chair,''and her father respects you. Moreover, she is a sweet
girl — rather thoughtless; fyit you would have sufficient
thought for both yourself and her. You ought to mzny
her/'
*'Does she like me?'* he asked,
''Certainly; better than she likes any one else. She talh
of you continually: there is no subject she enjoys so mucfa^
or touches upon so often/'
*'It is very pleasant to hear this/'be said — ** very:
go on for another quarter of an hour/* And he actually
took out his watch and laid it upon the table to measiin
the time,
" But where is the use of gomg on/'I asked, " when yott
are probably preparing some iron blow of contradiction,
forging a fresh chain to fetter your heart? "
A
i
I
JANE EYRE
375
'Don't imagine such liard things. Faricy me yielding
and melting, as I am doing: human love rising like a freshly
opened fountain in my mind and overflowing with sweet
iniandation all the field I have so carefully, and with such
labour prepared— ^o assiduously sown with the seeds of good
intentions J of self-denying plans. And now it is deluged with
& nectarous flood- — the young germs swamped — delidous
poison cankering them: now I see myself stretched on an
ottoman in the drawing-room at Vale Hall^ at my bride
Rosamond OUver's feet : she is talking to me with her sweet
\^ice — gazing down on me with those eyes your skilful
hand has copied so well — smihng at me with these coral
lips. She is mine — I am hers— this present life and passing
Tfforid suffice to me. Hush! say nothing— my heart is full
of delight^my senses are entranced — let the time I marked
pass in peace/'
I humoured him: the watch ticked on: he breathed fast
and low : I stood silent. Amidst this hush the quarter sped ;
he replaced the watchj laid the picture down, rose^ and stood
on the hearth.
*^ Now/^ said he, " that httle space was given to delirium
and delusion. I rested my temples on the breast of temp-
tation, and put my neck voluntarily under her yoke of
ioweis; I tasted her cup. The pillow was burning: there
is an asp m the garland: the wine has a bitter taste: her
pronuses are hollow — her offers false : I see and know all this. "
I gazed at him in wonder.
''It is strange/* pursued he, " that while I love Rosamond
Oliver so wildly— with all the intensity, indeed, of a first
passion, the object of which is exquisitely beautiful^ grace-
ful, and fascinating — I experience at the same time a cahn,
imwarped consciousness, that she would not make me a
good wife; that she is not the partner suited to me; that I
should discover this within a year after marriage; and that
to twelve months'rapture would succeed a hfetime of regret.
This 1 know. "
'* Strange, indeed 1 " I could not help ejaculating.
*'While something in me/* he went on, *'is acutely
sensible to her charms, something ebe is as deeply impressed
with her defects: they are such that she could sympathise
in nothing 1 aspired to — co-operate in nothing I undertook.
£l?™^amond a sufferer, a labourer, a female apostle? Rosa-
id a missionary's wife? Nol "
JANE EYRE
'* Bat you need not be a missionajry. Yoa might relin-
quish that scheme/'
" Relinquish! What! my vocation? My great wotk?
My foundation laid on earth for a mansion in heaven?
My hopes of being numbered in the band who have merged
ail ambitions in the glorious one of bettering their race^
of carrying knowledge into the realms of ignorance— of
substituting peace for war— freedom for bondage — religion
for superstition— the hope of beaven for the fear of hell?
Must I relinquish that ? It is dearer than the blood in my
veins. It is what I have to look forward to, and to hve for/*
After a considerable pause, I said, — *'And Miss Oliver?
Are her disappointment and sorrow of no interest to you? "
*'Miss Oliver is ever surrounded by suitors and flatterera:
in l^s than a month, my image will be efiaced from her
heart. She will forget me ; and will marry j probably, some
one who will make her far happier than I should do,**
** You speak coolly enough; but you sufier in the conflict.
You are wasting away/'
''No. If 1 get a little thin^ it is with anxiety about my
prospects, yet unsettled — my departure, continually pro-
crastinated. Only this morning, I received intelligence that
the successor, whose arrival I have been so long expecting j
cannot be ready to replace me for three months to come yet;
and perhaps the three months may extend to six/'
" You tremble and become flushed whenever Miss OH^a
enters the school-room.*'
Again the surprised expression crossed his face. He had
not imagined that a woman would dare to speak so to a
man. For me, I felt at home in this sort of discourse, I
could never rest in communication with strongj discreet,
and refined minds, whether male or female, till I had passed
the outworks of conventional reserve^ and crossed the
threshold of confidenccj and won a place by their hint's
very hearthstone,
** You are original/* said he, " and not timid. There is
something brave in your spirit, as well as penetrating in
your eye: but allow me to assure you that you partially
misinterpret my emotions. You think them more profound
and potent than they are. You give me a larger allowance
of sympathy than I have a just claim to. When I colour^
and when I shake before Miss Oliver, I do not pity myself,
I scorn the weakne^. I know it is ignoble; a mere fever of
JANE EYRE 377
ht flesh: not, I declare^ the convulsion of the souL Thai
IS just ajs fixed as a rockj film set in the depths of a restless
sea. Know me to be what 1 am — a cold hard man, "
I smiled increduloi^sly.
*'Yon have taken my confidence by storm^ " he contiatjed;
" and now it is much at your service. I am simply, in my
original state— stripped of that blood- bleached robe with
which Christianity covers human deformity — a cold, hard^
ambitious man. Natural affection only, of all the sentiments,
has permanent power over me. Reason , and not Feeling,
IS my guide; my ambition is unlimited; my desire to rise
higher J to do more than others insatiable, I honour endur-
ance, perseverance, industry, talent; because these are the
means by which men achieve great ends, and mount to lofty,
eminence, I watch your career with interestj because I
consider you a specimen of a diligent, orderly, energetic
woman : not because I deeply compassionate what you have
gone through, or what you still suffer.^'
** You would describe yourself as a mere pagan phil-
osopher/'I said.
'* No. There is this difference between me and deistfc
philosophers: I believe; and I believe the Gospel. You
missed your epithet, I am not a pagan, but a Christian
philosopher — a follower of the sect of Jesus. As his disciple
I adopt his pure^ his merciful, his benignant doctrines*
I advocate themr I am sworn to spread them. Won in
youth to religion, she has cultivated my original quahties
thus:— From the minute gemij natural affection^ she has
developed the over-shadowing tree, philanthropy* From
the wild, stringy root of human uprightness, she has reared
a due sense of the Divine justice. Of the ambition to win
power and renown for my wretched self, she has formed the
ambition to spread my Master*s kingdom; to achieve
victories for the standard of the cross. So much has religion
done for me; turning the original materials to the best
account; pruning and training nature. But she could not
eradicate nature: nor will it be emdicated'till this mortal
shall put on immortality/ "
Having said this, he took his hat, which lay on the table
beside my palette. Once more he looked at the portrait.
** She is lovely/* he munnured. " She is well named the
Hose of the World, indeed f "
! may I not paint one like it for yon? "
37S
JANE EYRE
'* Cut bono t No. "
He drew over the picture the sheet of thin paper on which
I was accustomed to rest my hand in painting, to prevent
the card-board from being sullied. What he suddenly saw
on this blank paper, it was impossible for me to tell: but
something had caught his eye. He took it up with a snatch;
he looked at the edge ; then shot a glance at me, inexpressibly
peculiar^ and quite incomprehensible : a glance that seemed
to take and make note of every point in my shape, face,
and dress; for it traversed all, quick, keen as lightning.
His lips parted, as if to speak r but he checked the coming
sentence, whatever it was,
'* What is the matter? " I asked.
'* Nothing in the world/^ was the reply: and, replai
the paper, I saw him dexterously tear a'narrow slip from
the margin. It disappeared in bis glove; and, with one
hasty nod and ** good-aftemoon, " he vanished.
''Well ! " I exclaimed, using an expression of the district;
" that caps the globe, however! "
I, in my tum^ scrutinised the paper; but saw nothing on
it save a few dingy stains of paint where I had tried the
tint in my pencil I pondered the mystery a minute or two;
but finding it insolvable, and bebg certain it couM not
be of much moment, I dismissed, and soon forgot it.
mr

CHAPTER XXXiri
When Mr. St* John went, it was beginning to snow; the
whirling storm continued all night. The next day a keen
wind brought fresh and blinding falls; by twilight the valley
was drift^ up and almost impassable, I had closed my
shutter, laid a mat to the door to prevent the snow from
blowing in under itj trimmed my fire, and after sitting nearly
an hour on the hearth listening to the muffled fury of thi
tempest, Ilit a candle, took down Marmion, and beginning—
" Day si?t on Korharn's castled steep.
And Tweed's fair river broad and deep.
And Cheviot's mDUntaina lone;
The massive towers, tbe dotijoa keep.
The flanking walls thM. round them sweep,
In yellow lustre shone. "
I soon forgot storm in music.
JANE EYRE
1 heard a noise: the wind, I thought, shook the door.
Ko] it was St. John Rivers, whOj lifting the latch, came in
out of the frozen hurricane— ^the howling darkness — and
stood before me; the cloak that covered his tall figure all
white as a glacier. I was almost in consternation; so little
had I expected any go est from the bio eked -up vale that
night.
*'Any ill news ? " I demanded. *'Has anything happened ? *'
" No, How very easily alarmed you arel " he answered,
removing his cloak and hanging it up against the door,
towards which he again coolly pushed the mat which his
entrance had deranged* He stamped the snow from his
boots.
'* I shall sully the purity of your floor/'said he^ " but
you must excuse me for once, " Then he approached the
fire: ** I have had hard work to get here, I assure you/'
he observed, as he warmed his hands over the flame, " One
drift took me up to the waist; happily the snow is quite
soft yet. "
" But why are you come ? " I could not forbear saying.
" Rather an inhospitable question to put to a visitor;
but since you ask it, I answer simply to have a little talk
with you; I got tired of my mute books and empty rooms,
Besides, since yesterday^ I have experienced the excitement
of a person to whom a tale has been half*toId, and who is
impatient to hear the sequel/*
He sat down. I recalled his singular conduct of yesterday,
and really I began to fear his wits were touched. If he were
insane, however, his was a very cool and collected insanity:
I had never seen that handsome-featured face of his look
more tike chiselled marble than it did just now, as he put
aside his snow-wet hair from his forehead and let the fire-
light shine free on his pale brow and cheek as pale, where
it grieved me to discover the hollow trace of care or sorrow
now so plainly graved, I waited, expectmg he would say
something I could at least comprehend; but his hand was
now at hjs chin, his finger on his lip: he was thinking. It
struck me that his hand looked wasted like his face, A
perhaps uncalled-for gush of pity came over my heart: I
was moved to say: —
" I wish Diana or Mary would come and live with you:
it is too bad that you should be quite alone; and you are
recklessly rash about your own health. "
^
38o
JANE EYRE
" Not at aU/'said he: " I care for myself wb^i necessary*
I am weU dow. What do you see amiss in me ? **
This wa5 said with a careless^ abstracted indifference^
which showed that my sohcitude was, at least in his opinion,
wholly superfluous, I was silenced.
He still slowly moved his fmgtr over his upper hp^ and
still his eye dwelt dreamily on the glowing grate ; thinkmg
it urgent to say something, I asked him presently if he
felt any cx}ld draught from the door^ which was behind
him*
" No, no; " he respond ed^ shortly and somewhat testily;
*'Well/* I reflected, " if you won't talk^ you may be stiU;
I'll let you alone now, and return to my book. "
So I snufied the candle, and resumed the perusal of Mar-
mion. He soon stirred ; my eye was instantly drawn to his
mo%'«ments; he only took out a morocco pocket-book^
thence produced a letterj which he read in silence^ folded it^
put it back^ relapsed into meditation. It was vain to try to
read with such an inscrutable fixture before me; nor could
I, in my impatience^ consent to be dumb; he might rebut
me if he iik«j, but talk I would*
''Have you heard from Diana and Mary lately? "
*'Not since the letter I showed you a week ago "
" There has not been any change made about your own
arrangements? Vou will not be summoned to leave England
sooner than you expected? "
" I fear not, indeed : such chance is too good to befall me "
Baffled so far I changed my ground — I bethought mysdf
to talk about the school and my scholars,
*'Mary Garrett's mother is better^ and Mary came back
to the school this morning, and I shall have four new giriS
next week from the Foundry Close — they would have come
to-day but for the snow/'
" Indeed 1*'
" Mr, Ohver pays for two, "
" Do^ he? " ^^
" He means to give the whole school a treat at Christoias.
''I know.'^
" Was it your suggestion? "
" No. "
" Whose then? "
" His daughter's, I think/'
*'It is like her: she is so good matured,**
I
JANE EYRE 381
" Yes.*'
Again came the blank of a pause: the dock struck eight
strokes. It aroused him; he uncrossed his IcgSj sat erect,
turned to me.
*'Leave your ix)ok a moment, and come a little nearer
the fire/'he said.
Wondering J and of my wonder finding no cndj I comphcd,
" Half an hour ago/'he pursued^ " I spoke of my im-
patience to hear the sequel of a tale: on reflection^ I find
the matter will be better manetged by my assuming the
narrator's part, and converting you into a listener. Before
commendiigj it is but fair to warn you that the story will
sound somewhat hackneyed in your ears^ but stale details
often regain a degree of freshness when they pass through
new lips. For the rest, whether trite or novel^ it is
short.
^'Twenty years ago^ a ptxir curate — never mind his name
at this moment — feU in Jove with a rich man's daughter;
she fell in love with him, and married him, against the
advice of all her friends; who a)nsequently disowned her
immediately after the wedding. Before two years passed,
the rash pair were both dead, and kid quietly side by side
tmder one slab, (I have seen their grave; it formed part
of the pavement of a huge churchyard surrounding the
grirOj soot-black old cathedral of an overgrown manufact-
uring town in shire.) They left a daughter, which, at
its very birth, Charity received in her lap — cold as that of the
snow-drift I almost stuck fast in to-night. Charity carried
the friendless thing to the house of its rich^ maternal re-
lations; it was reared by an aunt-in-law, called (I come to
names now) Mrs, Reed of Gateshead — you start—did you
hear a noise? I daresay it is only a rat scrambling along
the rafters of the adjoining schoolroom: it was a bam
before I had it repaired and altered, and bams are generally
haunted by rats.— To proceed. Mrs. Reed kept the orphan
ten years: whether it was happy or not with her, I cannot
say, never ha vmg been told ; but at the end of that time she
transferred it to a place you know^ — being no other than
Lowood School, where you so long resided yourself. It
seems her career there was very honouTable: from a pupil,
she became a teacher, hke yourself — really it strikes me there
are parallel points in her history and yours — she left it to
be a governess; there, again, your fates were analog^^
m
382
JANE EYR]
she undertook the education of the ward of a certain Mr J
Rochester. "
" Mr, Rivers I ** I intenupted,
'* I can guess your feelings/* he said, ** but restrain them
for a whUe: I have nearly finished; hear me to the end.
Of Mr, Rochester's character I know nothing, but the one
fact that he professed to offer honourable marriage to this
young girl, and that at the very altar she discovered he
had a wife yet alive, though a lunatic* What his subsequent
conduct and proposals were is a matter of pure conjecture;
but when an event transpired which rendered inquiry after
the governess necessary^ it was discovered she was gone—
DO one could tdl when^ wbere^ or how < She had left Thorn*
field Hall in the night; every research after her course had
been vain: the country had been scoured far and wide;
no vestige of information could be gathered respecting her.
Yet that she should be found is become a matter of serious
urgency: advertisements have been put in all the papen;
I myself have received a letter from one Mr. Briggs, a solicitor,
communicating the details I have just imparted* Is it mt
an odd tale? "
" Just tell me this/'said I, " and since you know so much,
you surely mn tell it me — what of Mr, Rochester? How and
where is he? What is he doing? Is he well ?''
" I am ignorant of all concerning Mr. Roch^ter; the
letter never mentions him hut to narrate the frauduleot
and iUegal attempt I have adverted to* You should rather
ask the name of the govemess^ — the nature of the event which
requires her appearance,**
''Did no one go to Thomfield Hall then? Bid no one
see Mr, Rochester? "
" I suppose not/'
*'But they wrote to him? "
^'Of course,'*
" And what did he say? Who has his letters? "
'* Mr, Briggs intimates that the answer to his appHcation
was not from Mr, Rochester, but from a lady: it is signed
'Alice Fairfax,*'*
I felt cold and dismayed: my worst f^rs then were
probably true: he had in all probability left England and
rushed in reckless desperation to some former haunt on the
Continent, And what opiate for his severe sufferings—
what object for his strong passions — had he sought there?
^
I
^
ll
JANE EYRE
I dared not answer the question. Oh, my poor master —
once almost my husband — whom I had often called ** my
dear Edward T'
" He must have been a bad raanj*'observed Mr. Rivers.
** You don't know him — don^t pronounce an opinion upon
him/* I said, with warmth.
*'Very well, " he answered, quietly: ^'and indeed my
head is otherwise occupied than with him : I have my tale
to finis h. Since you won't ask the governess's name, I must
tell it of my own accord — stay — I have it here— it is always
more satisfactory to see important points written down^
fairly committed to black and white. "
And the pocket-book was again deliberately produced^
opened, sought through; from one of its compartments
was extracted a shabby slip of paper^ hastily torn off: I
recognised in its texture and its stains of ultra-marine, and
lake, and vermilion, the ravished margin of the portrait*
cover* He got up, held it close to my eyes: and I read,
traced in Indian ink, in my own hand- writing, the words
" Jake Eyrs " — the work doubtless of some moment of
abstraction,
** Briggs wrote to me of a Jane Eyre: ** he said, *'the
advertisements demanded a Jane Eyre: I knew a Jane
Elliott, — I confess I had my suspicions^ but it was only
yesterday afternoon they were at once resolved into certainty.
You own the name and renounce the alias f "
** Yes— yes— but where is Mr, Briggs p He perhaps knows
more of Mr. Rochester than you do, "
" Briggs is in London; I should doubt his knowing any-
thing at all about Mr, Rochester; it is not in Mr, Rochester
he is inters ted. Meantime, you forget essential points
in pursuing trifles: you do not inquire why Mr. Briggs
sought after you — what he wanted with you. "
** Well, what did he want?''
" Merely to tell you that your uncle, Mr. Eyre of Madeira,
is dead; that he has left you all his property, and that you
are now rich— merely that— nothing more.''
**I! rich? "
*'Yes, you, rich— quite an heiress, "
Silence succeeded,
*'You must prove your identity of course, " resumed St,
Johiij presently: " a step which will offer no difficulties;
you can then enter on immediate possession. Your fortune
384
ANE EYRE
is vested in the English funds; BiiggB has the will and
necessary documents/'
Here was a new card turned up 1 It is a fine things reader,
to be lifted in a moment from indigence to wealth — a very
fine thing: but not a matter one can comprehend j or COQ-
sequently enjoy, all at once. And then there are other
chances in life far more thrilling and rapture-gi^Tng : this
is solid J an affair of the actual world, nothing id^ about it:
all its associations are solid 2tnd sober, and its manifestations
are the same. One does not jump, and spring, and shout
hurrah! at hearing one has got a fortune, one begins to
consider res ponsibili ties ^ and to ponder business; on a base
of steady satisfaction rise certain grave cares — ^and we
contain ouiselv^, and brood over our bliss with a solemn
brow,
Besides, the words Legacy ^ Bequest, go side by side with
the words Death, Funeral. My uncle 1 had heard was dead—
my only relative; ever since being made aware of his exist-
^ ence, I had cherished the hope of one day seeing him : noWj
I never should- And then this money came only to me;
not to me and a rejoicing family, but to my isolated self.
It was a grand boon doubtless; and independence would
be glorious — yes, I felt that — that thought swelled my heart
** You unbend your forehead at last,*'said Mr. Rivers:
" I thought Medusa had looked at you, and that you were
turning to stone — perhaps now yoo will ask how much you
are worth?*'
*'How much am I worth?''
" Ohj a trifle! Nothing of course to speak of— tweni
thousand pounds, I think they say — but what is that? "
" Twenty thousand pounds ? "
Here was a new stunner — I had been calculating on four
or five thousand. This news actually took my breath for a
moment: Mr. St. John, whom I had never heard laugh
before, laughed now.
" Well, " said he, " if you had committed a murder, and
I had told you your crime was discovered, you could scarcdy
look more aghast. "
*'It is a large sum — don^t you think there is a mistake? "
" No mistake at all. " ,
*'Perhaps you have read the figures wrong — ^it may bd
^ajOooT* I
" It is written in letteiSj not figures^ — twraity thousand* "'!
ou
^V I again
^B tronomic^
■ s Dread wi
JANE EYRE

I again felt rather like an individual of but average gas-
tronomical powers^ sitting down to feast alone at a table
spread with provisions for a hundred. Mr. Rivers rose now
and put his cloak on,
'* If it were not such a very wild night/'he said, " I would
send Hannah down to keep you company: you look too
desperately miserable to be left alone. But Hannah^ poor
woman 1 could not stride the drifts so well as I: her legs
are not quite so long: so I must e'en leave you to your
sorrows . Good -night ,'*
He was lifting the latch: a sadden thought occurred to me.
" Stop one minute 1 " I criM*
" Well?^'
" It puzzles me to know why Mr. Briggs wrote to you
about me; or how he knew you^ or could fancy that you,
living in such an out-of-the-way place, had the power to
aid in my discovery. "
" Ohl I am a clergyman/* he said; " and the clergy are
often appealed to about odd matters. " Again the latch
rattled,
"'Ko: that docs not satkfy mel " I exclaimed: and,
indeed, there was something in the hasty and unexplanatory
reply, which, instead of allaying^ piqued my curiosity more
than ever,
" It is a very strange piece of business, " I added. " I
must know more about it. "
*'Another time. "
** No: to-night 1 — to-night J " and as he turned from the
door^ I placed myself between it and him. He looked rathec
embarrassed,
*'You certainly shall not go tiE you have told me all I "
I said,
" I would rather not, just now. "
" You shall I — you must! "
'* I would rather Diana or Mary informed you. "
Of course these objections wrought my eagerness to a
climax: gratified it must be, and that without delay; and
I toJd him so,
** But I apprised you that I was a hard man/'said hej
" difficult to persuade. "
" And I am a hard womauj — impossible to put off. "
I " And then, " he pursued^ " I am cold: no fervour infects
me. "
^
JANE EYRE
*'Whereas 1 am hot, and fire dissolves ice. The bla^e
there has thawed al! the snow from your cbak; by the same
tokeDj it has streamed on to my Boor^ and made it like a
trampled street. As you hope ever to be forgivenj Mr» Rivers,
the high crime end misdemeanour of spoihng a sanded
kitchen^ tell me wliat I wUh to know- "
" Wellj then/* he said, " I yield j if not to your earnestness,
to your perseverance : as stone is worn by continual dropping.
Besides, you must know some day,^ — as well now as later.
Your name is Jane Eyre?''
** Of course: that was all settled before. "
" You are not, perhaps, aware that I am your namesake?
— that I was christened St. John Eyre Rivers? *'
" No, indeed ! I remember now seeing the letter E. com-
prised in your initials written in books you have at different
times lent me; but I never asked for what name it stood-
But what then? Surely "
I stopped: I could not trust mpelf to entertain, much
less to express, the thought that rushed upon me that
embodied itself, — that, in a second, stood out a strong,
solid probability. Circumstances knit themselves, fitted
themselves, shot into order: the chain that had been Ijdng
hitherto a formless lump of links, was drawn out straight, —
every ring was perfect, the connection complete. I knew,
by instinct, how the matter stood, before St» John had said
another word: but I cannot expect the reader to have the
same intuitive perception, so I must repeat his explanation,
** My mother's name was Eyre; she fiad two brothers;
one a clergyman, who married Miss Jane Reed, of Gateshead;
the other^ John Eyre, Esq,, merchant^ late of Funchal,
Madeira. Mr. Briggs, being Mr, Eyre*s solicitor, wrote to us
last August to inform us of our uncle's death; and to say
that he had left his property to his brother the clergj^nan's
orphan daughter; overlooking us, in consequence of a quarrel,
never foiigiven, between him and my father. He wrote again
a few weeks since, to intimate that the heiress was !ost;
and asking if we knew anything of her, A name casually
written on a slip of paper has enabled me to find her out*
You know the rest, " Again he was going, but I set my back
against the door.
** Do let me speak, " I said ; " let me have one moment
to draw breath and reflect. " I paused — he stood before
me, hat in hand, looking composed enough. I resumed:—
JANE EYRE ^^^ 387
*'Your mother was my father*s sister, "
" Yes. "
'* My aunt, oonfiequently? "
He bowed,
** My uncle John was your uncle John ? You, Diana and
Maiy, are his sister's children; as I am his brother's child? "
" Undeniably. "
*'You three J then, are my cousins; half our blood on each
side flows from the same source ? "
** We are cousins; yes. "
I surveyed him. It seemed I had found a brother; one I
could be pn > ud of, — one I could love; and two sisters,
whose quail ti^ were such, that, when 1 knew them but as
mere strangers j they had inspired me with genuine affection
end admiration. The two girls, on whom^ kneeling down
an the wet grotindj and looking through the low, latticed
window of Moor House kitchen, I had gazed with so bitter
a mixture of interest and despair, were my near kinswomen;
and the young and stately gentleman who had found me
almost dying at his threshold^ was my blood relation. Glorious
discovery to a lonely wretch! This was wealth indeed I
—wealth to the heart I — a mine of pure, genial affections.
This was a blessings bright, vivid, and exhilarating; — not
like the ponderous gift of gold: rich and welcome enough
in its way, but sobering from its weight* I now clapped my
hands in sudden joy — ^my pube bounded, my veins thrilled.
" Ohj I am glad ! — I am glad I " I exclaimed.
St, John smiled. " Did I not say you neglected essential
points to pursue trifles? " he asked, *'You were serious
when I told you you had got a fortune; and now, for a
matter of no moment, you are excited. "
** What £an you mean ? It may be of no moment to you ;
you have sisters^ and don't care for a cousin; but I had
nobody; and now three relations, — or two, if you don't
choose to be counted, — are bom into ray world full grown,
I say again, I am glad I "
I walked fast through the room: I stopped, half sufiocated
with the thoughts that rose faster than I could receive,
comprehend, settle them:^ — thoughts of what might, could,
would, and should be, and that ere long* I looked at the
blank wall: it seemed a sky, thick with ascending stars,^
every one lit me to a purpose or delight. Those who had
saved my life, whom, till this hour, I had loved barrenly^
388
JANE EYRE
I could now benefit* They were under a yoke: I could free
them: they were scattered, — I cx > uid reunite them — the
independence, the affluence which was mine, might be tJbeiis
too. Were we not four? Twenty thousand pounds shared
equally, would be five thousand each, — enough and to spare:
justice would be done,— -mutual happiness secured- Now
the wealth did not weigh on me: now it was not a mere
bequest of coin, — it was a legacy of life, hope, enjoyment.
How I looked while these ideas were taking my spirit
by storm, I cannot tell; but I perceived soon that Mr. Rivers
had placed a chair behind me, and was gently attempting
to make me sit down on it* He also advised me to be com-
posed: I scorned the insinuation of helplessness and dis-
traction, shook oS hh hand, and began to walk about again.
" Write to Diana and Mary to-morrow, " I said, *'and
tell them to come home directly; Diana said they would both
consider themselves rich with a thousand pound Sj so witb
five thousand J they will do very welL*^
" TeU me where I can get you a glass of water,''said St,
John; " you must really make an effort to tranquillise
youj feelings. "
'* Nonsense 1 and what sort of an effect will the bequest
have on you? Will it keep you in England, induce you to
marry Urns Oliver, and settle down like an ordinary mortal ? "
" You wander: your head becomes confused^ I have beea
too abrupt in communicating the news; it has excited you
beyond your strength. "
'* Mr. Rivers 1 you quite put me out of patience j I am
rational enough; it is you who misunderstand; or rather
who affect to misunderstand- "
*'Perhaps if you explained yourself a little more fully, I
should comprehend better. "
" Explain* What is there to explain? You cannot fail
to see that twenty thousand pounds, the sum in question,
divided equally between the nephew and three nieces of our
uncle, will give five thousand to each? What I want is,
that you should write to your sisters and tell them of the
fortune that has accrued to them,*'
" To you, you mean/'
" I have intimated my view of t^e case: I am incapable
of taking any other, I am not brutally seMsh, blindly
unjust, or fiendishly ungrateful. Besides, I am resolved I
will have a home and coimections* I like Moor House, and
JANE EYRE ^ ^ 389
^^1 will live at Moor House; I like Diana and Maiy^ and I
will attach myself for life to Diana and Mary. It would
please and benefit me to have five thousand pounds; it
would torment and oppress me to have twenty thousand;
which J moreover, could never be mine in justice^ though
it might in law. I abandon to you, then, what is absolutely
superfluous to me. Let there be no opposition, and no
discussion about it; let us agree amongst each other, and
decide the point at once. "
" This is acting on first impulses; you must take days
to consider such a matter, ere your word can be regarded
! as valid. "
H " Oh! if all you doubt is my sincerity, I am easy: you
^ see the justice of the case ? "
** I dfi see a certain justice; but it is contrary to all custom.
Besides, the entire fortune is your right: my uncle gained
it by his own efforts; he was free to leave it to whom he
would : he left it to you. After all^ justice permits you to
keep it: you may, with a clear conscience, consider it
absolutely your own. "
*'With me/'said I, " it is fully as much a matter of
feeling as of conscience: I must indulge my feelings; I so
seldom have had an opportunity of doing so. Were you to
ai]gu€, object, and annoy me for a year, I could not forego
the delicious pleasure of which I have caught a gHmpise —
that of repaying, b part, a mighty obligation, and winning
to myself life-long friends. "
" You think so now, " rejoined St. John; " because you
do not know what it is to possess, nor consequently to enjoy
wealth : you cannot form a notion of the importance twenty
thousand pounds would give you; of the place it would
enable you to take in society; of the prospects it would
open to you: you cannot " ^ —
** And you,'* I interrupted, " cannot at all imagine the
craving I have for fraternal and sisterly love- I never had
a home, I never had brother or sisters; I must and will
have them now: you are not reluctant to admit me and own
me, are you? "
** Jane: I will be your brother — my sisters will be your
sisters — without stipulating for this sacrifice of your just
rights. "
" Brother? Yes; at the distance of a thousand leagues 1
Sisters? Yes; slaving amongst strangers I I, wealthy^
L
390
JANE EYRE
gofged with gold I never earned and do not merit 1 You,
penniless! Famous equality and fraternisation I Ciose
union l Intimate attachment ! *'
. *'But, Jane, your aspirations after family ties and domestic
happiness may be realised otherwise than by the means you
contemplate: you may marry /^'
" Nonsense, again ! Alarry ! I don*t want to many, and
never shall marry/'
" That is saying too much; such hazardous affirmations
are a proof of the excitement under which you labour,**
*'It is not saying too much: I know what I feel, and how
averse are my inclinations to the bare thought of marriage.
No one would take me for love; and I will not be regarded
in the light of a mere money-speculation. And I do not
want a stranger— unsympathising alien, different from me;
I want my kindred: those with whom I have full fellow-
feeling. Say again you will be ray brother: wheo you uttered
the words I was sati^ed^ happy; repeat them, if you can,
repeat them sincerely/'
''I think I can. I know I have always loved my own
sktCTs; and I know on what my affection for them is
grounded,— respect for their worth, and admiration of their
talents* You too have principle and mind: your tastes
and habits r^emble Diana*s and Mary^s; your presence
is always agreeable to me; in your conversation I have
already for some time found a salutary solace. I feel I can
easily and naturally make room in my heart for youj as my
third and youngest sister* "
" Thank you: that contents me for to-night. Now you
had better go; for if you stay longer, you will perhaps
irritate me afresh by some mistrustful scruple.*'
*'And the school, Miss Eyre ? It must now be shyt up, I
suppose ?'*
*'No, I will retain my post of mistress till you get i
substitute. "
He smiled approbation: we shook hands^ and he took
leave.
I need not narrate in detail the further struggles I had,
and arguments I used, to get matters regarding the legacy
settled as I wished. My task was a very hard one: Ijut,
as I was absolutely resolved — as my cousins saw at length
that my mind was really and immutably fixed on making
a just division of the property — as they must in their own
JANE EYRl
hearts have felt the equity of the intention; and mmt,
besidesj have been innately conscious that in my place they
would have done precisely what I wished to do^they
yielded at length so far as to consent to put the affair to
arbitration. The judges chosen were Mr. Oliver and an able
lawyer: both coincided in my opinion: I carried my point.
The instruments of transfer were drawn out: St. John,
Diana, Mary^ and I, each became possessed of a competency*
CHAPTER XXXIV
It was near Christmas by the time all was settled: the
season of general holiday approached, I now closed Morton
school; taking care that the parting should not be barren
on my side. Good fortune opens the band as well as the
heart wonderfully; and to give somewhat when we have
largely received^ is but to afford a vent to the unusual
ebullirion of the sensations. I had long felt with pleasure
that many of my rustic scholars liked me, and when we
parted^ that consciousness was confirmed : they manifested
their affection plainly and strongly. Deep was my gratifi*
cation to find I had really a place in their unsophisticated
hearts: I promised them that never a week should pass
in future that I did not visit them^ and give them an hour*s
teaching in their school.
Mr- Rivers came up^ as — having seen the classes, now
numbering sixty girls^ file out before me^ and locked the
door — I stood with the key in my hand, exchanging a few
words of special farewell with some half-dozen of my best
scholars: as decent, respectable, modesty and well-informed
young women as could be found in the ranks of the British
peasanti7* And that is saying a gr^t dealj for after all^
the British peasantry are the best taught, best mannered,
most self-respecting of any in Europe; since those days I
have seen paysannes and Bauerinnen ; and the best of them
seemed to me ignorant, coarse, and besotted, compared
with my Morton girls,
'* Do you consider you have got your reward for a season
of exertion?''asked Mr. Rivers, when they were gone.
JANE EYRE
'^ Does not the consciousness of having done some rj
good in your day and generation give pleasure? ^*
'" Doubtless/'
'" And you have only toiled a few months 1 Would not a
life devoted to the task of regenerating your rac« be well
spent?'^
^'YeSj " 1 said; " but I could not go on for ever so: I
want to enjoy my own faculties as well as to cultivate those
of other people. I must enjoy them now; don*t recall either
my mind or bodv to the school; I am out of it and disposed
for full holiday. "
He looked grave. " What now ? What sudden eagerness
is this you evince? What are you going to do? "
" To be active; as active as I can. And first I must heg
you to set Hannah at liberty, and get somebody else to wait
on you, "
" Do you want her? "
'* YeSj to go with me to Moor House: Diana and M;
will be at home in a week, and I want to have ever3^hing
in order against their arrival. "
" I understand: I thought you were for flying off on some
excursion. It is better so: Hannah shall go with you* "
" Tell her to be ready by to*morrow then; and here is
the schoolroom key: I will give yon the key of my cottage
in the morning. "
He took it. " You give it up very gleefully/'said he:
'* I don't quite understand your iight-heartedn^s; because
I cannot tell what employment you propose to yourself as a
substitute for the one you are relinquishing. What aim,
what purpose J what ambition in hfe have you now? *'
" My first aim will he to clean down (do you comprehend
the full force of the expression?) to clean domn Moor House
from chamber to cellar; my next to rub it up with bees-
wax, oilj and an indefinite number of cloths, till it glitt^s
again ; my third , to arrange every chairj table, bed, carpet,
with mathematical precii^ion; afterwards I shall go near
to ruin you in coals and peat to keep up good fires in every
room; and lastly, the two days preceding that on which
your sisters are expected, will be devoted by Hannah and me
to such a beating of eggs, sorting of currants, grating of
spices^ compounding of Christmas cakes, chopping up rf
materials for mince-pies, and solemnising of other culinary
rites, as words can convey but an inadequate notion of to
;aif^
I
JANE EYRE " " ^ 393
the uninitiated like you* My purpose j in shortj is to have all
things in an absolutely perfect state of readiness for Diana
and Mary, before next Thursdays and my ambition is to
give them a beau-ideal of a welcome when they come/^
St, John smiled slightly: still he was dissatisfied.
'* It is all very well for the present/^ said he ; ^* but
seriously J I trust that when the first flush of vivacity is ovtt,
you will look a Uttle higher than domestic endearments and
household joys. "
" The tet things the world has ! " I interrupted.
''No, JanCj no: this world is not the scene of fruition j do
not attempt to make it so: nor of rest; do not turn slothful,'*
'* I mean, on the contrary , to be busy.*'
** Jane J I excuse you for the present; two months'grace
I aUow you for the full enjoyment of your new position , and
for pleasing yourself with this late-found charm of relation-
ship; but tk^n^ I hope you will begin to look beyond Moor
House and Morton, and sisterly society, and the selfish calm
and sensual comfort of civilised affluence. I hope your
energies will then once more trouble you with their strength. "
I Jooked at him with surprise. " St. John. " I said, *'I
think you are almost wicked to talk so, I am disposed to be
as content as a queen, and you try to stir me up to restless-
ness 1 To what end?**
" To the end of turning to profit the talents which God
has committed to your keeping; and of which he will surely
tone day demand a strict account, Jane^ I shall watch you
dosely and anxiously — I warn you of that. And try to
restrain the disproportionate fervour with which you throw
yourself into common-place home pleasures, Don^t cUng so
tenaciously to ties of the flesh; save your constancy and
ardour for an adequate cause; forbear to waste them on
trite transient objects. Do you hear, Jane? "
** Yes; just as if you were speaking Greek. I feel I have
adequate cause to be happy, and I will be happy. Good-bye ( *'
I Happy at Moor House 1 was, and hard I worked ; and so
did Haimahr she was charmed to see how jovial 1 could be
amidst the bustle of a house turned topsy-tur\y— how I could
dustj and brushy and clean, and cook. And really after a
kday or two of confusion worse confounded, it was dehghtful,
by degrees, to invoke order from the chaos ourselves had
made. I had previously taken a journey to S— — j to pur-
chase some new furniture; my cousins having given m
^
394
JANE EYRI
cane blanche to effect what alterations I pleased^ and a sui
having been set aside for that purpose. The ordinary sitting-
room and bed -rooms I left much as they were: for I knew
Diana and Mary would derive more pleasure from seeing
agam the old homely tablesj and chairs, and beds, than from
the spectacle of the smartest innovations. Still some novelty
was necessary J to give to their return the piquancy with
which I wished it to be invested* Dark handsome new
carpets and curtains, an arrangement of some carefully
selected antique ornaments in porcelain smd bronze, new
coveringSj and mirrors, and dressing-cases for the toilet
tables, answered the end: they looked fresh without being
glaring. A spare parlour and bed-room I refurnished entirely,
with old mahogany and crimson upholstery; I laid canvass
on the passage, and carpets on the stairs. When all was
finished J I thought Moor House as complete a model of
bright modest snugness within, as it was, at this season, a
specimen of wintry waste and desert dreariness without.
The eventful Thursday at length came. They were e
pected about dark, and ere dusk, fires were lit upstairs and
below ; the kitchen was in perfect trim ; Hannah and I were
dressed and all was in readiness.
St. John arrived first. T had entreated him to keep quite
clear of the house till everything was arranged; and, indeed,
the bare idea of the commotion^ at once sordid and trivial^
going on within its walls sufficed to scare him to estrange-
ment. He found me in the kitchen, watching the progress of
certain cakes for tea, then baking. Approaching the hearth,
he asked ,'* If I was at last satisfied with housemaid's work ?'*
I answered by inviting him to accompany me on a general
inspection of the result of my labours. With some difficulty,
I got him to make the tour of the house. He just looked in at
the doors I opened; and when he had wandered upstairs
and downstairs, he said I must have gone through a great
deal of fatigue and trouble to have effected such considerable
changes in so short a time : but not a syllable did he utter
indicatin^f pleasure in the improved aspect of his abode.
This silence damped me. I thought perhaps the altera-
tions had disturbed some old associations he valued, I
inquired whether this was the case : no doubt in a somewhat
crest-fallen tone.
** Not at all ; he had, on the contrary, remarked that I
had scrupulously respected every association : he feared,
M
JANE EYRE
395
h
indeed, I must have bestowed more thought on the matter
than it was worth. How many minutes, for instance, had I
devoted to studying the arrangement of this very room ?—
By-the-by, could I tell him where such a book was ? *'
I showed him the volume on the shelf: he took it down,
and withdrawing to his accustomed window recess, he began
to read it.
Now, I did not like this, reader. St, John was a good
man ; but I began to feel he had spoken truth of himself,
when he said he was hard and cold. The humanities and
amenities of life had no attraction for him — its peaceful
enjoyments no charm. Literally, he lived only to aspire-
after what was good and great, certainly; but still he would
never rest; nor approve of others resting round him. As I
looked at his iofty forehead, still and pale as a white stone —
at his fine lineaments fixed in study — I comprehended all at
once that he would hardly make a good husband: that it
would be a trying thing to be his wife. I understood, as by
inspiration, the nature of his love for Miss Oliver; I agreed
with him that it was but a love of the senses. I compre-
hended how be should despise himself for the feverish in-
fluence it exercised over him; how he should wish to stifle
and destroy itj how he should mistrust its ever conducing
permanently to his happiness, or hers. I saw he was of the
material from which nature hews her heroes — Christian and
Pagan — her lawgivers, her statesmen, her conquerors: a
steadfast bulwark for great interests to rest upon ; but, at
the fireside, too often a cold cumbrous column, gloomy and
out of place.
" This parlour is not his sphere, " I reflected: " the Hima*
lay an ridge, or Caff re bush, even the plague -cursed Guinea
Coast swamp, would suit him better. Well may he eschew
the calm of domestic life; it is not his element: there his
faculties stagnate — they cannot develop or appear to ad van-
tage. It is in scenes of strife and danger— where courage is
proved, and energy exercised, and fortitude tasked — that
he will speak and mo\^e, the leader and superior. A merry
child would have the advantage of him on this hearth. He is
right to choose a missionary's career — I see it now. "
**They are coming I they are coming I " cried Hannah,
throwing open the parlour door. At the same moment old
Carlo barked joyfully. Out I ran. It was now dark; but a
rumbhng of wheels was audible. Hannah soon had a lanterr
JANE EYRE
Et, Tlie vehicle had stopped at the wicket: the driver
opened the door: first one weli'known fonii, then another^
stepped out* In a minute I had my face under their bonneUj
in contact first with Mary's soft cheek, thea with Diana's
flowing curls. They laughed — kissed me — then Hannah:
patted Carlo, who was half wild with delight, asked eagerly
if all wa^ well j ajid being assured in the affirmative,
hastened into the house.
They were stiff with their long and jolting drive fmm
Whitcrossj and chilled with the frosty night air; but their
pleasant countenances expanded to the cheerful firelight.
While the driver and Hamiah brought in the boxes, they
demanded St. John, At this moment he advanced from the
parlour. They both threw their arms round his neck at once.
He gave each one quiet kiss, said in a low tone a few words
of welcome, stood a while to be talked to, and then, intimat-
ing that he supposed they would soon rejoin him in the
parlour, withdrew there as to a place of refuge,
I had ht their candles to go upstairs, but Diana had first
to give hospitable orders respecting the driver; this dan%
both followed me. They were deUghted with the renovation
and decoration of their rooms; with the new draperyj and
fresh carpets, and rich tinted china vases: they expressed
their gratification ungrudgingly. I had the pleasure of fed-
ing that my arrangements met their wishes exactly; and
that what I had done added a vivid charm to their joyous
return home.
Sweet was that evening* My cousins, fuU of exhilaration,
were so eloquent in narrative and comment, that their
fluency covered St, John's tadtumity: he was sincerely
glad to see his sisters; but in their glow of fervour and flow
of joy he could not sympathise. The event of the day— that
is, the return of Diana and Mary — pleased himj but the
accompaniments of that event, the glad tumult, the ganii-
lous glee of reception, irked him: I saw he wished the
quieter morrow was come. In the very meridian of the
night's enjoyment, about an hour after tea, a rap was heard
at the door» Hannah entered with the intimation that " a
poor lad was come, at that unlikely time, to fetch Mr, Rivers
to see his mother, who was drawing away/'
" Where does she live, Hannah? "
*'Clear up at Whitcross Brow, ahnost four miles off; and
moor and moss all the way/*
m
JANE EYRE
W
" Tell him I wiU go. "
** I'm sure, sir, you had better not. It's the woiBt roa4 to
tmvel after dark that can be; there's no track at all over the
bog; And then it is soch a bitter night—the keenest wind
you ever feit. You had better send word, sir, that you will
be there in the morning.''
But he was already in the passage^ putting on his cloak;
and without one objection^ one murmur, he departed. It
was then nine o'clock; he did not return till midnight.
Starved and tired enough he was: but he looked happier
than when he set out. He had performed an act of duty;
made an exertion ; felt his own strength to do and deny, and
was on better terras with himself,
I am afraid the whole of the ensuing week tried his patience.
It was Christmas week; we took to no settled employment ,
but spent it in a sort of merry domestic dissipation. The air
of the moors, the freedom of home, the dawn of prosperity,
acted on Diana and Mary's spirits like some life-giving
elixir: they were gay from morning till noon, and from noon
till night. They could always talk; and their discourse,
witty, pithy, originalj had such charms for me^ that I pre-
ferred listening to, and sharing in it, to doing anything else,
St. John did not rebuke our vivadtyj but he escaped from
it: he was seldom in the house; his parish was large, the
population scattered, and he found daily business in visiting
the sick and poor in its different districts.
One morning, at breakfast, Dianaj after looking a Kttle
pensive for aome minutes, asked him, " If his plans were
yet unchanged ?*'
" Undianged and unchangeable, " was the reply. And he
proceeded to inform us that his departure from England
was now definitely fixed for the ensuing year.
" And Rosamond Oliver? " suggested Maxy: the words
seeming to escape her lips involuntarily: for no sooner had
she uttered them, than she made a gesture as if wishing to
recall them. St. John had a book in his hand— -it was his
unsocial custom to read at meals— he closed it, and looked up,
*'Rosamond Oliver/'said he, *'is about to be married to
Mr. Granby ; one of the best connected and most estimable
residents in S , grandson and heir to Sir Frederic Granby :
I had the intelligence from her father yesterday. "
His sisters looked at each other, and at me; w« all thre*
looked at him r he was serene as glass.
n287
198
JANE EYRE
" The match raust have been got up hastily, " said Diana:
" they cannot have known each other long/'
'* Bat two months : they met in October at the county
ball at S . But where there are no obstacles to a uoion,
as in the present case, where the connection is in every point
desirable, delays are unnecessary: they will be married is
soon as S Place, which Sir Frederic gives up to thenii
can be refitted for their reception.'"
The first time I fomid St. John alone after this communi-
cation, I felt tempted to inquire if the event distressed him:
but he seemed so little to need sympathy, that, so far from
venturing to offer him more, I experienced some shame ai
the recolkction of what I had already hazarded. Besides, I
was oui of practice in talking to him : his reserve was agaia
frozen overj and my frankness was congealed beneath il
He had not kept his promise of treating me hke his sisters;
he continually made little, chilhng di Terences between tu,
which did not at all tend to the development of cordiality:
in short J now that I was acknowledged his kinswoman, and
Uved under the same roof with him, I felt the distance
between us to be far greater than when he had known mc
only as the village schoolmistress. When I remembered how
far I had once been admitted to his confidence, I could
hardly comprehend his present frigidity.
Such being the case, I felt not a little surprised when he
raised his head suddenly from the desk over which he was
stooping, and said: —
" You see, Jane, the battle Is fought and the victory
won. "
Startled at being thus addressed, I did not immediately
reply: after a moment's hesitation I answered: —
" But are you sure, you are not in the position of those
conquerors whose triumphs have cost them too dear?
Would not such another ruin you?''
*'I think not; and if I were, it does not much signify; I
shaU never be called upon to contend for such another. The
event of the conflict is decisive: my way is now clear; I
thank God for it I " So saying, he returned to his papers and
his silence*
As our mutual happiness (i.e. Diana's, Mary's, and mine)
settled into a qijieter character, and we resumed our tisual
habits and regular studies, St. John stayed more at home:
he sat with us in the same room, sometimes for houi^ together.
JANE EYRE 599^
lile Mary drew, Diana pursued a course of encyclopedic
reading she had (to my awe and amazement) undertaken,
and I fagged away at German^ he pondered a mystic lore of
his own; that of some Eastern tongue, the acquisition of
which he thought necessary to his plans.
Thus engaged^ he appeared, sitting in his own recess,
quiet and absorbed enough; but that blue eye of his had
a Jaabit of leaving the outlandish-looking grammarj and
wandering over, and sometimes fixing upon us, his fellow-
students, with a curious intensity of observation; if caught,
it would be instantly withdrawn; yet ever and anon^ it
returned scare hingly to our table. I wondered what it
meant; I wonderedj too, at the punctual satisfaction he
never failed to exhibit on an occasion that seemed to me of
small moment, namely,— my weekly visit to Morton School ;
and still more was I puzzled whenj if the day was unfavour-
able, if there was snow, or rain, or high wind, and his sisters
urged me not to go, he would invariably make light of their
solicittide, and encourage me to accomphsh the task without
n^fd to the elements.
" Jane is not such a weakling as you would make her/*
he would say:'* she can bear a mountain blasts or a shower,
Of a few flakes of snow, as well as any of us. Her constitution
is both sound and elastic; — better calculated to endure
variations of climate than many more robust. "
And when I returned, sometimes a good deal tired, and
not a little weather-beaten, I never dared complain, because
1 saw that to murmur would be to vex him r on all occasions
lortitude pleased him: the reverse was a special annoyance.
One afternoon, however, I got leave to stay at home^
because I really had a cold. His sisters were gone to Morton
m my stead r I sat reading Schiller; he, deciphering his
crabbed Oriental scrolls. As I exchanged a translation for
an exercise, I happened to look his way : there I found
myself under the influence of the ever-watchful blue eye.
How long it bad been searching me through and through,
and over and over, I cannot tell: so keen was it, and yet so
cold, I felt for the moment superstitious — as if I were sitting
in the room with something uncanny*
'* Jane, what are you doing? ^*
*'Learning German/'
" I want you to give up German, and learn Hindostanee, "
** You are not in earnest?^'
^
400
JANE EYRE
*'In such earnest that I must have it so : and I will telJ
you why* "
He then weat on to explain that Hindostanee was the
language he himself was at present studying: that^ as be
advanced J he was apt to forget the commencement ; that it
would assist him greatly to have a pupil with whom he
might again and again go over the elements, and so fix them
thoroughly in his mind; that his choice had hovered for
some time between me and his sisters; but that he had
fixed on me, because he saw I could sit at a task the longest
of the three. Would I do him this favour? I should not,
perhaps, have to make the sacrifice long; as it wanted now
barely three months to his departure,
St- John was not a man to be lightly refused: you felt
that every impression made on him, either for pain or
pleasure^ was deep-gmved and permanent. I consented.
When Diana and Mary returned, the former found her
scholar transferred from her to her brother; she laughed ^
and both she and Mary agreed that St, John should
never have persuaded them to such a step. He answered,
quietly :—
** I know it "
I found him a very patient, very forbearingj and yet an
exacting master: he expected me to do a great deal; and
when I fulfilled his expectations^ he, in his own way, fully
testified his approbation. By degree, he acquired a certain
influence over me that took away my Uberty of mind: his
praise and notice were more restraining than his indifference,
I could no longer talk or laugh freely when he was by;
because a tires omely importunate instinct reminded me that
vivacity (at least in me) was distasteful to him, 1 was so
fully aware that only serious moods and occupations were
acceptable, that in his presence every effort to sustain or
follow any other became vain: I fell under a freezing spell.
When he said *'go/'I went; ** come/* I came;'* do this/*
I did it. But I did not love my servitude: I wished^ many
a timcj he had continued to neglect me.
One eveoingj when^ at bedtimej his sisters and I stood
round him, bidding him good-night, he kissed each of them^
as was his custom; and, as was equally Us custom, he gave
me his hand. Diana, who chanced to be in a frohcsome
humour (she was not paixifully controlled by his will; kx
hers, in another way, was as strong), exclaimed: —
'JANE EYRE'
** St* John I you used to call Jane your third sister^
but you don't treat her as such: you should kiss her
too. "
She ptished me towards him, I thought Diana very
pigvokmg, and felt uncomfortably confused; and while
I was thus thinking and feelingj St. John bent his head;
'js Greek face was brought to a level with mine, his eyes
IQCstioned my eyes piercingly — he kissed me. There are no
auch things as marble kisses > or ice kisses^ or I should say^
my ecclesiastical cousin's salute belonged to one of these
classes; but there may be experiment kisses ^ and his was an
experiment kiss. When given, he viewed me to learn the
result; it was not striking: I am sure I did not blush; per-
baps I might have turned a httle pale^ for I felt as if the kiss
were a seal affixed to my fetters. He never omitted the
ceremony afterwards, and the gravity and quiescence with
which I underwent it, seemed to invest it for him with a
certain charm.
As for me, I daily wished more to please him: but to do
50, I felt daily more and more that I must disown half my
nature, stifle half my faculties, wrest my tastes from their
original bent, force myself to the adoption of pursuits for
which I had no natural vocation. He wanted to tntin me
to an elevation I could never reach; it racked me hourly
to aspire to the standard he uphfted. The thing was as
impossible as to mould my irregular features to his correct
and classic pattern, to give to my changeable green eyes
the sea-blue tint and solemn lustre of his own.
Not his ascendancy alone, however, held me in thiall
at present* Of late it had been easy enough for me to look
sad; a cankering evil sat at my heart and drained my
happiness at its source — ^the evil of suspense.
Perhaps you think I had forgotten Mr, Rochester^ reader,
amidst these changes of place and fortime. Not for a moment.
His idea was still with me; because it was not a vapour
sunshine could disperse; nor a sand-traced effigy storms
could wash away : it was a name graven on a tablet, fated
to last as long as the marble it inscribed. The craving to
know what had become of him followed me everyi^'here ;
when I was at Morton, I re-entered my cottage every evening
to think of that; and now at Moor House, I sought my
bed-room each night to brood over it.
In the course of my necessary correspondence with M
L
402
JANE EYRE
Briggs about the will, I had inquired if he knew anything
of Mr_ Rochester's present residence and state of health;
but^ as St. John had conjectured, he was quite ignorant of
all concerning him. I then wrote to Mis. Fairfax^ entreating
information on the subject, I had calculated with certainty
on this step answering my end: I felt sure it would elicit
an early answer, I was astonished when a fortnight passed
without reply; but when two months wore away, and day
after day the post arrived and brought nothing for me, I
fell a prey to the keenest anxiety,
I wrote again: there waa a chance of my first letter
having missed. Renewed hope followed renewed effort: it
shone Uke the former for some weeks, then, like it, fade4
flickered: not a line, not a word reached me. When half
a year wasted in vain expectancy my hope died out: and
then I felt dark indeed.
A fine spring shone round me, which I could not enjoy*
Summer approached; Diana tried to cheer me: she said I
looked ill^ and wished to accompany me to the sea-side.
This St, John opposed; he said I did not want dissipation,
I wanted employment; my present Ufe was too purposeless^
I required an aim; and, I suppose, by way of supplying
deficiencies, he prolonged still further my lessons in Hrndos-
tanee, and grew more urgent in requiring their accomplish-
ment: and I J like a foolj never thought of resisting him— I
could not resist him.
One day I had come to my studies in lower spirits than
usual; the ebb was occasioned by a poignantly felt dis-
appointment: Hannah had told me in the morning there
was a letter for me, and when I went down to take it, ahnost
certain that the long looked-for tidings were vouchsafed
me at last, I found only an unimportant note from Jfr.
Briggs on business. The bitter check had wrung from me
some tears- and now as I sat poring over the crabbed
characters and flourishing tropes of an Indian scribe, my
eyes filled again.
St. John called me to his side to read ; in attempting to do
this my voice failed me: words were lost in sobs. He and I
were the only occupants of the parlour: Diana was practising
her music in the drawing-room, Mar^^ was gardening-4t was
a very fine May-day, clear, sunny, and breezy* My com-
panion expressed no surprise at this emotion, nor did bf
question me as to its cause; he only said: —
JANE EYRE
^* We will wait a few minutes, Janej till you are more
composed/'And while I smothered the paroxysm with all
ha^te, he sat calm and patient, leaning on his desk and look-
ing like a physician watching with the eye of science an
expected and fully-understood crisis in a patient^s malady.
Having stifled my sobs, wiped my eyeSj and muttered some-
thing about not being very well that mornings I resumed
my task, and succeeded in completing it. St, John put
away my books and his, locked his desk, and said:—
" NoWj Jane, you shall take a walk; and with me/'
'* I will call Diana and Mary/'
'* No. I want only one companion this morning, and that
must be you: put on your things; go out by the kitchen
door: take the road towards the head of Marsh Glen; I will
join you in a moment/'
I know no medium : I never in my life have Imown any
medium in my dealings with positive, hard characters,
antagonistic to my own, between absolute submission and
determined revolt. I have always faithfully observed the one.
Lip to the very moment of burstingj sometimes with volcanic
vehemence, into the other j and as neither present circum-
stances warranted, nor my present mood inchned me to
mutiny, I observed careful obedience to St. John's directions;
and in ten minutes I was treading the wild track of the glen,
side by side with him.
The breeze was from the w^t: it came over the hills,
sweet with scents of heath and rush; the sky was of stamless
blue; the stream descending the ravine, swelled with past
spring rains J poured along plentiful and clear, catching
golden gleams from the sun, and sapphire tints from the
firmament. As we advanced and left the track, we trod a
soft turf, mossy fine and emerald green, minutely enamelled
mth a tiny white flower, and spangled with a star-like
yellow blossom: the hills, meantime, shut us quite in; for
the glen, towards its head, wound to their very core,
" Let us rest here/'said St. John, as we reached the first
stragglers of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pasSj
beyond which the beck rushed down a waterfall; and wherCj
stil] a little further, the mountain shook off turf and flower,
had only heath for raiment, and crag for gem— where it
exaggerated the wild to the savage, and exchanged the fresh
for the frowning — where it guarded the forlorn hope of
solitude^ and a last refuge for silence.
ft
JANE EYRE
I took a seat : St. John stood near me. He looked up the
pass and down the hollow; his glance wandered away with
the stream^ and returned to traverse the unclouded heaven
which coloured it: he removed his hatj let the breeze stir
his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed in commimion with
the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade farewell to
something.
'* And I shall see it again/'he said aloud, " in dreams^
when I sleep by the Ganges : and again, in a more remote
hour— when another slumber overcomes me — on the shore
of a darker stream. "
Strange words of a strange love I An austere patriot's
passion for his fatherland I He sat down ; for half an hoof
we never spoke ■ neither he to me nor I to him : that intervil
passed J he recommenced : —
" Jane J I go in six weeks : I have taken my berth in an
East Indiaman which sails on the twentieth of June, "
" God will protect you ; for you have undertaken His
work/'I answered.
" Yes/'said he^ " there is my glor > ^ and joy- I am the
servant of an infallible master. I am not going out under
human guidance, subject to the defective laws and erring
control of my feeble fellow-worms: my king, my lawgiver,
my captain, is the All-perfect. It seems strange to me that
all round me do not bum to enlist under the same banner,—
to join in the same enterprise/'
*'All have not your powers : and it would be folly for ^
feeble to wish to march with the strong/'
** I do not speak to the feeble^ or think of them : I addie & i
only such as are worthy of the work, and competent to
accomphsh it, "
" Those are few in number, and diflScult to discover/*
** You say truly: but when found, it is right to stir theaf
up— to tirge and exhort them to the effort — to show them
what their gifts are, and why they were given— to speak
Heaven's message in their ear, — to offer them, direct from
God, a place in the ranks of His chosen. "
" If they are really qualified for the task, will not their
own hearts be the first to inform them of it ? "
I felt as if an awful charm was framing round and gather-
ing over me: I trembled to hear some fatal word spoken
which would at once declare and rivet the spell.
*'And what does your heart say?''demanded St, Johit

^

h
JANE
" My heart is mute, — my heart is mute/* I answered,
struck and thrilled,
" Then I must speak for it/'continued the deep, relentless
voice. " JanCj come with me to India: come as my helpmeet
and feliow'labourer/'
The glen and sky spun round: the hills heaved I It was as
if I had heard a summons from Heaven — as if a visionary
messenger, like him of Macedonia, had enounced, " Come
over and help us ! " But I was no apostle, — I could not
behold the herald, — I could not receive his calL
" Oh, St. John ['* I cried, " have some mercy I "
I appealed to one who, in the discharge of what he believed
his duty^ knew neither mercy nor remorse. He continued : —
" God and nature intended you for a missionary's wife.
It is not personal, but mental aidowments they have given
you : you are formed for labour, not for love. A missionary's
wife you must — shall be. You shall be mine: I claim you —
not for my pleasure^ but for my Sovereign's service/'
*'I am not fit for it: I have no vocation/'I said.
He had calculated on these first objections: he was not
irritated by them. Indeed, as he leaned back against the
crag behind him, folded his arms on his chest, and fixed his
countenance, I saw he was prepared for a long and trying
opposition, and had taken in a stock of patience to last him
to its dose — resolved, however, that that close should be
conquest for him.
''Humihty^ Jane, " said he,'* is the groundwork of Chris-
tian virtues : you say right that you are not fit for the work*
Who is fit for it? Or who, that ever was truly called, beUeved
Mmself worthy of the summons? Ij for instance, am but
dust and ashes. With St. Paul, I acknowledge myself the
chief est of sinners: but I do not suffer this sense of my
personal vileness to daunt me. I know my Leader: that He
Is just as well as mighty; and while He has chosen a feeble
instrument to perform a great task, He will^ from the bound-
less stores of His providence, supply the inadequacy of the
means to the end. Think hke me, Jane — trust Kke me. It is
the Rock of Ages I ask you to lean on: do not doubt but it
will bear the weight of your human weakness. "
'* I do not understand a missionary fife: I have never
studied missionary labours. "
" There, I, humble as I am, can give you the aid yo-
want: I can set your task from hour to hour; stand by ^
4o6
JANE EYRE
always I help you from moment to momenta This I could
do in the beginning: soon (for I know your powers) you
would be as stroog and apt as myself ^ and would not require
my help.**
" But my powers — where are they for this undertaking?
I do not feel them. Nothing speaks or stirs in me while you
talk. I am sensible of no light kindling — no life quickening
—no voice counselling or cheering. Ohj 1 wish I could make
you see how much my mind is at this moment like a rayless
dungeon, with one shrinking fe^r fettered in its depths — the
fear of being persuaded by you to attempt what I cannot
accomplish 1 "
" I have an answer for you — hear it, I have watched
you ever since we first met : I have made you my study for
ten months, I have proved you in that time by sundry
tests; and what have I seen and ehdted? In the village
school I found you could perform well^ punctually, up-
rightly^ labour uncongenial to your habits and inclinations f
I saw you could perform it with capacity and tact; you
could win while you controlled. In the calm with which you
leamt you had become suddenly richj I r^d a mind clear
of the vice of Demas ; — lucre had no undue power over you,
In the resolute readiness with which you cut your wealth
into four shares, keeping but one to yourself, and relin-
quishing the three others to the claim of abstract justice,
I recognised a soul that revelled in the flame and excitement
of sacrifice. In the tractability with which, at my wish, you
forsook a study in which you were interested, and adopted
another because it interested me; in the untiring assiduity
with which you have since persevered in it — in the un-
flagging energy and unshaken temper with which you have
met its difficulties — I acknowledge the complement of the
qualities I seek, Jane, you are dodle^ diligent, disinterested,
faithful J constant, and courageous,- very gentle, and vtjy
heroic: cease to mistrust yourself — I can trust you un-
reservedly. As a conductress of Indian schools, and a helper
amongst Indian women, your assistance will be to me
invaluable. "
My iron shroud contracted round me; persuasion ad-
vanced with slow sure step* Shut my eyes as I would ^ these
last words of his succeeded in making the way, which had
seemed blocked up, comparatively clear. My work, which
had appeared so vague, so hopelessly diffuse, condensed
I
JANE EYRl
407
itself as he proceeded j and assumed a definite fonn under
his shaping hand. He waited for an answer. I demanded
a quarter of an hour to thinks before I again hazarded a reply.
'* Very willingly/'he rejoined: and rising, he strode a
little distance tap the pa^s^ threw himself down on a swell of
heath, and there lay stilL
''1 can do what he wants me to do: I am forced to see
and acknowledge that, " I meditated — " That is, if life be
spared me. But I feel mine is not the existence to be long
protracted under an Indian sun, — What then? He does
not care for that: when my time came to die he would
resign me, in all serenity and sanctity, to the God who gave
me. The case is very plain before me. In leaving England,
I should leave a loved but empty land — Mr. Rochester is
not there; and if he were, what is, what can that ever be
to me? My business is to live withoiit him now: nothing so
absurd J so weak as to drag on from day to day, as if I were
waiting some impossible change in circumstances, which
might reunite me to him. Of course (as St. John once said)
1 must seek another interest in life to replace the one lost;
is not the occupation he now offers me truly the most glorious
man can adopt or God assign ? Is it not, by its noble cares
and subUme results, the one best calculated to fill the void
left by uptom affections and demolished hopes? I beheve
I must say. Yes — and yet I shudder. Alas I If I join St.
John, I abandon half myself: if I go to India, I go to pre-
mature death. And how will the interval between leaving
England for India, and India for the grave, be filled ? Oh,
I know well! That, too, is very clear to my vision. By strain-
ing to satisfy St. John till my sinews ache, I shall satisfy
him^to the finest central point and farthest outward circle
of his expectations. If I io go with him — if I do make the
sacrifice he urges^ I will make it absolutely; I will throw all
on the altar— heart, vitals, the entire victim. He will never
love me; but he shall approve me; I will show him energies
he has not seen, resources he has never suspected, Yes;
T can work as hard as he can; and with as little grudging.
" Consent, then, to his demand is possible: but for one
item — one dreadful item. It is — that he asks me to be his
wife, and has no more of a husband's heart for me than
that frowning giant of a rock, down which the stream 15
foaming in yonder gorge. He prizes me as a soldier would
a good weapon; and that is aU. Unmarried to him^ this
-4o5~ Jane eyre
would never grieve me; but can I let him complete his^'
caJcuJations— coolly pnt into pmctice his plans — go through
the wedding ceremony? Can I receive from him the bridal
ring, endure all the forms of love (which I doubt not he
would scrupulously observe) and know that the spirit was
quite absent? Can I bea.r the consciousness that every
endearment he bestows is a sacrifice made on principle?
No: such a martyrdom would be monstrous* I will never
undergo it. As his sister, I might accompany him — not as
his wile: I will tell him so/'
I looked towards the knoll : there he lay^ still as a prostrate
column; his face turned to me: his eye beaming watchful^
and keen. He started to his feet^ and approached me. i
" I am ready to go to India, if I may go free/'
" Your answer requires a commentary/* he said ; " it 1$
not clear. "
** You have hitherto been my adopted brother: I, your
adopted sister; let us continue as such: you and I had
better not marry/'
He shook his head,''Adopted fraternity will not do in
Ithis case. If you were my real sister it would be different :
1 1 should take you, and seek no wife. But as it is, either our
imion must be consecrated and sealed by marriage, or it
cannot exist; practical obstacles oppose themselves to any
other plan. Do you not see it, Jane ? Consider a moment^-j—
your strong sense will guide you/* JH
I did consider: and still my sense, such as it waSj directe(f^
I me only to the fact that we did not love each other as man
land wife should; and therefore it inferred we ought not to
marry, I said so, *'St. John, " I returned,''I regard you as
) ft brother — you^ me as a sister: so let us continue "
" We cannot— we cannot/'he answered^ with short, sharp
determination : ** it would not do, You have said yo«
will go with me to India: remember^ — you have said
that/*
''Conditionally. "
" Well — well. To the main point — the departure with
me from England, the co-operation with me in my future
labours — you do not object. You have already as good as
put your hand to the plough: you are too consistent to
withdraw it. You have but one end to keep in view— how
the work you have undertaken can best be done. Simplify
[your compUcated interests, feelings, thoughts, wishes, aims;
I
h
JANE EYRE 409
merge all considerations in one purpose: that of fulfilling
with effect*-with power — the mission of your great Master.
To do so J you must have a coadjutor — -not a brother; that
is a loose tie; but a husband* I, too^ do not want a sister;
a sister might any day be taken from me, I want a wife;
the sole helpmeet I can influence efficiently in life, and retain
absolutely till death/'
I shuddered as he spoke: I felt his influence in my marrow
- — ^his hold on my limbs.
" Seek one elsewhere than in me, St, John ; seek one fitted
to you,**
" One fitted to my purpose^ you mean — fitted to my
vocation. Again I tell you it is not the insignificant private
individual — the mere man, with the man^s selfish senses —
I wish to mate : it is a missionary/*
" And I will give the missionary my encrgi^t — ^it is all he
wants— but not myself: that would be only adding the
husk and shell to the kernel. For them he has no use: I
retain them, "
** You cannot — you ought not. Do you think God will be
satisfied with half an oblation ? Will he accept a mutilated
sacrifice? It is the cause of God I advocate: it is under his
standard I enhst you, I cannot accept on His behalf a
divided allegiance; it must be entire. "
''Ohl I will ^ve my heart to God/'I said^ " You do not
want it.*'
I will not swear, reader, that there was not something
of repressed sarcasm both in the tone in which 1 uttered
this sentencej and in the feeling that accompanied it, 1 had
silently feared St. John till now, because I had not under-
stood him. He had heJd me in awe, because he had held
me in doubt. How much of him was saint, how much mortal,
I could not heretofore tell : but revelations were being made
in this conference: the analysis of his nature was proceeding
before my eyes. I saw his falhbilities : I comprehended them,
I understood that, sitting there where I did, on the bank
of heath, and with that handsome form before me, I sat at
the feet of a man, erring as I, The veil fell from his hardness
and despotism. Having felt in him the presence of these
qualities, I felt his imperfection, and took courage. I was
with an equal — one with whom I might argue— one whom,
if I saw good, I might resist.
He was silent after I had uttered the last seutenee^ aad
m
410
JANE EYRE
1 presently risked an upward glance at his countenance^
His eye, bent on me^ expressed at once stem surprise and
keen inquiry. " Is she sarcastic, and sarcastic to meT^^
it seemed to say,
*'What does this signify? "
** Do not let us forget that this is a solemn matter/'be
said ere long; ^^ one of which we may neither think nor talk
lightly without sin. I trusty Jane, you are in earnest when
you say you will gi ve your heart to God : it is all I want. Once
wrench your heart from man, and fix it on your Maker, the
advancement of that Maker's spiritual kingdom on earth
will be your chief delight and endeavour j you will be ready
to do at once whatever furthers that end. You mil see what
impetus would be given to your efforts and mine by our
physical and mental union in marriage : the only union that
gives a character of permanent conformity to the destinies
and designs of human beings : and, passing over all minor
caprices— all trivial difficulties and dehcacies of feelings
all scruple about the degree, kind^ strength, or tenderness
of mere personal inclination — you will hasten to enter into
that union at once/*
** Shall I? ^* I said, briefly; and I looked at his features,
beautiful in their harmony, but strangely formidable in their
still severity; at his brow, commanding but not open; *t
his eyeS| bright and deep, and searching, but never soft;
at his tall, imposing figure; and fancied myself in idea Ms
wife. Ohl it would never dol As his curate, his comrade,
all would be right: I would cross oceans with him in that
capacity ; toil under eastern suns, in Asian deserts with him
in that office; admire and emulate his courage, and devotioni
and vigour; accommodate quietly to his mas terhood; smile
undisturbed at his ineradicable ambition; discriminate the
Christian from the man; profoundly esteem the one, and
freely forgive the other. I should suffer often, no doubt^
attached to him only in this capacity: my body would be
under rather a stringent yoke, but my heart and mijxd would
be free, I should still have my unblighted self to turn to:
my natural unenslaved feelings with which to communicate
in moments of loneliness. There would be recesses in my
mind which would be only mine, to which he never came;
and senriments growing there fresh and sheltered, which
his austerity could never blight, nor his measured warrior-
[Lmarch trample down: but as his wife— at Ms side always,
JANE EYRE
and always restrained, and always checked — forced to keep
the fire of my nature continually low, to compel it to bum
inwardly and never utter a cryi though the imprisoned flame
consumed vital after vital— lAtf would be unendurable.
'* St, John ! " I exclaimed, when I had got so far in my
meditation,
f ** Well ? " he answered, idly.
^ " I repeat: I freely consent to go with you as your fellow-
missionary; but not as your wife; I cannot marry you and
become part of you/*
** A part of me you must become/'he answered steadily ;
'* otherwise the whole bargain is void. How can I^ a man
not yet thirty, take out with me to India a girl of nineteen,
unless she be married to me ? How can we be for ever to-
gether — sometimes in solitudes, sometimes amidst savage
tribes — and unwed ? "
** Very well/'I said shortly; " under the circumstances,
quite as well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and
a clergyman hke yourself. "
** It is known that you are not my sister; I cannot intro-
duce you m such t to attempt it would be to fasten injurious
suspicions on us both. And for the rest, though you have
a man's vigorous brain, you have a woman's hearty and— ^it
would not do. "
" It would do, " I affirmed with some disdain, ** perfectly
well* I have a woman's heart; but not where you are
concerned; for you I have only a comrade's constancy; a
fellow-soltHer*s frankness, fidelity, fraternity, if you like;
a neophyte's respect and submission to his hierophantr
nothing more — don't fear.^*
" It is what I want/'he said, speaking to himself; *'it
is just what I want. And there are obstacles in the way:
they must be hewn down. Jane, you would not repient
marrying me; be certain of that; we must be married*
I repeat it: there is no other way; and undoubtedly enough
of love would follow upon marriage to render the union
right even in your eyes. "
'* I scorn your idea of love, " I could not help saying;
as I rose up and stood before him, leaning my back against
the rock. " I scorn the counterfeit sentiment you ofifer:
yes, St* John, and I scorn you when you offer it. "
He looked at me fixedly: compressing his well-cut lips
while he did so. Whether he was incensed or surprised, or

413 JANE EYRE
wbatj it was not easy to tell: he could command his
tenance thoroughly.
** I scarcely expected to hear that express! oe from
he said: ** I thmk I have done and uttered nothing to
deserve scorn.'*
I was touched by his gentle tone, and overawed by his
high J calm mien. ^^
" Forgive me the words, St. John: but it is your owij^f
fault that I have been roused to speak so unguardedly*
You have introduced a topic on which om natures are at
variance — a topic we should never discuss: the %^ery name
of love is an apple of discord between us^ — ^if the reality
were required what should we do? How should we £eel?
My dear cousin ^ abandon your scheme of marriage — forget
it. "
" No, " said he j " it is a long-cherished schenie, and the
only one which can secure my great end: but I shall urge
you no further at present* To-morrow, I leave home for
Cambridge: I have many friends there to whom I should
wish to say farewell, I shall be absent a fortnight — take
that spiace of time to consider my offer: and do not forget
that if you reject it, it is not me you denyj but God. Through
my means, He opens to you a noble career; as my wife only
can you enter upon it. Refuse to be my wife, and you limit
yourself for ever to a track of selfish ease and barren ob-
scurity. Tremble lest in that case you should be numbered
with those who have denied the faith, and are worse thaa
infidels! "
He had done. Turning from me^ he once more —
'Looked to river, looked to hill :'
I
But this time his feelings were all pent in his heart; I was
not worthy to hear them uttered. As I walked by his side
homeward, I read well in his iron silence aU he felt towards
me: the disappointment of an austere and despotic nature^
which has met resistance where it expected submissios--
the disapprobation of a cool, inflexible judgment^ which has
detected in another feelings and views in which it has no
power to sympathise: in short, as a man, he would have
w^hed to coerce me into obedience: it was only as a sincere
Christian he bore so patiently with my perversity^ and
allowed so long a space for reflection and repentance.
That nightj after he bad kissed his skters, he thought
JANE EYRE
proper to f oiget even to shake hands with me; but left the
iDom in silence. I — who^ though I had no love^ had much
friendship for him— was hurt by the markexi omission:
so much hurt that tears started to my eyes,
" I see you and St. John have been quarrelling^ Jane, "
said Diana, " during your walk on the moon But go after
him; he is now lingering in the passagCj, eiq)ecting you —
he will make it up, "
I have not much pride under such circumstances : I would
always rather be happy than dignified; and I ran after him—
he stood at the foot of the stairs.
" Good-night, St, John, " said I.
" Good-night, Jane, " he repHed calmly-
*'Then shake hands, " I added.
What a cold, loose touch he impressed on my fingers 1
He was deeply displeased by what had occurred that day:
cordiahty would not warm, nor tears move him. No happy
reconcihation was to be had with him — no cheering smile
or generous word; but still the Christian was patient and
placid; and when I asked him if he forgave me, he answered
that he was not in the habit of cherishing the remembrance
of vexation; that he had nothing to forgive; not having
been offended.
And with that answer he left me. I would much rather
had knocked me do\^ii.
CHAPTER XXXV
He did not icave for Cambridge the next day^ as he had
said he would- He deferred his departure a whole week; and
dining that time be made me feel what severe punishment,
a good, yet stern, a consdentious, yet implacable man can
inflict on one who has offended him. Without one overt act
of hostility, one upbraiding word, he contrived to impress
me momently with the conviction that I was put beyond the
pale of his favour.
Not that St. John harboured a spirit of unchristian vin-
dictiveness— not that he would have injured a hair of my
head, if it had been fully in his power to do so. Both by
nature and principle, he was superior to the mtsxi gratifica-

JANE EYRE
tion of vengeance : he had forgiven me for saying I scomed
him and his love, but he had not forgotten the words; and
as long as he and I lived he never would forget them. I saw
by his look, when he turned to me^ that they were always
written on the air between me and him ; whenever I spoke,
they sounded in my voice to his earj and their echo toned
every answer he gave me.
He did not abstain from conversing with rae: he evfn
called me as usual each morning to join him at his desk;
and I fear the corrupt man within him had a pleasure unim-
parted to, and unshared by, the pure Christian, in evincing
with what skill he could, while acting and speaking ap-
parently just as usual, extract from every deed and every
phrase the spirit of interest and approval which had formerly
communicated a certain austere charm to his language and
manner. To me, he was in reahty become no longer flesh, but
marble ; his eye was a cold, bright^ blue gem ; his tongue, a
speaking instrument— nothing more.
All this was torture to me — refined, lingering torture. It
kept up a slow fire of indignation, and a tremblmg trouble
of grief J which harassed and crushed me altogether. I felt
how — if I were his ^^ife, this good man, pure as the deep
sunless source, could soon kill me: without drawing from
my veins a single drop of blood, or receiving on his own
crystal conscience the faintest stain of crime. Especially I
felt this, when I made any attempt to propitiate him* No
ruth met my ruth. Be experienced no suffering from estrange-
ment-^no yearning after reconciliation; and though, more
than once, my fast falling tears blistered the page over which
we both bent, they produced no more effect on him than if
his heart had been really a matter of stone or metah To his
sisters, meantime, he was somewhat kinder than usual: as
if afraid that mere coldness would not sufficiently convince
me how completely I was banished and banned, he added
the force of contrast: and this I am sure he did, not by
malice, but on principle.
The night before he left home, happening to see him walk-
ing in the garden about sunset, and remembering, as I
looked at him, that this man, alienated as he now was > had
once saved my life, and that we were near relations, I was
moved to make a last attempt to regain his friendship. I
went out and approached him, as he stood leaning over the
httle gate: I spoke to the point at once.
JANE EYRE
" St, John J I am unhappy, because you are still angry
with me. Let us be friends. "
" I hope we are friends/* was the unmoved reply; while
he still watched the rising of the moonj which he had been
contemplating as I approached,
" Noj St. John, we are not friends as we were. Vou know
that/*
''Are we not ? That is wrong. For my part^ I wish yon no
ill and all good,''
** I believe you^ St, John; for I am sure you are incapable
of wishing any one ill: but, as I am your kinswoman, I
should desire somewhat more of afiection than that sort of
general philanthropy you extend to mere strangers,'*
" Of course,'* he said, " Your wish is reasonable; and I
am far from regarding you as a stranger,**
This, spoken in a cool^ tranquil tone, was mortifying and
bafSing enough. Had I attended to the suggestions of pride
and irej I should immediately have left him: but something
worked within me more strongly than those feelings could.
I deeply venerated ray cousin's talent and principle. His
friendship was of value to me: to lose it tried me severely,
I would not so soon relinquish the attempt to reconquer it,
*'Must we part in this way, St. John? And when you go
to India, will you leave me so^ without a kinder woid than
you have yet spoken? **
He now turned quite from the moon, and faced me.
** When I go to India, Jane, will I leave you ? What 1 do
you not go to India?**
" Vou said I could not, unless I married you.*'
" And you will not marry me? You adhere to that
resolution? "
Reader^ do you know, as I do, what terror those cold
people can put into the ice of their questions ? How much
of the fall of the avalanche is in their anger? of the breaking
up of the frozen sea in their displeasure?
" No, St. John, I will not marry you. I adhere to my
resolution.*'
The avalanche had shaken and slid a little forward; but
it did not yet crash down,
" Once more, why this refusal? ** he asked,
*'Formerly,** I answered,''because you did not love me;
now, I reply, because you almost hate me. If I were to
marry you, you would kill me. You are killing me now.**
^n^^^^^ " JANE EYRE
His lips and cheeks turned white— quite white,
" / should kill you — I am kiUing you f Your words
such as ought not to be used: violent^ unfeminine, aad un-
tnie. They betray an unfortunate state of mind : they merit
severe reproof: they would seem inexcusable; but that it ii
the duty of man to forgive his fellow, even until seventy-
and -seven times, "
I had finished the business now* While earnestly wishiiig
to erase from his mind the trace of my former offence, I had
stamped on that tenadous surface, another and far deeper
impression ; I had burnt it in.
" Now, you will indeed hate me/'I said. " It is useless to
attempt to conciliate you: I see I have made an eternal
enemy of you. "
A fresh wrong did these words inflict: the worse, became
they touched on the truth. That bloodless Up quivered to a
temporary spasm. I knew the steelly ire I had whetted. I
was heart-wrung.
** You utterly misinterpret mj words, " I saidj at once
seizing his hand :'* I have no intention to grieve or pun
you — indeed, I have not/*
Most bitterly he smiled — most deddedly he withdrew his
hand from mine. " And now you recall your promise, and
win not go to India at all, I presume? " said he, after a
considerable pause,
''Yes I win, as your assistant, " I answered.
A very long silence succeeded. What struggle there was
in him between Nature and Grace in this interval, I cannot
tell : only singular gleams sdntillated in his cyeSj and strange
shadows passed over his face. He spoke at last.
** I before proved to you the absurdity of a single woman
of your age proposing to accompany abroad a single man of
mine, I proved it to you in such terms as, I should have
thought^ would have prevented your ever again aUuding to
the plan. That you have done so, I regret — for your sake, "
I interrupted him. Anything like a tangible reproach gave
me courage at once. " Keep to common sense^ St. John:
you are verging on nonsense. You pretend to be shocked by
what 1 have said. You are not really shocked; for, with
your superior mind, you cannot be either so dull or so con-
ceited as to misunderstand my meaning. I say again, I will
be your curate, if you like, bat never your wife. "
Again he turned lividly pale; but^ as before, controlled
JANE EYRE 417
his passion perfactly. He answered emphaticallj-j but
catmly : —
■* A female ctimtej who is not my wife^ would never suit
me. With me^ then^ it seems , you cannot go: but if you are
sincere in your oflter, I will, while in townj speak to a married
missionary, whose wife needs a coadjutor. Your own fortune
will make you independent of the Society's aid; and thus
you may still be spared the dishonour of breaking your
promise^ and deserting the band you engaged to join, "
Now I never had, as the reader knows ^ either given any
formal pronusCj or entered into any engagement; and this
language was all much too hard, and much too despotic for
the occasion, I replied:—
" There is no dishonour j no breach of promise; no deser-
tion in the case. I am not under the slightest obligation to
go to India r especially with strangers. With you I would
have ventured much ; because I admire, confide in^ and, as
a sister, I love you: but I am convinced that, go when
and with whom I would, I should not live long in that
climate, "
'* Ahi you are afraid of yourself/'he said, curling his tip.
" I am < God did not give me my life to throw away; and
to do as you wish me would, I begin to think, be almost
equivalent to committing suicide. Moreover, before I
definitely resolve on quitting England, I will know for
certain, whether I cannot be of greater use by remaining in
it than by lea\^ng it/'
** What do you mean? *'
** It would be fruitless to attempt to explain : but there is
a point on which I have long endured painful doubt; and I
can go nowhere till by some means that doubt is removed. "
" I know where your heart turns, and to what it clings.
The interest you cherish is lawless and unconse crated. Long
since you ought to have crushed it; now you should bhisb
to allude to it. You think of Mr. Rochester?'*
It was true, I confessed it by silence.
" Are you going to seek Mr. Rochester? **
" I must find out what has become of him. "
** It remains for me, then, " he said, " to remember you in
my prayers; and to entreat God for you^ in all earnestness,
that you may not indeed become a castaway, I had thought
I recognised in you one of the chosen. But God sees not as
man sees: IHs will be done/*
41*
;yre
He opened the gate^ passed through it, and stmyed 1
down the glen. He was soon out of sight.
On re-entering the parlour, I found Diana standing at the
window^ looking very thoughtful, Diana was a great deal
taller than I : she put her hand on my shoulder, and, stoop-
ingj examined my face.
" Jane/'she said^ *'you are always agitated and pale
now. I am sure there is something the matter. TeU me what
business St. John and you have on hands. 1 have watched
you this half hour from the window: you must forgive my
being such a spy^ but for a long time I have fancied I hardly
know what. St, John is a strange being "
She paused — I did not speak: soon she resumed: —
'^ That brother of mine cherishes peculiar views of some
sort respecting you, I am sure: he has long distinguished
you by a notice and interest he never showed to anyone
else — to w^hat end ? 1 wish he loved you— does he, Jane ? "
I put her cool hand to my hot forehead: ** No, Die, not
one whit.**
'* Then why does he follow you so with his eyes— and get
you so frequently alone with him, and keep you so continu-
ally at his side? Mary and I had both concluded he wished
you to marry him. "
*'He do^— he has asked me to be his wife,**
Diana clapped her hands. " That is just what we hoped
and thought I And you will marry him, Jane^ won't you?
And then he will stay in Englajid, "
" Far from that, Diana; his sole idea in proposing to roe
is to procure a fitting fellow-labourer in his Indian toils/'
*'What 1 He wishes you to go to India ? "
** Yes.*'
" Madness t''she exclaimed. " You would not live three
months there, I am certain. You never shall go: you have
not consented— have you, Jane? "
*'I have refused to marry him " -
** And have consequently displeased him? " she suggested.
** Deeply: he will never forgive me, I fear; yet I offered
to accompany him as his sister. "
" It was frantic foUy to do so, Jane, Think of the task
you undertook— one of incessant fatigue: where fatigue
kills even the strong; and you are weak, St, John — you
know liim— would urge you to impossibilities — with hiiri
there would be no permission to rest during the hot hours;
JANE EYRE
and unfortunately, I have noticed, whatever he exacts, you
force yourself to perfonn. I am astonished you found
courage to refuse his hand. You do not love him then, Jane? ^*
*'Not as a husband, "
** Yet he is a handsome fellow/*
" And I am so pkin you see, Die, We should never suit. "
^'Plain ! You ? Not at all. You are much too pretty^ as
well as too good, to be grilled alive in Calcutta.'^ And again
she earnestly conjured me to give up all thoughts of going
oyt with her brother,
''I must, mdeedj " I said : " for wh^i just now I repeated
the ofifer of serving him for a deacon, he expressed himself
shocked at my want of decency. He seemed to tbink I had
committed an impropriety in proposing to accompany him
unmarried: as if I had not from the first hoped to find in
him a brother; and habitually regarded him as such.'^
" What makes you say he does not love you, Jane ? *^
" You should hear himself on the subject. He has again
and again explained that it is not himself, but his office he
wishes to mate. He has told me I am fonned for labour —
not for love: which is true, no doubt. But, in my opinion,
if I am not formed for love, it follows that I am not formed
for marriage^ Would it not be strangCj Die, to be chained
for life to a man who regarded one but as a useful too!? "
*'Insupportable — unnatural— out of the question ! "
** And then/'I continued, *'though I have only sisterly
affection for him now, yet, if forced to be his wife, I can
imagine the possibility of conceiving an inevitable^ strange,
torturing kind of love for him : because he is so talented ;
and there is often a certain heroic grandeur in his look,
manner, and conversation. In that case, my lot would
become unspeakably wretched. He would not want me to
bve him; and if I showed the feeling, he would make me
sensible that it was a superfluity unrequired by him, unbe-
coming in me. I know he would.**
** And yetj St. John is a good man,** said Diana.
** He is a good and a great man: but he forgets, pitilessly^
the feelings and claims of little people, in pursuing his own
large views. It is better^ therefore, for the insignificant to
keep out of his way; lest, in his progress, he should trample
them down. Here he comes! I will leave you, Diana,** And
1 hastened upstairs, as I saw him entering the garden.
But I was forced to meet him again at: supper. Dunn :^ that
420
JANE EYRE
meal he appeared just as composed as usuaU I bad thought
he would hardly speak to me, and I was certain he bad
given up the pursuit of his matrimomal scheme: the sequel
showed I was mistaken on both points. He addressed me
precisely in his ordinary manner; or what had^ of late^ beea
his ordinary manner; one scrupulously polite* No doubt he
had invoked the help of the Holy Spirit to subdue the anger
I had roused in him, and now behcved he had forgiven me
once more.
For the evening reading before prayers, he selected the
twenty-first chapter of Revelation. It was at all times
pleasant to listen^ while from his lips fell the words of the
Bible: never did his fine voice sound at once so sweet and
full — never did his manner become so impressive in its noble
simphcity^ as when he delivered the oracles of God: and
to-night that voice took a more solemn tone — that manner
a more thrilling meaning — as he sat in the midst of his
household circle (the May moon shining in through the un*
curtained window, and rendering almost unnecessary tb«
Ught of the candle on the table): as he sat there, bendiog
over the great old Bible, and described from its page the
vision of the new heaven and the new earth — told how God
would come to dwell with men| how he would wipe away aH
tears from their eyes, and promised that there should be tto
more death, neither sorrow nor crying, nor any more paln^
because the former things were passed away.
The succeeding words thrilled me strangely as he spofce
themr especially as 1 felt, by the slight, indescribable altera-
tion in sound, that in uttering them, his eye had turned on me.
" He tbat overcometh shall inherit all things ; and I wiU
be his God, and he shall be my son. But, " was slowly, dis-
tinctly read, " the fearful, the unbelieving, etc., shall have
their part in the lake which bumeth with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death. "
Henceforward, I knew what fate St. John feared for me.
A calm, subdued triumph, blent with a longing earnest-
ness, marked his enunciation of the last glorious verses ol
that chapter. The reader believed his name was already
written in the Lamb's book of hfe, and he yearned after the
hour which should admit him to the city to which the kings
of the earth bring their glor > ^ and honour; which has QO
need of sun or moon to shine in it, because the glory of Gcd
hghtens it, and the Lamb is the hght thereof.
JANE EYRE
421
k
In the pmyer following tiie chapterj all his energy gathered
— all his stem zeal woke: he was in deep earnest^ wrestling
with God J and resolved on a conquest. He supplicated
strength for the weak-hearted; guidance for wanderers from
the fold; a return, even at the eleventh hour, for those whom
the temptations of the world and the flesh were luring from
the narrow path. He asked, he urged , he claimed the boon
of a brand snatched from the burning. Earnestness is ever
deeply solemn : firs tj as I listened to that prayer, I wondered
at his ; then, when it continued and rose, I was touched by
it, and at last awed. He felt the greatness and goodness of
his purpose so sincerely: others who heard him plead for it,
could not but feel it too.
The prayer over, we took leave of him: he was to go at a
very early hour in the morning, Diana and Mary having
kissed him, left the room — in compliance, I think, with a
whispered hint from him : I tendered my hand, and wished
him a pleasant journey,
" Thank you, Jane. As I said, I shall return from Cam-
bridge in a fortnight: that space, then^ is yet left you for
reflection. If I listened to human pride, I should say no
more to you of marriage with me; but I listen to my dut > %
and keep steadily in view my first aim— to do all things to
the glor > ^ of God. My Master was long-suffering: so will I
be, I camiot give you up to perdition as a vessel of wrath:
repent — resolve; while there is yet time. Remember, we
are bid to work while it is day-^wamed that * the night
Cometh when no man shall work/ Remember the fate of
Dives^ who had his good things in this life. God give you
strength to choose that better part which shall not be taken
from you I''
He laid his hand on my head as he uttered the last words*
He had spoken earnestly, mildly : his look was not, indeed,
that of a lover beholding his mistress; but it was that of a
pastor re calli ng his wand erin g sheep — or better, of a
pruardian angel watching the soul for which he is responsible.
All men of talent, whether they be men of feehng or not;
whether they be zealots, or aspirants, or despots— provided
only they be sincere — have their sublime moments; when
they subdue and rule. I felt veneration for St. John — venera-
tion so strong that its impetus thrust me at once to the point
I had so long shunned, I was tempted to cease struggling
with him — ^to rush down the torrent of his will into the gufi
122
JANE EYRE
of his existence, and there lose my own, I was almost as hard
I beset by him now as I had been once before^ in a different
way, by another. I was a fool both times. To have yielded
j then would have been an error of principle ; to have yielded
I now would have been an error of judgment. So I think at this
[hour, when I look back to the crisis through the quiet
medium of time: I was unconscious of folly at the instant.
I stood motionless under my hierophant's touch ♦ My
refusals were forgotten — my fears overcome — my wrestlings
paralysed. The Impossible^-i.r. ray marriage with St, John
^was fast becoming the Possible. All was changing utterly,
with a sudden sweep. Religion called — Angels beckoned—
God commanded — hfe rolled together like a scroll — death's
gates opening, showed eternity beyond ; it seemed, that for
safety and bliss there, all here might be sacrificed in a second.
The dim room was full of visions.
" Could you decide now?''asked the missionary. The
inquiry was pot in gentle tones : he drew me to him gently*
Oh I that gentleness! how far more potent is it than force!
I could resist St. John*s wrath: I grew phant as a reed imder
his kindness. Yet I knew all the time, if I yielded now, 1
should not the less be made to repent, some day^ of my
former rebellion. His nature was not changed by one hour
of solemn prayer: it was only elevated.
" I could decide if I were but certain,** I answered : " were
1 but convinced that it is God*s will I should marry you, I
could vow to marry you here and now — come afterwank
what would !'*
** My prayers are heard 1 " ejaculated St. John. He pressed
his hand firmer on my head, as if he claimed me: he sur-
rounded me with his arm, alfnost as if he loved me (I say
almost^l knew the difference— for I had felt what it was to
be loved; but, like him, I had now put love out of the
question, and thought only of duty): I contended with my
inward dimness of vision, before which clouds yet rolled. I
sincerely^ deeply, fervently longed to do what was right j
and only that. *'Show me, show me the path! " I entreated
of Heaven. I was excited more than I had ever been; and
whether what followed was the effect of excitement, the
reader shall judge.
All the house was still; for I believe all, except St. Joho
and myself, were now retired to rest. The one candle was
dying otjt : the room was full of moonlight. My heart beat
^
^
I
k
JANE EYRE 423
fast and thick: I heard its throb. Suddenly it stood still to
an inexpressible feeling that thrilled it through^ and passed
at once to my head and extxenuties. The feeling was not
hke an electric shock ; but it was quite as sharp, as strange,
as startling : it acted on my senses as if their utmost activity
hitherto had been but torpor; from which they were now
summLonedj and forced to wake. They rose expectant: eye
and ear waited, while the flesh quivered on my bones.
*'What have you heard? What do you see? *^ asked St.
John, I saw nothing: but I heard a voice somewhere cry —
** Janei Jane 1 Jane I " nothing more.
" Oh God I what is it ?'^ I gasped.
I might have said,'* Where is it? " for it did not seem in
the room — ^nor in the house — nor in the garden: it did not
come out of the air— nor from under the earth — ^nor from
overhead, I had heard it — where, or whence, for ever impos*
sible to know ! And it was the voice of a human being— a
knowBj loved, well-remembered voice—that of Edward
Fairfax Rochester; and it spoke in pain and woe wildly j
eerily, urgently.
*'I am coming \ " I cried, " Wait for me 1 Oh, I will
come I ^* I flew to the door, and looked into the passage: it
was dark. I ran out into the garden: it was void.
" Where are you? " I exclaimed.
The hills beyond Marsh Glen sent the answer faintly back
— ** Where are you ? " I listened. The wind sighed low in
the firs : all was moorland loneliness and midnight hush.
" Down superstition 1 " I commented, as that spectre rose
up black by the black yew at the gate, " This is not thy
deception, not thy witchcraft: it is the work of nature.
She was roused, and did — no miracle — but her best, "
I broke from St. John; who had followed, and would
have detained me. It was my time to assume ascendancy.
My powers were in play, and in force. I told him to forbear
question or remark; I desired him to leave me; I must,
and would be alone* He obeyed at once. Where there is
energy to command well enough, obedience never fails,
I mounted to my chamber; locked myself in; fell on my
knees ; and prayed in my way — a different way to St. John's^
but effective in its own fashion. I seemed to penetrate very
near a Mighty Spirit; and my soul rushed out in gratitude at
His feet, I rose from the thanksgiving — took a resolve — and
lay down, unscared, enlightened — eager but for the daylight.
4**
JANE EYRE
CHAPTER XXXVl
3
Tee daylight came. 1 rose at dawn. I busied myself fiSTS
hour or two with arranging my things m my chamber,
drawers and wardrobe, in the order wherein I should wish
to leave them during a brief absence- Meantime^ I heaid
St. John quit his room. He stopped at my door: I feared
he wouJd knock— no, but a slip of paper was passed under the
door, I took it up. It bore these words—
" You left me too suddenly last night. Had you stayed
l^^t a little longer, you would have laid your hand on the
Christianas cross and the angeFs crown. I shall expect your
dear dedsion when I return this day fortnight. Meantime,
watch and pray that you enter not into temptation: the
spirit^ I trust, is willing, but the flesh, I see, is weak. I shall
pray for you hourly,— Yours^ St. John.*'
" My spirit/'I answered, mentally, ** is willing to do what
is right] and my flesh, I hope, is strong enough to accom-
plish the will of Heaven, when once that will is distinctly
known to me. At any rate, it shall be strong enough m
search— inquire— to grope an outlet from thS crowd of
doubt, and find the open day of certainty. "
It was the first of June; yet the morning was overcast
and chilly: rain beat fast on my casement. I heard the
front-door open, and St, John pass out. Looking throtigb
the window, I saw him traverse the garden. He took the way
over the misty moors in the direction of Whitcross — there
he would meet the coach.
" In a few more hours I shall succeed you in that tracks
cousin, " thought I: *'I too have a coach to meet at Whit*
cross. I too have some to see and ask after in England,
before I depart for ever. "
It wanted yet two hours of breakfast-time, I filled the
'inter\^al in walking softly about my room, and pondering
the visitation which had given my plans their present bent.
I recalled that inward sensation I had experienced: for I
could recall it, with all its unspeakable strangeness, I
recalled the voice I had heard; again I questioned whence
it came, as vainly as before: it seemed in me— not m the
external world, I asked, was it a mere nervous impressicm
--a delusion? I could not conceive or believe: it was more
JANE EYRE
42s
like an inspiration. The wondrous shock of feeling had come
like the earthquake which shook the foundations of Paul
and SiSas*s prison; it had opened the doors of the sours
ceUj and loosed its bands — it had wakened it out of its sJeqjj
whence it sprang tremblings listening, aghast; then vibrated
thrice a cry on my startled ear, and in my quaking hearty
and through my spirit; which neither feared nor shook,
but exult ^ a^ il in joy over the success of one effort it had
been privileged to make^ independent of the cumbrous
body.
** Ere many days/'I saidj as I terminated my musingS|
'* I will know something of him whose voice seemed last
night to summon me. Letters have proved of no avail —
personal inquiry shall replace them/'
At breakfast I arniounced to Diana and Mary that I was
going a journey j and should be absent at least four days,
'* Aloncj Jane? " they asked,
" Yes ; it was to see, or hear news of, a friend about whom
I had for some time been uneasy. "
They might have said, as I have no doubt they thought,
that they had believed me to be without any friends save
them: for, indeed^ I had often said so; but with their true
natuml dehcacy, they abstained from comment; except
that Diana asked me if I was sure 1 was well enough to travel,
I looked very pale, she observed. I replied, that nothing
ailed me save anxiety of mind^ which I hoped soon to
alleviate.
It was easy to make my further arrangemenls; for 1 was
troubled with no inquiries— no surmises. Having once
explained to them that I could not now be exphcit about my
plaoSj they kindly and wisely acquiesced in the silence with
which I pursued them; according to me the privilege of
free action I shouldj mider similar circumstances, have
accorded them.
I left Moor House at three o'clock p,m., and soon after
four, I stood at the foot of the sign-post of Whitcross, waiting
the arrival of the coach which was to take me to distant
Tbomfield. Amidst the silence of those solitary roads and
desert hills, I heard it approach from a great distance. It
was the same vehicle whence, a year ago, I had alighted one
summer evening on this very spot — how desolate^ and
hopeless, and objectless 1 It stopped as I beckoned. I entered
— ^not now obliged to part with my whole fortune as the price
4^
rANE

of its accommodation. Once more on the road to Thomfield,
I fdt like the messenger-pigeon flying home.
It was a journey of six-and -thirty hours, I had set out from
Wytcross on a Tuesday afternoon, and early on the suc-
ceeding Thursday morning the coach stopped to water the
horses at a wayside inn, situated in the midst of scenery
whose green hedges and large fields, and low pastoral hills
(how mild of feature and verdant of hue compared with the
stem north*midland moors of Morton !) met my eye like the
lineaments of a once familiar face. Yes, I knew the character
of this landscape: I was sure we were near my bourne*
" How far is Thomfield Hall from here? *'I asked of the
ostler.
" Just two miles, ma'am^ across the fields/*
" My journey is closed/'I thought to myself. I got out
of the coachj gave a box I had into the ostler's charge^ to be
kept till I called for it; paid my fare; satisfi^l the coach-
man^ and was going: the brightening day gleamed on the
sign of the mn^ and I read in gilt letters,''The Rochester
Arms. " My heart leapt up: I was already on my master's
very lands. It fell again: the thought struck it: —
*'Your master himself may be beyond the British Channel^
for aught you know; and then, if he is at Thomfield Hall^
towards which you hasten, who besides him is there? His
lunatic wife; and you have nothing to do with him : you dare
not speak to him or seek his presence. You have lost your
labour — you had better go no farther/'urged the monitor.
" Ask information of the people at the inn ; they can give
you all you seek; they can solve your doubts at once. Go
up to that manj and inquire if Mr. Rochester be at home, "
The suggestion was sensible; and yet 1 could not force
myself to act on it, I so dreaded a reply that would crush
me with despair. To prolong doubt was to prolong hope.
I might yet once more see the Hall under the ray of her star*
There was the stile before me— the very fields through which
I had hurried J blindj deaf, distracted, with a revengeful fury
tracking and scourging me, on the morning I fled from
Thomfield: ere I well knew what course I had resolved to
take, I was in the midst of them. How fast I walked I How
I ran sometimes 1 How I looked forward to catch the first
view of the well-known woods ! With what feelings I wd*
corned single trees I knew, and familiar glimpses of meadow
and hill between them 1
JANE EYRE
At last the woods rose; the rookery clustered dark; a
loud cawing broke the morning stillness, Stratige delight
inspired me: on I hastened. Another field crossed — a lane
threaded — ^and there were the courtyard walls — the back
offices ; the house itself, the rookery still hid, ** My first
view of it shall be in front/'I determinedi *^ where its bold
battlements will strike the eye nobly at once, and where 1
can single out my master's very window: perhaps he will
be standing at it — he rises early: perhaps he is now walking
in the orchard^ or on the pavement in front. Could I but
see him! — but a moment! Surely, in that case, I should not
be so mad as to run to him? I cannot tell — I am not certain.
And if I did — what then ? God bless him 1 What then ?
Who would be hurt by my once more tasting the life his glance
can give me — I rave: perhaps at this moment he is watching
the sun rise over the PyreneeSj or on the tideless sea of the
south/*
I had coasted along the lower wall of the orchard —
turned its angle: there was a gate just there, opening into
the meadow, between two stone pillars, crowned by stone
balls. From behind one pillar, I could peep round quietly
at the full front of the mansion. I advanced my head with
precaution, desirous to ascertain if any bedroom window-
blinds were yet drawn up; battlements, wmdows, long front
— all from this sheltered station were at my command.
The crows sailing overhead perhaps watched me while
I took this survey. I wonder what they thought: they must
have considered I was very careful and timid at first, and
that gradually I grew very bold and reckless. A peep, and
then a long stare; and then a departure from my niche and
a straying out into the meadow; and a sudden stop full in
front of the great mansion, and a protracted, hardy gaze
towards it,''What affectation of diffidence was this at
first? ** they might have demanded, ** What stupid regard-
lessness now? "
Hear an illustration, reader,
A lover finds his mistress asleep on a mossy bank; he
wishes to catch a glimpse of her fair face without waking her.
He steals softly over the grass, careful to make no sound j
be pauses— fancying she ha^ stirred ; he withdraws ; not for
worlds would he be seen. All is still: he again advances;
he bends above her; a light veil rests on her features: he
lifts itj bends lower; now his ty^ anticipate the vision of
^pf* ^^JANE EYRE
beauty — ^wann, and blcwjming, and loveiyj in rest. How
hurried was their first gkncel But bow they fix! How he
starts! How he suddenly and vehemently clasps in both
arms the form he dared not, a moment since j touch with his
finger i How he calls aloud a name, and drops his burden^
and gazes on it wildly ! He thus ^asps and cries, and gazes,
because he no longer fears to waken by any sound he can
utter — by any movement he can make. He thought his
love slept sweetly: he finds she is stone-dead.
I looked with timorous joy towards a stately house: I saw
a blackened ruin.
No need to cower behind a gate-post, indeed 1 — ^to peep
up at chamber lattices, fearing life was astir behind theml
No need to listen for doors openbg — to fancy steps on the
pavement or the gravel-walk 1 The lawn, the grounds were
trodden and waste: the portal yawned void. The front was,
as I had once seen it in a dream^ but a shell-like w*all^ veiy
high and very fragile looking, perforated with pandess
windows: no roofj no battlements, no chimneys — ^all had
crashed in.
And there was the silence of death about it: the solitude
of a lonesome wild. No wonder that letters addressed to
people here had never received an answer: as well despatdi
epistles to a vault in a church aisle. The grim blackness of
the stones toM by what fate the Hall had fallen— by con-
flagration: but how kindled? What story belonged to this
disaster? What loss, besides mortar and marble, and wood-
work, had followed upon it? Had life been wrecked, as well
as property? If so, whose? Dreadful question: there was
no one here to answer it — not even dumb sign, mute token*
In wandering round the shattered walls and through
the devastated interiorj I gathered evidence that the calamity
was not of late occurrence. Winter snows, I thought, had
drift^ through that void arch; winter rains beaten in at
those hoUow casements; for, amidst the drenched piles of
rubbish, spring had cherished vegetation: grass and weed
grew here and there between the stones and fallen rafters.
And oht where, meantime, was the hapless owner of this
wredc? In what land? Under what auspices? My eye
involuntarily wandered to the grey church tower nesa the
gates, and I asked, " Is he with Darner de Kochester, sharing
the shelter of his narrow marble house? *'
Some answer must be had to these questions. I could
^tad it E
JANE EYRE
429
id it nowhere but at the inn^ and thither, ere long, I re-
turned * The host himself brought my breakfast into the
parlour. I requested lum to shut the door and sit down:
I had some questions to ask him. But when he comphed >
I scarcely knew how to begin; such horror had I of the
possible answers. And yet the spectacle of desolation I had
just I eft J prepared me in a measure for a tale of misery*
The host was a respectable-looking^ middle-aged man-
'* You know Thomfield HaU, of course? " I managed
to say at last*
" Yes, ma'am ; I lived there once. "
** Did you? " Not in my time^ I thought; you are a
stranger to me.
" I was the late Mr. Rochester's butler j " he added.
The latel I seemed to have received with full force j the
blow I had been trying to evade,
''The late I " I gasped- *Ms he dead? "
** I mean the pr^ent gentleman, Mr, Edward *s father/'
he explained. I breathed again: my blood r^umed its flow.
Fully assured by these words that Mr. Edward — my Mr,
Rochester (God bless him, wherever he was I) was at least
alive; was, in short, " the present gentleman. " Gladdening
words 1 It seemed I could hear all that was to come—*
whatever the disclosures might be — with comparative
tranquillity. Since he was not in the gravCj I cotdd bear,
I thought, to learn that be was at the Antipodes.
*Ms Mr, Rochester living at Thomiield Hall now? "
I asked, knowing, of course, what the answer would be,
but yet desirous of deferring the direct question as to where
he really was.
** No^ ma'am — oh, no I No one is living there, I suppose
you are a stranger in these parts, or you would have heard
what happened last autumn, — Thorn field Hall is quite a
ruin : it was burnt down just about harvest time* A dreadful
calamity 1 such an immense quantity of valuable property
destroyed: hardly any of the furniture could be saved.
Hie fire broke out at dead of night, and before the engines
arrived from Millcote, the building was one mass of flame.
It was a terrible spectacle: I witnessed it m)raelf/*
*'At dead of night T'I muttered. Yes, that was ever the
hour of fatality at Thornfield, " Was it known how it
originated ?'* I demanded.
" They guessed, ma'am: they guessed. Indeed^ I should
I

430 JANE EYRE
say it was ascertained beyond a doubt* You are no
aware/'he continued, edging his chair a little nearer ihe
table^ and speaking low^ " that there was a lady, — a^ — a
lujiatiCj kept in the house? "
*'I have heard some tiling of it. "
*'She was kept in very close confinement, ma'am ; people
even for years was not absolutely certain of her existence.
No one saw her: they only knew by rmnour that such a
person was at the Hall; and who or what she was it was
difficult to conjecture. They said Mr. Edward had brought
her from abroad; and some believed she had been hh
mistress. But a queer thing happened a year since — a verj^
queer thing, "
I feared now to hear my own story > T endeavoured to
recall him to the main fact.
" And duslady? "
" This ladyj ma'am/'he answered, ** turned out to be
Mr, Rochester's wife 1 The discovery was brought about in
the strangest way. There was a young lady^ a governess at
the Hall, that Mr. Rochester fell in'* M
" But the fire, " I suggested. "
*'Vm coming to that, ma'am— that Mr. Edward fell in
love with. The servants say they never saw anybody so
much in love as he was : he was after her continually. They
used to watcli him— servants will^ you know, ma-am--and
he set store on her past every^thing: for all^ nobody but him
thotjght her so very handsome. She was a little small thm|,
they say^ almost like a child. I never saw her myself ; but I've
heard Leahj the housemaid, tell of her, Leah hked her well
enough. Mr. Rochester was about forty, and this governess
not twenty ; and you see, when gentlemen of his age fall in
love with girls, they are often like as if they were bewitched:
well, he would marry her, "
" You shall tdl me this part of the story another time^^'
I said ; " but now I have a particular reason for wishing to
hear all about the fire. Was it suspected that this lunatiCi
Mrs, Rochester^ had any hand in it?'*
" YouVe hit it, ma*amr it*s quite certain that it was b«
and nobody but her, that set it going. She had a woman to
take care of her called Mrs, Poole — an able woman fn her
hne, and very trustworthy ^ but for one fault— a fault common
to a deal of them nurses and matrons— sAj kept a pmaU
bottle of gin by her^ and now and then took a drop ovier much*
i^Tt is e^
i
JANE EYRE 43^
It is excusable, for she had a hard life of it: but still it was
dangerous; for when Mrs. Poole was fast asleep, after the
gin and water, the mad lady, who was as cunning as a
witchj would take the keys out of her pocket, let herself out
of her chamberj and go roaming about the house, doing any
wild mischief that came into her head* They say she had
nearly burnt her husband in his bed once : but I don't know
about that. However, on this night, she set fire first to the
hangings of the room next to her own; and then she got
down to a lower story, and made her way to the chamber
that had been the governess's — (she was like as if she knew
somehow how natters had gone on, and had a spite at her) —
and she kindled the bed there ; but there was nobody sleep-
ing in it fortunately. The governess had run away two
months before ; and for ail Mr. Rochester sought her as if she
had been the most precious thing he had in the world, he
never could hear a word of her; and he grew savage — quite
savage on his disappointment: he never was a wild maUj
but he got dangerous after he lost her* He would be alone,
too. He sent Mrs. Fairfax, the housekeeper, away to her
friends at a distance; but he did it handsomely, for he
settled an annuity on her for Hfe: and she deserved it — she
was a very good woman. Miss Ad^le, a ward he had, was put
to school. He broke off acquaintance with all the gentry, and
shut himself up, Uke a hermit, at the Hal!. "
" What! did he not leave England ? "
" Leave England? Bless you, no 1 He would not cross
the door-stones of the house; except at night, when he
walked just like a ghost about the grounds and in the orchard
as if he had lost his senses — ^which it is my opinion he had ;
for a more spirited, bolder, keener gentleman than he was
before that midge of a governess crossed him, yon never
saw, ma'am. He was not a man given to wine, or cards, or
racing, as some are, and he was not so very handsome; but
he had a courage and a will of his own, if ever man had, I
knew him from a boy, you see: and for my part I have
often wished that Miss Eyre had been sunk in the sea before
she came to Thomfield Hall. "
" Then Mr, Rochester was at home when the fire broke
out?'*
** Yes, indeed was he; and he went up to the attics when
all was burning above and below, and got the servants out
of their beds and helped them down himself— and went bacJr
432
JANE EYRE
to get his mad wiie out of her cell. And then they called out
to Mm that she was on the roof; where she was standings
waving her arms^ above the battlements^ and shouting out
till they could hear her a mile off : I saw her and heard her
with my own eyes. She was a big woman, and had long,
black hair: we could see it streaming against the flames as
she stood. I witnessed, and several more witnessed Mr.
Rochester ascend through the skyhght on to the roof: wc
heard him call'Bertha !'We saw him approach her; and
then J ma'am, she yelled, and gave a spring, and the ne:
minute she lay smashed on the pavement. "
" Dead? "
" Dead ? Ay, dead a^ the stones on which her brains and
blood were scattered. "
" Good God ! "
" You may well say so, ma'am : it was frightful I *
He shuddered.
" And afterwards ? " I urged.
" Well, ma*ani, afteriivards the house was burnt to tht
ground ; there are only some bits of walls standing now/*
" Were any other hves lost? "
" No — perhaps it would have been better if there had/*
" What do you mean? "
" Poor Mr. Edward !'* he ejaculated, " 1 httle thougW
ever to have seen it I Some say it was a just judgment Ofl
him for keeping his first marriage secret, and wanting to
take another wife while he had one living: but I pity him^
for my part/'
*'You said he was alive? " I exclaimed.
" Yes J yes : he is alive ; but many think he had better bfl
dead/^
" Why? How? " My blood was again running cold
" Where is he ? " I demanded.''Is he in England? "
" Ay^ — ay — he's in England ; he can't get out of England,
1 fancy — he's a fixture now/'
What agony was this I And the man seemed resolved lo
protract it.
" He is stone-blind/'he said at last. " Yes— he is stone*
blind — is Mr, Edward/'
I had dreaded worse. I had dreaded he was mad. I
summoned strength to ask what had caused this calamity. ^
" It was all his own courage, and a body may say^ his
'essj in a way, ma^am : he wouldn't leave the house till

»
t
JANE EYRE 433
every one else was out before him. As he came down the
great staircase at last^ after Mrs. Rochester had flung herself
from the battlements, there was a great crash— all fell. He
was taken out from under the ruins ^ aUve^ but sadly hurt*
a beam had fallen in such a way as to protect him partly;
but one eye was knocked out, and one hand so crushed that
Mr. Carter^ the surgeon ^ had to amputate it directly. The
other eye inflamed : he lost the sight of that also. He is
" ttow helpless J indeed — blind and a cripple/'
" Where is he ? Where does he now live ?'*
*'At Femdean, a manor-house on a farm he has, about
thirty miles off : quite a desolate spot. "
" Who is with him? "
" Old John and his wife: he would have none else. He is
quite broken down^ they say. "
" Have you any sort of conveyance ? "
'* We have a chaise, ma'am, a very handsome chaise. "
" Let it be got ready instantly; and if your post-boy can
drive me to Fern dean before dark this day, I'll pay both you
and him twice the liire you usually demand, "
CHAPTER XXXVII
The manor-house of Femdean was a building of considerable
antiquity J moderate size, and no architectural pretensions ,
deep buried in a wood. I had heard of it before. Mr,
Rochester often spoke of it, and sometimes went there. His
father had purclmsed the estate for the sake of the game
covers. He would have let the house: but could find no
tenant^ in consequence of its ineligible and insalubrious site.
Femdean then remained uninhabited and unfurnished;
with the exception of some two or three rooms fitted up for
the accommodation of the squire when he went there in the
season to shoot.
To this house I camcj just ere dark, on an evening marked
by the characteristics of sad sky, cold gale, and continued
small, penetrating rain. The last mile I performed on foot,
baling dismissed the chaise and driver with the double
remuneration I had promised. Even when within a very
short distance of the manor-house, you could see nothing of
it; so thick and dark grew the timber of the gloomy wonH
yS^^^^^ JANE EYRE
aboot it. Iron gates between granite pillars showed me
where to enter, and passing through them, I found myself at
once in the twilight of close-ranked trees. There was a grass-
grown track descending the forest aisle, between hoar and
knotty shafts and under branched arches. I followed it,
expecting soon to reach the dwelling; but it stretched on
and on, it wound far and farther: no sign of habitation or
grounds was visible,
I thought I had taken a wrong direction and lost my way.
The darkness of natural as well as of sylvan dusk gathered
over me. I looked round in search of another road. There
was none : all was interwoven stem, columnar trunks dense >
summer f oh age — no opening anywhere.
1 proceeded: at last my way opened, the trees thinned
a little; presently I beheld a railing, then the house —
scarce, by this dim light, distinguishable from the trees;
so dank and green were its decaying walls* Entering a
portal, fastened only by a latch, I stood amidst a space of
enclosed ground^ from which the wood swept away in a
semicircle. There were no flowers, no garden-beds ; only a
broad gravel- walk girdling a grass-plat, and this set in the
heavy frame of the forest. The house presented two pointed
gables in its front: the windows were latticed and narrow:
the front-door was narrow too, one step led up to it. The
whole looked, as the host of the Rochester Arms had said,
** quite a desolate spot. " It was as still as a church on a
week-day: the pattering rain on the forest leaves was thi
only sound audible in its vicinage.
** Can there be life here? *'I asked.
Yes : hfe of some kind there was; for I heard a movement
— that narrow front-door was unclosing, and some sh^ > e
was about to issue from the grange.
It opened slowly; a figure came out into the twilight
and stood on the step; a man without a hat: he stretched
fortii his hand as if to feel whether it rained. Dusk as it
was, I had recognised him^t was my master, Edward
Fairfajc Rochester, and no other.
1 stayed my step, almost my breath, and stood to watch
him — to examine him, myself unseen ^ and alas I to him
invisible. It was a sudden meeting, and one in which rapture
was kept well in check by pain. I had no diHiculty in re-
straining my voice from exclamation, my step from hasty
a
fANE EYRE
His form was of the same strong and stalwart contour
as ever: his port was still erect, Hs hair was still raven*
black; nor were his features altered or sunk: not in one
year's space, by any sorrowj could his athletic strength
be quelled J or his vigorous prime blighted* But in his coun-
tenance, I saw a change; that looked desperate and brooding
— that reminded me of some wronged and fettered wild
beast or bird, dangerous to approach in his sullen woe. The
caged eagle J whose gold -ringed eyes cruelty has extinguished,
might look as looked that sightless Samson*
And, reader, do you think I feared him in his blind fero-
city ? — if yoy do, you Httlc know me. A soft hope blent with
my sorrow that soon I should dare to drop a kiss on that
brow of rock, and on those lips so sternly sealed beneath it:
but not yet, I would not accost him yet*
He descended the one step, and advanced slowly and
gropingly towards the grass-plat. Where was his daring
stride now? Then he paused, as if he knew not which way
to turn. He lifted his hand and opened his eyeUds; gazed
blank, and with a straining effort, on the sky, and towards
the amphitheatre of trees: one saw that all to him was
void darkness. He stretched his right hand (the left arm,
the mutilated one, he kept hidden in his bosom); he seemed
to wish by touch to gain an idea of what lay around hira:
he met but vacancy still; for the trees were some yards off
where he stood. He relinquished the endeavour, folded his
arms, and stood quiet and mute in the rain^ now falling fast
on his uncovered head. At this moment John approached
him from some quarter,
" Will you take my arm, sir? " he said; " there is a heavy
shower coming on : had you not better go in ? "
" Let me alone, " was the answer.
John withdrew, without having observed me. Mr, Ro-
chester now tried to walk about: vainly ,^all was too
uncertain. He groped his way back to the house, and, re*
entering it, closed the door*
I now drew near and knocked : John's wife opened for me.
*• Mary, " I said, " how are you?'*
She started as if she had seen a ghost: I cahned her.
To her hurried " Is it really you, miss, come at this late
hour to tliis'only place? " I answered by taking her hand;
and then I followed her into the kitchen, where John now
sat by a good fire. I explained to them, in a few words, th'
^51^^^^^ JANE EYRE
I had heard all which had happened since I left Tbomfield
and that I was come to see Mr. Rochester, I asked John to
, go dowm to the turnpike-house, where I liad dismissed the
P chaise, and bring my trunk, which I had left there* and
then, while I removed my bonnet and shawl, I questioned
Mary as to whether I could be accommodated at the Manor
House for the night; and finding that armngements to that
effect, though difficult, would not be impossible, I informed
her I should stay. Just at this moment the parlour-beU
rang,
^^ men you go in, " said I, " tell your master that a person
wishes to speak to him, but do not give my nameJ'
" I don*t think he will see you, " she answered: " he
refuses every body/'
When she returned, I inquired what he had said.
" You are to send in your name and your business, " she
rephed. She then proceeded to fill a glass with water, and
place It on a tray, together with candle.
" Is that wliat he rang for?''I asked, _
*'Yes: he always has candles brought in at dark though
he is blind. " ^
'" Give the tray to me, I will carry it in/*
I took it from her hand: she pointed me out the parlour'
door* The tray shook as I held it; the water spilt fit > m the
glass; my heart struck my ribs loud and fast. Mary opened
the door for me, and shut it behind me.
This parlour looked gloomy: a neglected handful of fire
burnt low m the grate; and, leaning over it, with his head
supported against the high, old-fashioned mantelpiece,
appeared the blind tenant of the room. His old dog, Pilot,
lay on one side, removed out of the way, and coiled up as
if afraid of being inadvertently trodden upon. Piiot pricked
up his ears when I came in: then he jumped up with a yelp
and a whine, and bounded towards me; he almost knocked
the tray from my hands, I set it on the table; then patted
him, and said softly, " Lie down! " Mr. Rochester turned
mechanically to see what the commotion was: but as he
saw notliing, he returned and sighed,
" Give me the water, Mary, " he said.
I approached him with the now only half-filled glass.
Pilot followed me, still excited.
*'What is the matter?'* he inquiraj,
" Down, Pilot I " I again said. He checked the water on
*
b
JANE EYRE 437
its way to his lipSj and seemed to listen : lie drank, and put
tlie glass down, *'This is you, Mary, is it not P''
" Mary is in the kitchen/'I aoswered.
He put out his hand with a quick gesture^ but not seeing
where I stood, he did not touch me, " Who is this? Who is
this ? " he demanded, trying, as it seemed, to see with those
sightless eyes — unavailing and distressing attempt 1 " Answer
me — speak again I " he ordered, imperiously and aloud.
" WiU you have a little more water, sir? I spiit half of
what was in the glass/'I said.
'* Who is it? Whai is it? Who speaks? "
" Pilot knows me, and John and Mary know I am here.
I came only this evening/'I answered.
** Great God 1— what delusion has come over me? What
sweet madness has seized me ? "
No delusion — no madness: your mind, sir, is too strong
for delusion, your health too sound for frenzy.*-
*'And where is the speaker? Is it only a voice? Ohl I
cannot see, but I must feel, or my heart will stop and my
brain burst. Whatever — whoever you are — be perceptible
to the touch or I cannot live I "
He groped ; I arrested his wandering hand, and prisoned
it in both mine.
" Her very fingers I " he cried ] " her small, slight fingers I
If so, there must be more of her, "
The muscular hand broke from my custody; my arm
was seized, my shoulder— neck— waist— I was entwined
and gathered to him.
** Is it Jane? What is it? This is her shape — this is her
size " — *
" And this her voice/'I added, *'She is all here: her
ibeart, too* God bless you, sir I I am glad to be so near you
again,'*
" Jane Eyre I— Jane Eyre, " was all he said.
*'My dear master/'I answered, " I am Jane Eyre: I
have found you out — I am come back to you.^'
" In truth?- in the fiesh? My living Jane? "
" You touch me, sir,— you hold me, and fast enough:
I am not like a corpse, nor vacant like air, am I? "
** My living darUng I These are certainly her Umbs, and
these her features ; but I cannot be so blest, after all my misery.
It is a dream ; such dreams as I have had at night when I
have clasped her once more to my heart, as I do now; and
438
JANE EYRE
kis & ed her, as thus — and felt that she loved me, and trusted i
that she would not leave me/'^H
" Which I never will, sir, £rom this day,** ^^
" Never willj says the vision? But I always wake and
found it an empty mockery; and I was desolate and aban-
doned — my life dark, jonely^ hopeless^ — my soul athirst and
forbidden to drink— my heart famished and never to be fed.
Gentle^ soft dream, nestling in my arms now, you will fly,
too, as your sisters have all fled before you: but kiss me
before you go — embrace me, Jane. "
" There, sir — and there i "
I pressed my lips to his once brilliant and now rayless
eyes — I swept his hair from his brow, and kissed that too.
He suddenly seemed to arouse himself: the conviction of
the reality of all this seized him,
" It is you — ^is it^ Jane ? You are come back to me, then ? "
" I am. "
" And you do not lie dead m some ditch under some
stream ? And you are not a pining outcast amongst stiaa-
gera? "
" No, sir; I am ^i independent woman now. "
" Independent ! What do you mean, Jane ? "
** My uncle in Madeira is dead, and he left me five thousand
pound^. "
'* Ahj this is practical — this is reall " he cried: *^I
should never dream that. Besides, there is that peculiar
voice of hers, so animating and piquant, as well as soft*
it cheers my withered heart; it puts life into it* — What,
Janet I Are you an independent woman ? A rich woman ? "
" Quite rich, sir. If you won^t let me Hve with you, I can
buiM a house of my own close up to your door, and yoo
may come and sit in my parlour when you want company
of an evening.''
'* But as you are rich^ Jane, you have now, no doubt,
friends who will look after you, and not sufier you to devote
yourself to a bUnd lameter like me ? "
" I told you I am independent, sir, as well as rich: I am
my own mistress, "
" .^d you win stay with me? "
" Certainly — unless you object. I will be your neighbour,
your nurse, your housekeeper. I find you lonely: I will be
your companion— to read to you, to walk with you, to sit
with you J to wait on you, to be eyes and hands to you*
^
I
JANE EYRE 439
Cease to look so melancholy, my dear master; you shall
not be left desolate ^ so long a^ I live, "
He replied not: he seemed seriotis—- abstracted^ he
Sighed^ he half -opened his lips as if to speak; he dosed
them again, I felt a little embarrassed. Perhaps I had too
rashly overleaped conventionalities ; and he, like St. John,
Haw impropriety in my inconsiderateness. I had indeed
made my proposal from the idea that he wished and would
ask me to be his wife: an expectation, not the less certain
because unexpressed, had buoyed me up, that be would
claim me at once as his own. But no hint to that effect
escaping him and his countenance becoming more overcast,
I suddenly remembered that I might have been all wrong,
and was perhaps playing the fool unwittingly ; and I began
gently to withdraw myself from his arms — but he eagerly
snatched me closer,
'* No — no — Jane; you must not go. No — I have touched
you, heard you, felt the comfort of your presence — the
sweetness of your consolation ; I cannot give up these joys.
I have little left in myself— I must have you. The world
may laugh— may call me absurd, selfish — but it does not
signify* My very soul demands you: it will be satisfied!
or it will take deadly vengeance on its frame, "
*'Well, sir, I will stay with you : I have said so. "
" Yes— but you understand one thing by staying with
me: and I understand another. You, perhaps, could make
up your mind to be about my hand and chair— to wait on
me as a kind little nurse (for you have an affectionate heart
and a generous spirit^ which prompt you to make sacrifices
for those you pity)^ and that ought to suffice for me no
doubt. I suppose I should now entertain none but fatherly
feelings for you : do you think so ? Come — ^tell me, "
*'I will think what you hke, sir: I am content to be only
your nurse, if you think it better. "
" But you cannot always be my nurse, Janet: you are
young — you must marry one day. "
" I don^t care about being married, "
*'You should care, Janet: if I were what 1 once was, I
would try to make you care — but — b, sightless block 1 "
He relapsed again into gloom. Ij on the contrary j becsime
more cheerful^ and took fresh courage: these last words
gave me an insight as to where the difficulty lay; and as it
WB & no difficulty with me^ I felt quite relieved from my
k
440
JANE EYRE
previous embarrassment, I resumed a livelier vem of
conversation,
** It k time some one undertook to rehtimanise yon/*
£aid I J parting his thick and long uncut locks; " for I see
you are being metamorphosed into a hoUj or something of
that sort. You have a'faux air'of Nebuchadnezzar in the
fields about you^ that is certain; your hair reminds me of
eagles* feathers; whether your nails are grown like birds'
claws or notj^ I have not yet noticed, "
" On this arm, I have neither hand nor nails/'he said^
drawing the mutilated h'mb from his breast, and showing
it to me,''It is a mere stump— a ghastly sight I Don't yon
think so, Jane? **
" It is a pity to see it; and a pity to see your eyes^ — and
the scar of fire on your forehead : and the worst of it is, one
is in danger of loving yon too well for all this ; and making
too much of you/'
" I thought you would be revolted, Jane, when you saw
my arm, and my cicatrised visage. "
** Did you ? Don't tell me so— lest T should say something
disparaging to your judgment- Now, let me leave you an
instant J to make a better fire, and have the hearth swept up.
Can you tell when there is a good fire ? "
" Yes ; with the right eye 1 see a glow — ^a ruddy haze/*
" And you see the candles ? "
*'Very dimly — each is a luminous cloud/'
** Can you see me? "
** No, my fairy: but I am only too thankful to hear and
feel you/*
" When do you take supper? "
" I never take supper/'
*'But you shall have some to-night, I am hungry: so
are you, I daresay, only you forget/'
Summoning Mary, I soon had the room in more cheerful
order: I prepared him, likewise, a comfortable repast.
My spirits were excited, and with pleasure and ease I talked
to him during supper^ and for a long time after. There was
no harassing restraint, no repressing of glee and vivacity
with him; for with lum I was at perfect ease, because I
knew I suited him : all I said or did seemed either to console
or revive him. Delightful consciousness I It brought to life
and hght ray whole nature: in his presence I thoroughly
lived; and he lived in mine. Blind as he was, smiles played
Jane eyrjT
44t^
his face J joy dawned on has forehead: his lineamenta
softened and warmed.
After supper, he began to ask me many questions^ of
where I had been, what I had been doing, how I had found
him out; but I gave him only very partial replies: it was
too late to enter into particulars that night. Besides, I
wished to touch no deep-thriUing chord — to open no fresh
we!! of emotion in his heart: my sole present aim was to
cheer him. Cheered^ as I have said, he was : and yet but by
fits. If a moment^s silence broke the conversatioDj he would
turn restless, touch me, then say, ** Jane. "
" You are altogether a human being, Jane ? You are
certain of that? "
'* I conscientiously beheve so, Mr, Rochester. "
" Yet how, on this dark and doleful eveningj could you so
suddenly rise on my lone hearth? I stretched my hand to
take a glass of water from a hirehng, and it was given me by
you: I asked a question, expecting John's wife to answer
me, and your voice spoke at my ear, "
** Because I had come in, in Mary*s stead, with the tray/'
" And there is enchantment in the very hour I am now
spending with you. Who can tell what a dark^ dreary, hope-
less life I have dragged on for months past? Doing nothing,
expecting nothings merging night in day; feeling but the
sensation of cold when I let the fire go out, of hunger when
I forgot to eat : and then a ceaseless sorrow, and^ at times,
a very delirium of desire to behold my Jane again. Yes: for
her restoration I bnged, far more than for that of my lost
sight. How can it be that Jane is with me, and says she
loves me? Will she not depart as suddenly as she came?
To-morrow J I fear I shall find her no more. "
A common -pi ace, practical reply, out of the train of his
owTi disturbed ideas, was, I was sure, the best and most
reassuring for him in this frame of mind. I passed my finger
over his eyebrows, and remarked that they were scorched^
and that I would apply something which should make them
grow as broad and black as ever*
" Where is the use of doing me good in any way, benefi-
cent spirit, when, at some fatal moment, you will again desert
me — passing like a shadow, whither and how to me un-
known ; and for mej remaining afterwards undiscoverable ? "
*'Have you a pocket-comb about you, sir? *'
•'What for, Jane?'*
k
*'Just to corab out this shaggy black mEne. I find you
rather alamiingj when I examine you dose at hand: yoa
talk of my being a faiiy; but I am sure, you are more like
a brownie/*
*'Am I liideous, Jane ? "
" Very, sir: you always were, you know. "
** Humph! The wickedness has not been taken out of you,
wherever you have sojourned.'*
" Yet 1 have been with good people; far better than you:
a hundred times better people ; possessed of ideas and views
you never entertained in your life: quite more refined and
exalted. "
" Who the deuce have you been with? "
" If you twist in that way you will make me puU the hair
out of your head; and then I think you will cease to enter-
tain doubts of my substantiality/*
'* Who have you been with, Jane? *'
" You shall not get it out of me to-night, sir; you must
wait till to-morrow; to leave my tale half-told, will, you
know, be a sort of security that I shall appear at your
breakfast-table to finish it. By-the-by, I must mind not to
rise on your hearth with only a glass of water, then: I mtist
bring an egg at the least, to say nothing of fried ham. "
" You mocking changeling — fairy-horn and human-bred !
You make me feel as I have not felt these twelve months.
If Saul could have had you for his David, the evil spirit would
have been exorcised without the aid of the harp,*'
" There, sir, you are redd up and made decent. Now FH
leave you : I have been travelling these last three days, and
I believe I am tired. Good-night.**
** Just one word, Jane: were there only ladies in the
house where you have been ? **
I laughed and made my escape, still laughing as I ran
upstairs* " A good ideal " I thought, with glee, " I see I
have the means of fretting him out of his melancholy for
some time to come. "
Very early the next morning, I heard him up and astir,
wandering from one room to another* As soon as Mary came
down I heard the question: ** Is Miss Eyre here? " Then:
" Which room did you put her into ? Was it dry ? Is she up?
Go and ask if she wants anything ; and when she will come
down/'
I came down as soon as I thought there was a prospect of
h
JANE EYRE 443
Mast* Entering the room very softlyj I had a view of
him before he discovered my presence. It was mournful,
indeed, to witness the subjugation of that vigorous spirit to
a corporeal infirmity. He sat in his chair, — stillj but not at
rest; expectant evidently; the lines of now habitual sad-
ness marking his strong features. His countenance reminded
one of a lamp quenched^ waiting to be relit — and alas 1 it was
not himself that could now kindle the lustre of animated
expression; he was dependent on another for that office I
I had meant to be gay and careless, but the powerlessness
of the strong man touched my heart to the quick: still I
accosted him mth what vivacity I could : —
" It is a bright, sunny mornings sir/'I said, *'The rain is
over and gone, and there is a tender shining after it ; you
shall have a walk soon.*'
I had wakened the glow: his features beamed.
*'Oh, you are indeed there, my skylark 1 Come to me.
You are not gone : not vanished ? I heard one of your kind
an hour agOj singing high over the wood : but its song had
no music for me, any more than the rising sun had rays. All
the melody on earth is concentrated in my Jane's tongue to
my ear (I am glad it is not naturally a silent one): ail the
sunshine I can feel is in her presence. "
The water stood in my eyes to hear this avowal of his
dependence: just as if a royal eagle^ chained to a perch,
should be forced to entreat a sparrow to become its pur-
veyor* But I would not be lachrymose: I dashed off the
salt drops, and busied myself with preparing breakfast.
Most of the morning was spent in the open air, I led him
out of the wet and wild wood into some cheerful fields : I
described to him how brilliantly green they were; how the
flowers and hedges looked refreshed; how sparklingly blue
was the sky. I sought a seat for him in a hidden and lovely
spot: a dry stump of a tree; nor did I refuse to let him,
when seated, place me on his knee: why should I, when
both he and I were happier near than apart? Pilot lay
beside us: all was quiet. He broke out suddenly while
clasping me in his arms:—
" Cmel, cruel deserter 1 Oh, Jane, what did I feel when I
discovered you had fled from Thoinfield, and when I could
nowhere find you; and, after examining your apartment,
ascertained that you had taken no money, nor anything
which could serve as an equivalent I A pearl necklace 1 h'
fANE EYRE
given you la/ untouched in its little casket; joixr trunks
were left corded and locked as they had been prepared for
the bridal tour. What could my darhng do, I asked, left
destitute and penniless? And what did she do? Let me
bear now/'
Thus urgedj I began the narrative of my experience for
the last year. I softened considerably what reJkted to the
three days of wandering and starvation, because to have told
him all wouJd have been to inflict unnecessary pain: the
little 1 did say lacerated his faithful heart deeper than I
wished,
I should not have left him thus^ he said^ without any
means of making my way: I should have told him my
intention. 1 should have confided in him: he would never
have forced me to be fus mistress. Violent as be had seemed
in his despair, he, in truth, loved me far too well and too
tenderly to constitute himself my tyrant: he would have
given me half his fortunej without demanding so much as a
kiss in return, rather than I should have flung myself friend-
less on the wide world, I had endured, he was certain, more
than I had confessed to bim.
" Well, whatever my sufferings had been, they were very
short, " I answered: and then I proceeded to tell him how I
had been received at Moor House; how I had obtained the
office of schoolmistress, etc. The accession of fortune^ the
discovery of my relations, followed in due order. Of coiirse,
St, John Rivers'name came in frequently in the progress of
my tale. When I had done, that name was immediately
taken up.
''This St. JohUj theuj Is your cousin? "
" Yes/'
** You have spoken of him often: did you like him? **
" He was a very good man, sir; I could not help liking
him/'
" A good man? Does that mean a respectable, well-
conducted man of fifty ? Or what does it mean ? "
" St. John was only twenty-nine, sir/'
*''Jeum encors,* as the French say. Is he a person of low
stature, phlegmatic, and plain? A person whose goodness
consists rather in his guiltlessness of vice, than in his prowess
m virtue ? *'
'* He is untiringly active. Great and exalted deeds are
what he lives to perform. "
JANE EYRE 445
** But his brain? That is probably rather soft? He means
well: but you shrug your shoulders to hear him talk? "
" He talks little, sir: what he does say is ever to the point.
His brain is first-rate, I should think not impressible, but
vigorous. "
I " Is he an able man^ then ? "
. " Truly able;'
" A thoroughly educated man ? "
*'St. John is an accompUshed and profound scholar/*
** His manners, I think^ you said are not to your taste? —
priggish and parsonic? *'
** I never mentioned his manners ; but, unless I had a
very bad taste, they must suit it; they are polished, calm^
and gentlemanhke. "
** His appearance, — I forget what description you gave
of his appearance; — a sort of raw curatCj half strangled with
his white neckcloth, and stilted up on his thick -soled high-
lows, eh? "
" St. John dresses welh He is a handsome man : tallj
feir with blue eyes, and a Grecian profile, "
(^Aside.) *'Damn himl " — {To me.) ** Did you like him,
Jane? "
*'Yes, Mr. Roches ter^ I liked him: but you asked me that
before. "
I perceived J of course, the drift of my interlocutor. Jeal-
ousy had got hold of him; she stung him; but the sting
was salutary " it gave him respite from the gnawing fang
of melancholy. I would not^ thereforCj immediately charm
the snake.
*'Perhaps you would rather not sit any longer on my
knee. Miss Eyre? " was the next somewhat unexpected
obijervation.
** Why not, Mr. Rochester?'*
** The picture you have just drawn is suggestive of a rather
too overwhelming contrast. Your words have delineated
very prettily a graceful Apollo: he is present to your im-
agination, — tall J fair, blue-eyed, and with a Grecian profile.
Your eyes dwell on a Vulcan, — a real blacksmith, brawn,
broad-shouldered; and blind and lame into the bargain.*'
** I n*;ver thought of it^ before; but you certainly are
rather like Vulcan, sir.''
*'Well, — you can leave me, ma'am: but before you go **
(and he retained me by a firmer grasp than ever), " you
446
JANE EYRE
will be pleased just to answer me a question or two.** He
paused.
" What questions^ Mr. Rochester? "
Then followed this cross-examination.
" St* John made you schoolmistress of Morton before he
knew you were his cousin? "
** Yesr
" You would often see him? He would visit the school
sometime?''
** He would approve of your plans j Jane? I know they
WQutd be dcv^ij for you are a talented creature/'
*'Htt approved of them— 3^5. "
" Hi would discover many things in you he could not
h«kvt «i| > ocldd to find? Some of your accotnpttshments arc
not ortiiimy/'
** I dm'i know about that, "
** You had a little cottage near the school, you say: did
he ever come there to see you ? "
** Now and then? "
" Of an evening? "
** Once or twice.''
A pause.
** How lon^ did you reside with him and his sisters after
the cousinship was discovered? "
'* Five months, "
** Did Rivers spend much time with the ladies of his
family? "
" Yes; the back parlour was both his study and ours:
he sat near the window, and we by the tabic. "
" Did he study much? "
" A good dea!/^
" What? "
'* Hindostanee. "
** And what did you do meantime? "
" I learnt German^ at first. "
" Did he teach you? "
'* He did not understand German, "
" Did he teach you nothing? "
" A little Hindo'stanee. "
" Rivers taught you Hmdostanee? "
" Yes, sir, "
" And his sisters also? "

JANE EYRE
" No, "
" Only you? "
" Only me/'
" Did you ask to l^m ? "
** No. "
" He wished to teach you? "
A second pause.
" Why did he wish it? Of what use could Hindostanee
be to you? "
" He intended me to go with him to India. "
" Ah ! here I reach the root of the matter. He wanted
you to marry him? "
" He asked me to marry him.''
" That is a fiction — an impudent invention to vex me* "
" I beg your pardon, it is the hteral truth; he asked me
more than once, and was as stiff about urging his point as
ever you could be,'
Miss Eyre J I repeat it, you can leave me. How often
am I to say the same thing? Why do you remain perti-
naciously perched on my knee, when I have given you
notice to quit?''
" Because I am comfortable there. "
" No, Jane, you are not (Ximfortable there, because your
heart is not with me : it is with this cousin — this St. John.
Oh, till this moment, I thought my little Jane was all minel
I had a belief she loved me even when she left me: that
was an atom of sweet in much hitter. Long as we have been
parted, hot tears as I have wept over our separation, I never
thought that while I was mourning her, she was loving
another! But it is useless grieving, Jane, leave me: go and
marry Rivets. "
** Shake me off, then, sir, — push me away, for 1*11 not
leave you of my own accord. "
*'Jane, I ever like your tone of voice: it still renews hope,
it sounds so truthful. When I hear it, it carries me back a
year* I forget that you have formed a new tie. But I am
not a fool— go " - —
*'Where must I go, sir? "
^'Your own way— with the husband you have chosen* "
" Who is that? "
*'You know— this St. John Rivers. "
** He is not my husband^ nor ever will be. He does n^'^
h
JANE EYRJ
love me: I do not love liim. He loves (as he can lave, and
that is not as you love) a beautiful young lady called Rosa-
mond. He wanted to many me only because he thought I
should make a suitable missionary's wife, which she would
not have done. He is good and great^ but severe; and, for
mej cold as an iceberg. He is not like yoy , sir: I am not happy
at his side, nor near him^ nor with him. He has no indulgence
for me — ^no fondness* He sees nothing attractive in me;
not even youth — only a few useful mental points. — ^Then I
must leave you^ sir^ to go to him ? "
I shuddered invoiuntarilyj and clung instinctively closer
to my blind but beloved master. He smiled,
" Whatj Jane 1 Is this true ? Is such really the state of
matters between you and Rivers ? "
** Absolutely, sir. Oh, you need not be jealous ! I wanted
to tease you a little to make you less sad : I thought anger
would be better than grief. But if you wish me to love you,
could you but see how much 1 da love yoUj you would be
proud and content. All my heart is yours^ sir: it belongs to
you; and with you it would lemainj were fate to exile the
rest of me from your presence for ever. "
Again^ as he kissed me, painful thoughts darkened his
aspect.
" My seared vision I My crippled strength 1 " he murmured
regretfully*
I caressed J in order to soothe him. I knew of what he was
thinking, and wanted to speak for him; but dared not. As
he turned aside his face a minute, I saw a tear slide from
under the sealed eyehd, and trickle down the manly cheek.
My heart swelled,
** I am no better than the old lightning-struck chestnut-
tree in Thornfield orchard/'he remarked, ere long. " Aod
what right would that ruin have to bid a budding woodbine
cover its decay with freshness? "
*'You are no ruin, sir— no lightning-struck tree: you are
green and vigorous* Plants will grow about your roots,
whether you ask them or not, because they take delight in
your bountiful shadow; and as they grow they will lean
towards you^ and wind round you, because your strength
offers them so safe a prop. "
Again he smiled : I gave him comfort*
** You speak of friends, Jane? " he asked.
•* Yes; of friends/'I answered, rather hesitatingly: for 1
JANE EYRE
knew I meant more than friends, but could not tell what
other word to employ. He helped me 1
*'Ah I Jane. But I want a wife. "
'*Do you, sir? "
** Yes: is it news to you? "
" Of course: you said nothing about it before/'
_*'* Is it unwelcome news? *'
■'* That depends on circumstances, sir — on your choice* "
** Which you shall make for me^ Jane. I wiH abide by
yoiir decision. "
'* Choose then, sir— A^r who loves you hest^
'* I will at least choose— Aer / imie best. JaBe^ will you
niarry me? **
" Yes, sir, "
'* A poor blind man, whom you will have to lead about
by the hand? "
" Yes, sir. "
** A crippled man, twenty years older than you, whom
you will have to wait on ? "
" Y^.sin'*
" Truly, Jane? "
" Most truly, sir "
" Oh i my darling! God bless you and reward you! "
" Mr. Rochester! if ^ver I did a good deed in my life— if
ever I thought a good though t^ — if ever I prayed a sincere
and blameless prayer— if ever I wished a righteous wish, — I
am rewarded now* To be your wife is, for me, to be as happy
as I can be on earth. "
'* Because you delight in sacrifice. "
" Sacrifice [ What do I sacrifice? Famine for food, ex-
pectation for content. To be privileged to put my arms
round what I value — to press my lips to what 1 love — to
repose on what I trust: is that to make a sacrifice? If so,
then certainly I delight in sacrifice. "
'* And to bear with my inftrmities, Jane: to overlook my
deficiencies. "
" Which are none, sir, to me. I love you better now, when
I can really be useful to you, than I did in your state of
proud independence, when you disdained every part but
that of the giver and protector. "
*'Hitherto I have hated to be helped—to be led : hence*
forth, I fee!, I shall hate it no more. I did not like to put my
hand into a hireling'Sj but it is pleasant to feel it circled by
450
'JANE EYRE
Jsme's little fingers, I preferred utter loneliness to the con-
stant attendance of servants ; but Jane's soft ministry will be
a perpetual joy. Jane suits me: do 1 suit ber?'^
" To the finest fibre of my nature, sir. "
" The case being soj we have nothing in the world to wait
for: we must be married mstantly/*
He looked and spoke with eagem^s: his old impetuosity
was rising,
" We must become one flesh without any delay, Jane:
there is but the licence to get — ^then we ma^^)^'*
" Mr* Rochester, I have just discover«l the sun is far
declined from its meridianj and Pilot is actually gone home
to his dinner. Let me look at your watch. "
** Fasten it into your girdle, Janetj and keep it hence-
forward: I have no use for it,'*
'* It is nearly four o'clock in the afternoon, sir. Don't you
feel hungry ? "
** The third day from this must be our wedding-day, Jane,
Never mind fine clothes and jewels^ now: all that is not
worth a fillip* "
'" The sun has dried up all the rain-dropSj sir. The breeze
is still: it is quite hot.*'
" Do you know^ Jane, I have your little pearl necklace at
this moment fastened round my bronze scrag under my
cravat ? I have worn it since the day I lost my only treasure r
as a memento of her.'^
'*We will go home through the wood: that will be the
shadiest way.'*
He pursued his own thoughts without heeding me.
" Jane I you think me, I daresay, an irreligious dog : but
my heart swells with gratitude to the beneficent God of this
earth just now* He sees not as man sees, but far clearer:
judges not as man judges, but far more wisely. I did wrong:
I would have sullied my innocent flower— breathed guilt on
its purity: the Omnipotent snatched it from me. 1, in my
stiS-necked rebellion, almost cursed the dispensation: in-
stead of bending to the decree, I defied it. Divine justice
pursued its course; disasters came thick on me: I was
forced to pass through the valley of the shadow of death.
His chastisements are mighty; and one smote me which has
humbled me for ever. You know I was proud of my strength:
but what is it now^ when I must give it over to foreign
guidance^ as a child does its weakness ? Of late, Jane— only
JANE EYRE 45i
—only of late — I began to see and acknowledge the hand of
God in my doom. I began to experience remorse^ repent-
aoce; the wish for reconcilement to my Maker, 1 began
sometimes to pray: very brief prayers they were, but very
sincere,
** Some days since: nay, I can number them — fourj it
was last Monday night, a singular mood came over me: one
in which grief replaced frenzy — ^sorrow, suUenness, I had
long had the impression that since I could nowhere find you,
you must be dead. Late tliat night— perhaps it might be
between eleven and twelve o'clock — ere I retired to my
dreary restj I supplicated Godj that, if it seemed good to
Him, I might soon be taken from this life, and admitted to
that world to comCj where there was still hope of rejoining
** I was in my own room, and sitting by the window^
which was open: it soothed me to feel the balmy night-air;
though I could see no stars, and only by a vague, luminous
haze, knew the presence of a moon. I longed for thee, Janet \
Oh, I longed for thee both with soul and flesh I I asked of
God, at once in anguish and humiUty, if I had not been long
enough desolate^ afflictedj tormented; and might not soon
taste bliss and peace once more. That I merited all I en-
dured, I acknowledged^ that I could scarcely endure more,
I pleaded; and the alpha and omega of my heart's wishes
broke involuntarily from my lips in the words — * Janel
Jane I Jane!^'*
** Bid you speak these words aloud ? **
** I did, Jane, If any listener had heard me, he would
have thought me mad: I pronounced them with such
^ frantic energy. "
" And it was last Monday night: somewhere near mid-
^might? "
" Yes; but the time is of no coasequence: what followed
is the strange point. You will think me superstitious, —
some superstition I have in my blood, and always had:
nevertheless, this is true — true at least it is that I heard
what I now relate.
" As I exclaimed * Jane ! Janel JaneT a voice — I cannot
tell whence the voice came^ but I know whose voice it was —
replied, * I am coming: wait for me; * and a moment after,
went whispering on the wind, the words—'Where are you?'
" I'll tell you, if I can, the idea, the picture these word*;
452
JANE EYRE
opened to my mind : yet it is difficult to express what I want
to express, Femdean is buried, as you see^ In a heavy wood,
where sound falls duUj and dies un reverberating, * Where
are you ?'seemed spoken amongst mountains ; for I heard
a hill-sent echo repeat the words. Cooler and fresher at the
moment the gale seemed to visit my brow: I could have
deemed that in some wildj lone scene^ I and Jane were meet-
ing. In spirit J I believe we must have met. You no doubt
were, at that hour, in unconscious sleep, Jane: perhaps your
soul wandered from its cell to comfort mine; for those were
your accents — ^as certain as I live— they were yours I "
Reader, it was on Monday night — ^near midnight — that I
too had received the mysterious summons; those were the
very words by which I rephed to it. I hstened to Mr.
Rochester's narrative; but made no disclosure in return.
The coinddence struck me as too awful and inexplicable to
be communicated or discussed. If I told anything, my tale
would be such as must necessarily make a profound impres-
sion on the mind of my hearer: and that mind, yet from its
suflferings too prone to gloom, needed not the deeper shade
of the supematuraL I kept these things then, and pondered
them in my heart.
" You cannot now wonder/'continued my master,''that
when you rose upon me so unexpectedly last night, I had
difficulty in believing you any other than a mere voice and
vision : something that would melt to silence and annihila-
tion^ as the midnight whisper and mountain echo had melted
before. Now, I thank God I I knew it to be otherwise. Ves,
I thank God !*^
He pnt me off his knee, rose, and reverently lifting his
hat from his brow, and bending his sightless eyes to the
earth, he stood in mute devotion. Only the last words of the
worsiiip were audible.
** I thank my Maker^ that in the midst of judgment he
has remembered mercy. I humbly entreat my Redeemer to
give me strength to lead henceforth a purer Hfe than I have
done hitherto I "
Then he stretched his hand out to be led. I took that dear
hand, held it a moment to my lips, then let it pass round my
shoulder: being so much lower of stature than he, I served
both for his prop and guide. We entered the wood, and
wended homeward.
A
JANE EYRE 453
CHAPTER XXXViri
CONCLUSION
Rbader, I manied him. A quiet wedding we had: he and
I^ the parson and derk^ were alone present. When we got
hsuck from church, I went into the kitchen of the manor-
house, where Mary was cooking the dinner^ and John
cleaning the knives j and I said :—
** Mary, I have been married to Mr, Rochester this morn-
ing, " The housekeeper and her husband were both of that
decent phlegmatic order of people, to whom one may at any
time safely communicate a remarkable piece of news without
incurring the danger of having one*s ears pierced by some
shrill ejaculation, and subsequently stunned by a torrent of
(wordy wonderment, Mary did look up, and she did stare at
me : the ladle with which she was basting a pair of chickens
roasting at the fire^ did for some three minutes hang sus-
pended in the air; and for the same space of time John's
I knives also had a rest from the polishing process ; but Mary,
l bending again over the roast, said only —
^ *'Have you. Miss? Well, for sure ! *'
^f A short time after she pursued: " I seed you go out with
'the master, but I didn*t Imow you were gone to church to be
wed ; *^ and she basted away, John, when I turned to him,
I was grinning from ear to ear.
f " I telled Mary how it would be/'he said: " I knew what
Mr. Edw^ard''(John was an old servant, and had known his
. master when he was the cadet of the house, therefore, he
I often gave him his Christian name)— " I knew what Mr,
^ Edward would do; and I was certain he would not wait
long neither: and he's done right, for aught I know. I wish
I you joy. Miss 1 " and he politely pulled his forelock,
" Thank you, John, Mr, Rochester told me to give you
and Mary this/'I put into his hand a five-pound note.
Without waiting to hear more, I left the kitchen. In passing
the door of that sanctum some time after, I caught the
wordSj —
" Shell happen do better for him nor ony 0't'grand
ladi^/* Aud again,'* If she ben't one o* th'handsomest
L
454
fANE EYRl
she's noan fail and varry good-natured; and i* his e^i
she's fair beautiful, onybody may see that* "
I wrote to Moor House and to Cambridge immediately, to
say what I had done: fully explaining also why I had thus
acted- Diana and Mary approved the step unreservedly.
Diana announced that she would Just give me fame to get
over the honey -moonj and then she would come and see mc,
" She had better not wait till then, Jane, " said Mr,
Rochester, when I read her letter to him; " if she doesj she
wiU b€ too latCj for our honey-moon will shine our hfe-long:
its beams will only fade over your grave or mine "
How St. John received the news, I don*t Imow; he never
answered the letter in which 1 commurricated it: yet six
months after he wrote to me ; without, however, motioning
Mr. Rochcster*s name, or alluding to my marriage. His
letter was then calm; and, though very seriousj kind. He
has maintained a regular, though not frequent correspon-
dence ever since: he hopes I am happy, and trusts 1 am not
of those who Uve without God in the world, and only mind
earthly things.
You have not quite forgotten little Ad^le, have you,
reader? I had not; I soon asked and obtained leave of Mr,
Rochester, to go and see her at the school where he had
placed her. Her frantic joy at beholding me again moved
me much. She looked pale and thin : she said she was not
happy. I found the rules of the establishment were too
strict, its course of study too severe, for a child of her age: I
took her home with me, I meant to become her governess
once more; but I soon found this impracticable; my time
and cares were now required by another — my husband
needed them all. So I sought out a school conducted on a
more indulgent system; and near enough to permit of my
visiting her often, and bringing her home sometimes, I took
care she should never want for anything that could contribute
to her comfort: she soon settled in her new abode, became
very happy there, and made fair progress in her studies. M
she grew up, a sound KngUsh education corrected in a great
measure her French defects; and when she left school, I
found in her a pleasing and obliging companion: dodle^
good-tempered, and well-principled. By her grateful atten-
tion to me and mine, she has long since well repaid any Utile
kindness I ever had it in my power to offer her.
My tale draws to its close: one word respecting my experi^
JANE EYRE
455
i
ence of married life, and one brief glance at the fortunes of
those whose names have most frequently recurred in this
narrative, and I have done.
I have now been married ten years, I know what it is to
live entirely for and with what I love best on earth. I hold
myself supremely blest— blest beyond what language can
express; because I am my husband*s life as fully as he is
mine. No woman was ever nearer to her mate than I am;
ever more absolutely bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh*
I know no weariness of my Edward's society: he knows
none of mine, any more than we each do of the pulsation of
the heart that beats in our separate bosoms; consequently,
we are ever together. To be together is for U3 to be at once
as free as in solitude^ as gay as in company. We talk, I
believe^ all day long: to talk to each other is but a more
animated and an audible thinking. All my confidence is
bestowed on him, all his confidence is devoted to mej we
are precisely suited in character — perfect concord is the
result,
Mr, Rochester continued blind the first two years of our
union: perhaps it was that circumstance that drew us so
very near — that knit us so very close 1 for I was then his
vision, as I am still his right hand. Literally, I was (what
he often called me) the apple of his eye. He saw nature —
he saw books through me; and never did I weary of gazing
for his behalf, and of putting into words the effect of field,
tree, town^ river^ cloud, sunbeam — of the landscape before
us; of the weather round us— and impressing by sound on
his ear what light could no longer stamp on his eye. Never
did I weary of reading to him; never did I weary of con-
ducting him where he wished to go : of doing for him what he
wished to be done. And there was a plea^sure in my services,
most full, most exquisite, even though sad — because he
daimed these services without painful shame or damping
humiliation. He loved me so truly, that he knew no re-
luctance in profiting by my attendance : he felt that I loved
him so fondly, that to yield that attendance was to indulge
my sweetest wishes.
One morning at the end of the two years, as I was writing
a letter to his dictation, he came and bent over me, and said—
^* Jane, have you a glittering ornament round your neck? "
I had a gold watch-chain; I answered " Yes.^*
And have you a pale blue dress on? "
456
JANE EYRE

I bad. He informed me then, that for some time he had
fancied the obscurity clouding one eye was becoming less
dense; and that now he was sure of it.
He and I went tip to London. He had the advice of an
eminent oculist; and he eventually recovered the sight of
that one eye. He cannot now see very distinctly : he cannot
read or write much; but he can find his way without hdng
led by the hand : the sky is no longer a blank to Mm — ^the
earth no longer a void. When his first-bom was put into his
arms J he could see that the boy had inherited his own eyes,
as they once were — large^ brill iantj and black* On that
occasion J he again^ with a full hearty acknowledged that
God had tempered judgment with mercy*
My Edward and Ij then, are happy: and the more so,
because those we most love are happy likewise, Diana aad
Mary Rivers are both married: alternately, once every
year, they come to see uSj and we go to see them, Diana's
husband is a captain in the navy; a gallant ofBcer, and a
good man* Mary*s h a clergyman; a college friend of hef
brother's ; and, from his attainments and principles j worthy
of the connection. Both Captain Fitzjames and Mr, Whartoa
love their wives, and are loved by them.
As to St, John Rivers, he left England: he went to India.'
He entered on the path be had marked for himself; he pur-
sues it stilh A more resolute, indefatigable pioneer never
wrought amidst rocks and dangers. Firm, faithful, and
devoted; full of energy, and zeal, and truth, he laboms
for his race: he clears their painful way to improvement:
he hews down like a giant the prejudices of creed and caste
that encumber it* He may be stem; he may be exacting;
he may be ambitious yet; but his is the sternness of tfie
warrior Great-heart, who guards his pilgrim convoy ffOJB
the onslaught of Apollyon. His is the exaction of the apostle,
who speaks but for Chris tj when be says— ^* Whosoever wfl]
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me/* His is the ambition of the high master-
spirit, which aims to fill a place in the first rank of those
who are redeemed from the earth — who stand without
fault before the throne of God; who share the last mighty
victories of the Lamb; who are called, and chosen, and
faithfuh
St. John is unmarried; he never will marry now, Hims^
has hitherto sufficed to the toil; and the toil draws nearit^
JANE EYRE
457
close: his glorious sua hastens to its setting* The last
letter I received from him drew from my eyes human tears,
and yet filled my heart with Divine joy: he anticipated
liis sure reward, his incorruptible crown, I know that a
stranger's hand will write to me next, to say that the good
and faithful servant has been called at length into the joy
of his Lord. And why weep for this? No fear of death will
darken St, John's last hour: his mind will be unclouded;
his heart will be undaunted; his hope will be sure; his
faith steadfast. His own words are a pledge of this: —
** My Master,'* he says, ** has forewarned me. Daily he
announces more distinctly, — * Surely I come quickly I'
and hourly I mare eagerly respond, —'Amen; even so come,
Lord Jesiisl'"
PRINTED IN ENGLAND BIT J, B, PEACE^ M.a.
AT THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRISS



m

mi
a bios OQM A1S llA
STANFORD UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
CECIL H. GREEN LIBRARY
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 94305-6004
(415) 723-1493
All books may be recalled after 7 days
DATE DUE
28D MAY 0319?'^
JUN 2 4 2001
%

nt »»rtAi«
