


Harvard University
UBRARY OF THE
Graduate School of Education
COLLECTION OF TEXT-BOOKS
GtHmninVD BT THB PUBUraERS
TRANSFERRED
HARVARD COLLEGE
...Cooiilc
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ta,i,.=db, Google
The Modern
Student's Library
PHILOSOPHY SERIES
l- larged to include :
tainit^ vni tings of the great philosopKers.
These vt^umes are edited by the most competent
authorities at home and abroad. The selections
are comprehensive and suited to the special needs
of students and the general reading public. Each
volume contains an introduction giving a brief
outline of the system of the author and indicating
his place in the history of thoi^t.
The Philosophy Series is under the general e < U-
torship of Ralph Barton Perry, Professor of Phi-
losophy, Harvard University.
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
ta,i,.=db, Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
JANE AUSTEN
mTH AN mTBOSCCnON
WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS
CHARLES SCRIBNERS SONS
r TOKK CHICAGO BOSTON
,,;,l,.-,„ Google
HARVMi* umvcitsnv
IIBRKHY OF THE GRADUATE SCHOtL
OF EOUCATIQfl

MNOTED TO
Ki^i mm \sm
Pibted in the Unitei) St
lUNIVERSITY
LIBRARY
I DEC t1 t962 ,

I.Z (Google
INTRODUCTION
My delight in Pride and Prejudice is so manifold that I
hardly know how to begin t«lling it, but I am tempted first
to try with my wonder at the constantly increasing fame of
the author. Yet her fame seems the least thing in our love
of her, our joy in her subtle and beautiful and ever adequate
art. It is the dignity and sweetness and brightness of her
nature which take us most, and our affection grows in honor
of her as we think over the modest facts of her gentle life,
which can be told in twenty lines, but never can be told oft«n
enough in their full significance.
Unless daily sacrifice this side of martyrdom is a fault
there is nothing to blame n the story of Jane Austen's life.
Out other idols, literary idols, need veils in their temples
where we like them to hide certain traits from us while we
worship them, or at best receive from us a piety mixed with
our pity; we cannot help knowing they were poor things,
though divine. If our human frailties, our vices, our foiblee,
have a consecration in them it does not keep us from being
ashamed, or at best, sony for them. But this altogether
admirable woman, good as she waa great, we could offer
pruse without such reserve, when we joined last year in her
apotheosis a century after her death. The defects of faer quali-
ties are as few as may be in our mortal conditioning, and
they have the charm which she knew how to impart to the
faulte of her most endearing creations. But to talk of her
so seems an offence against the restrained art which knew
no excess, and it is like rather noisily boasting of the per-
fectly ascertained love'iness of characters like Anne Elliott,
Emma Woodhouse, Fanny Price, Catherine Moriand, and
above all Elizabeth Bennet, which each in ite sort derived
from the character of Jane Austen; for whether she knew it
or not she always drew from herself, and gave the creatures
she loved the loveliness of her own soul. / • r ,
ri INTRODUCllON
It eeems impossible that she who is still bo freshly young
and whose fame now fills the world anew was born a hundred
and forty years ago. Her father was rector of the livings of
Steventon and Dean, which adjoined each other in the
County of Hampshire, and it was at Steventon that she
came into the world, the fifth of a good many brothers and
sisters. There she grew up through a very glad girlhood in
a life rounded to its close by the limits of pleasant country-
sides in Hants and Kent, and such now shrunlcen social
capitals as Bath and Southampton and Winchester, with a
few liberations of days and weeks to London for the pictures
and fashions of that faded day. Life in that faded day
was less provincial in provincial towns than now, and Jane
Austen enjoyed it to the limit of her happy temperament.
Against the background of their gayeties and the simpler
pleasures of the country, and the joys of a family rich in the
dreaminp and doings of those many brothers and sisters,
with herself first in their incentives, she painted her own por-
trait in the novels she wrote for twenty years and the letters
she was always writii^ to the end. But in her own time,
her star shone so dimly in the literary firmament, that only
here and there a telescopic eye distinguished it from the
nebulous host and such meteoric lustres as are always wink-
ing about the heavens of every time. The greatest and
kindest of her contemporaries knew her excellence, and
Scott's generous praise confessed her gift finer than his own;
but criticism grew slowly to the sense of it. Now, indeed,
her public is of a consciousness so intensively pervasive that
it seems as if the literary world of her day were filled with
her alone, as if she had been really sole in it; but that is a
very mistaken idea. She was not alone even in he^ sort and
this renders her work not less but more precious. If she was
Shakespearean she was like Shakespeare in being Srst among
her peers, or if peers is saying too much for thera, then first
amoi^ her kind, as he (to whom she has been too largely
likened) was among his kind. Nobody b^ins of himself,
and as Shakespeare, who was of his time and of such con-
temporaries as Jonson, Marlowe, Webster, Greene, Beau-
mont and Fletcher, began from many forgotten dramatists,
., „C,oo;(lc
INTRODUCTION vii
Jane Austen was of such contemporaries as Maria Edge-
worth, Frances Bumey, Miss Ferrier, Richardson, Mrs. Opie,
and began of such masters no longer remembered.
Her own past and her present mirror themselves in the
glancing facets of her work, and her art was beyond that of
all the other writers of English fiction, with a clear light
which has steadily glowed for a hundred years. Her style ha« >
the rare distinction of absolute prose, which at times has the
anxiety of ht«rary decorum and is stiffened by the formahty
of the eighteenth century ideals, but is often of the simplicity
of the best talk, and always of the naturalness which still
freshly charms. It is never of poetic quality, it is the elect
speech of life expressing itself without pretending to emotions
not felt, but finding human nature sufficient for its highest ef-
fects. Her prose is never of rhythmical movement; she kept
her dancing for the balls she loved; and her joy in human
nature seldom went beyond it to the nature outside of it.
Now and then, but seldom and very sparingly, she brings
outdoors into her page; she mentions a shrubbery or a plan-
tation, or a very dirty road; there is no parade of mountains
or clouds, of forests or meadows; even when she has a party
of her people go " exploring, " she makes no dramatic use of
the scenery, and Box Hill does not share in the evolution of
character; at the furthest, as with the woods of Pemberley
in Pride and Prejudice, she permits herself a restrained topo-
graphical statement. There is convincing proof that she is
no poet in the few lines which have survived from her very
indifferent rhymii^, and her favorite poet was George Crabbe,
who would have cast his fidelity to life in prose if he could,
and confided it to verse because he must. Her admiration
for his admirable tales in verse did not stop short of a de-
hciously playful pretence of passion for the poet himself,
whom she avowed her purpose of marrying, without ask-
ing vdiether he had a wife or not already.
Playfulness was the note of her most delightful nature,
uid in her perpetual irony it gives that prime quaUty of her
talent a charm which satire never has. We have only to
call it satire in order to fed its difference from all other irony,
and to find in it a sort of protesting pity, a sort of latent will-
C.OO;(lc
viii INrRODUCTION
iDgnees that the recider shall come to the rescue against it.
To be sure, almost every character in her fiction is more or
less a fool, as every one b in life, and if there is not a tacit
allowance from the author that she shares the universal
folly with the reader, there is a sort of flattering concession
that they form together something like the only exceptions
'to the rule. li he will consent to share the folly constantly
bathed in the shimmer of that electrical irony, he cannot
refuse her delight in the company of the fools who people
her page and seldom fail of some appeal in their moments
of sense or even nonsense. There are only a few stark-foolish
fools, Uke first of all Mr. Collins, Lady Catherine de Boui^h,
and Mrs. Bennet in Pride and Prejudice. Mrs. Norris in
Mansfield Park, John Thorp and General Tilney in North-
anger Abbey, Sir Walter Elliott and Mrs, Tom Musgrove in
Persuasion, John Daehwood in S^ise and SermbUUy, Mrs.
Elton in Emma, and a few besides, are beyond compassion
because they are unkind and not because they are foolish.
Even Mrs. Bennet has a redeeming pitiableness, even Mr.
Collins entreate our tolerance because he is a sheer donkey
and bom so. Otherwise the fools are lost to mercy because
they are not only foolish but cruel, and selfish and stupid
and brutal and mean and vulgar. You cannot wish to save
them from their folly, you can only desire them more and
more abandoned to it. The worst of them are snobs, and
snobs are fools for whom there is no redemption. These
stand prominently out, and unjustly characterize the company
of the pitiable and even lovable fools whom the reader ought
t^ have it on hb conscience to distinguish from them. He
ought to remember the kindliness of Mr. Woodhouse and his
thoughtful ness of others, the good-will of Miss Bates in Emma,
the blandness of Lady Bertran's selfishness in Mansjusld Park,
the romantic wish to love as well as to be loved of Marianne
Dashwood in Sense and SetmbilUy, the long endeavor of Lady
Russell in Penruision to atone for an act of disastrous med-
dling, and the suffering of Aime Elliott for yielding to her
influence, the girlish pure-heartedness of Catherine Morland
in Northanger Abbey, and others whom my memory fails of.
They are whoUy or partly foolish, but they are not voluntarily
C.OO;(lc
INTRODUCTION ix
molestive or entirely ridiculous; they are of tbat auccesaion
of simpletons who abound in Jane Austen's fiction rather more
tti & a others'fiction because she could not help seeing them in
her world, where still they did not abound more than else-
where. She had the fatal gift of observation, which is pos-
sibly the rarest ^t of all, and where once a foible diowed un-
der her eye she could not help noting it to her reader; it
did not matter that she loved and honored the character
where she found it. In Pride and PrtjuAice the divine Eliza-
beth herself, whom she values beyond any of her creations,
has momenta of being quite a fool, and Darcy himself, high-
minded and pure-minded, generous and magnanimous, as he
was, and worthy of such a girl as Elizabeth was at her best,
ia in certain junctures a preposterous and all but impossible
aas, a self-satisfied meddler and cruelly insensible to the suf-
fering he unselfishly inflicts from respectable motives. Prob-
ably they were boUi quite what their author meant them to
be, for she did nothhig ignorantly, though for what they
were she seems to have thought Elizabeth, much as she loved
and admired her, more a fool than Darcy, whom she had too
much sense herself to love or admire nearly as much. Per-
haps she did not really love or admire hirn at all, though
upcm asking one of her most devoted readers I found that
among even the wisest young people he was held in an im-
passioned awe.
Jane Austen was not the most satirical of English novd-
ista; Thacka«y perhaps was, and in his several disguises
was always trying for the reader's recognitaon in that quality;
but she was so entirely the most ironical, that she m^t
be said to have invented (if any one ever invents anything)
tliat attitude. Her irony indeed broke into satire, into bitter
sarcasm, toward the cruel and hopeless fools of her story; but
for the others it was caressing to open fondness. They be-
came her joke; a joke that they would have entered into
themaelvee, if that could have been; and her tender amuse-
ment at their absurdity may well have come from the life of
ingrowing family affection which she led among the brothers
and sisters, and progresaively nephews and nieces, in the home
bdoved of h» beyond all Uie other world. It is known how
- Cooxic
X INTRODUCTION
she lived her whole life among them, how she wrote her
wonderfully studied literature and evolved the master[»eces
of her beautiful art in the midst of them, and yet alwayn
knew how to isolate heraelf in the gayety which must have
teased her so to share it.
The home of the Austeoa, whether in town or country,
was a kingdom of the mind, independent when they woul < )
of all the other world, but part of it also when they would
in the high and harmless things beyond which great cajMtals
have nothing to o & er. They were distinctly and in the
best sense gentle, tending in Que fondness of later times to
gentility, but actually without that tunt of conscious su-
periority which is the most perilous infection of gentlefolk.
In this kingdom the second of the two sisters was unques-
tionably sovereign; her thought was always at work, always
at play, and that of the others, especially of her older sister,
was always at work and at play with her. Indefinitely early
she began to write little stones so constantly among the rest
that it might almost be said in cooperation with them; and
she made little dramas, comedy tending to farce, which they
acted together. At last, when her twenty years were ripe,
she wrote a novel which her father thought so good that he
offered it, with her proud but somewhat timorous consent,
to the most respectable publisher he could think of; but,
thou^ he assured the publisher of this fact, Mr. Cadell,
with the sometime fatuity of his trade, promptly declined
it. Without losing the first post he returned the manuscript,
and it WBS not until seven years later that Pride and Pr^'
udice was given to the world by another house. In the mean-
time Sense and SensHnUty, " By a I^tdy, " had appeared, tmd
when Pride and Pr^udice followed from whatever obscurer
press, it consulted the diffidence of the writer by masking
as the work of " the Author of Sense and Sensibiliiy. "
It U not my wish to ft^ow the succession of the other
books, of Norlhanger Abbey, of Emma, of Peravanon, of Mans-
field Park, because for one thing I am not sure of it, and for
another because I am impatient to talk of the best of them,
as I think Pride and Prejudice. There I am sure the author
would be in a^eement with me; but then I should not per-
L ..„■„ Google
INTRODUCTION Ti
fectly ^ree with her about the hero and heroine. Eluabeth
Betmet one may entirely love, while one may share her own
mi^viDgs as to her wisdom and taete at times, though < me
grows in regard for her good heart and m respect for her sound
mind, not steadily but finally. One shares the author's con-
viction that she is the most adorable character in her fiction;
she will not say in all fiction, but ^e reader need not share
her scruple, and may well challenge other readers to name
him uiy heroine equal to her. ^Vhen I came to read Pride
and Pr^udice the tenth or fifteenth time at the close of 1917
for the purposes of this Introduction, I found it as fresh as
when I read it first in 1889, after long shying off from it I
found it as fresh as at any earlier reading, but I had never
reaUzed before the open simplicity of the design, and the
young artlessness of its art; so young that every now and
then the artist lapsed to the artizan, and frankly operated
a scheme which hesitated to operate itself. The quality of
the different persons is disclosed from the beginning; the
chief personages make no secret of their characteristics, and
at their first encounter the history of their love might have
been as fitly named Arrogance and Impertintnex as Pride
and Prejvdice. But arrc^ance was not the keynote of Carey's
character, and impertinence was only the effect of semi-
humorous resentment in EUzabeth ; if they are both merely
nasty at the first they quickly intimate their real natures,
and in the retrospect one b^ins very soon to guess what
they really are. Darcy indeed changes radically from his
primary mistakenness, but Elizabeth without ceasing to
be impertinent becomes more and more witty in the irony ■
which delights from her to the happy close of their often tu-
multuous story. Her very fault, if gay pertness is a fault
in a pretty girl who is also good, ie part of her charm, and is
immediately useful in helping the author to keep the whole
story within the play of her characteristic irony. This
sounds the depths as well as lights the surfaces of the drama,
which it never allows to become utter tragedy, though it m-
volves the effect of the passions which conduce to tragedy.
Though so many of us know the story, I might safely tell
it again in outfine without dulling the interest of those
L ..„■„ Google
xii INTRODUCTION
readers whom I am supposed to be making acquainted with
it. But I will not take this shabby chance; I will do
nothing worse than deal with the points of the story as they
have presented themselves in my own latest reading of it,
•without trying to give the shape or sequence of a review to
my essay. Every scene is fuH of character if not of incident,
and the charm of Elizabeth is full of her sweetness and arch-
ness as well as her pertness. Every page of what is so dis-
tinctively a " novel of manners " testifies to the fidelity and
veracity of the author's observation. The snobbishness of
the local society whether in its ruder or finer vulgarity, has
earlier recognition in Bingley's sister, wio is instinctively
jealous of Elizabeth from merely seeing her with Darcy,
though their acquaintance be^Jis in mutual repulsion. She
sits beside Darey while he writes, and comments on the sym-
metry and rapidity of his pemnanship, for in that period of
social formality he writes in the presence of the family with
no more consciousness of being in it than a person takes up
a book and b^ns to read, as often happens in the fiction if
not the fact of the time. It happens in almost every novel,
but I do not remember any other case of a gentleman lying
down on a sofa in the drawing-room and going to sleep, out-
side of PruU and Prejvdice; though I am sure the thing
may have commonly happened, or Jane Austen would not
have had Bingley's brother-in-law do it. People talked with
a stilted formality and conversation moved with a high lit-
CTary gait much beyond the imagination of our easy-going
day. But even then it does not seem probable that two girls
'talked together like E^zabeth and her friend Charlotte Lucas,
or that Charlotte should express her low views of matrimony
so deliberately as she does. This is tor the instruction of
the reader, as the burlesque priggishness of Elizabeth's sister
Mary is too openly for his diversion.
As for the colloquial or rhetorical languaging of the dia-
Ic^e throughout, I have noticed in my latest reading of the
book that the style is natural when the matter in hand re-
quires the expression of no grand emotion, but that then the
author mounts her high horse, and advances at the stately
pace ^rtiich the imitators of the great Doctor Johnson had
L .., > ,„Cooylc
INTRODUCTION xiii
eet. She ceases to be J & ne Austen, demure, ironical, n & tural,
and becomea Panny Bumey after Fanny Burney has l«aroed
lier lesson in the process of becoming Madame d'Arblay. It
is a pity, but it cannot be helped; fortunately the impassioned
moment^, the didactic moments, in Pride and Prejvdice are
few, as they are in Jane Austen's other stories, where they
tend to become constantly fewer. We must always remember
that " P. and P. " as she likes playfully to call it in the letters
to her sister Cassandra, was her first book, which she won-
derfully wrote in her twentieth year, aad tJiat she was then
willingly, almost eagerly, subordinate to the literary mas-
tery of the period in tiie intensive expression of the first-
class emotions. People had then foigotten that passion, or
impassioned conviction, expressed itself in poetic but al-
most never rhetorical terms, and authors with the rare gift
of either seeing or hearing their fellow-beings, had not yet
learned to report their looks or words as they really saw
or heard them. Things went on from bad to worse through-
out tbe long Georgian era, till late in the Victorian time,
when fiction had escaped the instruction of the prepotent
lexicographer (he never spoke as he wrote himself, however)
and let its heroes and heroines utter their most intensive
feelings as simply as they had felt. Jane Austen perhaps
never unlearned the mistaken lesson which she had learned
so painfuUy as well as with so much pains. But I think that
in each successive novel her people employ the high horse
less and less in their great emotions and keep the levels of
life afoot, the levels which ^e loved beyond any other when
she could consent to be herself or let them be themselves.
I venture to think that the playful family spirit may have
forgotten itself in the office of criticism, which again I fancy
it must often have exercised upon the fiction so mostly created
in the family midst with the family privity. But very pos-
sibly I am wrong, though I bate to own it, for I should like
to believe that the faults of Jane Austen were always some-
body else's faults.
l^e procession of fools in their delightful variety moves
from the start of the story, and the types of vulgarity dis-
tinguish themselves from one another, with a loudness in
., ,.e.ooyic
xiv INTRODUCrnON
Elizabeth's aunt Mrs. Phillips which is acucely even sur-
passed by that of her sister Lydia, though it attests ita^
supremely only in that moment wheo she flings up hOT
window and shouts her hospitable good-will to the militia
ofGcers and their attendant young ladies in the street. Fool
for fool it is hard to choose between Elizabeth's mother who
appears in the earliest scene and her cousin Mr. Collins who
comes on soon after the rise of the curtain and recurs again
and again on the scene almost to the fall of the curtain. An
author who was so faithful to nature could not in mere
virtue of her youth be leas loyal to convantion than have ft
villain b^in his machinations at the outset, but it must be
owned that Wickham is very artistically handled, and that
this admirably managed scoundrel is eclii^ed only by the
superior fascination of a fool so incomparable as Mr. Collins,
whom nobody wbo ever knew him can have forgotten, any
more than he foigot himself; if he has a blemish it is the
ideal perfection of his foUy, it is his so unfailingly acting in
character. I cannot remember any passages of fiction more
richly ridiculous than the rise and progress of his passion
for Elizabeth springing instantly from hia knowledge of her
sister's probable engagement, and then instantly turnii^
from her rejection of him to the comfort of her friend Char-
lotte Lucas's readily responsive affection. The whole thii^t
is unampassed if not unparalleled comedy; there is no pas-
sage descriptive or expressive of him which fails the reader's
just expectation in his spoken or written word. One aban-
dons oneself to a supreme delight in his love-m^dng, his self-
appreciation as a clei^yman, his veneration for his noble
patroness Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and his deference of
all his clerical obligations to hia duty to her; it is hard
to determine whether he ie more characteriatic as host or
guest or in what point he ahines most; but if I must choose
I think (though I am not sure) that I enjoy him most when,
after Lydia's escapade, he writes to condole with her'family
and after dwelling upon all the calamitous aspects of the
affair, and congratulating himself that Elizabeth's oppor-
tune rejection of him saved him any share in their sorrow
and diucrace, he advises Lydia's fatiieE to " console hlmsdf
■ Coo;ilc
INTRODUCTION xr
as mucb as poedble, to throw off his unworthy child from
Mb affection forever, and leave her to reap the fniite of her
own heinous offence. " His couueel to Elisabeth not to ac <
cept Barcy becaufle it must be so distasteful to his aunt. Lady
Catherine de Bourgh, who has deseed him for her dau^ter,
is not wanting, and is supported by the fact Uiat her lady-
ship has personally assured Him that she will never give her
consent to the match. " I thought it my duty to give the
speediest intelligence of this to my cousin that she and her
noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and
not run hastily into a marriage which haa not been properly
sanctioned. " At the same time he declares his joy that
" Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up, " but
censures her father for receiving her and her husband after
they have been married. " It was an encouragement to vice;
and had I been rector of Longboura I should very strenuously
have opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them as
a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow
them to be mentioned in your hearing. "
Whatever the reader may think of the morality of this
I am sure he will agree with me that if her family had refused
to see Lydia and her husband when she came home to them
married after living with him a fortnight unmarried, we
should have missed some of the most characteristic traits of
her remarkable nature. There is something absolute in her
selfish recklessness, her reckless pursuit of her own pleasure
without the least regard not only to others but even to her-
self. She is no fool, at least not as the other fools are; after
her one object in getting a husband at any cost is achieved
she behaves with unprincipled devotion to the sole motive of
her life: to get everything for herself without the least re-
gret for the ways and means. She has a passion for Wick-
bam, but simply because he contributes to her comfort and
enables her to realize her quite childish ideal of worldly im-
pori^ance as a married woman. Otherwise she would not
have cared to be married to him; she would have gone on
Uving with him, molested by no regret for herself or thought
of others. She is a perfectly probable wonder of india-rub-
bery unmorality which does not seem abnormal and doubt-
Cooylc
xvi INTRODUCTION
less is not. If she could be ascertained scientifically she would
clarify one of the darkest problems of social psychology.
Wickham is equally without a flaw in his malce-up, and,
as a mthtess and reckless liar through his whole life, as a
predatory scoundrel in every motive and every action, formed
to win the trust of all who meet him and then to betray it
on the first occasion without remorse for any ruin that fol-
lows, he is not the monster of iniquity which he appears in
this statement, but is quite as normally abnormal as Lydia
herself, and is surprising in nothing so much as the perfection
of his fitness for her companionship. It must be a question,
with the witness of their lives which will get the better or
the worse of the other in the career which is perfectly studied
at the outset in all its suggestions of quite self-satisfied evil.
The mind which could imagine his badness and not overdo
his nature in its boundless potentialities oi mischief divines
the fascination he certainly has for EUiabet^ Bennet from
their ■ earliest meeting up to the time when she reluctantly
yields to the proofs pven her of his worthlessness, of his
native proclivity to falsehood and his imvarying practice of
deceit. But she is only one of those who fall a prey to hia
frank and winning powers of deceiving and betraying. He
invites her to the danger of trusting her romantic prej-
udice against the man who has vexed her by seeming in-
different to her wit, to her steadfast self-respect, to her
beauty and to her resentment of his high-principled but not
very well reasoned pride which she takes for mere arrogance
and insolence. She is so simple-hearted for all her irony,
that she has no doubt of his good faith when he begins
with her by telling her of his injured past and accusing the
man whose whole^ family he has cruelly betrayed in every
circumstance of their love and trust, and made their future
kindness impossible. Yet Elizabeth is not in love with
Wickham, as we duly learn, though she remains deceived
by him until she tries to do herself the greatest possible harm
with the man whom she has always, from the hour of her
primal repulsion, been drawn to by those elemental forces
which result in love and in spite of the centr'ifugal chances
result in the happy marriages of fiction, if not quite so in-
C.OO;(lc
INTRODUCTION xvii
variably of fact. It must be owned that the author does
everything that can be done to make Darcy as acceptable
to t^e reader as he becomes to Elizabeth, after she has suc-
ceeded in tnftVing all her friends believe she hates if not de-
spises him. She accumulates every virtue upon him; there
is not a noble or magnanimous action which she does not
make ^im do, and one can well believe that the family circle
of those Austens who assisted at his rehabilitation long
before it was made public did not share the im^nable
severity of her struggles, in rendering him lovable to the
reader. It must have been a Titanic struggle with her to
render him meek and modest and foi^ving, an eater of hum-
ble pie in quantity unknown among heroes, and quite unex-
ampled in the lives of the English gentry. He not only comes
to the rescue of the loathsome Lydia, but he yields to the
rapacity of Wickham in letting him fix the conditions of mar-
rying her, when she is quite willing ia remain his mistresSr
aiid, so far as " we are told, he never tries to beat him down.
The author makes him the scapegoat of the situation; she-
accumulates on him not the sins but the virtues of his tribe;
then she drives him not into the wilderness but into para-
dise. The miracle is in time for Elizabeth, but it is too late^
for the reader. So it seems to me, but again when I sub-
mitted the case to a younger reader, I was told that I was
wrong; that Darcy is perfectly adorable and always waa^
and that if Elizabeth had not been perverted by Wickham
and infected with an all but fatal prejudice she would hav &
known it from the start. Perhaps the elderly reader is not
given time to recover from the effect of Darcy's arrogant
offer of his love to Elizabeth, his acknowledgment of his con-
tempt for her family, his vaunting confession that he broke
ofi the affair between her sister and Bingley, and did what-
ever else he could do to outrage her self-respect and wqund
her feelings, before he begins to show himself in a better light;
to bring himself by a tour de farce to buy off Wickham from
Lydia's willing dishonor; to feel the goodness and essential
r^nement of Elizabeth's uncle, who, although he is in trade,
is willing to pay Lydia's ransom from his narrow means
and at the cost of Us own family; to receive him and his
xviii INTRODUCTION
wife when they happen with EUzabeth at his country seat;
to bring hie sister to call upon her, and try to make them all
his guests; to show her every proof of his regret short of
words for his past conduct; to throw ofE his disguise of pride,
and reveal himself in ha true character of a gentleman by
nature as well as birth, kind, considerate, and even meek
at every point where you would have him so. All this is sup-
posed to happen, but life is short, especially for elderly
readers, and the art of the author is long in bringing her ends
about; she brings them about by very rough magic at times.
The surrender of Darey is effected by main force when he
first offers himself, and the struggle is not so hard to have
him renew his suit. By that time Elisabeth had worked
round to him " when he had become unattainable " and they
had reached their common conclusion that they had each,
thrown a pearl away. Still the affair is obviously operated,
and if it had not been for Lydia's elopement and the di^raiM
which Darcy was obUged to share with Elizabeth, I could not
accept the conclusion as inevitable. It is to be allowed that
they talk reasonably about the event which shocks every-
body but Lydia and Wickham, and it is to be realized that
no love affair was ever treated in its minor aspects with so
much open good sense.
We cannot refuse any means to the end; we can even re-
joice in them with the lovers, for how otherwise could we
have had that immortal scene with Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when she comes to browbeat EUzabeth at the rumor
of her engagement to Darcy, and io bid her forbear all
thoughts of it, with outrage which scarcely parses that of
his first offer to her? It is a scene which in her ladyship's
defeat gives the utmost comfort to the younger reader and
compensates the suffering sage for all his doubts. If it is
not true to fact it is true to life, and it is triumphantly true
to Elizabeth and her inborn ability upon occasion to rout
Lady Catherine and every like of her. Better yet it clothes
her with final authority to make peace between Darcy and
his aunt and to urge his forgiveness when marriage has put
her in possession of the field. It is the supreme histrionic
scene cj the story, but there is another scene more consoU
■ C.OO;(lc .
INTRODUCTION nx
ing to the experienced reader for the sacrifice he is obliged
to make in sJlowii^ the author to effect the accepted con-
clusion. Without their engagement and imminent mar-
riage, how could it be that " Eliiabeth's spirits soon rimng
to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for
his having ever fallen in love with her.'How could you be-
gin ?'Baid she.'I can comprehend your going on charmingly,
^leii you had once made a b^inning, but what could set
you off in the first place? . . . My beauty you had eariy
withstood; and as for my mamiers, my behavior to you was
always at least bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke
to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
Now be sincere; did you admire me for my imperti-
nence? . . . You may as well call it impertinence at
once. ... In spite of the pains you took to disgiuse your-
self your feelings were always noble and just. . . . There,
I have saved you the trouble of accounting for it ; and really,
all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reason-
able. To be sure you knew no actual good of me, but no-
body thinks of that when they fall in love.'"
The rapture of trae lovers when they are newly betrothed
and they seek each other out in the earliest and least stirring
of it in their hearts, is of universal experience, but tlie wonder
is not BO much that it here seems recognized for the fiist time
in the history of the passion, as that fiction seems never to
have recurred to it. But perfiaps it has recurred often and
often, and it is only the superiative charm of it in this pas-
sage that wins us from other knowlet^e of it. It is the very
heart of £3izabeth Bennet which opens itseff in the lively
episode, that is to say the heart of Jane Austen, who is al-
most one with her, and was always writing herself into her,
in her irony, her playfulness, her final dignity of heart and
mind. The denouement is so unhurried that the reader
has as much time as he wants for his pleasure in her char-
acter after her rejection of Mr. Collins to Charlotte Lucas's
precipitate acceptance of him, but he does not at once
reconcile himself to Elizabeth's visiting her friend in fulfill-
ment of a rash promise and an obligation of the auth < H''B to
bring about her second meeting with Darcy, with his offer
- Cooxic
XX INTRODUCTION
to her and her enli^tenment with regard to Wickfaam, and
all the events that roughly contribute to emooth the course
of their trae love. Her Unguage is never more unnaturally
rhetorical than when she rejects Darcy, or her behavior more
truly natural than when she brealcs down and cries as soon
as he leaves her. Without this rather foreed series of events
we should never have had Lady Catherine de Boui^, so
increasingly precious to the end, with her ideal of herself
aa a great lady empowered to meddle with everybody's af-
fairs and her goodness to her tenants whom, when she found
them hungry and unhappy, she " scolded into harmony and
jdenty. " Elizabeth's sdf-analysis is always good, and it is a
just tribute to her character as she reveals it when Darcy tolls
her of Wickham's attempted elopement with his innocent
young ^ster when he wishes to make her understand per-
fectly how mistaken she has been. It is the greatest sacrifice
of himself that he can oSer, and is far beyond his gentle-
manly instinct in bringing the young girl to call upon Eliza-
beth after their accidental meeting at Pemberley. Iliat
is something he owes to himself as a gentleman, but the otjier
is something he owes to her. I can scarcely think of any
point where she fails in her claim on our affection, our re-
spect, though she is often mistaken and sometimes absurd.
It is no wonder that the author loves her, and cannot think
of her but as the finest creature in that world of imagination
where she mostly had her own being. There are Uttle in-
cidents which are related to her through her kindly charm,
as when the children of her Uncle Gardiner wait for her on
the stwr when she first comes to his house, and her grati-
tude to him and her aunt for not being as vulgar as Darcy
thinks all her kindred is pathetic. Not everything is so simply
contrived, but the things that must be inevitably gain worth
at her hands from their necessity, like her telhng Darcy of
Lydia's elopement, and again her owning her knowledge of
his goodness in paying Wickham the price of saving her family
from the shame iJiat Lydia would never feel.
The goodness of her own nature comes out in all she says
and does to her beloved sister Jane, whose goodness shows
the dearer in the flickering irony which Elizabeth cannot
L ..„■„ Google
INTRODUCTION xm
spare her. That most lovable creature always reached a
merciful coHclusion in any question through her angelio
reasonableness; the greatest difficulty she seems ever to
Lave had, after being persuaded to think ill of Darcy by
Elizabeth, was learning from her to think well enough of
him to believe in her love for him. To be sure, she had under-
gone much in being taught to believe Wickham a villain;
and the changes were almost too great for her constant nature.
The afiection of these sisters is one of the sweetest things in
all fiction, and the art, the truth, of the author in always guard-
ing the soul of Jane from insipidity la miraculous. She is al-
lowed to think and say all the good of everybody without
lapsing into fatuous optimism or doubting the keener wisdom
of Elizabeth, who loves her even beyond their father. He
is always Ehzabeth's great friend, her good comrade, whose
sarcasm saves her from the silliness of her mother and flat-
ters her with a not too great sense of her equaUty with
himself, but whose foibles she recognizes in the terrible
hour when she has to confess the truth of Darey's cruel
arraignment of her family for its vu^arity. It is pathetic
to have him own that he has not been all a father should
to his varied girls, that he owed something more than he
has done even for Lydia, and has not at least tried to keep
her from being a worse fool than her mother. We never
have enou^ of him; he is not staled by our foreknowledge
of how he will take anything about to happen, but is as
freshly delightful at the last when he calls Elisabeth to him
to know what right Darcy has to ask for her hand, and to
confess that he has already granted it, Darcy being the sort
of man he would not think of denying anythii^ he asks.
Lydia being married and Jane engaged, and Elizabeth given
away, it is with her own joy in him that we hear him chai^
her to send him any other young men who may be wanting
to marry Kitty or Mary, for now he is quite at leisure to
see them. We really cannot get enough of his saying that of ,
all his sons-in-law Wickham is his favorite or not want him
to keep on saying it always.
Of the younger daughters who remeun to him the pedantic
Mary is too gross and mere a caricature, such as we do not
- Coo;(lc
Bdi INTRODUCTION
remember the author otherwise indulging herself in. Mary
must renmin what she is, but the hope of the petulant Kitty's
becoming less silly under the infiuence of Jane and Ellizabeth
does not seem unreasonable. There is no such hope for her
mother, but we would not have Mrs. Bennet less perfect a
fool than she is to the last. What ie most wonderful in her
is the perennial youthfulness of her folly. She is never any
older than the youngest of her daughters, but it is to be owned
for her rapture in Lydia's marriage that it is not greater than
in that of Jane and of Elizabeth, though in her mounting satis-
faction with their successively mounting wealth and station
she tries not to distinguish among them. I am not quite
sure that I like her being somewhat quelled by Darcy; but
it is inevitable, and it is to be considered that she remains
equal to her affectionate and familiar deUght in Bingley and
Jane; and I think it to Bingley's credit that he does not and
could not do anything to snub her overwhelming fondness.
This, if there were no other proof of his goodness, would be
quite enoi^. Jane is equal to the even greater task of loving
hia unkind sisters, though I doubt if Elizabeth ever admitted
Miss Binglejf's overtures to her friendship after she was
married to Darcy. I think there must always have been
some flashes of her irony to light up the forgiveness of the
friend who meant him for herself, and tried for him throu^
every discouragement.
We must take leave of the whole company of comedians
who have been kept from that bleakness of tragedy which
ie not very common off the sta^e, though the dramatists would
like us to think differently, and are so often asking us to
share their tears for it. liiere is trouble enough in real life,
but it is mostly annulled by the use of common sense and
patience and kindness even by people who have tried to do
themselves mischief. Perhaps something like the oversoul
helps the good ending and leaves us quite comfortable if not
peifectiy contented. We might have wished Wickham
punished to the limit of his deserts, but we can manage with
the quiet scorn Elizabeth makes him fed when she spares
faim, and it is her sufficient condemnation of Lydia to have
ber say that " Lydia is Lydia still. "
L ..„■„ Google
INTRODUCTION xriii
In her letters the author frankly avowed her doting fond-
ness for Elizabetli, whom with her usual ironical reserves
she thought the most adorable creature in the world, and
she tenderly preferred Pride and Pr^vdice to her other books.
She meant once to call it First Impraaions but she must have
always been ^ad that she called it Pride and Prejudice be-
cause that was a far fitter name, and because in her letters
to her sister Cassendra she could talk of it, with affectionate
mocking, as " P. and P. " I take leave to take leave of it as
" P. oTid P., " and I shall like my readers the better if they will
thus initialize it in their associations with it. 1 do not believe
that Jane Austen would resent the familiarity if she were
still alive, as indeed she is, apparently more and more as the
years grow into the centuries. I wish we were all worthier
her tolerance, but it is my hopeful remembrance of her kind-
ness to others that it is never apportioned among the deserv-
ing alone but is bestowed on many as little deserving as our-
selves, both in and out of her books.
WiLLUH Dean Howslu.
Jtuiuary, 1918.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER I
It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single
man in possession of a good fortune must be in want
of a wife.
However little known the feelings or viewa of such
a man may be on his first entering a neighborbood,
this truth is ao well fixed in the minds of the surround-
ing families, that he is considered as the rightful prop-
erty of some one or other of their daughters.
" My dear Mr. Bennet, " said his lady to him one day,
" have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last? "
Mr. Bennet replied that be had not.
" But it is, " returned she; " for Mrs. Long has just
been here and she told me all about it. "
Mr. Bennet made no answer.
" Do not you want to know who has taken it? " cried
bis wife impatiently.
" Yott want to tell me and I have no objection to hear-
ing it. "
This was invitation enough.
" Why, my dear, yon must know, Mrs. Long says that
Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune
from the north of England; that he came down on Mon-
day in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so
much delighted with it, that he agreed with Mr.
Morris immediately ; that he is to take possession before
I Coo < j,k
2 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the
house by the end of nest week. "
" What is his name? "
" Bingley. "
" Is he mairied or single? "
" Oh! single^ my dear, to be sure! A single man of
large fortune; four or five thousand «-year. What a
fine thing for our girls! "
" How so? how can it affect them? "
" My dear Mr. Bennet, " replied his wife, " how can
you be so tiresome ! you must know that I am thinking
of his marrying one of them. "
" Is that his design in settling here? "
" Design! nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is
very likely that he may fall in love with one of them,
& nA therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes. "
" I. see no occasion for that. You and the girls may
go, or you may send them by themselves, which perhaps
will be atill better, for as you are as handsome as any
of them, Mr. Bingley might like you the best of the
" My dear, yon flatter me. I certainly have had my
share of beauty, but I do not pretend to be anything
extraordinary now. When a woman has five grown-up
daughters, sl^e ought to give over thinking of her own
beauty. "
" In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty
to think of. "
" But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr.
Bingley when he comes into the neighborhood. "
" It is more than I engage for, I assure you. "
" But consider your daughters. Only think what an
establishment it would be for one of them. Sir William
and Lady Lucas are determined to go, merely on that
accomit, for in general, you know, they visit no new-
,'Coogic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 3
emners- Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible
for u» to visit him if you do not. "
" You are over-scrupulous, surely, I dare aay Mr.
Bingley will be very glad to see yon; and I will send
a few lines by yon to assure him of my hearty consent
to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls : though
I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy, "
" I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a
bit better than the others ; and I am sure she is not
half so handsome as Jane, nor htilf so good-humored
as Lydia. But you are always giving her the prefer-
ence. "
" They have none of them much to recommend them, "
replied he; " they are all silly and ignorant, like other
girls ; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than
her sisters. "
" Mr. Bennet, bow can you abuse your own children
in such a way! You take delight in vexing me. You
have no compassion on my poor nerves, "
" You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect
for your nerves. They are my old friends. I have
heard you mention them with consideration these twenty
years at least. "
" Ah ! you do not know what I suffer. "
" But 1 hope you will get over it, and live to see many
young men of four thousand a-year come into the neigh-
borhood. "
" It wUl be no use to us, if twenty such should come,
since you will not visit them. "
" Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty,
I will visit them all. "
Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts,
sarcastic humor, reserve, and caprice, that the experi-
ence of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to
make his wife understand his character. Her mind was
- Cootllc
4 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean
understanding, little information, and uncertain temper.
When she was discontented, she fancied herself nervons.
The business of her bfe was to get her daughters mar-
ried; its solace was visiting and news.
CHAPTER II
Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of thoae who
waited on Mr. Bingley. He had always intended to
visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife
that he should not go; and till the evening after the
visit was paid she had no knowledge of it. It was then
disclosed in the following manner: — Observing his sec-
ond daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly
addressed her with,
" I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy. "
" We are not in a way to know what Mr. Bingley
likes, " said her mother resentfully, " since yre are not to
visit. "
" But you forget, mamma, " said Elizabeth, " that we
shall meet him at the assemblies, and that Mrs. Long
has promised to introduce him. "
" I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing.
She has two nieces of her own. She is a selfish, hypo-
critical woman, and I have no opinion of her, "
" No more have I/'said Mr. Bennet; " and I am glad
to £nd that you do not depend on her serving you. "
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but unable
to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters.
" Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake!
Have a little compassion on my nerves. You tear them
to pieces. "
- " Xyogic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 5
" Kitty has no discretion in her congas, " said her
father; " she times them ill. "
" I do not cough for my own amnsement, " replied
Kitty fretfvdly. " When is your next ball to be, Llj»y? "
" To-morrow fortnight. "
" Aye, so it is, " cried her mother, " and Mrs. X^ng
does not come back till the day before; so it will be
impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not
know him herself. "
" Then, my dear, you may have^e advantBge of your
friend, and introduce Mr, Bingley to her. "
" Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not
acquainted with him myself ; how can yon be so teas-
ing? "
" I honor your circumspection. A fortnight's ac-
quaintance is certainly very little. One cannot know
what a man really is by the end of a fortnight. But
if tue do not venture somebody else will; and after all,
Mrs. Long and her nieces must stand their chance; and,
therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you
decline the offer, I will take it on myself. "
The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said
only, " Nonsense, nonsense ! "
" What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclama-
tion? " cried he. " Do you consider the forms of intro-
duction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense?
I cannot quite agree with you there. What say you,
Mary? for you are a young lady of deep reflection, I
know, and read great books And make extracts. "
Mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew
not how.
" While Mary is adjusting her ideas, " he continued,
" let us return to Mr. Bingley. "
" I am sick of Mr. Bingley, " cried his wife,
" I am sorry to bear that; but why did not you tell
L .., > ,„Coo < il(
J
6 PHIDE AND PREJUDICE
me so before? If I had known as much this morning^
I certainly would not have called on him. It is very
unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, we can-
not escape the acquaintance now. "
Tlie astonishment of the ladies was jnst what he
wished; that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the
rest; tliongh, when the first tumult of joy was over, she
began to declare that it was what she had expected all
the while.
" How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But
I knew I should persuade you at last. I was sore you
loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance.
Well, how pleased I am ! and it is such a good joke, too,
that you should have gone this morning and never said
a word about it till now. "
" Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose, "
said Mr. Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room,
fatigued with the raptures of his wife.
" What an excellent father you have, girls ! " said she,
when the door was shut. " I do not know how you will
ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either,
for that matter. At our time of life it is not so pleasant,
I can tell you, to be making new acquaintance every
day; but for your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia,
my love, though you are the youngest, I dare say Mr.
Bingley will dance with you at the next ball. "
" Oh! " said Lydia stoutly, " I am not afraid; for
though I am the youngest, I'm the tallest. "
The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing
how soon he would return Mr. Bennet's visit, and detet^
mining when they should ask him to dinner.
PBiOE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER III
Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the asaiat-
ance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was
snfficieDt to draw from her husband any satisfactory
description of Mr. Btn^ey. They attacked him In vari-
ous ways — ^with barefaced questions, ingenioos supposi-
tions, and distant sunnises; but he eluded the skill of
them all, and they were at last obliged to accept the
second-hand intelligence of their neighbor. Lady Lucas.
Her report was highly favorable. Sir William had
been delighted with him. He was quite young, wonder-
fully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the
whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a
large parfy. Nothing could be more delightful ! To be
fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in
love ; and very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were
entertained.
" If I can bnt see one of my daughters happily settled
at Netherfield, " said Mrs. Bennet to her hosband, " and
all the others equally well married, I shall have nothing
to wish for. "
In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's
visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in bia library.
He had entertained hopes of being admitteid to a sight
of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much ;
bat he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat
more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascer-
taining from an upper window that he wore a blue coat,
and rode a black horse.
An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dis-
patchedr and already had Mrs. Bennet planned the
courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when
an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingley
..„■„ Google
8 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
was obliged to be. In town the following daj, and con-
sequently, unable to sccept the honor of their invita-
tion, etc. Mrs. Benuet was quite disconcerted. She
conld not imagine what business he could have in town
so soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire ; and she began
to fear that he might be always flying about from one
place to another, and never settled at Netherfield as he
ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fears a little by
starting the idea of his being gone to London only to get
a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed,
that Mr. Bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven
gentlemen with him to the assembly. The girls grieved
over such a number of ladies, but were comforted the
day before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve
he had brought only six with him from London, — his
five sisters and a cousin. And when the party entered
the assembly room it consisted only of five all together, —
Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest,
and another young man.
Mr. Bin^y was good-looking and gentlemanlike ; he
had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected man-
ners. His sisters were fine women, with an air of de-
cided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merely
looked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon
drew the attention of liie rotnn by his fine, tall perstm,
handsome features, noble mien, and the report which
was in general circulation within five minutes after his
entrance, of his having ten thousand a-year. The gentle-
men pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the
ladies declared he was much handsomer than Mr. Bing-
ley, and he was looked at with great admiration for
about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgost
which turned the tide of his popularity ; for he was dis-
covered to be proud, to be above his company, and above
being pleased; and not all his large estate in Derbyshire
- Cooxic
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 9
could then save faim from hftving « most forbidding, dis-
agreeable countenance, and being unwortfiy to be com-
pared with his friend.
Mr. Bingley bad soon made himself acqoainted with
all the principal people in the room; he was lively and
unreserved, duiced every dance, was angry that the ball
closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at
Nether field- Such amiable qualities must speak for
themselves. What a contrast between him and his
friend ! Mr. Darcy danced only once with Mrs. Hurst
and once with Miss Bingley, declined being introduced
to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in
walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one
of his own party. His character was decided. He was
the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and
everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet,
wbrae dislike of his general behavior was sharpened
into particnlar resentment by his having sli^ted one of
her daughters.
Elisabeth Bennet had been obliged, by tiie scarcity
of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during
part of that time, Mr. Darcy had been standing near
enough for her to overhear a conversation between him
and Mr. Bingley, who came from the dance for a few
minutes, to press his friend to join it.
" Come, Darcy, " said he, " I must have yon dance. I
hate to see yon standing about by yourself in this stupid
manner. You had much better dance. "
" I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it,
unless I am particularly acquainted with my partner.
At such an assembly as tiiis it would be insupportable.
Your sisters are engaged, and there is not another
woman in the room wtuun it would not be a punishment
to me to stand np with. "
L ..„■„ Google
10 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" I wcmld not be so fastidions as yon are, " cried Bin^
ley, " for a kingdom! Upon my honor, I never met
vith so many pleasant girla in my life as I have this
evening; and there are several of them you see imcom-
monly pretty. "
" You are dancing with the only handsome girl in the
room, " said Mr. Darcy, looking at tiie eldest Miss
Bennet.
" Oh! she is the most beautiful creature I ever be-
held ! But there is one of her sisters sitting down just
behind you, who is very pretty, and I dare Bay very
agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce yon. "
" Which do you mean? " and turning round he looked
for a moment at Elisabeth, till catching her eye, he with-
drew his own and coldly said, " She is tolerable, but not
handsome enough to tempt me; and I am in no humor
at present to give consequence to young ladies who are
slighted by other men. You had better return to your
partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your
time with me. "
Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Hasey walked
off; and Elisabeth remained with no very cordial feel-
ings towards him. She told tbe story, however, with great
spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful
disposition, which delij^ted in anything ridiculous.
The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the
whole family. Mrs. Bennet had seen her eldest daughter
much admired by the Netherfield party. Mr, Bingley
had danced with her twice, and she had been distin-
guished by his sbters. Jane was as much gratified by
this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way.
Elisabeth felt Jane's pleasure. Mary had heard her-
self mentioned to Miss Bingley as the most accMnplished
girl in the neighborhood ; and Catherine and Lydia had
been fortunate enough to be never without partners,
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 11
which -was all that they had yet learot to care for at
a ball. They returned, therefore, in good spirits to
Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which
they were the principal inhabitants. They found Mr.
'Bennet still up. With a book he was regardless of
time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal
of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had
raised such splendid expectations. He had rather hoped
that all his wife's views on the stranger would he dis-
appointed ; but he soon foijnd that he had a very different
story to hear.
" Oh ! my dear Mr. Bennet, " as she entered the room,
" we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent
ball. I wish you had been there. Jane was so admired,
nothing could be like it. Everybody said how welt she
looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful,
and danced with her twice ! Only think of that, my
dear ; he actually danced with her twice ! and she was
the only creature in the room that he asked a second
time. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so
vexed to see him stand up with her ! but, however, he
did not admire her at all ; indeed, nobody can, you know ;
and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was going
down the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got
introduced, and asked her for the two next. Then the
two third he danced with Miss King, and the two fourth
with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,
and the two sixth with Lizzy and the Boulanger. "
" If he had had any compassion for me, " cried her
husband impatiently, " he would not have danced half so
much ! For God's sake, say no more of his partners. O
that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance ! "
" Oh ! my dear, " continued Mrs. Bennet, " I am quite
delighted with him. He is so excessively handsome!
and his sisters are charming women. I never in my life
Cooylc
12 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
saw anything more elegant than their dreaaes. I dare
flay the lace npon Mrs. Hurst's gown "
Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet pro-
tested against any description of finery. She was there-
fore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and
related, with much bitterness of spirit and some ex-
aggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy.
" But I can assure you, " she added, " that Lizzy does
not lose much by not sniting hh fancy ; for he is a most
disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. So
high and so conceited that there was no endnring him !
He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself
so very great! Not handsome enough to dance with!
I wish you had been there, my dear, to hare given him
one of your set-downs. I qnite detest the man. "
CHAPTER IV
When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former,
who had been cautious in her praise of Mr. Bingley
before, expressed to her sister how very much she ad-
mired him.
" He is just what a young man ought to be, " said
she, " sensible, good-humored, lively, and I never saw
3uch happy manners ! — so much ease, with such perfect
good-breeding'. "
" He is also handsome, " replied Eliaabeth; " which a
young man ought likewise to be, if he possibly can. His
character is thereby complete. "
" I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance
a second time. I did not expect sueh a compliment. "
" Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great
difference between us. Compliments always take yot
t-'Ooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 18
hj surprise, and me never. What could be more natural
ttian his asking you again? He could not help seeing
that you were about five times as pretty as every other
woman in the room. No thanks to his gallantry for
that. Wellj he certainly is very agreeable, and I give
you leave to like him. You have Ijked many a stupider
person. "
" Dear Lixsy.
" Oh^ you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like
people in general. Yon never see a fault in anybody.
All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes. I
never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life. "
" I would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone;
bat I always speak what I think. "
*'I know you do; and it is that which makes the
wonder. With your good sense, to be so honestly blind
to the foUies and nonsense of others! Affectation of
candor is common enough — one meets it everywhere.
But to be candid without ostentation or design — to take
the good of everybody's character and make it still
better, and say nothing of the bad — belongs to you
alone. And so you like this man's sisters too, do you?
Their manners are not equal to his. "
" Certainly not — at first. But they are very pleasing
women when you converse with them. Miss Bingley is
to live with her brother, and keep his house; and I am
much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming
neighbor in her. "
Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced;
their behavior at the assembly had not been calculated
to please in general ; and with more quickness of ob-
servation and leas pliancy of temper than her sister,
and with a judgment too unassailed by any attention
to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them.
They were in fact very fine ladies ; not deficient in good
- Cooxic
1* PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
humor when they were pleased, nor in the power of
being agreeable when they chose it, but proud and con-
ceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated
in one of the first private seminaries in town, had a
fortxme of twenty thousand pounds, were in the habit of
spending more than they ought, and of associating with
people of rank] and were therefore in every respect
entitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of
others. They were of a respectable family in the north
of England; a circumstance more deeply impressed on
their memories than that their brother's fortune and
their own had been acquired by trade.
Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of
nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who
had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to
do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes
made choice of his county; but as he was now provided
with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was
doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of
his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder
of his days at Netherfield, and leave the nest generatioa
to purchase.
His sisters were very anxious for Iiis having an estate
of his own; but, thougji he was now established only
as a tenant. Miss Bingley was by no means unwilling
to preside at his table — nor was Mrs. Hurst, who had
married a man of more fashion than fortune, less dis-
posed to consider his house as her home when it suited
her. Mr. Bingley had not been of age two years, when
he was tempted by an accidental recommendation to
look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it
for half-an-hour — ^was pleased with the situation and
the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said
in its praise, and took it immediately.
Between him and Darcy there was a very steady
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 15
friendsliip, in spite of gre & t opposition of character.
Bingley was endeared to Darcy hy the easiness, open-
ness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition
could offer a greater contrast to bis own, and though
with his own he never appeared dissatisfied. On the
strength of Darcy's regard, Bingley had the firmest re-
liance, and of his judgment the highest opinion. In
understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was
by no means deficient, but Darcy was clever. He was
at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and
his manners, though well-bred, were not inviting. In
that respect his friend had greatly the advantege. Bing-
ley was sore of being liked wherever be appeared, Darcy
was continually giving offense.
The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton
assembly was sufficiently characteristic. Bingley bad
never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in his
life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to
him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had
soon felt acquainted with all the room; and as to Miss
Bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful.
Darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people
in whom was little beauty and no fashion, for none of
whom be had felt the smallest interest, and from none
received cither attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he
acknowledged to be pretty, but she smiled too much.
Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so — bat
still ihej admired her and liked her, and pronounced
her to be a sweet girl, and one whom they should not
object to know more of. Miss Bennet was therefore
established as a sweet girl, and their brother felt author-
ized by such commendation to think of her as he chose.
.., > ,„Coo < ilc
16 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER V
Within a short walk of Longboum lived a family
with whom the Bennett vere partinilarly intimate. Sir
William Lucas had been formerly in trade in Merytoa,
where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the
honor of knighthood by an address to the king, dnring
his mayoralty. The distinction had perhaps been felt
too strongly. It had given him a disgust to his busi-
ness, and to his residence in a small market town; and,
quitting them both, he had removed with his family to
a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from
that period Lucas Lodge, where he could think with
pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by busi-
ness, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the
world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render
him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention
to everybody. By nature inoffensive, friendly and oblig-
ing, his presentation at St. James's had made him
courteous.
Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too
clever to be a valuable neighbor to Mrs. Bennet. They
had several children. The eldest of them, a sensible,
intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, was Eliza-
beth's intimate friend.
That the Miss Lucases and the Misa Bennets should
meet to talk over the ball was absolutely necessary; and
the morning after the assembly brought the former to
Longboum to hear and to communicate.
" You began the evening well, Charlol±e, " said Mrs.
Bennet with civil self-command to Miss Lucas. " You
were Mr. Bingley's first choice. "
" Yes ; hut he seemed to like his second better. "
" Oh ! you mean Jane, I supjjose, because he danced
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 17
with her twice. To be sure that did seem aa if he ad-
mired her — indeed I rather believe he ifid — I heard
sMnetbiog about it — but I hardly know what — something
about Mr. Robinson. "
" Perhaps you mean what I orerheaid between him
and Mr. Robinson; did not I mention it to yonP Mr.
Robinson's asking him how he liked our Meryton assem-
blies, and whether he did not think there were a great
many pretty women in the room, and which he thought
the prettiest? and his answering immediately to the lost
question —'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet, beyond a doubt;
there cannot be two opinions on that point.'"
" Upon my word! — Well, that was very decided in-
deed — that does seem as if — but, however, it may all
cmne to nothing, you know, "
" My overhearings were more to the purpose than
goarij Eliia, " said Charlotte. " Mr. Darcy is not so
well wortii listening to as his friend, is he? — Poor
Elisa! — to be only just tolerable. "
" I beg yon would not'put it into Liziy's head to be
vexed hy his ill-treafa aent, for }te- in mu-h * d p sapyeeabl e
ma n, that it won jij Hp ijiiitr* r » " i°* " -t " — ■ *« hr'■'■^-'^ ^j
him. Mtb Tj^ng t^]f\ [ptf 1.«f night that h. > gut c]n < ie. to
her for jmlf— " -*■ " " - ~.i*i.~..* —.-. " pcnin if hia lips . "
" Are you quite sure, ma'am? — is not there a little
mistake? " said Jane. " I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speak-
ing to her. "
" Aye — ^because she asked him at last bow he liked
Netherfield, and he could not help answering her; but
she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to. "
" Miss Bingley told me, " said Jane, " that he never
speaks much, unless among his intimate acquaintance.
With them be is remarkably agreeable. "
" I do not believe a word of it, ray dear. If he had
been so very agreeable, he would have talked to Mrs.
- Coo;(lc
18 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Long. But I csn guess how it was ; everybody says that
he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he had heard
somehow tiiat Mrs. Long does cot keep a carriage, «nd
had to come to the ball in a hack chaise. "
" I do not mind bis not talking to Mrs. Long, " said
Miss Lucas, " bnt I wish he had danced with Eliaa. "
" Another time, Lizzy, " said her mother, " I would
not dance with him, if I were yon. "
" I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you never to
dance with him, "
" His pride, " said Miss Loeas, " does not offend tne
so much as pride often does, becanse there is an excuse
for it. One cannot wonder that so very fine a young
man, with family, fortune, everything in his favor,
should think highly of himself. If I may so express
it, hf hua m ri/j ht to be prood . "
" That is very true, " replied Elizabeth, " and I could
easily forgive hit pride, if he had not mortified fnin«. "
" Pride, " observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the
solidity of her reflections, " is a very common failing, I
believe. By all that I have e ver r ead , , I am convinced
that it is very common indeed; tCat human nature is
particnlarly prone to it, and that there are very few of
ns who do not cherish a feeling of self-«)mplacency on
the score of some quality or the other, real or imaginary.
Vanity and pride are different things, though the words
are often used sjmoaymously. A person may be proud
without being v^n. Pride relates more to our opinion
of ourselves, vanity to what ve would have others think
of us. "
" If I were as Hch as Mr. Darcy, " cried a young
Lucas, who came with his sisters, " I should not care
how proud I was. I would keep a pack of foxhounds,
and drink a bottle of wine every day. "
" Then yon would drink a great deal more than you
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 19
ou^t, " said Mrs. Benoet; " and if I were to see yoa
at it, I should take awajr your bottle directly. "
The boy protested that she should not; she continued
to declare that she vould, and the argument ended only
vjth the visit
CHAPTER VI
The ladies of Longbourn soon waited oa those of
Netherfield, The visit was returned in due form. Miss
Benoet's pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of Mrs.
Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother was
found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not
worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted
with them was expressed towards the two eldest. By
Jane, this attention was received with the greatest pleas'
ure; but Elizabeth atill saw superciliousness in their
treatment of everybody, hardly escepting even her sister,
and could not like them; though their kindness to Jane,
such as it was, had a value as arising in all proba-
bility from the influence of their brother's admiration.
It w^as generally evident whenever they met, that he did
admire her; and to her it was equally evident that Jane
was yielding tb the preference which she had begun to
entertain for him from the first, and wasi in a way to
be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure
that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in
general, since Jane united, with great strength of feeling,
a composure of temper and a uniform cheerfulness of
manner which would guard her from the suspicions of
the impertiDent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss
" It may perhaps be pleasant, " replied Charlotte, " to
be able to impose on the public iu such a case; but it is
- Cooxic
20 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
sometimea a disadvantage to be eo very guarded. If a
voman coiu^eala tier affection with the same skill from
the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing
him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe
the world equally in the dark. There is so much of
gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it is
not safe to leave any to itself. We can all begin freely
— a slight preference is natural enough; but there are
very few of us who have heart enough to be really in
love without encouragement. In nine cases out of ten
a woman had better show more affection than she feels.
Bingley likes your sister, undoubtedly ; but he may never
do more than like her, if she does not help him on. "
" But she does help him on, as much as her nature will
allow. If / can perceive her regard for him, he must
be a simpleton, indeed, not to discover it too. "
" Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's dis-
position as yon do. "
" But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not
endeavor to conceal it, he must find it out. "
" Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But,
thongh Bingley and Jane meet tolerably often, it is
never for many hours together; and as they always see
each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together.
Jane should therefore make the most of every half-hour
in which she can command his attention. When she is
secure of him, there will be leisure for falling in love as
much as she chooses. "
" Your plan is a good one, " replied Elizabeth, " where
nothing is in question but the desire of being well mar-
ried; and if I were determined to get a rich husband, or
any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. But these
are not J ane'sj eelings; she is not acting by design. As
yet, she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own
- Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 21
regard, nor of its reasonableoess. She has known him
only a fortnight. She danced fonr dances with him at
Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,
and has since dined in company with him four times.
This ia not quite enough to make her understand his
character. "
" Not as you represent it. Had she merely dined with
him, she might only have discovered whether he had a
good appetite; but yoa must remember that fonr even-
ings have been also spent together — and four evenings
may do a ^eat deal, "
" Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to as-
certain that they both like Vingt-un better than Com-
nierce; bat with respect to any other leading character-
istic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded. "
" Well, " said Charlotte . " I wish Jane success with all
my heart; and if she were married to him to-morrow, I
should think she had as good a chance of happiness as
if she were to be studying his character for a twelve-
month. Happiness in marriage ia entirely a matter of
chance. I( the dispositions of the parties are ever so
well known to each other or ever so similar beforehand,
it does not advance their felicity in the least. They
always continne to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards
to have their share of vexation; and it is better to know
as little aa possible of the defects of tlie person with
wh(Hn yon are to pass your life. "
" You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound.
You know it is not sound, and that yon would never act
in this way yourself. "
Occupied in observing Mr. Bin^ey's attentions to her
sister, Elizabeth was far from snspecting that she was
herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes
of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcely allowed
ber to be pretty; he had lucked at her without admira-
22 PRIDi: AND PREJUDICE
tion at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at
her only to criticize. But no sooner had he made it
clear to himself and his friends that she had hardly a
good feature in her face, than he began to find it was
rendered Tmcommonly intelligent by the beantifol ex-
pression of her dark eyes. To this discovery saeceeded
some others equall y mortifying.
Thongh he had detected with a critical eye more than
one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was
forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleas-
ing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were
not those of the fashionable world, he was caaght by
their easy playfulness. Of this she was perfectly nn-
aware; — ^to her he was only the man who made himself
agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her hand-
some enough to dance with.
He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step
towards conversing with her himself, attended to her
conversation with others. His doing so drew her notice.
It was at Sir William Lncaa's, where a large party were
assembled.
" What does Mr. Darcy mean, " said she to Charlotte,
" by listening to my conversation with Colonel Forster? "
" That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can an-
" Bnt if he does it any more I shall certainly let him
know that I see what he is about. He has a very satiri-
cal eye, and if I do not begin by being impertinent
myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him. "
On his approaching them soon afterwards, thongh
without seeming to have any intention of speaking. Miss
Lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to
him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it,
she tm-ned to him and said —
" Did not yon think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed my-
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
■ PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 23
self nncommDniy well just now, when I was teasing
Colonel Forater to give us a ball at MerTton? "
" With great energy; — but it is a subject which al-
ways makes a lady energetic. "
" You are severe on us. "
" It will be her turn soon to be teased, " said Misa
Lucas. " I am going to open the instrument, Eliza, and
you know what follows. "
" You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!
— always wanting me to play and sing before anybody
and everybody! If my vanity had taken a musical
turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I
would really rather not sit down before those who most
be in the habit of hearing the very best performers. "
On Miss Lucas's persevering, however, she added, " Very
well; if it must be ao, it mast. " And gravely glancing
at Mr. Darcy, " There is a fine old saying, which every-
body here is of course familiar with —'Keep your breath
to cool your porridge,'— and I shall keep mine to swell
my song. "
Her performance was pleasing, though by no means
capital. After a song or two, and before she could re-
ply to tiie entreaties of several that she would sing
again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by
her sister Mary, who having, in consequence of being
the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowl-
e^e and accomplishments, was always impatient for
display.
Mary had neither genius nor taste ; and though vanity
had given her application, it liad given her likewise a
pedantic air and conceited manner, which woold have
injured a higher degree of excellence than she had
reached. Elisabeth, easy and nnaffected, had been lis*
tened to with much more pleasure, though not playing
half 80 well; and Mary, at the end of a long concerto,
- Cooxic
24 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by Scotch
and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters,
who, with some of the Locases, and two or three officers,
joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room.
Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at
such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of
all couversation, and was too much engrossed by his
thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas was his
neighbor, till Sir William thus began,
" What a charming amusement for young people this
is, Mr. Darcy ! There is nothing like dancing after
all. I consider it as one of the first refinements of pol-
ished societies. "
" Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of
being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of
the world. Every savage can dance. "
Sir William only smiled. " Your friend performs de-
lightfully, " he continued after a pause, on seeing Bing-
ley join the group; — " and I doobt not that you are an
adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy, "
" You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir. "
" Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure
from the sight. Do you often dance at St. James's? "
'.'Never, sir. "
" Do you not think it would be a proper compliment
to the place? "
" It is a compliment which I never pay to any place
if I can avoid it, "
" You Lave a house in town, I conclude? "
Mr. Darcy bowed.
" I had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself —
for I am fond of superior society; but I did not feel
quite certain that the air of London wonld agree with
Lady Lucas. "
He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 25
was not disposed to make anj; and Elisabeth at that
instaot moving towards them, be was stmck with tbe
notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called oat
to hei^
" My dear Miss Etiaa, why are not yon dancing? — ■
Mr. Dsrcy, yon mast allow me to present this young
lady to you as a very desirable partner. Yon cannot
refuse to dance, I taa sore, when so much beauty is be-
fore you. " And, taking her hand, he would have given
it to Mr. Darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was
not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back,
and said with some discomposure to Sir William —
" Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of danc-
ing. I entreat you not to suppose that I moved this
way in order to beg for a partner. "
Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be al-
lowed the honor of her hand, but in vain. Elisabeth
was determined; nor did Sir William at all shake her
purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
" You escel so much in the dance. Miss Elisa, that it
is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you; and
though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in gen-
eral, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige us
for one half-hour. "
" Mr. Darcy is all politeness, " said Elizabeth, smiling.
" He is indeed; but considering the inducement, my
dear Miss Elisa, we cannot wonder at his complaisance
— for who would object to such a partner? "
£lisiabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her re-
sistance had not injured her witli the gentleman, and
he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus
accosted by Miss Bingley —
" I can guess the subject of your reverie. "
" I should imagine not. "
" Yon are considering how insupportable it would be
L,,;,l,.-,„ Google
26 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
to pass many evenings in this manner — in such society,
and indeed I am quite of your opinion. I vas never
more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise — the
nothingness, and yet the self-importance of all these
people ! What would I give to hear your strictures on
" Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My
mind was more agreeably engaged. I have been medi-
tating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine
eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow. "
Miss Bingley immediately fixed lier eyes on his face,
and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of
inspiring such reflections, Mr. Darcy replied with great
intrepidity —
" Miss Elizabeth Bennet. "
" Miss Elizabeth Bennet! " repeated Miss Bingley. " I
am all astonishment. How long has she been such a
favorite? — and pray, when am I to wish you joy? "
" That is exactly the question which I expected you
to ask. A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps
from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a
moment. I knew yon would be wishing me joy. "
" Nay, if you are so serious about !t, I shall consider
the matter as absolutely settled. You will have a charm-
ing mother-in-law, indeed; and, of course, she will be
always at Pemberley with you. "
He listened to her with perfect indifference while she
chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his
composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed
long.
ta,i,.=db, Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 27
CHAPTER VII
Mb. B > nnkt'b property consisted almost entirely in
an estate of two thousand a-year, which, unfortunately
for his daughters, vas entailed in default of heirs male,
on a distant relation; and their mother's fortune, though
ample fpr her situation in life, could but ill supply the
deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in
Meryton, and had left her four thousand pounds.
She had a sister married to a Mr. Philips, who had
been a clerk to their father and succeeded him in the
business, and a brother settled in London in a respect-
able line of trade.
The village of Longboum was only one mile from
Meryton; a most convenient distance for the young la-
dies, who were usnaUy tempted thither three or four
times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt and to a
milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest
of the family, Ca therine and Lydia . were particularly
frequent in these attentions ; their minds were more va-
cant than their sisters', and when nothing better ofEered,
a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morn-
ing hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and
however bare of news the country in general might be,
they always contrived to learn some from their aunt.
.At present, indeed, they were well supplied both with
news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia
regiment in the neighborhood; it was to remain the whole
Srinter, and Meryton was the headquarters.
Their visits to Mrs, Philips were now productive of
the most interesting intelligence. Every day added
something to their knowledge of the officers'names and
connections. Their lodgings were not long a secret,
and at length tiiey began to know the officers themselves.
28 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Mr. Philips visited them all, and this opened to hi?!
nieces a source of felicity nnknown before. They could
talk of nothing bat officers; and Mr. Bingley's large
fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their
mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the
regimentals of an ensign.
After listening one morning to their effusions on this
subject, Mr. Bennet coolly observed —
" From all that I can collect by your manner of talk-
ing, you must be two of the silliest girls in the conntry.
I have suspected it some time, but I am now convinced. "
Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer ; but
Lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express
her admiration of Captain Carter, and her hope of see-
ing him in the course of the day, as he was going the
nest morning to London.
" I am astonished, my dear, " said Mrs. Bennet, " that
you should be so ready to think your own children silly.
If I wished to think slightingly of anybody's children,
it should nffT trf-nf my ifvn , hf twprfr "
■'If my children are silly, I must hope to be always
sensible of it. "
" Yes — ^but as it happens, they are all of them very
" This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we
do not agree. I had hoped that onr sentiments coin-
cided in every particular, but I must so far differ from
you as bo think our two youngest daughters uncommonly
foolish. "
" My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls
to have the sense of their father and mother. When
they get to our age, I dare say they will not think
about officers any more than we do. I remember the
time when I liked a red coat myself very well — and, in-
deed, so I do still at my heart; and if a smart young
- Coo;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 29
colonel, with five or six thouaand a-year, should want
one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thought
Colonel Forster looked very becoming the other night
at Sir William's in his regimentals. "
" Manuna, " cried Lydia, " my aunt saya that Colonel
Forster and Captain Carter do not go so often to Misa
Watson's as they did when they first came; she sees
them now very often standing in Clarke's library. "
Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance
of the footman with a note for Miss Bennet; it come
from Netherfield, and the servant waited for an an-
swer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and
she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read —
" Well, Jane, who is it from? what is it about? what
does be say? Well, Jane, make haste and tell us;
make haste, my love. "
" It is from Miss Bingley, " said Jane, and then read
it aloud.
" Mt dear Friend, —
" If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day
with Louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating
each other for the rest of our lives, for a whole day's
tete-a-tete between two women can never end without a
quarrel. Come as soon as you can on the receipt of this.
My brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the
officers.— Yours ever, Caroline Binglby. "
" With the officers! " cried Lydia. " I wonder my aunt
did not tell us of that. "
" Dining out, " said Mrs. Bennet, " that is very un-
lucky. "
''Can I have the carriage? " said Jane.
" No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, be-
cause it seems likely to rain; and then yon must stay
all night. "
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
30 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
" That would be a good scheme, " said Elizabeth, " if
you were sure they would not offer to send her
" Oh ! bnt the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley'a chaise
to go to Meryton; and the Hursts have no horses to
theirs. "
" I had much rather go in the coach. "
" But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses,
I am sure. They are wanted in the farm. Mr. Bennet,
are not they? "
" They ^are wanted in the farm much oftener than I
can get them. "
" But if you have got them to-day, " said Elizabeth,
" my mother's purpose will be answered. "
She did at last extort from lier father an acknowl-
edgment that the horses were engaged; Jane was there-
fore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother at-
tended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics
of a bad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not
been gone long before it rained hard. Her sisters were
uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted. The rain
continued the wliole evening without intermission; Jane
certainly could not come back.
" This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed! " said Mrs.
Bennet more than once, as if the credit of making it
rain were all her own. Till the next morning, however,
she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance.
Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Neth-
erfield brought the following note for Elizabeth: —
" Mv DEAREST Lizzy, —
" I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I
suppose, is to be imputed to my getting wet through
yesterday. My kind friends will not heat of my re-
turning home till I am better. They insist also on my
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 81
seeing Mr. Jones — therefore do not be Alarmed if yoa
should hear of his having been to me — and, excepting a
sore-throat and headache, tiiere is not much the matter
with me. — Yours, etc. "
" Well, mj dear, " said Mr. Bennet, when Elisabeth
had read the note aloud, " if your daughter should have
a dangerous fit of illness — if she should die, it would
be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of Mr.
Bingley, and under jrour orders. "
" Oh ! I am not at all afraid of her dying. People
do not die of little, trifling colds. She will be taken
good care of. As long as she stays there, it is all very
well. ,- I would go and see her if I could hare the
carriage. "
Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to
go to her, though the carriage was not to be had ; and
as she was no horsewoman, walking was ber only alter-
native. She declared her resolution.
" How can you be ao silly, " cried her mother, " as to
think of such a thing, in all this dirt! You wilt not be
fit to be seen when you get there. "
" I shall be very fit to see Jane — ^which is all I want. "
" Is this a hint to me, Lisey, " said her father, " to
send for the horses? "
" No, indeed. I do not wish to avoid the walk. The
distance is nothing when one has a motive; only three
miles. I shall be back by dinner. "
" I admire the activity of your benevolence, " ob-
-served Mary, " but every impulse of feeling should be
guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should
always be in proportion to what is required. "
" We wUl go as far as Meryton with you, " said Cath-
erine and Lydia. Elizabeth accepted their ctHnpany,
and the three young ladies set off tt^ether.
t-'Ooylc
82 PEIDE AND PEEJUDICE
" If ve make haste, " said Lj'dia, aa thtj walked
along, " perhaps we may see something of Captain Carter
before he goes. "
In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired
to the lodgings of one of the officers'wives, and Elisa-
beth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field
at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over
puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at
last within view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty
stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of
exercise.
She was shown into the breakfast-parlor where all
but Jane were assembled, and where her appearance
created a great deal of surprise. That she should have
walked three miles so early in the day, in such dirty
weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs.
Hurst and Miss Bin^ey; and Elizabeth was convinced
that they held her in contempt for it. She was received,
however, very politely by them; and in their brother's
manners there was something better than politeness;
there was good humor and kindness. Mr, Darcy said
very little, and Mr. Hurst nothing at all. The former
was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which
exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt as to
the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The
latter was thinking only of his breakfast.
Her inquiries after her sister were not very favorably
answered. Miss Bennet had slept ill, and though up
was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her
room. Elieabetb was glad to be taken to her imme-
diately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the
fear of giving alarm or inconvenience from expressing
in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was
delighted at her entrance. She was not equal, however,
to much convenation, and when Miss Bingley left them
C.OO;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 8S
togetheTf could attempt little besides expressions of grat-
itude for the extraordinuf kindness she was treated
with. Elizabeth silently attended her.
When breakfast was over they were joined by the
sisters; and Elisabeth began to like them herself, when
she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed
for Jane. The apothecary came, and having examined
bis patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had
caagbt a violent cold, and that they must endeavor to
get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and
promised ber some draughts. The advice was followed
readily, for the feverish S3rmptonui increased, and her
head ached acutely. Elisabeth did not quit her room
for a moment, nor were (be other ladies often absent:
the gentlemen being out, they had, in fact, nothing to
do elsewhere.
When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that abe
must go, and very unwillingly said so. Miss Bingley
offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little
pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concern
in parting with her, that Miss Binfi^ey was obliged to
convert the offer of the chaise into an invitation to re-
main at Netberfield for the present. Elisabeth most
thankfully consulted, and a servant was dispatched to
Longboum to acquaint the family with her stay and
bring back a supply of clothes.
CHAPTER VIII
At fire o'dock the two ladies retired to dress, and at
half-past six Elisabeth was summoned to dinner. To
the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst
which she had the pkasure of distinguiafaing the much
84 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICfc
superior soUcitode of Mr. Bingley's, she coold not make
a very favorable answer. Jane was by no means better.
The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four
times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was
to have a bad cold, and how excessively they dbliked
being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the
matter: and their indifference towards Jane when not
immediately before them restored Elizabeth to the en-
joyment of all her original dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the part^
whom she could regard with any complacency. His anx-
iety for Jane was evident, and hia attentions to herself
most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so
much an intruder as she believed she was considered by
the others. She had very little notice from any but
him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Dorcy, her
sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom
Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only
to eat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found
her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane,
and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was
out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be
very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;
she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty.
Mrs. Hurst thought the some, and added —
" She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but
being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her
appearance this morning. She really looked almost
wUd. "
" She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my
countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why
must the be scampering about the country, because her
sister had a cold? Her hair, so ontidy, .so blowsy! "
PBIDE AND PEEJUDICE 86
" Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petti-
coat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely certain;
and the gown which had been let down to hide it not
doing its office. "
" Your picture may be very exact, Louisa, " said Bing-
ley; " but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss
Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well when she came
into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite
escaped my notice. "
" You observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure, " said Miss
Bingley; " and I am inclined to think that yon would
not wish to see your titter make sach an exhibition. "
" Certainly not. "
" To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or
whatever it is, above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite
alone ! what could she mean by it? It seems to me to
show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a
most country-town indifference to decorum. "
" It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleas-
ing, " said Bingley.
" I am afraid, Mr. Darcy, " observed Miss Bingley,
in a half whisper, " that this adventure has rather af-
fected your admiration of her fine eyes. "
" Not at all, " he replied; " they were brightened by
the exercise. " A short pause followed this speech, and
Mrs. Hurst began again —
" I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet, she is
really a very sweet girl, and I wish with alt my heart
she were well settled. But with such a father and
mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there
is no chance of it. "
" I think I have heard yon say that their nncle is an
attorney in Meryton. "
" Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere
near Cheapside. "
- Coo;(lc
36 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" That is capital, " added her sister, and they both
laughed heartily.
" If they had uncles enough to fill all Cheapside, "
cried Bingley, " it would not make them one jot less
agreeable. "
" But it must very materially lessen their chance of
marrying men of any consideration in the world, " replied
Darcy.
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his aia-
tera gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their
mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend's
vulgar relations.
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired
to her room on leaving the dining-parlor, and sst with
her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly,
and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the
evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep,
and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant
that she should go downstairs herself. On entering the
drawing-room she found the whole party at loo, and
was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting
them to be playing high, she declined it, and making
her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself, for
the short time she could stay below, with a book. Mr.
Hurst looked at her with astonishment
" Do you prefer reading to cards? " said he; " that is
rather singular. "
" Miss Eliza Bennet, " said Miss Bingley, " despises
cards. She is a great reader, and has no pleasure in
anything else. "
" I deserve neither such praise nor such censure, "
cried Elizabeth; " I am not a great reader, and I have
pleasure in many things. "
" In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasore, "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 87
said BiDgley; " and I hope it will soon be increased hy
seeing her quite well. "
£lizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then
walked towards a table where a few books were lying.
He immediately offered to fetch her others — all that
his library afforded.
" And I wish my eoUection were larger for yonr bene-
fit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow, and
though I have not many, I have more than I ever look
into. "
Elizabeth assured him that she could snit herself per-
fectly with those in the room.
" I ata astonished, " said Miss Bingley, " that my father
should have left so small a collection of books. What
a deligblfiU library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy! "
" It onght to be good, " he replied; " it has been the
work of many generations. "
" And then you have added so much to it yourself;
you are always buying books. "
" I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library
in snch days as these. "
" Neglect! I am sore you neglect nothing that can
add to the beanties of that noble place. Charles, when
you build your house, I wish it may be half as delightful
as Pemberley, "
" I wish it may. "
" But I would really advise you to make your pur-
chase in that neighborhood, and take Pemberley for a
kind of model. There is not a finer county in England
than Derbyshire. "
" With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if
Darcy will sell it. "
" I am talking of possibilities, Charles. "
" Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more
38 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by Imita-
Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to
leave her very little attention for bet book; and soon
laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card table,
and stationed herself between Mr. Btngley and his
eldest sister, to observe the game.
" Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring? " said
Miss Bingley; " she will be as tall as I am? "
" I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth
Bennet's height, or rather taller. "
" How I long to see her again ! I never met with
anybody who delighted me so much. Such a counte-
nance, such manners ! and so extremely accomplished for
her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is ei-
qoisite. "
" It is amazing to me, " said Bingley, " how young
ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as
they all are. "
" All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles,
what do you mean? "
" Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables,
cover screens, and net purses. I scarcely know any-
one who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never
heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished. "
" Your list of the common extent of accomplishments, "
said Dsrcy, " has too much truth. The word is applied
to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by
netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very
far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies
in general. I cannot boast of knowing more than half-
a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that
are really accomplished. "
" Nor I, I am sure, " said Miss Bingley.
. L.ooylc
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 89
" Then, " observed Elisabeth, " ytw muat comprehend
a great deal in your idea of an accompliahed woman. "
" Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it "
" Oh! certainly, " cried his faithful assistant, " no one
can be really esteemed accomplished who does not
greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman
mast have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, draw-
ing,- dancing, and the modem languages, to deserve the
word; and besides all this, she must possess a certain
something in her air and manner of walking, the tone
of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word
will be bnt half deserved. "
" All this she must possess, " added Darcy, " and to
all this she must yet add something more substantial, in
the improvement of her mind by extensive reading. "
" I am no longer surprised at your knowing onlg six
accomplished women. I rather wonder now at your
knowing any. "
" Are yon so severe upon your own sex as to doubt
the possibility of all this? "
" J never saw such a woman. / never saw snch
capacity, and taate, and application, and elegance, as
yoa describe, united. "
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against
the injustice of her implied doabt, and were both pro-
testing that they knew many women who answered this
description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with
bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going
forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end,
Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
" Elisa Bcnnet, " said Miss Bingley, when the door
was closed on her, " is one of those yoong ladies who
seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by nnder-
valning their own; and with many men, I dare say, it
- Coo;(lc
40 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
succceda. Bnt, in mj opinion, it is a paltry device, a
" Undoubtedly, " replied Dsrcy, to whom this remark
w»a chiefly addressed, " there is meanness in all the arts
which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for capti-
vation. Whatever bears affinity to canning is despicable. "
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this
reply as to continue the subject
Elizabeth joined tfaem again only to say that her
sister was worse, and that she could not leave her.
Bingley urged Mr. Jones's being sent for immediately;
while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could
be of any service, recommended an express to town for
one of the most eminent physicians. This she would
not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply
with their brother's proposal; and it was settled that
Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if
Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was
quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were
miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however,
by duets after sapper, while he could find no better re-
lief to bis feelings than by giving bis housekeeper direc-
tions that every possible attention might be paid to the
sick lady and her sister.
CHAPTER IX
Elizabeth passed the chief of tiie night in her sister's
room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able
to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she
very esrly received from Mr. Bin^ey b^ a hoosemaid,
and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies
who waited on his sisters. In spite of this amendment,
however, she requested to have a note sent to hoag-
- Coofiic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 41
bonm, desiring her mother to visit J & ne, and form her
owa judgment of her situation. The note was imme-
diately dispatched, and its contents as quicldj complied
with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two youngest
girls, reached Netfaerfield soon after the family break-
fast.
Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs.
Bennet would have been very miserable ; bat being satis-
fied on seeing her that her illness waa not alarming, she
bad no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restor-
ation to health would probably remove her from Nether-
field. She would not listen, therefore, to her daughter's
proposal of being carried home ; neither did the apothe-
cary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all
advisable. After sitting a littie with Jane, on Miss
Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and
three danghters all attended her into the breakfast par-
lor. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet
had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected.
" Indeed I have. Sir, " was her answer. " She is a great
deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must not
think of moving her. We mast trespass a little longer
on your kindness. "
" Removed! " cried Bingjey. " It must not be thought
of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her removal. "
" You may depend upon it. Madam, " said Miss Bing-
ley, with cold civility, " that Miss Bennet shall receive
every possible attention while she ren[iaiiis with us. "
Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
" I am sure, " she added, " if it was not for such good
friends, I do not know what woold become of her, for
she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though
with the greatest patience in the world, which is always
the way with her, for she has, without exception, the
sweetest temper I ever met with. I often tell my other
L ..„■„ Google
42 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
girls they are nothing to ker. You have a sweet romn
here, Mr. Bingley, and a charming prospect over that
gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that
is equal to Netherfield. You will itot think of quitting
it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short
lease. "
" Whatever I do is done in a hurry, " replied he; " and
therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I
should probably be off in five minutes. At present,
however, I consider myself as quite fixed here. "
" That is exactly what I should have supposed of
you, " said Elizabeth.
" You begin to comprehend me, do you.^ " cried he,
turning towards her.
" Oh! yes — I understand you perfectly. "
" I wish I might take this for a compUment; but to
be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful. "
" That is as it happens. It does not necessarily fol-
low that a deep, intricate character is more or less esti-
mable than such a one as yours. "
" Liasy, " cried her mother, " remember where you are,
and do not run on in the wild manner that you are
suffered to do at home. "
" I did not know before, " continued Bingley imme-
diately, " that yon were a studier of character. It must
be an amusing study. "
" Yf S| ti i t infrir ^ t^ characters ar e the moit amusing .
Th ev have at least that advantag e.
" The country, " said Darcy, " can in general supply
but few subjects for such a study. In a country neigh-
borhood you move in a very confined and unvarying
society. "
" But people themselves alter so much, that there Is
something new to be observed in them forever. "
" Yes, indeed, " cried Mrs. Beonet, offended by his
- Cooxic
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 48
manner of mentioning a country neighborhood. " I as-
sure you there is quite as much of that going on in the
country as in town. "
Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking
at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs. Ben-
net, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over
him, continued her triumph.
" I cannot see that London has any great advantage
over the country, for my part, except the shops and
public places. The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is
not it, Mr. Bingley? "
" When I am in the country, " he replied, " I never
wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty
much the same. They have each their advantages, and
I can be equally happy in either. "
" Aye — that is because you have the right disposition.
Sut that gentleman, " looking at Darcy, " seemed to think
the country was nothing at all. "
" Indeed, mamma, you are mistaken, " said Elizabeth,
blushing for her mother. " You quite mistook Mr.
Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety
of people to be met with in the country as in town, which
you must acknowledge to be true. "
" Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were ; but as
to not meeting with many people in this neighborhood,
I believe there are few neighborhoods larger. I know
we dine with four-and-twenty families. "
Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bing-
ley to keep hia countenance. His sister was leas deli-
cate, and directed her eye towards Mr. Darcy with a
very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake of saying
something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now
asked her if Charlotte Lncas had been in Longbourn
since her coming away.
" Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
4* PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr. Bingley — is not
he} so much the man of fashion! so genteel and so
easy ! — He has always something to say to everybody. —
That is my idea of good breeding; and those persons
who fancy themselves very important, and never open
their mouths, quite mistake the matter. "
" Did Charlotte dine with you? "
" No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted
about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, /
always keep servants that can do their own work; tny
daughters are brought up differently. But everybody
is to judge for tliemselves, and the Lucases are a very
good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a pity they are
not handsome ! Not that I think Charlotte so very plain
— ^but then she is our particular friend. "
" She seems a very pleasant young woman, " said
Bingley.
" Oh! dear, yes; — but you must own she is very plain.
Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied me
Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child,
but to be sure, Jane — one does not often see anybody
better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not
trust my own partiality. When she was only fifteen,
there was a gentleman at my brother Gardiner's in town
so much in love with her that my sister-in-law was sure
he would make her an offer before we came away. But,
however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young.
However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty
they were. "
" And so ended his affection, " said Elizabeth, impa-
tiently. " There has been many a one, I fancy, over-
come in the same way. I wonder who first discovered
the efficacy in poetry in driving away love! "
" I have been used to consider poetry as the food of
love, " said Darcy.
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 45
" Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything
nourishes what is strong already. But if it be only a
slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that ont
good sonnet will starve it entirely away. "
Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which en-
sned made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be
exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could
think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.
Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for
his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him
also with Liszy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in
his answer, and forced his younger lister to be civil also,
and say what the occasion required. She performed
her part indeed without much graciousness, but Mrs.
Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her
carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daugh-
ters put herself forward. The two girls had been whis-
pering to each other during the whole visit, and the
result of it was, that the youngest should tax Mr. Bing-
ley with having promised on his first coming into the
country to give a ball at Netherfield.
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with
a fine complexion and good-humored countenance; a
favorite with her mother, whose affection bad brou^t
her into public at an early age. She had high animal
spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which
the attentions of the officers, to whom her uncle's good
dinners and her own easy manners recommended her,
had increased into assurance. She was very equal,
therefore, to address Mr, Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise ; adding,
that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if
he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack
was delightful to her mother's ear —
" I am perfectly ready, I assure yon, to keep my en-
C.OO;(lc
46 PRIDJE AND PREJUDICE
gagemeat; and when your sister is recovered, jon shall,
if you pleascj name the very day of the ball. Bot you
would Dot wish to he dancing while she is ill. "
Lydia declared herself satisfied. " Oh ! yes — it would
be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by that
time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton
again. And when you have given i/our ball, " she added,
" I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell
Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if he does not. "
Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and
Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her own
and her relations'behavior to the remarks of the two
ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,
could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of
her, in spite of all Miss Bingley's witticisms on fne eytt.
CHAPTER X
The day passed much as the day before had done.
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours of
the morning with the invalid, who continued, though
slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joined
their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, how-
ever, did not appear. Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss
Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress
of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention by
messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were
at piquet, and Mrs. Hurst was ^observing the game.
Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was suffi-
ciently amused in attending to what passed between
Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commenda-
tions of the lady, either on his band-writing, or on the
evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with
L .., > ,„Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 47
the perfect unconcem with which her praiaes were re-
ceived, formed a curioaa dialo^e, and was exactly in
unison with her opinion of each.
" How delighted Misa Darcy will be to receive socb
a letter! "
He made no answer.
" You write unconunonly fast. "
" You are mistaken. I write rather slowly. "
" How many letters you must have occasion to write
in the coarse of a year ! Letters of hnsiness, too t How
odious I should think them ! "
" It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot in-
stead of to yours. "
" Pray tell your sister that I long to aee her, "
" I have already told her so once, by your desipe. "
" I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend
it for you. I mend pens remarkably well. "
" Thank you — but I always mend my own. "
" How can you contrive to write so even? "
He was silent.
" Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her im*
provement on the Darp ; and pray let her know that I am
quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for
a table, and I think it infinitely superior to Miss
Grantley's. "
" Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till
I write again? At present I have not room to do them
justice. "
" Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in
January. But do yon always write such charming long
letters to her, Mr. Darcy? "
" They are generally long; but whether always charm-
ing it is not for me to determine, "
" It is a rule with roe, that a person who can write
a long letter with ease, cannot write ill. "
L .., > ,„Cooylc
*6 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
" That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caro-
line, " cried ber brother — " because he does not write with
ease. He studies too mach for words of four syllables.
Do not yon, Darcy? "
" My style of writing is very different from yoiirs. "
" Oh! " cried Mias Bingley, " Charles writes in the
most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his
words, and blots the rest. "
" My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to
express them — by which meana my letters sometimes
convey no ideas at all to my correspondents. "
o " Your humility, Mr. Bingley, " said Elizabeth, " must
/disarm reproof. "
■■ > : -
'Nothiny is more deceitfa] , " said Darcy, ^han ^]n»
y V'^pp^^f pce of humility . It if nflrn " " ly rn rplpaa'^fi sfl " ^
ii-f\ opinion , a nd sometimes an indirect boas t. "
? Sy " And which of the two do yon call my little recent
'fj^ ■ P'*''* "'modesty f "
\L-, " The Indirect boast; for you are really proud of your
^defects in writing, because you consider them as pro-
ceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of
execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least
highly interesting. The power of doing anything with
quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and
often without any attention to the imperfection of the
performance. When you told Mrs. Bennet this morn-
ing, that if you ever resolved on quitting Netherfield
you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be
a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself — and yet
what is tiiere so very laudable in a precipitance which
must leave very necessary business undone, and can be
of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else? "
" Nay, " cried Bingley, " this is too much, to remember
at night all the foolish things that were said in the
morning. And yet, upon my honor, I believed what X
- Cookie
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 49
said of jayatlt to be tme, and I believe it at this mo-
ment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the char-
acter of needless precipitance merely to show off before
the ladies. "
" I dare say you beliered it; but I am by no means
convinced that you would be gone with such celerity.
Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as
that of any man I know; and if, as you were mounting
your horse, a friend were to say,'Bingley, you had
better stay till next week,'you would probably do it,
you would probably not go — and at another word, might
stay a month. "
" Yon have only proved by this, " cried Elisabeth,
" that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own dis-
position. You have shown him off now much more than
he did himself. "
" I am exceedingly gratified, " said Bingley, " by your
converting what my friend says into ^ compliment on
the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are
giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means
intend; for he wonld certainly think the better of me,
if nnder such a circumstance I were to give a fiat denial,
and ride off as fast as I could. "
" Would Mr, Darcy tben consider the rashness of your
original intention as atoned for by your obstinacy in
adhering to it? "
" Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter;
Darcy must speak for bimself . "
" Ypn expect me to account for opinions which yon
choose to call mine, but which I have never acknowl-
edged. Allowing the case, however, to stand according
to your representation, you must remember, Miss Ben-
net, that the friend who is supposed to desire his return
to the house, and the delay of hia plan, has merely dc-
- Cooxic
80 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
sirad ft, asked it without offering one argument in faTor
o( its propriety. "
" To yield readily — easily — to the fertuaiton of a
friend is no merit with yoD. "
" To yield withont conrictioD is no compliment to the
understanding of either. "
" Yon appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for
the influence of friendship and affection. A regard for
the requester would often make one readily yield to a
request, without waiting for arguments to reason one
into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case
as you have supposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as
well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs before
we discuss the discretion of his behavior thereupon.
But in general and ordinary cases between friend and
friend, where one of them is desired by the other to
change a resolution of no very great moment, should
you think ill of that person for complying with the
desire, without watting to be argued into it? "
" Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this
subject, to arrange with rather more precision the de-
gree of importance which is to appertain to this re-
quest, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting
between the parties? "
" By all means, " cried Bingley;'let us hear all the
particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and
size; for that will have more weight in the argument.
Miss Beonet, than you may be aware of. I assure you,
that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in
comparison with myself, I should not pay him half so
much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful
object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and in par-
ticular places; at his own house especially, and of a
Sunday evening, when he has nothing to do. "
Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could
- Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 81
perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore
checked her langh. Miss Bii]gle3r warmly resented the
indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her
brother for talking such nonsense.
" I see your design, Bingley, " said his friend. " Yoa
dislike an argument, and want to silence this. "
" Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like dis-
putes. If yon and Miss Bennet will defer yours tilt I
am out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then
you may say whatever you like of me. "
" What you ask, " said Elizabeth, " is no sacrifice on
my side; and Mr. Darcy had much better finish bis
letter. "
Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
When that business was over, he applied to Miss
Bingley and Elizabeth for the indulgence of some music.
Miss Bingley moved with alacrity to the pianoforte;
and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would lead the
way, which the other as politely and more earnestly
negatived, she seated herself.
Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were
thus employed, Elizabeth could not help observing, as
she turned over some music-books that lay on the in-
strument, how frequently Mr, Darcy's eyes were fixed
on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she
coald be an object of admiration to so great a man;
and yet that he should look at her because he disliked
her, was still more strange. She could only imagine
however at last, that she drew his notice because there
was a something about her more wrong and reprehensible,
according to his ideas of right, than in any other person
present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked
him too little to care for his approbation.
After playing some Italian songs. Miss Bingley varied
- Coo;(lc
52 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
the charm bj a lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards
Mr. Darcj, draving near Elizabeth, said to her —
" Do you not feel a great inclination. Miss Bennet,
to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reelF "
She smiled] but made no answer. He repeated the
.question, with some surprise at her silence.
1 " Oh ! " said she, " I heard you before, but I could not
pnunediately determine what to say in reply. Von
wanted me, I know, to say'Yes,'that you might have
the pleasure of despising my taste ; but I always delight
?m overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a
fUrson of their premeditated contempt. I have, there-
fire, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want
tq dance a reel at all — and now despise me if you dare. "
I " TTijfpil T i^ p not dare . "
Ebzabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was
amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixtore of
sweetness and archness in her manner which made it
difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcy had never
been so bewitched by any woman as he was by h er. He
/ rp»^ ^y believed, that were it no t for the inferiority of
f ^]fl■ j-nnnpftinnij hi* wlipti ld be ju some dange r.
Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous;
and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear
friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of
getting rid of Elizabeth.
She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her
guest, by talking of their supposed marriage, and plan-
ning his happiness in such an alliance.
" I hope, " said she, as they were walking together in
the shrubbery the next day, " you will give your mother-
in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place,
as to the advantage of holding her tongue; and if you
can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running
after the officers. — ^And, if I may mention so delicate a
L ..„■„ Google
¥.
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 5S
subject, endeavor to check that little Bomething, border-
ing on conceit and impertinence, vhich your lady pos-
Beises, "
" Have you anything else to propose for my domestic
felicity? " J^
" Oh! yes. — Do let the portraits of your uncle and (y.'
aunt Philips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put
them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are i
the same profession, you know; only in different lines. _
As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not attempt v,r
to have it taken, for what painter could do justice to > J-X
tliose beautiful eyes? "
" It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expres-
sion, but their color and shape, and the eyelashes, so
remarkably fine, might be copied. "
At that moment they were met from another w & lk
by Mrs. Hurst and Elisabeth herself.
" I did not know that you intended to walk, " said
Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had beea
overheard.
" Yon used vs abominably ill, " answered Mrs. Hurst,
" ruiming away without telling us that yon were coming
Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she
left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just ad-
mitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness, and im-
mediately said —
" This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had
better go into the avenue. "
But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to
remain with them, laughingly answered —
" No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly
grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The pic-
turesque would be epoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-
bye. "
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
a* PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
She then run gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled
about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or
two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend
leaving her room for a couple of hours that eveuing.
CHAPTER XI
When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran
up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold,
attended her into the drawing-room, where she was wel-
comed by her two friends with many professions of
pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agree-
able as they were during the hour irhich passed before
the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation
were considerable. They conld describe an entertain-
ment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humor, and
laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer
the first object; Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly
turned towards Darcy, and she had something to say to
him before be had advanced many steps. He addressed
himself directly to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratu-
lation; Mr. Hurst also made her a slight bow, and said
he was " very glad " ; but diffuseness and warmth re-
mained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy
and attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling
up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of
room; and she removed at hia desire to the other side
of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the
door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to
anyone else. Elizabeth, at work In the opposite corner,
saw it all with great delight.
When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-
in-law of the card table — but in vain. She had obtained
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 5S
priTste intelligence that Mr. Darcy did not wish for
cards ; and Mr. Hurst soon f oond even bis open petition
rejected. She assured htm that no one intended to
play, and the silence of the whole party on the snbject
seemed to justify her. Mr. Hurst had therefore noth-
ing to do, but to stretch himself on one of the sofas and
go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did
the same; and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in play-
ing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then
in her brother's conversation with Miss Bennet.
Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged
in watching Mr, Darcy's progress through kii book, as
in reading her own ; and she was perpetually either mak-
ing some inquiry, or looking at his page. She could not
win him, however, to any conversation; he merely an-
swered her qnestion, and read on. At length, quite ex-
hausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book,
which she had only chosen because it was the second
volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, " How
pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I de-
clare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How
much sooner one tirea of anything than of a book ! —
When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable
if I have not an excellent library. "
No one made any reply. She then yawned again,
threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room
in quest of some amusement; when hearing her brother
mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenly
towards him and said —
" By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in medi "
tating a dance at Netherfield? — I would advise you, b^
fore you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the
present party; I am much mistaken if there are not some
among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment
than a pleasure, "
L ..„■„ Google
56 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
" If you mean Darcy, " cried her brother, " he may go
to bed, if he chooses, before it begina — but as for the
ball, it is quite a settled thing; and as soon as Nicholls
has made white sonp enough, I shall send round my
cards. "
" I should like balls infinitely better, " she replied, " if
they were carried on in a different manner; bat there is
something insufferably tedious in the usual process of
such a meeting. It would surely be much more rational
if conversation instead of dancing made ihc order of
the day. "
" Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dara say,
but it wonld not be near so much like a ball. "
Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards
got up and walked about the room. Her figure was
elegant, and she walked well;— but Darcy, at whom it
was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. In the
desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort
more, and, turning to Elizabeth, said —
" Miss Eliza Bennct, let me persuade you to follow
my example, and take a turn about the room. — I assure
you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one
attitude. "
Elizabeth wfes surprised, but agreed to it immedi-
ately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real object
of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked up. He was as much
awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as
Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his
book. He was directly invited to join their party, but
he declined it, observing, that he could imagine but two
motives for their choosing to walk up and down the
room together, with either of which motives his joining
them would interfere. " What could he mean? she was
djring to know what could be his meaning " — and asked
Elizabeth whether she could at all nnderstand him?
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 67
" Not at all, " w«s her answer; " but depend npon it,
he means to be severe on us, and onr sorest way of dis-
appointing him will'be to ask nothing about it "
Miss Bin^ey, however, was incapable of disappoint-
ing Mr. Darcy in anything, and persevered therefore
in requiring an explanation of his two motives.
" I have not the smallest objection to explaining them, "
said he, ss soon as she allowed him to speak. " You
either choose this method of passing the evening be-
cause yon are in each other's confidence, and have secret
affairs to discuss, or because you. are conscious that your
figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking; —
if the first, I should be completely in your way, and
if the second, I can admire yon much better as I sit by
the fire. "
" Oh! shocking! " cried Miss Bingley. " I never heard
anything so abominable. How shall we punish him for
such a speech? "
" Nothing ao easy, if yon have but the inclination/'
said Elisabeth. " We can all plague and punish one
another. Tease him — laugh at him. — Intimate as you
are, you must know how it is to be done. "
" But upon my honor I do not. I do assure yon that
my intimacy has not yet taught me that. Tease calm-
ness of temper and presence of mind ! No, no — I feci
he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we will not
expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh
without a subject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself, "
" Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at ! " cried Elizabeth.
" That is an uncommon advantage, and nncommon I
hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to me
to have many such acquaintance. I dearly love a laugh. "
" Miss Bingley, " said he, " has given me credit for
more than can be. The wisest and the best of men —
nay, tiie wisest and best of their actions — may be ten-
- Coo;(lc
58 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
dered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life
is a joke. "
" Certainly, " replied Elizabeth — " there are aueh peo-
ple, but I hope I am not one of them. I hope I never
ridicule what is wise or good. Follies and nonsense,
whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can — But these, I suppose,
are precisely what you are without. "
" Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has
been the study of my life to avoid those weaknesses
which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule. "
" Such as vanity and pride. "
" Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride — where
there is a real superiority of mind, pride will be always
under good regulation. "
Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
" Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume, "
said Miss Bingley; " and pray what is the result? "
" I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has
no defect. He owns it himself without disguise. "
" No " — said Darcy, " I have made no such pretension.
I have faults enough, but they are not, I hope, of under-
standing. My temper I dare not vouch for. It is, I
believe, too little yielding— -certainly too little for the
convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies
^K^ and vices of others so soon as I ought, nor their offences
against myself. My feelings are not puffed about with
every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps
be called resentful. — My good opinion once lost, is lost
forever. "
" That is a failing indeed! " — cried Elizabeth. " Im-
placable resentment it a shade in a character. But yon
have chosen your fault well. I really cannot laugh at
it. You are safe from me. "
" There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE S9
to aome particuUr evil — a natural defect, which not even
the best education can overcome. "
" And your defect is a propensity to hate everybody. "
" And yours, " he replied, with a smile, " is wilfully to
misunderatand them. "
" Do let us have a little music, " cried Mbs Bingley,
tired of a conversation in which she had no share.
" Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst.''"
Her sister made not the smallest objection, and the
pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after a few mo-
ments'recollection, was not sorry for it. He began
feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.
■^1^
CHAPTER XII
In consequence of an agreement between the sisters,
Elisabeth wrote the next morning to her mother, to beg
that the carriage might be sent for them in the course
of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated on
her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the follow-
ing Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane's week,
could pot bring herself to receive them with pleasure
before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at
least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient
to get home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word that they
could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday;
and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley
and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could
spare them very well. Against staying longer, how-
ever, Elizabeth was positively resolved — nor did she
much expect it would be asked ; and fearful, on the con-
trary, as being considered as intruding themselves need-
lessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
60 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that
their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning
should be mentioned, and the request made.
The communication excited many profesaiona of con-
cern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at
least till the following day to work on Jane ; and till the
morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley was
then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her
jealousy and dislike of one sister mnch exceeded her
affection for the other.
The master O'f the house heard with real sorrow that
they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to per-
suade Miss Benn^ that it would not be safe for her —
that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm
where she felt herself to be right.
To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence — Elizabeth
had been at Netherfield long enough, fili.'ai-ffflj^[gfl him
tnni-g flian hf ]il^^■^ — and Miss Bingley was uncivil toAe;^
an d more teasing than us jia l to hims elf. HeTFisely re-
solved to be particularly careful that no sign of admira-
tion should note escape him, nothing that could elevate
her with the hope of Inflnencing his felicity; sensible
that if sueli an idea had been suggested, his behavior
during the last day must have material weight in con-
firming or crushing it. Steady to Ms purpose, he
scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of
Saturday, and though they were at one time left by them-
selves for half-an-bour, he adhered most conscientiously
to his book, and would not even look at her.
On Siind flyr after morning service, the separatio n, so
agreea ble to almost all, took plac^. Miss Bingley's
civility~t < T EllisalMitTl U < !RHsed liClast very rapidly, as
well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,
after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always
give her to see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield,
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE «1
ttnd embnudng lier most tenderlj, she ereii shook hands
with the former. Elisabeth took leave of the whole party
in the liveliest spirits.
They were not welcomed home very cordially by their
mother. Mrs. Bennet wondered at their coming, and
tiiong^t them very wrong to give so much tronUe, and
was sore Jane would have cat^t oAA again. But their
father, thongh very laconic in his expressions of pleas-
nre, was really ^ad to see them; be had felt their im-
portance in the family circle. The evening conversatSon,
when they were all assembled, had lost much of its ani-
matioii, and almost all its sense, by the absence of Jane
and Elizabeth.
They foond Mary, as nsoal, deep in the study of
thorough bass and hmnan nature; and had some new
extracts to admire, and soine new observations of thread-
bare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had
information for them of a different sort. Much had been
done and mnch had been said in the regiment since the
preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined
lately with their uncle, f pH " " *^'■■'* hrf " i ftnggrilj and it
bad actnally been hinted that Colonel F < wster was going
to be married.
CHAPTER XIII
" I HOPE, my dear, " said Mt. Bennet to his wife, as
tbey were at breakfast the next morning, " that you have
ordered a good dinner tw-day, because I have reason to
expect an addition to our family party. "
" Who do yoa mean, my dear? I know of nobody
that is coming, I am snre, unless Charlotte Lucas should
happen to call in — and I hope m^ dinners are good
enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at
home. "
^ Cooxic
62 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a
stranger, "
Mrs. Rennet's eyes sparkled. — " A gentleman and a
stranger ! It is Mr. Ringley, I am snre. Why, Jane—
you never dropped a word of this ; yon sly thing ! Well,
I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley.
— But — good Lord! how unlucky! there is not a bit of
lish to be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell — I
must speak to Hill this moment. "
" It i^ not Mr. Bingley, " said her husband; " it is a
person whom I never saw in the whole course of my
life. "
This roused a general astonishment; and he had the
pleasure of being eagerly questioned by bis wife and
five daughters at once.
After amusing himself some time with their curiosity,
he thus explained —
" About a month ago I received this letter; and about
a fortnight ago I answered it, foB I thought it a case
of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is
from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead, may
turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases. "
" Oh ! my dear, " cried his wife, " I cannot bear to hear
that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious man. I
do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your
estate should be entailed away from your own children;
and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried
long ago to do something or other about it. "
Jane and Elizabeth attempted to explain to her the
nature of an entail. They had often attempted it before,
but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond
the reach of reason, and she continued to rail bitterly
against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a
family of five daughters, in favor of a man whom nobody
cared anything about.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 6S
" It certftinly is a most iniquitous affair, " said Mr.
Beiinet, " and nothing can dear Mr. Collins from the
guilt of inheritiiig Longboum. But if you will listen to
his letter, you may perhaps he a little softened fay his
manner of expressing himself. "
" No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it was
very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very
hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could not
he keep on quarrelling with yon, as his father did before
" Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial
scruples on that head, as you will hear. "
" Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent,
" D„, S,», " " > " ■ " = " >'»'•
" The disagreement subsisting between yourself and
my late honored father always gave me much uneasiness,
and since I have had the misfortune to lose him, I have
frsqaently wished to heal the breach; but for some time
I was kept back by my own donbts, fearing lest it might
seem disrespectful to his memory tar me to be on good
terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him
to be at variance. — [There, Mrs. Bennet.] — My mind,
however, is now made up on the subject, for having re-
ceived ordination at Easter, I have been to fortunate as
to be distinguished by the patronage of the Rif^t Honor-
able Lady Catherine de Bonrgh, widow of Sir Lewis de
Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me
to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be
my earnest endeavor to demean myself with grateful
respect towards her I^yship, and be ever ready to per-
form those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by
the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I
feel it my dnty to prtnoote and establish the blessing of
peace in all families witihin the reacb of my iufloence;
- Cooxic
04 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present
overtures of good will are highly commendable, and
that the clrcnmstance of my being next in the entail of
Longboum estate will be kindly overlooked on your side,
and not lead you-to reject the offered olive branch. I
cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means
of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
apologise for it, as well as to asanrc you of my readiness
to make them every possible amends, — but of this here-
after. If you should have no objection to receive me
into your house, I propose myself the satisfactioir of
waiting on you and your family, Monday, November
18th, by four o'clock, and shall probably trespass on
your hospitality till the Saturday se'nnight following,
which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady
Catherine is far. from objecting to my occasional absence
on a Sunday, provided that some other clergyman is en-
gaged to do the duty of the day. — I remain, dear sir,
with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters,
your well-wisher and friend,
" William Collins. "
" At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-
making gentleman, " said Mr. Bennet, as be folded np
the letter. " He seems to be a most conscientious and
polite young man, upon my word, and I donbt not will
prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Cath-
erine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us
again. "
" There is some sense in what he says about the girls,
however, and if he is disposed to make them any amends,
I shall not be the person to discourage him. "
" Though it is difficult, " said Jane, " to gness in what
way he can mean to make us tbe atonement be thinka
our due^ the wish is certainly to his credit. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PHEJUDICE es
Elisabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary
deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention of
christening, marrjring, and bnrying his parishioners
whenever it were required.
" He mmt be an oddity, I think, " said she. " I cannot
make him out. — There is something very pompous in
his style. — And what can he mean by apoli^sing for
being next in the entail ? — We cannot suppose he would
help it if he could. — Can he be a sensible man, airP "
" No, my dear; I think not. I have great hopes of
finding him quite the rererse. There is a mixture of
aerrility and self-importance in his letter, which prom-
ises well. I am impatient to see him. "
" In point of composition, " said Mary, " his letter does
not seem defective. The idea of the olive branch per-
haps ia not wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed. "
To Catherine and Lydia^ neither the letter nor its
writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to
impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet
coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received
pleasure from the society of a man in any other color.
As for their mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away
with much of her ill will, and she was preparing to see
him with a degree of composure which astonished her
husband and daughters.
Mr. Collins was punctnal to his time, and was re-
ceived with great politeness by the whole family. Mr.
Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready
enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in need
of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He
was a tall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty.
His air was grave and stately, and his manners were
very formal. He had not been long seated before he
complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family
of dsDj^ters; said he had heard much of their beaaty >
L ..„■„ Google
66 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
bnt that in this instance fame bad fallen abort of the
troth ; and added, that be did not donbt ber seeing tliem
all in dne time well disposed of in marriage. This gal-
lantry was not mach to the taste of some of his hearers;
but Mrs. benitet, who quarreled with no ccunplimcnts,
answered most readily.
" YoD are very kind, I am sure; snd I wish with all
my heart it may prove so, for else they will be destitute
enongb. Things are settled so oddly. "
" Yon allnde, perhaps, to the entail of this estate. "
" Ab ! sir, I do indeed. It is a grierons affair to my
poor girls, yon most confess. Not that I mean to find
fault with gou, for stich things I know are all chance in
this world. There is no knowing how estates will go
when once they come to be entailed. "
" I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my
fair cousins, and conld say much on the subject, bnt that
I am cautions of appearing forward and precipitate.
Bat I can assure the young ladies that I come prepared
to admire them. At present I will not say more; bu^
perhaps, when we are better acquainted "
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the
girls smiled on each other. They were not the only
objects of Mr. CoUins's admiration. The hall, the din-
ing-room, and all its furniture, were examined and
praised ; and his commendation of everything would have
touched Mrs. Bennet's heart, bnt for the mortifying
supposition of his viewing it all as his own future prop-
erty. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired;
and be begged to know to which of his fair cousins the
excellency of its cooking was owing. But here he was
set right by Mrs. Bennet, who assured him with some
asperity that they were very well able to keep a good
cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the
kitchen. He be^ed pardon for having displeased ber.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 67
In a softened tone she declared herself not at all of-
fended ; but he continned to apologize for about a quarter
of an hour.
CHAPTER XIV
DcsiNo dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all ; but
when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time
to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore
started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by
observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness.
Lady Catherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and
consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable.
Mr, Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins
was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated him
to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a
most important aspect he protested that " he had never
in his life witnessed such behavior in a person of tank
— such affability and condescension, as bf^ had himself
experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been gra-
ciously pleased to approve of both the discourses which
he had already had the honor of preaching before her.
She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and
had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up
her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine
was reckoned proud by many people he knew, but he
had never seen anything but affability in her. She had
always spoken to him as she would to any other gentle-
man; she made not the smallest objection to his joining
in the society of the neighborhood, nor to his leaving
bis parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his
relations. She Jiad even condescended to advise him to
marry as soon as be could, provided he chose with dis-
cretion: and had once paid him a visit in his humble
„C,oo;(lc
68 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
parsonage, where she bad perfectly approved all the
alterations he had been making, and had even vonch-
safed to suggest some herself — some shelves in the
closets upstairs. "
" That is all very proper and civil, I am sure, " said
Mrs. Bennet, " and I dare say she is a very agreeable
woman. It ia a pi^ that great ladies in general are
not more like her. Does she live near you, sir? "
" The garden in vhich stands my bumble abode is
separated only by a lane from fiosings Park, her lady-
ship's residence. "
" I think you said she was a widow, sir? has she ai^
family? "
" She has one only daughter, the heiress of Rosings,
and of very extensive pnq > erty. "
" Ah! " cried Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, " then
she is better off than many girls. And what sort of
young lady is she? is she handsome? "
" She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady
Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty.
Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her
sex, because there is that in her features which marks
the young woman of distinguished birth. She is un-
fortunately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented
her making that progress in many accomplishments
which she could not otherwise have failed of, as I am
informed by the lady who superintended ber education,
and who still resides with tbem. But she is perfectly
amiable, and often condescends to drive by my hnmblc
abode in her little phaeton and ponies. "
" Has she been presented? I do not remember her
name among the ladies at court. "
" Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents
her being in town; and by that means, as I told Lady
Catherine myself one day, has deprived J^be British court
Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 69
of its brightest ornament. Her lad7al)ip seemed pleased
with the idea; and yon may imagine that I am happy
on every occasion to offer those little delicate compli-
ments which artf always acceptable to ladies. I have
more than once observed to Lady Catherine, that her
charming daughter seemed bom to be a duchess, and
that the most elevated rank, instead of giving her
consequence, would be adorned by her. — These arc the
kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it ia
a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly
bound to pay. "
" You judge very properly, " said Mr. Bennet, " and
it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flat-
tery with delicacy. May I ask vhether these pleasing
attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or
arc the result of previous stady? "
" They ariac chiefly from what is passing at the time,
and though I sometimes amuse myself with suggesting
and arranging such little elegant compliments as may
be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish to give
them as unstudied an air as possible. "
Mr. Bennct's expectations were fully answered. His
cousin was as absurd as he bad hoped, and he listened
to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the
same time the most resolute composure of countenance,
and, except in an occasional glance at Elisabeth, re-
quiring no partner in his pleasure.
By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and
Mr. Bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawing-
room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him
to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readily assented,
and a book was produced; but on beholding it (for every-
thing announced it to be from a circulating lilirary), he
started back, and bef^ng pardon, protested that he
never read novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia ex-
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
70 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
claimed. — Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped
as he opened the volume, and before he had, with very
monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted
hint with —
" Do you know, mamma, that my nncle Philips talks
of turning away Richard; and if he does. Colonel Fors-
ter will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on Sat-
urday, I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear more
about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from
Lydia was bid by her twp eldest sisters to hold her
tongue ; but Mr. Collins, much offended, laid aside his
book, and said —
" I have often observed how little young ladies are in-
terested by books of a serious stamp, though written
solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; — for,
certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous to them
as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young
Then turning to Mr, Bennet, he offered himself as
his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Rennet accepted
the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in
leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements. Mrs.
Bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for
Lydia's interruption, and promised that it should not
occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Col-
lins, after assuring them that he bore bis young cousin
no ill will, and should never resent her behavior as any
affront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Ben-
net, and prepared for backgammon.
ta,i,.=db, Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XV
Mr, Collins was not a sensible man, and the de-
ficiency of Nature had been but little assisted by edu-
cation or society ; the greatest part of his life having been
spent nnder the goiduice of an illiterate and miserly
father; and thou^ he belonged to one of the universi-
ties, he had merely kept the necessary terms, without
forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection
in which his father had brought him up had given him
originally great humility of manner; but it was now a
good deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak
bead, living in retirement, and the consequential feel-
ings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate
chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine de
Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and
the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his
veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a
very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a cler-
gyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether
a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, self-importance,
and humility.
Having now a good house and very sufficient income,
he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation
with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as
he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found
tfaem as handsome and amiable as they were repre-
sented by ctHnmoD report. This was his plan of aiAends
— of atonement — for inheriting their father's estate;
and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and
suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested |
on hia own part. I
His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's |
- Coo;(lc
72 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Wei; face confirmed his vieirs, and established all hia
strictest notions of what vas doe to Beaiority; and for
the first evening Mhe was his settled choice. The next
tnorning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter
of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before break-
fast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-honse,
«nd leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that
a mistress for it might be found at Longboum, pro-
duced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and gen-
eral Encouragement, a caution against the very Jane he
had fixed on. " As to her j/ounger daughters, she could
not take upon her to say — she could not positively an-
swer — but she did not know of Any prepossession; — her
eldest daughter, she must just mention — she felt it inr
cumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon
engaged. "
Mr. Collins bad only to change from Jane to Elisa-
beth — and It was soon done — done while Mrs. Bennet
was stirring the fire. Elisabeth, equally next to Jane
in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that
she might soon have two daughters married; and the
man whom she could not bear to speak of the day be-
fore was now high in her good graces.
Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not for-
gotten ; every sister except Mary agreed to go with her ;
and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of
Mr. Bennet, who was most anxions to get rid of him,
and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins
had followed him after breakfast, and there he would
continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest
folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr. Bennet,
with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hans-
ford. Snch doings disctmiposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly.
In his library he had been always sure of leisure and
- Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 78
tranqnillity ; and though prepared, as lie told Elisabeth,
to meet with folly and conceit in every other nxHn in
tlie boose, he was used to be free from them there; his
civility, therefore,'was most prompt in inviting Mr. Co)- I ,
lina to join his daughters in their walk; and Mr. Collins,! /
being in fact mocb better fitted for a walker than a I
reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large |
book, and go.
In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on
that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered
Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then
no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes were imme-
diately wandering up the street in quest of the officers,
and nothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a
really new muslin in a shop window, could recall them.
Sut the attention of every lady was soon caught by
a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most
gentlemanlike appearance, walking vrith an officer on
the other side of the way. The officer was the very
Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia
came to inquire, and he bowed as tbey passed. All were
struck with the stranger's air, all wondered who he
could be; and Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible
to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense
of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortu-
nately had just gained the pavement when the two gen-
tlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Mr,
Denny addressed them directly, and entreated permis-
sion to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who bad
returned with him the day before from town, and he
was happy to say had accepted a commission in their
corps. This was exactly as it should be; for the young
man wanted only regimentals to make him completely
charming. His appearance was greatly in his favor ; be
bad all the best part of beauty, a fine countenance, a
- Coo;(lc
74 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
good figure, and veij pleasing address. The introdactioii
was followed up on his side hj a happy readiness of
conversation — a readiness at the same time perfectly
correct and unassuming; and the vhole party vere still
standing and talking together very agreeably, when the
sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bing-
ley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing
the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly
towards them, and began the usual civilities. Bingley
was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the prin-
cipal object. " ° — AT th° " j fi° rn'-^j " " hif - " y tf
T.nny ^um on purpose to intjuire after h er. Mr, Darcy
corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to deter-
mine not to fix his tjcs on Elizabeth, when they were
suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and
Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as
they looked at each other, was all astonishment ati the
effect of the meeting. Both changed color, one looked
white, the other red. Mr. Wickliam, after a few mo-
ments, touched his hat — a salutation which Mr. Darcy
jiiat i^ejyned to return. What could be the meaning of
it? — It was impossible to inmfrim-; it WH im possible n ot
to long to know .
In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming
to hare noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with
his friend.
Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young
ladies to the door of Mr. Philips's house, and then made
their bows, in apite of Miss Lydia's pressing entreaties
that they would come in, and even in spite of Mrs.
Philips's throwing np the parlor window and loudly
seconding the invitation.
Mrs. Philips was always glad to see her nieces; and
the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particu-
larly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her but-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 7«
prise at their sadden return home, which, as their own
carriage had not fetched them, she should have known
nothing aboDt, if she had not happened to see Mr.
Jones's shop-boy in the street, who had told her that
they were not to send any more draughts to Netherfield
because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her
civility was claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's in-
troduction of him. She received him with her very best
politeness, which he returned with as much more, apolo-
gizing for bis intrusion without any previous acquaint-
ance with her, which he could not help flattering him*
self, however, might be justified by his relationship to
the young ladies who introduced him to her notice. Mrs.
Philips was quite awed by such an excess of good breed-
ing ; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put
an end to by exclamations and inquiries about the other;
of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what
they already knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him
from London, and that he was to have a lieutenant's
commission in the shire. She had been watching
him the last hour, she said, as be walked up and down
the street, and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and
Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation,
but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a
few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger,
were become " stupid, disagreeable fellows. " Some of
them were to dine with the Pbilipses the next day, and
their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.
Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family
from Longbourn would come in the evening. This was
agreed to, and Mrs. Philips protested ithat they would
have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets,
and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The pros-
pect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted
in mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apol-
Cooylc
76 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ogiea In quitting the room, and was assured with un-
wearying civility that they were perfectly needless.
As they walked home, Elisabeth related to Jane what
she had seen pass between the two gentlemen ; but though
Jane would have defended either or both, had they ap-
peared to be wrong, she could no more explain such
behavior than her sister.
Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet
by admiring Mrs. Philips's manners and politeness. He
protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter,
he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had
not only received him with the utmost civility, but had
even pointedly included him in her invitation for the
next evening, although utterly unknown to her before.
Something, he supposed, might be attributed t» his con-
nection with them, but yet he bad never met witii so
much attention in the whole coiufse of his life.
CHAPTER XVI
As no objection was made to the yoang -people's en-
gagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples
of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening
during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach
conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to
Meryton; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as
they entered the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham had
accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then in the
When this information was given, and they had all
taken their seats, Mr. Collins was at leisure to look
around him and admire, and he was so much strudc with
the size aod furniture of the apartment, that he de-
L .., > ,„Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 77
dared be might almost have supposed himself in the
small amnmer breakfast parlor al; Rosings; a compari-
son that did not at first convey much gratification; but
when Mrs. Philips understood from him what Rosings
was, and who was its proprietor — when she had listened
to the description of only one of Lady Catherine's draw-
ing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone had
cost eight hiuidred pounds, she felt all the force of the
compliment, and would hardly have resented a compari-
son with the housekeeper's room.
In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Cather-
ine and her mansion, with occasional digressions in praise
of his own bumble abode, and the improvements it was
receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen
joined them ; and he found in Mrs. Philips a very atten-
tive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased
with what she heard, and who was resolved to retail it
all among her neighbors as soon as she could. To the
girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who hod
nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and exam-
ine their own indifferent imitations of china on the
mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long.
It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did ap-
proach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,
Elisabeth felt that she hod neither been seeing him
before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest
degree of nnreasonable admiration. The officers of the
shire were in general a very creditable, gentleman-
like setj and the best of them were of the present party ;
but Mr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person,
conntenance, air, and walk, as tkejf were superior to
the broad-faced, stuSy uncle Philips, breathing port
wine, who followed them into the room.
Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom al-
most every female eye was tamed, and Eliiabeth was
- Coo;(lc
78 PHIDE AND PREJUDICE
the bappy woman by whom he finally seated himself;
and the agreeable manner in which be immediately fell
into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet
night, and on the probability of a rainy season, made
her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare
topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the
With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr.
Wickham and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink
into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was
notliing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in
Mrs. Philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abun-
dantly supplied with coffee and muffins.
When the card tables were placed, he had an oppor-
tunity of obliging her in return, by sitting down to
" I know little of the game at present, " said he, " but
I shall be glad to improve myself, for in my situ & tioa
in life " Mrs. Philips was very thankful for his
compliance but could not wait for his reason.
Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready
delight was he received at the other table between Eliza-
beth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia's
engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined
talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery
tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game,
too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to
have attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for
the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was
therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was
very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished
to hear she could not hope to be told — the history of
his acquaintance with Mr, Darcy. She dared not even
mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was
unexpectedly relieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 79
himself. He inquired bow far Netherfield was from
Meryton; and, «fter receiving her answer, asked in a
hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been stay-
ing there.
" About a month, " said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling
to let the subject drop, added, " He is a man of very
large property in Derbyshire, I understand. "
" Yes, " replied Wickham ; — " his estate there is a noble
one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You could not
have met with a person more capable of giving you cer-
tain information on that head than myself — for I have
been connected with his family in a particular manner
from my infancy. "
Elizabeth could not but look surprised.
" You may well be surprised. Miss Bennet, at such
an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the
very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. — Are you
much acquainted with Mr. Darcy? "
" As much as I ever wish to be, " cried Elisabeth
warmly. — " I have spent four days In the same house
with him, and 1 think him very disagreeable. "
" I have no right to give my opinion, " said Wickham,
" as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not quali-
fied to form one. I have known him too \ < mg and too
well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for me to be
impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in
general astonish — and perhaps yon would not express
it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you arc in
your own family. "
• " Upon my word, I say no more Here than I might
say in any house in the neighborhood, except Nether-
field. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Every-
body is disgusted with his pride. Yon will not find him
more favorably spoken of by anyone. "
" I cannot pretend to be sorry, " said Wickham, after
- Coo;(lc
80 PEIDE AND PEEJUDICE
a short interruptioa, " that he or that any man shoaM
not be estimated beyond their deserts ; but with him I
believe it does not often happen. The world is blinded
by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his
high and imposing manners, and sees him only as be
chooses to be seen. "
" I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance,
to be an ill-tempered man. " Wickham only shook his
head.
" I wonder, " said he, at the next opportunity of speak-
ing, " whether he is likely to be in this country much
" I do not at all know; but I heard nothin^i; of his
going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your
plans in favor of the shire will not be affected by
bis being in the neighborhood. "
" Ob ! no — it is not for me to be driven away by Mr.
Darcy. If he wishes to avoid seeing me, he must go.
We are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me
pain to meet him, but I have no reason for avoiding
him but what I might proclaim before all the world, — a
sense of very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets
at his being what he is. His father. Miss Bennet, the
late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best men that ever
breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can
never be in company with this Mr. Darcy without be-
ing grieved to the soul by & thousand tender recol-
lections. His behavior to myself has been scandalous;
but I verily believe I could forgive htm anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and
disgracing the memory of his father. "
Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase,
and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it
prevented farther inquiry.
Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topica*
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 81
Meryton, the neighborboad, the society, appearing higbl?
pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of
the latter especially with gentle bat very intelligible
gallantry.
" It was the prospect of constant > ocie^, and good
society, " he added, " which was my chief inducement to
enter the shire. I knew it to be a moat respect-
able, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted
me farther by his account of their present qnarters, and
the very great attentions and excellent acquaintance
Meryton had procored them. Society, I own, is neces-
sary to me. I have been a disappointed man, and my
spirits will not bear solitude. I miui have cmplc^ment
and society. A military life is not what I was intended
for, but circimistances have now made it eligible. The
church ought to have been my profession — I was brought
np for the chorch, and I shotdd at this time have been
in possession of a most valnable living, had it pleased
the gentleman we were speaking of just now. "
" Yes — the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next
presentation of the best living in his gift. He was my
godfather, and excessively attached to me. I cannot
do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me
amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living
fell, it was given elsewhere. "
" Good heavens! " cried Elisabeth; " but bow could
that be? — How could his will be disregarded? — Why
did you not seek legal redress? "
" There was jnst soch an informality in the terms of
the bequest as to give me no hope from law. A man
of honor could not have doubted the intention, but Mr.
Darcy chose to doubt it — or to treat it as a merely c(Mk-
ditional reconmiendation, and to assert tbat I hod for-
feited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudenofr'-in
- Cooxic
82 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
short anything or nothing. Certain it is, that the living
became vacant two years ago, exactly as I was of an
age to hold It, and that it was given to another man;
and no less certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself
of having really done anything to deserve to lose it. I
have a warm, unguarded temper, and I may perhaps
have sometimes spoken my opinion of him, and to him,
too freely. I can recall nothing worse. But the fact
is that we are very different sort of men, and that he
hates me. "
" This is quite shocking! — He deserves to be pablicly
disgraced. "
" Some time or other he vnU be — but it shall not be
by me. TUl I can forget his father, I can never defy
or expose Attn. "
Elizabeth honored him for such feelings, and thought
him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
" But what, " said she, after a pause, " can have been
his motive? — what can have induced him to behave so
cmelly? "
" A thorough, determined dislike of me — a dislike
which I cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy.
Had the late Mr. Darcy liked me less his son might
have borne with me better; but his father's uncommon
attachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early
in life. He had not a temper to bear the sort of com-
petition in which we stood — the sort of preference which
was often given me. "
" I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this — though
X have never liked him, I had not thought so very ill
of him. — I had supposed him to be despising his fellow-
creatures in general, but did not suspect him of de-
scending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such
inhumanity as this. "
After a few minutes'reflection, however, she <
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 88
ued — " I do remember hia boasting one day, at Netber-
field, of the implacability of his resentments, of bis
baring an unforgiving temper. His disposition must be
dreadful. "
" I will not trust myself on the subject, " replied Wick-
ham; " I can hardly be just to him. "
Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a
time exclaimed, " To treat in such a manner the godson,
the friend, the favorite of his father ! " — She could have
added, " A young man, too, like gou, whose very coun-
tenance may vooch for your being amiable " — but she
contented herself With, " And one, too, who had probably
been his own companion from childhood, connected to-
gether, as I think you said, in the closest manner ! "
" We were bom in the same parish, within the same
park; the greatest part of our yonth was passed to-
gether; inmates of the same house, sharing the same
amusements, objects of the same parental care. Mg
father began life in the profession which your nncle,
Mr. Philips, appears to do so much credit to — but he
gave up everything to be of use to the late Mr. Darcy,
and devoted all his time to the care of the Pemberley
property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy,
a most intimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often
acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obliga-
tions to my father's active superintendence, and when,
immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave
him a voluntary promise of providing for me, I am con-
vinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude
to hitn, as of affection to myself. "
" How strange ! " cried Elizabeth. " How abominable !
— I wonder that the very pride of this Mr. Darcy has
not made him just to yon! — If from no better motive,
that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,
— for dishonesty I must call it. "
- Cooxic
•a
> .
84 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" It U woDderfui, " replied Wickham, — " for almost all
his actions may be traced to pride; — and pride has often
been his best frieiid. It has connected him nearer with
virtue than with any other feeling. But we are none of
us consistent, and in his behavior to me, there were
stronger impulses even than pride. "
" Can snch abominable pride as his have ever done
him good? "
" Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and gener-
-to give his money freely, to display hospitality,
ist his tenants, and relieve the poor. Family pride,
and filitd pride, — for he is very proud of what his
father was, have done this. Not to appear to disgrace
his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or
lose the influence of the Pemberley House, is a powerful
motive. He has also brotherly pride, which, with tome
brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful
guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally
cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers. "
" What sort of a girl is Miss Darcy? "
He shook his head. — " I wish I could call her amiable.
It gives me pain to speak ill of a Darcy. But she is
too much like her brother, — very, very proud. As a
child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely
fond of me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her
amusement. But she is nothing to me now. She is a
handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, I under-
stand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death,
her home has been London, where a lady lives with her,
and superintends her education. "
After many pauses and many trials of other subjects,
Elizabeth could not help reverting once more to ths
first, and saying —
" I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley!
How can Mr. Bingley, who seems good-humor itself^
L ..„■„ Google
PHIDE AND PREJUDICE 85
and is, I really believe, tmly amiable, be in friendship
with such ft man? How can they suit e & cU other? — Do
yon know Mr. Bingley? "
" Not at alL " .it
He cannot know what Mr. Dorcy is. " ^tf^ i'1
" He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, eharming man.
" Probably not; — but Mr. Darcy can please where
be chooses. He does not want abilities. ■ He can be a
conversable companion if he thinks it worth bis while.
Among those who are at all his equals in consequence,
he ia a very different man from what he is to the less
prosperous. His pride never deserts him: but with the
rich he is liberal-minded, just, sincere, rational, honor-
able, and perhaps agreeable^ — allowing something for
fortune and figure. "
The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the
players gathered round the other table, and Mr. Collins
took his station between his cousin Elizabeth and Mrs.
Philips. The usual inquiries as to his success was made
by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost
every point; but when Mrs. Philips began to express
her concern thereupon, he assured her with much earnest
gravity that it was not of the least importance, that he
considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she
would not make herself uneasy.
" I know very well, madam, " said he, " that when per-
sons sit down to a card table, they must take Uieir
chance of these things, — and happily I am not in such
circumstances as to make five shillings any object.
There are undoubtedly many who could not say the
same, but thanks to Lady Catherine de Boorgh, I am
removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little
matters. "
Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after ob-
serving Mr. Collins for a few moments, hv asked Elisa-
- Coo;(lc
)*
86 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
beth in & low voice whether her relation were very
intimately acquainted with the family of de Bonrgh.
" Lady Catherine de Bonrgh, " she replied, " h*9 very
lately given him a living. I hardly know how Mr.
Collins was first introduced to her notice^ but he cer-
tainly has not known her long. "
I " You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh
and Lady Anne Darcy were sisters; consequently that
she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy. "
" No, indeed, I did not. — I knew nothing at all of
Lady Catherine's connections. I never heard of her
existence till the day before yesterday. "
" Her daugliter. Miss de Bourgh, will have a very
large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin
will unite the two estates. "
This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought
of poor Miss Bingley. Vain indeed must be all her
attentions, vain and cseless her affection for his sister
and her praise of himself, if he were already self-des-
tined to another.
" Mr. Collins, " said she, " speaks highly both of Lady
Catherine and her daughter; but from some particulars
that he has related of her ladyship, I suspect his grati-
tude misleads him, and that in spite of her being his
patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman. "
" I believe her to be both in a great degree, " replied
Wickham; " I have not seen her for many years, but I
very well remember that I never liked her, and that
her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has the
reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but
I rather believe she derives part of her abilities from
her rank and fortune, part from her anthoritative man-
ner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who
chooses that everyone connected with him should have
an understanding of the first class. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 87
Elizftbeth allowed that he bad given a very rational
account of it, and they coutinned talking together with
mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and
gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr. Wick-
ham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the
noise of Mrs. Philips's snpper party, but his manners
recommended him to everybody. Whatever he said, was
said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully. Elisa-
beth went away with her head full of him. She could
think of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he
had told her, all the way home; but there was not time
for her even to mention his name as they went, for
neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydia
talked incessantly of lottery tickets; of the fish she had
lost and the fish she had won; and Mr. Collins in de-
scribing the civilify of Mr. and Mrs. Philips, protesting
that he did not in the least regard his losses at whist,
enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly
fearing that he crowded his cousins, had more to say
than he could well manage before the carriage stopped
at Longbourn House.
CHAPTER XVII
Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had
passed between Mr. Wickbam and herself. Jane listened
with astonishment and concern; — she knew not how to
believe that Mr, Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.
Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to
question the veracity of a young man of such amiable
appearance as Wickham. The possibility of his having
really endured such nnkindness, was enough to interest
all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained
to be done, but to think well of them both^ to defend
- Cooxic
88 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
the conduct of each, and throw into the acconnt o£ acci-
dent or mistake whatever coold not be otherwise ex-
plained.
" They have both, " said she, " been deceived, I dare
8aj, in some way or other, of which we can form no
idea. Interested people have perhaps miarepresented
each to the otlier. It is, in short, impossible for as to
conjecture Hie causes or circumstances which may have
alienated them, witfiout actual blame on either side. "
" Very true, indeed; — and now, my dear Jane, what
have you got to say in behalf of the interested people
who have probably been concerned in the business? —
Do clear them too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of
somebody. "
" Laugh as mocb as yon choose, Imt yon will not laugh
me out of my opinion. My dearest Lizay, do but con-
sider in what a disgraceful light it places Mr. Darcy, to
be treating his father's favorite in such a manner, — one,
whom his fatlier had promised to provide for. It is
impossible. No man of common humanity, no man who
had any value for his character, could be capable of it.
Can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived
in him? — oh! no, "
" I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being
imposed on, than that Mr. Wickham should invent such
a history of himself as he gave me last night; names,
facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If it be
not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was
truth in his looks. "
" It is difficult indeed — it is distressing. One does
not know what to think. "
" I beg yoar pardon ; one knows exactly what to think. "
Bnt Jane could think with certainfy on only one point
— that Mr. Bingley, if he had been imposed on, would
have much to suffer when the affair became public.
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 89
The two joung ladies were siinunoiied from the shrub-
bery, where this cooversation passed, by the arrival of
some of the very persons of whom they had been speak-
ing: Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their per-
sonal invitation for the long-expected ball at Nether-
field, which was fixed for the following Tuesday. The
two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again,
— called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly
asked what she had been doing with herself since their
separation. To the rest of the family they paid little
attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennet as much as possible.
Baying not mnch to Elisabeth, and nothing at all to the
others. They were soon gone again, rising from their
seats with an activity which toi^ their brother by sur-
prise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from Mrs.
Bennet'3 civilitiea.
The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely
agreeable to every female of the family. Mrs. Bennet
chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest
daughter, and was particularly flattered by receiving the
invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of a cere-
monious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy even-
ing in the society of her two friends, and the attentions
of their brother; and Elisabeth thought with pleasure
of dancing a great deal wiUi Mr. Wickham, and of see-
ing a confirmation of everytiiing in Mr. Darcy's look
and behavior. The happiness anticipated by Catherine
and Lydia depended less on any single event, or any
particular person, for though they each, like Elizabeth,
meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,
he was by no means ihe only partner who could satisfy
tiiem, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball. And even
Mary could assure her family that she had no disinclina-
tion for it.
" While I can have my mornings to myself, " said she,
L ..„■„ Google
90 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" it is enough — I think it is no sacrifice to join occa-
sionally in evening engagements. Society has claims on
lis all; snd I confess myself one of those who consider
intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for
everybody. "
Elizabeth's spirits irere so high on the occasion, that
though she did not often speak unnecessarily to Mr.
Collins, she could not help asking him whether he in-
tended to accept Mr. Bin^ey's invitation, and if he
did, whether he would think it proper to join in the
evening's amusement; and she was rather surprised to
find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that
head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke either
from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by
venturing to dance.
" 1 am by no means of opinion, I assure yon, " said
he, " that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of
character, to respectable people, can have any evil ten-
dency; and I am so far from objecting to dancing my-
self, that I shall hope to be honored with the hands
of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and
I take this opporttmity of soliciting yours. Miss Elisa-
beth, for the two first dances especially, — a preference
which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the right
cause, and not to any disrespect for her. "
Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had
fully proposed being engaged by Mr. Wickhana for
those very dances; and to have Mr. Collins instead!
her liveliness had been never worse timed. There was
no help for it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and
her own was perforce delayed a little longer, and Mr.
Collins's proposal accepted with as good a grace as
she could. She was not the better pleased with his
gallantry from the idea it suggested of something more.
It now first struck her, that ike was selected from
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 91
among her sisters as worthy of being the mistress of
Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form a quad-
rille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible
visitors. The idea soon reached to conviction, as she
observed his increasing civilities toward herself, and
heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit
and vivacity ; and though more astonished than gratified
herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long
before her toother gave her to understand that the
probability of their marriage was exceedingly agreeable
to her, Elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the
hint, being well aware that « serious dispute must be tbe
consequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never
make the offer, and, till he did, it was useless to quarrel
about him.
If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare
for and talk of, the younger Miss Bennets would have
been in a pitiable state at this time, for from the day
of the invitation, to the day of the ball, there was such
a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Mery-
ton once. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought
after — the very shoe-roses for Netherfield were got by
proxy. Even Elizabeth might have found some trial of
her patience in weather which totally suspended the
improvement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham;
and nothing less than a dance on Tuesday, could have
made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday
endurable to Eitty and Lydia.
ta,i,.=db, Google
PBIDS AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XVIII
T11.L Elisabeth entered the drawing-room at Nether-
field, and looked in vain for Mr. Wickham among the
cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of hia
being present had never occurred to her. The cer-
tainty of meeting him had not been checked b; any of
those recollections that might not unreasonably have
alarmed her. She had dressed with more than usual
care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the con-
quest of all that remained tuuubdned of his heart, trust-
ing that it was not more than might be won in the
course of the evening. But in an instant arose the
dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for
Mr. Darcy's pleasure in the Bingleys'invitation to the
officers; and thongh this was not exactly the case, the
absolute fact of bis absence was pronounced by his
friend Mr, Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and
who told them that Wickham had been obliged to go
to town on business the day before, and was not yet
returned; adding, with a significant smile,
" I do not imagine bis business would have called him
away just now, if he had not wished to avoid a certain
gentleman here. "
This part of his intelligence, though imheard by
Lydia, was caught by Elisabeth, and as it assured her
that Darcy was not less answerable for Wickham'a ab-
sence than if her first surmise had been just, every
feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharp-
ened by immediate disappointment, that she could
hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite in-
quiries which he directly afterwards approached to
make. Attention, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 93
injuiy to Wickbam. She was resolved ag«iiut any sort
of couversatioD with him, and tanaed away with a de-
gree of ill-hnmor which she conld not wholly sormoimt
even in speaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality
provoked her.
But Elisabeth was not formed for ill-humor; and
though every prospect of her own was destroyed for
the evening, it conld not dwell long on her spirits; and
having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she
had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a
voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and
to point him out to her particular notice. The two first
dances, however, brought a return of distress ; they were
dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and
solemn, apologising instead of attending, and often mov-
ing wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the
shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a
couple of dances can give. The nUKnent of her release
from him was ecstasy.
She danced next with an officer, and had the re-
freshment of talking of Wickham, and of hearing that
he was universally liked. When those dances were over,
she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conver-
aation with her, when she found herself suddenly
addressed by Mr. Darcy, who took her so much by sur-
prise in his application for her hand, that, without know-
ing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away
again immediately, and she was left to fret over her
own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried to con-
sole her.
" I dare say you will find him very agreeable. "
" Heaven forbid ! — That would be the greatest mis >
fortune of all ! — To find a man agreeable whom one is
determined to hate ! — Do not wish me such an evil. "
When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy
L ..„■„ Google
9\ PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
approached to claim her hand, Chatlotte coold not help
caationing her in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and
allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear un-
pleasant in the eyes of a man of ten times his conse-
quence. Elizabeth made no answer, and took her place
in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was
arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy,
and reading in her neighbors'looks, their eqnal amase-
ment in beholding it. They stood for some time without
speaking a word ; and she began to imagine that their
silence was to last through the two dances, and at first
was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that
it would be the greater punishment to her partner to
oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on
the dance. He replied^ and was again silent. After a
pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time
with — " It is jour turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy.
/ talked about the dance, and t/ou ought to make some
kind of remark on the size of the room, or the number
of couples. "
He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished
him to say should be said.
" Very well. That reply will do for the present. Per-
haps by and by I may observe that private balls are
much pleasanter than public ones. Bat now we may
be silent. "
" Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing? "
" Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It
would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour
together; and yet for the advantage of tome, conversa-
tion ought to be so arranged, as that they may have the
trouble of saying as little as possible. "
" Are you consulting your own feelings in the present
case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying
mine ? "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE & S
" Both, " replied Elisabeth, archly; " for I have al-
ways seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds.
We are each of an unaocial, taciturn disposition, tin-
williag to speak, unless we expect to say something that
will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to
poaterity with all the 4clat of a proverb. "
" This is no very striking resemblance of your own
character, I am sure, " said he. " How near it may be
to mine, I cannot pretend to say. You think it a futh-
ful portrait ondonbtedly. "
" I must not decide on my own performance. "
He made no answer, and they were again silent till
they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if
she and her sisters did not very often walk to Meryton?
She answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist
the temptation, added, " When yon met us there the
other day, we had just been forming a new acquaint-
The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of hauteni:
overspread his features, but he said not a word, and
Elisabeth, though blaming herself for her own weak-
ness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in
a constrained manner said, " Mr. Wickham is blessed
with snch happy manners as may insure his making
friends — whether he may be equally capable of retain-
ing them, is less certain. "
" He has been so unlucky as to lose gour friendship, "
replied Elizabeth with emphasis, " and in a manner
which he is likely to suffer from all his life. "
Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of chang-
ing the subject. At that moment Sir William Lucas
appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the
set to the other side of the room ; but on perceiving Mr.
Darcy, he stopped with & bow of superior courtesy to
compliment him on his dancing and his partner.
L ..„■„ Google
96 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
" I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear
sir. Such very anperior dancing is not often seen. It
is evident that yon belong to the first circles. Allow
me to say, however, that your fair partner does not
disgrace yon, and that I must bope to have this pleasure
often repeated, especially when a certain desirable
event, my dear Miss Eliza (^ndng at her sister and
Bingley), shall take place. What congratulations will
then flow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy: — but let me not
interrupt you, sir. — You will not thank me for detaining
you from the bewitching converse of that young lady,
whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me. "
The latter part of this address was scarcely heard
by Darcy ; bat Sir William's allusion to his friend seemed
to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed with
a very serious expression towards Bingley and Jane,
who were dancing together. Recovering himself, how-
ever, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, " Sir
William's interruption has made me fo^rt what we
were talking of. "
" I do not tliink we were speaking at all. Sir William
could not have interrupted any two people in the room
who had less to say for themselves, ■ We have tried two
or three subjects already without success, and what we
are to talk of next I cannot imagine. "
" What think you of books? " said he, smiling.
" Books — Oh! no. I am sure we never read the same,
or not with the same feelings. "
" I am sorry yon think so; but if that be ^e case,
there can at least be no want of subject. We may com-
pare OUT different opinions. "
" No — I cannot talk of books in a ball-TOom; my head
is always full of something else. "
" The preatnt always occupies yoo in such scenes —
does it? " said he, with a look of doubt.
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PEEJUDICE 97
" Yes, always, " she replied, without knowing what she
said, for her thoughts had wandered far from the sub-
ject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly ex-
claiming, " I remember bearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,
that yon hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once
created was unappeasable. You are very cautious, I
suppose, as to its being created. "
" 1 am, " said be, with a firm voice.
" And never allow yourself to be blinded 1^ preju-
dice? "
" I hope not. "
" It ia particularly incumbent on those who never
change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly
at first. "
" May I ask to what these questions tend? "
" Merely to the illustration of your character, " said
she, endeavoring to shake off her gravity. " I am trying
to make it out. "
" And what is your snccess? "
She shook her head, " I do not get on at all. I hear
such different accounts of you as puszle me exceed-
ingly- "
" I can readily believe, " answered he gravely, " that
reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and I
could wish. Miss Bennet, that yon were not to sketch
my character at the present moment, as there is reason
to tear that the performance would reflect no credit on
either. "
" But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never
have another opportunity. "
" I would by no means suspend any pleasure of
yours, " he coldly replied. She said no more, and they
went down the other dance and parted in silence; on
each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,
for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerable powerful
- Coo;(lc
98 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon^
and directed all his anger against another.
They had not long separated, when Miaa Bingley
came towards her, and with an expression of civil dis-
dain thus accosted her:— ~ " So, Mias Eliza, I hear yon
are quite delighted with George Wic^ham! Yonr sister
has been talking to me about him, and asking me a
thousand questions ; and I find that the yonng man forgot
to tpl] yrni, nmting hifi n^hl•■^ nniniifmjjjfaljnns^ that hft Was
thp ann nf nlH ^ jckham. the late Mr . Da rcy's steward .
Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to
give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to
Mr. Darcy's using him ill, it is perfectly false; for,
on the contrary, he has been always remarkably kind
to him, though George Wickham has treated Mr. Darcy
in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particu-
lars, but I know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the
least to blame, that he cannot bear to hear George Wick-
ham mentioned, and that though my b rother t hought he
■yiil d " " t wfH fty " id if'liidi " !; ^^■ "'^n ^'''° invitation to
the officers, t. » w.a a^naa-JT^iy g] " < ^^^ " il thwt hn h ad
t.ifpnjhjnia^if^ ;int ftf thf Wfly . H jb coming into the
country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and I
wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you. Miss
Eliza, for this discovery of your favorite's guilt; but
really, considering his descent, one could not expect
much better, "
" His guilt and his descent appear by your account
to be the same, " said Elizabeth angrily; " for I have
heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being
the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of that, I can
assure you, he informed me himself. "
" I beg your pardon, " replied Miss Bingley, turning
away with a sneer. " Excuse my interference: it was
kindly meant. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 99
" Insolent girl! " aaid Elizabeth to herself. " Yon are
much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such «
paltry attack as this. I see nothing in it bnt.your own
wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr. Darcy. " She
then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to
make inquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane
met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow
of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how
well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the even-
ing. Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that
moment solicitude for Wickham, resentment against his
enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope
of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness.
" I want to know, " said she, with a countenance no
less smiling than her sister's, " what you have learnt
about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you have been too
pleasantly engaged to think of any third person ; in
which case you may be sure of my pardon. "
" No, " replied Jane, " I have not forgotten him; but
I have nothing satisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley
does not know the whole of his history, and is quite
ignorant of the circumstances which have principally
offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good
conduct, the probity, and honor of his friend, and is
perfectly convinced that Mr. Wickham has deserved
much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he has re-
ceived; and I am sorry to say that by his account as
well BS his sister's, Mr. Wickham is by no means a
respectable young man. I am afraid he has been very
imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's re-
gard. "
" Mr, Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself? "
" No; he never saw him till the other morning at
Mcryton. "
" Thia account then is what he has received from
L ..„■„ Google
100 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
Mr. Darcy. I am perfectly satisfied. Bat what does
he say of the living? "
" He does not exactly recollect the circumstances,
tbongfa he has heard them from Mr. Darcy more than
once, bat he belierea that it -was left to him conditionally
" I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's siacerity, " said
Elizabeth warmly: " but you must ezcaae my not being
convinced by assurance only. Mr. Bingley's defense of
his friend was a very able one, I date say; bat since
he is anacqaainted with several parts of the story, and
has learnt the rest from that friend himself, I shall
venture still tn thii^ of both gentlemen as I did before. "
She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying
to each, and on which there could be no difference of
sentiment. Elizabeth listened with delight to the happy,
though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Bing-
ley's regard, and said all in her power to hei^ten her
confidence in it. On tbeir being joined by Mr. Bingley
himself, Elizabeth withdrew to Miss Lucas; to whose
inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she
had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to
them, and told her with great exultation that he had just
been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
" I have found out, " said he, " by a singular accident,
that there is now in the room a near relation of my
patroness. I happened to overhear the gentleman him-
self mentioning to tite young lady who does the honors
of this house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh,
and of her mother Lady Catherine. How wonderfnlly
these sort of things occur! Who would have thought of
my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine
de Bourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that
the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects
to him, which I am now going to do, and trust he will
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 101
excnae my not baring done it before. Mj total igno-
Tance of the connectioa must plead my apolt^y. "
" Yon are not going to introduce yourself to Mr.
Darcy ! "
" Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not
having done it earlier. I believe him to be Lady Cath-
erine's nephew. It will be in my power to assure him
that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'nnight "
Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from snch a
scheme, assuring him that Mr. Darcy wonld (»nsider
his addressing him without introduction as an imperti-
nent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt;
that it was not in the least necessary there should be
any notice on either side; and that if it were, it must
belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior in consequence, to
begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to her with
the determined air of following his own -inclination, and,
when she ceased speaking, replied thus: — " My dear Miss
Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world of
your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope
of your understanding; but permit me to say, that there
must be a wide difference between the established forms
of ceremony amongst the laity, and those which regu-
late the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that I
consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity
with the highest rank in the kingdom— provided that a
proper humility of behavior is at the same time niain-
tained. You most therefore allow me to follow the dic-
tates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me
to perform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon
me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on
every other subject shall be my constant guide, though
in the case before us I consider myself more fitted by
education and habitual study to decide on what is right
than a young lady like yourself. " And with a low bow
- Coo;(lc
102 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
he left her to attack Mr. Darcy, whose reception of his
adrances she eagerly watched^ and whose astooishment
at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin pre-
faced his speech with a solemn bow: and though she
could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all,
and saw in the motion of his lips the words " apology, "
" Hnnsford, " and " Lady Catherine de Bourgh. " It
vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr.
Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and
when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak,
replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, how-
ever, was not discouraged from speaking again, and
Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed abundantly increasing
with the length of his second speech, and at the end
of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another
way. Mr. Collins then returned to Elizabeth.
" I have no reason, I assure yon, " said he, " to be
dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed much
pleased with the attention. He answered me with the
utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of
saying, that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's
discernment as to be certain she could never bestow
a favor nnworthily. It wns really a very handsome
thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with
As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own
to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on
her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable
reflections which her observations gave birth_tQ,_mad &
twi. pg-h^po nlmnnf oa li.ppy i|ff T.T.^ She saw hcr in
idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which
a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt
capable, under such circumstances, of endeavoring even
to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts she
plainly saw were bent the same way, and she detennined
C.OO;(lc
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 103
not to ventQre near her, lest she might hear too much.
When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered
it a most unlacky perverseness which placed them within
one of each other ; and deeply was she vexed to find that
her motiier was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas)
freely, openly, and of nothing else but of her expecta-
tion that Jane would be soon married to Mr. Bingley. —
It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennet seemed
incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages
of the match. His being such a charming young man,
and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were
the first points of self -gratulation ; and then it was such
a comfort to think how food the two sisters Vere of
Jane, and to be certain that tfaey must desire the con-
nection & s much as she could do. It was, moreover,
such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as
Jane's marrying so greatly most throw them in the way
of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her
time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to
the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to
go into company more than she liked. It was necessary
to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because
on sn4^ occasions It is the etiquette; but no one was
less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying
at home at any period of her life. She concluded with
many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be
equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly be-
lieving there was no chance of it.
In vain did Elisabeth endeavor to check the rapidity
of her mother's words, or persuade her to describe her
felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpres-
sible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of il
was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them.
Her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
" What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be
- Coo;(lc
104 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
afraid of him ? I am sure we owe him no anch particular
civilitf as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like
to hear. "
" For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What ad-
vantage can it be to you to offend Mr. Darcy? — You will
never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing 1 "
Nothing that she could say, however, had any inflaence.
Her mother would talk of her views in the same in-
telligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again
with shame and vexation. She could not help frequently
glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance
convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was
not always looking at her mother, she was convinced
that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The ex-
pression of his face changed gradually from indignant
contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say;
and Lady Lucas, who hod been long yawning at the
repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of
sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and
chicken. Elisabeth now began to revive. But not long
was the interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was
over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortifica-
tion of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty, preparing
to oblige the company. By many significant looks and
silent entreaties, did she endeavor to prevent such a
proof of complaisance, — ^bot in vain; Mary would not
understand them; such an opportmiity of exhibiting was
delightful to her, and she begaa ber song. Elisabeth's
eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and
she watched her progress through the several stanxas
with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their
close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanks of the
table, the hint of a hope Uiat she might be prevailed
on to favor them again, after the pause of half a minute
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 105
beg & n another. Maiy's powers were bj no means fitted
for such a display ; her voice was weak, and her manner
affected. — Elisabeth was in agonies. She looked at Jane,
to see how she bore it; bnt Jane was very composedly
talking to Bingley- She looked at his two sisters, and
saw them making signs of derision at each other, and
at Darcy, who continued, however, impeDetrably grave.
Sh« looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest
Mary should be singing all night. He took the bint,
and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud,
" That will do extremely well, child. You have de-
lighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have
time to exhibit. "
Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat
disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry
for her father's speech, was afraid her anxiety had done
no good. Others of the party were now applied to.
" If I, " said Mr. Collins, " were so fortunate as to be
able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am sure,
in obliging the company with an air ; for I consider mnsic
as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible
with the profession of a clergyman. — I do not mean,
however to assert that we can be justified in devoting
too much of our time to mnsic, for there arc certainly
other things to be attended to. The rector of a parish
has much to do. — In the first place, be must make such
an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself
and not offensive to his patron. He must write his own
sermons ; and the time that remains will not be too much
for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of
his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making
as comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light
importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory
manners towards everybody, especially towards those to
whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquit him of
- Coo;(lc
106 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
that duty ; nor could I tbink well of the man who should
omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards any-
body connected with the family. " And with a bow to
Mr. Darcy, be concluded his speech, which had been
spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. — Many
stared — many smiled; but no one looked more amused
than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously com-
mended Mr. Collins for baring spoken so sensibly, and
observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that be was
s remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
To Elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made
an agreement to expose themselves as mncb as they could
during the evening, it would have been impossible for
them to play their parts with more spirit or finer success;
and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister
that some of the exhibition bad escaped bis notice, and
that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed
by the folly which he must have witnessed. That his
two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such
an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad
enoD^, and she could not determine whether the silent
contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the
ladies, were more intolerable.
The rest of the evening brought her little amusement.
She was teased by Mr. Collins, who eontinaed most per-
severingly by her side, and though he could not prevail
upon her to dance with him again, put it out of her power
to dance wiHi others. In vain did she entreat him to
stand up with somebody else, and offer to introduce him
to any young lady in tbe room. He assured her, that as
to dancing, be was perfectly indifferent to it; that hia
chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend
himself to her, and that be should therefore make a point
of remaining close to her the whole evening. There was
no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 107
relief to her friend Miss Lncas, who often joined them,
and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation
to herself.
She was at least free from the oSense of Mr. Darcy's
further notice ; though often standing within a very short
distance of her, qnite disengaged, he never came near
enoDgh to speak. -She felt it to be the probable conse-
quence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced
in it.
The Longbonm party were the last of all the com-
pany to depart, and, by a manoEuvre of Mrs. Bennet,
had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after
everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see
how heartily they were wished away by some of the
family. Mrs. Hurst and her sister scarcely opened their
mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evi-
dently impatient to have the house to themselves. They
repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation,
and by so doing threw a languor over the whole party,
which was very little relieved by the long speeches of
Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and
his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and
the hospitality and politeness which had marked their
behavior to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all.
Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
Mr, Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little
detached from the rest, and talked only to each other.
Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs.
Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much
fatigned to utter more than the occasional exclamation
of " Lord, how tired I am! " accompanied by a violent
yawn.
When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet
was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole
family soon at Longboum, and addressed herself par^
■ Coo;(lc
108 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Ucnlarly to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy he
would make them by eating a family dinner with them
at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation.
Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily eU'
gaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on
her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged
to go the nest day for a short time.
Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the
house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for
the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages,
and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her
daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three
or four months. Of having another daughter married
to Mr. Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and
with considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Eliza-
beth was the least dear to her of all her children; and
though the man and the match were quite good enough
for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by Mr. Bingley
And Netherfield.
CHAPTER XIX
Thb next day o3 > ened a new scene at Longbonm. Mr.
Collins made his declaration in form. Having resolved
to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence
extended only to the following Saturday, and having
no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself
even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly
manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a
regular part of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet,
Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon
after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:
" May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair
daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honor of a
- Coofilc
PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE 109
private audience ■with her in the course of this morning ? "
Before Elisabeth had time for anything but a blnsh
of surprise, Mrs. Bennet instantly answered, " Oh dear!
— Yes — certainly. I am sure Lissy will be very happy
— I jutt sure she can have no objection. Come Kitty, I
want yon upstairs. " And, gatliering her work together,
she was hastening away, when Elisabeth called oat,
" Dear ma'am, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr.
Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to say
to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away
myself. "
" No, no, nonsense, Liz»y. I desire yon will stay where
yon are. " And upon Elisabeth's seeming really, vrith
vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added,
" Lizny, I imiit upon yonr staying and hearing Mr. Coir
Elisabeth would not oppose such an inj unction — and
a moment's consideration making her also sensible that
it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly
as possible, she sat down again, and tried to conceal,
by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided
between distress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty
walked oS, and as soon as they were gone Mr. Collins
began.
" Believe me, my dear Miss Elisabeth, that your mod*
esty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds
to your other perfections. Yon would have been less
amiable in my eyes had there not been this little unwil-
lingness ; but allow me to assure yon, that I have your
respected mother's permission for this address. You can
hardly doubt the porport of my discourse, however yonr
natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my atten- I
tions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as ]
soon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the
companion of my future life. But before I am run away
- Coo;(lc .
no PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
with by my feelings on this auhject, perhaps it would
be advisable for me to state my reasons for marrying —
and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the
design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did. "
The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn compo-
snre, being run away with by his feelings, made Eliza-
beth so near laughing, that she conld not use the short
pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther,
and he continued: —
" My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a
tight thing for every clergyman in easy circmnstances
(like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his
parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add very
greatly to my happiness; and thirdly— which perhaps I
ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular
advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom
I have the honor of calling patroness. Twice has she
condescended to give me her opinion (nnasked too!) on
this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night
before I left Hunsford — between our pools at quadrille,
while Mrs. Jenktnson was arranging Miss de Bourgh's
footstool, that she said,'Mr, Collins, you must marry.
A clergyman like yon must marry. — Choose properly,
choose a gentlewoman for mg sake; and for your ovm,
let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up
high, but able to make a small income go a good way.
This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as you
can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.'Allow
me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do
not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine
de Bourgb as among the least of the advantages in my
power to offer. You will find her manners beyond any-
thing I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think,
must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with
the silence and respect which her rank will ioeWtably
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
111
excite. Thna moch for m; general intentioii in favor of
outrimoay; it remains to be told why my riem were
directed to Longbonm iwatfil of my own neighborhood,
where I-assnre yon there are many amiable young w < Hnen.
But the fact is, that being, as I am, to inherit this
estate after the death of your honored father (who,
however, may live many years longer), I conld not sat-
isfy myself without resolving to choose a wife frtMn
among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as
little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place
— ^which, however, as I have already said, may not be
for several years. This has been my motive, my fair
cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your
esteem. And now nothing remains for m e but to a ssure
you in the most^Slmated lang uage of the violence of m y
affg^hnn lo fo rtune 1 am perfectly indiffer ent, and
kIiiiH y^ilip tin demand of that nature on your fith er,
Bin ffl. T «Tn well gy.re th«t jt conld not be co mjjied
with; and that one th ousand pounds in the i per cent s.,
which will not be vours till affp r your mo »''^r'|''< < - > ^» < »-,
in r ^^l jj) at you p iny f,'«fr hp. i:nH\] e.^ to. On that head,
therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and yon may as-
sure yourself that no nngenerons reproach shall ever pass
my lips when we are married. "
It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
" Yon are too hasty, sir, " she cried. " You forget that
I have made no answer. Let me do it without further
loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment yon
are paying me. I am very sensible of the honor of your
proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise
than decline them. "
" I am not now to learn, " replied Mr. Collins, with a
formal wave of the hand, " that it is usual with young
ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they
secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their
- Coo;(lc
112 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
favor; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a sec-
ond or even a third time. I am thereftwe b7 no means
discouraged hy vhat yon have jast said, and shall hope
to lead f OD to the altar ere long. "
" Upon my word, sir, " cried Elizabeth, " yoor hope is
rather an extraordinary one after my declaration. I do
assure you that I am not one of those yoong ladies (if
such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to
risk their happiness on th|; chance of being asked a
second time. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You
could not make me happy, and I am convinced that I
am the last, woman in the world who would make you
so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me,
I am persuaded she would fiud me in every respect ill
qualified for the situation. "
" Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think
so, " said Mr. Collins very gravely — " but I cannot im-
agine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you.
And you may be certain that when I have the honor
of seeing ber again, I shall speak in the highest terms
of your modesty, economy, and other amiable qualifi-
cations. "
" Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnec-
esaary. You must give me leave to judge for myself,
and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I
wish yon very happy and very rich, and by refusing
your hand, do all in my power to prevent your b^ng
otherwise. In making me the offer, you must have
satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to
my family, and may take possession of Longboum es-
tate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This
matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled. "
And rising aa she thus spoke, she would have quitted
the room, had not Mr. Collins thus addressed her:
" When I do myself the honor of speaking to you next
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 118
on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more favorable
answer than you have nov given me; though I am far
from accusing you of cruelty at present, because I know
it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a
man on the first application, and perhaps you have even
now said as much to encourage my suit as would be
consistent with the true delicacy of the female char-
" Reatly, Mr. Collins, " cried Elizabeth with some
warmth, " you piuale me exceedingly. If what I have
hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encour-
agement, I know not how to express my refusal in such
a way as may convince you of its being one. "
" You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear
cousin, that your refusal of my addresses is merely words
of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these:
— It does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy
your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer
would be any other than highly desirable. My situation
in life, my connections with the family of De Bourgh,
and my relationship to your own, are circumstances
highly in my favor; and you should take it into further
consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions,
it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage
may ever be made you. Your portion is unhappily so
small, that it will in all likelihood undo the effects of
your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must
therefore conclude that you are not serious in your re-
jection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish
of increasing my love by suspense, according to the usual
practice of elegant females. "
" I do assure yon, sir, that I have no pretensions what-
ever to that kind of elegance which connsts in torment-
ing a respectable man. I wonid rather be paid the com-
pliment of being believed sincere. I thank yon again
- Coo;(lc
II* PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
and again for the honor you have done me in your prcH
posals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible. My
feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer ?
Do not consider me now as an elegant female, intending
to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the
truth from her heart, "
" You are imiformly charming! " cried he, with an air
of awkward gallantry; " and I am persuaded that when
sanctioned by the express authority of both your excel-
lent parents, my proposals will not fail of being ac <
ceptable. "
To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Eliza-
beth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence
withdrew; determined, that if he persisted in consider-
ing her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement,
to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered
in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose be-
havior at least could not be mistaken for the affectation
and coquetry of an elegant female.
CHAPTER XX
Mr. Colljns was not left long to the silent c
plation of his successful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having
dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of
the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open the door
and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than
she entered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both
him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect
of their nearer connection, Mr, Collins received and
returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then
proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview,
with the result of which he trusted he had every reason
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 115
to hs satisfied, since the refusal which his causin had
steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her
bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her char-
acter.
This informationj however, startled Mrs. Bennet; —
she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that
her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting
against his proposals, but she dared not believe it, and
could not help saying so.
" But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins, " she added, " that
Lizzy shall be broaght to reason. I will speak to her
about it myself directly. She is a very headstrong, fool-
ish girl, and does not know her own interest; but I will
make her know it. "
" Pardon me for interrupting you, madam, " cried Mr.
Collins; " but if she is really headstrong and foolish, I
know not whether she would altogether be a very de-
sirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally
looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore
she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it
were better not to force her into accepting me, because
if liable to such defects of temper, she could not con-
tribute much to my felicity. "
" Sir, yon quite misunderstand me, " said Mrs, Bennet,
alarmed. " Lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as
these. In everything else she is as good-natured a girl
as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, and we
shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure. "
She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying
instantly to her husband, called out aa she entered the
library, " Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately;
we are all in an uproar. You must come and make
Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vowa she will not have
him, and if you do not make haste he will change his
mind and not have her. "
- Coo;(lc
116 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
Mr. Bennet rtused his eyes from his bode as she en-
tered, and fixed them ob her face with a cabn Dnconcem
which was not in the least altered by her communication.
" I have not the pleasure of understanding you, " said
he, when she bad finished her speech. " Of what are
yon talking? "
" Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will
not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say
that he will not have Lizzy. "
" And what am I to do on the occasion? — It seems a
hopeless business. "
" Speak to Lizzy abont it yourself. Tell her that you
insist upon her marrying him. "
" Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion. "
Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was
summoned to the library.
" Come here, child, " cried her father as she appeared.
" I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I
understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of
marriage. Is it true? "
Elizabeth replied that it was.
" Very well — and this offer of marriage you have re-
fused? "
" I have, sir. "
" Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother
insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs, Ben-
net? "
" Yes, or I will never see her again. "
" An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth.
From this day you must be a stranger to one of your
parents. Your mother will never see you again if you
do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you
again if you do. "
Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of
such a beginning; but Mrs. Bennet who had persuaded
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 117
berself that her husband regarded the affair as she
irished, was excessively disappointed.
" What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, by talking in this
ir«7? You promised me to tnti*( upon her marrying
" My dear, " replied her huaband, " I have two small
favors to request. First, that you will allow me the
free use of my understanding on the present occasion;
and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have the
library to myself as soon as may be. "
Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in
her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give np the point. She
talked to Elizabeth again and again; cosxed and threat-
ened her by turns. She endeavored to seeure Jane in
her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, de-
clined interfering; and EliBabeth, sometimes with real
earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied
to her attacks. Though her manner varied, however, her
determination never did.
Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on
what had passed. He thou^t too well of himself to
comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse him ;
and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other
way. His regard for her was quite imagiuary; and the
possibility of her deserving her mother's reproach pre-
vented his feeling any regret.
While the family were in this confnsion, Charlotte
Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was met
in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in
a half whisper, " I am glad you are come, for there is such
fun here ! — ^What do you think has happened this morn-
ing? — Mr. Collins has made an offer to Lizzy, and she
will not have him. "
Charlotte had hardly time to answer, before they were
joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same news; and
- Coo;(lc
118 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
no sooner had they entered the break faat- room, where
Mrs. Beonet was alone^ than she likewise began on the
subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and
entreating her to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply
with the wishes of all her family. " Pray do, my dear
Miss Lucas, " she added in a melancholy tone, " for no-
body is on my side, nobody takes part with me, I am
cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves. "
Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane
and Elizabeth.
" Aye, there she comes, " continued Mrs. Bennet,'look-
ing as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for
us than if we were at York, provided she can have her
own way. — But I tell you what, Miss Lizzy-— if you
take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of
marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at
all — and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain
you when your father is dead. — I shall not be able to
keep you- — and so I warn you, — I have done with you
from this very day. — I told you in the library, you
know, that I should never speak to you again, and you
will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure
in talking to undutiful children. — Not that I have much
pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody. People who
suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no
great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I
suffer! — But it is always so. Those who do not com-
plain are never pitied. "
Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensi-
ble that any attempt to reason with or soothe her would
only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore,
without interruption from any of them, till they were
joined by Mr. Collins, who entered with an air more
stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said
to the girls, " Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 119
yoa hold your tongues, and let Mr. Collins and me have
a little conversation together. "
Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and
Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined
to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by
the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries after herself
and all her family were very minute, and then by a little
curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window
and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs.
Bennet thus began the projected conversation: — " Oh!
Mr. Collins ! "
" My dear madam, " replied he, " let ns be forever silent
on this point. Far be it from me, " he presently contin-
ued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, " to resent
the behavior of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable
evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young
man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early
preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not
the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness
had my fair cousin honored me with her hand; for I
have often observed that resignation is never so perfect
AS when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of
its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, con-
sider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my
dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to
your daughter's favor, without having paid yourself and
Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to inter-
pose your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I
fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission
from*your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we
are all liable to error. I have certainly meant well
through the whole affair. My object has been to secure
an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration
for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner
has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apol-
ogise. " ^ .-,„„Cooylc
120 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXI
The discussion of Mr. CoUins's offer was now nearly
at an end, and EtlKabeth hod only to suffer from the
uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and oc-
casionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
As for tlie gentleman himself, hit feelings were chiefly
expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by try-
ing to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resent-
ful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and the
assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of
himself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss
Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable
relief to them all, and especially to her friend.
The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's
ill humor or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same
state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his
resentment might shorten his visit, bat his plan did not
appear in the least affected by it. He was always to
have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday be still meant
to stay.
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to in-
quire if Mr. Wickhara were returned, and to lament
over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined
them on their entering the town, and attended them to
their aunt's, where his regret and vexation, and the
concern of everybody, was well talked over. — To Eliza-
beth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the
necessity of his absence had been self-imposed.
" I found, " said he, " as the time drew near that I
had better not meet Mr. Darcy; — that to be in the
same room, the same party with him for so many hours
together, might be more than I could bear, and that
scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PHEJUDICE 121
She hi^y approved his forbearance, and they had
leisure for a fall diacossiott of it, and for all the eom-
mendation which they civilly bestowed on each other,
aa Wickham and another officer walked back with them
to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly at-
tended to her. Mis accompanying them was a double
advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to her-
self, and it was most acceptable as an occasion of in-
troducing him to her father and mother.
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss
Bennet; it came from Netheriield, and was opened im-
mediately. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant,
little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair,
flowing hand; and Elisabeth saw her sister's conntenance
change as she read it, and aaw her dwelling intently
on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself
soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her
usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elisa-
beth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her
attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he
and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane
invited her to follow her upstairs. When they had
gained their own room, Jane, taking out her letter, said,
" This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has
surprised me a good deal. The whole party have left
Netherlietd by this time, and are on their way to town
— and without any intention of coming back again. You
shall hear what she says. "
She then read the first sentence aloud, which com-
prised the information of their having just resolved to
follow their brother to town directly, and of their mean-
ing to dine that day in Grosvenor Street, where Mr.
Hurst had a house. The next was in these words: " I
do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in Hert*
fordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but
L .., > ,„Cooylc
122 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many re
turns of that delightful intercourse we have knownj
and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation
by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence.
I depend on you for that. " To these high-flown expres-
sions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of dis-
trust; and though the suddenness of their removal sur-
prised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament: it
was not to be supposed that their absence from Nether*
field would prevent Mr. Bingley'a being there; and as
to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane
must soon cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
" It is unlucky, " said she, after a short pause, " that
you should not be able to see your friends before they
leave the country. But may we not hope that the
period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks
forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that
the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will
be renewed with greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr.
Bingley will not be detained in London by them. "
" Caroline decidedly says that none of the party wUl
return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it
to you: —
"'When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined
that the business which took him to London might be
iconclnded in three or four days; but as we are certain
it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that
when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to
leave it again, we have determined on following him
thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant
hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance
are already there for the winter; I wish I could hear
that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making
one in the crowd — but of that I despair. I sincerely
hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE I2S
the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that
your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feel-
ing the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive
" It is evident by this, " added Jane, " that he comes
back no more this winter. "
" It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean
he thould. "
" Why will you think so? It must be his own doing.
He is his own master. But you do not know all. I will
read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I
will have no reserves from you.
"'Mr. Darcy is impatient to see hia sister; and to
confess the truth we are scarcely less eager to meet her
again. I really do not think Georgians Darcy has her
equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and
the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is height-
ened into something still more interesting, from the
hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our
sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned
to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave
the country without confiding them, and I trust you will
not esteem them unreasonable. My brother admires her
greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now
of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her rela-
tions all wish the connection as much as his own ; and
a sister's partiality is not misleading me, I think, when
I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman's
heart. With all these circumstances to favor an attach-
ment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will
secure the hapiriness of so many?'
" What think you of thit sentence, my dear Lizzy? "
said Jane as she finished it. " Is it not clear enough?
does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither ex-
- Coo;(lc
124 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
pecta nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is per-
fectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that
if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she
means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can
there be any other opinion on the subject? "
" Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. — ^WiU
you hear it? "
" Most willingly. "
" You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley
sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants him
to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the
hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade yon
that he does not care about you. "
Jane shook her head.
" Indeed, Jane, yon ought to believe me. — No one who
has ever seen you together can doubt hia affection.
Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. She is not such a
simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in
Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her
wedding clothes. But the case is this: — We are not
rich enough or grand enough for them; and she is the
more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from
the notion that when there has been one intermarriage,
she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in
which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say
it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the
way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously im-
agine that because Miss Bingley tells you her brother
greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree
less sensible of goitr merit than when he took leave of
you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to per-
suade him that, instead of being in love with you, be is
very much in love with her friend. "
" If we thought alike of Miss Bingley, " replied Jane,
" your representation of all this might make me quite
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 126
easy. But I know the foandation is unjust. Caroline
is incapable of wilfnlly deceiving any one; and all that
I can hope in this case is that she is deceived her-
self. "
" That is right — You could not have started a more
happy idea, since yon will not take comfort in mine.
Believe her to be deceived, by all means. You have
now done yonr duty by her, and must fret no longer. "
" But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing
the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and friends
are all wishing him to marry elsewhere? "
" You must decide for yourself, " aaid Elizabeth; " and
if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery
of disobliging his two sisters is more than equivalent to
the happiness of being his wife, I advise yon by all
means to refuse him. "
" How can yon talk so? " aaid Jane, faintly smiling.
" You must know that though I should be exceedingly
grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate. "
" I did not think you would: and that being the case,
I cannot consider your situation with much compassion. "
" But if he returns no more this winter, my choice
will never be required. A thousand things may arise in
six months ! "
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated
with the utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely
the suggestion of Caroline's interested wishes, and she
could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, how-
ever openly, or artfully spoken, could influence a young
man so totally independent of everyone.
She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible
what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure
of seeing its happy effect. Jane's temper was not de-
sponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though the
diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that
- Cooxic
126 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Binglej wonld return to Netherfield and anawer every
viah of her heart.
They agreed that Mra. Bennet ahould only hear of
the departure of the family, without being alarmed on
the score of the gentleman's conduct; but even this par-
tial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and
she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies
should happen to go away just as they were all getting
so intimate together. After lamenting it, however, at
some length, she had the consolation of thinking that
Mr. Bingley would be soon down and soon dining at
Longboum, and the conclusion of all was the com*
fortable declaration, that though he had been invited
only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two
full courses.
CHAPTER XXII
The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases,
and again during the chief of the day was Misa Lucas
so kind as to listen to Mr. Collina. Elizabeth took an
opportunity of thanking her. " It keeps him in good
humor, " said she, " and I am more obliged to you than
I can express. " Charlotte assured her friend of her
satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid
her for the little sacrifice of her time. This was very
amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than
Elizabeth had any conception of; — its object waa noth-
ing else than to secure her from any return of Mr.
Collina's addresses, by engaging them towards herself.
Such waa Misa Lucas's scheme; and appearancea were
so favorable, that when they parted at night, she would
have felt almost sure of success if he had not been to
leave Hertfordshire ao very aoon. But here she did
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 127
injustice to the fire and independence of his character,
for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the
nest morning with admirable sljrness, and hasten to
Lacas Zxidge to throw himself at her feet. He was
anxious to avoid the notice'of his cousins, from a con-
viction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail
to conjectnre his design, and he was not willing to
have the attempt known till its success could be known
likewise; for though feeling almost secure, and with
reason, for Charlotte hod been tolerably encouraging,
he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of
Wednesday. His reception, however, was of the most
flattering kind. Miss Lucas perceived him from an up-
per window as he walked towards the house, and in-
stantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane.
But little had she dared to hope that so much love and
eloquence awaits her there.
In as short a time as Mr. Collins'a long speeches would
allow, everything was settled between them to the satis-
faction of both; and as they entered the house he ear-
nestly entreated her to name the day that was to make
him the happiest of men; and though sttch a solicitation
must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclina-
tion to trifle with his happiness. The stupidity with
which he was favored by nature must guard his court-
ship from any charm that could make a woman wish
for its continuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him
solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an
establishment, cared not how soon that establishment
were gained.
Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied
to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most
joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's present circumstances
made it a most eligible match for their daiighter, to
whom they could give little fortune; and his prospects
. , ,.Coo-;lc
laS PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
of future wealth were exceedingly faip, Lftdy Lucas
began directly to calculate, with more interest than the
matter had ever excited before, how many years longer
Mr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it
as his decided opinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should
be in possession of the Longboum estate, it would be
highly expedient that both be and his wife should make
their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in
abort, were properly overjoyed on the occcasion. The
younger girls formed hopes of coming out a year or two
sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the
boys were relieved from their apprehension of Char-
lotte's dying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tol-
erably composed. She had gained her point, and had
time to consider of it. Her reflections were in general
satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensi-
ble nor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his
attachment to her must be imaginary. But still he
would be her husband. Without thinking highly either
of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been her
object; it was the only honorable provision for well-
educated young women of small fortune, and however
uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest
preservative from want. This preservative she had now
obtained; and at the age of twenty-seven, without hav-
ing ever been handsome, she felt all the good lack of it.
The least agreeable circumstance in the business was
the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose
friendship she valued beyond that of any other person.
Elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her;
and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her
feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She
resolved to give her the information herself, and there*
fore charged Mr. Collins, when he retomed to Long-
bonrn to dinner, to drop no hint of what bad passed
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 12 &
before 0117 of the family. A promise of secrecy was
of course very dutifully given, but it could not be
kept without difficulty; for the cariosity excited by his
long absence burst forth in such very direct questions
on his return as required some ingeniiity to evade, and
he was at the same time exercising great self-denial, for
he was longing to publish his prosperous love.
As he was to begin his journey too early on the mor-
row to see any of the family, the ceremony of leave-
taking was performed when the ladies moved tor the
night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cor-
diality, said how happy they should be to see him at
Longbonru again, whenever his other engagements might
allow him to visit them.
" My dear madam, " he replied, " this invitation is par-
ticularly gratifying, because it is what I have been
hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that I
shall avail myself of it as soon as possible. "
They were all astonished ; and Mr, Bennet, who could
by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately
said —
" But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's dis-
approbation here, my good sir ? You had better neglect
your relations than ran the risk of offending your pa-
troness. "
" My dear sir, " replied Mr. Collins, " I am particu-
larly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you
may depend upon my not taking so material a step
without her ladyship's concurrence. "
" Yon cannot be too much on your guard. Risk any-
thing rather than her displeasure; and if you find it
likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which
I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at
home, and be satisfied that we shall take no oSense. "
" Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitnde is warmly
- Coofilc
180 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
excited by such afFectionate attention; and depend upon
it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks
for this, as for every other mark of your regard during
my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins,
though my absence may not be long enough to render
it necessary, I shall now take the liberty of wishing
them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin
Elizabeth. "
With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all
of them equally surprised to Jind that he meditated a
quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished to understand by it
that he thou^t of paying his addresses to one of her
younger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on
to accept him. She rated his abilities much higher than
any of the others; there was a solidily in his reflections
which often struck her, and though by no means so
clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to read
and improve himself by such an example as hers, he
might become a very agreeafite companion. But on the
following morning, every hope of this kind was done
away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in
a private conference with Elisabeth related the event
of the day before.
The possibility of Mr. CoUins's fancying himself in
love with her friend had once occurred to Elizabeth
within the last day or two; but that Charlotte could
encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility
as she could encourage him herself, and her astonish-
ment was consequently so great as to overcome at first
the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying
out —
" Engaged to Mr. Collins! my dear Charlotte, — im-
possible ! "
The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had com-
manded in telling her story, gave way to a momentary
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 181
confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though,
as it was no more than ahe expected, she soon regained
her composvire, and calmly replied—
" Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? — Do
you think it incredible that Mr. Collins should be able
to proctire any woman's good opinion, because he was
not so happy as to succeed with you? "
But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making
a strong effort for it, was able to assure her with toler-
able firmness that the prospect of their relationship was
highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all
imaginable happiness.
" I see what you are feeling, " replied Charlotte, — " you
must be surprised, very much surprised — so lately as
Mr. Collins was wishing to marry yon. Bat when you
have had time to think it all over, I hope you will be
satisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you
know ; I never was. I ask only a comfortable home ; and
considering Mr. Collins'a character, connections, and
situation in life, I am convinced that my chance of
happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast
on entering the marriage state. "
Elizabeth quietly answered " Undoubtedly; " — and
after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of
the family. Charlotte did not stay much longer and
Elizabeth was left to reflect on what she had heard.
It was a long time before she became at all reconciled
to the idea of so unsuitable a match. The strangeness
of Mr. Collins'a making two offers of marriage within
three days was nothing in comparison of his being now
accepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion
of matrimony was not exactly like her own, but she
could not have supposed it possible that, when called
into action, she would have sacrificed every better feel-
ing to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr.
- Cooxic
132 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
Collins, was a most hnmiliating picture! — And to the
pang of a friend disgracing herself and sunk in her
esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it was
impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the
lot she had chosen.
CHAPTER XXIII
Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters,
reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether
she was anthorized to mention it, when Sir William
Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to an-
nounce her engagement to the family. With many com-
pliments to them, and much self-gratulation on the pros-
pect of a connection between the houses, he unfolded
the matter — to an audience not merely wondering, but
incredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance
than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken;
and Lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boister-
ously exclaimed —
" Good Lord ! Sir William, how can yon tell such a
story? Do not you know that Mr. Collins wants to
marry Lizzy? "
Nothing less than the complaissnce of a courtier coold
have borne without anger snch treatment; but Sir Will-
iam's good breeding carried him through it all; and
though he b^^d leave to be positive as to the truth
of his information, he listened to all their impertinence
with the most forbearing courtesy.
Elisabeth, feeling it incmnbent on her to relieve him
from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward
to confirm his account, by menUoning her prior knowl-
edge of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavored to
put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters
..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 133
by the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William,
in vhich she was readily joined by Jane, and by mak-
ing a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be
expected from the match, the excellent character of
Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hnnsford
from London,
Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to
say a great deal while Sir William remained; but no
sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid
vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelieving
the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure
that Mr. Collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted
that they would never be happy together; and fourthly,
that the match might be broken o£F. Two inferences,
however, were plainly deduced from the whole : one,
that Elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief;
and the other that she herself had been barbarously
used by them all: and on these two points she princi-
pally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing could
console and nothing appease her. Nor did that day
wear out her resentment. A week elapsed before she
could gee Elizabeth without scolding her, a month passed
away before she could speak to Sir William or Lady
Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone
before she could at all forgive their daughter.
Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on
the occasion, and such as he did experience he pro-
nounced to he of a most agreeable sort; for it gratified
him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom
he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as
foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!
Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match ;
but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest
desire for their happiness ; nor could Elizabeth per-
suade hnr to consider it as improbable. Kitty and
- Coo;(lc
184 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
Lydia were far from envying Misa Lucas, for Mr. Col-
lins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no
other way than as a piece of news to spread at Meryton.
Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on
being able to retort on Mrs. Bennet the comfort of
having a daughter well married; and she called at Long-
bourn rather oftener than usual to aay how happy she
was, though Mrs. Bennet's aour looks and ill-natured
remarks might have been enough to drive happiness
away,
Betvreen Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint
which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and
Elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could
ever subsist between them again. Her disappointment
in Charlotte made her torn with fonder regard to her
sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her
opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness
she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley had now been
gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.
Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter,
and was counting the days till ahe might reasonably
hope to hear again. The promised letter of thanks from
Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their
father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude
which a trwelvemonth's abode in the family might have
prompted. After discharging his conscience on that
head, he [proceeded] to inform them, with nuiny rap-
turous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained
the affection of their amiable neighbor. Miss Lucas, and
then explained that it was merely with the view of en-
joying her society that he had been so ready to close
with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn,
whither he hoped to be able to return on Monday fort-
night; for Lady Catherine, he added, so heartily ap-
proved bis marriage, that she wished it to take place
L .., > i„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 135
as soon as possible, which he trusted wonld be an un-
answerable argument with his amiable Charlotte to name
an early day for making him the happiest of men.
Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer
a matter of pleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary,
she was as much disposed to complain of it as her hus-
band. — It was very strange that he should come to
Loagbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very
inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome. — She hated
having visitors in the house while her health was so
indifferent, and lovers were of all people the moat dis-
agreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Ben-
net, and they gave way only to the greater distress of
Mr. Bingley's continued absence.
Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this
subject. Day after day passed away without bringing
any other tidings of him than the report which shortly
prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more to Nether-
field the whole winter; a report which highly incensed
Mrs. Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict
as a most scandalous falsehood.
Even Elisabeth began to fear — not that Bingley was
indifferent — but that his sisters would be successful in
keeping him away. Unwilling as she was to admit an
idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and so dishonor-
able to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent
its frequently recurring. The united efforts of hia two
unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted
by the attractions of Miss Darcy and the amusements
of London, might be too much, she feared, for the
strength of bis attachment.
Aj for Jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of
course, more painful than Elisabeth's: bat whatever she
felt she was deairoos of concealing, and between herself
and Elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded
L ..„■„ Google
136 PRIDE AND PRKJUDICE
to. But aa do such delicacy restrained her mother, an
boar seldom passed in'which she did not talk of Bingley,
express her impatience for his arrival, or even require
Jane to confess that if he did not come back, she should
think herself very ill used. It needed all Jane's steady
mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tran-
quillity.
Mr. Collins retnrned most pnnctually on the Monday
fortnight, but his reception at Longboum was not quite
so gracious as it had been on his first introduction. He
was too happy, however, to need mnch attention; and,
luckily for the others, the business of love-making re-
lieved them from a great deal of his company. The
chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge,
and he sometimes returned to Longboum only in time
to make an apology for fais absence before the family
went to bed.
Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The
very mention of anything concerning the match threw
her into on agony of ill-humor, and wherever she went
she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sight of
Miss Lttcos was odious to her. As her successor in that
house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence. When-
ever Charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to
be anticipating the hour of possession ; and whenever she
spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced that
they were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolv-
ing to turn herself and her daughters out of the house,
as soon as Mr. Bennet was dead. She complained bit-
terly of all this to her husband.
" Indeed, Mr. Bennet, " said she, " it is very hard to
think that Charlotte Lucas shoidd ever be mistress of
this house, that / should be forced to moke way for her,
and live to see her take my place in it I "
" My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts.
L .., > ,„Coojilc
PHIDE AND PREJUDICE 187
Let us hope for better thinga. Let as flatter ourselves
that / may be the survivor. "
This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and,
therefore, Instead of making any answer, she went on
as before.
" I cannot bear to think that they should have all this
estate. If it was not for the entail, I should not mind it. "
" What should not yon mind? "
" I should not mind anything at all. "
" Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a
state of such insensibility. "
" I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything
about the entail. How anyone could have the conscience
to entail away an estate from one's own daughters, I
cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins
too! — Why should he have it more than anybody else? "
" I leave it to yourself to determine, " said Mr. Bennet.
CHAPTER XXIV
Miss Butglet's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt.
The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their
being settled in London for the winter, and concluded
with her brother's regrets at not having had time to pay
his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left
the country.
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could
attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except
the professed affection of the writer, that could give her
any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied the chief of it.
Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ven-
tured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which
- Coo;(lc
188 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote Also
with great pleasare of her brother's being an inmate
of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some
plans of the latter with regard to new furniture.
Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the
chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her
heart was divided between concern for her sister, and
resentment against all others. To Caroline's assertion of
her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no
credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted
no more than she bad ever done; and much as she had
always been disposed to like him, she could not think
without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easi-
ness of temper, that want of proper resolntion, which
now made him the slave of his designing friends, and
led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of
their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however,
been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to
sport with it in whatever manner he thought best, but
her sister's was involved in it, as she thought he must
be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on
which reflection would be long indulged, and must be
unavailing. She coald think of nothing else; and yet
whether Bingley's regard had really died away, or were
suppressed by his friends'interference; whether he had
been aware of Jane's attachment, oi whether it bad es-
caped his observation; whatever were the case, though
her opinion of him must be materially affected by the
difference, her sister's situation remained the same, her
peace equally wounded.
A day or two passed before Jane had courage to
speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on Mrs.
Bennet's leaving them together, after a longer irritation
than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could
not help saying,
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE 189
" Ob that toy dear mother had more command over
herself! she can have no idea of the pain she gives me
by her continnal reflections on him. Sut I will not
repine. It cannot laat long. He will he forgot, and we
ahall all be as we were before. "
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulons solici-
tude, bat said nothing.
" You doubt me, " cried Jane, slightly coloring; " in-
deed you have no reason. He may live in my memory
as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that is
all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing
to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not that
pain, A little time therefore — I shall certainly try to
get the better. "
With a stronger voice she soon added, " I have this
comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an
errop of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm
to anyone bnt myself. "
" My dear Jane! " ezclatmed Elisabeth, " you are too
good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really
angelic; I do not know what to say to yon. I feel as
if I had never done you justice, or loved yon as you
deserve. "
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary
merit, and threw back the praise on her sister's warm
afFection.
" Nay, " said Elizabeth, " this is not fair. Yon wish
to think all the world respectable, and are hnrt if I
speak ill of anybody. / only want to think you perfect,
and yon set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of
my running into any excess, of my encroaching on yonr
privilege of universal good will. You need not. There
are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of
whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the
more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms
L ..„■„ Google
140 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
my belief of the iDcoiuistency of all hnman characters,
and of the little dependence that can be placed on the
appearance of either merit or sense. I have met with
two instances lately, one I will not mention; the other
is Charlotte's marriage. It is nnacconntable ! in every
view it is unacconntable ! "
" My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings
as these. They will rain your happiness. You do not
make allowance enough for the difference of situation
and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and
Charlotte's prudent, steady character. Remember that
she is one of a large family; that as to fortune, it is a
most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for every-
body's sake, that she may feel something like regard
and esteem for our cousin. "
" To oblige you, I would try to believe almost any-
thing, hut no one else could be benefited by such a be-
lief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had
any regard for him, I should only think worse of her
understanding than I now do of her heart. My dear
Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-
minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do: and
you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who
marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking. You
shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas. You
shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the
meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavor to
persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence,
and insensibility of danger security for happiness. "
" I must think your language too strong in speaking
of both, " replied Jane; " and I hojM you will be con-
vinced of it, by seeing them happy together. But enough
of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned
two instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I en-
treat yon, dear Lizsy, not to pain me by thinking that
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 141
penon to blame, and saying your opinioa of him is
sunk. We most not be so ready to fancy oorselTes in-
tentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young
man to be alvays so guarded and circumspect. It is
very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives ns.
Women fancy admiration means more than it does. "
" And men take care that they should. "
" If it is designedly done, they cannot he justified;
but I have no idea of there being so much design in the
world as some persons imagine. "
" I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's
conduct to design, " said Elizabeth; " but without schem-
ing to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may
be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,
want of attention to other people's feelings, and want
of resolution, will do the business, "
" And do you impute it to either of those? "
" Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease
yon by saying what I think of persons you estoem.
Stop me whilst yon can. "
" You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence
him? "
" Yes, in conjunction with his friend. "
" I cannot believe it. Why should they try to in-
fluence him? They can only wish his happiness; and
if he is attached to me, no other woman can secure it. "
" Your first position is false. They may wish many
things besides his happiness; they may wish his increase
of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry
a girl who has all the importance of money, great con-
nections and pride. "
" Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to choose Miss
Darcy, " replied Jane; " but this may be from better
feelings than you are supposing. Tliey have known her
much longer than they have known me; no wonder if
L ..„■„ Google
142 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
they love her better. But, whatever may be their own
wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed
their brother's. What sister would think herself at
liberty to do it, unless there were something very ob-
jectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they
would not try to part us; if he were so, they could
not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make
everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most
uphappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not
ashamed of having been mistaken — or, at least, it is
slight, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel
in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in
the best light, in the light in which it may be under-
stood. "
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from
this time Mr. Bingley's name was scarcely ever men-
tioned between them.
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at
his returning no more, and though a day seldom passed
in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there
seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less
perplexity. Her daughter endeavored to convince her
of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions
to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and
transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no morp;
hut though the probability of the statement was ad-
mitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat
every day. Mrs. Bennet's best comfort was that Mr.
Bingley must be down again in the summer.
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. " So,
Lizzy, " said he one day, " your sister is crossed in love,
I find. I congratulate her. Next to being married,
a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then.
It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of
distinction among her companions. When is yonr turn
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 148
to come? You Till hardly bear to be long outdone by
Jane. NcFw is your time. Here are officers enough at
Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the coun-
try. Let Wickham'be your man. He is a pleasant
fellow, and would jilt you creditably. "
" Thank yon, sir, but a less agreeable man would
satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane's good for-
tune. "
" True, " said Mr. Rennet, " but it is a comfort to think
that whatever of that kind may befall you, you have on
affectionate mother who will always make the most of it. "
Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dis-
pelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences
had thrown on many of the Longboum family. They
saw him often, and to his other recoimncndations was
now added that of general unreserve. The whole of
what Elisabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr.
Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now
openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed ; and every-
body was pleased to think how much they had always
disliked Mr. Darcy before they bad known anything of
the matter.
/. ^^fiss Bennet was the only creature who could sup-
pose there might he any extenuating circumstances in
the case, unknown to the society of Hertfordshire ; her
mild and steady candor always pleaded for allowances,
and urged the possibility of mistakes — but by everybody
else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXV
week apent in ptofesaions nf l^y ^ nnH
_l of feXlCit v. Ml- t,'.pllilia ■ < • "'i-oMi'ii f.nm fijji
- " amiable Char l otte (by tKk arrif at ^t Saturd ay- The
pain at separation, nowever, might be alleviated on hia
side, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as
he had reason to hope, that shortly after his next return
into Hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to
make him the happiest of men. He took leave of hia
relations at Longbourn with as mnch solemnity as be-
fore ; wished his fair cousins health and happiness again,
and promised their father another letter of thanks.
On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleas-
ure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came as
nsnal to spend the Christmas at Longbourn^— 3i£E_.£ar-
diner vr a a n t unsihlrj f en t :] em u nlike man^ greatly superio r
toUiis sister , a_s well bj nature .siLeducati on. The Neth-
erfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that
a man who lived by trade, and within view of his own
warehonses, could have been so well-bred and agreeable.
Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years younger than
Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Philips, was an amiable, intelli-
gent, elegant woman, and a great favorite with all her
Longbourn nieces. Between the two eldest and herself
especially, there subsisted a very particular regard.
They had frequently been staying with her in town.
The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her
arrival was to distribute her presents and describe tlie
newest fashions. When this was done she had a less
active part to play. It became her turn to listen. Mrs.
Bennet had many grievances to relate, and mnch to
complain of. ■ They had all been very ill-used since she
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PEEJUDICE 146
last saw her sister. Two of her girls had been on the
point of marriage, and after all there was nothing
in it.
" I do not blame Jane, " she continued, " for Jane
would have got Mr. Blngley if she could. But Lissy !
oh, sister ! it is very hard to think that she might have
been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had not it'been
for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this
very room, and she refused him. The consequence of
it is, that Lady Lucas will have a daughter married be-
fore I have, and that Longbonm estate is just as much
entailed as ever. The Lucases are very art£al people
indeed, sister. Tbey are all for what they can get. I
am sorry to say it of them, but so it is. It makes me
very nervous apd poorly, to be thwarted so in my own
family, and to have neighbors who think of themselves
before anybody else. However, your coming just at this
time is the greatest of comforts, and I am very glad to
hear what you tell ns, of long sleeves. "
Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had
been given before, in the course of Jane and Eliiabeth'a
correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer,
and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation.
When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke
more on the subject. " It seems likely to have been a
desirable match for Jane, " said she. " I am sorry it
went off. But these things happen so often ! A young
man, such as you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls
in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and when
accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these
sort of inconstancies are very frequent. "
" An excellent consolation in its way, " said Eliza-
beth, " but it will not do for ut. We do not suffer by
accident. It does not often happen that the interference
of friends will persuade s young man of independent
- Cooxic
146 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
fortnne to think no more of s ^rl whom he was via-
lently in love with only a few days before. "
" But that expression of'violently in love'is so hack-
neyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very
little idea. It is aa often applied to feelings which arise
from a half-hour's acquaintance, as to a real, strong
attachment. PTju^ Iw.ip n iF i ^../i. jyij- Binglev's l ove ? "
" I never ssw a more promising inclination; be was
growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly
engrossed by her. Every time they met, it was more
decided and remarkable. At his own ball he offended
two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance ;
and I spoke to him twice myself, without receiving an
answer. Could there be finer symptoms? Is not gen-
eral incivility the very essence of love? "
" Oh, yes ! — of that kind of love which I snppose him
to have felt. Poor Jane ! I am sorry for her, because,
with her disposition, she may not get over it imme-
\ diately. It had better have happened to gou, Lizzy;
I you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But
I do you think she would be prevailed on to go back
I with us? Change of scene might be of service — and per-
I haps a little relief from home may be as useful as any-
Ijhing. "
Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal,
and felt persuaded of her sister's ready acquiescence.
" I hope/'added Mrs. Gardiner, " that no considera-
tion with regard to this young man will inAuence her.
We live in so different b part of town, all our connec-
tions are so different, and, as you well know, we go
out so little, that it is very improbable that they should
meet at all, imless he really comes to see her. "
" And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the
custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more
suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London!
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 147
My de«T annt, bow could jou think of it? Mr. Darcy
may perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch
Street, hut he would hardly think a month's ablution
enongh to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once
to enter it ; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs
without him, "
" So much the better. I hope they will not meet at
all. But does not Jane correspond with his sister? She
will not be able to help calling. "
" She will drop the acquaintance entirely. "
But in spite of the certainty in which Elisabeth af-
fected to place this point, as well as the still more
interesting one of Bingley's being withheld from seeing
Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which con-
vinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it
entirely hopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she
thought it probable, that his affection might be reani-
mated, and the influence of his friends successfully com-
bated by the more natural influence of Jane's attractions.
Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleas-
ure ; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts
at the same time, than as she hoped by Caroline's not
living in the same house with her brother, she might
occasionally spend a morning with her, without any
danger of seeing him.
The Gardiners stayed a week at Longboum; and what
with the Philipses, the Lucases, and the officers, there
was not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet
had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her
brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a
family dinner. When the engagement was for home,
some of the oflicers always made part of it — of which
officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; and on these
occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicions by Eliza-
beth's warm commendation of him, narrowly observed
- Coo;(lc
.148 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
them both. Witliout supposing them, from vhat she
saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference o{
each other iras plain enough to make her a little uneasy;
and ahe resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject
before she left Hertfordshire, and represent to her the
imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.
To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of afford-
ing pleasure, unconnected with his general powers.
About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage,
she bad spent a considerable time in Uiat very part of
Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore,
many acquaintance in common; and though Wickham
had been little there since the death of Darcy's father,
five years before, it was yet in his power to give her
fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had
been in the way of procuring.
Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the
late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Here
consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse.
In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the
minute description which Wickham could give, and in
bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its
late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself.
On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy's
treatment of him, she tried to remember something of
that gentleman's reputed disposition when quite a lad
which might agree with it, and was confident at last
that she recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy
formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boyr " "
ta,i,.=db, Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXVI
Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elusbetb wss pnnctiuU;
and kindly given on the first favorable opportunity of
speaking to ber alone; after honestly telling her vhat
she thought, she thus went on: —
" You arc too sensible a girl, Lissy, to fall in love
merely because yon are vamed against it; and, there-
fore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I
would have you be on yoor guard. Do not involve your-
self or endeavor to involve him in an affection which
the want of fortune would make so very impruden t. I _
have nothing to sav against hivif- he is a moat inter eaijng
y oung man; and if h e ha d the fnrt iinf; hp n ugnt to have,
I ahonld t^\yf}r jrnn ^i^if not d o better. But »
y ou must not let your fancy run away wit h yon. Yo u
h ave sense, and we all eipect vou to use it. Y our
fat her w ould depend on your resolu tion and good con-
" My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed. "
" Yes, and I hope to engage yon to he serious likewise. " s,
" Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I ^.i^
will take care of myself, and of Mr. VQckluun too. He'
shall not he in love with me, if I can prevent it. "
" Elisabeth, you are not serious now. "
" I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I
am not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am
not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agree-
able man I ever saw — and if he becomes really attached
to me — I believe it will be better that he should not.
I see the imprudence of it. — Oh ! that abominable Mr.
Darcy — My father's opinion of me does me the greatest
honor, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. My
father, however, is partial'to Mr. Wickham. In short,
- Coo;(lc
150 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
my dear aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means
of making any of you unhappy; but aince we see every
day that where there is affection, young people are sel-
dom withheld by immediate want of fortune from enter-
ing into engagements with each other, how can I promise
to be wiser than so many of my fellow-creature a if I am
tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be
wisdom to " " -n* ai^ h,^^ | ^„„ j-,rm nin^. vnn^ therefore ,
i7 — t t " V in » hnn-v . I will — * ^■ "'- ti hiirrT * " "
believe myself his first obje ct. When I am in company
mp best. "
" Perhaps it will be as well if you diacoiuage his com-
ing here so very often. At least, you should not remind
your mother of inviting him. "
" As I did the other day, " said Elisabeth with a con-
scious smile: " very true, it will be wise in me to refrain
from that. But do not imagine that he is always here
so often. It is on your account that he has been so
frequently invited this week. You know my mother's
ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her
friends. But really, and upon my honor, I will try to
do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hope you
are satisfied. "
Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elicabeth
having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they
parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on
such a point, without being resented.
Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it
had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but as
he took up his abode with the Lucases, Iiis arrival was
no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage
was now fast approaching, and she was at length so far
resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly
to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she " toUhed they
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 151
might be happy. " Thursday was to be the Tedding
day, and Wednesday Misa [Lucas] paid her farewell
visit; and when she rose to take leave, Elisabeth,
ashamed of her mother's nngracions and reluctant good
wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accwnpanied her
out of the room. As they went down stairs together,
Charh)tte said—
" I shall depend on bearing from yon very often,
Elixa. "
" That you certainly shall. "
" And I have another favor to ask. Will you come
and see me? "
" We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire. "
" I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Prom-
ise me, therefore, to come to Hunsford. "
Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little
pleasure in the visit.
" My father and Maria are to come to me in March, "
added Charlotte, " and I hope yon will consent to be of
the party. Indeed, EUza, you will be as welcome to me
as either of them. "
The wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom
set off for Kent from the church door, and everybody
had as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual.
Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and their corre-
spondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever
been; that it should be equally imreserved was impos-
sible. Elizabeth could never address her without feel-
ing that all the comfort of intimacy was over, and
though determined not to slacken as a correspondent,
it was for the sake of what had been, rather than what
was. Charlotte's first letters were received with a good
deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to
know how she would speak of her new home, how she
L ..„■„ Google
153 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
would Uke I^dy Catheriiifl. and bow happ7 she would
dare pronounce Aersel/ to be; though, when the letters
were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed her-
self on every point exactly as she might have foreseen.
She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts,
and mentioned nothing which she could not praise. The
house, furniture, neighborhood, and roads, were all to
her taste, and Lady Catherine's behavior was most
friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of
Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elisa-
beth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there,
to know the rest.
I Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to
1 announce their safe arrival in London ; and when she
Vvrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power
fu say something of the Bingleys.
'Her impatience for this second letter was as well
rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been a
week in town without either seeing or hearing from
Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing
that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had
by some accident been lost.
" My aunt, " she continued, " is going to-morrow into
that part of the town, and I shall take the opportunify
of calling in Grosvenor Street. "
She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she
had seen Miss Bingley. " I did not think Caroline in
spirits, " were her words, " but she was very glad to see
me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my
coming to London. I was ri^t, therefore; my last
letter had never reached her. I inquired after their
brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged
with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him, I
found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish
I could see her. My visit was not long, as Caroline and
L ,., > ,„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 158
Mrs. Hnrst were going ont. I dare ssy I shall soon see
tbem here. "
Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It con-
vinced her that accident only could discover to Mr.
Single; her sister's being in town.
Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of
him. She endeavored to persuade herself that she did
not regret it; but she conld no longer be blind to Miss
Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morn-
ing for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh
excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; hut the
shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of
her manner, would allow Jane to deceive herself no
longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to
her sister will prove what she felt.
" My dearest Lizsy will, I am sure, be incapable of
triumphing in her better judgment, at my expense, when
I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss
Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister, though the
event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate
if I still assert, that, considering what her behavior was,
my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do
not at all comprehend ber reason for wishing to be
intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were
to happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again.
Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday; and not
a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When
she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleas-
ure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not
calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me
again, and was in every respect so altered a creature,
that when she went away I was perfectly resolved to
continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I
cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in sin-
C.OO;(lc
154 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
giing me out as she did; I csn safely saj that every ad-
vance to intimacy began on her side. But I pity her,
because she most feel that she has been acting wrong,
and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother
is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther;
and though tee know this anxiety to be quite needless,
yet if she feels it^ it will easily account for her behavior
to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister,
whatever anxiety she may feel on his behalf is natural
and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her
having any such fears now, because, if he had at all
cared about me, we must have met long, long ago. He
knows of my being in town, I am certain, from some-
thing she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her
manner of talking, as if she wanted to persaade herself
that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot under'
stand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I
should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong
appearance of duplicity in all this. But I will endeavor
to banish every painful thought, and think only of what
will make me happy — your affection, and the invariable
kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from
you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his
never returning to Netherfield again, of giving up the
house, but not with any certainty. We had better not
mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such
pleasant accounts from our friends at Hnnsford. Pray
go to see them, with Sir William and Maria. I am sure
you will be very comfortable there. — Yours, etc "
Xhis letter gave Elizabeth some pain ; but her spirits
returned as she considered that Jane would no longer
be dnped by the sister at least. All expectation from
the brother was now absolutely over. She would not
even wish for any renewal of his attentions. His char-
L ..„■„ Google
PfllDE AND PREJUDICE 155
acler sunk on every review of it; and as a punishment
for him, as frell as a passible advantage to Jane, she
seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr. Darcy'a
sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him
abundantly regret what he had thrown «way.
Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elisabeth of
her promise concerning that gentleman, and required in-
formation; and Elizabeth had such to send as might
rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself.
His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were
over, he was the admirer of someone else. Elizabeth
was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it
and write of it without material pain. Her heart had
been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied
with believing that she would have been his only choice,
had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten
thoQsand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the
young lady to whom he was now reitdering himself agree-
able; but Elicabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this
case than in Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him for
his wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary,
could be more natural ; and whUe able to suppose that it
cost him a few straggles to relinquish her, she was ready
to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and
could very sincerely wish him happy.
All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after
relating the circumstances, she thus went on: — " I am
now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been
mncb in love ; for had I really experienced that pure and
elevating passion, I should at present detest his very
name, and wish him all manner of evil. But my feelings
are not only cordial towards fern ; they are even impar-
tial towards Miss King. I cannot find out that I bate
her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think
her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in
L ..„■„ Google
166 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
all this. My watchfulness has been effectaal ; and though
I should certainly be a more interesting object to all
my acquaintance were I distractedly in love with him, I
cannot say that I regret my comparative insignifi < »nce.
Importance may sometimes be pnrcliased too dearly.
Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart
than I do. They are young in the ways of the world,
and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that hand-
some young men must have sometiiing to live on as well
as the plain. "
CHAPTER XXVII
With no greater events than these in the Longboum
family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond tbe
walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold,
did January and February pass away. March was to
take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought
very seriously of going thither; but Charlotte, she soon
found, was depending on the plan, and she gradually
learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as
well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her
desire of seeing Charlotte again, and weakened her dis-
gust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme,
and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable
sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was
not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would
moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in short, as the
time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any
delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly, and
was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch.
She was to accompany Sir William and his second daugh-
ter. The improvement of spending a night in London
C.OO;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 157
was added in time, and the plan became perfect as plan
could be.
The only pain was in leaving her father, who would
certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point,
so little liked her going, that he told her to write to
him, and almost promised to answer her letter.
The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was
perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His present
pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had
been the first to escite and to deserve his attention, the
first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and
in his manner of bidding her adieu, wiahing her every
enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in
Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting their opinion
of her — their opinion of everybody — would always coin-
cide, there was a solicitude, an interest which she felt
must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard?!
and she parted from him convinced that, whether mar- I
ried or single, he must always be her model of the ami- I
able and pleasing. ^
Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind
to make her think him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas,
and his daughter Maria, a good-humored girl, but as
emp^-headed as himself, had nothing to aay that could
be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as
much delight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved
absurdities, but she had known Sir William's too long.
He could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his
presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were
worn out, like his information.
It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they
began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street by noon.
As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's door, Jane was at a
drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they
entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and
- Coo;(lc
158 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
Elisabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to
see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were
a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their
cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in the
drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen
her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower.
All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleas-
antly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and
the evening at one of the theatres.
Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their
iirst subject was her sister; and she was more grieved
than'astonished to bear, in reply to her minute inquiries,
that though Jane always struggled to support her spirits,
there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable,
however, to hope that they would not continue long.
Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Hias
Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, and repeated con-
versations occurring at difEerent times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her
heart, given up the acquaintance.
Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's
desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so
well.
" But, my dear Elizabeth, " she added, " what sort of
girl is Miss King? I should be sorry to think onr friend
mercenary. "
" Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matri-
monial affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent
motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin?
Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is
trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, yon
want to find out that he is mercenary. "
" If yon will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King
is, I shall know what to think. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 159
" She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know
no harm of her. "
" But he paid her not the smalleat attention till her
grandfather's death made her mistress of this fortune. "
" No — why should he? If it were not allowable for
him to gain mg a & ections because I had no money, what
occasion could tiiere be for making love to a girl whom
he did not care about, and who was equally poor? "
" But there seems indelicacy in directing his attention
towards her so soon after this event. "
" A man in distressed circumstances has not time for
all those elegant decorums which other people may ob-
serve. If the does not object to it, why shotild we? "
" Her not objecting does not justify kim. It only
shows her being deficient in sometidng herself — sense or
feeling. "
" Well, " cried Elizabeth, " have it as yon choose. He
shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish, "
" No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should
be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has
lived so long in Derbyshire. "
" Oh ! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of
young men who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate
friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better.
I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-
morrow where I shall find a man who has not one agree-
able quality, who has neither manner nor sense to rec-
ommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth
knowing, after alL "
" Take care, Lizzy; that speech savors strongly of
disappointment.''
Before they were separated by the conclusion of the
play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation
to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure
which they proposed taking in the summer. -
C.OO;(lc
160 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" We hare not quite determined how far it -shall carry
V3, " said Mrs. Gardiner, " bnt, perhaps, to the Lakes. "
No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elisa-
beth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most
ready and gratefol. " My dear, dear aont, " she rap-
turously cried, " what delight! what felicity! Yon give
me fresh life and vigor. Adieu to disappointment and
spleen. What are men to rocks and mountains? Oh!
what hours of transport we shall spend ! And when we
do return, it shall not be like other travellers, without
being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We
will know where we have gone — ^we will recollect what
we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not
be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor when wc
attempt to describe any particnlar scene, will we begin
quarrelling about its relative situation. Let < mr first
effusions be less insupportable than those of the gener-
ally of travellers. "
CHAPTER XXVIII
EvxEY object in tbe next day's journey was new and
interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state
of enjoyment; for she had seen'her sister looking so well
as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of
her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
When they left the high road for the lane to Huns-
ford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage, and
every turning expected to bring it in view. The paling
of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elisa-
beth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard
of its inhabitants.
At length tbe Parsonage was discernible. The garden
sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the green
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 161
pales, and the laurel hedge, everything declared they
were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at
the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate
which led by a short gravel walk to the hoose amidst
the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment
they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight
of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with "
the liveliest pleasure, and Elisabeth was more and rocwe
satisfied with coming when she found herself ao affec-
tionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin's
manners were not altered by his marriage; his formal
civility was just what it had been, and he detained her
some minutes at the gate to be & r and satisfy his in-
quiries after all her family. They were then, with no
other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the
entrance, taken into the house ; and as soon as they were
in the parlor he welcomed them a second time, with
ostentatious formality, to his humble abode, and punc-
tually repeated all his wife's offers of refreshment.
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and
she could not help fancying that in displaying the good
proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he
addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to
make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But
though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was
not able to gratify him by any sign of repentance, and
rather looked with wonder at her friend that she could
have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When
Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might rea-
sonably be ashamed, which certainly was not unseldom,
she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or
twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general
Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enou^
to admire every article of furnitore in the room, from
the sideboard to the fender, to pve an account of their
L ..„■„ Google
162 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
journey, and of all that had happened in London, Mt.
Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which
was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of
which he attended himself. To work in his garden was
one of his most respectable pleasures ; and Elicabeth ad-
mired the command of countenance with which Charlotte
talked of the health fulness of the exercise, and owned
she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading
the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely
allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked
for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which
left beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields
in every direction, and could tell how many trees there
were in the most distant clump. But of all the views
which his garden, or which the country or the kingdom
could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect
of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that
bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house.
It was a handsome modern building, well situated on
rising ground.
From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them
round his two meadows ; but the ladies, not having shoes
to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back;
and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlotte took
her sister and friend over the house, extremely well
pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing
it without her husband's help. It was rather small, but
well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up
and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Col-
lins could be forgotten, there was really a great air of
comfort throughout, and by Charlotte's evident enjoy-
ment of it, Elisabeth supposed he most be often for-
gotten.
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 188
in the countrr. It was spoken of again while they were
at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed —
" Yes, Hiss Elizabeth, yon will have the honor of see-
ing Lady Catherine de Boorgh on the ensning Sunday
at Church, and I need not say yon will be delighted
with her. She is all affability and condescension, and I
doubt not but yoa will be honored with some portion of
her notice when service is over. I have scarcely any
hesitation in saying that she will include you and my
sister Maria in every invitation with which she honors
us during your stay ^ere. Her behavior to my dear
Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every
week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her lady-
ship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I ihould
say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several. "
" Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman I
indeed, " added Charlotte, " and a most attentive neigh-
bor. "
" Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She
is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too
much deference. "
The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hert-
fordshire news, and telling again what had been already
written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude
of her chamber, had to meditate upon Charlotte's degree
of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,
and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to
acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had
also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet
tenor of their usual employments, the vexations inter-
ruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their inter-
course with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled
it all.
About the middle of the next day, as she was in her
room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below
164 PHIDE AND PREJUDICE
seemed to apeak the whole house in confusion; and, after
listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs
in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She
opened the door and met Maria in the landing place,
who, breathless with agitation, cried out —
" Oh, my dear Eliza ! pray make haste and come into
the dining-room, for there is snch a sight to be seen!
I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come
down this moment. "
Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell
her nothing more, and down they, ran into the dining-
room, which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder!
it was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the gar-
den gate.
" And is this all? " cried Elizabeth. " I expected at
least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here
is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter ! "
" La ! my dear, " said Maria, quite shocked at the mis-
take, " it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs.
Jenkinson, who lives with them; the other is Miss de
Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little crea-
ture. Who would have thought she could be so thin
and small! "
" She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of
doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in. "
" Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the
greatest of favors when Miss de Bourgh comes in. "
" I like her appearance, " said Elizabeth, struck with
other ideas. " She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she will
do for him very well. She will make him a very proper
wife. "
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the
gate in conversation with tlie ladies; and Sir William, to
Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the doorway.
In earnest contemplation of the greatness before him,
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 166
and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bonrgh looked
that way.
At length there was nothing more to be said; the
ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house.
Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began
to congratulate them on their good fortune, which Char-
lotte explained by letting them know that the whole
party was asked to dine at Rosings the next day.
CHAPTER XXIX
Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invi-
tation, was complete. The power of displaying the gran-
deur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of
letting them see her civility towards himself and his
wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an
opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was
aucb an instance of Lady Catherine's condescension, as
he knew not how to admire enough.
" I confess, " said he, " that I should not have been at
all surprised by her ladyship's asking us on Sunday to
drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather
expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it
would happen. But who could have foreseen such an
attention as this?* Who could have imagined that we
should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation,
moreover, including the whole party) so immediately
after your arrival ! "
" I am the less surprised at what has happened, " re-
plied Sir WUliam, " from that knowledge of what the
manner of the great really are, which my situation in
life has allowed me to iscquire. About the court, such
instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon. "
- Coo;(lc
166 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or
next morning but tiieir visit to Bosings. Mr. Collins
was carefully instructing them in what they were to
expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants,
and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he
said to Elizabeth —
" Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about
your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that
elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and daugh-
ter. I would advise y pu merely to pu t o
your clothes is superior to the r est — there l
for iiijilliiMji_jj|ii > ii 1 llilj I nil I II III mil think the
worse of yon for being simply dressed. She likes to
While they were dressing, he came two or three times
to their different doors, to recommend their being quick,
as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting
for her dinner. Snch formidable accounts of her lady-
ship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria
Lucas, who had been little used to company, and she
looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as
much apprehension as her father had done to his pres-
entation at St. James's.
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of
about half a mile across the park. Every park has its
beauty and its prospects ; and Elisabeth saw much to be
pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures
as Mr. Collins expected the scene to iTispire, and was
but slif^tly affected by his enumeration of the windows
in front of the house, and his relation of what the glas-
ing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis de Rourgh.
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's
alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir Will-
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 167
■am did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth's courage
did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lad; Cath-
erine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary tal-
ents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of
money and rank she thought she could witness without
trepidation.
From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed
out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished
ornaments, they followed the servants through an ante-
chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daugh-
ter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship, with
great condescension, arose to receive them ; and as Mrs.
Collins had settled it with her husband that the office of
introduction should be hers, it was performed in a propet
manner, withont any of those apologies and thanks which
be would have thought necessary.
In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William
was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding
him, that he had but just courage enough to make a
very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;
and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses,
sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to
look. Elizabeth found her self quite equal to the scene,
and could observe the three ladies before her composedly.
— Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-
marked features, which might once have been handsome.
Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of
receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their
inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by
silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authori-
tative a tone, as marked her self-importance, and brought
Mr, Wickham immediately to EliKabeth's mind; and
from the observation of the day altogether, she believe*
Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented!
When, after examining the mother, in whose connte-
- Coo;(lc
nt
t
168 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
nance and deportment she soon fotmd some resemblance
of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she
could almost have joined in Muria's astonishment at
her being so thin and so small. There was neither in
figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss
de Bourgh vas pale and sickly ; her features, though not
plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, ex-
cept in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appear-
ance there was nothing remarkable, and who was en-
tirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing
" ^ screen in the proper direction before her eyes.
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one
of the windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attend-
. ing them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine
kindly informing them that it was mach better worth
looking at in the summer.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were
all the servants and all the articles of plate which Mr.
Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold,
he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her lady-
ship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could
furnish nothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised
with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended,
first by him and then by Sir William, who was now
enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-law saidj
in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine
could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by
their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles,
especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty
to them. The party did not supply much conversation.-
Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an
opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Misa
de Bourgh — the former of whom was engaged in listen-
ing to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word
to her all dinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 169
empIoTed in wstching how little Miss de Bonrgh ate,
pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she
iraa indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the
qnestioD, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and
admire.
When tbe ladies returned to the drawing-room, there
was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talkj
iriiich she did without any intermission till coffee came
in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so de-
cisive a manner, as proved that she was not used to bare
her judgment controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's
domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her
a great deal of advice as to the management of them all;
told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small
a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of
her cows and her poultry. Elisabeth found that noth -
iTi[f yn a beneath this great lady's attention, which conld
furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others. J n
the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she
addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Eliaabethj
but especially to the latter, of whose connections sbe
knew tbe least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins
was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl. She asked her,
at different times, bow many sisters she had, whether
they were older or younger than herself, whether any
of them were likely to be married, whether they were
handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage
her father kept, and what bad been her mother's maiden
name } — Elisabeth felt all the impertinence of her ques-
tions, but answered them very composedly. — Lady Cath-
erine then observed,
" Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I
think. For your sake, " turning to Charlotte, " I am
E^ad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing
estates from the female line. — It was not thought neces-
L ..„■„ Google
170 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
sary in Sir Lewis de Boorgh's fttmily. Do 70a pla^
and sing, Miss Bennet? "
" A little. "
" Oh! then — sometime or other we shall be happy to
hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, probably
superior to You shall try it some day. Do your
sisters play and sing? "
" One of tbem does. "
" Why did not you all learn? — You ought all to have
learned. The Miss Webbs all play, and their father
has not so good an income as yours. — Do yoa draw? "
" No, not at all. "
" What, none of yoo? "
" Not one. "
" That is very strange. But I suppose you had no
opportunity. Your mother should have taken you to
town every spring for the benefit of masters. "
" My mother would have had no objection, but my
father hates London. "
" Has your governess left you? "
" We never had any governess. "
" No governess! How was that possible? Five daugh-
ters brought up at home without a goremeas ! I never
heard of such a thing. Your motiier must ha.ve been
quite a slave to your education. "
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured
her that had not been the case.
" Then, who taught you? who attended to yon? With-
out B governess, you must have been neglected. "
" Compared with some families, I believe we were;
but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the
means. We were always encouraged to read, and had
all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose
to be idle, certainly might. "
" Ayej no donbt; but that is what a governess will
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 171
prevent, and if I had known your mother, I should have
advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always
say that nothing is to be done in education without
steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a gov-
erness can give it. It is wonderful how many families
I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am
always glad to get a young person well placed out.
Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully
situated through my means ; and it was but the other day
that I recommended another young person, who was
merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are
4]uite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you
of Lady Metcalfe's calling yesterday to thank me? She j
finds Miss Pope a treasure.'Lady Catherine,'said she, iv.
'you have given me a treasure.'Are any of your younger /
sisters out. Miss Bennet? "
" Yes, ma'am, all. "
" All!— What, all five out at once? Very odd!— And
you only the aecond.— The younger ones out before the
elder are married ! — Your younger sisters must he very
young? "
" Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps the is full
young to be much in company. But really, ma'am, I
think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that
they should not have their share of society and amuse-
ment, because the elder may not have the means or in-
clination to marry early. The last-born has as good a
right to the pleasures of youth as the first. And to be
kept back on tuch a motive ! I think it would not be
very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of
mind. "
" Upon my word, " said her ladyship, " you give your
opinion very decidedly for so young a person. Pray,
what is your age? "
" With three younger sisters grown up, " replied Eliza-
L ..„■„ Google
J 72 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
beth, smiling, " your ladyship can hardly expect me to
owa it, "
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiv-
ing a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to
be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with
so much dignified impertinence.
" You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, — there-
fore you need not conceal your age. "
" I am not one-and-twenty. "
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was
over, the card tables were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir
William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quad-
rille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at casino,
the two girls had the honor of assisting Mrs, Jenkinsoa
to make up her party. Their table was superlatively
stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not
relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson ex-
pressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh's being too hot or
too cold, or having too much or too little light. A great
deal more passed at the other table. Lady Catherine
was generally speaking — stating the mistakes of the
three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr.
Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her lady-
ship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and apolo-
gizing if he thought he won too many. Sir William did
not say much. He was storing his memory with anec-
dotes and noble names.
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played
as long as they chose, the tables were broken up, the
carriage was offered to Mrs, Collins, gratefully accepted,
and immediately ordered. The party then gathered
round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what
weather they were to have on the morrow. From these
instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the
coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 173
Collins's side, and as many bows on Sir William's, they
departed. As soon as they had driven from the door,
Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion
of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Char-
lotte's sake, she made more favorable than it really was.
But her commendation, though costing her some trouble,
could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very
soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own
CHAPTER XXX
Sir WiLLiAU stayed only a week at Hnnsford, bat bis
visit was long enough to convince him of bis daughter's
being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing
such a husband and such a neighbor as were not often
met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Col-
lins devoted his morning to driving him out in his gig,
and showing him the country ; but when he went away,
the whole family returned to their usual employments,
and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not
see more of her cousin by the alteration, for the chief
of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed
by him either at -work in the garden, or in reading and
writing, and looking out of window in his own book-
room, which fronted the road.
The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte
should not prefer the dining-parlor for common use; it
was a better sized room, and hod a plessanter aspect;
but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason
for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly
have been much less in his own apartment had they sat
in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for
the arrangement.
L ..„■„ Google
174 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
From the drawing-room they could distinguish noth-
ing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr, Collins for the
knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often
especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,
which he never failed coming to inform them of, though
it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently
stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes'con-
versation with Charlotte, bat was scarcely ever pre-
vailed on to get out.
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not
walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife did
not think it necessary to go likewise ; and till Elizabeth
recollected that there might be other family livings to
be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice
of so many hours. Now and then they were honored
with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped ber
observation that was passing in the room during these
visits. She examined into their employments, looked at
their work, and advised them to do it differently; found
fault with the arrangement of the furnitnre, or detected
the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any
refreshments, seemed to do it only for the sake of find-
ing out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large
for her family.
Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady
was not in the commission of the peace for the county,
she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the
minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr,
Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were dis-
posed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she
sallied forth into the village to settle their differences,
silence their complaints, and scold them into har mony
and plenty.
.- T-hg^ntertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated
about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 175
William, and there being only one card table in the
evening, every snch entertainment was the counterpart
of the first. Their other engagements were few, as the
style of living of the neighborhood in general was be-
yond the Collina's reach. This, however, was no evil
to EliEabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time
comfortably enongh; there were half-hours of pleasant
conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so
tine for the time of year that she had often great en-
joyment out of doors. Her favorite walk, and where
she frequently went while the others were calling on
Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged
that aide of the park, where there was a nice sheltered
path, which no one seemed to value bnt herself, and
where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's
curiosity.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon
passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week
preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at
Rostngs, which in so small a circle mnst be important.
Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr.
Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks,
and though there were not many of her acquaintance
whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one
comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties,
and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss
Bingley's designs on him were, by his behavior to his
cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady
Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest
satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest ad-
miration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had
already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for
Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning within view
of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane, in order to
- Coo;(lc
176 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
have the earliest usnruice of it, and after making bis
bow as tbe caifiage tnnied into the Park, hurried home
with the great Intelligence. On the following monung
he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were
two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for
Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam,
the younger son of his uncle Lord , and, to tbe
great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins re-
turned, the gentlemen accompanied bim. Charlotte had
seen them from her husband's room, crossing the road,
and immediately running into the other, told the girls
what an honor they might expect, adding —
" I may thank yon, Eliza, for this piece of civility.
Mr. Darcy would never have come so soon to wait apon
me. "
Elizabeth bad scarcely time to disclaim all right to
tbe compliment, before their approach was announced
by the doorbell, and shortly afterwards the three gentle-
men entered tbe room. Colonel Fitswilliam, who led the
way, was about tiiirty, not handsome, but in person and
address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked
just as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire — paid
his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins,
and whatever might be his feelings towards her friend,
met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth
merely curtseyed to him, without saying a word.
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly
with tbe readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and
talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having ad-
dressed a slight observation on the house and garden
to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to
anybody. At length, however, his civility was so far
awakened as to inquire of Elizabeth after the health
of ber family. She answered bim in the usual way, and,
after a moment's pause, added —
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 177
" My eldest aiater has been in town tbege three months.
Hftve you never happened to see her there? "
She was perfectly sensible that be never had; but
she wished to see whether he wonld betray any con-
scioDsness of what had passed between the Bingleys
and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused
as he answered that he bad never been so fortunate as
to meet Miss Bennet The subject was pursued no
farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.
CHAPTER XXXI
Colonel Fitzwti.liaii's manners were very much ad-
mired at the Parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he
must add considerably to the pleasure of their engage-
ments at Rosings. It wa» some days, however, before
they received any invitation thither — for while there
were visitors in the house, they could not be necessary;
and it was not till £aster-^y, almost a week after the
gentlemen's arrival, that they were honored by snch
an attention, and then they were merely asked on leav-
ing church to come there in the evening. For the last
week they had seen very little of either Lady Catherine
or her daughter. Colonel Fitiwilliam had called at the
Parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr.
Darcy they had only seen at church.
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a
proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine's
drawing-room. Her ladyship received them civilly, but
it was plain that their company was by no means so
acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she
was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking
to them, especially to Darcj, mnch more than to any
other person in the room.
- Coo;(lc
178 PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
Colonel Fitzvilliam seemed really glad to see them;
anything was a welcome relief to him at Roaings; and
Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had moreover canght his
fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and
talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travel-
ling and staying at home, of new books and music, that
Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that
room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and
flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine her-
self, as well as of Mr. Darcy. Hit eyes bad been soon
and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of
curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while, shared
the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did
not scruple to call out—
" What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What
is it you are talking of? What are you telling Miss
Bennet? Let me hear what it is. "
" We are speaking of music, madam, " said he, when
no longer able to avoid a reply.
" Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all
subjects my delight. I must have my share in the con-
versation if you are speaking of music. There are few
people in England, I suppose, who have more true en-
joyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste.
If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great profi-
cient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed
her to apply. I am confident that she would have per-
formed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on,
Darcy? "
Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sis-
ter's proficiency.
" I am very glad to hear such a good account of her, "
said Lady Catherine; " and pray tell her from me, that
she cannot expect to excel if she does not practise a
great deal. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 179
" I aasnre yon, madAm, " he replied, " that she does not
need such advice. She practises very constantiy. "
" So much the better. It cannot be done too much;
and when I neit write to her, I shall charge " her not
to neglect it on any account- I often tell young ladies
that no excellence in music is to be acquired without
constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several
times, that she will never play really well unless she
practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has no instru-
ment, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to
come to Roaings every day, and play on the pianoforte
iu Mrs. Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's
way, you know, in that part of the house. "
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill
bi'cediiig, and made no answer.
When coffee was over. Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded
Elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she
sat down directly to the instrument He drew a chair
near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and
then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the
latter walked away from her, and moving with his usual
deliberation towards the pianoforte, stationed himselt so
as to command a full view of the fair performer's coun-
tenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the
first convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile,
and said —
" You mean to frighten me, Mr, Darcy, by coming
in all this state to hear me? But I wUl not be alarmed
though your sister doet play so well. There ia a stub-
bornness about me that never can bear to be frightened
at the will of others. My courage always rises with
every attempt to intimidate me. "
" I shall not say that you are mistaken, " he replied,
" because you could not really believe me to entertain
any design of alarming you; and'I have had the pleasure
L ..„■„ Google
180 PHIDE AND PREJUDICE
of your acqnaintsnce long enough to know that yon find
great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions
which in fact are not yonr own. "
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this pictnre of herself,
and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, " Yonr cousin will gire
you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to be-
lieve a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting
with a person so well able to expose my real character,
in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass my-
self off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy,
it is very nngenerons in you to mention all that you
knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire — and, give
me leave to say, very impolitic too^for it is provoking
me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will
shock your relations to hear. "
" I am not afraid of you, " said he, smilingly.
" Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of, "
cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. " I should like to know how
he behaves among strangers. "
" Yon shall hear then — but prepare yourself for some-
thing very dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing
him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a ball —
and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced
only four dances ! I am sorry to pain you — but so it
was. He danced only four dances, though gentlemen
were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than
one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner.
Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact. "
" I had not at that time the honor of knowing any
lady in the assembly beyond my own party. "
" True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-
room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next?
My fingers wait your orders. "
" Perhaps, " said Darcy, " I should have judged bet-
L ..„■„ Google
PKIDE AND PREJUDICE 181
ter, had I soi]|;lit ftn introduction; but I am ill qualified
to recommend myself to strangen. "
" Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this? " said
Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitswilliun. " Shall
we ask him why a man of sense and education, and
who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend
himself to strangers? "
" I can answer your question, " said Fitzwilliam, " with-
out applying to him. It is because he will not give
himself the trouble. "
" I certainly have not the talent which some people
possess, " said Darcy, " of conversing easily with those I
have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of
conversation^ or appear interested in their concerns, as
I often see done. "
" My fingers, " said Elizabeth, " do not move over this
Instrument in the masterly manner which I see ao many
women's do. They have not the same force or rapidity,
and do not produce the same expression. But then I
have always supposed it to be my own fault — ^because
I would not take the trouble of practising. It is not
that I do not believe mg fiqgers as capable as any other
woman's of superior execution. "
Darcy smiled and said, " You are perfectly right. You
have employed your time much better. No one admitted
to the privilege of hearing you can think anything want-
ing. We neither of us perform to strangers. "
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who
called out to know what they were talking of. Ehzabeth
immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine ap-
proached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said
to Darcy —
" Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she
practised more, and could have the advantage of a
London Master. She has a very good notion of finger-
- Coo;(lc
182 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ing, thongh her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne woold
have been n delightful performer, had her health \lloved
ber to learn. "
Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he
assented to his coitsin's praise; bnt neither at that mo-
ment nor at any other could ahe discern any symptom
of love; and from the whole of his behavior to Miss de
Bourgb she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that
he taight have been just as likely to marry her, had she
been his relation.
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's
performance, mixing with them many instructions on
execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all
the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of the
gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her lady-
ship's carriage was ready to take them all home.
CHAPTER XXXII
Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning,
and writing to Jane, while Mrs. Collins and Maria were
gone on business into the village, when she was startled
by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor.
As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not un-
likely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehen-
sion was putting away her half-finished letter that she
might escape all impertinent questions, when the door
opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy,
and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and
apologized for his intrusion by letting her know that he
had understood all the ladies to be within.
They then sat down, and when her inquiries after
- Coo;(lc ■
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 188
Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into
total silence. It was absolately necessary, therefore, to
think of something, and in this emergence recollecting
wken she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feel-
ing curious to know what he would say on the subject
of their hasty departure, she observed —
" How very suddenly yon all quitted Netherfield last
November, Mr. Darcy ! It must have been a most agree-
able surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him
so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day
before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when yon
left London? "
" Perfectly so, I thank yon. "
She found that she was to receive no other answer,
and, after a short pause, added —
" I think I have Dnderstood that Mr. Bingley has not
much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again? "
" I have never heard him say so; but it is probable
that he may spend very little of his time there in future.
He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when
friends and engagements are continually increasing. "
" If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would
be better for the neighborhood that he should give up
the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a
settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley did
not take the house so much for the convenience of the
neighborhood as for his own, and we must expect him
to keep ot quit it on the same principle. "
" I should not be surprised, " said Darcy, " if he were
to give it np as soon as any eligible purchase offers. "
Elisabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talk-
ing longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to
say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding
a subject to him.
He took the hint, and soon began with, " This seema
- Cooxic
184 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
a very comfortable house. Lndy Catherine, I believe,
did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins £rst came to
Hunsford. "
" I believe she did — and I am sore she could not have
bestowed her kindness on a more gratefol object. "
" Mr. Collins appears vetj fortunate in his choice of
" Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in bis hav-
ing met with one of the very few sensible woD[ien who
would have accepted him, or have made him happy if
he had. My friend has an excellent understanding —
though I am not certain that I consider her marrying
Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems
perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential lig^t it
is certainly a very good match for her. "
" It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within
so easy a distance of her own family and friends. "
" An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty
miles. "
" And what is fifty miles of good roadP Little more
than half a day's journey. Yes, I call it a very easy
distance. "
" I should never have considered the distance as one
of the advantages of the match, " cried Elisabeth. " I
should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled near her
family. "
" It is a proof of your attachment to Hertfordshire.
Anything beyond the very neighborhood of Longboum,
I suppose, would appear far. "
As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elisa-
beth fancied she understood; be must be supposing her
to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed
as she answered —
" I do not mean to say that a woman may not be
settled too near her family. The far and the near must
- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 185
be relative, and depend on many varying circnmstances.
Where there is fortune to make the expenses of trard-
ling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is
not the case here. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfort-
able income, but not such a one as will allow of fre-
quent journeys — and I am persuaded my friend would
not call herself near her family under less than half
the present distance. "
Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and
said, " You cannot have a right to snch very strong local
attachment. You cannot have been always at Long-
bourn, "
Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experi-
enced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair,
took a newspaper from the table, and, glueing over it,
said, in a colder voice —
" Are you pleased with Kent? " ^
A short dialogue on the subject of the county en-
sued, on either side calm and concise — and soon put an
end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just
returned from their walk. The tete-a-tete surprised
them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occa-
sioned his intruding on Miss Sennet, and after sitting:
a few minutes longer without saying much to anybody,
went away.
" What can be the meaning of this? " said Charlotte,
as soon as he was gone. " My dear Eliza, he must be
in love with yon, or he would never have called on us
in this familiar way. "
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not
seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the
case; and after various conjectures, they could at last
only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of
finding anything to do, which was the more probable
from the time of year. All field sports were over.
L ..„■„ Google
186 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Widiin doors there was Lady CatheriDe, books, and a
billiard table, but geatlemen cannot be always within
doors; and in the nearness of tiie Parsonage, or the
pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who
lived in it, the two consins found a temptation from this
period of walking thither almost every day. They
called at various times of the morning, sometimes sepa-
rately, sometimes together, and now and then accom*
panied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that
Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in
their society, a persuasion which of course recwnmended
him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own
satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident
admiration of her, of her former favorite George Wick'
ham ; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was
less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's man-
ners, she believed he might have the best Informed mind.
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage,
it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for
society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together
without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it
seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice — s
sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He
seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew
not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occa-
sionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was
generally different, which her own knowledge of him
could not have told her; and as she would have liked to
believe this change the effect of love, and the object of
that love her friend Eliza, she set herself seriously to
work to find it out. She watched him whenever they
were at RosingSj and whenever he came to Hunsford;
but without much success. He certainly looked at her
friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was
disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaae, but she
- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 187
often doubted whether there were much admiration in it,
and sometimes it seemed nothing bat absence of mind.
She had once or twice suggested to Elisabeth the poasi-
bility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth alwajs
laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collina did not think it
right to press the subject, from the danger of raising
expectations which might only end in disappointment;
for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all
her friend's dislike would vanish, if she could suppose
him to be in her power.
In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes
planned her marrying Colonel Fitiswilliam. He was be-
yond comparison the pleasaatest man; he certainly ad-
mired her, and his situation in life was most eligible;
but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had
considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin
could have none at all.
CHAPTER XXXIII
More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within
the park, unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all
the perverseness of the mischance that should bring
him where no one else was brought, and, to prevent
its ever happening again, took care to inform him at
first that it was a favorite haunt of hers. How it could
occur a second time, therefore, was very odd! Yet it
did, and even the third. It seemed like wilful ill-
nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions
it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward
pause and then away, but he actually thought it neces-
sary to turn back and walk with her. He never said
a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talk-
.., > ,„Cooylc
188 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
ing or of listening mnch ; bat it struck her in the course
of their third rencontre that he was asking some odd
imconnected qoeations — about her pleasure in being at
HiiDsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of
Mr. and Mrs. CoUins's happiness; and that in speaking
of Rosings and her not perfectly understanding the
house, he seemed to espect that whenever she came into
Kent again she would be staying there too. His words
seemed to imply it. Conld he have Colonel Fitzwilliam
in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything,
he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that
quarter. It distressed her a little, and she was quite
glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite
the Parsonage.
She was engaged one day as she walked in reperasing
Jane's last letter, and dwelling on some'passage which
proved that Jane had not written in spirits, when, in-
stead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she saw
on looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her.
Putting away the letter immediately and forcing a smile,
she said —
" I did not know before that you ever walked this
way. "
" I have been making the tour of the park, " he re-
plied, " as, I generally do every year, and intend to close
it with a call at the Parsonage. Are you going much
farther ? "
" No, I should have turned in a moment. "
And accordingly she did turn, and they walked to-
wards the Parsonage together.
" Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday? " said she.
" Yes — if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am
at his disposal. He arranges the business just as he
pleases. "
" And if not able to please himself in the arrange-
L,,;,I,.K > ,„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 189
ment, be bos at least great pleasure in the power of
choice. I do sot know anybody who seems more to
enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy. "
" He likes to have his own way very well, " replied
Colonel Fitzwilliam. " But so we all do. It is only that
he has better means of having it thao many others,
because he is rich, and many othera are poor. I speak
feelingly. A younger son, you know, must be enured
to self-denial and dependence. "
" In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know
very little of either. Now, seriously, what have you
ever known of self-denial and dependence ? When have
yon been prevented by want of money from going where-
ever you chose*, or procuring anything you had a fancy
for? "
" These are home questions — and perhaps I cannot
say that I have experienced many hardships of that
nature. But in matters of greater weight, I may suffer
from the want of money. Younger sons cannot marry
where they like. "
" Unless where they like women of fortune, which I
think they very often do. "
" Our habits of expense make ns too dependent, and
there are not many in my rank of life who can afford
to marry without some attention to money. "
" Is this, " thought Elizabeth, " meant for me? " and
she colored at the idea; but, recovering herself, said in
a lively tone, " And pray, what is the usual price of an
earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother is very
sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand
pounds. "
He answered her in the same style, and the sub-
ject dropped. To interrupt a silence which might make
him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon
afterwards said —
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
190 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" I imagine joxa consin brought you dawn with him
chiefly for the sake of having somebody at his disposal.
I wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting con-
venience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does
as well for the present, and, as she is under his sole care,
he may do whjit he likes with her. "
" No, " said Colonel Fitawilliam, " that is an advantage
which he must divide with me. I am joined with him
in the guardianship of Miss Darcy. "
" Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians
do you make? Does your charge give you much trouble?
Young ladies of her age are sometimes a, little difficult
to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, she may
like to have her own way. "
As she spoke she observed bim looking at her ear-
nestly; and the manner in which he immediately asked
her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely to give them
any uneasiness, convinc;ed her that she had somehow
or other got pretty near the truth. She directly re-
plied—
" You need not be frightened. I never heard any
harm of her; and I dare say she is one of the moat
tractable creatures in the world. She is a very great
favorite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs.
Hurst and Miss Bingley. I think I have heard you say
that yon know them. "
" I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant
gentlemanlike man — he is a great friend of Darcy'a. "
" Oh! yes, " said Elizabeth drily — " Mr. Darcy is un-
commonly kind to Mr. Bingley, and takes a prodigious
deal of care of him. "
" Care of him ! — Yea, I really believe Darcy does
take care of him in those points where he most wants
care. From something that he told me in our journey
hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much in-
- ..- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 191
debted to him. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I
have no right to suppose that Bingley was the persOD
meant. It was all conjecture. "
" What ia it you mean? "
" It is a circomstsnce which Darcy of course could
not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get
round to the lady's family, it would be an unpleasant
" You may depend upon my not mentioning it. "
" And remember that I have not much reason for sup-
posing it to be Bingley. What he told me was merely
this: that he congratulated himself on having lately
saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most
imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or
any other particulars, and I only suspected it to be
Bingley from believing him the kind of young man to
get into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them
to have been together the whole of last summer, "
" Did Mr, Darcy give you his reasons for this inter-
ference ? "
" I understood that there were some very strong ob-
jections against the lady. "
" And what arts did he use to separate them? "
" He did not talk to me of his own arts, " said Fitz-
william, smiling. " He only told me what I have now
told you. "
Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart
swelling with indignation. After watching her a little,
Fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
" I am thinking of what you have been telling me, "
said she. " Your (iousiu's conduct does not suit my
feehngs. Why was he to be the judge? "
" You are rather disposed to call his interference
officious? "
- Cooxic
192 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" I do not sec what right Mr. Dare; had to decide on
the propriety of his friend's inclination, or why, aprai
his own judgment alone, he was to determine and direct
in what manner that friend waa to be happy. But, "
she continued, recollecting herself, " as we know none
of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is
not to be supposed that there was much affection in the
" That is not an unnatural surmise, " said Fitzwilliam,
" but it 19 lessening the honor of my cousin's triumph
very sadly. "
This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so
jost a picture of Mr. Darcy, that she would not tmst
herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly chang-
ing the conTcrsation, talked on indifferent matters till
they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into ber own
room, as soon as their visitor left them, she conld think
without interruption of all that she had heard. It was
not to be supposed that any other people could be
meant than those with whom she was connected. There
could not exist in the world two men over whom Mr.
Darcy could have anch boundless influence. That he
bad been concerned in the measures taken to separate
Mr. Bingley and Jane she bad never doubted; but sfae
had always attributed to Miss Bingley the principal
design and arrangement of them. If his own vanity,
however, did not mislead him, he was the cause, his
pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had
suffered, and still continued to snfTer. He had ruined
for awhile every hope of happiness for the most affection-
ate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say
how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.
" There were some very strong objections against the
lady, " were Colonel Fitzwilliam's words; and these
strong objections probably were, her having one uncle
- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 198
who was a conntry ftttomey, and another who was in
basiiiess in London.
" To Jane herself, " she exclaimed, " there could be no
possibility of objection; all lovelinesa and goodness as
she is ! her understanding excellent, ber mind improved,
and her manners captivating. Neither could anything
be urged against my father, who, though with some
pecaharities, has abilities which Mr. Darcy himself need
not disdain, and respectability which he will probably
never reach. " When she thought of her mother, indeed,
her confidence gave way a little; but she would not
allow that any objections there had material weight with
Mr. Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would re-
ceive a deeper wound from the want of importance in
his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;
and she was quite decided at last, that he had been
partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly
by the wish of retaining Mr. Bingley for his sister.
The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned,
brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse
towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to
see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend her
cousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink
tea. Mrs. Collins, seeing that she was really unwell,
did not press her to go, and as much as possible pre-
vented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collins
could not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's
being rather displeased by her staying «t home.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXXIV
When they were gone, Etisabeth, as if intending to
exasperate herself as much as possible against Mr.
Darcy, chose for her employment the examination of
all the letters which Jane had written to her since her
being in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor
was there any revival of past occurrences, or any com-
munication of present suffering. But in all, and in al-
most every line of each, there was a want of that cheer-
fulness which had been used to characterize her style,
and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at
ease with itself and kindly disposed towards everyone,
had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every
sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an at-
tention which it had hardly received on the first perusal.
Mr. Darcy's shameful boast of what misery he had been
able to inflict gave her a keener sense of her sister's
sufferings. It was some consolation to think that his
visit to Rosings was to end on the day after the next, —
and, ft still greater, that in less than a fortnight she
should herself be with Jane again, and enabled to con-
tribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affec-
tion could do.
She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without
remembering that his cousin was to go with him; but
Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no
intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did not
mean to be unhappy about him.
While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by
the sound of the door-bell, and her spirits were a little
fluttered by the idea of its being Colonel Fitzwilliam
himself, who had once before called late in the evening,
and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 195
But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were
very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement,
she saw Mr. Darcy walk into the room. In a harried
maimer he immediately began on inquiry after her
health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she
were better. She answered him with cold civility. He
sat down for a few momenta, and then getting up,
walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, but
said not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he
came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus
began —
I " In vain have I struggled. It will not do. My
feelings will not be repressed. You must allow me to
tell you how ardently I admire and love you. "
Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. • j
She stared, colored, doubted, and was silent. This he Sr
considered sufficient encouragement; and the avowal of . j y^
all that he felt, and had loug felt for her, immediately'^fU
followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings be- ^j/^
sides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not'" ^^
more eloquent oa the subject of tenderness than of
pride. His sense of her inferior ity — ^(f ihi l)cina; a
'^ " C'urtntiitTB — " f the family obstacles which ju dgment
a warmth wh ich seemed due to the conseque nce he w as
" " " niliTlir ^ " ^ wh s " very unl iHr^* "''^ "'^''^rP "'"''"'^ his siiiT "
In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not
hfl imrr- "''''* " l *^- -nmplimpnt of such r

Ji a gJirM, tn fl ninpn M.J l £i:;3^Jia»«ta " e';,.him with^pa-
ti3££_^|t£Il_]lC ihnillii 1'f HI done. He concluded with
representing to,Jtw-4tt & .a twg t h ■^ -.that attachment
L ..„■„ Google
196 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
which, in spite of all his endeavors, he had found im-
possible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it
^^Jj^jjd^^^s, she could e asily g^e tblL.bc,. .*'H'^ •* "
.^.{^^ h..t |j} > j j.niiTit-j'Tiance expressed real
g„,t. - „: ^g^pp pn„l^ " nli_eiasger«tp
^j^ • " •* ■—* " ■ " he ceased, the color rose into her
cheekH. > nd abe AAlfl— — —
" In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established
mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments
avowed, however unequally they may be returned. It is
natural that obligation should be felt, and if I could feel
gratitude, I would now thank you. But I cannot — I
have never desired yoor good opinion, and you have
certainly bestowed it most unwillii^y. I am sorry to
have occasioned pain to anyone. It has been most nn-
eonscionsly done, however, and I hope will be of short
duration. The feelings which, yon tell me, have long
prevented the acknowledgment of your regard, can have
little diificnlty in overcoming it after this explanation. "
Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece
with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her
words with no less resentment than sorprise. His com-
plexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of
his mind was visible in every feature. He was strug^ing
for the appearance of composure, and would not open
his lips till he believed himself to have attained it. The
pause was to Elizabeth's feelings dreadful. At length,
in a voice of forced calmness, he said —
" And this is all the reply which I am to have the
honor of expecting! I might, perhaps, wish to be in-
formed why, with so little endeavor at civility, I am
thus rejected. But it is of small importance. "
" I might as well inquire, " replied she, " why with so
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 197
evident & design of offending and insolUng me, yon
chose to tell me that yoa liked me against your will,
against your reason, and even against your character?
Was not this some ezcnse for incivility, if I wa* tm-
civil? But I have other provocations. You know I
have. Ha^ not my own feelinm^£cid^.flfl| Migtjgu —
had they bee n intlilte rem^rhad tbev even been favor-
»hl^^ rtf. Y»^. tmnir Tn«r j|pv .•»tia > Hpr»linp ^n^jlrt tempt'
^^ j-p p* «!.» ^^^ „1.^ h.. l..^„ ^■h. ■ "'^liUlflf T " ^'
jistg^ " " -»«•
As she prononnced these words, Mr, Darcy changed
color; but the emotion was short, and he listened with-
out attempting to interrupt her while she continued —
" I have every reason in the world to think ill of you.
No motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part
you acted there. You dare not, you cannot deny that you
have been the principal, if not the only means of divid-
ing them from each other — of exposing one to the cen-
sure of the world for caprice and instability, the other
to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving
them both in misery of the acutest kind. "
She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that
he was listening with an air which proved him wholly
unmoved by any feeling of remorse. He even looked
at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
" Can you deny that you have done it? " she repeated.
With assumed tranquillity he then replied, " I have
no wish of denying that I did everything in my power
to separate my friend from your sister, or that I rejoice
in my success.'Csgards Aim I have been kinder than
towards myself. "
Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this
civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was
it likely to conciliate her.
L ..„■„ Google
198 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" But it ia not merely this affair, " she continued, " on
which my dislike is founded. Long before it had taken
place my opinion of you was decided. Your character
was unfolded in the recital which I received many months
ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you
have to say? In what imaginary act of friendship can
yon here defend yourself.^ or under what misrepresenta-
tion can you here impose upon others? "
" You take an eager interest in that gentleman's con-
cerns, " said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a
heightened color.
" Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can
help feeling an interest in him? "
J " His misfortunes! " repeated Darcy contemptnously ;
'yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed. "
" And of your infliction, " cried Elizabeth with energy.
" You have reduced him to hia present state of poverty —
comparative poverty. You have withheld the advantages
which you must know to have been designed for him.
You have deprived the best years of his life of that
■independence which was no less bis due than hia desert,
nou have done all this ! and yet yon can treat the men-
lion of hia misfortunes with contempt and ridicule. "
" And this, " cried Darcy, aa he walked with quick
stepa across the room, " is your opinion of me ! This
ia the estimation in which yon hold me ! I thank yoo
for explsining it ao fully. My fanlts, according to this
calculation, are heavy indeed! But perhapa, " added he,
stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, " these
offenses might have been overlooked, had not yourpride
been hurt by my honest confeaaion of the scruple^TGat
had long prevented my forming any serious design.
These bitter accusations might have been suppressed,
had I, with greater policy, concealed my struggles, and
flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 199
nnqaalified, unftlloyed inclination; by reason, by reflec-
tion, by everything. Bnt disguise of every, sort is my
abhorrence. Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I re-
lated. They were natural and just. Copld von ^ xnf.f^t *
me to rejoice in the inferiority of your coanectiipna.''— */^
to congratnlate myself on the hor* - " f ■■pi.iHn.... v-i.„.jj,
condition yj li^q js so dP PJH^^yTmieatli »»]y | > yrTi > " (
■ Elizabeth felt toeraelT growing more angry every mo-
ment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with com-
posure when she said —
" You are mistaken, Mr, Darcy, if you suppose that
the mode of your declaration aSected me in any other
way, than as it spared me the concern which I might
have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more
gentlemanlike manner. "
She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and
she continued —
" You could not have made me the offer of your hand
in any possible way that would have tempted me to
accept it. "
Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked
at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and
mortification. She went on— ^
" From the very beginning — from the first moment,
I may almost aay— of my acquaintance with you, your
manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your
arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the /
feelings of others, were such as to form that ground- 9
work of disapprobation on which succeeding events have ^ ^
built so immovable a dislike ; and I had not known you f^X
a month before I fdt that you were the last man in the \ ^
world whom I could ever be prevaUed on to marrj,^ . -^
" You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly *-^
< »)mprehend your feedings, and have now only to be
ashamed of what my own have been. Forgive me for
L ..„■„ Google
the-iihj^ectiai
200 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
having taken np so mnch of 70ur time, and accept raj
best wishes for yoor health and happiness. "
And with these words he hastily left the room, and
Elicabeth heard him the next moment open the front
door and qoit the house.
The tumult of her mind was now painfully great.
She knew not how to support herself, and from actual
i rf ii l i wnii ■■'I't''" "'^~i ^ilf n n ll " " " Qsi
increased by eyery review ot it. T hat she should re -
■^eive an oSer of marriage from Mr. T > .n-jy'^^ln^ " T^j-
which had made him pteT£iiit.Ma.iufiiid's
sister, and. wJweb- intBt'g p peu i w t Wat
wi th f^f Y VP^ fn TPP in ^ j[j (j^jjyajL— Yff[^^^)^^^j[^jJ^^pTPl^i^l^^^ !
— it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously bo
— hjff f|liniir».1pi.» .fY?^*'of what JifiJiaijdonejirithjp-
a pe ct to jg pe his mumrilfinahjf fii^BlirMllifi ^^ ft 9 ^ , S ^^ "
manner in which he had mentioned Mr. Wickham, his
cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny,
soon overcame the pity which the copsideration of iis
attachment had for a moment excited. flShe continoed
in very agitating reflections till the sound of Lady
Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was
to encounter Charlotte's observation, and hurri^ her
.waytobcrn,?-..-^^^^-^ ^^^^^
7*
< fAr ti/jry-
•C -fxj /«,//»w-

PfilDE AN£t PREJUDICE 201
PfilDE ANC P
^ > Xy T CHAPTER
CHAPTER XXXV
Elizabit h awok^ the next morning to the asme
thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her
eyes. She coald not yet recover from the surprise of
what had happened; it was impossible to think of any-
thing else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she
resolved, soon after breakfast, to indulge herself in air
and exercise. She was proceeding directly to her favor-
ite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy's some-
times coming there stopped hei, and instead of entering
the park, she turned up the lane, which led her farther
from the turnpike-road. The park paling was still the
boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the
gates into the ground.
After walking two or three times along that part of
the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the
morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park.
The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent had
made a great differeuce in the country, and every day
was adding to the verdure of the early trees. She was
on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught
a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove
which edged the park; he was moving that way; and,
fearful of its being Mr. Darcy, she was directly re-
treating. Bat the person who advanced was now near
enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness,
pronounced her name. She had turned away; but on
bearing herself called, though in a voice which proved
it to be Mr. Darcy, she moved again towards the gate.
He had by that time reached it also, and, holding out
a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look
of haughty composure, " I have been walking in the
grove sMue time in the hope of meeting you. Will yoa
- Coo;(lc
202 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
do me the honor of reading that letter? " And then,
with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and
waa soon out of sight.
With no expectation of pleasure, bnt with the strong*
eat curiosity, Elizabeth opened the letter, and, to her
atill-inereasing wonder, perceived an envelope contain-
ing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through, in
a very close hand. The envelope itself waa likewise
full. Pursuing her way along the lane, she then began
it. It was dated from Rosings, at eight o'clock in the
morning, and was as follows: —
" Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by
the apprehension of its containing any repetition of
those sentiments or renewal of those offers which were
last night so disgusting to you. I write without any
intention of paining you, or bumbling myself, by dwell-
ing on wishes which, for the happiness of both, cannot
be too soon forgotten: and the effort which the forma-
tion and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should
have been spared had not my character required it to
be written and read. Yoa must, therefore, pardon the
[freedom] with which I demand your attention; your
feelings, I know, will bestow it unwillingly, but I de-
mand it of your justice.
" Two offenses of a very di£[erent nature, and by no
means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my
charge. The first-mentioned was, that, regardless of
the sentiments of either, I had detached Mr. Bingley
from your sister, — and the other, that I bad, in de-
fiance of various claims, in defiance of honor and ha-
manity, mined the immediate prosperity and blasted the
prospects of Mr. Wickham. — Wilfully and wantonly to
have thrown off the companion of my youth, the ac-
knowledged favorite of my father, a young man who
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 208
had scarcely any oihei dependence tban on our patron-
age, and who had been bronght np to expect ita exertion,
would be a depravity, to which the separation of two
young persona, whose affection conld be the growth of
only a few weeks, conld bear no comparison. Bat from
the severity of that blame which was last night so
liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, I shall
hope to be in future secured, when the following ac-
< N}unt of my actions and their motives has been read.
If, in the explanation of them, which is due to myself,
I am nnder the necessity of relating feelings which may
be offensive to yours, I can only say that I am sorry.
The necessity must be obeyed, and farther apology
would be absurd..
" I had not been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw,
in common with others, that Bingley preferred your
elder sister to any other young woman in the country.
But it was not till the evening of the dance at Nether*
field that I had any apprehension of his feeling a
serious attachment. I had often seen him in love be-
fore. At that ball, while I had the honor of dancing
with you, I was first made acquainted, by Sir William
Lucas's accidental information, that Bingley's attentions
to your sister had given rise to a general expectation
of their marriage. He spoke of it as a certain event,
of which the time alone could be undecided. From that
moment I observed my friend's behavior attentively;
and I conld then perceive that his partiality for Miss
Bennet was beyond what I had ever witnessed in him.
Your sister I also watched. Her look and manners
were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without
any symptom of peculiar regard, and I remained con-
vinced from the evening's scrutiny, that though she re-
ceived his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite
them by any participation of sentiment. If gou have not
L ..„■„ Google
204 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
been mistaken here, I rnnst have been in an error. Your
superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter
probftble. — If it be so, if I have been misled by such
error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been
unreasonable. But I shall not scruple to assert, that
the serenity of your sister's countenance and air was
such as might hare given the most acute observer a con-
[ viction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was
\not likely to be easily touched^ That I was desirous of
believing her indifferent is certain— but I will venture
to say that my investigations and decisions are not usu-
ally influenced by my hopes or fears. I did not believe
her to be indifferent because I wished it; — I believed
it on impartial conviction, as truly as I wished it in
reason. My objections to the marriage were not merely
those which I last night acknowledged to have required
the utmost force of passion to put aside, in my own
case; th e want of connection could not be so great a n
evib4a my.frJgTid.aaJPJ'e. But ihi;re y,cre other^3uses
of repugnance^ — causes which, though still existing, and
existing to an equal degree in both instances, I had my-
self endeavored to forget, because they were not im-
mediately before me. These causes must be stated,
though briefly. The situation of your mother's family,
though objectionable, was nothing in comparison of that
total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uni-
formly betrayed by herself , by your three younger sis-
ters, and oc caaionally e^ i* " by y our fath er. Pardon
me. It pains me to offend yon. But amidst your con-
cern for the defects of your nearest relations, and yont
displeaam^ at this representation of them, let it ^ve
you consolation to consider that, to have tnndncted your-
selves so as to avoid any share of the like censure, is
praise no less generally bestowed on yon and your eldest
sister, than it is honorable to the sense and disposition
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
PKIDE AND PREJUDICE 205
of both. I will only say lartiier that from what passed
that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed,
and every inducement heightened which could have led
me before to preserve my friend from what I esteemed
« most unhappy connection. He left Netherfield for
London, on the day following, as yoa, I am certain,
remember, with the design of soon returning.
" The part which I acted is now to be explained. His
sisters'uneasiness had been equally excited with my
own; oiu* coincidence of feeling was soon discovered,
and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detach-
ing their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him
directly in London. We accordingly went — and there I
readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my
friend the certain evils of such a choice. I described,
and enforced them earnestly. Bat, however this remon-
strance might have staggered or delayed his determina-
tion, I do not suppose that it would ultimately bave
prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by
the assurance which I hesitated not in giving, of your
si ster's indifferenc e. He had before believed her to
return his affection with sincere, if not with equal re-
gard. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a
stronger dependence on my judgment than on his own.
To convince him, therefore, that he bad deceived himself,
was no very difficult pcunt. To persuade him against
returning into Hertfordshire, when that conviction had
been given, was scarcely the work of a moment. I can-
not blame myself for having done thus much. There
is but one part of my conduct in the whole affair on
which I do not reflect with satisfaction; it is, that I
condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to
conceal from him your sister's being in town. I knew
it myself, as it was known to Miss Bin^ey; but her
brother is even yet ignorant of it. That they might
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
206 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
have met without ill consequence ia perhaps probable;
but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished
for him *-- " fp h " "''th " lt''ome danger. Perhaps this
concealment, this disguise was beneath me ; it is done,
however, and it was done for the Tint Oni thin Tvih_
ject I have nnth mj m b i o tn Bajj n n n fhrr n pnlnji T to
. offa». If I have wounded your sister's feelings, it was
inknowinylv don e; and though the motives which gov-
erned me may to you very naturally appear insufG-
dent, I have not yet learnt to condemn them.
" With respect to that other, more weighty accusa-
tion, of having injured Mr. Wickham , I can only refute
it by laying before you the whole of his connection with
my family. Of what he has particularly accused me I
am ignorant; but of the truth of what I shall relate, I
can summon more than one witness of nndoubted
veracity.
" Mr. Wickham is the son of a very respectable man,
who had for many years the management of all the
Pembertey estates, and whose good conduct in the dis-
charge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be
of service to him; and on George Wickham, who was
his godson, his kindness was tlierefore liberally be-
stowed. My father supported him at school, and after-
wards at Cambridge, — most important assistance, as his
own father, always poor from the extravagance of his
wife, would have been unable to give him a gentleman's
" eSucation. My father was not only fond of this young
man's society, whose manners were always engaging; he
had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the
church would be his profession, intended to provide for
him in it. As for myself, it is many, many years since
I first began to think of him in a very different manner.
The vicious propensities — the want of principle, which
he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best
L ..„■„ Google
PHIDE AND PREJUDICE 207
friend, could not escape the observation of a young man
of nearly the same age with himself, and who had
opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments,
which Mr. Darcj could not haire. Here again I shall
give yoa pain — to what degree you only can tell. But
whatever may be the sentiments which Mr. Wickham
has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not pie
vent me from unfolding his real character — it adds even
another motive.
" My excellent father died about five years ago; and
his attachment to Mr. Wickham was to the last so steady,
that in his will he particularly recommended it to me,
to promote his advancement in the best manner that
his profession might allow — and if he took orders, de-
sired that a valuable family living might be his as soon
as it became vacant. There was also a legacy of one
thousand pounds. His own father did not long survive
mine, and within half a year from these events Mr.
Wickham wrote to inform me that, having finall y re-;
solved against taking orders, he hoped I should not think
it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate
pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the [preferment], by
which he could not be benefited. He had some intention,
he adde d, of studying tfa eJag, and I must be aware that
the interest ot one thousand pounds would be a very
insufiGcient support therein. 1 1 rather wished, than be-
lieved him to be sincere — but, at any rate, was perfectly
ready to accede to his proposal. I knew that Mr. Wick-
ham ODgfat not to be a clergyman; the business was
therefore soon settled — ^he resigned all claim to assistance
in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in
a sitaation to receive it, and accepted in return three
t housand pound s. All connection between us seemed
(low dissolved. I thought too ill of him to invite him to
Pemberley, or admit his society in town. In town I bfr-
- Coo;(lc
208 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
liere be chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a
mere pii^J-m-^, »nA Ivin^ Tijiw fFPo fi-n m »11 ^f ;j nlTyii f.j
— hill li f m i l ifi ii f hlh iii ii i w i n l iT |ii|^ |iiiliiiii For abont
three years I heard little of him; but on the decease of
the incumbent of the living which had been designed for
him, he applied to me again by letter for the presenta-
tion. His circumstances, he assured me, and I had no
difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad. He had
found the law a most unproiitable study, and was now
absolutely reso lved on beinp ordained , if I would present
him to the living in questi^ — of which he trusted there
could be little doubt, as he was well assured that I had
no other person to provide for, and I could not have
fergotten my revered father's intentions. Yon will
hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this en-
treaty, or for resisting every repetition of it. His re- "
flentment was in proportion to the distress of his cir-
eumstsDces— and he was doubtless as violent in ins abuse
of me to others as in bis reproaches to myself. After
this period evexy appearance of acquaintance was
dropped. How he lived I know not. But last summer
he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
'" I must now mention a circumstance which I woatd
wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than
the present should induce me to unfold to any human
being. Having said thus much, I feel no doubt of your
secrecy. My sister, who is more than ten years my
junior, was left to the guardianship of my mother's
nephew. Colonel Fitswilliam, and myself. About a year
ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment
formed for her in London; and last smnmer she went
with the lady who presided over it, to Ramsgate; and
thidier also went Mr. Wickham, undoubtedly by design;
for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance be-
tween him and Mrs. Yonnge, in whose character we were
Cootjic
raiDfi AND PREJUDICE 209
most unhappily deceived; and by her connivsace and
aid, he so far recommended himself to Georgi«na,\rho3e
affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his
kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to
■believe herself in love, and to consent to an elopement.
jjSbe was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse;
land after stating her imprudence, I am happy to add,
Fthat I owed the knowledge of it to herself. I joined
them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended
elopement, and tiien Geoi^ana, unable to snpport tfae
idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she al-
most looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole
to me. You may imagine what I felt and bow I acted.
Regard for my sister's credit and feelings prevented
any public exposure; hut I wrote to Mr. Wickham, who
left the place immediately, and Mrs. Younge was of
coarse removed from her charge. Mr. Wickham's chief
object was unquestionably my sister's fortune, which
is thirty t^fnnimnft p pund a; but I cannot help supposing
that the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong
indticement. His revenge would have been complete
indeed.
" This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event
in which we have been concerned together; and if yon
do not reject it as false, you will, I hope, acquit me
henceforth of cruelty towards Mr. Wickham. I know
not in what manner, under what form of falsehood he
has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to
be wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of every-
thing concerning either. Detection could not hr in ymir
power, and sus picion certainly n o t in your ir ^ljnpt'itr
" You may possibly wonder why all this was not told
yon last night; but I was not then master enon^ of my-
self to know what could or ought to be revealed. For
the troth of everything here related, I can appeal more
Cooylc
210 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
particularly to the testimonf of Colonel Fitzwilliam,
who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy,
and, still more, as one of the executors of my father's
will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particu-
lar of these transactions. Jf your abhorrence of me
should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be pre-
vented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin;
and that there may be the possibility of consulting him,
I shall endeavor to find some opportunity of putting
this letter in your hands in the coarse of the morning.
I will only add^ God bless you.
FiTZ WILLI AM Darcy. "
CHAPTER XXXVI
Ir Elizabeth, when Mr. Darcy gave her the letter, did
not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had
formed no expectation at all of its contents. Bnt such
as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly she
went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion
they excited. Her feelings as she read were scarcely
to be defined. With amazement did she first understand
that he believed any apology to be in his power; and
steadfastly was she persuaded, that be could have no
explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would
not conceal. With a strong prejudice against every-
thing he might say, she began his account of what had
happened at Netherfield. She read with an eagerness
which hardly left her power of comprehension, and from
impatience of knowing what the next sentence might
bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the
one before her eyes. His belief of her sister's insensi-
bility she instantly resolved to be false ; and his account
of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 211
too angry to have any Trish of doing him justice. He ex-
pressed no regret for vhat he had done which satisfied
her; his style was not penitent, but haughty. It was
all pride and insolence.
But when this subject was succeeded by his account
of Mr. Wickham, — when she read with somewhat clearer
attention a relation of events which, if true, must over-
throw every cherished opinion of his worth, and which
bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of him-
self, — her feelings were yet more acutely painful and
more difficult of definition. Astonishment, apprehension,
and even horror, oppressed her. She wished to discredit
it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, " This must be false !
This cannot be! This must be the grossest falsehood! "
— and when she had, gone through the whole letter^
though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or
two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not
regard it, that she would never look in it again.
In this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that
could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not
do; in half a miaute the letter was unfolded again, and
collecting herself as well as she could, she again began
the mortifying perusal of all that related to Wickham,
and commanded herself so far as to examine the mean-
ing of every sentence. The account of his connection
with the Pemberley family was exactly what he had re-
lated himself; and the kindness of the late Mr. Darcy,
though she had not before known its extent, agreed
equally well with his own words. So far each recital
confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the
difference was great. What Wickham had said of the
living was fresh in her memory, and as she recalled his
very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was
gross duplicity on one side or the other; and, for a few
moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not
- Coo;(lc
212 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
err. But when she read and re-read with the closest
attention, the particalars immediately following of Wick-
ham's resigning'all pretensions to the living, of his re-
ceiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand
pounds, again was she forced to hesitate. She put down
the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she
meant to he impartiality—deliberated on the probability
of each statement — but with little success. On both
sides it was only assertion. Again she read on; but
every line proved more clearly that the affair, which
she had believed it impossible that any contrivance conid
so represent as to render Mr. Darcy's conduci; in it less
than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make
him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
The extravagance and general profligacy which be
scrupled not to lay to Mr. Wickham's charge, exceed-
ingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no
proof of its injustice. She had never heard of him be-
fore his entrance into the shire Militia, in which
he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man who,
on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed
a slight acquaintance. Of his former way of life noth-
ing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told
himself. As to his real character, had information been
in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring.
/Uiii ..nnntirinii^^^ YlTiffi " " id manucr had established him
I °t ftnnp \7] *^1\ p " aa''> »ijpp i)f pvp,rv_ virtne . She tried to
recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished
trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him
from the attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the
predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors
under which she would endeavor to class what Mr.
Darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many
years'continuance. But no such recollection befriended
her. She could see him instantiy before her, in every
- Coo;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
213
charm of air aod address ; but she could remember no
more sabstantial good than the general approbation of
the neighborhood, and the regard which his social powers
had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this
point a considerable while, she once more continned to
read. But, alas ! the story which followed, of his de-
signs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from
what had passed between Colonel Fitzwilliam and her-
self only the morning before; and at last she was re-
ferred for the truth of every particular to Colonel Fitz-
william himself — from whom she had previously re-
ceived the information of bis near concern in all bis
cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no reason
to question. At one time she had almost resolved on
applying t« him, but the idea was checked by the awk-
wardness of the application, and at length wholly ban-
ished by the conviction t^«*, " Mf Darcv f d'''^ riptn-r
lllllil baiiiililiil liiirh II |iilHlf " "'l, if > " ■ l " " j r,nt ^)een well
assured of his yflPl'"'s fif •^ " ^ ^oration.
She perfectly remembered everything that had passed
in conversation between Wickham and herself, in their
first evening at Mr. Philips's. Many of his expres-
sions were still fresh in her memory. She was now
struck with the impropriety o f such communicaiiagg_to
a strangs ri " i^ trnnrtiT'^ it: " ^! i'jum\\vff%ai! hpffft-p
'btie saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he
bad done, and the inconsistency of his professions with
his conduct. She remembered that he. had boasted of
^ " " " 0 " " frnr -^f " -'" n Mr - Darcv — that Mr. Darcy
might Ifinia thr rriiiiM'j^ liiil lliiil,'■f -t-^-i-^ ptnttii hii
#M^uidi_ietJieJifld_j£flided--th«--N«rterfeld--baH--the
vet ^next week . She remembered also that, till the Ncth-
erfield family had quitted the country, he had told his
story to no one but herself; but that after their re-
.^j^c ry w ht-i't. di ou uMM ed; that he had
214 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
character, though he had aaa ured h < ^r tifftt: rp-apfict
f oif the f^th^ Trf-l^^r^ rtlwny^ prJ^y^nl : IHT exposing the
How differently did everything now appear in which
he was concerned ! HifUaUgntiDns to Miss Kijig_3rere
n " TY t^f mnfirilllfn* " " ^ viaiTS snlfly iir^'^^tiPf " ^'y ingi--
_Cfinajy; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no
longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness
to grasp at anything. His behavior to herself could
now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been
deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been grati-
fying his vanity by encouraging the preference which
she believed she had most incautiously shown. Every
lingering struggle in his favor grew fainter and fainter;
and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not
but allow that Mr. Bingley, when questioned by Jane,
had long ago asserted his blamelessnesa in the affair;
that proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had
never, in the whole course of their acquaintance — an
acquaintance which had latterly brought them much to-
gether, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways
— seen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled
or unjust — anything that spoke him of irreligious or
immoral habits; that among his own connections he was
esteemed and valued — that even Wickham had allowed
him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard
biro speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him
capable of some amiable feeling; that had hia actions
been what Wickham represented them, so gross a viola-
tion of everything right could hardly have been con-
cealed from the world; and that friendship between a
person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr.
\ Bingley, was incomprehensible.
•^ She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of lieitber
- Cookie
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE lV^ 215 " *,^ " " ^
Darcy nor Wickham could she think withotit feeling thai \\
she had been blind, partial, p rejudiced, aba.u rd. ^^ fe
" How despicably have 1 acted! "'she cried; " I'whoiO
have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have ^M
valued myself on jaj abilities! who have often disdained p*T'^ " >
the generous candor of my sister, and gratified my,,.) ^
vanity in useless or blamable distrnat. How humili- " f
\ ating is this discovery! yet, how just a humiliation! tL/'I
\a^- kHad I been in love, I could not have been more wretch-''jV
y^ y^^^y blind. But vanity, n nf. Invi-.. has been my foUy. i**i
JV'■y vPleased with the preference, nf nn^ , and offead^^ tlT the i " J^. " )
■4\ n.a.;„t-»npp. ^ h«vp poiii-ted Tirgpoaaeasion and ignoran ce. T
\^'^■ " j A,i«^^ -^-.„„ ° " rTi TrJlfir? " ^''°''were concerned.
V jI^'T': " tl-i " ^rnf: ^ TiptriT Irnpw mygglf "
^ T From herself to Jane — fjfln?janc to Bingley, her
^j /thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recol-
/ lection that Mr. Darcy's expUnatioti there had ap-
peared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely
different was the eifect of a second perusal. How could
she deny that credit to his assertions, in one instance,
which she had been obliged to give in the other. He
declared himself to have been totally unsnapicious of
her aiater's attachment; and she could not help remem-
bering what Charlotte's opinion had always been.
Neither could she deny the justice of his description
of Jane. She felt that Jane's feelinp|s^ thouph fervent,
" ^'•'^ ilitrtfs dianf^'" " ^ W^ that th ere was a constan t
complacency in her "'■■'" -^ m.njifi- r^^t nft^n^TWlM
When she came to that part of the letter in which her
family were mentioned in terms of such mortifying, yet
"'* i''i ltfi l^ reproac h, her sense of ahamtf was severe. The
justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial,
and ttie circumstances to which he particnlarly alluded
L ,., > ,„ Google
218 PKIDE AND PREJUDICE
& s having paased at the Netherfield ball, and as con-
firming all his first disapprobation, could not have made
a stronger impression on his mind than on hera.
The compliment to herself and her sister was not
— *- " - " ■ —'Vfj^^..t it ^fi]4 Tint pp^,»y f^p,. f^-. n.^
con tempt, which* had ^l*^! V^ " ir'f iltTMtnd hf Huj rnt
oi liet falilByrand as she considered that Jane's dis-
appoiu^ent had in fact been the work of her nearest
relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both
must be hart by snch impropriety of conduct, she felt
depressed beyond anything she had ever known , fpL hw*\ .
After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving
way to every variety of thought — rc-considering events,
determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well
as she could, to a change so sudden and so important,
fatigue, and a recoUection'of her long absence, made
her at length return home ; and she entered the house
with the wish of appeftjring cheerful aa v''^f\ ■p'* H^*-
.xeaolution of r epreasim^ s uch reHections as must make
She was immediately told that the two gentlemen
from Rosings had each called during her absence; Mr.
Darcy, only for a few minutes to take leave, but that
Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an
hour, hopiog for her return, and almost resolving to walk
after her till she could be found. Elizabeth could but
just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced
at it. Colonel Fitzwilliam was no longer an object; she
could think only of ber letter.
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXXVII
.^-i
The two gentlemen left Rosings th6 next morning,
«nd Mr. Collins having been in waiting near the lodges,
to make them his partin g obe ij»ac»; waa able to bring
home the pleasing intelligence, of their appearing in
very good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be
expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone
tbroogh at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened, to
console Lady Catherine and her daughter; and on his
return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message
from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so
doll as to make her very desirous of having them all to
dine with her. r~
Elisabeth could not see La^y Catherine without recol-
lecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time
have been presented to her as her future niece; nor
could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyship's
indignation would have been. " What would she have
said? — how would she have behaved? " were questions
with which she amused herself. -^
Their first subject was tiie diminution of the Rosings
party. " I assure yon, I feel it exceedingly, " said Lady
Catherine; " I believe nobody feels the loss of friends so
much as I do. But I am particularly attached to these
yonng men, and know them to be so much attached to
me! — They were excessively sorry to go! But so they
always are. The dear colonel rallied his'spirits tolerably
till just at last; but Darcy seemed to feel it most
acutely, more, I think, than last year. His attachment
to Rosings certainly increases. "
Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw
in here, which were kindly smiled on by the mother and
daughter.
L ..„■„ Google

218 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Misa
Becnet seemed oat of spirits, and immediately account-
ing for it heraelf, by supposing that she did not like to
go home again so soon, she added —
" But if that is the ease, you must write to your mother
to beg that you may atay a little longer. Mrs. Colliiu
will be very glad of your company, I am sure. "
" I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind
invitation, " replied Elieabeth, " but it is not in my
power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday. "
" Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six
weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I tohi
Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occa-
sion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could cer-
tainly spare you for another fortnight. "
, " But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry
my return. "
" Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your
mother can. Daughters are never of so much conse-
quence to a father. And if yon will stay another month
complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as
far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a
week; and as Dawson does not object to the barouche-
bos, there will be very good room for one of yon — and
indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, I
should not object to taking you both, as you are neither
of yon large. "
" You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must
abide by our original plan. "
Lady Catherine seemed resigned. " Mrs. Collins, you
must send a servant with them. You know I always
speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two
young women travelling post by themselves. It is highly
improper. Yon must contrive to send somebody. I have
the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 219
Young women should alvays be propetly guarded and
attended, according to their situation in life. When my
niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made
ft point of her having two men-servanta go witii her.
Misa Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of Pemberley,
and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety
in a different manner. I am excessively attentive to all
those things. You must send John with the young ladies,
Mrs. Collins. I am glad it occurred to me to mention
it ; for it would really be discreditable to- yoit to let them
go alone. "
" My uncle is to send a servant for us. "
" Oh! — Your uncle! — He keeps a man-servant, does
he? — I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of
those thiugs. Where shall you change horses? — Oh!
Bromley, of course. — If yon mention my name at the
Bell, you will be attended to. "
Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask re-
specting their journey, and as she did not answer them
all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth be-
lieved to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so occupied,
she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection
must be reserved for solitary hours; whenever she was
■lone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not
a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she
might indulge i n all the i ^^Hght j > f ^inpjf^paant T^pM-
Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon
knowing by heart, She studied every sentence; and her
feelings towards it^ writer were at times widely different.
When she remembered the style of his address, she was
still full of indignation; but when she considered how
unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her
anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed
feelings became the object of cinnpassion. His attach-
L ..„■„ Google
220 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ment excited gratitude, liia general character respect;
\ but she cbald not approve him; nor conld she for a
( , moment rep ent her refusal , or f eel the slightest ipcli na-
\^,- tion ever to see him again. In her own past behavior,
^ there was^a'coiisEant source of vexation and regret; and
in the unhappy defects of her familj) a subject of yet
hfftvjp r cbaapin . They were hopeless of remedy . Her
father, contented'^cith laughing at them, would never
exert himself to rt-irfTniii i-hp wi|j^ yj^^^^illgaB fit hia young-
est daughters; and her mother, with nianners_so_^*r
from right herself, was entirely insensible, ^f the evil,
Elizabeth had frequency mtifed with Jane in an en-
deavor to check the imprudence of Cathenj^^mdJijuli^ ;
but while they were supported by their mother's indnl-
gence,_what clmnce.jaBUd Jhere be of improyement?
Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable^ and completely under
Lydia's guidance, had been always affronted by their
advice; and Lydia, self-willed and careless, would
scarcely give them a hearin g. They were ignorant, idle,
»ni Wi^. VtTiil'e there was an officer in Meryton, they
would flirt with him; and while Meryton was within a
walk of Longbourn, they would be going there for ever.
Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing con-
cern; and Mr. Darcy's explanation, by restoring Bing-
ley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense
of what Jane had lost. His affection was proved to have
been sincere, an d-his-copduct cleared of all blaroe, nn-
Ipcb ifTij, ■;,j)n|(}, af^Bigh tn thi- implintnffSH nf hjfl " "'^~
aence i n his ^ y end. How grievous then was the thought
" TTiairoT a situation so Sesiratre in every re3t > ect, so re-
plete with rn j -nnt a gr, i Hi j ii'" * ! j •* — ^^TT^'- J^ne
own'*?Stnilv-L f^A. y.u^.j j-yf^-tw-fc* r^JffJutXj/
Wnen to these recollections was added the develop-
ment of Wickham's character, it may be easily believed
Coosic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 221
th & t the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed
before, were now so much affected as to make it almost
impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.
Their engagements at Bosings were as frequent dur-
ing the last week of her stay as they had been at first.
The very last evening was spent there; and her lady-
ship again inquired minutely into the particulars of their
jonrney, gave them directions aa to the best method of
packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing;
I gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought her-
I self obliged, on her return, to undo aU the work of the
Imorning, and pack her trunk afresh.
When they parted. Lady Catherine, with great con-
deacenaion, wished them a good journey, and invited
them to come to Hunsford again next year: apd Mi^y
de Bourgh everted herself so far as to courtsey a nd
^ "''* ■ " "''" " r ha "''* " *'1?*''
CHAPTER XXXVIII
Oh Saturday morning, Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met
for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared;
and be took the opportunity of paying the parting civili-
ties which he deemed indispensably necessary.
" I know not. Miss Elieabeth, " said he, " whether Mrs.
Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in
coming to us ; but I am very certain you will not leave
the house without receiving her thanks for it. The
favor of your company has been much felt, I assure you.
We know how little there is to tempt anyone to our
humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our smalt
rooms and few domestics, and the little we see of the
world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young
- Coo;(lc
222 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
lady like yourself; but I hope yon will believe us grate-
ful for the coudescensioa, and that we have done every-
thing in our power ta prevent your spending your time
unpleasantly. "
Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances
of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great en-
joyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and
the kind attentions she had received, must make her
feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a
more smiling solemnity replied —
" It gives me the greatest pleasure to hear tliat you
have passed your time not disagreeably. We have cer-
tainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in
our power to introduce you to very superior society, and,
from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter
ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been en-
tirely irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady
Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary
advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see
on what a footing we are. Yon see how continually we
are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that,
with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I
should not think anyone abiding in it an object of com-
passion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at
Words were insuflicient for the elevation of his feel-
ings ; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while
Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in tt few short
sentences,
" You may, in fact, carry a very favorable report of
us into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter myself
at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine's
great attentions to Mrs. Collins you have been a daily
witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 228
that your friend haa dr & wn an nnfortunftte But on
this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me
asflure you, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that I can from
my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in mar-
riage. My dear Charlotte and I have but one mind and
one way of thinking. There is in everything a most
remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between
US. We seem to have been designed for each other. "
'Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happi-
ness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity
could add, that she 6rmly believed and rejoiced in his
domestic comforts. She was not sorry, however, to have
the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the
lady from whom they sprang. Poor Charlotte! it was
melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had
chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently re-
gretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem
to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping,
her pariah and her poultry, and all their dependent con-
cerns, bad not yet lost their charms.
At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened
on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to
be ready. After an affectionate parting between the
friends, Elisabeth was attended to the carriage by Mr.
Collins, and as they walked down the garden, he was
commissioning her with his best respects to all her
family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he
had received at Longbonm in the winter, and bis com-
pliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, tbou^ unknown.
He then handed her in, Maria followed, and the door
was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly
reminded them, with some consternation, that they bad
hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies
of Rosings.
" But, " he added, " you will of course wish to have
- Coo;(lc
224 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
your humble respects delivered to them, with your grate-
f al thanks for their kindness to you while you have been
here. "
Elizabeth made no objectioo; the door was then al-
lowed to be shot, and the carriage drove off.
" Good gracious! " cried Maria, after a few minutes'
silence, " it seems but a day or two since we first came !
— and yet how many things have happened ! "
" A great many indeed, " said her companion with a
•igh.
" We have dined nine times at Bosings, besides drink-
ing tea there twice! How much I shall have to tell! "
Elizabeth privately added, " And how much I shall
have to conceal! "
Their journey was performed without much conversa-
tion, or any alarm; and within four hours of their leav-
ing Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's house, where
they were to remain a few days.
Jane looked well, and Elizabetii had little opportnnil^
of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements
which tlie kindness of her aunt had reserved for them.
But Jane was to go home with her, and at Longbourn
there would be leisure enough for observation.
It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she
conld wait even for Longboam, before she told her sister
of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know that she had the
power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify
whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able
to reason away, waa such a temptation to openness as
nothing could have conquered but the state of indecision
in which she remained as to the extent of what she should
communicate; and her fear, if she once entered on the
subject, of being hurried into repeating something of
Bingley whicli might only grieve her sister further.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XXXIX
It was the second week in May, in which the three
young ladies set oat tt^ether from Gracechurch Street
£or the town of , in Hertfordshire; and, as they
drew near the appointed inn where Mr. Bennet's car-
riage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token
of the coachman's punctuality, both Eitty and Lydia
looking out of a dining-room upstairs. These two girls
had been above an hour in the place, happily employed
in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel
on guard, and dressing « [salad] and cucumber.
After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly dis-
played a table set out with such cold meat as on inn
larder usually affords, exclaiming, " Is not this nice? is
not this an agreeable surprise? "
" And we mean to treat you all, " added Lydia; " but
you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ouia
at the shop out there. " Then, showing her purchases —
" Look here, I have bought this bonnet. I do not think
it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it
as not. I shall pull it to pieces as soon as I get home,
and see if I can make it up any better. "
And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added,
with perfect unconcern, " Oh! but there were two or
three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought
some prettier-colored satin to trim it with fresh, I think
it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much
signify what one wears this summer after the shire
have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight. "
" Are they indeed ! " cried Elixabetb, with the greatest
satisfaction.
" They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and
I do so want papa to take us all there for the summer !
- Coo;(lc
226 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
It would be sucb a delicious scheme, and I dare say
would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma wonld like
to go too of all things ! Only think what a miserable
summer else we shall have! "
" Yes, " thought Elizabeth, " that wonld be a delightful
scheme indeed, and completely do for us at once. Good
Heaven ! Brighton, and a whole campful of soldiers, to
us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment
of militia, and the monthly balls at Meryton! "
" Now I have got some news for you, " said Lydia, as
they sat down at table. " What do you think? It is
excellent news — capital news — and about a certain per-
son that we all like! "
Jane and Elisabeth looked at each other, and the
waiter was told that he need not stay. Lydia laughed,
and said —
" Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion.
You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared!
I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am
going to say. Bat be is such an ugly fellow! I am
glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my
life. Well, but now for my news; it is about dear
Wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it? There is
no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary King. There's
for you! She is gone down to her ancle at Liverpool:
gone to stay. Wickham is safe, "
" And Mary King is safe! " added Elizabeth; " safe
from a connection imprudent as to fortune. "
" She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him. "
" But I hope there is no strong attachment on eitiier
side, " said Jane.
" I am sure there is not on hit. I will answer for
it, he never cared three straws about her — who could
about such a nasty little freckled thing? "
Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however in-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 227
capable of anch coarseneas of exprettion herself, the
coarseness of the tentiment was little other than her own
breast had formerlf harbored and fancied liberal !
As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the
carriage was ordered; and after some contrivance, the
whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels,
and the onwelcome addition of Kitty's and Lydia's put-
chases, were seated in it.
" How nicely we are crammed in, " cried Lydia. " I
am glad I bonght my bonnet, if it is only for the fun
of having another bandbox t Well, now let us be quite
comfortable and snag, and talk and laugh all the way
home. And in the first place, let ns hear what has
happened to you all since you went away. Have you
seen any pleasant men i Have you had any flirting ? I
was in great hopes that one of you would have got a
hnsband before you came back. Jane will be quite an
old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-
twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not being
married before three-and-twenty ! My aunt Philips
wants you so to get husbands, yon can't think. She says
lAzsy had better have taken Mr. Collins; but / do not
think there would have been any fun in it. Lord ! how
I should like to be married before any of you ! and then
I would chaperon you about to all the halls. Dear me !
we had such a good piece of fun the other day at
Colonel Forster's, Kitty and me were to spend the
day there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little
dance in the evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and
me are $uch friends !) and so she asked the two Har-
ringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen was
forced to come by herself ; and then, what do you think
we did ? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman's
clothes on purpose to pass for a lady, — only think what
fon! Not a sonl knew of it, but Colonel and Mrs.
C.qo;(lc
228 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
\ Forster, and Eitty and me, except my snnt, for ire were
\ forced to borrow one of her gqvna ; and you cannot
limagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Widc-
ibam, and Pratt, and two or three more of the men came
In, they did not know him in the least. Lord! how I
Danghed! and so did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should
(have died. And that made the men suspect something,
land then they soon found out what was the matter. "
With such kind of histories of their parties and good
jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and additions,
endeavor to amuse her companions all the way to Long-
bourn. EUiabeth listened as little as she could, bnt
there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wid£-
ham's name.
Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet
rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty; and more
than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily
to Elizabeth —
" 1 am glad yoa are come back, LisHy. "
Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost
ail the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the news;
and various were the subjects which occupied them:
Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, across the table,
after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter;
Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one band collect-
ing an account of the present fashions frtnn Jane, who
sat some way below her, and, on the other, retailing them
all to the younger Miss Lncases; and Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person's, was enumerating
the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who
would hear her.
" Oh! Mary, " said she, " I wish you had gone with
us, for we had such fun ! As we went along, Kitty and
me drew op all the blinds, and pretended there was
nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 229
w»y, if Kitty had not been sick ; and when we got to the
George, I do think we behaved very handsomely, for we
treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in
the worldj and if yoo would have gone, we would have
treated you too. And then when we came away it was
such fun ! I thought we never should have got into the
coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we
were so merry all the way home ! we talked and laughed
so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles
off! "
To this Mary very gravely replied, " Far be it from
me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They
would doubtless be congenial with the generality of
female minds. But I confess they would have no charms
for ffle — I should infinitely prefer a book. "
But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She
seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute,
and never attended to Mary at all.
In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of
the girls to walk to Meryton, and see how everybody
went on; but BlJEabeth steadily opposed the scheme.
It should not be said that the Miss Bennets could not
be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of
the officers. There was another reason too for her op-
position. She dreaded seeing Wickham again, and was
resolved to avoid it as long as possible. The comfort
to her of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed
beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go —
and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more
to plague her on his account.
she had not been many hours at home before she
found that the Rrigfaton scheme, of which Lydia had
given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent dis-
cossion between her parents. Elizabeth saw directly
that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding;
L ..„■„ Google
280 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
bat hU answers were at the same time so vague and
equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened,
had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.
CHAPTER XL
Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what
had happened could no longer be overcome; and at
length, resolving to suppress every particular in which
her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be sur-
prised, she related to her the next morning the chief of
the scenes between Mr. Darcy and herself.
Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the
strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of
Elizabeth appear perfectly natural ; and all surprise was
shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr.
Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a man-
ner so little suited to recommend them; but still more
was she grieved for the unhsppiness which her sister's
refusal must have given him.
" His being so sure of succeeding was wrong, " said
she, " and certainly ought not to have appeared; but
consider how maeh it must increase his disappoint-
" Indeed, " replied Elizabeth, " I am heartily sorry for
him ; but he has other feelings, which will probably soon
drive away his regard for me. You do not blame me,
however, for refusing him ? "
" Blame you! Oh, no! "
" But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of
Wickham? "
" No — I do not know that you were wrong in saying
what you did. "
L .., > ,„Cooglc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 281
" But yon xeill know it, when I have told yoa what
happeaed the very nest day. "
She then spoke of the letter^ repeating the whole of its
contenta as far as they concerned George Wickham.
What a stroke was this for poor Jane ! who would will-
ingly have gone through the world without believing
that so nrach wickedness existed In the whole race of
mankind, as was here collected, in one individual. Nor
was Darcy's vindication, though grateful to her feelings,
capable of consoling her for such discovery. Most ear-
nestly did she labor to prove the probability of error,
and seek to clear one withoat involving the other.
" This will not do, " said Elisabeth; " you never will
be able to make both of them good for anything. Take
your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one.
There is but such a quantity of merit between them;
joat enough to make one good sort of man; and of late
it has been shifting about pretty much. For my part,
I am inclined to believe it all Mr. Darcy's ; but you shall
do as you choose. "
It was some time, however, before a smile could be
extorted from Jane.
" I do not know when I have been more shocked, " said
she. " Wickham so very bad! It is almost past belief.
And poor Mr. Darcy ! Dear Lizzy, only consider what
he must have suffered. Such a disappointment! and with
the knowledge of your ill opinion too! and having to
relate such a thing of bis sister! It is really too dis-
tressing. I am sure you must feel it so. "
" Oh ! no, my regret and compassion are all done away
by seeing you so full of both. I know you will do him
such ample justice, that I am growing every moment
more unconcerned and indifferent. Your profusion
makes me saving; and if you lament over him much
longer, my heart will be as light as a feather. "
L ..„■„ Google
282 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" Poor Wickham ! there is such an expression of good-
ness in his countenance ! such an openness and gentle-
ness in his manner! "
" There certainly was some great mismanagement in
the education of those two young men. One has got all
the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it. "
" I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the appear-
ance of it as you used to do. "
" And yet I meant to be uncommooly clever in taking
so decided a dislike to him, without any reason. It is
such a spur to one's genins, such an opening for wit, to
have a dislike of that kind. One may be continually
abusive without saying anything just; but < «ie cannot be
always laughing at a man without now and then stum-
bling on something witl^. "
" Liziy, when you first read that letter^ I am sure yon
could not treat the matter as you do now. "
" Indeed, I could not. I was uncomfortable enough.
I was very imcomfortable, I may say unhappy. And
with no one to speak to of what I felt, no Jane to com-
fort me and say that I had not been so very weak and
vain and nonsensical as I knew I bad! Ob! how I
wanted you I "
" How unfortunate that yon should have used such
very strong expressions in speaking of Wickham to Mr.
Darcy, for now they do appear wholly nndeserved. "
" Certainly. But the misfortune of speaking with bit'
temess is a most natural consequence of the prejudices
I had been encouraging. There is one point on which
I want yonr advice. I want to be told whether I ou^t,
or ought not, to make onr acquaintance in general under-
stand Wickham's character. "
Miss Bennet paused m little, and then replied, " Sorely
time can be do occasion for exposing faim ao dreadfully.
What is your own (pinion? "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PRBJUDICE 233
" Thst it ought not to be attempted. Mr. Darcy haa
not autfaorized me to make his commaiiication public.
On the contrary, every particnlar relative to his sister
was meant to be kept as moch as possible to myself;
and if I endeavor to undeceive people as to the rest of
his conduct, vho will beheve me? The general preja-
dice against Mr, Darcy is so violent, that it would be
the death of half the good people in Meryton to attempt
to place him in an amiable light. I am not equal to it.
Wiekham will soon be gone; and therefore it will not
signify to anybody here what he really is. Some time
hence it will be all found out, and then we may lan^
at their stupidity in not knowing it before. At present
I will say nothing about it. "
" Yon are quite right. To have his errors made public
might ruin him forever. He is now, perhaps, sorry for
what he has done, and anxious to re-establish a char-
acter. We mnst not make him desperate. "
The tumult of Elizabeth's mind was allayed by this
conversation. She had got rid of two of the secrets
which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was cer-
tain of a willing listener in Jane, whenever she might
wish to talk again of either. But there was still some-
thing lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the
disclosure. She dared not relate the other half of Mr.
Darcy's letter, nor explain to her sister bow sincerely
she had been valued by his friend. Here was knowledge
in which no one could partake; and she was sensible
that nothing less than a perfect understanding between
the parties could justify her in throwing off this last
encumbrance of mystery. " And then, " said she, " if that
very improbable event should ever take place, I shall
merely be able to tell what Bingley may tell in a much
more agreeable manner himself. The liberty of com-
municatitm cannot be mine till it has lost oil its Talne ) "
L ..„■„ Google
284 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
She was now, on being settied at home, at leisure to
observe the real state of her sister's spirits. Jane was
not happy. She still cherished a very tender affection
for Bingley. Having never even fancied herself in love
before, her regard had all the warmth of first attach-
meat, and, from her age and disposition, greater steadi-
ness than first attachments often boast; and so fervently
did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every
other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention
to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check
the indulgence of those regrets which must have been
injurions to her own health and their tranquillity.
" Well, Lizzy, " said Mrs. Bennet one day, " what ia
your opinion now of this sad business of Jane's ? For my
part, I am determined never to speak of it again to any-
body. I told my sister Philips so the other day. But I
cannot find out that Jane saw anything of him in I^on-
don. Well, he is a very undeserving young man — and
I do not suppose there is the least chance in the world
of her ever getting him now. There is no talk of his
coming to Netherfield again in the summer; and I have
inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know. "
" I do not believe that he will ever live at Netherfield
any more. "
" Oh, well! it is jost as he chooses. Nobody wants
him to come. Though I shall always say that he used
my daughter extremely ill ; and if I was her, I would
not have put up with it. - Well, my comfort is, I am sure
Jane will die of a broken heart; and then he will be
sorry for what he has done. "
But as Elizabeth could not receive comfort from any
such expectation, she made no answer.
" Well, Liszy, " continued her mother, soon afterwards,
" and so the Collinses live very comfortable, do they?
Well, well, I only hope it will last. And what sort of
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 286
table do they keep? Charlotte is an excellent manager,
I dare say. If she is half as sharp as her mother, she
is saving enough. There is nothing extravagant in their
housekeeping, I dare say. "
" No, nothing at all. "
" A great deal of good management, depend iipon it.
Yes, yes. They wiU take care not to outrun their in-
come. They will never be distressed for money. Well,
much good may it do them ! And so, I suppose, they
often talk of having Longbonrn when your father is
dead. They look upon it quite as their own, I dare say,
whenever that happens. "
" It was a subject which they could not mention be-
fore me. "
" No; it would have been strange if they had; but I
make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves.
Well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not
lawfully their own, so much the better. / should be
ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me. "
CHAPTER XXI
The first week of their return was soon gone. The
second began. It was the last of the regiment's stay in
Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighborhood
were drooping apace. The dejection was almost uni-
versal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to
eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of
their employments. Very frequently were they re-
proached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose
own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend
such hard-heartedness in any of the family.
" Good Heavens! what is to become of us? What are
..„■, " , Google
236 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
we to do? " wotild they often exclaim in the bittentess
of woe. " How can yoa be smiling so, Li%xyi "
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she
remembered what she had herself endured on a similar
occasion, five-and-twenty years ago.
" I am sure, " said she, " I cried for two days together
when Colonel Miller's regiment went away. I thought
I should have broke my heart. "
" I am sure I shall break mine, " said Lydis.
" If one could bnt go to Brighton! " observed Mrs.
Bennet.
" Oh, yes ! — if one could but go to Brighton ! Bnt papa
is so disagreeable. "
" A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever, "
" And my Aunt Philips is sare it would do me a great
deal of good, " added Kitty.
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding per-
petually through Longbonrn House. Elizabeth tried to
be diverted by them; bnt all sense of pleastire was lost
in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr, Darcy's
objections; and never had she before been so mncb dis-
posed to pardon his interference in the views of his
But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared
away; for she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster,
the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany
her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very
young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance
in good humor and good spirits had recommended her
and Lydia to each other, and ont of their three months'
acquaintance they had been intimate ttoo.
The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration
of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the
mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described.
Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings^ Lydia fiew
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 237
about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for every-
one's congratnlatiocs, and lauf^ing and talking with
more violence than everj whilst the luckless Kitty con-
tinued in the parlor repining at her fate in terms as
unreasonable as ber accent was peevish.
" I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask me
as well as Lydia, " said she, " though I am not her
particular friend. I have just as much tight to be
asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years
older. "
In rain did Elisabeth attempt to make her reason-
able, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth
herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in ber
the same feelings as in ber mother and Lydia, that she
considered it as the death warrant of all possibility of
common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a
step must make her were it known, she could not help
secretly advising ber father not to let ber go. She
represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's gen-
eral behavior, the little advantage she could derive from
the friendship of rach a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the
probability of ber being yet more impmdent with such
a companion at Brixton, where the temptations must
he greater than at hcnne. He beard her attentively, and
then said —
" Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself
in some public place or other, and we can never erpect
her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her
family as under the present circumstances. "
" If you were aware, " said Elizabeth, " of the very
great disadvantage to us all which must arise from the
pablic notice of Lydia's nngoarded and imprudent man-
ner — nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure
yaa would jndge differently in the affair. "
" Already arisen? " repeated Mr. Bennet. " What, has
L ..„■„ Google
238 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
she frightened away some of your lovers ? Poor little
Lizzy ! Bat do not be cast down. Sneh sqneamish
youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little
absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the
list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by
Lydia's folly. "
" Indeed you are mistaken. I luive no such injuries
to resent. It is not of peculiar, but of general evils,
which I am now complaining. Our importance, our
respectability in the world must be affected by the wild
volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which
mark Lydia's character. Excuse me, — for I must speak
plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trou-
ble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching
her that her present pursuits are not to be the business
of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amend-
ment. Her character will be fixed, and she will, at
sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made
herself and her family ridiculous; — a flirt, too, in the
worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any
attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and,
from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly
unable to ward off any portion of that universal con-
tempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In
this danger Kitty is also comprehended. She will fol-
low wherever Lydia leads. Vain, ignorant, idle, and
absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you
suppose it possible that they will not be censured and
despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters
will not be often involved in the disgrace? "
Mr. Rennet saw that her whole heart was in the sub-
ject, and affectionately taking her hand, said in reply —
" Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever
yon and Jane are known you must be respected and
valued; and yon will not appear to less advantage for
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 239
having a couple of — or I may say, three very silly
sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbonm if Lydia
does not go to Brighton. Let her go, then. Colonftl
Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any
real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an
object of prey to anybody. At Brighton she will be of
less importance even as a common flirt than she has
been here. The oiGcers will find women better worth
their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being
there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate,
she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorizing
us to lock her up for the rest of her life. "
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content;
but her own opinion continued the same, and she left
him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature,
however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
She was confident of having performed her duty, and
to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by ans-
iety, was no part of her disposition.
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of
her conference with her father, their indignation would
haidly have found expression in their united volubility.
In Lydia's imagination, a visit tn Brighton comprised
every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with
the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing-
place covered with officers. She saw herself the object
of attention to tens and to scores of them at present
unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp— its tents
stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded
with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet;
and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath
a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six oiEcers at once.
Had'she known that her sister sought to tear her
from such prospects and such realities as these, what
would have been her sensations? They could have been
- Cooxic
240 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
understood only hj her mother, who might have nearly
felt the same. Ly dia's going to Brighton was all tfiat
consoled her for her melancholy conviction of her hus-
band's never intending to go there himself.
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed;
and their raptures continned, with little intermission, to
the very day of Lydia's leaving home.
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for tiie last
time. Having been frequently in company with him
since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the
agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had
even learned to detect, in the very gentleness which had
first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to dis-
gust and weary. In his present behavior to herself,
moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure, for the
inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions
which had marked the early part of their acquaintance
could only serve, after what had since passed, to pro-
voke her. She lost all concern for him in finding herself
thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous
gallantry ; and while she steadily repressed it, could not
but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that
however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions
had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and
her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
On the very last day of the regiment's remaining at
Meryton, he dined, with others of the officers, at Long-
bourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from
him in good humor, that on his making some inquiry as
to the maimer in which her time had passed at Huns-
ford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr.
Darcy's having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and
asked him if he was acquainted with the former.
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; hut with a
moment's recollection and a returning smile, replied,
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 241
that he hod formerly seen him often; uid, after ob-
serving that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked
her how she had liked faim. Her answer was warmly
in his favor. With an air of indifference be soon after-
wards added —
" How long did you say that he was at Bosings? "
" Nearly three weeks. "
" And yon saw him frequently f "
" Yes, almost every day. "
" His manners are very different from his cousin's. "
" Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy im-
proves on acquaintance. "
" Indeed! " cried Wiekham, with a look which did not
escape her. " And pray, may I ask? " But checking
himself, he added, in a gayer tone, " Is it in address
tiiat he improves? Has he deigned to add aught of
civility to his ordinary style ! — for I dare not hope, " he
contioued in a lower and more serious tone, " that he is
improved in essentials. "
" Oh, no! " said Elizabeth. " In essentials, I believe,
lie is very much what he ever was. "
While she spoke, Wiekham looked as if scarcely know'
ing whether to rejoice over her words, or to distrust
their meaning. There was a sometiiing in her counte-
nance which made him listen with an apprehensive and
anxious attention, while she added —
" When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I
did not mean that either his mind or manners were in
a state of improvement, bat that, from knowing him
better, his disposition was better understood. "
Wickham's alarm now appeared in a hei^tened com-
plexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was
silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to
her again, and said in the gentlest of accents —
" You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr.
L ,., > ,„ Google
34.2 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Darcj, will readily comprehend how sincerely I mnat
rejoice that he is wise enough to assame even the appear-
ance of what is right. His pride, in that direction, ma^
be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it
must deter him from snch foul misconduct as I have
suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness
to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely
adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion
and judgment he stands mnch in awe. His fear of her
has always operated, I know, when they were together;
and a good deal is t« be imputed to his wish of for-
warding the match with Miss de Bourgh, which I am
certain he has very much at heart. "
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she
answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She
saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject
of his grievances, and she was in no humor to indulge
him. The rest of the evening passed with the appear-
ance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no
further attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they
parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual
desire of never meeting again.
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs.
Forster to Meryton, from whence they were to set out
early the next morning. The separation between her
and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty
was the only one who shed tears ; but she did weep
from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her
good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and im-
pressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the
opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible —
advice which there was every reason to believe would
be attended to ; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia
herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of
her sisters were ottered without being heard.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XLII
Had Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her
own family, she conld not have formed a very pleasing
picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. Her
father, captivated by yonth and beanty, and that ap-
pearance of good humor which youth and beauty
generally give, had married a wmnan whose weak
understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their
marriage pat an end to all real affection for her. Re-
spect, esteem, and confidence had vanished forever;
and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown.
But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort
for the disappointment which his own imprudence had
brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often
console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He
was fond of the country and of books; and from these
tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife
he was very little otherwise indebted, than as her igno-
rance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This
is not the sort of happiness which a man would in gen-
eral wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers
of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will
derive benefit from such as are given.
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the im-
propriety of her father's behavior as a husband. She
had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities,
and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself,
she endeavored to forget what she could not overlook,
and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach
of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing
his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so
highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly
as now the disadvantages which must attend the chil-
L .., > ,„Coojilc
244 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
dren of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully
aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction
of talents ; talents which, rightly used, might at least
have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even
if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
When Elizabetli bad rejoiced over Wickhun's de-
parture, she found little other cause for satisfaction in
the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less
varied than before, and st home she had a mother and
sister whose constant repining at the dulneas of every-
thing around them threw a real gloom over their domes-
tic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her
natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain
were runoved, her other sister, from whose disposition
greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be
hardened in all her folly and assurance by a situation
of such double danger as a watering-place and a camp.
Upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been
stMnetimes found before, that an event to which she had
looked forward with impatient desire did not, in taking
place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised her-
self. It was consequently necessary to name some other
period for the commencement of actual felicity — to have
some other point on which her wishes and hopes might
be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of antici-
pation, console herself for the present, and prepare for
another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now
the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best con-
solation for all the uncomfortable hours which the dis-
contentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable;
and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every
part of it would have been perfect.
" But it is fortunate, " thought she, " that I have some-
thing to wish for. Were the whole arrangement com-
plete, my disappointment would be certain. But here,
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 2*5
my carrying with me one ceftseless source of regret in
my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all
my expectations of pleasure realized. A scheme of
which every part promises delight can never be snccess-
fui; and general disappointment is only warded ofiE by
the defence of some little peculiar vexation. "
When Lydia went away, she promised to write very
often and very minntely to her mother and Kitty; but
her letters were always long expected, and always very
short. Those to her mother contained little else than that
they were just returned from the library, where such
and such officers had attended them, and where she had
seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild;
that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she
would have described more fully^ but was obliged to
leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her,
and they were going to the camp; and from her corre-
spondence with her sister there was stilt less to be
learned — for her letters t« Kitty, though rather longer,
were much too full of lines under the words to be made
public.
After the first fortnight or three weeks of her ab-
sence, health, good hnmor, and cheerfulness began to re-
appear at Longbourn. Everything wore a happier as-
pect. The families who had been in town for the winter
came back again, and summer finery and summer en-
gagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual
qnemlons serenity; and, by the middle of June, Kitty
was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton
without tears; an event of such happy promise as to
make Elizabeth hope that by the following Christmas she
might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an
officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and mali-
cious arrangement at the War Office, another regiment
should be quartered in Meryton.
- Cooxic
246 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
The time fixed for the beginning of their northern
tour was now fast approaching, and a fortnight only was
wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner,
which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed
its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by busi-
ness from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and
must be in London again within a month ; and as that
left too short a period for them to go so far, and see
so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with
the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were
obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more
contracted tour, and, according to the present plan, were
to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that
county there was enough to be seen to occnpy the chief
of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a
peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had
formerly passed some years of her life, and where they
were now to spend a few days, was probably as great
an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties
of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.
Elisabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set
her heart on seeing the Lakes, and still thought there
might have been time enough. But it was her business
to be satisfied — and certainly her temper to be happy;
and all was soon right again.
With the mention of Derbyshire there were many
ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the
world without thinking of Pemberley and its owner.
" But surely, " said she, " I may enter his county with
impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without
his perceiving me. "
The period of expectation was now doubled. Four
weeks were to pass away before her nncle and aunt's
arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs,
Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 247
at LoDgboum. The children, two giris of six and eight
years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under
the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the
general favorite, and whose steady sense and sweetness
of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in
every way — teaching them, playing with them, and lov-
ing them.
The Gardiners stayed only one night at Longbonrn,
and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit
of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain
— that of suitableness as companions ; a suitableness
which comprehended health and temper to bear incon-
veniences — cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure — and
affection and intelligence, which might supply it among
themselves if there were disappointments abroad.
It is not the object of this work to give a description
of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places
through which their route thither lay; Oxford, Blen-
heim, Warwick, Eenilworth, Birmingham, etc, are suffi-
ciently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the
present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the
scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where
she had lately learned that some acquaintance still re-
mained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the
principal wonders of the country; and within five miles
of Lambton, Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pem-
berley was situated. It was not in their direct road, nor
more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their
route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an
inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner de-
clared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for
her approbation.
" My love, should not you like to see a place of which
yon have heard so much? " said her aunt; " a place, too,
L ..„■„ Google
248 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
with which 80 many of joar acquaintance are connected.
Wickham passed all his youth there, you know. "
Elisabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no
business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a dis-
inclination for seeing it. She must own that she was
tired of great houses; after going over so many, she
really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.
Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. " If it were
merely a fine house richly furnished, " said she, " I should
not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful.
They have some of the finest woods in the country. "
Elizabeth said no more — but her mind could not
acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while
viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be
dreadful ! She blushed at the very idea, and thought it
would he better to apeak openly to her aunt than to
run such a risk. But against this there were objections;
and she finally resolved that it could be the last re-
source, if hfer private inquiries as to tiie absence of the
family were unfavorably answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the
chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine
place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no
little alarm, whether the family were down for the sum-
mer. A most welcome negative followed the last question
— and her alarms being now removed, she was at leisure
to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself;
and when the subject was revived the next morning,
and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and
with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really
any dislike to the scheme. — To Pemberley, therefore,
they were to go.
ta,i,.=db, Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XLIII
Elizabeth, as tlkej drove along, vatched for the
first appearance of Femberley Woods with some pertor-
bation ; and when at length they turned in at the lodge,
her spirits were in a high flutter.
The park was very large, and contained great variet]r
of ground. They entered it in one of its lowest points,
and drove for acme time throng a beautifnl wood
stretching over a wide extent.
Elizabeth's mind was too full for conversation, but
she saw and admired every ranarkable spot and pmnt
of view. They gradually ascended for half-a-mite, and
then found themselves at the top of a considerable emi-
nence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly
caught by Pemberley House, situated on the opposite
side of the valley, into which the road with some abrupt-
ness wound. It was a large, handsome stone building,
standing wdl on rising ground, and backed by a ridge
of high woody hills ; and in front, a stream of some natu-
ral importance was swelled into greater, but without any
artificial appearance. Its banks were neither formal nor
falsely adorned. Elisabeth was delighted. She had
never seen a place for which nature had done more, or
where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by
an awkward taste. They were all of them warm in-
their admiration ; and at that moment she felt that to be
mistress of Pemberley might be something!
They descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove
to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of
the house, all her apprehension of meeting its ovner
returned. She dreaded lest the chambermaid had been
mistaken. On applying to see the place, they were ad-
mitted into tJie hall; and Elizabeth, as they waited for
- Cooxic
250 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being
where she was.
The housekeeper came; a respectable-looking elderly
woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any
notion of finding her. They followed her into the din-
ing-parlor. It was a large, well-proportioned room,
handsomely fitted up. Elizabeth, after slightly survey-
ing it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect. The
hill, crowned with wood, from which they had descended,
receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a .
beantifnl object. Every disposition of the ground was
good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the
trees scattered on its banks, and the winding of the
valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight. As
they passed into other rooms these objects were taking
different positions ; but from every window there were
beauties to be seen. The rooms were lofty and hand-
some, and their furniture suitable to the fortnne of their
proprietor; but Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his
taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine; with
less of splendor, and more real elegance, than the furni-
ture of Rosings.
" And of this place, " thought she, " I might have been
mistress t With these rooms I might now have been
familiarly acquainted! Instead of viewing them as a
stranger, I might have rejoiced in them as my own, and
welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt. — But
no, " — recollecting herself, — " that could never he: my
uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; I should
not have been allowed to invite them. "
This was a lucky recollection — it saved her from
something like regret.
She longed to inquire of tiie housekeeper whether her
master was really absent, but had not courage for it.
At length, however, the question was asked by her uncle ;
- Coo;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 251
and ahe turned away with alarm, while Mrs. Reynolds
replied that he was, adding, " But we expect him to-
morrow, with a large party of friends. " How rejoiced
was Elizabeth that their own jouraey had not by any
circumstance been delayed, a day !
Her aunt now called her to look at a picture. She
approached and saw the likeness of Mr. Wickham sus-
pended, amongst several other miniatures, over the man-
telpiece. Her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked
it. The housekeeper came forward, and told them it
was the picture of a young gentleman, the son of her
late master's steward, who had been brought up by him
at his own expense. " He is now gone into the army, "
she added; " but I am afraid he has turned out very
wild. "
Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but
Elizabeth could not return it.
" And that, " said Mrs. Reynolds, pointing to another
of the miniatures, " is my master — and very like him.
It was drawn at the same time as the other — about eight
years ago. "
* " I have heard much of your master's fine person, "
said Mrs. Gardiner, looking at the picture; " it is a hand-
some face. But, Lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like
Mrs. Reynolds'respect for Elizabeth seemed to in-
crease on this intimation of her knowing her master.
" Does that young lady know Mr. Darcy? "
Elizabeth colored, and said — " A little. "
" And do not you think him a very handsome gentle-
man, ma'am? "
" Yes, very handsome. "
" I am sure I know none so handsome; but in the
gallery upstairs you will see a finer, larger picture of
him than this. This room was my late master's favorite
, L .., > ,„Cooglc
252 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
room, and these miniatures are just aa they used to be
then. He was very fond of them. "
This accounted to Elizabeth for Mr. Wickham's being
among them.
Mrs. Reynolds then directed their attention to one of
Miss Darcy, drawn when she was only eight years old.
" And is Miss Darcy as handsome as her brother? "
said Mr. Gardiner.
" Oh ! yes — the handsomest young lady that ever was
seen; and so accomplished! — She plays and sings all
day long. In the next room is a new instrument just
come down for ber — a present from my master; she
comes here to-morrow with him. "
Mr. Gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant,
encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and
remarks: Mrs, Reynolds, either from pride or attach-
ment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her
master and his sister.
" Is your master much at Pemberley in the course of
the year? "
" Not so much as I could wish, sir; but I dare say he
may spend half his time here ; and Miss Darcy is always
down for the summer months. "
" Except, " thought Elizabeth, " when she goes to Rama-
gate. "
" If your master would marry, yon might see more of
him. "
" Yes, sir; but I do not know when that will be. I do
not know who is good enough for him. "
Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner smiled. Elizabeth could not
help saying, " It is very much to his credit, I am sure,
that yon should think so. "
" I say no more than the truth, and what everybody
will say that knows him, " replied the other. Elizabeth
thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with
- Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 258
increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, " I
have never had a crosa word from him in my life, and
I have known him ever since he was four years old. "
This was praise, of all others most extraordinary,
most opposite to her ideas. That he was not a good-
tempered man had been her firmest opinion. Her keen-
est attention was awakened; she longed to hear more,
and was grateful to her uncle for saying —
" There are very few people of whom so mnch can be
said. Yon are Incky in having such a master. "
" Yes, sir, I know I am. If I were to go through the
world, I could not meet with a better. But I have
always observed, that they who ape good-natured when
children, are good-natured when they grow up; and he
was always the sweetest-tempered^ most generous-hearted
boy in the world. "
Elizabeth almost stared at her. " Can this be Mr.
Darcy? " thought she.
" His father was an excellent man, " said Mrs. Gardiner.
" Yes, ma'am, that he was indeed ; and his son will be
just like him— just as affable to the poor, "
Elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impa-
tient for more. Mrs. Reynolds could interest her on no
other point. She related the subjects of the pictures,
the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furni-
ture, in vain. Mr. Gardiner, highly amused by the kind
of family prejudice to which he attributed her excessive
commendation of Ber master, soon led again to the sub-
ject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits as
they proceeded together up the great staircase.
" He is the best landlord, and the best master, " said
she, " that ever lived; not like the wild young men nowa-
days, who think of nothing but themselves. There is
not one of hia tenants or servants but what will give him
a good name. Some people call him proud; but I am
L ..„■„ Google
254 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
sure I never saw anything of it. To my fancy, it is only
because he does not rattle away like other yoang men. "
" In what an amiable light does this place him? "
thought Elizabeth.
" This fine account of him, " whispered her aunt as
they walked, " is not quite conaistent with his behavior
to our poor friend. "
" Perhaps we might be deceived. "
" That is not very likely; our authority was too good, "
On reaching the spacious lobby above Ihey wer*
shown into a very pretty sitting-room, lately fitted up
with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments
below; and were informed that it was but just done to
give pleasure to Miss Darcy, who had taken a liking to
the room when last at Pemberley.
" He is certainly a good brother, " said Elizabeth, as
she walked towards one of the windows.
Mrs. Reynolds anticipated Miss Darcy's delight, when
she should enter the room. " And this is always the way
with him, " she added. " Whatever can give his sister
any pleasure is sure to be done in a moment. There
is nothing he would not do for her. "
The picture-gallery, and two or three of the principal
bedrooms, were all that remained to be shown. In the
former were many good paintings; but Elizabeth knew
nothing of the art: and from such as had been already
visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some
drawings of Miss Darcy's, in crayons, whose subjects
were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.
In the gallery there were many family portraits, bnt
they eould have little to fix the attention of a stranger.
Elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose
features would be known to her. At last it arrested
her — and she beheld a striking resemblance of Mr.
Darcy, with such a smile over the face as she remem-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 2B5
bered to have sometimeB seen when he looked at her.
She stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest
contemplation, and returned to it again before they
quitted the gallery. Mra. Reynolds informed them that
it had been taken in his father's lifetime.
There was certainly at this moment, in Elizabeth's
mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than
she had ever felt in the height of their acquaintance.
The commendation bestowed on him by Mrs. Reynolds
was of no trifling nature. What praise is more valuable
than the praise of an intelligent servant? As a brother,
a landlord, a master, she considered how many people's
happiness were in his guardianship! — how much of
pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow ! — how
much of good or evil must he done by him ! Every idea
that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was
favorable to his character, and as she stood before the
canvas on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes
upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper
sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before;
she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety
of expression.
When all of the house that was open to general in-
spection had been seen, they returned downstairs, and,
taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to
the gardener, who met them at the hall-door.
As they walked across the lawn towards the river,
Elizabeth turned hack to look again; her uncle and
aunt stopped also, and while the former was conjectur-
ing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself
suddenly came forward from the road, which led behind
it to the stables.
They were within twenty yards of each other, and so
abrupt was his appearance that it was impossible to
avoid his si^t. Their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks
C.OO;(lc
266 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
of each were overspread with the deepest blnsL. He
absolutelj'started, and for a moment seemed immovable
from siuprise; but shortly recovering himoelf, advanced
towards the party, and spoke to Elizabeth, if not in
terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civilit7.
She had iostinciively turned away; but stopping on
his approach, received bis compliments with an embar-
rassment impossible to be overc(»ne. Had his first ap-
pearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had
just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other
two that they now saw Mr. Darcy, the gardener's ex-
pression of surprise, on beholding his master, must im-
mediately have told it. They stood a little i^loof wliile
be was taUciTig to their niece, who, astonished and
confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and
knew not what answer she retnmed to bis civil inqniriec
after her family. Amazed at the alteration of his man-
ner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered
was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of
Hk impropriety of her being found there recnrring to
her mind, the few minutes in which they continued to-
gether were some of the moat uncomfortable of her life.
Nor did he seem much more at ease: when be spoke, his
accent had none of its usual sedateness ; and he repeated
his inquiries as to tbe time of her having left Long-
bourn, and of her stay in Derbyshire, so often, and in
so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his
thoughts.
At length every idea seemed to fail him; and, after
standing a few moments without saying a word, he sud-
denly recollected himself, and took leave.
The others then joined her, and expressed their ad-
miration of his figure ; but Elisabeth heard not a word,
and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed
tiiem in silence. She was overpowered by shame snd
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 2B7
vexation. Her coming there was the most unfortunttte,
the most ill-jndged thing in the world! How strange
most it appear to him ! In what a disgraceful light
mi^t it not strike so rain a man ! It might seem as if
she had purposely thrown herself in his way again! Oh!
why did she come? or, why did he thus come a day be-
fore he was expected ? Had they been only ten minutes
sooner, they shonld have been beyond the reach of his
discrimination; for it was plain that he was that mo-
ment arrived — that moment alighted from his horse or
his carriage. She blushed again and again over the
perverseness of the meeting. And his behavior, so strik-
ingly altered, — what could it mean? That he should
even speak to her was amazing! — but to speak with such
civility, to inquire after her family ! Never in her life
had she seen hia manners so little dignified, never had
he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected
meeting. What a contrast did it offer to his last ad-
dress in Rosings Park, when he put his letter into her
hand! She knew not what to think, or how to account
for it.
They had now entered a beantifal walk by the aide
of the water, and every step was bringing forward a
nobler fall of gromid, or a finer reach of the woods
to which they were approaching; but it was some time
before Elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though
she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of
her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to
such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no
part of the scene. Her thoughts were all fixed on that
one spot of Pemberley House, whichever it might be,
where Mr. Darcy then was. She longed to know what
at that moment was passing in his mind — in what man-
ner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of every-
thing, she was still dear to him. Perhaps he had been
- Coo;(lc
258 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
civil only because he felt hisiself at ease; yet there had
been that in his voice which was not like ease. Whether
he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her she
could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her vith
composure.
At length, however, the remarks of her companions
on her absence of mind roused her, and she felt the
necessity of appearing more like herself.
They entered the ivoods, and bidding adieu to the
river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds ;
whence, in spots where the opening of the trees gave
the eye power to wander, were many charming views of
the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of
woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the
stream. Mr. Gardiner expressed a wish of going round
the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
With a triumphant smile, they were told that it was ten
miles round. It settled the matter; and they pursued
the accustomed circuit ; which brought them again, after
some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the
edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts. They
crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the
general air of the scene; it was a spot less adorned than
any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted
into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a
narrow walk amidst the rough coppice-wood which bor-
dered it. Elizabeth longed toeiplore its windings; but
when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their
distance from the house, Mrs. Gardiner, who was not a
great walker, could go no fartJier, and thought only of
returning to the carriage as quickly as possible. Her
niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took
their way towards the house on the opposite side of the
river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was
slow, for Mr. Gardiner, though seldom able to indulge
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 259
the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much
engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some
trout in the water, and talking to the man about them,
that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in this
slow manner, they were again surprised, and Elizabeth's
astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at
first, by the sight of Mr. Darcy appraaching them, and
at no great distance. The walk being here less sheltered
than on the other aide, allowed them to see him before
they met. Elizabeth, however astonished, was at least
more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved
to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really in-
tended to meet them. For a few moments, indeed, she
felt that he would probably strike into some other path.
The idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed
him from their view; the turning past, he was imme-
diately before them. With a glance, she saw that he
had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his
politeness, she began as they met to admire the beauty
of the place; but she had not got beyond the words
" delightful, " and " charming, " when some unlucky recol-
lections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of Pem-
berley from her might be mischievously construed. Her
color changed, and she said no more.
Mrs. Gardiner was standing a little behind; and on
her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honor
of introducing him to her friends. This was a stroke
of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she
could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking
the acquaintance of some of those very people against
whom his pride had revolted in his offer to herself.
" What will be his surprise, " thought she, " when he knows
who they arc? He takes them now for people of
fashion. "
The introduction, however, was immediately made;
. - Coo;(lc
260 FBIDE AND PREJUDICE
and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole
a sly look at him, to see how he bore it, and was not
without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he
could from such disgraceful companions. That he was
turprited by the connection was evident; he sustained
it, however, with fortitude, and, so far from going away,
turned back with them, and entered into conversation
with Mr. Gardiner. Elizabeth could not but be pleased,
could not but triumph. It was consoling that he should
know she had some relations for whom there was no
need to blush. She listened most attentively to all that
passed between them, and gloried in every expression,
every sentence of her uncle, which mariced his intelli-
gence, his taste, or hia good manners.
The conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she
heard Mr. Darcy invite him, with the greatest civility,
to fish there as often as be chose while he continued in
the neighborhood, offering at the same tjme to supply
him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of
the stream whpre there was usnally most sport. Mrs.
Gardiner, who was walking arm-and-arm with Eliaebeth,
gave her a look expressive of her wonder. Elisabeth
said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly ; the compli-
ment must be all for herself. Her astonishment, how-
ever, was extreme, and continually was she repeating,
" Why is he so altered? From what can it proceed?
It cannot be for me — it cannot be for my sake that his
manners are thus softened. My reproofs at Hunsford
could not work such a change as this. It is impossible
that he should still love me. "
After walking some time in. this way, the two ladies
in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming tbeir
places, after descending to the brink of the river for
the better inspection of some curious water-plant, there
chanced to be a little alteration. It originated in Mrs.
- Coofilc
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 261
Gardiner, who, fatigned by the exercise of the morning,
found Elizabeth's arm inadequate to her support, and
consequently preferred her husband'^. Mr. Darcy took
her place by her niece, and they walked on together.
After a short silence, the lady first spoke. She irished
him to know that she had been assured of his absence
before she came to the place, and accordingly began by
observing, that his arrival had been very unexpected —
" for your housekeeper, " she added, " informed ns that
yon wonld'certainly not be here till to-morrow; and
indeed, before we left Bakewell, we understood that yon
were not immediately expected in the country. " He
acknowledged the truth of it all, and said that business
with his steward bad occasioned his coming forward a
few hours before the rest of the party with whom he
had been travelling. " They will join me early to-
morrow, " he continued, " and among them are some who
will claim an acquaintance with yon, — Mr. Bingley and
his sisters. "
Ehzabeth answered only by a slight how. Her
thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when
Mr. Bingley's name had been last mentioned between
them; and, if she might jodge from his complexion, kit
mind was not very differently engaged.
" There is also one other person in the party, " he
continued after a pause, " who more particularly wishes
to be known to you ; — Will you allow me, or do I ask too
mnch, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during
your stay at Lambton? "
The surprise of such an application was great indeed;
it was too great for her to know in what manner she
acceded to it. She immediately felt that whatever de-
sire Miss Darcy might have of being acquainted with
her must be the work of her brother, and, without look-
ing farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to
- Coo;(lc
262 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
know that his resentment had not made him think really
ill of her.
They now walked on in silence, each of them deep
in thought. Elizabeth was not comfortable; that was
impossible; but she was flattered and pleased. His wish
of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the
highest kind. They soon outstripped the others, and
when they had reached the carriage, Mr. and Mrs.
Gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.
He then asked her to walk into the honse — but she
declared herself not tired, and they stood together on
the lawn. At such a time much might have been said,
and silence was very awkward. She wanted to talk, but
there seemed an embargo on every subject. At last she
recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked
of Matlock and Dovedale with great perseverance. Yet
time and her aunt moved slowly — and her patience and
her ideas were nearly worn out before the tete-a-tete
was over. On Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's coming up they
were all pressed to go into the house and take some
refreshment ; but this was declined, and they parted on
each side with the utmost politeness. Mr. Darcy handed
the ■ ladies into the carriage ; and when it drove oft,
Elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.
The observations of her uncle and aunt now began;
and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely supe-
rior to anything they had expected. " He is perfectly
well behaved, polite, and unassuming, " said her nncle.
" There i» something a little stately in him, to be sure, "
replied her aunt; " but it is confined to his air, and is
not unbecoming. I can now say with the housekeeper,
that though some people may call him proud, I have
seen nothing of it. "
" I was never more surprised than by his behavior to
us. It was more than civil; it was really attentive; and
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 268
there vas do necessity for such attention. His acqualnt-
snce with Elizabeth vas very trifling. "
" To be sure, Lizsy, " said her aont, " he is not so
handsome aa Wickhua; or, rather, he has not Wickham's
coontenance, for bis features are perfectly good. But
hov came you to tell me that he was so disagreeable? "
Elizabeth excused herself as veil as she could; said
that she had liked him better vhen they met in Kent
than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant
as this morning.
" But perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his
civilities, " replied her ancle. " Your great men often
are ; and therefore I shall not take him at his word aboiA
fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and
warn me off his grounds. "
Elisabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his
character, but said nothing.
" From what we have seen of him, " continued Mrs.
Gardiner, " I really should not have thought that he
could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as hft
has done by poor Wickham. He has not an ill-natured
l < Kik. On the contrary, there is something pleasing about
his mouth when he speaks. And there is something of
dignity in his countenance, that would not give one an
unfavorable idea of his heart. But, to be sure, the good
lady who showed ns the house did give him a most flam-
ing character! I could hardly help laughing aloud
sometimes. But he is a liberal master, I suppose, and
that in the eye of a servant comprehends every virtue. "
Elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something
in vindication of his behavior to Wickham; and there-
fore gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner
as she could, that by what she bad heard from his rela-
tions in Kent, his actions were capable of a very diffei >
ent construction; and that his character was by no means
L ..„■„ Google
264 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
so fault]', HOT Wickham's so amisble, as diey had been
considered in Hertfordshire. In eonfimiatian of this,
she related tjie particulars of all the pecnniary trans-
actions in which they had been connected, without actu-
ally naming her authority, bnt stating it to be such as
might be relied on,
Mrs. Gardiner was sorprised and concerned; bat as
they were now approaching the sc^ie of her former
pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollec-
tion ; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to
her husband all the interesting spots in its environs to
think of anything else. Fatigued as she had been by the
morning's walk, they had no sooner dined than she set
off again in qoest of her former acquaintance, and the
evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse
renewed after many years'discontinuance.
The occurrences of the day were too foil of interest
to leave Elizabeth much attention for any of these new
friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think
with wonder, of Mr. Darcy's civility, and, above all, of
his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.
CHAPTER XLIV
EuzABBTH had settled it that Mr. Darcy wonid bring
his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching
Femberley ; and vas consequently resolved not to be out
of sight of the inn the whole of tiiat morning. But her
conclusion was false ; for on tbe very morning after their
own arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They bad
been talking about the place with some of their new
friends, and were just returned to the inn to dress
themselves for dining with the same family, when the
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 265
sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they
saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle driving up the
street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing the livery,
guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree
of surprise to her relations by acquainting them with
the honor which she expected. Her ancle and amit were
all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner
as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many
of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to
them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever
suggested it before, hut they now felt that there waa no
other way of accounting for such attentions from such
a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece.
While these newly-born notions were passing in their
heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth's feelings was every
moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own
discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet, she
dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should Lave
said too much in her favor; and, more than commonly
anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every
power of pleasing would fail her.
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen ;
and as she walked up and down the room, endeavoring
to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise
in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this for-
midable introduction took place. With astonishment did
Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least
as much embarrassed as herself. Since her being at
Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly
proud; but the observation of a very few minutes con-
vinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found
it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a
monosyllable.
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Eliza-
L ..„■„ Google
AIM PRIDE AND PBEJUDICB
betb; and, tboi^ Uttle more than sizteen, her figure
was formed, and her appearance womanlj and graceful.
Sbe was less handsome than her brother; but there was
sense and good humor in her face, and her manners were
perfectly unassmning and gentle. Elizabeth, who had
expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an
observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was moch relieved
by discerning such different feelings.
They had not been long together before Darcy told
her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and
she had barely time tn express her satisfaction, and pre-
pare for such B visitor, when Bingley's quick step was
beard < hi ^le stairs, and in a moment he entered the
room. All Elisabetii's anger against him had been long
done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly
have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality
with which be expressed himself on seeing her again.
He inquired in a friendly, though general way, after her
family, and lodced and spoke with the aune good-
humored ease that he had ever done.
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less in-
teresting persOTUge than to herself. They had long
wished to see him. The whole partr before them, in-
deed, excited a lively sttentaon. The suspicions which
had just arisen of Mr. Darcy and their niece directed
their observation towards each with an earnest though
guarded inquiry; and they soon drew from those in-
quiries the fall conviction that one of them at least knew
what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they re-
mained a little in doubt; but that the gentleman wu
overflowing with admiration was evident enough.
Elisabeth, on her aide, hod much to do. She wanted
to ascertain the feelings of ea < ji of her visitors; she
wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agree-
able to oU; and in the latter object, where she feared
L ,., > ,„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 267
most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to
whom she endeavored to give pleasure were prepossessed
in her favor. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager,
and Darcy determined, to be pleased.
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her
sister; and oh! how ardently did she long to know
whether any of his were directed in a like manner.
Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on
former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with
the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying 1j
trace a resemblance. But, though this might be imagi-
Dary, she could not be deceived as to his behavior to
Mins Darcy, who had been set up as a rival to Jane. No
look appeared on either side that spoke particular re-
gard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify
the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon
satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred
ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation,
denoted a recollection of Jane not ontinctDred by tender-
ness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the
mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a
moment when the others were talking together, and in a
tone which had something of real regret, that it " was
a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing
her " ; and, before she could reply, he added, " It is above
eight months. We have not met since the 26th of No-
vember, when we were all dancing together at Nether-
field. "
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact;
and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when un-
attended by any of the rest, whether all her sisters
were at Longbourn. There was not much in the ques-
tion, nor in the preceding remark ; but there was a look
and a manner which gave them meaning.
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr.
L ,., > ,„ Google
268 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Darcy himself; bnt, whenever she did catch a glimpse^
she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in
all that he said she heard an accent so far remored from
hautenr or disdain of his companions, as convinced her
that the improvement of manners which she had yester-
day witnessed, however temporary its existence mi^t
prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw
him thus seeking the acquaintance and coarting the good
opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few
months ago wonld have been a disgrace — when she saw
him thna civil, not only to herself, but to the very rela-
tions whom he had openly disdained, and recollected
their last lively scene in Hnnsford Parsonage, — the dif-
ference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly
on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonish*
ment from being visible. Never, even in the company of
bis dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations
at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so
free from self-conseqnence or unbending reserve, as
now, when no importance could result from the success
of his endeavors, and when even the acquaintance of
those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw
down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of
Netherfield and Rosings.
Their visitors stayed with them above half-an-hour;
and when they arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his
sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner, and Miss Bennet, to dinner at Pem-
berley, before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though
with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit
of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner
looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how the, whom
the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its
acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away ber head.
Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke
L ..„■„ Google
PKIDE AND PREJUDICE 269
'rsther a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of
the proposal, and seeing in her husband] who was fond
of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ven-
tured to engage for her attendance, and the day after
the next was iised on.
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of
seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to
her, and many inqoirics to make after all their Hert-
fordshire friends, Elizabeth, construing all this- into a
wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased;
and on this account, as well as some others, found her-
self, when their visitors left them, capable of considering
the last half-hour with some satisfaction, though whilp
it was passing, the enjoyment of it had been little.
Eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from
her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long
enough to hear their favorable opinion of Bingley, and
then hurried away to dress.
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's
curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communic»-
tion. It was evident that she was much better acquainted
with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was
evident that he was very much in love with her. They
saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to
think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached,
there was no fault to find. They could not be un-
touched by his politeness ; and had they drawn his char-
acter from their own feelings and his servant's report,
without any reference to any other account, the circle in
Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have
recognized it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an inter-
est, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they
soon became sensible that the authority of a servant who
had known him since he was four years old, and whose
L .., > ,„Cobglc
270 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
own manners indicated respectability, was not to be
hastily rejected. Neither had anything occurred in the
intelligence of their Laoibton friends that could materi-
ally lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him
of but pride ; pride he probably had, and if not, it would
certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small
market-town where the family did not visit:. It was
acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and
did much good among the poor.
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found
that he was not held there in much estimation; for
though the chief of his concerns with the son of his
*patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well-
known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire, he had left
many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards
discharged.
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this
evening more than the last; and the evening, though as
it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to deter-
mine her feelings towards one in that mansion; and she
lay awake two whole hours endeavoring to make them
out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had
vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been
ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could
be so called. The respect created by the conviction of
bis valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly ad-
mitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her
feelings; and it was now heightened into somewhat of
a friendlier nature, by the testimony so highly in his
favor, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable
a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all,
above respect and esteem, there was a motive within ber
of goodwill which could not be overlooked. It was grati-
tude; — gratitude, not merely for having once loved her,
but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the
C.OO;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 271
petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him,
and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejec-
tion. He who, she bad been persuaded, would avoid
her as bis greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental
meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and
without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculi-
arity of manner, where their two selves only was con-
cerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends,
and bent on making her known to bis sister. Such a
change in a man of so much pride excited not only
astonishment but gratitude — for to b)ve, ardent lore, it
must be attributed; and as such, its impression on her
was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means un-
pleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She
respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she
felt a real interest in his welfare ; and she only wanted
to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon
herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of
both that she should employ the power, which her fancy
told her she still possessed, of bringing on the renewal
of his addresses.
It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt
and niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's
in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at
Pemberley, for she had reached it only to a late break-
fast, ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled,
by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, con-
sequently, that it would be hi^ly expedient to wait on
her at Pemberley the following morning. They were,
therefore, to go, — Elizabeth was pleased; though when
she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say
in reply.
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The
fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a
positive engagement made of his meeting some of the
gentlemen al Pemberley by noon. t ikhjI • -
272 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER XLV
CoNTiNCBD as Elizabeth now vas that Miss Bingley's
dislike of her had originated in jealousj, she could not
help feeling how very unwelcome her appearance at
Pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with
how much civility on that lady's side the acquaintance
would now be renewed.
On reaching the house, they were shown through the
hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it
delightful for summer. Its windows, opening to the
ground, admitted a most refreshing riew ot the high
woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks
and Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the
intermediate lawn.
In this room they were received by Miss Darcy, who
was sitting there with Mrs. Hurst and Mtss Bingley,
and the lady with whom she lived in London. Geor-
giana's reception of them was very civil, but attended
with all that embarrassment which, though proceeding
from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily
give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of
her being proud and reserved. Mrs. Gardiner and her
niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
By Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley they were noticed
only by a curtsey ; and, on their being seated, a pause,
awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a
few moments. It was first broken by Mrs. Anncsley, a
genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose [endeavor] to
introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more
truly well-bred than either of the others; and between
her and Mrs. Gardiner, with occasional help from Eliza-
beth, the conversation was carried on. Miss Darcy
looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it;
L .., > ,„Googlc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 278
and sometimes did venture a short sentence when there
was least danger of its being heard.
EUtabeth soon saw that she vas herself closely
watched by Miss Bingley, and that she could not speak
a word, especially to Miss Darcy, without calling her
attention. This observation would not have prevented
her from trying to talk to tbe latter, had they not been
seated at an inconvenient distance ; but she was not sorry
to be spared the necessity of saying mnch. Her own
thoughts were employing her. She expected every mo-
ment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room.
She wished, she feared that the master of the house might
be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it
most, she could scarcely determine. .After sitting in this
manner a quarter of an hour without hearing Hiss Bing-
ley's voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her
a cold inquiry after the health of her family. She
answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the
other said no more.
The next variation which their visit afforded was pro-
duced by the entrance of servants with cold meat, cake,
and a variety of all the finest fruits in season; but this
did not take place till after many a significant look and
smile from Mrs. Annesley to Miss Darcy had been given,
to remind her of her post. There was now employment
for the whole party — for though they could not all talk,
they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes,
nectarines, and peaches soon collected them round the
table.
While thus engaged, Elizabeth had a fair opportunity
of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the
appearance of Mr. Darcy, by the feelings which pre-
vailed on his entering the room; and then, tiiough but
a moment before she had believed her wishes to pre-
dominate, she began to regret that he came.
L ..„■„ Google
t7i PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
He had been some time witii Mr. Gardiner, vho, with
two or three other geoUemea f-om the house, was en-
gaged by the river, aod had left him only on learning
that the ladies of the family intended a visit to Geor-
giana that morning. No sooner did he appear than
Elieafaeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and Da-
embarrassed; — a resolution the more necessary to be
made, bat perhaps not the more easily kept, because she
saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awak-
ened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye
which did not watch his behavior when he first came
into the room. In no countenance was attentive curiosity
so strongly marked as in Miss Bingley's, in spite of the
smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to
one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her
desperate, and her attentions to Mr. Darcy were by no
»eana over. Miss Darcy, on her brother's entrance,
exerted hersdf much SMwe to talk; and Elisabeth saw
that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get
acquainted, and forwarded as much as possible, every
attempi at c & nversation on either side. Miss Bin^ey saw
all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took
the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility —
" Pray, Miss Eliza, are not the shire Militia re-
moved from Meryton? They must he a great loss to
jrOBr family. "
In Darcy's presence she dared not mention Wickham's
name; but Elisabeth instantly ci^nprehended that he was
uppermost in her thoughts ; and the various recollections
connected with him gave her a moment's distress; hut
exerting herself vigorously to repel the ill-natnred attack,
she presently answered tite question in a tolerably dis-
engaged tone. While she spoke, an involuntary glance
showed her Darcy, with an hei^tened onnplexion, ear-
nestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with con-
L ..„■„ Google
PHIDE AND PREJUDICE 275
fusion and unable to lift Dp her eyes. Had Miss Bing-
ley known what pain slie was then giving her beloved
friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the
bint; but she had merely intended to discompose Eliza-
beth, by bringii^ forward the idea of a man to whom
she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility
which might injure her in Darcy's opinion, and, perhaps,
to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by
which some part of her family were connected with that
corps. Not a syllable had ever reached her of Miss
Darcy's meditated elopement. To no creature had it
been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except to
Elizabeth; and from all Bingley'a connections her brot^r
was particularly ansious to conceal it, from that very
wish which Elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of
their becoming hereafter her own. He had certaijily
formed such a plan, and without meaning that it shoald
effect his endeavor to separate him from Miss fiennet,
it is probable that it might add something to his lively
concern for the welfare of hia friend-
ElizabetJi's collected behavior, however, soon quieted
his emotion; and as Miss Bingley, vexed and disap-
pointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Geor-
giana also recovered in time, though not enough to be
able to speak any more. Her brother, whose eye she
feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest iu the
affair, and the very circumstance which had been de-
signed to turn his thoughts from Elizabeth seemed to
have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully. Their
visit did not continue long after the question and answer
above mentioned; and while Mr. Darcy was attending
them to their carriage. Miss Bingley was venting her
feelings in criticisms on Elizabeth's person, behavior,
and dress. But Georgiana would not join her. Her
brother's recommendation was enough to insure her
L .., > ,„Cooylc
276 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
favor: liis judgment could not err, and he had spoken in
such terms of Elizabeth as to leave Georgiana without
the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and
amiable. When Darcy returned to the saloon. Miss
Bingley could not help repeating to him some part of
what she had been saying to his sister.
" How very ill Eliza Bennet looks this morning, Mr.
Darcy, " she cried; " I never in my Uf^ saw anyone so
much altered as she is since the winter. She is grown
so brown and coarse ! Louisa and I were agreeing that
we should not have known her again. "
However Uttle Mr. Darcy might have liked such an
address, he contented himself with coolly replying that
he perceived no other alteration than her being rather
tanned, — no miraculous consequence of travelling in the
summer.
" For my own part, " she rejoined, " I most confess
that I never could see any beauty in her. Her face is
too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her
features are not at all handsome. Her nose wants char-
acter — there is nothing marked in its lines. Her teeth
are tolerable, but not oat of the cqrnmon way; and as
for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine,
I never could perceive anything extraordinary in them.
They have a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like
at all; and in her air altogether there is a self-sufficiency
without fashion, which is intolerable. "
Persuaded as Miss Bingley was that Darcy admired
Elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommend-
ing herself; but angry people are not always wise; and
in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all
the success she expected. He was resolutely silent, how-
ever; and, from a determination of making him speak,
she continued —
" I remember, when we first knew her in Hertford-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 277
shire, how amazed we all were to find that she was a
reputed beauty; and I particularly recollect your saying
one night, after they had been dining at Netherfield,
'She a heauty ! I should as soon call her mother a wit.*
But afterwards she seemed to improve on yoo, and I
believe you thought her rather pretty at one time. "
" Yes, " replied Darcy, who could contain himself no
longer, " but that was only when I first knew ber, for it
is many months since I have considered her as one of the
handsomest women of my acquaintance. "
He then went away, and Miss Bingley was left to all
the satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave
no one any pain but herself.
Mrs. Gardiner and Elizabeth talked of all that had
occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what
had particularly interested them both. The looks and
behavior of everybody they had seen were discussed,
except of the person who had mostly engaged their at-
tention. They talked of his sister, his friends, his house,
his fruit — of everything hut himself; yet Elizabeth was
longing to know what Mrs. Gardiner thought of him,
and Mrs. Gardiner would have been highly gratified by
her niece's beginning the subject.
CHAPTER XLVI
Elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not
finding a letter from Jane on their first arrival at Lamb-
ton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each
of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on
the third her repining was over, and her sister justified,
by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one
of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere.
., „C,oo;(lc
278 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Elisabeth was not nirprued at it, u Jane had written
the direction lemarkably ill.
They had just been preparing to walk aa the letters
come in; and ber ancle and aunt, leaving her to enjoj
them in qniet, set off b^ tbemselves.
The one missent must be first attended to ; it had been
written five days ago. The beginning contained an ac-
ootint of all their little parties and engagements, with
soch news as (he coimtrf afforded; bnt the latter half,
which was dated a day later, and written in evident agi-
tation, gave more important intelligence. It was to this
effect —
" Since writing the above, dearest Lizzy, something has
occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but
I am afraid of alarming you — be assured that we are all
well. What I have to say relates to poor Lydia. An
express came at twelve last night, just as we were all
gone to bed, from Colonel Forster, to inform us that she
was gone off to Scotland with one of bis officers ; to own
the truth, with Wickham ! Imagine our sui^rise. To
Kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected.
I am very, very sorry. So imprudent a match on both
sides ! But I am willing to hope the best, and that his
character has been misunderstood. Thoughtless and in-
discreet I can easily believe him, hot this step (and let
us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart. His
choice is disinterested at least, for he must know my
father can give her nothing. Our poor mother is sadly
grieved. My father bears it better. How thankful am
I that we never let them know what has been said against
him ! we must forget it ourselves. They were off Satur-
day night about twelve, as ia conjectured, but were not
missed till yesterday morning at eight. The express was
sent off directly. My dear Lizzy, they must have passed
within ten miles of us. Colonel Forster gives us reason
C.OO;,lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 379
to expect him here soon. Lydia left a few lines for his
wife, informing her of their intention. I most con-
clude, for I cftnnot be long from my poor mother. I
am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but I
hardly know what I have written. "
Without allowing herself time for consider ation, and
scarcely knowing what she felt, Elisabeth on finishing
this letter instantly seized the other, and c^pening it with
the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been writ-
ten a day later than the conclusion of the firsL
" By this time, my dearest sister, you have received
my hurried letter; I wish this may be more intelligible,
but though not confined for time, my head is so bewil-
dered that I cannot answer for being coherent. Dearest
Lizzy, I hardly know what I would write, but I have
bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. Imprudent
as a marriage between Mr. Wtckham and our poor Lydia
would be, we are now anxious to he assured it has taken
place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are
not gone to Scotland. Colonel Forster came yesterday,
having left Brighton the day before, not many hours
after the express. Though Lydia's short letter to Mrs.
F. gave them to understand that they were going to
Gretna Green, something was dropped by Denny ex-
pressing his belief that W. never intended to go there,
or to marry Lydia at all, which was repeated to Colond
F., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from B., in-
tending to trace their route. He did trace them easily
to Clapham, but no farther; for on entering that place,
they removed into a hackney-coach, and dismissed the
chaise that brought them from Epsom. All that is known
after this is, that they were seen to continue the Londcw
road. I know not what to think. After making every
L .-...Xl-X
^
280 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
possible inquiry on that side London, Colonel F. came
on into Hertfordshire, anxiously reneiring them at all
the turnpikes, and at the inns in Bamet and Hatfield,
but without any success — no such people had been seen
to pass through. With the kindest concern he came on
to Longboom, and broke his apprehensions to u« in a
manner most creditable to his heart. I am sincerely
grieved for him and Mrs. F., but no one can throw any
blame on them. Our distress, my dear Liszy, is very
great. My father and mother believe the worst, but I
cannot think so ill 0t him. Many circumstances might
make it more'eligible for them to be married privately
in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if he
could form such a design against a young woman of
Lydia's connections, which is not likely, can I suppose
her so lost to everything ? Impossible ! I grieve to find,
however, that Colonel F. is not disposed to depend upon
their marriage; he shook his head when I expressed my
hopes, and said he feared W, was not a man to be trusted.
My poor mother is really ill, and keeps her joom. Could
she esert [herself], it would be better; but this is not
to be expected. And as to my father, I never in my life
saw him so affected. Poor Kitty has anger for having
concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of
confidence, one cannot wonder. I am truly ^ad, dearest
Liazy, that you have been spared something of these
distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over,
shall I own that I long for your return? I am not so
selfish, Iiowever, as to press for it, if inconvenient. —
Adieu! I take up my pen again to do what I have just
told you I would not; but circumstances are such that
I cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as
soon as possible. I know my dear uncle and aunt so
well, that I am not afraid of requesting it, though I have
still something more to ask of the former. My father
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 281
is going to London with Colonel Forster instantly, to try
to discover her. What he means to do I am sure I know
not; bat his excessive diab^ss will not allow him to
pnrsue any measure in the best and safest way, and
Colonel Forster is obliged to be at Brighton again to-
morrow evening. In such an exigence, my uncle's advice
and assistance would be everything in the world ; he will
immediately comprehend what I most feel, and I rely
upon his goodness. "
" Oh! where, where is my uncle? " cried Elizabeth,
darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eager-
ness to fallow him, without losing a moment of the time
so precious ; but as she reached the door it was opened
by a servant, and Mr. Darcy appeared. Her pale face
and impetuous manner made him start, and before he
could recover himself enough to speak, she, in whose
mind every idea was superseded by Lydia'a situation,
hastily exclaimed, " I beg your pardon, but I must leave
you. I most find Mr. Gardiner, this moment, on busi-
ness that cannot be delayed; I have not an instant to
lose. "
" Good God! what is the matter? " cried he, with more
feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, " I will
not detain you a minute ; but let me, or let the servant,
go after Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner. Yon are not well
enough; — yon cannot go yourself. "
Elizabeth hesitated, but her knees trembled under her,
and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting
to pursue them. Calling back the servant, therefore, she
commissioi)ed him, though in so breathless an accent as
made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and
mistress home instantly.
On his quitting the room she sat down, unable to sup-
port herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it was
L ..„■„ Google
282 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
impossible for Darcy to leave her, or to refrain from
saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiserattan, " Let
me call your maid. Is there nothing you could take to
give yon present relief? — A glass of wine; — shall I get
you one f— You are very ill. "
" No, I thank you, " she replied, endeavoring to recover
herself. " There is nothing the matter with me. I am
quite well; I am only distressed by some dreadful news
which I have just received from Longboum. "
She burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a
few minutes could not speak another word. Darcy, in
wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly
of his concern, and observed her in compassionate silence.
At length she spoke again. " I have just had a letter
from Jane, with such dreadful news. It cannot be con-
cealed from anyone. My youngest sister has left all her
friends — has eloped ; — has thrown herself into the power
of — of Mr. Wickham. They have gone off bother from
Brighton. You know him too well to doubt the re^.
She has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt
him to — she is lost forever. "
Darcy was fixed in astonishment. " When I consider, "
she added in a yet more agitated voice, " that / might
have prevented it! /, v/ho knew what he was. Had I
but explained some part of it only — some part of what
I learned, to my own family? Had his character been
known, this could not have liappened. But it is all — all
too late now, "
" I am grieved indeed, " cried Darcy; " grieved —
shocked. But is it certain — absolutely certain? "
" Oh yes ! They left Brighton together pn Sunday
night, and were traced almost to London, but not be-
yond; they are certainly not gone to Scotland. "
" And what has been done, what has been attempted,
r her? "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 283
" My father is gone to London, and Jane has written
to beg my uncle's immediate assistance ; and we shall be
off, I hope, in haif-an-hour. But nothing can be done —
I know very well that nothing can be done. How is such
a man to be worked on? How are they even to be dis-
covered? I have not the smallest hope. It is every
way horrible! "
Darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
" When my eyes were opened to his real character —
Oh! had I known what I ought, what I dared to do!
But I knew not — I was afraid of doing too much.
Wretched, wretched mistake ! "
Darcy made no answer. He seemed scarcely to hear
her, and was walking up and down tlie room in earnest
meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy. Eliza-
beth soon observed, and instantly understood it. Her -
power was sinking; everything muat sink under such a
proof of family weakness, such an assnrance of the
deepest disgrace. She could neither wonder nor con-
demn, but the belief of his self-'Conqnest brought nothing
consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her
distress. It was, on the contrary, exactly calcnlated to
make her understand her own wishes ; and never had she
so honestly felt tliat she could have loved him, as now,
when all love must be vain.
fiut »elf, thongh it would intrude, could not engross
her, Lydia — ^Uie hmniliation, the misery she was bring-
ing on them all, soon swallowed np every private care;
and covering her face with her handkerchief, Eliaabeth
was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of
several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situ-
ation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner
which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise re-
straint, said, " I am afraid yon have been long desiring
my absence, nor have I anything to plead in excuse of
L ..„■„ Google
284 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
my stay, but real, though nnavailing, concern. WooM
to Heaven that anything coald be either said or done on
my part that might offer consolation to such distress ! —
But I will not torment you with vain wishes, which may
seem purposely to ask for your thanks. This onforta-
nate affair willj I fear, prevent my sister's having the
pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day. "
" Oh yes. Be so kind as to apologize for us to Miss
Darcy. Say that urgent buainesa calls us home imme-
diately. Conceal the unhappy troth as long as it is
possible, — I know it cannot be long. "
He readily assured her of his secrecy — again expressed
his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclu-
sion than there was at present reason to hope, and leav-
ing his compliments for her relations, with only one
serious, parting look, went away.
As he quitted the room, Elizabeth felt how improbable
It was that they should ever see each other again on such
terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings
in Derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance
over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contra-
dictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those
feelings which would now have promoted its continuance,
and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.
If gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affec-
tion, Elizabeth's change of sentiment will be neither im-
probable nor faulty. But if otherwise— if the regard
springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural,
in comparison of what is so often described as arising
on B first interview with its object, and even before two
words have been exchanged, — nothing can be said in her
defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial
to the latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and
that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek
the other less interesting mode of attachment. Be that
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 286
as it m & y, she saw him go vith regret; and in this early
example of what Lydia's infamy must produce, found
additional anguish, as she reflected on that wretched busi-
ness. Never, since reading Jane's second letter, had she
entertained a hope of Wickham's meaning to marry her.
No one but JanCj she thought, could flatter herself with
such an expectation. Surprise was the least of her feel-
ings on this development. While the contents of the first
letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise — all
astonishment that Wickham should marry a girl whom it
was impossible he conld marry for money; and how
Lydia could ever have attached him had appeared in-
comprehensible. But now it was all too natural. For
such an attachment as this she might have suflicient
charms ; Mid though she did not suppose Lydia to be de-
liberately engaging in an elopement without the intention
of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither
her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her
from falling an easy prey.
She had never perceived, while the regiment was in
Hertfordshire, that Lydia had any partiality for him;
but she was convinced that Lydia had wanted only en-
couragement to attach herself to anybody. Sometimes
one ofiicer, sometimes another, had been her favorite, as
their attentions raised them in her opinion. Her afEec-
tions had been continually fluctuating, but never without
an object. The mischief of neglect and mistaken indul-
gence towards such a girl — oh ! how acutely did she now
feel it!
She was wild to be at home — to hear, to see, to be
upon the spot to share with Jane in the cares that must
now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged, a
father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and re-
quiring constant attendance; and though almost per-
suaded that nothing could be done for Lydia, her uncle's
- Cooxic
286 PHIDE AND PREJUDICE
interference seemed trt the utmost importance, and till
he entered the room the misery of her impatience was
severe. Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner had hurried back in
alarm, supposing by the servant's account that their niece
was taken suddenly ill; — but satisfying them instantly
on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of
their sommons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwell-
ing on the postscript of the last vith trembling energy,
though Lydia had never been a favorite with them. Mr.
and Mrs. Gardiner could not bnt be deeply afflicted.
Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after
the first exclam & tions of surprise and horror, Mr. Gar-
diner readily promised every assistance in his power.
Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with
tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one
spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily
settled. They were to be off as soon as possible. " But
what ia to be done about Pemberley? " cried Mrs. Gar-
diner. " John told ns Mr. Darcy was here when yon
sent for ua — was it so? "
" Yes; and I told him we should not be able to keep
our engagement. That is all settled. "
" What ia all settled? " repeated the oHier, as she ran
into her room to prepare. " And are they upon snch
terms as for her to disclose the real truth? Oh, that I
knew how it was ! "
But wishes were vain, or at best could serve only to
amnae her in the hurry and confusion of the following
hour. Had Elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she
would have remained certain that all employment was
impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had
her share of business as well as her atmt, and amongst
the rest there were notes to be written to all their
friends at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden
departure. An hour, however, saw the whole completed;
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 287
and Mr. Oardmer meanwliile hcving settled his account
at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and
ElizabeUi, after all the misery of the morning, found
herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have
supposed, seated in the carriage, aud on the road to
Longbourn.
CHAPTER XLVII
" I HATE been thinking it over again, Elizabetii, " said
her uncle, as they drove from the town; " and really, upcMi
serious consideration, I am much more inclined than I
was to judge as your eldest sister does of the matter.
It appears to me so very unlikely that any young man
should form such a design against a girl who is by no
means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually
staying in his colonel's family, that I am stron^y in-
clined to hope the best. Should he expect that her
friends would not step forward? Could he expect to be
noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to
Colonel Forster? His temptation is not adequate to the
" Do you really think so? " cried Elisabeth, brightening
up for a moment.
" Upon my word, " said Mrs. Gardiner, " I begin to be
of your uncle's opinion. It is really too great a violation
of decency, honor, and interest, for him to be guilty of it.
I cannot think so very ill of Wickham. Can you your-
self, Lizzy, so wholly ^re him up, as to believe hian
capable of it? "
" Not, perhaps, of neglecting his own interest; but of
every oHier neglect I can believe him capable. If, in-
deed, it should be so ! But I dare not hope it Why
should they not go an to Scotland, if that bad been the
case? "
L ..„■„ Google
288 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" In the first place, " replied Mr. Gardiner, " there la
DD absolute proof that they are not gone to Scotland. "
" Oh! bat their removing from the chaise into an hack-
ney coach is snch a presumption ! And, besides, no traces
of them were to be foond on the Barnet Road. "
" Well, then — supposing them to be in London. They
may be there, though for the purpose of concealment,
'if for no more exceptionable purpose. It is not likely that
money should be very abundant on either side; and it
might strike them that they could be more economically,
though less expeditiously, married in London than in
Scotland, "
" But why all this secrecy ? Why any fear of detection ?
Why must their marriage be private? Oh, no, no — this
is not likely. His most particular friend, you see by
Jane's account, was persuaded of his never intendit^ to
marry her. Wickham will never marry a woman with-
out some money. He cannot afford it. And what claims
has Lydia — what attraction has she beyond youth, health,
and good humor that could make him, for her sake, forego
every chance of bcne^ting himself by marrying well?
As to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in
the corps might throw on a dishonorable elopement with
her, I am not able to judge; for I know nothing of the
effects that such a step might produce. But as to your
other objection, I am afraid it will htirdly hold good.
Lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might
imagine, from my father's behavior, from his indolence
and the little attention he has ever seemed to give to
what was going forward in his family, that he would do
as little, and think as little about it, as any father could
do, in such a matter. "
" But can you think that Lydia is so lost to everything
but love of him as to consent to live with him on any
other terms than marriage ? "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 289
" It does seem, and it is, most shocking iiideed, " re-
plied Elisabeth, with tears iu her eyes, " that a sister's
seiue of decency and virtue in such a point should admit
of donbt. But, really, I know not what to say. Per-
haps I am not doing her justice. But she is very young;
she has never been taught to think on serious subjects;
and for the last half-year — nay, for a twelve-month —
she has been given up to nothing but amnsement and
vanity. She has been allowed to dispose of her time
in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any
opinions that came in her way. Since the shire were
first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love, flirtation,
and officers have been in her head. She has been doing
everything in her power by thinking and talking on the
subject, to give greater — ^what shall I call it? suscepti-
bility to her feelings ; which are naturally lively enou^.
And we all know that Wickham has every charm of
person and address that can captivate a woman, "
" But yon see that Jane, " said her aunt, " does not think
80 ill of Wickham as to believe him capable of the at-
tempt. "
" Of whom does Jane ever think ill? And who is
there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she
would believe capable of such an attempt, till it were
proved against them? But Jane knows, as well as I do,
what Wickham really is. We both know that he has
been profligate in every sense of the word ; that he has
neither integrity nor honor; that he is as false and de-
ceitful as he is insinuating. "
" And do you really know all this? " cried Mrs. Gar-
diner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence
was all alive.
" I do indeed, " replied Elizabeth, coloring. " I told
you, the other day, of his infamous behavior to Mr.
Darcy; and yon yourself, when last at Longboum, heard
L ..„■„ Google
200 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
in what mawMT be tpok^ of the man ^ > o had bchsved
with snch forbearance and liberalitf towards him. And
there are other circmnstaiices which I am not at liberty
— which it is not worth while to relate; bnt bis lies
aboat the whole Pemberley family are endless. Fran
what he said of Miss Darcy, I was thoroo^y prepared
to see a prond, reserved, disagreeable girL Yet he knenr
to the contrary himself. He mnst hnow that she was
as amiable and unpretending as we have found her. "
" But does Lydia know nothing of this? Can she be
ignorant of what yon and Jane seem so well to under-
stand ? "
" Oh yes !— that, that is the worst of all. Till I was in
Kent, and saw so much both of Mr. Darcy and his rela-
tion, Colooel Fitzwilliam, I was ignorant of the truth
myself. And when I returned home, the shire was
to leave Meryton in a week or fortnight's time. As that
was the case, neither Jane, to whom I related the whole,
nor I, thoDght it necessary to make our knowledge pub-
lic; for of what use could it apparently be to any one,
that the good opinion which all the neighborhood [had]
of him should then be overthrown? And even when it
was settled that Lydia should go with Mrs. Forster, the
necessity of opening her eyes to his character never oc-
curred to me. That the could be in any danger from
the deception never entered my head. That such a con-
sequence as thit should ensue, you may easily believe,
was far enough from my thoughts. "
" When they all removed to Brighton, therefore, yon
had no reason, I suppose, to believe them fond of each
other? "
" Not the slightest. I can remember no symptom of
affection on either side; and had anything of the kind
been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a
family on which it could be thrown away. When firat
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 291
he entered tiie corps, she was ready ewni^ to admire
him; but ao we all were. Every girl in or near Meryton
was out of her senses about him for the first two months ;
but he never distinguished her by any particular atten-
tion; and, consequently, after a moderate period of ex-
travagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave
way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with
more distinction, again became her favorites. "
It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty
conld be added to their fears, hopes, aod conjectures,
on this interesting subject, by its repeated discussion, no
other could detain them from it long, during the whole -
of the journey. From Elizabeth's thon^ts it was never
absent. Fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, self-
reproach, she could find no interval of ease or forget-
fulness.
They travelled as expeditiously as possible, and,
sleeping one night on the road, reached Ixingbourn by
dinner-time the next day. It was a comfort to Eliza-
beth to consider that Jane could not have been wearied
by long expectations.
The little Gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise,
were standing on the steps of the house as they entered
the paddock; and, when the carriage drove np to the
door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces, and
displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of
capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their
welcome.
Elizabeth jumped out; and, after giving each of them
an hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where Jane,
who came running downstairs from her mother's apart-
ment, immediately met her.
Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst
tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in ask-
. „C,oo;(lc
292 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ing whether an > iJiing had been heard of the fugitives.
" Not yet, " replied Jane. " Bnt now that my uncle
is come, I hope everything will be well. "
" Is my father in town? "
" Yea, he went on Tuesday, as I wrote you word, "
" And have you heard from him often? "
" We have heard only once. He wrote me a few lines
on Wednesday, to say that he had arrived in safety, and
to give me his directions, which I particularly begged
him to do. He merely added that he should not write
again till he had something of importance to mention. "
" And my mother — how is she? How are you all? "
" My mother is tolerably well, I trust; though her
spirits are greatly shaken. She is upstairs, and will have
great satisfaction in seeing you all. She does not yet
leave her dressing-room. Mary and Kitty, thank Heaven,
are quite well. "
" But you — how are you? " cried Elisabeth. " You look
pale. How much you must have gone through ! "
Her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly
well ; and their conversation, which had been passing
while Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner were engaged with their
children, was now put an end to by the approach of the
whole party. Jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and wel-
comed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and
When they were all in the drawing-room, the questions
which Elizabeth had already asked were of course re-
peated by the others, and they soon found that Jane
had no intelligence to give. The sanguine hope of good,
however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested
had not yet deserted her ; she still expected that it would
all end well, and that every morning would bring some
letter, either from Lydia or her father, to explain their
proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 298
Mrs. Bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired,
after a few minutes'conversation together, received them
exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamenta-
tions of regretj invectives against the villainous conduct
of Wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and
ill-usage; hlaming everybody bat the person to whose
ill- judging indulgence the errors of her daughter must
be principally owing.
" If I had been able, " said she, " to carry my point in
going to Brighton, with all my family, tkU would not
have happened: but poor dear Lydia had nobody to take
care of her. Why did the Forsters ever let her go out of
their sight? I am sure there was some great neglect
or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl
to do such a thing if she had been well looked after.
I always thought they were very unfit to have the charge
of her; but I was overruled, as I always am. Poor dear
child! And now here's Mr. Bennet gone away, and I
know he will light Wickham, wherever he meets him;
and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us
all? The Collinses will turn us out before he is cold
in his grave, and if yon are not kind to us, brother, I
do not know what we shall do. "
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and
Mr. Gardiner, after general assurances of his affection
for her and all her family, told her that he meant to be
in London the very neit day, and would assist Mr. Ben-
net in every endeavor for recovering Lydia.
" Do not give way to useless alarm, " added he; " though
it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no
occasion to look on it aa certain. It is not quite a week
since they left Brighton. In a few days more we may
gain some news of them; and till we know that they are
not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let
us give the matter over as lost As soon as I get to
- Coo;(lc
294 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
town I shall go to my brother, and make him come home
with me to Gracecburch Street; and then we may eoa-
snlt together as to what is to be done. "
" Oh ! my dear brother, " replied Mrs. Bennet, " that is
exactly what I could most wish for. And now do, when
you get to town, find them out, wherever they may be;
and if they are not married already, make them marry.
And as for wedding clothes, do Dot let them wait for that,
but tell Lydia she shall have as much money as she
chooses to buy them, after they are married. And, above
all things, keep Mr. Bonnet from fighting. Tell him
what a dreadful state I am in, — Uiat I am frighted
oat of my wits — and have atich tremblings, snch flutter-
ings, all over me — such spasms in my side and pains in
my head, and soch beatings at heart, that I can get no
rest by night nor by day. And tell my dear Lydia not
to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen
me, for she does not know which are the best ware-
houses. Oh, brother, how kind you are ! I know yoa
will contrive it all. "
But Mr. Gardiner, though he assured her again of his
earnest endeavors in the cause, could not avoid recom-
mending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her
fears; and after talking with her in this manner till
dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings
on the housekeeper, who attended, in the absence of her
daughters.
Though her brother and sister were persuaded that
there was no real occasion for such s seclusion from the
family, they did not attempt to oppose it, for they knew
that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue
before the servants, while they waited at table, and
judged it better that one only of the household, and the
one whom they could most trust, should comprehend all
her fears and solicitude on the subject.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 295
In the dining-room they were soon joined by Mary snd
Kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate
apartments to make their appearance before. One eame
from her books, and the other from her toilette. The
faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no
change was visible in either, except that the loaa of her
favorite sister, or the anger which she had herself in-
curred in the business, had given something more of
fretfulness than nsnal to the accents of Kitty. As for
Mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to
Elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon
after they were seated at table —
" This is a most nnfortonate affair, and will probably
be mach talked of. Bnt we must stem the tide of malice,
and pour into the wounded bosoms of each otiier the
balm of sisterly consolation. "
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of reply-
ing, sbe added, " Unhappy as the event most be for
Lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson: tiuit loss
of virtue in a female is irretrievable — that one false step
involves her in endless ruin — that her reputation is no
less brittle than it is beautiful — and that sbe cannot be
too much guarded in her behavior towards the undeserv-
ing of the other sex. "
Elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amasement, but was
too much oppressed to make any reply. Mary, how-
ever, continued to console herself with such kind of
moral extractions from tite evil before them.
In the afternoon, the two elder Miss Bennets were
able to be for half-an-hour by themselves; and Elisa-
beth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of
making any inquiries, which Jane was equally eager to
satisfy. After joining in general lamentations over the
dreadful sequel of this event, which Elizabeth consid-
ered as all but certain, and Miss Rennet could not assert
L ..„■„ Google
296 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
to be vbolly impossible, the former continned the sub-
ject, by saying, " But tell me all and everything aboat it
which I have not already heard. Give me furUier par-
ticulars. What did Colonel Forster say? Had they no
apprehension of anything before the elopement to < &
place? They must have seen them together for ever. "
" Colonel Forster did own that he had often suspected
some partiality, especially on Lydia's side, but nothing
to give him any alarm. I am so grieved for him! His
behavior was attentive and kind to the utmost. He wa*
coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before
he had any idea of their not being gone to Scotland:
when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his
journey. "
" And was Denny convinced that Wickham would not
marry? Did he know of their intending to go off?
Had Colonel Forster seen Denny himself? "
" Yes; but, when questioned by him, Denny denied
knowing anything of their plan, and would not give
his real opinion about it. He did not repeat his per-
suasion of their not marrying — and from that, I am
inclined to hope, he might have been misunderstood
before. "
" And till Colonel Forster came himself, not one of
yon entertained a doubt, I suppose, of their being really
married ? "
" How was it possible that such an idea should enter
our brains! I felt a little uneasy — a little fearful of
my sister's happiness with him in marriage, because I
knew that his conduct had not been always quite right.
My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only
felt how imprudent a. match it must be. Kitty then
owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more
than the rest of us, that in Lydia's last letter she had
pre'pared her for such a step. She bad known, it
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 297
seems, of their being in lore irith each other, jaany
■weeks. "
" But not before they went to Brif^tonf "
" No, I believe not. "
" And did Colonel Forster appear to think ill of Wick-
ham himself? Does he Icnow his real character? "
" I muat confess that he did not speak so well of
Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be
imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad affair
has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton greatly
in debt; but I hope this may be false. "
" Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what
we knew of him, this could not have happened ! "
" Perhaps it would have been better, " replied her sis-
ter. " But to expose the former faults of any person
without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed
unjustifiable. We acted with the best intentions. "
" Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of
Lydia's note to his wife? "
" He brought it with him for us to see. "
Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it
to Elisabeth.
These were the contents —
" My Dear Harriet, —
" You will laugh when yoa know where I am gone, and
I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise to-mor-
row morning, as soon as I am missed, I am going to
Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess with who, I shall
think yoa a simpleton, for tiiere is but one man in the
world I love, and he is an angel. I should never be
happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You
need not send them word at Longboum of my going,
if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the
greater, when I write to them and sign my name'Lydia
C.OO;(lc
298 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
WickhuD.'What a good joke it will be ! I can hardly
write for laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for
not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-
night. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when be knows
all ; and tell him I will dance with him at the next ball
we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for my
clothes when I get to Longboum ; but I wish you would
tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin
gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my
love io Colonel Forster. I hope yon will drink to our
good journey. — Your affectionate friend,
" Lydia Ben net. "
" Oh ! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia ! " cried Elizabeth
when she had finished it. " What a letter is this, to be
written at such a moment! But at least it shows that
the was serious in the object of her joaruey. Whatever
he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her
side a tckeme of infamy. My poor father ! how he most
have felt it 1 "
" I never saw any one so shocked. He could not apeak
a word for full ten minutes. My mother was taken ill
immediately, and the whole house in such confusion ! "
" Oh ! Jane, " cried Elizabeth, " was there a servant be-
longing to it who did not know the whole story before the
end of the day? "
" I do not know. — I hope there was. — But to be guarded
at such a time is very difficult. My mother was in hys-
terics, and though I endeavored to give her every assist-
ance in my power, I am afraid I did not do so much as I
might have done ! But th^ horror of what might possi-
bly happen almost took from me my faculties. "
" Your attendance upon her has been too much for you.
Yon do not look well. Oh, that I had been with you ! —
L ..„■„ Google
PRID£ AND PREJUDICE 299
yon have had every care and anxiety npon yonrself
alone. "
" Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would hare
shared in every fatigue, I am sure, but I did not think
it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate;
«nd Mary studies so mtich, that her hours of repose
should not be broken in on. My aunt Philips came to
Longbourn on Tuesday, after my father went away ; and
was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. SI»e was
of great use and comfort to ns all. And Lady Lucas
has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday
morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or
Any of her daughters', if they could be of use to us. "
" She had better have stayed at home, " cried Elizabeth;
" perhaps she meant well, but, under such a misfortune
as this, one cannot see too little of one's neighbors.
Assistance is impossible; condolence insufferable. I.et
them trinmph over ns at a distance, and be satisfied. "
She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which
her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for
the recovery of his daughter.
" He meant, I believe, " replied Jane, " to go to Ep-
som, the place where they last changed horses, see the
postilions, and try if anything could be made out from
them. His principal object must be to discover the
number of the hackney coach which took them from
Clapham. It had come with a fare from London; and
as he thought the circmnstance of a gentleman and lady's
removing from one carriage into another might be re-
marked, he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he
could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had
before set down his fare, he determined to make in-
quiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to
find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not
know of any other designs Oiat he had formed; bnt he
L ..„■„ Google
800 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
was in such a hurry to be gone, & nd bis spirits so greatlj
discomposed, that I bad difficulty in finding out even ao
mocb as this. "
CHAPTER XLVIII
Thk whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr.
Bennet the nest morning, but the post came in without
bringiDg a single line from him. His family knew him
to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and
dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had
hoped for exertion. They were forced to conclude that
he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of
that they would have been glad to be certain. Mr.
Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set
off.
When he was gone, they were certain at least of re-
ceiving constant information of what was going on, and
their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Ben-
net to return to Longbourn, as soon as he could, to the
great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the
only security for her husband's not being killed in a
duel.
Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in
Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thought
her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She
shared in their attendance on Mrs. Bennet, and was a
great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their
other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as
she said, with the design of cheering and heartening
them up— though, as she never came without reporting
some fresh instance of Wiekham's extravagance or irregu-
larity, she seldom went away without leaving them more
dispirited than she found them.
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 301
All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who,
but three months before, had been almost an angel of
light He»Tas declared to be in debt to every tradesman
in the place, and his intrigues, all honored with the title
of sedaction, had been extended into every tradesman's
family. Everybody declared that he was the wickedest
young man in the world; and everybody began to find
out that they had always distrusted the appearance of
his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit above
balf of what was said, believed enough to make her
former assurance of her sister's ruin still more certain;
and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became al-
most hopeless, more especially as the time was now
come when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had
never before entirely despaired of, they must in all proba-
bility have gained some news of them.
Mr. Gardiner left Longbonrn on Sunday; on Tuesday,
his wife received a letter from him: it told them that,
on his arrival, he had immediately found out his brother,
and persuaded him to come to Gracechurch Street; that
Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before
his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory infor-
mation; and that he was now determined to inquire at
all the principal hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought
it possible they might have gone to one of them on their
first coming to London, before they procured lodgings.
Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success from
this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he
meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added that Mr.
Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave
London, and promised to write again very soon. There
was alsq a postscript to this effect —
" I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to
find out, if possible, from some of the young man's inti-
mates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any rela-
802 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
tions or connections who would be likely to know ia
wfaat part of the town he has now concealed himself.
If there were any one that one -could apply to with a
probability of gaining such » clue as that, it might be of
essential consequence. At present we have nothing to
guide ns. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do every-
thing in his power to satisfy ns on this head. Bnt, ou
second thoughts, perhaps Lizzy could tell us what rela-
tions he has now living, better than any other person. "
Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence
this deference for her authority proceeded; but it was
not in her power to give any information of so satis-
factory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had
never heard of his having had any relations, except a
fathe'and mother, both of whom had been dead many
years. It was possible, however, that some of his com-
panions in the shire might be able to give more
information j and though she was not very sanguine Id
expecting it, the application was a something to look
forward to.
Every day at Longboum was now a day of anxiety;
but the most anxious part of each was when the post was
expected. The arrival of letters was the first grand
object of every morning's impatience. Through letters,
whatever of good or bad was to be told would be com-
municated, and every succeeding day was expected to
bring some news of importance.
But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a
letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter,
from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received direc-
tions to open all that came for him in liia absence, she
accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curi-
osities his letters always were, looked over her, and read
it likewise. It was as follows: —
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 808
" Mt Dear Sir, —
" I feel myself colled upon, by onr relationship, and
my sitaation in life, to condole with you on the grievons
affiicUon you are now suffering under, of which we were
yesterday informed by a letter from Hertfordshire. Be
assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sin-
cerely sympathize with you and all your respectable
family, in your present distress, which must be of the
bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which
no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on
my part that can alleviate so severe a mbfortone^— «r
that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must
be of all others most afflicting to a parent's mind. The
death of your daughter would have been a blessing in
comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented,
because there is reason to suppose, as my dear Char-
lotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behavior in
your daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of in-
dulgence ; though, at the same time, for the consolation
of yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think
that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she
could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so eariy an
age. Howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be
pitied ; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs.
Collins, but likewise by Lady Catherine and her daugh-
ter, to whom I have rdated the affair. They agree with
me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter
will be injurious to the fortunes of all tha others; for
who, as Lady Catherine herself condescendingly says,
will connect themselves with such a family? And this
consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with aug-
mented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November;
for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in
all your sorrow and disgrace. Let me advise you then,
my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to
- Coo;(lc
^y
804 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
tbrov off four nnwortby child from your affection for
ever, and leave her to reap the fmita of her own heinona
offence.-^I am, dear sir, etc., etc, "
Mr, Gardiner did not write again till he had received
an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he had nothing
of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that
Wickham had a sin^e relation with whom he kept up
any connection, and it was certain that he had no near
one living. His former acquaintance had been numerous;
but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear
that he was on terms of particular friendship with any
of them. There was no one, therefore^ who could be
pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in
the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very
powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of
discovery by Lydia's relations, for it had jnst tran-
spired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a
very considerable amount. Colonel Forster believed that
more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to
clear his expenses at Brixton. He owed a good deal
in the town, but his debts of honor were still more
formidable. Mr. Gardiner did not attempt to conceal
these particulars from the Longbourn family. Jane
heard them with horror. " A gamester! " she cried.
" This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it. "
Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might
expect to see their father at home on the following day,
which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-
success of all their endeavors, he had yielded to his
brother-in-law'a entreaty that he would return to his
family, and leave it to him to do whatever occasion
might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pur-
suit. When Mrs, Bennet was told of this, she did not
express so much satisfaction as her children expected,
- Coofilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE SOS
considering what her anxiety for his life had been be-
fore.
" What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia? "
she cried. " Sure he will not leave London before he has
found Idiem. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him
marry her, if he comea away? "
As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was
settled that she and her children should go to London,
at the same time that Mr, Bennet came from it. The
coacb, therefore, took them the first stage of their jour-
ney, and brought its master back to Longboum.
Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about
Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that had attended
her from that part of the world. His name had never
been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece;
and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner
had formed, of their being followed by a letter from
him, had ended in nothing. Elisabeth had received none
since her return that could come from Pemberley.
The present unhappy state of the family rendered any
other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary;
nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from thai,
though Elisabeth, who was by this time tolerably well
acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware
that, had she known nothing of Qarcy, she could have
borne the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It
would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night
out of two.
When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance
of his usual philosophic composure. He said as little
as he had ever been in the habit of saying, made no
mention of the business that had taken him sway, and
it was some time before his daughters had courage to
speak of it.
It was not till the afternoon, when be joined them
L .., > ,„Cooglc ■
c
806 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
at tea, that Elisabeth ventuied to introduce the subject;
and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what
he must have endured, he replied, " Say nothing of that.
Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own
doing, and I ou^t to feel it. "
" You mnst not be too severe upon yourself, " replied
Elizabeth.
" You may well warn me against such an evil. Human
nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lissy, let me
once in my life feel how much I have been to blame.
I am uot afraid of being overpowered by the impres-
sion. It will pass away soon enough. "
" Do yon suppose them to be in Zxindon? "
" Yes; where else can they be so well concealed? "
" And Lydia used to want to go to London, " added
Kitty.
" She is happy then, " said her father drily; " and her
residence there will probably be of some duration. "
Then, after a short silence, he continued —
" Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in
your advice to me last May, which, considering the event,
shows some greatness of mind. "
They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to
fetch her mother's tea.
" This is a. parade, " cried he, " which does one good ;
it gives such an elegance to misfortune ! Another day
I will do the same ; I will sit in my library, in my night-
cap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as I
can; — or, perhaps, I may defer it till Eitty runs away. "
" I am not going to run away, papa, " said Kitty fret-
fully. " If I should ever go to Brighton, I would behave
better than Lydia. "
" You go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near
it as East Bourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have
at last learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects
- Cooxic
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 807
of it. No officer is ever to enter my house again, nor
even to pass through the village. Balls will be abso:
lutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your
sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors till you
can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every
day in a rational matuier. "
Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light,
began to cry.
" Well, well, " said he, " do not make yourself un-
happy. If you are a good girl for the nest tea years,
I will take you to a review at the end of them. "
CHAPTER XLIX
Two days after Mr. Rennet's return, as Jane and
Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery be-
hind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming to-
wards them, and, concluding that she came to call them
to their mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead
of the expected summons, when they approached her,
she said to Miss Rennet, " I beg your pardon, madam,
for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might have
got some good news from town, so I took the liberty
of coming to ask, "
" What do you mean. Hill? We have heard nothing
from town. "
" Dear madam, " cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonish-
ment, " don't yon know there is an express come for
master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here this half-
hour, and master has had a letter. "
Away ran the girls, too eager to get i^ to have time
for speech. They ran tfarongh the vestibnle into the
breakfast-room ; from thence to the library ; — their father
..„■„ Google
808 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Tas in neither; and they were on the point of seeking
him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by
the butler, who said —
" If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is
walking towards the little copse. "
Upon this in formation, they instantly passed through
the hall onee more, and ran aeross the lawn after their
father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards
a small wood on one side of the paddock.
Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit
of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind, white her
sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly
cried out —
" Oh, papa, what news — what news? Have you heard
from my uncle? "
" Yes, I have had a letter from him by espress. "
" Well, and what news does it bring — good or bad? "
" What is there of good to be expected? " said he, tak-
ing the letter from his pocket. " But perhaps you would
like to read it. "
Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane
now came up.
" Read it aloud, " said their father, " for I bardly know
myself what it is about. "
" Gracechurch Street, Monday,
August 2.
" My dear Brother, —
" At last I am able to send you some tidings of my
niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope will give yon
satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I
was fortunate enough to iind out in what part of Lon-
don they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet:
it is enough to know they are discovered. I have seen
them both "
L ..„■„ Google
PBIDE AND PREJUDICE 809
" Then it is as I always hoped, " cried Jane; " they are
married! "
Elizabeth read on —
" I have seen them both. They are not married, nor
can I find there was any intention of being so; bnt if
yon are willing to perform the engagements which I
have ventured to make on your side, I hope it will not be
long before they are. All that is reaoired of top is.
to assure to your daiip^hter, by settlempiit, her eqi^
sh are o^ the nve taouaan rl pminH.i ■»-/-iii-^ < i ..tithithf ypii >
children afte r the decease yj ypm-oi-l f and mv sister ; an d,
m oreover, to enter into an engagement of allo ying h < ^T,
during your lifr, nnr h^nl^ir^'d •pnunrlg.p^'r nnnnm ■ These
are conditions which, considering everything, I had no
hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought my-
self privileged^ for you. I shall send this by express,
that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer.
You will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that
Mr. Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as
they are generally believed to be. The world has been
deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say there
will be some little money, even when all his debts are
discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her
own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, yoa
send me full powers to act in your name throughont the
whole of this business, I will immediately give directions
to Haggerston for preparing a proper settlement. There
will not Be the smallest occasion for your coming to
town again; therefore stay quietly at I > ongbourn, and
depend on my diligence and care. Send back your
answer as soon as you can, and be careful to write ex-
plicitly. We have judged it best that my niece should
be married from this house, of which I hope you will
L ..„■„ Google
810 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
approve. She comes to ns to-day. I shall write again
as 9oon aa anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.
Edw. Gardinir. "
" Is it possible? " cried Elisabeth, when she had fin-
ished. " Can it be possible that he will marry heri "'
" Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have
tboQght him, " said her sister. " My dear father, I con-
gratulate yoD. "
" And have you answered the letter? " said Elizabeth.
" No; but it mu6t be done soon. "
Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no
more time before he wrote.
" Oh! my dear father, " she cried, " come back and
write immediately. Consider how important every vafy-
ment is in such a case. "
" Let me write for you, " said Jane, " if you dislike the
trouble yourself. "
" I dislike it very much, " he replied; " but it most be
done, "
And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked
towards the house.
" And may I ask " said Elizabeth; " but the terms,
I suppose, must be complied with. "
" Complied with ! I am only ashamed of his asking bo
little. "
" And they must marry! Yet he is tuck a man! "
" Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else
to be done. But there are two things that I .want very
much to know: one is, how much money your uncle has
laid down to bring it about; and the other, how I am
ever to pay him. "
" Money I my uncle ! " cried Jane, " what do you mean,
sir? "
" I mean, that no man in his senses would marry
L,,;,l,.K > ,„C00 < ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 311
LjrdJa on bo sli^t « temptatioa u one hnndred a year
during my life, and Mty after I am gone. "
" That is very true/'said Elizabeth; " though it had
not occnrred to me before. His debts to be discharged,
and something still to remain! Oh! it mnst be my
uncle's doing! Generous, good man, I am afraid he
has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all
this. "
" No, " said her father; " Wickham's a fool if he takes
ber with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds. I
should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very be~
giniiing of our relationship. "
" Ten thousand pounds ! Heaven forbid ! How is
half such a sum to be repaid? "
Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep
in thought, continued silent till they reached the house.
Their father then went to the library to write, and the
girls walked into the breakfast-room.
" And they are really to be married! " cried Elizabeth,
as soon as they were by themselves. " How strange this
is! And for this we are to be thankful. That they
should marry, small as is their chance of happiness,
and wretched as is bis character, we are forced to re-
joice. Oh, Lydia! "
" I comfort myself with thinking, " replied Jane, " that
he certainly would not marry Lydia if he had not a real
regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done some
thing towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten
thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced.
He has children of his own, and may have more. How
could he spare half ten thousand pounds? "
" If we were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts
have been, " said Elizabeth, " and how much is settled
on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what
Mr. Gardiner has done for them, because Wtckham has
- Coofilc
812 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle
and (Hint can never be requited. Their taking her home,
and affording her their personal protection and couit-
tenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years
of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time
she is actually with them! If snch goodness does not
make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be
happy t What a meeting for her, when she first sees
my aunt! "
" We must endeavor to forget all that has passed on
either side, " said Jane: " I hope and trust they will yet
be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof, I
will believe, that he is come to a right way of thinking.
Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter
myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational
a manner, as may in time make their past impradence
forgotten, "
" Their conduct has been such, " replied Elisabeth, " as
neither you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is
useless to talk of it. "
It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in
all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened.
They went to the library, therefore, and asked their
father whether he would not wish them to make it
known to her. He was writing, and, without raising
his head, coally replied —
" Just as you please. "
" May we take my unde's letter to read to herP "
" Take whatever yoa like, and get away. "
Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and
they went upstairs together. Mary and Kitty were both
with Mrs. Bennct: one communication would, therefore,
do for all. After a slight preparation for good news,
the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly
contain herself. As soon as Jane had read Mr. Gar-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PKEJUDICE 818
diner's bope of Lydia's being soon married, her joy
bnrst forth, and every following sentence added to its
exaberance. She was now in an irritation as violent
from delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm
and vexation. To know that her daughter would be
married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for
her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her
misconduct.'
" My dear, dear Lydia! " she cried. " This is delight-
fnl indeed! — She will be married! — I shall see her
again ! — She will be married at sixteen ! — My good, kind
brother! I knew how it would be — I knew he would
manage everything ! How I long to see her, and to see
dear Wickhsm too! But the clothes, the wedding
clothes ! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them
directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and
ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I wil >
go mysdf. Ring the bell, Kitty, for Hill. I will put oo-
my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia ! — How
merry we shall be together when we meet ! "'
Her eldest daughter endeavored to give some relief
to the violence of these transports, by leading her
thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Gardiner's be-
havior laid them all nnder.
" For we must attribute this happy conclusion, " she
added, " in a great measure to his kindness. We are
persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Mr.
Wickham with money. "
" Well, " cried her mother, " it is all very right; who
should do it but her own uncle? If he had not had
a family of his own, I and my children must have had
all his money, you know; and it is the first time we
have ever had anything from him, except a few presents.
Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall have a
daughter married. Mrs. Wickham ! — how well it sounds !
L ..„■„ Google'
814 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
And she was only sixteen last June. — My dear Jane, I am
in snch a flutter, that I am sure I can't write ; so I will
dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your
father about the money afterwards; but the things
should be ordered immediately. "
She was then proceeding to all the particulars of
calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly bsve
dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though
with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her'
father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay,
she observed, would be of small importance; and her
mother was tov happy to be quite so obstinate as usual.
Other schemes, too, came into ber head.
" I will go to Meryton, " said she, " as soon as I am
dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister
Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas
and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the carriage.
An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure.
Girls, can I do anything for you in Meryton? Oh!
here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the
good news? Miss Lydia is going to be married; and
you sball all have a bowl of punch to make merry at
her wedding. "
Mrs. Hill began instantly to express ber joy. Elisa-
beth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and
then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room,
that she might think with freedom.
Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough;
hut that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful.
She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither
rational happiness nor worldly prosperity could be justly
expected for her sister, in looking'back to what they
had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advanr
tages of what they had gained.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER L
Mr. Bennbt had very often wished before thia period
of his life that, instead of spending his whole income,
he bad laid by an annual sum for the better provision of
his children, and of his wife, if she anrvived him. He
now wished it more than ever. Had be done his daty
in that respect, Lydia need not hare been indebted to
her nncle for whatever of honor or credit could now be
purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on
one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain
to be her husband might then have rested in its proper
place.
He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little
advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole ex-
pense of his brother-in-ltLW, and he was determined, if
possible, to find oat the extent of bis assistance, and to
discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
When first Mr. Bennet bad married, economy was
held to be perfectly useless; for, of course, they were
to have a son. This son was to join in cutting off tiie
entail, as soon as he should be of age, and tbe widow
and younger children would by that means be provided
for. Five daughters successively entered the world, but
yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many
years after Lydia's birth, had been certain that he
would. This event had at last been despjl^ed of, but it
was then too late to be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no
turn for economy, and her husband's love of indepenr
dence had alone prevented their exceeding tiieir income.
Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles
on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But in what proper-
tions it should be divided amongst the latter depended
on the will of the parents. This was one point, with
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
810 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
regard to LydiA, at least, wliich was now to be settled,
and Mr. Bennet could have no faesitatton in acceding to
the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowl-
edgment for the kindness of his brother, thon^ ex-
pressed moat concisely, be then delivered on paper his
perfect approbation of all that was done, and his will-
ingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made
for him. He had never before supposed that, cootd
Wicklum be prevailed on to marry bis daughter, it would
be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the
present arrangement He would scarcely be ten pounds
a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid
them; for, what witii her board and pocket allowance,
and the continual presents in money which passed to
her through her mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had
been very little within that sum.
That it would be done with such trifling exertion on
his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his
wish, at present was to have as little trouble in the
business as possible. When the first transports of rage
which had produced his activity in seeking her were
over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence.
His letter was soon dispatched; for, thongh dilatory in
undertaking business, he was quick in its execution.
He begged to know further particulars of what he was
indebted to his brother, bat was too angry with Lydia
to send any message to her.
The good news quickly spread through the house, and
with proportionate speed through the neighborhood. It
was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To
be sure, it would have been more- for the advantage of
conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the
town; or, as the happiest alternative, been seclnded
from the world, in some distant farm-house. But there
was much to be talked of in marrying her; and the
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 817
good-nfttured wishes for her vell-doing which had pro-
ceeded before from & 11 the spiteful old ladies in Mery-
ton lost but little of their spirit in this ehange of cir-
cumstances, because with such a husband her misery
was considered certain.
It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been down-
stairs; but on this happy day she again took her seat
at the head of her table, and in. spirits oppressively high.
No sentiment of shame gave & damp to her tritunph.
The marriage of a daughter, which hod been the first
object of her wishes since Jane was sixteen, was now
on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and
her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant
nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She
was busily searching through the neighborhood for a
proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing
or considering what their income might be, rejected
many as deficient in size and importance.
" Haye Park might do, " said she, " if the Gouldinga
would quit it — or the great house at Stoke, if the draw-
ing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off! I
could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as
for Purvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful. "
Her husband allowed her to talk on without Interrup-
tion while the servants remained. But when they had
withdrawn, he said to her, " Mrs. Bennet, before you
take any or all of these houses for your son and daugh-
ter, let us come to a right understanding. Into one
house in this neighborhood they shall never have ad-
mittance. I will not encourage the imprudence of either,
by receiving them at Longbourn. "
A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr.
Bennet was firm. It soon led to another; and Mrs.
Bennet found, with amazement and horror, that her
husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for
- Coo;(lc
818 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
bis danghter. He protested that she should Kceive
from him no mule of affection whatever on the occa-
sion. Mrs. Beimet could hardly comprehend it. That
his anger conld be carried to such a point of incon-
ceJTable resentment as to reftise his danghter a privi-
lege without which her marriage would scarcely seem
valid, exceeded all that she could believe possible. She
was more alive to the disgrace which her want of new
clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to
any sense of shame at her eloping and living with
Wickham a fortnight before thej todt place.
Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had,
from the distress of the moment, been led to make Mr.
Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for
since her marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination to the elopement, they might hope to ctMi-
ceai its unfavorable beginning from all those who were
not immediately on the spot.
She had no fear of its spreading farther through his
means. There were few people on whose secrecy she
would have more confidently depended ; but, at the same
time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister's
frailty would have mortified her so much — not, however,
from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to
herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable
between them. Had Lydia's marriage been concluded
on the most honorable terms, it was not to be supposed
that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family
where, to every other objection, would now be added an
alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with the
man whom he so justly scorned.
From such a connection she could not wonder that he
should shrink. The wish of prociu-ing her regard,
which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derby-
shire, could not in rational expectation survive such a
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 319
blow as thia. She was humbled, she waa grieved; she
repented, though she hardly knew of what. She became
jealous of bis esteem, when she could no longer hope
to be benefited bj it. She wanted to hear of him, when
there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence.
She was convinced that she could have been happy with
him; when it was no longer likely they should meet.
What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could
he know that the proposals which she had proudly
sponied only four months ago, would now have been
gladly and gratefully received 1 He was as generous,
she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but
while he waa mortal, there must be a triumph.
She began now to comprehend that he was exactly
the man who, in disposition and talents, would most
suit her. Hia understanding and temper, though un-
like her own, wonld have answered all her wishes. It
was a union that must have been to the advantage of
both: by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have
been softened, his manners improved; and from his
judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she
must have received benefit of greater importance.
But no such happy marriage could now teach the ad-
miring multitude what connubial felicity really was.
A union of a different tendency, and precluding the
possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their
family.
How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in
tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But how
little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple
who were only brpught together because their passions
were stronger than their virtue, she could easily con-
jecture,
Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr.
L ..„■„ Google
820 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Becnet's acknowledgments he briefly replied, with a«-
snrances of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any
of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the
subject might never he mentioned to him again. The
principal purport of his letter was to inform them that
Mr. Wickbam had resolved on quitting the militia.
" It was greatly my wish that he should do so, " he
added, " as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I
think you will agree with me, in considering a removal
from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account
and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go
into the regulars; and among his former friends there
are still some who are able and willing to assist him in
the army. He has the promise of an ensigncy in General
's regiment, now quartered in the North. It is
an advantage to have it so far from this part of the
kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among dif-
ferent people, where they may each have a character
to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have
written to Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present
arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the
various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton,
with assurances of speedy payment, for which I have
pledged myself. And will yon give yourself the trouble
of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in Mery-
ton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his
information? He has given in all his debts; I hope at
least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our direc-
tions, and all will be completed in a week. They wHl
then join his regiment, imless they are first invited to
Longbourn; and I understand from Mjs. Gardiner, that
my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she
leaves the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully
remembered to you and her mother. — Yours, etc.
E. Gardiner. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 821
Ht. Bennet and his danghten saw all the advantages
of Wickham's rcmoral from the shire as clearly as
Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so
well pleased with it. Lydia's being settled in the North,
just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in
her company, for she had by no means given up her plan
of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe disap-
pointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia
should be taken from a regiment where she was ac-
quainted with everybody, and had so many favorites.
" She ia so fond of Mrs. Forster, " said she, " it will
be quite shocking to send her away ! And there are
several of the young men, too, that she likes very much.
The officers may not be so pleasant in General's
regiment. "
His dau^ter's request, for such it might be con-
sidered, of being admitted Into her family again before
she set off for the North, received at first an absolute
negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who agreed in wish-
ing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and conse-
quence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by
her parents, urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally
and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at Long-
bourn, as soon as they were married, that he was pre-
vailed on to think as they thought, and act as they
wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of know-
ing that she should be able to show her married daughter
in the neighborhood before she waa banished to the
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother,
therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and
it was settled, that as soon as the ceremony was over,
they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was sur-
prised, however, that Wickham shoiild'consent to such
a scheme, and had she consulted only her own inclina-
tion, any meeting with him would bare been the last
object of her wishes. u, i,..,i. > ,Cooylc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER LI
Thbir sister's wedding-day srrived; and Jsne and
Elisabeth felt for her, probably more than she felt for
herself. The cftrriage was sent to meet them at ,
and they were to return ia it by dimier-time. Their
arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and
Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the feelings
which would have attended herself, had the been the
culprit, and was wretched in the tiiought of what her
sister must endure.
They came. The family were assembled in the break-
fast-room to receive them. Smiles decked the face of
Mrs. Beuiet as the carriage drove up to the door; her
husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters.
Alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule ; the door
was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her
mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed
her with rapture ; gave her hand with an affectionate
smile to Wickham, who followed his lady, and wished
them both joy, with an alacri^ which showed no doubt
of their happiness.
Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then
turned, was not quite so cordial. His countenance rather
gained in austerity, and he scarcely opened his lips.
The easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was
enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and
-even Miss Bennet was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still,
— untamed, onabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She
inrned from sister to sister, demanding their congratu-
lations; and when at length they all sat down, looked
eagerly round the room, took notice of some little altera-
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 828
tion in it, and observed, ■with a Ungb, that it ■was a
great while since ahe had been there.
Wickbam waa not at all more distressed than her-
self; but his maimers were always so pleasing, that had
his character and his marriage been esactly what they
ought, his smiles and bis easy address^ while he claimed
their relationship, would bave delighted them all. Eliza-
beth had not before believed him quite equal to such
assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to
draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impu-
dent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the
cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered
no variation of color.
Tliere was no want of discourse. The bride and her
mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and
Wickbam, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began
inquiring after bis acquaintance in that neighborhood
with a good-humored ease which she felt very unable
to equal in her replies. They seemed each of them t»
have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of
the past was recollected with pain; and Lydia led volun-
tarily to snbj ects which her sisters would not have
alluded to for the world.
" Only think of its being three months, " she cried,
" since I went away! It seems but a fortnight, I de-
clare; and yet there have been things enough happened
in the time. Good gracious! when I went away, I am
sure I had no more idea of being married till I came
back again ! though I thought it would be very good fun
if I was, "
Her father lifted up bis eyes, Jane was distressed,
Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who
never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be
insensible, gaily continued — " Oh ! mamma, do the people
hereabouts know I am married to-day f I was afraid
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
824 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
they might not; uid we overtook William Gonldiog in
hia carricle, so I was determined he should know it, and
so I let down the side glass next to him, and took off
my glove and let my hand just rest upon the window-
frame, so that he mig^t see the ring; and then I bowed
and smiled like anything. "
Elizabeth could hear it no longer. She got up and
ran out of the room, and returned no more till she heard
them passing through the hall to the dining-parlor. She
then joined them soon enough to see Lydia, with aoxions
parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her
say to her eldest sister, " Ah, Jane, I take your place
now, and you must go lower^ because I am a married
woman ! "
It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia
that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly
free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She
longed to see Mrs. Philips, the Lupases, and all theJr
other neighbors, and to hear herself called " Mrs. Wick-
ham " by each of them; and, in the meantime, she vent
after dinner to show her ring, and boast of being mar-
ried, to Mrs. Hill and the two housemaids.
" Well, mamma, " said she, when they were all re-
turned to the breakfast-room, " and what do yon think
of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure
my sisters must all envy me. I only hope they may
have half my good lock. They must sU go to Brighton.
That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is,
mamma, we did not all go! "
" Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But,
my dear Lydia, I don't at all like your going such a
way off. Must it be so? "
" Oh, Lord! yes; there is nothing in that. I shall
like it of all things. Yon and papa, and my sisters,
must come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 825
all the irinterj and I dare say there irill be some balls,
and I will take care to get good partners for them all. "
" I should like it beyond anything! " said her mother.
" And then, when yon go away, you may leave one
or two of my sisters behind you ; and I dare say I shall
get husbands for tbem before the winter is over, "
" I thank you for my share of the favor, " said Eliza-
beth; " bat I do not particularly like your way of get-
ting husbands. "
Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with
them. Mr, Wickham had received his commission be-
fore he left London, and he was to join his regiment at
the end of a fortnight.
No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay
would be so short; and she made the most of the time,
by visiting about witb her daughter, and having very
frequent parties at home. These parties were acceptable
to all: to avoid a family circle was even more desirable
to such as did think, than such as did not.
Wickham's afFection for Lydia was just what Eliza-
beth had expected to find it — not equal to Lydia's for
him. She had scarcely needed her present observation
to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that their
elopement had been broaght on by the strength of her
love rather than by his; and she would have wondered
why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope
with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight
was rendered necessary by distress of circmnstances ;
and if that were the case, he was not the young man
to resist an opportunity of having a companion.
Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her
dear Wickham on every occasion ; no one was to be put
in competition with him. He did everything best in the
world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on the
first of September than anybody else in the country.
L ..„■„ Google
826 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was
sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to Eliza-
beth—
" Liza;, I never gave gou an account of my wedding,
I believe. Yon were not by when I told manuna and
the others all about it. Are not yon curious to hear
how it was managed ? "
" No, really, " replied Elizabeth; " I think there can-
not be too little said on the subject. "
" La ! Yon are so strange ! But I must tell you bow
it went off. We were married, yon know, at St
Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in that
\parish. And it was settled that we sbonld all be there
by eleven o'clock. My uncle and aunt, and I, were to
go together ; and the others were to meet us at the church.
Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss !
I was so afraid, yon know, that something woold hap-
pen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite
distracted. And there was my aunt, all the time I was
dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was
reading a sermon. However, I did not hear above one
word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of
my dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would
be married in his blue coat.
" Well, and so we breakfasted at ten, as nsnaL I
thou^t it would never be over; for, by the bye, you
are to understand that my uncle and aunt were horrid
unpleasant all the time I was with them. If you'll be-
lieve me, I did not once put my foot out of doors,
though I was there a fortnight. Not one party, or
scheme, or anything! To be sure, London was rather
thin; but, however, the Little Theatre was open. —
Well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door,
my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid
man, Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 837
get togetiieT, there is no end of it. Well, I was so
fri^tened, I did not know what to do; for mj nncle
was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hoar
we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came
back again in ten minutes'time, and then we all set
out. However, I recollected afterwards, that if he had
been prevented going, the wedding need not be pnt off,
for Mr. Darcj might have done as well. "
" Mr. Darcy! " repeated Elizabeth, in utter amaze-
" Oh, yes ! — he was to come there with Wickham, you
know. Bat, gracious me! I quite fo^ot! I ought not
to have said a word abont it. I promised them so faith-
fully ! What will Widdiam say ? It was to be such a
secret ! "
" If it was to be a secret, " said Jane, " say not an-
other word on the subject. You may depend upon my
seeking no further. "
" Oh ! certainly, " said Elisabeth, though burning with
curiosity; " we will ask you no questions. "
" Thank you, " said Lydia; " for, if you did, I should
certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be so
angry. "
On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced
to put it out of her power, by running away.
But to live in ignorance on such a point was impos-
sible; or, at least, it was impossible not to try for ior
formation. Mr. Darcy had been at her sister's wedding.
It was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where
be had apparently least to do, and least temptation to
go. Conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild,
hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none.
Those that beat pleased her, as placing his conduct in
the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could
not bear such suspense ; and hastily seizing a sheet of
- Cooxic
328 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
paper, wrote a short letter to ber annt, to reqoest ui
expUnatfon of what Lydia had dropped, if it were
compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
" You may readily comprehend, " she added, " what my
curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected
with any of us, and (comparatively speaking) a stranger
to our family, should have been amongst you at such
a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it
— unless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the
secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then
I must endeavor to be satisfied with ignorance. "
" Not that I thall, though, " she added to herself, and
she finished the letter: " and, my dear aunt, if you do not
tell me in an honorable manner, I shall certainly be re-
duced to tricks and stratagems to find it out. "
Jane's delicate sense of honor would not allow her to
speak to Elisabeth privately of what Lydia had let fall:
Elizabeth was glad of it; — till it appeared whether her
inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather
be without a confidante.
CHAPTER LII
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an an-
swer to ber letter as soon as she possibly could. She
was no sooner in possession of it than, hurrying into the
little copse, where she was least likely to be inter-
rupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared
to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her
that it did not contain a denial.
" My dear Nwce Gracechuich Street, Sept. 6.
" I have just received your letter, and shall devote
this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee that a
.., > ,„Coo < ilc
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 829
little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. —
I muat confess myself surprised by yonr application; I
did not expect it from gou. Don't think me angry,
however, for I only mean to let you know that I had
not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your
side. If you do not choose to understand me, forgive
my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as
I am, and nothing but the belief of your being a party
concerned would have allowed him to act as he has
done. But if you are really innocent and ignorant, I
must be more explicit.
" On the very day of my coming home from Long-
boaro, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr,
Darcy called, and was shut up with him several boors.
It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity was
not so dreadfully racked as youn seems to have been.
He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he had found out
where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he
had seen and talked with them both — Wickham repeat-
edly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left
Derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and came to
town with the resolution of hunting for tbem. The
motive professed was his conviction of its being owing
to himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so
well known as to make it impossible for any young
woman of character to love or confide in him. He
generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride,
and confessed that he had before thought it beneath
him to- lay his private actions open to the world. His
character was to speak for itself. He called it, there-
fore, his duty to step forward, and endeavor to remedy
an evil which had been brought on by himself. If he
had another motive, I am sure it would never disgrace
him. He had been some days in town before he was
able to discover them; but he had something to direct
L ..„■„ Google
830 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
his search, which was more than u > e had; and the coo-
sciousness of this waa another reason for his resolving
to follow us.
" There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was
some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was diS'
missed from her eharge on some canse of disapproba-
tion, though he did not say what. She then took a large
house in Edward Street, and has since maintained her-
self by letting lodgings. This Mrs. Younge, was, he
knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham ; and he went
to her for intelligence of him, as soon as lie got to town.
But it was two or three days before be could get from
her what he wanted. She would not betray her toust, I
suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she leally
did know where her friend was to be found. Wickham,
indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in London,
and had she been able to receive them into her house,
they would have taken up their abode with her. At
length, howevetj our kind friend procured the wisbed-
for direction. They were in Street He saw
Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His
first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to
persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation,
and return to her friends as soon as tiiey could be pre-
vailed on to receive her, offering his assistance as far
as it would go. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved
on remaining where she was. She cared for none of
her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not
hear of leaving Wickham; she was sure they should be
married some time or other, aud it did not much signify
when. Since such were her feelings, it only remained,
he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in
his very first conversation with Wickbam, he easily
learnt had never been hit design. He confessed him-
self obliged to leave the regiment on account of tone
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 881
debts of honor which were very pressing, and scrupled
not to lay all the ill consequences of Lydia's Jlight on
her own folly alone. He meant to resign his couunission
immediately; and «s to his future situation, he could
conjecture very little abont it. He must go somewhere,
bat he did not know where, and he knew he should have
nothing to live on.
" Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your
sister at once^ Though Mr. Bennet was not imagined
to be very rich, he would have been able to do something
for him, and his situation must have been benefited by
marriage, fiut he found, in reply to this question, that
Wickham still cherished the hope of more eSectoally
making his fortune by marriage in some other country.
Under such circumstances, however^ he was not lilcely
to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
" They met several times, for there was much to be
discussed. Wickham, of coarse, wanted more than he
could get, but at length was reduced to be reasonable.
" Everything being settled between them, Mr. Darcy's
next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it,
and he first called in Gracechurch Street the evening
before I came borne. But Mr. Gardiner could not be
seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that
your father was still with him, but would quit town the
next morning. He did not judge your father to be «
person whom he conld so properly consult as your uncle,
and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the
departure of the former. He did not leave his name,
and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman
had called on business.
" On Satnrday he came again. Your father was gone,
your ancle at home^ and, as I said before, they had a
great deal of talk together.
" They met again on Sunday, and then / saw him too.
C.OO;(lc
882 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
It waa not all settled before Monday: aa soon as it vaa,
the express was sent off to Longbourn. But wif viBitoE
was verj obstinate. I fancy, t!— |.^ tu^^f ^^„n— ^ jg
the rwil ^ffivt n( hjji character after al l. He has been
accused of many faults at different times, but tku is the
true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do
himself; though I am sure (and I do not speak it to be
thanked, therefore say nothing about it) your uncle
would most readily have settled the whole.
" They battled it together for a long time, which was
more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it
deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield,
and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece,
was forced to put up with only having the probable
credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and
I really believe your letter this morning gave him great
pleasure, because it required «n explanation that would
rob him of fiis borrowed feathers, and give the praise
■I where it was due. But, Lizzy, this mnst go no farther
\l than yourself, or Jane at most.
" Yoa know pretty well, I suppose, what has been
done for the young people. His debts are to be paid,
amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thou-
sand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own
settled upon her, and bis commission purchased. The
reason why all this was to be done by him alone was
such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to
his reserve and want of proper consideration, that
Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and,
consequently, that he had been received and noticed as
he was. Perhaps there was some truth in thu; though
I doubt whether hit reserve, or anybody'i reserve, can
be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this
fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly
assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PHEJUDICE 838
had not given him credit for another intereti in the
affair.
" When all this was resolved on, he returned again to
his friends, vho were stUl staying at Pemberley; but it
was agreed that he should be in London once more when
the wedding took place, and all money matters were
then to receive the last finish.
" I believe I have now told you everything. It is a
relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise;
I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure.
Lydia came to us; and Wickham had constant admis-
sion to the house. He was exactly what he had been
when I knew him in Hertfordshire; but I would not
tell you how Uttle I was satisfied with her behavior
while she stayed with us, if I had not perceived, by
Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on com-
ing home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore
what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I
talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner,
representing to her the wickedness of what she had done
and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family.
If she heard me, it was by good luck, for I am sure she
did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, hut
then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and Jane, and for
their aakes had patience with her.
" Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and, aa Lydia
informed yot > , attended the wedding. He dined with us
the next day, and was to leave town again on Wednes-
day or Thursday. Will you be very angry with me, my
dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what
I was never bold enough to say before) how much I
like iaxa? His behavior to us has, in every respect,
heen as pleasing as when we were in Derbyshire. His
understanding and opinions all please me; he wants
nothing but a little more liveliness, and that, if he
..L.ooyFc
S84 PRIDE AND PEEJUDICE
marry prudently, his vife may teach him. I thought
him very sly; — ^he hardly ever mentJoued your name.
But fllyneas aeems the fashion .
Pray lorgive me if I have been very presuming; or
at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from
P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all
round the park. A low phaeton, with » nice little pair
of ponies, would be the very thing.
(^'^ " But I must write no more. The children have been
\ wanting me this half-hour.
V- Yours, very sincerely,
" M. Gardinbb. "
The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a
flutter of spirits, in which it was difGcult to determine
whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The
vague and unsettled suspicions which nncertainty had
produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to
forward her sister's match, which she had feared to
encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to he
probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from
the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their great-
est extent to be true 1 He had followed them purposely
to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and
mortifieation attendant on such a research; in which
supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he
must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced
to meet — frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and
finally bribe — the man whom he always most wished to
avoid, and whose .very name it was punishment to him
to pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom
he could neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did
whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a
hope shortly checked by other considerations, and she
soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient, when re-
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 885
quired to depend on h:.s affection for her, for a woman
who had already refused him, as able to overcome a
sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship
with Wickham, — Brother-in-law of Wickham! — Every
kind of pride most revolt from the connection. He had,
to be sure, done much, — she was ashamed to think how
much. But he had given a reason for his interference,
which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It was
reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he
had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it;
and though she would not place herself as his principal
inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining
partiality for her might assist his endeavors in a cause
where her peace of mind must be materially concerned.
It was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they
were under obligations to a person who could never re-
ceive a return. They owed thtf restoration of Lydia,
her character, everything to him. Oh ! how heartily did
she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever
encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed
towards him. For herself j she was humbled; but she
was proud of him. Proud that in a cause of compassion
and honor he had been able to get the better of himself.
She read over her annt's commendation of him again and
again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She
was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with
regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her
uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence
subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself.
She was roused from her seat and her reflections by
someone's approach; and before she could strike into
another path she was overtaken by Wickham.
" I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear
sister? " said he, as he joined her.
" Yon certainly do, " she replied with a smile; " but ft
- Coo;(lc
886 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
does not follow that the interraption most be unwel-
come. "
" I should be Sony indeed if it were. We were al-
ways good friends; and now we are better. "
" Tme. Are the others coming out? "
" I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are goin^
in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I
find from onr nncle and annt that 70a hare actually
seen Pemberley, "
She replied in the a£Srmatire.
" I almost euTy you the pleasure, and yet I bdieve it
would be too much for me, or else I could take it in
my way to Newcastle. And yon saw the old housekeeper,
I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was always very fond
of me. But of course she did not mention my name to
you. "
'Tcs, she did. "
" And what did she say? "
" That you were gone into the army, and, she was
afraid, had — ^not turned out welL At such a distance
as that, yon know, things are strangely misrepresented. "
" Certainly, " be replied, biting his lips.
Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; bat be soon
afterwards said —
" I_was sarprised to flee Darcy in town last month.
We passed each other several times. I wonder what he
can be doing there? "
" Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de
Bonrgh, " said Elizabeth. " It must be something par-
ticnlar to take him there at this time of year. "
" Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at
Lambton? I tiionght I understood from the Gardiners
that you had. "
" Yes; he introduced us to his sister, "
" And do you like her? "
L ..„■„ Google
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 887
" Very mnch. "
" I have heardj indeed, that she is nnconimonly im-
proved within this year or two. When I last saw her
she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked
her. I hope she will turn out well. "
" I dare say she will; she has got over the most txy-
ing age. "
" Did yon go by the village of Kymplon? "
" I do not recollect that we did. "
" I mention it becaose it is the living which I ooght
to have had. A most delightful place ! — Excellent Par-
sonage House! It would have suited me in every re-
spect. "
" How shotdd you have liked making sermons? "
" Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as
part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been
nothing. One ought not to repine; hot, to be sure, it
would have been such a thing for me ! The quiet, the
retirement of such a life, would have answered all my
ideas of happiness! But it was not to be. Did yon
ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance when you
were in Kent? "
" I have heard, from authority, which I thought at
good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the
will of the present patron. "
" Yon have ! — ^Yes, there was s < »nething in thai ; I told
yon so from the first, you may remember. "
" I did hear, too, that there was a time when sermon-
making was not so palatable to yon as it seems to be
at present— that you actually declared yoor resolution
of never taking orders, and that the business had been
compromised accordingly. "
" You did ! — and it was not wholly without founda-
tion. You may remember what I told you on that point,
when first we talked of It. "
L ..„■„ Google
888 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
They were now almost at the door of the honae, for
she had walked fast to get rid of him, and, amrilliiij;
for her sister's sake, to provoke him, she only said in
reply, with a good-hnmored smile —
" Come, Mr. Wickham, ve are brother and sister, you
know. Do not let us quarrel abont the past. In future,
I hope we shall be always of one mind. "
She held out her hand ; he kissed it with affectionate
gallantry, though he hardly k new, how to lo olA and they
entered the house. J
CHAPTER LIU
Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this
conversation, that he never again distressed himself or
provoked his dear sister Elizabeth by introducing the
subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had
said enough to keep him quiet.
The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and
Mrs. Bennet was forced to submit to a separation which,
as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of
their all going to Newcastle, was likely to continue at
least a twelvemonth.
" Oh ! my dear Lydia, " she cried, " when shall we meet
again? "
" Oh, Lord! I don't know. Not these two or three
years, perhaps. "
" Write to me very often, my dear. "
( " As often as I can. But yon know married women
have never much lime for writing. My sisters may write
to me. They will have nothing else to do. "
Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate
than his wife's. He smiled, looked handsome, and said
many pretty things.
" He is as fine a fellow. " said Mr. Bennet, as soon as
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 889
they were out of the house, " as ever I saw. He sim-
pers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am pro-
digiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William Lucas
himself to produce b more valuable son-in-law, "
The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull
for several days.
" I often think, " said she, " that there is nothing so
bad as parting with one's friends. One seems so forlorn
without them. "
" This is the consequence, you see, madam, of marry-
ing a daughter, " said Elizabeth. " It must make you
better satisfied that your other four are sin^e. "
" It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me be-
cause she is married, but only because her husband's
regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been
nearer, she would not have gone so soon. "
But the spiritless condition which this event threw her
into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened again
to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which
then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper at
Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the ar-
rival of her master, who was coming down in a day or
two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was
quite in the fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled,
and shook her head by turns.
" Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down,
sister " (for Mrs, Philips first brought the news). " Well,
so much the better. Not that I care about it, though.
He is nothing to us, you know, and I am sure / never
want to see him again. But, however, he is very wel-
come to come to Netherfield, if he likes it. And who
knows what mag happen ? But that is nothing to ns.
You know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention
a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is
coming? "
L ..„■„ Google
8*0 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" You may depend on it, " replied the other, " for Mrs.
Nichols was in Meryton last night; I aaw her passing
by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth
of it; and she told me that it was certainly true. He
comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on
Wednesday. She was going to the butcher's, she told
me, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday,
and she has got three couple of ducks jnst fit to be
killed. "
Miss Bennet had not been able to hear o£ his coming
without changing color. It was many months since she
had mentioned his name to Elisabeth; but now, as soon
as they were «Ione together, she said —
" I saw yoo look at me to-day, Liasy, when my aunt
told OS of the present report; and I know I appeared
distressed; but don't imagine it was from any silly
cause. I was only confused for the moment, because I
felt that I should be looked at. I do assure you that
ttie news does not affect me either with pleasure or
pain. 1 am glad of one thing— that he comes alone;
because we shall see the less of him. Not that I am
afraid of mytelf, but I dread other people's remarks. "
Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she
not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have supposed
him capable of coming there with no other view than
what was acknowledged; but she still thought him par-
tial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probabil-
ity of his coming there with his friend's permission, or
being bold enough to come without it.
" Yet it is hard, " she sometimes thought, " that this
poor man cannot come to a house which he has legally
hired without raising all this speculation. I wUl leave
him to himself. "
In spite of what her sister declared, and really be-
lieved to be her feelings, in the expectation of his ar-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 84.1
riTsl, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits
were affected by it. They were more disturbed, more
unequal, than she had often seen them.
The subject which had been so warmly canvassed
between their parents about a twelvemonth ago was
now brought forward again.
" As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear, " said
Mrs. Bennet, " you will wait on him, of course. "
" No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year,
and promised, if I went to see him, he should marry
one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I
will not be sent on a fool's errand again. "
His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary
such an attention would be from all the neighboring
gentlemen, on hia returning* to Netherfield.
"'Tis an etiquette I despise, " said he, " If he wants
our society^ let him seek it. He knows where we live.
I will not spend my hours in running* after my neigh-
bors every time tbey go away and come back again. "
" Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude
if you do not wait on him. But, however, that shan't
prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined.
We must have Mrs. Long and the Gouldings soon. That
will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just
room at table for him. "
Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able
to bear her husband's incivility; though it was very
mortifying to know that her neighbors might all see
Mr, Bingley, in consequence of it, before they did. As
the day of his arrival drew near,
" I begin to be sorry that he comes at all, " said Jane
to her sister. " It would be nothing; I could see him
with perfect indifference; bat I can hardly bear to hear
it thus perpetually talked of. My mother means well;
but she does not know — no one can know — how moch I
342 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
snffer from vhat she says. Happy shall I be -when his
< tay at Netberfield is over ! "
" I wish I could say anything to comfort you, " replied
Elizabeth; " but it is wholly out of my power. You must
feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience
to a sufferer is denied me, because you hare always so
moch. "
Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the as-
sistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings
of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her
side might be as long as it could. She counted the days
that must intervene before their invitation could be sent
— hopeless of seeing him before. But, on the third morn- .
ing after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him from
her dresaing-room window enter the paddock and ride
towards the house.
Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of ber
joy. Jane resolutely kept ber place at the table; but
Elisabeth, to satisfy ber mother, went to the window, —
she looked — she saw Mr. Darcy with him, and sat down
again by ber sister.
" There is a gentleman with him, mamma, " said
Kitty; " who can it be? "
" Scune acquaintance or other, my dear, I snppose; I
am sure I do not know. "
" La! " replied Kitty, " it looks just like that man that
used to be with him before, — Mr. what's bis name. —
That tall, proud man. "
" Good gracious ! Mr. Darcy ! — and so it does, I vow.
Well, ony friend of Mr. Bingley's will always be wel-
come here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate
the very sight of him. "
Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern.
She knew but little of their meeting in Derbyshire, and
therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend
L .., > ,„Cooylc
PEIDE AND PREJUDICE 848
her sister, iu seeing him almost for the first time after
receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters vete nn-
comfortable enough. Each felt for the other, and of
course for themselves ; and their mother talked on, of
her dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil
to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being heard
by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of un-
easiness which could not be suspected by Jane, to whom
she had never yet had courage to show Mrs. Gardiner's
letter, ot to relate her own change of sentiment towards
him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals
she had refused, and whose merit she had undervalued;
bnt to her own more extensive information, he was the
person to whom the whole family were indebted for
the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with
an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable
and just as what Jane felt for Bing^ey. Her astonish-
ment at his coming — at his coming to Netherfield, to
Longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was al-
most equal to what she bad known on first witnessing
his altered behavior in Derbyshire.
The color which had been driven from her face, .re-
turned for half a minute with an additional glow, and
a smile of delight added Instre to her eyes, as she
thought for that space of time, that his affection and
wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be
" Let me first see how he behaves, " said she; " it will
then be early enough for expectation. "
She sat intently at work striving to be composed, and
without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity
carried them to the face of her sister, as the servant
was approaching the door. Jane looked a little paler
than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had ex-
pected. On the gentlemen's appearing, her color in-
L ..„■„ Google
. 844 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
creased; jet she received them with tolerable ease, and
with a propriety of beharior eqnally free from any
symptom of resentment, or any nimeceasary complais-
ance.
Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would
allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eager-
ness which it did not often command. She had ven-
tured only one glance at Darcy. He looked serious as
nsual, and, she thought, more as he had been nsed tt >
look in Hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at
Pemberiey. But, perhaps, he could not in her mother's
presence be what he was before her uncle and atmt.
It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
Bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in
that short period saw him looking both pleased and
embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a
degree of civility which made her two daughters
ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and
ceremonious politeness of her curtsey and address of
his friend.
Elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother
owed to the latter the preservation of her favorite
daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and dis-
tressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so
ill-applied.
Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gar-
diner did — a question which she could not answer with-
out confusion — said scarcely anything. He was not
seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of his si-
lence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There
he had talked to her friends, when he could not to her-
self. But now several minutes elapsed, without bring-
ing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, un-
able to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her
eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at Jane
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 313
as «t herself, and {reqnently on no object bnt the
ground. More thoughtfulness, and less anxiety to please
than Then they last met, were plainly expressed. She
was disappointed, and Angry with herself for being so.
" Could I expect it to be otherwise ! " said she. " Yet
why. did he come? "
She was in no hnmor for conversation with anyone
bat himself; and to him she had hardly courage to
speak.
She inqnired after his sister, bat could do no more.
" It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since yon went away/'
said Mrs. Bennet
He readily agreed to it. " I began to be afraid you
voold never come back again. People did say, you
meant to quit the place entirely at Michaelmas; but,
however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes
have happened in the neighborhood since you went away.
Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my own
daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you
must have seen it in the papers. It was in the Times
and the Courier, I know; thongh it was not put in
as it ought to be. It only said,'Lately, George Wick-
ham, Esq., to Miss Lydia Bennet,'without there being
a syllable said of her father, or the place where she
lived, or an3rthing. It was my brother Gardiner's
drawing up too, and I wonder how he came to make
such an awkward business of it. Did yon see it? "
Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratu-
lations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How
Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell,
" It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daugh-
ter well married, " continued her mother; " but, at the
same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her
taken away from me. They are gone down to New-
castle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they
- Cooxic
8*6 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
are to stay I do not know how long. His regiment is
there; for I suppose you have heard of bis leaving the
shire, and of his being gone into the regulars.
Thank Heaven! he has tome friends, though, perhaps,
not so many as he deserves, "
Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy,
was in snch misery of shame that she could hardly keep
her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of
speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done
before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to
make any stay in the country at present A few weeks,
he believed.
" When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bing-
ley, " said her mother, " I beg yon will come here, and
shoot as many as you please, on Mr. Bennet's manor.
I am sure he wUl be vastly happy to oblige you, and
will save all the best of the covies for you. "
Elizabeth's misery increased at snch unnecessary, such
officious attention ! Were the same fair prospect to arise
at present as had flattered them a year ago, everything,
she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same
venations conclusion. At that instant she felt that years
of happiness could not make Jane or herself amends
for moments of such painful confusion.
" The first wish of my heart, " said she to herself, " is
never more to be in company with either of them. Their
society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such
wretchedness as this ! Let me never see either one or
the other again! "
Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to
offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material
relief from observing how much the beauty of her sister
rekindled the admiration of her former lover. When
first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but
every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of
- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 847
his attention. He found her as handsome as she had
been last year, — as good-natured and as unaffected,
though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was
really persuaded that she talked as much as ever. But
her mind was so busily engaged that she did not always
know when she was silent.
When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet
was mindful of her intended civility, and they were
invited and engaged to dine at Longboum in a few
days'time.
" You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley, " she
added; " for when you went to town last winter you
promised to take a family dinner with us as soon as
you returned. I have not forgot, you see ; and I assure
you I was very much disappointed that you did not
come back and keep your engagement. "
Bingley looked a littlef silly at this reflection, and
said something of his concern at having been prevented
by business. They then went away.
Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them
to stay and dine there that day, bat, though she alwaj^
kept a very good table, she did not think anything less
than two courses could be good enough for a mani on
whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appe-
tite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year.
CHAPTER LIV
As soon as they wtre gone Elizabeth walked out to
recover her spirits, — or, in other words, to dwell without
interruption on those subjects that must deaden them
more. Mr. Darcy's behavior astonished and vexed her.
- Coo;(lc
848 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
" Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indif-
ferent, " said she, " did he come at all? "
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
" He could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle
and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to nae?
If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer
cares for me, why silent? — Teasing, teasing man! I
will think no more abont him. "
Her resolution was for a short time involontarily kept
by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a
cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with
their visitors than Elizabeth.
" Now, " said she, " that this first meeting is over, I
feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I
shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am
glad he dines here on Tuesday: it will then be publicly
seen that on both sides we met only as common and
indifferent acquaintance. "
" Yes, very indifferent indeed, " said Elizabeth, laugh-
ingly. " Oh, Jane ! take care. "
" My dear Lizzy, yon cannot think me so weak as to
be in danger now. "
" I think yon are in very great danger of making him
as much in love with you as ever. "
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday;
and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to
all the happy schemes which the good humor and com-
mon politeness of Bingley, in half-an-hoor's visit, had
revived.
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at
Longbourn; and the two, who were most anxiously ex-
pected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen,
were in very good time. When they repaired to the
dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 319
fiingley would take the place which, in all their former
parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her pru-
dent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to
invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he
seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look rouni
and happened to smile; it was decided — he placed himA
self by her. \
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards!
his friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she i
would have imagined that Bingley had received his t
sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise |
turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half- I
laughing alarm.
His behavior to her sister was such, during dinner-
time, as showed an admiration of her which, though
more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that
if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his own,
would be speedily secured. Though she dared not de-
pend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure
from observing his behavior. It gave her all the ani-
mation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no
cheerful humor. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her
as the table could divide them.
He was on one aide of her mother. She knew how
little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or
make either appear to advantage. She was not near-
enough to hear any of their discourse; but she could
see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how
formal and cold was their manner whenever they did.
Her mother's nngraciousness made the sense of what
they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and
she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged
to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor
nnfelt by the whole of the family.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some
- Cooxic
850 PRID£ AND PREJUDICE
opportnnity of bringing them together; that the whole
of the visit would not pass away without enabling them
to enter into something more of conversation, than the
mere ceremonious salutations attending his entrance.
Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the
drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was weari-
some and dull to a degree that almost made her nn*
civil. She looked forward to their entrance as the
point on which all her chance of pleasure for the even-
ing mnst depend.
" If he does not come to me then, " said she, " I shall
give him up forever. "
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as
if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the
ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet
was making tea, and Elizabeth ponring out the coffee,
in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single
vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And
on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls moved
closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper —
" The men shan't come and part us, I am determined.
We want none of them; do we? "
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room.
She followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to
whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help
anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against her-
self for being so silly !
" A man who has once been refused. How could I
r ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love?
1 Is there one among the sex who wonld not protest
*i.U against such a weakness as a second proposal to the
E same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to
I their feelings ! "
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing
back his coffee-cup himself; and she seised the oppor-
tunity of saying, " Is your sister at Pemberley still? "
L .., > ,„Cooj^lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 861
" Yes, she will remain there tUl Christmas. "
" And quite alose? Have all her frieads left her? "
" Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been
gone on to Scarborough these three weeks. "
She could think of nothing more to say; hut if he
wished to converse with ber, he might have better suc-
cess. He stood by herj however, for some minutes, in
silence; and, at last, on the young ladies whispering
to Elizabeth again, be walked away.
When the tea-things were removed, and the card-
tables placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was
then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her
views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to
her mother's rapacity for whist-players, and in a few
nooments after seated with the rest of the party. She
now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were con-
fined for the evening at different tables, and she had
nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned
towards her side of the room, as to make him play as
unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Rennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield
gentlemen to sapper ; but their carriage was unluckily
ordered before any of the others, and she had no oppor-
tunity of detaining them.
" Well, girls, " said she, as soon as they were left to
themselves, " what say yon to the day? I think every-
thing has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you.
The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw.
The venison was roasted to a turn — and everybody said,
they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty
times better than what we had at the Lncases'last week;
and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged that the partridges
were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two
or three French cooks at least And, my dear Jane, I
never saw you look in greater beaoty. Mrs. Long said
L ..„■„ Google
352 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
so, too, for I asked her whether you did not. And
what do you think she said besides?'Ah! Mrs. Bennet,
we shall have her at Netberfield at last.'She did in-
deed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as
ever lived — and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls,
and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously. "
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits. She
had seen enough of Bingley's behavior to Jane, to be
convinced that she would get him at last; and her ex-
pectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy
humor, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite
disappointed at not seeing him there again the next
day to make hb proposals.
" It has been a very agreeable day, " said Miss Bennet
to Elizabeth. " The party seemed so well selected, so
suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet
again. "
Elizabeth smiled.
" Lizzy, you must not do so. Yon most not suspect
me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now
learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and
sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it.
I am perfectly satisfied from what his manners now are,
that he never had any design of engaging my affection.
It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of
address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing,
than any other man. "
" You are very cruel, " said lier sister; " you will not
let me smile, and are provoking me to it every mo-
" How hard it is in some cases to be believed ! "'
1 [This sentence ia here separated fnmi the next In Bi^i^ordance
with a reference in a letter of Miss AnBten'a to tbe page of the
first edition < hi which it occurs. " The greatest blun^r in print-
ing is in p. 930, V, 3, where two sentences are made into ooe. "
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 858
" And how impossible in others! "
" But why shonld you wish to persaade me that I feel
more than I acknowledge? "
" That is a question which I hardly know how to
answer. We all love to instruct, though we can teach
only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if
you persist in indifference, do not make me your con-
fidante. "
CHAPTER LV
A FEW days after this visit, Mr. Biugley called again
and alone. His friend had left him that morning for
London, but was to return boiae in ten days'time. He
sat with them above an honr, and was in remarkably
good spirits. Mrs. Bennet invited him to dine with
them; but, with many expressions of concern, he con-
fessed himself engaged elsewhere.
" Next time you call, " said she, " I hope we shall be
more Ineky. "
" He should be particularly happy at any time, etc.,
etc., and if she would give him leave, would take an
early opportunity of waiting on them. "
" Can yon come to-morrow? "
" Yes, he had no engagement at all for to-morrow; "
and'her invitation was accepted with alacrity.
He came, and in such very good time, that the ladies
were none of them dressed. In ran Mrs. Bennet to her
daughters'room, in her dressing gown, and with her
hair half finished, crying out, " My dear Jane, make
haste and hurry down. He is come — Mr. Bingley is
come — He is indeed. Make haste, make haste. Here,
Sarah, come to Miss Bennet this moment, and help her
on with her gown. Never mind Miss Lizzy's hair. "
" We wiU be down as soon as we can, " said Jane;
L ..„■„ Google
asi PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" but I dare say Kitty is forwarder than either of as,
for she went upstairs half an hour ago. "
" Oh! hang Kitty! what has she to do with it? Come,
be quick, be quick! where is your sssh, my dear? "
But when her mother was gone, Jane would not be
prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.
The same anxiety to get [them) by themselves, was
visible again in the evening. After tea, Mr. Bennet
retired to the library, as was his custom, and Mary went
upstairs to her instrument. Two obstacles of the five
being thus removed, Mrs. Bennet sat looking and vrink-
ing at Elizabeth and Catherine for a considerable time,
without making & ny impression on them. Elizabeth
would not observe her; and when at last Kitty did, she
very innocently said, " What is the matter, mamma?
I What do you keep winking at me for? What am I
\to do? "
\ " Nothing, child, nothing. I did not wink at you. "
'She then sat still five minutes longer; but, unable to
waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up,
and saying to Kitty, " Come here, my love, I want to
speak to you/'took her out of the room. Jane !□'
atantly gave a look at Elizabeth, which spoke her dis-
tress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that ihe
wonld not give in to it.
In a few minutes, Mrs. Bennet half opened the door,
and called out, " Lizzy, my dear, I want to speak with
you. "
Elizabeth was forced to go. " We may as well leave
them by themselves, you know, " said her mother as soon
as she was in the hall. " Kitty and I are going upstairs
to sit in my dressing-room. "
Elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother,
but remained quietly in the hall till she and Kitty were
out of sight, then returned into the drfiwtng-room.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 865
Mrs. Rennet's schemes for this day were ineffectnal.
Single}'was everything that was charming, except the
professed lover of her dangbter. His ease and cheerfnl-
ness rendered liim a most agreeable addition to their
evening party; and he bore with the ill-judged officious-
ness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks, with
a forbearance and command of countenance partienlarly
grateftd to the daughter.
He scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper;
and before he went away, an engagement was formed,
chiefly through his own and Mrs. Rennet's means, for
his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.
After this day, Jane said no more of her indiffer-
ence. Not a word passed between the sisters concerning
Bingley ; but Elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief
that all must speedily be concluded, unless Mr. Darcy
retnrned within the stated time. Seriously, however,
she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have
taken place with that gentleman's concurrence.
Bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and
Mr. Rennet spent the morning together, as had been
agreed on. The latter was much more agreeable than
his companion expected. There was nothing of pre-
sumption or folly in Bingley, that could provoke his
ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more
communicative and less eccentric than the other had
ever seen him. Ringley of coarse returned with him
to dinner; and in the evening Mrs. Rennet's invention
was again at work to get everybody away from him and
her daughter. Elizabeth, who had a letter to write,
went into the breakfast-room for that purpose soon after
tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to
cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mother's
schemes.
But on returning to the drawing-room when her letter
L ..„■„ Google
386 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was
reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious
for her. On opening the door, she perceived her sister
and Bingtey standing together over the hearth, as if
engaged in earnest conversation ; and had this led to
no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned
round and moved away from each other, would have
told it all. Their situation was awkward enough; but
hen, she thought, was still worse. Not a syllable was
nttercd by either; and Elizabeth was on the poiut of
going away again, when Bingley, who as well as the
other had sat down, suddenly rose, and whispering a
few words to her sister, ran out of the room.
Jane could have no reserves from Elizabeth, where
confidence would give pleasure; and instantly embrac-
ing her, acknowledged with the liveliest emotion, that
she was the happiest creature in the world.
"'Tis too much, " she added, — " by far too mnch. I
do not deserve it. Oh I why is not everybody as happy ! "
Elizabeth's congratulations were given with a sincer-
ity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly
express. Every sentence of kindness was a fresh source
of happiness, to Jane. But she would not allow herself
to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to
be said, for the present.
" I must go instantly to my mother, " she cried; " I
would not on any account trifie with her affectionate
solicitude, or allow her to hear it from anyone but my-
self. He is gone to my father already. Oh ! Liszy, to
know that what I have to relate will give such pleasure
to all my dear family ! how shall I bear so much happi-
ness ! "
She then hastened awa-y to her mother, who had pur-
posely broken up the card party, and was sitting up-
stairs with Kitty.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 357
Elizabeth, vbo was left hy herself, now smiled at the
rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled,
that had given them so many prerioos months of [sus-
pense] and vexaHoo.
" And tiiis, " said she, " is the end of all his friend's
anxious circumspection! of all his sister's falsehood and
contrivance! the happiest, wisest, and most reasonable
end! "
In a few minutes she was joined by Bingley, whose
conference with her father had been short and to the
pnipose.
" Where is your sister? " said he hastily, as he opened
the door.
" With my mother upstairs. She will be down in a
moment, I dare say. "
He then shot the door, and coming up to her, claimed
the good wishes and affection of a sister. Elisabeth
honestly snd heartily expressed her delight in the pros-
pect of their relationship. They shook hands with great
cordiality; and then till her sister came down, she had
to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and
of Jane's perfections; and in spite of his being a lover,
Elisabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity
to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the
excellent understanding and snperexcellent disposition
of Jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste
between her and himself.
It was an evening of no common delight to them all.
The satisfaction of Miss Bennet's mind gave such a
^ow of sweet animation to her face, as made her look
handsomer than ever. Kitty simpered and smiled, and
hoped her turn was coming soon. Mrs. Bennet could
not give her consent or speak her approbation in terms
warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked
to Bingley of nothing else for half an hour: and when
Cooylc
358 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Mr. Bennet joined them at supper, his voic« and manner
plainly showed how really happy he was. -
Not a word, however, passed his lips in allnsion to it,
till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as
soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter and
said —
" Jane, I congratulate you. You will be a very happy
woman. "
Jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked
him for his goodness.
" You are a good girl, " he replied, " and I have great
pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled. I
have not a doubt of your doing very well together.
Your tempers are by no means imlike. You are each
of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved
on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so
generous, that you will always exceed your income. "
" I hope not so. Imprudence or thoughtlessness in
money matters would be unpardonable in me. "
" Exceed their income! My dear Mr. Bennet, " cried
his wife, " what are you talking of? Why, he has four
or five thousand a-year, and very likely more. " Then
addressing her daughter, " Oh! my dear, dear Jane, I
am so happy, I am sure I shan't get a wink of sleep
all night. I knew how it would be, I always said it
must be so, at last. I was sure you conld not be bo
beautiful for nothing.'I remember, as soon as ever I
saw him, when he first came into Hertfordshire last
year, I thought how likely it was that you should come
together. Oh ! he is the handsomest young man that
Wickham, Lydia, were all forgotten. Jane was be-
yond competition her favorite child. At that moment
she Cared for no other. Her younger sisters soon began
to make interest with her for objects of happiness which
she might in future be able to dispense, Cii^ > t) < ;lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 8B9
Mary petitioned for the use of the library at Nether*
field; and Kitty begged very hard for a few balls there
every winter.
Bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor
at Longbourn, — coming frequently before breakfast and
always remaining till after supper, — unless when some
barbarons neighbor, who could not be enough detested,
had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought
himself obliged to accept.
Elizabeth had now but little time for conversation
with her sister; for while he was present, Jane had
no attention to bestow on anyone else; bat she found
herself considerably osefnl to both of them, in those
hours of separation that must sometimes occur. In the
absence of Jane, be always attached himself to Eliza-
beth for the pleasure of talking of her; and when Bing-
ley was gone, Jane constantly sought the same means
of relief.
" He has made me bo happy, " said she, one evening,
" by telling me, that be was totally ignorant of my being
in town last spring! I had not believed it possible. "
" I suspected as much, " replied Elizabeth. " But how
did he account for it? "
" It must have been his sisters'doing. They were
certainly no friends to hia acquaintance with me, which
I cannot wonder at, since be might have chosen so much
more advantageously in many respects. But when they
see, as I trust they will, that their brother is happy with
me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be
on good terms again; though we can never be what we
once were to each other. "
" That Is the most unforgiving speech, " said Elizabeth,
" that I ever heard yoa otter. Good girl! It would
vex me, indeed, to see yon again the dope of Miss
Bingley's pretended regard! "
L ..„■„ Google
860 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
" Would you believe it, Liszjj th & t when he went to
town last November, he really loved me, and nothing
but a persuasion of my being indifferent would have
prevented his coming down again ! "
" He made a little mistake, to be sore ; but it is to the
credit of his modesty. "
This natnrally introduced a panegyric from Jane on
his diffidence, and the little valne he pat on bis own
good qnaliUes.
Elizabeth was pleased to find that be had not be-
trayed the interference of his friend; for though Jane
had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world,
she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice
her against him.
" I am certainly the most fortonate creature that ever
existed! " cried Jane. " Ofal Lizsy, why am I thus
singled from my family, and blessed above them all!
If I conld but see you as happy ! If there were but
such another man for you! "
" If you were to give me fm-ty such men, I never
could be so happy as yoo. Till I have your disposition,
your goodness, I never can have your happiness. No,
'1') ,no, let me shift for myself; and perhaps, if I have very
good luck, I may meet with another Mr. Collins in
time. "
The situation of affairs in the Longboom family
conld not be long a secret. Mrs. Bennet was privileged
to whisper it to Mrs. Philips, and the ventured, without
any permission, to do the same by all her neighbors in
Meryton.
The Bennets were speedily pronounced to be the
luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks
before, when Lydia had first mn away, tbey had been
I generally proved to be marked out for mlsfortmie.
j L .., > ,„Cooglc
v >'
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER LVI
One morning, about a week after Bingley's engage-
ment with Jane had been formed, as he and the females
of the family were sitting together in the dining-room,
their attention was suddenly drawn to the window, by
the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chsiae-
and-four driving up the lawn. It was too early in the
morning for visitors, and besides, the equipage did not
answer to that of any of their neighbors. The horses
were post; and neither the carriage nor the livery of
the servant who preceded it, were familiar to them. As
it was certain, however, that somebody was coming,
Bingley instantly prevailed on Miss Bennet to avoid
the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away
with him into the shrubbery. They both set off, and
the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though
with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open,
and their visitor entered. It was Lady Catherine de
Bonrgh.
They were of course all intending to be surprised;
but their astonishment was beyond their expectation;
and on the part of Mrs. Bennet and Kitty, though she
was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what
Elizabeth felt.
She entered the room with an air more than usually
ungracious, made no other reply to Elisabeth's salutption
than a slight inclination of the bead, and sat down with-
oot saying a word. Elizabeth had mentioned her name
to her mother on her ladyship's entrance, though no
request of introduction had been made.
Mrs. Bennet, all amaeement, though flattered by hav-
L ..„■„ Google
363 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
ing a guest of such high importance, received her vrth
the utmost politeness. After sitting for a moment in
silence, she said, very stiffly to Elizabeth —
" I hope yoa are well. Miss Bennet. That lady, I
suppose, is your mother? "
Elizabeth replied very concisely that she vas.
" And that, 1 suppose, is one of your sisters? "
" Yes, madam, " said Mrs. Bennet, delighted to spe^
to Lady Catherine. " She is my yonngest girl but one,
my youngest of all is lately married; and my eldest is
somewhere about the ground, walking; with a yonng
man, who I believe, will soon become a part of the
family. "
" You have a very small park here, " retnmed Lady
Catherine, after a short silence.
" It is nothing in comparison of Rosings, my lady,
I dare say; but, I assure you, it is much larger than
Sir William Lucas's. "
" This must be a most inconvenient sitting-room for
the evening in summer: the windows are fall west. "
Mrs. Bennet assared her that they never sat there
after dinner, and then added —
" May I take the liberty of asking yonr ladyship
whether you left Mr. and Mrs. Collins well? "
" Yps, very well. I saw them the night before last. "
Eliiabeth now expected that she would produce a
letter for her from Charlotte, as it seemed the only
probable motive for her calling. But no letter ap-
peared, and she was completely ptizaled.
Mrs. Bennet, with great civility, bef^d her lady-
ship to take some refreshment; but Lady Catherine very
resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating any-
thing; and then rising up, said to Elisabeth —
" Miss Bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of
a little wilderness on one side of your lawn. I should
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 868
be glad to take a tnrn in it, if 70U will favor me with
your company. "
" Go, my dear, " cried her mother, " and show her
ladyship about the different walks. I think she will be
pleased with the hermitage. "
Elizabeth obeyed, and, running into her own room
for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs.
As [they] passed through the hall. Lady Catherine
opened the doors into the dining-parlor and drawing-
room, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to
be decent-looking rooms, walked on.
Her carriage remained at the door, and Elizabeth
saw that her waiting-woman was in it. They proceeded
in silence along the gravel-walk that led to the copse;
Elisabeth was determined to make no effort for con-
versation with a woman who was now more than usually
insolent and disagreeable.
" How could I ever think her like her nephew ? " said
she, as she looked in her face.
As soon as they entered the copse. Lady Catherine be-
gan in the following manner: —
" You can be at no loss, Miss Bennet, to understand
the reason of my journey hither. Your own heart, your
own conscience, mast tell you why I come. "
Elizabeth looked with nnaffected astonishment.
" Indeed, you are mistaken, madam. I have not been
at all able to account for the honor of seeing you here. "
" Misa Bennet, " replied her ladyship, in an angry
tone, " you .ought to know that I am not to be trifled
with. But, however insincere you may choose to be,
you shall not find me so. My character has ever been
celebrated for its sincerity and frankness, and in a
cause of such moment as this I shall certainly not de-
part from it. A report of a most alarming nature
reached me two days ago. I was told that not only
L ..„■„ Google
864 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
your sister was on the point of being most advanta-
geous!}'married, but that you, that Miss Elizabeth Ben-
net, would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united
to my nephew — my own nephew — Mr. Darcy. Though
I know it must be a scandalous falsehood — thougb I
would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth
of it possible, I instantly resolved on setting off for this
place, that I might make my sentiments known to you. "
" If yon believed it impossible to be true, " said Elisa-
beth, coloring with astonishment and disdain, " I won-
der you took the trouble of eoming ao far. What could
your ladyship propose by it? "
" At once to insist upon having such a report uni-
versally contradicted. "
" Your coming to Longboum, to see me and my
family, " said Elizabeth coolly, " will be rather'a con-
firmation of it; if, indeed, such a report is in existence. "
" If! do yon, then, pretend to be ignorant of it? Has
it not been industriously circulated by yourselves? Do
you not know that such a report is spread abroad? "
" I never heard that it was. "
" And can you likewise declare, that there is do fouK~
dation for it? "
" I do not pretend to possess equal frankness with
your ladyship. You may ask questions, which / shall
not choose to answer. "
" This is not to be borne! Miss Bennet, I insist oa
being satisfied. Has he, has my nephew, made you an
offer of marriage? "
" Your ladyship has declared it to be impossible. "
" It ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains
the use of his reason. But gour arts and allurements
may, in a moment of infatuation, have made bim forget
what he* owes to himself and to'all his family. You
may have drawn him in. "
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 366
" If I have, I shall be the last person to confeas
it. "
" Mi99 Bennet, do you know who I am? I have not
been accustomed to such language as thia. I am almost
the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled
to know all his deareat concerna. "
" But you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such
behavior as this ever induce me to be explicit. "
" Let me be rightly understood. Thia match, to which
you have the presumption to aspire, can never take
place. No, never. Mr. Darcy is engaged to my daugh-
ter. Now, what have yoo to say? "
" Only this: that if he is so, you can have no reason
to suppose he will make an offer to me. "
Lady Catherine hesitated for a moment, and then
replied —
" The engagement between them is of a peculiar kind.
From their infancy, they have been intended for each
other. It was the favorite wish of hit mother, as well
as of hers. ^While in their cradles, we planned the
union: and now, at the moment when the wiahea of both
sisters would be accomplished in their marriage, to be
prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of no
importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the
family! Do you pay no regard to the wishes of his
frienda — to his tacit engagement with Miss de Bourgh?
Are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy?
Have yon not heard me say that from his earliest hours
he was destined for his cousin? "
" Yes, and. I had heard it before. But what is that
to me? If there is no other objection to my marrying
your nephew, I shall certainly not be kept from it by
knowing that hia mother and aunt wished him to marry
Miss de Bourgh. Yon both did as much as you could,
in planning tlie marriage; its completion depended on
866 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
others. If Mr. Darcy is neither by honor nor inclina-
tion conlined to hia cousin, -why is not he to make an-
other choice ^ and if I am that choice^ why may I not
accept him? "
" Because honor, decorum, prudence — nay, interest,
forbid it. Yes, Miss Bennet, interest; for do not ex-
pect to be noticed by his family or friends if you wil-
fully act against the inclinations of all. You will be
censured, slighted, and despised by every one connected
with him. Your alliance will be a disgrace; your name
will never even be mentioned by any of us. "
" These are heavy misfortunes, " replied Elizabeth.
" Bnt the wife of Mr. Darcy must have such eztraor < -
dinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to
her situation, that she could, apon the whole, have no
cause to repine. "
" Obstinate, headstrong girl! I am ashamed of you!
Is this yoQr gratitude for my attentions to you last
spring? Is nothing due to me on that score?
" Let us sit down. You are to understand. Miss Ben-
net, that I came here with the determined resolution of
carrying my purpose; nor will I be dissuaded from it.
I have not been used to submit to any person's whims.
I have not been in the habit of brooking disappoint-
ment. "
" That will make your ladyship's situation at present
more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me. "
" 1 will not be interrupted ! Hear me in silence. My
daughter and my nephew are formed for each other.
They are descended, on the maternal side, from the same
noble line; and, on the fathers', from respectable, honor-
able, and ancient, though untitled families. Their for-
tune on both sides is splendid. They are destined for
each other by the voice of every member of their re-
spective houses; and what is to divide them? The up-
- Coo;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 867
start pretensions of a yonng voman without family,
connections, or fortune. Is this to be endured! But
it must not, shall not be ! If you were sensible of yonr
own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in
which you have been brought up. "
" In marrying your nephew I should not consider my-
self as quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I
am a gentleman's daughter: so far we are equal. "
" True. You are a gentleman's daughter. But who
was your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts F
Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition. "
" Whatever my connections may be, " said Elizabeth,
" if your nephew does not object to them, they can be
nothing to gou. "
" Tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him? "
Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose
of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this ques-
tion, she could not but say, after a moment's delibera-
tion, " I am not. "
Lady Catherine seemed pleased.
( " And will you promise me never to enter into such
an engagement? "
" I will make no promise of the kind. "
" Miss Bennet, I am shocked and astonished. I ex-
pected to find a more reasonable young woman. But
do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever
recede. I shall not go away till you have given me the
assurance I require. "
" And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to be
intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your
ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter ; but
would my giving yon the wished-for promise make ihetr
marriage at aU more probable? Supposing bim to be
attached to me, would my refusing to accept his hand
make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me
- Coo;(lc
368 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
to say. Lady CatheriDC, that the arguments with which
you have supported this extraordinary application have
been as frivoloos as the application was ill-jadged. Yoa
have widely mistaken my character, if you think I can
be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far
your nephew might approve of your interference in kit
affairs I cannot tell ; but you have certainly no right to
concern yourself in mine. I most beg, therefore, to be
importuned no farther on the subject. "
" Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means
done. To all the objections I have already urged, I
have still another to add. I am no stranger to the
particulars of your youngest sister's infamous elope-
ment. I know it all; that the young man's marrying
her was a patched-up business, at the expense of yonr
father and unele. And is tuck a girl to be my nephew's
sisterF Is her husband, who is the* son of his late
father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth
— of what are you thinking! Ate the shades of Pem-
berley to be thus polluted? "
" You can now have nothing farther to say, " she re-
sentfully answered. " You have insulted me, in every
possible method. I must beg to return to the house. "
And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also,
and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly in-
censed.
" Yoii have no regard, then, for the honoi* and credit
of my nephew ! Unfeeling, selfish girl ! Do you not
consider that a connection with you must disgrace him
in the eyes of everybody? "
" Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. Yon
know my sentiments. "
" You are, then, resolved to have him? "
" I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to
act in that manner which will, in my own opinion, coa-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 869
statute my happiness, vithoDt reference to you, or to
Any person so wholly uneonneeted with me. "
" It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You
refuse to obey the claims of duty, honor, and gratitude.
You are determined to niin him in the opinion of all his
friends, and make him the contempt of the world. "
" Neither duty, nor honor, nor gratitude, " replied
Elizabeth, " has any possible claim on me in the present
instance. No principle of either would be violated by
my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with regard to the
resentment of his family or the indignation of the world,
if the former were excited by his marrying me, it would
not give, me one moment's concern— and the world in
general would have too much sense to join in the scorn. "
" And this is your real opinion ! This is your £nal
resolve ! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do
not imagine. Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever
be gratified. I came to try you, I hoped to find you
reasonable ; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point. "
In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they
were at the door of the carriage, when, turning hastily
rotmd, she added —
" I take no leave of you. Miss Bennet. I send no com-
pliments to your mother. Yon deserve no such atten-
tion. I am most seriously displeased. "
Elizabeth made no answer, and, without attempting
to persuade her ladyship to return inttf the house, walked
quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive
away as she proceeded upstairs. Her mother impa-
tiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask
why Lady Catherine would not come in again and rest
herself.
" She did not choose it, " said her daughter; " she
would go. "
" She is a very fine-looking wmnan! and her calling
- Coo;(lc
870 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
here vas prodigiouslj civil ! for she only came, I sup-
pose, to tell ua the Collinses were well. She ia on her
road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing tbrongh
Meryton, tbou^t she mi^t as well call on yon. I sup-
pose she had nothing particular to say to yon, Lizsy? "
Elisabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood
here; for to acknowledge the snbstance of their con-
versation was impossible.
CHAPTER LVII
Trk discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary
visit threw Elizabeth into could not be easily overcome,
nor could she for many hours learn to thii^ of it less
than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it appeared, had
actually taken the trouble of this journey from Roslngs
for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed en-
gagement with Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme,
to be sure! but from what the report of their engage-
ment could originate, Elisabeth was at a loss to imag-
ine; till she recollected that his being the intimate friend
of Bingley, and her being the sister of Jane, was enough,
at a time when the expectation of one wedding made
everybody eager for another, to supply the idea. She
had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of
her sister must bring them more frequently together.
And her neighbors at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for
through their communication with the Collinses the re-
port, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had
only set that down as almost certain and immediate
which the bad looked forward to as possible, at some
future time.
In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however,
she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 871
possible consequence of her persisting in this inter-
ference. From what she had said of ber resolution td
prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she
must meditate an appUcation to her nephew; and how
he might take a similar representation of the evils at-
tached to a connection with ber, she dared not pronounce.
She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his
aant, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was
natural to suppose that he thought much higher of ber
ladyship than ahe could do; and it was certain that, in
enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one whose
iounediate connections were so unequal to his own, his
aunt would address him on his weakest side. With his
notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the
arguments which to Elizabeth had appeared weak and
ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid rea-
soning.
If he had been wavering before as to what he should
do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and en-
treaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt,
and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. In that case, he would
return no more. Lady Catherine might see him in her
way through town, and his engagement to Bingley of
coming again to Netherfield must give way.
" If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise
should come to his friend within a few days, " she added,
" I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give
over every expectation, every wish of his constancy.
If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might
have obtained my affections and hand, I shall soon cease
to regret him- at all. "
The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing
who their visitor had been, was very great; but they
C.OO;(lc
872 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
obligingly satisfied it with the same kind of supposition
which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's cariosity j and Elisa-
beth was spared from much teasing on the subject.
The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she
was met by her father, who came out of his library
with a letter in his hand.
" Lizzy, " said he; " I was going to look for you; come
into my room. "
She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know
what he had to tell her was heightened by the supposition
of its being in some manner connected with the letter
he held. It suddenly struck her that it might be from
Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay, all
the consequent explanations.
She followed her father to the fireplace, and they
both sat down. He t^en said —
" I have received a letter this morning that has aston-
ished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns your-
self, you ought to know its contents. I did not know
before that I had two daughters on the brink of matri-
mony. Let me congratulate you on a very important
conquest, "
The color now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the
instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the
nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined
whether most to be pleased that he explained himself
at all, or offended that his letter was not rather ad-
dressed to herself; when her father continued —
" You look conscious. Young ladies have great pene-
tration in such matters [as] these; but I think I may
defy even your sagacity to discover the name of your
admirer. This letter* is from Mr. Collins. "
" From Mr. Collins! and what can he have to say? "
" Something very much to the purpose, of course. He
begins witii congratulations on the approaching nnp-
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 878
tials of my eldest daughter, of which it seems he has
been told, by some of the good-natured, gossiping
Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience by
reading what he says on that point. What relates to
yourself is as follows:'Having thns offered you the
sincere congratulations of Mrs. Collins and myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the
subject of another; of which we have been advertised
by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is
presumed, will not long bear the name of Bennet, after
her eldest sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner
of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of
the most illustrious personages in this land.'
" Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this?
—'This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way,
with everything the heart of mortal can most desire, —
splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patron-
age. Yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn
my cousin Elisabeth, and yourself, of what evils you
may incnr by a precipitate closure with this gentleman's
proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to take
immediate advantage of.'
" Have yon any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is?
But now it comes out —
"'My motive for cautioning you is as follows: we have
reason to imagine that his aunt. Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.'
" Mr. Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I
think I have surprised you. Could he or the Lucases
have pitched on any man, within the circle of our
acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who
never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and
who probably never looked at you in his life ? It is ad-
mirable ! "
L ..„■„ Google
37* PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantr}', bnt
could only force one most reluctant smile. Never had his
wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.
" Are yon not diverted? "
" Oh! yes. Pray read on. "
"'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to
her ladyship lost ni^t, she immediately, with her asnal
condescension, expressed what she felt on the occa-
sion; when it became apparent, that on the score of
some family objections on the part of my consin, she
would never give her consent to what she termed so
disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the
speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and
her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about,
and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been
properly sanctioned.'- — Mr. CoUins, moreover, adds,'I
am trnly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad business
has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned
that their living together before the marriage took place
should be so generally known, I must not, however,
neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declar-
ing my amazement, at hearing that you received the
young couple into your house as soon as they were mar-
ried. It was an encouragement of vice; and had I been
the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously have
opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a
Christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or
allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.'—
That is his notion of Christian forgiveness! The rest
of his letter is only abou^ his dear Charlotte's situation,
and his expectation of a young olive-branch. But, Lizsy,
you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going
to be mittiih, I hope, and pretend to be affronted at an
idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport
for our nei^bors, and laugh at them in our turn? "
L .., > ,„Coo < ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 876
" Oh ! " cried Elizabeth, " I am excessively diverted.
But it is so atrange ! "
" Yes — that is what makes it amusing. Had they
fised on any other man, it would have been nothing;
but his perfect indifference, and your pointed dislike,
make it so delightfully absurd ! Much as I abominate
writing, I wbiild not give up Mr. CoUins's correspond-
ence for any consideration. Nay, when I read a letter
of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even
over Wickham, much as I value the impudence and hy-
pocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said
Lady Catherine about this report? Did she call to re-
fuse her consent? "
To this question his daughter replied only with a
laugh; and as it had been asked without the least sus-
picion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Eliza-
beth had never been mote at a loss to make her feelings
appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh,
when she would rather have cried. Her father had most
cruelly mortified her by what he said of Mr. Darcy's in-
difference, and she could do nothing but wonder at
such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, in-
stead of his seeing too little, she might have fancied
CHAPTER LVIII
Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from
his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley to do,
he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longboum be-
fore many days had passed after Lady Catherine's visit.
The gentlemen arrived early; and before Mrs. Bennet
had time to tell him of their having seen hia aunt, of
which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley,
L ..„■„ Google
876 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
who w & nted to be atone with Jane, proposed their all
walking ont. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not
in the habit of walking. Mary could never spare time,
but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and
Jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them.
They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and Darcy
were to entertain each other. Very little was said by
either: Kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; Eliaa-
beth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and,
perhaps, he might be doing the same.
They walked towards the Lncases, because Kitty
wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no
occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty
left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was
the moment for her resolution to be executed; and,
while her courage was high, she immediately said —
" Mr. Darey, I am a very selfish creature; and for
the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not
how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer
help thanking yon for yonr unexampled kindness to
my poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have
been vaost, anxious to acknowledge to you how grate-
fully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family,
I should not have merely my own gratitude to express. "
" I am sorry, exceedingly sorry, " replied Darcy, in a
tone of surprise and emotion, " that you have ever been
informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given
you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs. Gardiner was so
little to be trusted. "
" You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtless-
ness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned
in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I
knew the particulars. Let me thank you again and again,
in the name of all my family, for that generous com-
passion which induced you to take so much trouble, and
L„ I,., ,„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 877
bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering
them. "
" If yon teill thank me, " he replied,'let it be for
yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to
you might add force to the other inducements which led
me on, I shall not attempt to deny. Bnt your family
owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I
thought only of you. "
Elizabeth waa too much embarrassed to say a word.
After a short pause, her companion added, " You are
too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are
still what they were last April, tell me so at once. My
affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from
yon will silence me on this subject forever. "
Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkward-
ness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to
speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave
him to understand that her sentiments had undergone
so material a change since the period to which he alluded,
as to make her receive with gratitnde and pleasure his
present assurances. The happiness which this reply
produced was such as he had probably never felt be-
fore, and he eicpressed himself on the occasion as sen-
sibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be
supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able to encounter
his eyes, she might have seen how well the expression
of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him;
but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he
told her of feelings which, in proving of what impor-
tance she was to him, made his affection every moment
more valuable.
They walked on, without knowing in what direction.
There was too much to be thought, and felt, and said,
for attention to any otber objects. She soon learnt
tbat they were indebted for their present good under-
L .., > ,„Coojilc
878 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
standing to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on
him in her retorn through London, and there relate her
journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of
her conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically
on every expression of the latter which, in her lady-
ship's apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness
and assurance, in the belief that such a relation must
assist her endeavors t4 > obtain that promise from her
nephew which the- had refused to give. But, unluckily
for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrary-
" It taught me to hope, " said he, " as I had scarcely
ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough of
your disposition to be certain, that had you been abso-
lutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have
acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly. "
Elizabeth colored and laughed as she replied, " Yes,
you know enough of my frankneti to believe me cap-
able of that. After abusing you so abominably to your
face, I could have no scruple in abusing you to all your
relations. "
" What did you say of me that I did not deserve?
For, though your accusations were ill-founded, formed
on mistaken premises, my behavior to you at the time
had merited the severest reproof. It was unpardonable.
I caimot think of it without abhorrence. "
" We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame
annexed to that evening, " said Elizabeth; " the conduct
of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable.
But since then we have both, I hope, improved in
civility. "
" I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The
recollection of what I then said — of my condnct, my
manners, my expressions daring the whole of it — is now,
and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me.
- Cooxic
PHIDE AND PREJUDICE 879
Yonr reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget:
'Had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.'
Those were yoor words. You know not, you can scarcely
conceive, how they ha > ve tortured roe; — though it was
some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough
to allow their jnstice. "
" I was certainly very far from expecting them to
make so strong an impression. I had not the smallest
idea of their being ever felt in such a way. "
" I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid
of every proper feeling, I am sure yon did. The turn
of your coimtenance I shall never forget, as you said
that I conld not have addressed you in any possible way
that would induce you to accept me. "
" Oh ! do not repeat what I then said. These recol'
lections will not do at all. I assure you, that I have
long been moat heartily ashamed of it. "
Darcy mentioned his letter. " Did it, " said he, " did it
toon make you think better of me? Did yon, on reading
it, give any credit to its contents? "
She explained v^at its effect on her had been, and
bow gradually all her former prejudices had been re-
moved.
" I knew, " said he, " that what I wrote mnst give you
pain; but it was necessary, I hope you have destroyed
the letter. There was one part, especially the opening
of itj which I should dread your having the power of
reading again. I can remember some expressions which
might justly make you hate me. "
" The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it
essential to the preservation of my regard; but, though
we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely
unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite so easily changed
as that implies. "
" When I wrote that letter, " replied Darcy, " I be-
L ..„■„ Google
380 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
lieved myself perfectly calm uid cool; but I am since
convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness
of spirit. "
" The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness; but it did
not end so. The adieu is charity itself. — But think no
more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote
and the person who received it are now so widely dif-
ferent from what they were then, that every unpleasant
circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten. You
must learn some of my philosophy.— Think only of the
past as its remembrance gives you pleasure. "
" I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the
kind. Four retrospections must be so totally void of
reproach, that the contentment arising from them is
not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of igno-
rance. But with me it is not so. Painful recollections
will intrude, which cannot, Vhich ought not, to be re-
pelled. I have been s selfish being all my life, in prac-
tice, though not in principle. As a child, I was taught
what was right; but I was not taught to correct my tem-
per. I jvas given good principles, but left to follow
them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately, an only son
(for many years an only child), I was spoiled by my
parents, who, though good themselves (my father par-
ticularly, all that was benevolent and amiable), allowed,
encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and over-
bearing — to care for none beyond my own family circle,
to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to vnih at
least to think meanly of their sense and worth com-
pared with my own. Such I was, from eight to eight-
and-twenty; and such I might still have been but for
you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I not owe
you ! You taught me a lesson, bard indeed at first, but
most advantageous. By you I was properly humbled.
I came to you without a doubt of my reception. You
- Coo;(lc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 381
showed me how insnfficient were all my pretensions to
please a woman worthy of being pleaaed. "
" Had you then persuaded yourself that I should? "
" Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity?
I believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses. "
" My manners must have been in fault, but not inten-
tionally, I assure yon. I never meant to deceive you,
but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you
most have hated me after that evening! "
" Hate you ! I was angry, perhaps, at first, but my
anger soon began to take a proper direction. "
" I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of
me when we met at Pemberley, You blamed me for
coming? "
" No, indeed, I felt nothing but surprise. "
" Yoor surprise could not be greater than mine in be-
ing noticed by you. My conscience told me that I
deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that
I did not expect to receive more than my due. "
" My object then, " replied Darcy, " was to show you,
by every civility in my power, that I was not so mean
as to resent the past ; and I hoped to obtain your forgive-
ness, to lessen your ill-opinion, by letting you see that
your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any
other wishes introduced themselves I can hardly tell,
but I believe in about half-an-hour after I bad seen
you. "
He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her ac-
quaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden
interruption; which naturally leading to the cause o{
that intermption, she soon learnt that his resolution of
following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister
hod been formed before he quitted the inn, and that
his gravity and thought fulness there had arisen from no
other struggles thar what such a purpose must com-
prehend. ^ .-,„„Cooglc
382 PRIDE AND PHEJUDICE
She expressed her gratitude agsin; bat it WAa too
painfnl a subject to each to be dwelt od farther.
After walking several miles in a leisnrely manner,
and too bos; to know anything about it^ they found at
last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be
at home.
" What could [have] become of Mr. Bingley and
Jane ! " was'a wonder which introduced the discussion
of their affairs. Darcy was delighted with their en-
gagement; hia friend had given him the earliest informa-
tion of it.
" I must ask whether you were surprised, " said Eliza-
beth.
" Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would
soon happen. "
" That is to say, you had given yoin permission. I
guessed as much. "
And though he exclaimed at the term, she found that
it had been pretty much the case.
" On the evening before my going to London, " said
he, " I made a confession to him which I believe I ought
to have made long ago. I told hiiA of all that had
occurred to make my former interference in his affairs
absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He
had never had the slightest suspicion. I told him, more-
over, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as
I had done, that your sister was indifferent to him ; and
as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her
was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness to-
gether .'-
Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner
of dir^ting his friend.
" Did yon speak from your own observation, " said
she, " when you told him that my sister loved him, or
merely from my information last spring!'"
L ..„■,, Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 888
" From the former. I had narrowly observed her dor-
iiig the two visits which I had lately made her here,
and I was convinced of her affection. "
" And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried inune-
diate conviction to him. "
" It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His
diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judg-
ment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine
made everything easy. I was obliged to confess one
thing which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him.
I could not allow myself to conceal that your lister had
been in town three months last winter — that I had
known it, and purposely kept it from him. He was
angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer
than he remained in any doubt of your sister's senti-
ments. He has heartily forgiven me now. "
Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had
been a most delightful friend— ^o easily guided, that
his worth was invaluable ; but she checked herself. She
remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at,
and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating
the happiness of Bingley, which of course was to be
inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation
till they reached the house. In the ball they parted.
CHAPTER LIX
" Mt dear Lissy, where can you have been walking
to? " was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane
as soon as she entered the room, and friMu all the others
when they sat down to table. She had only to say in
reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond
her own knowledge. She colored as she spoke; bnt
- Coo;(lc
S84 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion
of the truth.
The evening passed quietly nnmarked by anything
extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talked and
laughed; the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was
not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in
mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew
that she was happy, then felt herself tff be so; for,
besides the inunediate embarrassment, there were other
evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt
in the .family when her situation became known; she was
aware that no one liked him but Jane, and even feared
that with the others it was a ditUke which not all his
fortune and consequence might do away.
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though sus-
picion was very far from Miss Bennet's general habits,
she was absolutely incredulous here.
" You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! — engaged
to Mr. Darcy ! — No, no, you shall not deceive me. I
know it to be impossible. "
" This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole de-
pendence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will
believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest.
I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we
are engaged. "
■Jane looked at her doubtingly. " Oh, Lizzy! it can-
not be. I know how much you dislike him. "
" You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be
forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as
I do now. But in such cases as these a good memory
is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever re-
member it myself. "
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth
again, and more seriously, assured her of its truth.
" Good Heaven! can it be really so? Yet now I most
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PHEJUDICE 38S
believe you, " cried Jane. " My dear, dear lAzxy, I
would — I do congrati£ate you — but are you certain —
forgive the question — are you quite certain that you can
be happy with him? "
" There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between
us already that we are to be the happiest couple in the
world. But ar^ you pleased, Jane ? Shall you like to
have such a brother? "
" Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley
or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked
of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite
well enough ? Oh, Lizzy ! do anything rather than marry
without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what
you ought to do? "
" Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I
ought to do, when I tell you all. "
" What do you mean? "
" Why I must confess that I love him better than I
do Bingley. I am afraid you will he angry. "
" My dearest sister, now be, be serious. I want to
talk very seriously. Let me know everything that I am
to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you
have loved him? "
" It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly
know when it began. But I believe I must date it from
ray first seeing his beautiful grounds at Femberley. "
Another entreaty that she would be serious, however,
produced the desired effect, and she soon satisfied Jane
by her solemn assurances of attachment. When con-
vinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing further
to wish.
" Now I am quite happy, " said she, " for you will be
as happy as myself. I always had a value for him.
Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always
have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and
- Coo;(lc
386 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
your husband, there cao be only Bingley and yourself
more dear to me. But, Liasy, you have been very sly,
very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of
what passed at Pemberley and Lambton ! I owe all that
I know of it to another, not to you. "
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She
had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the un-
settled state of her own feelings had made her equally
avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no
longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage.
All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in con-
versation.
" Good gracious ! " cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at
a window the next morning, " if that disagreeable Mr.
Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley!
What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always
coming here f I had no notion but he would go a-shoot-
ing, or something or other, and not disturb us with his
company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, yon
must walk out with him again, that he may not be in
Bingley's way. "
Elizabetli could hardly help laughing at so convenient
a proposal, yet wag really vexed that her mother should
be always giving him snch an epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so ex-
pressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no
doubt of his good information ; and he soon afterwards
said aloud, " Mr. Bennet, have you no more lanes here-
abouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day? "
" I advise Mr, Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty, " said
Mrs. Bennet, " to walk to Oakham Mount this morning.
It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen
the view. "
" It may do very wdl for the others, " replied Mr.
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 887
Bingley; " bot I am sure it %rill be too much for Kitty.
Won't it, Kitty? "
Kitty owned that she h & d rather stay at home. Darcy
professed a great curiosity to see the view from the
Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went
upstairs lo get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her say-
ing—
" I am qnite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced
to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I
hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane's sake, you
know; and there is no occasion for talking to him, ex-
cept just now and then. So do not put yourself to
inconvenience. "
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's
consent should be asked in the course of the evening.
Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her
mother's. She could not determine bow her mother
wpuld take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth
and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhor-
rence of the man. But whether she were violently set
against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was
certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted
to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear
that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of hei joy
than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to
the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him,
and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not
fear her father's opposition, but he was going to be made
unhappy, and that it should be through her means that
she, bis favorite child, should be distressing him by
her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets
in disposing of her, was a wretched reflection, and she
sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when,
L ..„■„ Google
888 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
looking at him, she v«s a little relieved by his smile.
In a few minutes he approached the table where she
was sitting with Kitty, and, while pretending to admire
her work, said in a whisper, " Go to your father; he
wants you in the library, " She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave
and anxious. " Lizzy, " said he, " what are you doing?
are you out of yonr senses, to be accepting this man?
Have not you always hated him? "
How earnestly did she then wish that her former
opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more
moderate! It would have spared her from explanations
and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to
give; but they were now necessary, and she assured
him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr.
" Or, in other words, you are determined to have him.
He is rich, to be sure, and yon may have more fine
clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make
you happy? "
" Have you any other objection, " said Elizabeth, " than
your belief of my indifference? "
" None at all. We all know him to be a proud, un-
pleasant sort of man; but this would he nothing if yon
really liked him. "
" I do, I do like him, " she replied, with tears in her
eyes; " I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride.
He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he
really is ; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him
in such terms. "
" Lizzy, " said her father, " I have given him my con-
sent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should
never dare refuse anything which he condescended to
ask. I now give it to gou, if you are resolved on having
him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 889
youx disposition, Lizzy. I know that yon could be
neitliei happj nor respectable nnless yoD truly esteemed
your husband — unless you looked up to him as a supe-
rior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest
danger in an onequal marriage. You could scarcely es-
cape discredit and misery. My cbild, let me not have
the grief of seeing j/ou unable to respect your partner
JQ life. Yon know not what you are about. "
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn
in her reply ; and at length, by repeated assurances that
Mr. Darey was really the object of her choice, by ex-
plaining the gradual change which her estimation of him
had undergone, relating ber absolute certainty that his
affection was not the work of a day, but bad stood the
test of many months'suspense, and enumerating with
energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father's
incredulity^ and reconcile him to the match.
" Well, my dear, " said he, when she ceased speak-
ing, " I ha.Te no more to say. If this be the case, he
deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my
Liazy, to anyone less worthy. " To complete the favor-
able impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy bad
voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with aston-
ishment.
" This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so,
Darcy did everything— ^nade up the match, gave the
money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his com-
mission! So much the better! It will save me a world
of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing;
I must and would have paid him ; but tiiese violent young
lovers carry everything their own way. I shall offer
to pay him to-morrow: he will rant and storm about
hia love for you, and there will be an end of the mat-
ter. " He then recollected her embai-rassment a few
days before, on his reading Mr. Colllns's letter; and after
L ..„■„ Google
890 PEIDE AND PREJUDICE
laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go,
sayings as she quitted the room, " If any yoimg men
come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am qnite at
leisure. "
Elisabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy
weight, and, after half-an-hour's quiet reflection in her
own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable
composure. Everything was too recent for gaiety, but
the evening passed tranquilly away ; there was no longer
anything material to be dreaded; and the comfort of ease
and familiarity would come in time.
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at
night she followed her, and made the important com-
munication. Its effect was most extraordinary ; for, on
first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable
to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many min-
utes, that she could comprehend what she heard, though
not in general backward to credit what was for the ad-
vantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a
lover to any of them. She began at length to recover,
to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again,
wonder, and bless herself.
" Good gracious ! Lord bless me ! only think ! dear
me ! Mr. Darcy ! Who would have thought it? And is it
really true? Oh, my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how
great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels,
what carriages you will have ! Jane's is nothing to
it — nothing at all. I am so pleased — so happy ! Such
a charming man !— -so handsome ! so tall ! — Oh, my dear
Lizzy ! pray apologize for my having disliked him so
much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear
Lizzy! A house in town! Everything that is charming!
Three daughters married ! Ten thousand a year ! Oh,
Lord ! what will bectHue of me } I shall go distracted. "
This was enough to prove that her approbation need
- Cooxic
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 881
not be donbted; and Elixabetli, rejoicing that anch an
effasion was beard only by herself, soon went away. But
before she had been three minutes in her own room, her
mother followed her.
" My dearest child, " she cried, " I can think of nothing
else ! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more !'Tis
as good as a lord! And a special license! Yon moat
and shall be married by a special license! But, my
dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly
fond of, that I may have it to-morrow. "
This was a sad omen of what her mother's bebavioF
to the gentleman himself might be ; and Elizabeth fonnd,
that though in the certain possession of bis warmest
affection, and secure of her relations'consent, there was
still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed
off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet
luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that
she ventored not to speak to him, unless it was in her
power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference
for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father
taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Ben-
net soon assured her that he was rising every hour in
bis esteem.
" I admire all my sons-in-law highly, " said be.
" Wickham, perhaps, is my favorite; but I think I shall
like ^OHr bnsband quite as well as Jane's. "
CHAPTER LX
Eluubith's spirits soon rising to playfulness again,
flbe wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having ever
fallen in love with her. " How could yon begin? " said
she. " I can comprehend your going on charmin^y,
L ..„■„ Google
S92 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
when you had once made « b^inning; bnt what could
set yoa off in the first place? "
" I cannot fix on the hour or the spot, or the look, or
the words, which laid the foundation. It is too long ago.
I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun. "
" My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my
manners— my behavior to yow was at least always bor-
dering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without
rather wishing to give you pain than not. Now, be
sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence? "
" For the liveliness of your mind, I did. "
" You may as well call it impertinence at once. It
was very little else. The fact is, that you were sick of
civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were
disgusted with the women who were always speaking
and looking and thinking for your approbation alone. I
roused and interested you, because I was so unlike them.
Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated
me for it; but, in spite of the pains you took to disguise
yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and,
in your heart, you thoroughly despised the persons who
so assiduously courted you. There — I have saved you
the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things
considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable.
To be sure, you know no actual good of me — but nobody
thinks of that when they fall in love, "
" Was there no good in your affectionate behavior to
Jane, while she was ill at Netherfield? "
" Dearest Jane! Who could have done less for her?
But make a virtue of it by all means. My good quali-
ties are under your protection, and you are to exa^erate
them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to
me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with
you as often as may be; and I shall begin directly, by
asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the
- Cookie
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 898
point at last? Wbat made you so shy of me wlien you
first called, and afterwards dined here f Why, especially,
^ben you called, did you look as if you did not care
about me? "
" Because yon were grave and silent, and gave me no
" But I was embarrassed. "
" And so was I. "
" You might have talked to me more when you came
to dinne-. "
" A man who had felt less, might. "
" How unlucky that you should have a reasonable
answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable as
to admit it! But I wonder how long you would have
gone on if you had been left to yourself! I wander
when yon would have spc^en, if I had not asked you!
My resolution of thanking you for your kindness to
Lydia had certainly great effect — too much, I am afraid ;
for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs
from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have
mentioned the subject. This will never do. "
" You need not distress yourself. The moral will be
perfectly fair. Lady Catherine's unjustifiable endeav-
ors to separate ns were the means of removing all my
doubts. I am not indebted for my present happiness
to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I
was not in a humor to wait for an opening of yours.
My aunt's Intelligence had given me hope, and I was
determined at once to know everything. "
" Lady. Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought
to make her happy, for she loves to be of use. But
tell me, what did yon come down to Netherfield for?
Was it merely to ride to Longboum, and be embarrassed ?
or had you intended any more serious consequences? "
" My real purpose was to see gou, and to judge, !f I
L ..„■„ Google
894 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
eoold, whether I might ever hope to moke yon love me.
My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to
see whether yoar sister was still putial to Bingley, and,
if she were, to make the confession to him which I have
since made. "
" Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady
Catherine wh«t is to befall her? "
" I am more likely to want time than courage, Eliza-
beth. But it ought to be done ; and if you will give me a
sheet of paper, it shall be done directly, "
" And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might
sit by you, snd admire the evenness of your writing, as
another young lady once did. But I have an annt, too,
who must not be longer neglected. "
From an unwillingness to confess how much her inti-
macy with Mr, Darcy had been overrated, Elizabeth had
never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's long letter, but now,
having that U > communicate which she knew would be
most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her
uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happi-
ness and immediately wrote as follows: —
" I would have thanked yon before my dear aunt as
■ I ought to have done for your long, kind, satisfactory
details of particulars; but, to say the truth, I was too
cross to write. You supposed more than really existed.
But tune suppose as much as you choose ; give a loose
to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every pos-
sible flight which the subject will afford, and unless
you believe, me actually married, you cannot greatly
err. Yon must write again very soon, and praise him a
great deal more than you did in your last, I thank you
again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How conid
I be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the ponies is
delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
L ..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 896
an the b & ppieat creature in the world. Perhaps other
people have said ao before, but no one with anch justice.
I am happier even than Jane; she onl; smiles, I laugh.
Mr. Darcf sends ^on all the love in the world that can be
spared from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at
Christmas. — Yours, etc. "
Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a differ-
ent style, and still different from either was what Mr.
Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply to his last.
" Dear Sir, —
" I mnst trouble you once more for congratolations.
Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console
Lady Catherine as well as yon can. But, if I were you,
I would stand by the nephew; he has more to give. —
Yours sincerely, etc. "
Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother on his
approaching marriage were all that was affectionate and
insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to
express her delight, and repeat all her former profes-
sions of regard. Jane was not deceived, bnt she was
affected, and, though feeling no reliance on her, could
not help writing her a much kinder answer than she
knew was deserved.
The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving
simOar information was as sincere as her brother's in
sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to
contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of
being loved by her sister.
Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or
any congratulations to Elizabeth, from his wife, the
Longfaourn family heard that the Collinses were come
themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of this sadden
L ..„■„ Google
896 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
remoTal was soon evident. Lady Catherine bad been
rendered so ezceedin^y angry by the contents of her
nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the
match, was anxious to get away till the storm waa blown
over. At such a moment the arrival of her friend was a
sincere pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of
their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure
dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all
the parading and obsequious civility of her husband.
He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He
could even listen to Sir William Lucas, when he com-
plimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of
the country, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting
frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure.
If he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till Sir William
was out of sight.
Mrs. Philips's vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a
greater tax on bis forbearance ; and though Mrs. Philips,
as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to
speak with the familiarity which Bingley's good humor
encouraged, yet, whenever she did speak, she must be
vulgar. Nor was her respect for him, though it made
her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant.
Elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the fre-
quent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep
hitn to. herself, and to those of her family with whom he
might converse without mortification ; and though the un-
comfortable feelings arising from all this took from the
season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to the
hope of the future ; and she looked forward with delight
to the time when they should be removed from society
so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and ele-
gance of their family party at Pemberley.
..„■„ Google
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
CHAPTER LXI
Happy for all her maternal feelings was the daj on
which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most deserving
daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards
visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of Mrs. Darcy, may
be guessed. I wish I could saj, for the sake of her
family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire
in the establishment of so many of her children pro-
duced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life;
though, perhaps, it was lucky for her Itusband, who
might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a
form, that she still was occasionally nervous, and in-
variably silly.
Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly;
his affection for her drew him oftefter from home than
anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pem-
berley, especially when he was least expected.
Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only
a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother and
Meryton relations was not desirable even to hit easy
temper, or her affectionate heart. The darling wish of
his sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a.
neighboring county to Derbyshire; and Jane* and Eliza-
beth, in addition to every other source of happiness,
■were within thirty mUes of each other.
Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief
of her time with her two elder sisters. In society so
sDpeiior to what she had generally known, her improve-
naent was great. She was not of so ungovernable a
temper as Lydia: and, removed from the influence of
Lydis's example, she became, by proper attention and
L ..„■„ Google
988 PRIDE ANr > PREJUDICE
management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less in-
sipid. Ftom the further disadvwitage of Lydia's go-
ciety she was gf course carefully kept; and thoagh Mrs.
Wickham frequently invited her to come and stay wiUi
her, with the promise of balls and young men, her
father would never consent to her going.
Mary was the only daughter who remained at homei
and she was neeessarily drawn from the porauit of
accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite nnaUe
to Bit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more with tbe
world, but she coidd still moralize over every moming
visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisoni
between her sisters'beauty and her own, it was sus-
pected by her father that she submitted to the change
without much reluctance.
As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters sofferrf
no revoluUon from the marriage of her sisters. He bore
With philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must nw
be» < —~ ..,..._ ...
fa
id
.,Goo > ilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 899
of about three or font bimdre < l a year: but, however, do
not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if yon had rather not.
— Yours, etc. "
As it happened that Elizabeth had tnueh rather not,
she endeavored in her answer to pnt an end to every
entrea^ and expectation ot the kind. Such relief, how-
ever, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice
of what might be called econonay in her own private
expenses, she frequently sent them. It had always been
evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the
direetion of two persons so extravagant in their wants,
and heedless of the futnre, must be very insufficient to
their support; and whenever they changed their quar-
ters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied
to, for some little assistance towards discharging their
bills. Their manner of living, even when the restora-
tion of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled
in the extreme. They were always moving from place
to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spend-
ing more than they ought. His affection for her soon
sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and
in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all
the claims to reputation which her marriage had given
Though Darcy could never receive him at Pemberley,
yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further in his
profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when
her husband was gone to enjoy himself in London or
Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them fre-
quently stayed so long, that even Bingley's good humor
was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of
giving them a hint to be gone.
Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy'a
marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the
L ..„■„ Google
400 PRIDE AND PREJUDICE
right of viaiting at Pemberiey, she dropped all her re-
sentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost
as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every
arrear of civiltty to Elizabeth.
Pemberiey was now Georgians's home; and the at-
tachment of the sisters was esaetly what Darcy had
hoped to see. They were able to love each other, even
as well as they intended. Georgiana had the highest
opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she
often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm
at her lively, sportive manner of talking to ber brother.
He, who had always inspired in herself a respect which
almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object
of open pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge
which had never before fallen in her way. By Elisa-
beth's instructions she began to comprehend that a
woman may take liberties with her husband, which a
brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten
years younger than himself.
Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the mar-
riage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the
^nuine frankness of her character, in her reply to the
letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him
language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that
for some time all intercourse was at an end. But at
length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on
to overlook the offense, and seek a reconciliation; and,
after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt,
her resentment gave way, either to her affection for
him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted her-
self: and she condescended to wait on them at Pemberiey,
in spite of that pollution which its woods had received,
not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but
the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
With the Gardiners they were always on the most
- Coojilc
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 401
intimftte tenns. Darcy, aa well as Elizabeth, really
loved them; and they were both ever senaible of the
warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing
her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting
The Modern
Student's Library
ELIOT; Adam B < d«
With an inlToduclion by Lauka Johnson Wvlik, formerly Profcu
EngUih. Vanar College
> r of Enillah LlterBtiire.
HARDY : The Return of the N«tiv«
Witli an iDtioducticin by J. W, CuNLiFFB, ProfeHor of EncUsh. Cdutnbia
HAWnXStNE: The Scarlet Letter
Willi an introduction by Stuart P. Sherhan. late Llteruy Editor of the
New York HtraU Tribunt
MEREDITH: Evui Hurincton
With Bn Introduction by Gkobce F, Reynolds, Profeasor ot EnsUah Lit-
erature, Univenlty of Colorado
MEREDITH: The Ordeal of Richard Fcrarcl
With an introduction by Fiahk VI. Chandleb, Profeuor of Bn|3llb and
Comparailn Literature, and Dean of the CoUece of Liberal ArU, Uni.
..„■„ Google
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
I: The Master at Ballantrve
With an intioductJoD by H. S. Canhv, AwlNanl Editor of the Yah Rttim
and Editor of Uk Satmiay Raitm
THACKERAY: The HlMmy of Pcmlcnnl*
With an intindiictiDn by Rohrit Mobss Lovktt, FTof(«sor of Bn^ish,
Unlvcnitr of Chicsgo
2 vols.; iiiopasu
TROLLOPE: B*rche*ter Tower*
With an inlioductlan by Ci-UenCk D. Stovshs, Pmfeoor of EncUib. Uni-
vereitv of CiDdnnBti
BROWNING: Poenu and Playa
Edited by Hewbitb E. Jovcb. Awitant i^afesKir of En^lah Dartmoutb
BROWNING : llie Rlns and the Book
Ediled by Fbedeiick Morgan pADBLFOKti. ProfoioT of & wUib, Unlvn-
Bty of WaitaingtoQ
Heali Tribune
oi of EbiUbIi. Princeton Univenity
AMERICAN S < »4GS AND BALLA[)S
Edited by Louise Pound, Profcssoi of Eoitlah. Univenity ol Nebnska
ENGLISH POETS OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
Edited by Ernest Beknbauu, ProfcHor of English, UnJvengty of tUInds
MINOR VICTORIAN POETS
Edited by John D. Cooke. Professor of English, University of Southern
California.
ROMANTIC PCWTRY OF TIffi EARLY NINETEENTH CENTURY
Edited by Akthub Beattt, Professor ol EdiUbIi, University of WlKomla
..„■„ Google
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
ESSAYS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROSE
ADDISON AND STEELE: Sdectknu
Edited by Will D. Howk. fonnerty htad of the Depaitmpnl of EDgUih,
Indiana Univnsilj'
ARNOLD: Prose and Poetry
Edited by Archibald L, BcnnOH. PiDfemr of Engliih and Dean of the
Graduate School. New York Univereity
BURKE 1 Selcclloiu
Edited by Lbsl[B Nathan Brouobtoh. AMiMant Protenor of English
Cotndl UnJveraity
FRANKLIN AND EDWARDS: Selections
Edited by Cabl Van Dobbm. Associate professor of English. Columbia
University
HAZLirri Eways
Edited by Fbrcy V. D. Shelly, Professor of EngliBh, University of Penn-
„., > ,„Cooglc
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
MEREDITH: An Eh^ ca Cofnc^
b/iited by L.AMB CoopBR, l^tifcHor of the EnsLiBh Laogua^ and Liters
lure, CdtikII Univereit)'
PARKMAN: The Oregon TrdU
r^iud by Jauks Clovd Bowuan, Proffnor of EntUih, Northeni StMe
Normal College, Marquette, Micb.
POEi Talea
Edited by James Southall Wilson, Edcu Allan Poe PiofeiKir of EngliBh,
Univeraily of Vitgiiiia
RUSKIN: Selections mad Esuys
Edited by Fkbdbrick Wiluah Ron. Profeaoi of Bntfiati, Unlvcralty o <
WiKtniaIn
r of Engliah. Univeralty of Iowa
C(»4TEMPORARY ESSAYS
Edited by Odbll Shbpabd. James J. Goodwin Professor of EDgli»h, Trin-
ity College
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
BIOGRAPHY
PHILOSOPHY SERIES
Editor, Ralph Barton Perry
PngissBr d Philosophy, HarPard Unmriilr
lans. Profewor of Philopophy and Piychology,
DESCARTES; Selections
Ediud by Ralph M. Eaton. Asaiatant ProfeBSor of PhiloBophy, Hacvard
UnivetBity
HEGEL: Selecthtns
Edited by Jacob LoBWBNBBKa, ProfeBsor of Ptdlosopby. Univeralty of
HUME: Selection
Edited by Chablks VV. Hendbl, J»„ Aa»odale ProfM^or of PhlloKphy,
Princtlon Univenlty
KANT: Selectiotu
Edited by Trbodokb M. Greene. Auodate Profenor of Phllosocihy.
Princeton University
LXX^KE: Selections
Edited by SrHBLiNii P. Laiipbkcki, Profesaorof Philosophy, Amherst
CoUege
PLATO : The Republic .
With an introduction by C. M. Bacewell, Professor of Philosophy. Ya}e
PLATO: Selections
Edited by Raphaei. Deuos. Assistanl Professor of Fhilosaphv, Harvard
SCHOPENHAUER: Selections
Edited by DKWin H. Parkeb, Professor of Phlbsophy, Univenity of
Midugan
MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY
Tianilated and edited by Richakd McKbon. AialMant Professor of
Philosophy. Columbia University
f
L ..„■„ Google
THE MODERN STUDENT'S LIBRARY
FRENCH SERIES
Editor, Horatio Smith
Fn^asor ef Prntdi Languagt and UUralHri. Brom UnlvirsUy
BALZAC: Le Fere Gortoc
W\lii an introduction by Horatio ^nxH, ProtcMor of French LansuaiF
and Literature, Brown Univeralty
FLAUBERT: Madame Bovary
With an introduction by Chrtstun Gauss, Dean of the C < dkie. Princeton
Unlvenlty
FRENCH ROMANTIC PROSE
Edited by W. W. COMi > OET. Pnsldent. Haverford CoUese
MOLlkRE: Three Plays
Edited by William A. Nitze and Hilda L. NtwiUM, Univenity of Chicago
VOLTAIRE: Candide lUid Other PhiltMopfalcal Talea
Edited by Morris Bishop, Aagiitant FrofcSBor of tbe Rom
and Literature, Cornell Univenity
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
ta,i,.=db, Google
4
Mf U».
^^Bi.
ta,i,.=db, Google
