



d by Google
rs^fn. (%M^ C^U.
Z^L f
^//^
1
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
STANBARB
NOVELS.
N " XXIII.
< * No kind of Ittemtoie if iogHMnU7«ttnuith« m Fiction. iPieturei Of
life and mannen, and Stories of advenlure, aie more eaferiy ncttnA bf
the many than graver productions, however important these latter may be
Apolbios is better remembered by his iablt of Cupid and Psyche than by
his dwtruser Platooic ^ rtUa yi ; and the Decameron of Boccaccio has out.
lived the Latin Treatises, and other learned works of ths* author.** ^
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
BY JANE AUSTEN.
COMFLnK IM ONX TOLUMft.
LONDON:
HICHAHI) BENTLEY, new BURLINGTON STREET,
(LATE COLBURN AND BENTLEY) i
BELL AND BRADFUTB, EDINBUROHs
CUMHIK0, DUBLIN { AND
OALIONAKI, FABIS^
18SS»
d by Google
The next Number of *'Tbe Standard KoveV* to be published on the
Ist of February, will contain a new translation, by Mim Ibabbl Hill, of
MADAME D£ STAEL*S odebrated Romance,
CORINNE; OR, ITALY,
complete in One Volume, with metrical versions of the ** Cbants,** or Odes,
by Miss Landon ; and graphic illustrations, consisting of an engraving from
the well known picture of Gerard, and a view of Coppet (the residence of
Madame de Stael) from the pencil of Fielding.
* }
London: i
Printed by A. ft R. Spottiswood &
'• New-Stzeet^uara ^
d by Google

d by Google

Digitized by Google
VjcAJ-. t < .rU^\| > |j ,
d by Google
Digitized by LaOOQ IC
SJEWSM Mm ^Esrsi:^:T^i::'r
BIT

I yfta-hca^/vnye^, .,^t£^s^ai»t7.^^ a'n^txA:^n.«c^ /^ ^^nrui-
^
T.oTqDoir:
CUMMITTG. DUBLIN .-BELL & • BPAOrUTE. EDDSTF^URGII .
la. " ^3.
d by Google
d by Google
SENSE
SENSIBILITY:
A NOVEL-
BY JANE AUSTEN.
LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
(LATE COLBURN AND BENTLET):
BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH;
CUMHINO, DUBLIN; AND
OALIGNANI. PARia
183S.
d by Google

d by Google
MEMOIR
OP
MISS AUSTEN.
Jake Austek was bom on the 16th of December,
1776, at Steventon, in the county of Hants. Her
fethet was rector of that parish upwards of forty
years. There he resided in the conscientious and un-
assisted discharge of his ministerial duties until he was
turned of seventy years. Then he retired with his
wife, our authoress, and her sister, to Bath, for the
remainder of his life, a period of about four years.
Being not only a profound scholar, but possessing a
most exquisite taste in every species of literature, it is
not wonderful that his daughter Jane should, at a very
early age, have become sensible to the charms of style,
and enthusiastic in the cultivation of her own language.
On the death of her father, she removed, with her
mother and sister, for a short time, to Southampton;
and finally, in 1809, to the pleasant village of Chawton
in the same county. From this place she sent her
novels into the world. Some of them had been the
gradual performances of her previous life ; for though
in composition she was equally rapid and correct, yet
A 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
VI MEMOIR OF MISS AUSTEN.
an invincible distrust of her own judgment induced
her to withhold her works from the public, till tinsie
and many perusals had satisfied her that the charm of
recent composition was dissolved. The natui^ con-
stitution, the regular habits, the quiet and happy occu-
pations of our authoress, seemed to promise a long
succession of amusement to the public, and a gradual
increase of reputation to herself. But the symp-
toms of a decay, deep and incurable, began to show
themselves in the commencement of 1816. Her
decline was at first deceitfully slow ; but in the month
of May, 1817, it was found advisable that she should
be removed to Winchester for the benefit of constant
medical aid, which none, even then, dared to hope
would be permanently beneficial. She supported, dur-
ing two months, aU the varying pain, irksomeness, and
tedium, attendant on decaying nature, with more than
resignation — with a truly elastic cheerfulness. She
retained her faculties, her memory, her fancy, her
temper, and her aflPections, warm, clear, and unim-
paired, to the last. Her last voluntary speech con-
veyed thanks to her medical attendant; and to the
final question asked of her, purporting to know her
wants, she replied, " I want nothing but death. " She'
expired shortly afler, on Friday, the 18th of July, 1817/
in the arms of her sister; and was buried, on the 24?th
of the same month, in the cathedral church of Win-
chester. .
Of personal attractions she possessed a consider-
able share ; her stature rather exceeded the middle
height ; her carriage and deportment were quiet, but
graceful ; her features were separately good ; their as-
semblage produced an unrivalled expression of that
d by Google
MEMOIR OF MISS AUSTEN. VU
cjte^rfolness, sensibility, and benevolence, which were
her real characteristics ; her complexion was of the
finest texture— it might with truth be said, that her
eloquent blood Ispoke through her modest cheek*; her
voice was sweet ; she delivered herself with fluency and
precision ; indeed, she was formed for elegant and ra-
tional society, excelling in conversation as much as in
composition. In the present age it is hazardous to
mention accomplishments; our authoress would pro-
bably have been inferior to few in such acquire-
knents, had she not been so superior to most, in higher
things.
It remains to make a few observations on that which
her friends deemed more important, on those en-
dowments which sweetened every hour of their lives.
If there be an opinion current in the world that a per-
fectly, amiable temper is not reconcilable to a lively
imagination, and a keen relish for wit, such an opinion
will be rejected for ever by those who had the happi-
ness of knowing the authoress! of the following work.
Though the frailties, foibles, and follies of others, could
not escape her immediate detection, yet even on their
vices did she never trust herself to comment with
unkindness. The affectation of candour is not un-'
oommon, but she had no affectation. Faultless herself,
as nearly as human nature can be, she always sought,
in the & ults of others, something to excuse, to forgive,
or forget. Where extenuation was impossible, she
had a sure refuge in silence. She never uttered either
a hasty, a silly, or a severe expression. In short, her
temper wds as polished as her wit ; and no one could
be often in her company without feeling a strong desire
of obtaining her friendship, and cherishing a hope of
A 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
VIU Jk^EMOXI^ QV MI« & AUSTSir*
having obtained it. She became on authoress eiHirely
from taste and indination* . Neither the hope of fame
nor profit mixed with her early motives. It w^ with
extreme difficulty that her friends^ whose | > artiality she
suspected) whilst she honoured their judgment)^ eoold
persuade her to publish her first work. Nay, so per-
suaded was she tiiat the sale would not repay the ex-
pense of publication, that she actually made a reserve
irom her moderate income to meet the expected loss.
She could scarcely believe what she termed her great
good fortune, when " Sense and Sensibility " produced a
clear profit of about 150/. Few so gifted were so truly un-
pretending. She regarded the above sum as a prodigious
recompense for that which had cost her nothing. Her
readers, perhaps, will wonder that such a work pro-
duced so little, at a time when some authors have
received more guineas than they have written lines.
But the public has not been unjust ; and our authoress
was far from thinking it so. Most gratifying to her
was the applause which from time to time reached her
ears from those who were competent to discriminate.
When " Pride and Prejudice " made its appearance,
a gentleman, celebrated for his literary attainments,
advised a friend of the authoress to read it, adding, with
mote point than gallantry, ^ I should like to k2U > w who
is the author, for it is much ^oo clever to have been
written by a woman. " Still, in spite of such applause,
so much did she shrink from notoriety, that no increase
of fame would have induced her, had she lived, to affix
her name to any productions of her pen. In the bosom
of her femily she talked of them freely ; thankful for
praise, open to remark, and submissive to criticism. But
in public she turned away from any allusion to the cha-
d by Google
MEMOIR OF Mm AUftXlK. IX
Fscter of an auth(H*ess* In proof of thisy the foUowing
cirGumstanoe, otherwise unimportant^ k stated. Miss
Austen was on a. visit in London soon after the pubH-'
cation of Mannfield Park: a nobleman^ personally
unknown to her, but who had good reasons foot con*
Sfdering her to be the authoress of that work, was
desirous of her jotoing a literary circle at his hoose. He
communicated his wish in the politest manner, through
a mutual fiiend, adding, what his Lordship doubtl^s
tiiou^t would be an irresistible inducement, that the
celebrated Madame de Stael would be of the party.
Miss Austen immediately declined the invitation To
her truly deHcate mind such a display would have given
pain instead of pleasure.
. Her power of inventing characters seems to have
been intuitive, and almost unlimited. She drew £rom
nature ; but, whatever may have been surmised to the
contrary, never from individuals. The style of her fa-
miliar correspondence was in all respects the same as
that of her novels. Every thing came finished from
her pen ; for on all subjects she had ideas as cleur as
her expressions were well chosen* It is not too much
to say that she nevei^ despatched a note or letter un-
worthy of publication. The following few short extracts
from her private correspondence are submitted to the
public without apology, as being more truly descriptive
of her temper, taste, and feelings, than any thing which
the pen of a biographer can produce. The first is a
playful defence of herself from a mock charge of
having pilfered the manuscripts of a young relation.
« What should I do, my dearest E., with your manly,
vigorous sketdies, so full of life and spirit ? How could
i possibly join them on to a little bit of ivory, two
d by Google
X MEMOIR OF MISS AUSTEN.
inches wide, on which I work with a brush so fine, as
to produce little effect after much labour ? " The re-
maining extracts are from a letter written a few weeks
before her death. " My medical attendant is encourag-
ing, and talks of making me quite well. I live chiefly
oa the sofa, but am allowed to walk from one room to
the other. I have been out once in a sedan chair, and
am to repeat it, and be promoted to a wheel-chair as
the weather serves. On this subject I will only say
farther, that my dearest sister, my tender, watchful, in-
defatigible nurse, has not been made ill by her exei:-
tlons. As to what I owe to her, and to the anxious
affection of all my beloved family on this occasion, I
can only cry over it, and pray to God to bless them
more and more. " She next touches with just and gen-
tle animadversion on a subject of domestic disappoint-
ment. Of this, the particulars do not concern the
public Yet, in justice to her characteristic sweetness
and resignation, the concluding observation of our au-
thoress thereon must not be suppressed. < < But I am
getting " too near complaint. It has been the appoint-
ment of God, however secondary causes may have
operated. "
The above brief biographical sketch has been, in
substance, already published -with Miss Austen's post-
humous novels. It is a matter of deep regret to the
writer, that materials for a more detailed account of so
talented a woman cannot be obtained ; therefore, as a
tribute due to her memory, he subjoins the following
d by Google
MEMOIR OP MISS AUSTBK. XI
extracts from a critical joiinial of the highest repute
ation : —
" Unlike that of many writers, Miss Austen's feme has
grown fastest since she died : there was no 6clat about
her first appearance: the public took time to make up
its mind ; and she, not having staked her hopes of hap-
piness on success or failure, was content to wait for the
decision of her claims. Those claims have long been
established beyond a question; \)ut the merit oi JirH
recognising them belongs less to reviewers than to
general readers. So retired, so unmarked by literary
notoriety, was the life Miss Austen led, that if any
likeness was ever taken of her, none has ever been
engraved.* With regard to her genius, we must ad-
venture a few remarks. She herself compares her pro-
ductions to a little bit of ivory, two inches wide, worked
upon with a brush so fine, that little effect is produced
after much labour. It is so : her portraits are perfect
likenesses, admirably finished, many of them gems, but
it is all miniature painting; and, satisfied with being iiu^
imitable in one line, she never essayed canvass and oils;
never tried her hand at a majestic daub. Her " two
inches of ivory " just describes her preparations for a
tale of three volumes. A village — two families con»
nected together — three or four interlopers, out of
whom are to spring a little tracasserie; — and by means
of village or country town visiting and gossiping a real
plot shall thicken, and its " rear of darkness " never be
scattered tDl six pages oS finis* The plots are simple
* No likeness ever was taken of Miss Austen ; which the editor
much laments, as he is thereby precluded from the gratification
of prefixing her portrait to this edition.
d by Google
Xn MEMOIR 07 MISS AVStSSU
in construction, and yet intricate in developeinent ;-^
the main characters, those that the reader feels sure are
to love, marry, aiid make mischiefy are introduced iii the
first or second chapter ; the work is all done bj half a
dozen people ; no person, scene, or sentence, is ever in-c
troduced needless to the matter in hand : — no catas-
trophes, or discoveries, or surprises of a grand nature,
are allowed — neither children nor fortunes are lost or
found bj accident — the mind is never taken off die
level surface of life — the reader breakfasts, dines,
walks, and gossips, with the various Worthies, till a pro-*
cess of transmutation takes place in him, and he abso-
lutely fancies himself onie of the company. Yet the
winding up of the plot involves a Surprise : a few inci-
dents are entangled at the beginning in the most simple
and natural manner, and till the close one never ieelB
quite sure how they are to be disentangled. Disen-
tangled, however, they are, and that in a most satisfac-
tory manner. The secret is, Miss Austen was a thorough
mistress in the knowledge of human character ; how it
is acted upon by education and circumstance ; and how,
when once formed, it shows itself through every hour
pf every day, and in every speech to every person.
Her ccmversations would be tiresome but for this; and
her pers(»iages, the fellows to whom may be met in the
streets, or drank tea with at half an hour's notice,
would excite no interest ; but in Miss Austen's hands
we see into their hearts and hopes, their motives, their
struggles within themselves; and a sympathy is induced,
which, if extended to daily life, and the world at large,
Would make the reader a more amiable person ; and we
must think it that reader's own fault who does not
close her pages with more charity in his heart towards
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
MEMOI & Off MISS AUSTXK. xHl
iinpreteiulaiig, if prosing, worth ; with a higher esti*'
mation of simple kuodncss, and sincere good-will ; witl^
a qmckened sense of the doty oi bearing and forfoeeN
ing, in domestic intercourse, and of the pleasure of
adding to the litde comforts even of persons who are
neither wits nor beauties, — who, in a word, does not
feel more disposed to be benevolent. In the last post^
faumouis tale (^ Persuasion') there is a strain of a higher
mood; there is still the exquisite delineation of common
life, sudi lile as we hear, and see, and make part ^
with the addition of a ^^, more poetic, yet equally
real tone of thought and actions in the principals. If
Miss Austen was sparing in her mtroduction of nobler
characters, it w%a because they are scattered sparingly
in life. Hef death has made a chasm in our light litei^
ature, •«- tlie domestic novel, with its home-bom in*
c & ients, its ^ ftmiliar matter of to-day,'its slight
anayof names, and great cognisance of people and
thingi, its confinemieiit to < ;ountry life, and total obli*
Tiim of oMtume, maaneni, the great world, and * the
mirr^ of fashion*^ Every i^oies of composition is,
when giood, to be admieed m its way ; but the revivd
^the domestic novel wmtld make a pleasant interlude
tbe showy, skalichyilovelB 6f high life.
^ Miss Austen lias the merit (in our judgment most
essential) of being evidently a Christian writer: k
merit which is much enhanced^ both on the 3cpre of
good taste and of practical utility, by her religion
being not at all obtrusive. She might defy the most
fastidious critic to call any of her novels (as Coelebs
was designated) a dramatic sermon. The subject is
rather alluded to, and that incidentally, than studiously
brought forward and dwelt upon* In & ct, she is mor^
d by Google
Xlir MEMOIR OF MISS AUSTBK.
sparing of it than would be thought desirable by some
persons ; perhaps even by herself, had she consulted
merely her own sentiments ; but she probably intro*
duced it as & r as she thought would be genei;ally prot
fitable ; for when the purpose of inculcating a religious
principle is made too palpably prominent, many readers,
]f they do not throw aside the book with disgust, are
«pt to fortify themselves with that respectful kind of
apathy with which they undergo a regular sermon,
and prepare themselves as they do to swallow a dose
cf medicine, endeavourii^ to get it down in large
gulps, without tasting it more than is necessary. "
Perhaps these volumes may be perused by some
readers who will feel a solicitude respecting the author-
46^, extending beyond the perishable qualities of tem < *
,per,maimers, taste, and talents.— *We can assure all such
(and the being able so to do gratifies us more than the
loudest voice of human praise) that Jane Austen's
iiOpes of immortality were built upon the Rock of ages;
That she deeply felt, and devoutly acknowledged, the
.insignificance of all worldly attainments, and the worth-
lessness of all human services, in the eyes of her
heavenly Father. That she had no other hope of
mercy, pardon, and peace, but through the merits and
sufferings of her Redeemer. >
October 5. ISS2. ■ I
d by Google
MEMOIR OF MISS AUSTEN. XV
The Editor of « The Standard Novels " feels happy
in being able to state, that arrangements have been
made for including several other of the works of Miss
Austen in this collection. Miss Austen is the founder
of a school of novelists ; and her followers are not con-
fined to her own sex, but comprise in their number
some male writers of considerable merit. The au*
thoress of < < Sense and Sensibility " had for her con-
temporaries several female novelists, whose works
attained instant popularity — Madame D*Arblay, Miss
Edgeworth, Mrs. Opie, Miss Porter, and others, most of
whose novels preceded hers in order of time : but,
notwithstanding the temptation which nearly all writers
are under (especially at the commencement of their
vocation) to imitate that which has commanded dis-
tinguished success, Miss Austen at once freed herself
from such, influence, and, with combined boldness and
modesty, struck into a path of her own, of which she
remains, to this day, Uie undisputed mistress. The
truth, spirit, ease, and refined humour of her con-
versations have rarely been equalled. She is, em-
phatically, the novelist of home. One of the most
remarkable traits of her genius may be found in the
power by which, without in the slightest degree violat-
ing the truth of portraiture, she is able to make the
veriest every-day person a character of great interest.
This is, indeed, turning lead into gold ; but it would
be difficult to detect the secret of the process.
d by Google
d by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
VOLUME THE FIRST.
CHAPTER I.
Xbe family of Dashwood had been long settled in Sus-
sex. Their estate was large^ and their residence was at
Norland Park^ in the centre of their property^ where^ for
many generations^ they had lived in so respectable a
manner as to engage the general good opinion of their sur-
rowiding acquaintance. The late owner of this estate was
a single man^ who lived to a very advanced age^ and who^
for many years of his life^ had a constant companion and
housekeeper in his sister. But her deaths which happened
ten years before his own^ produced a great alteration in his
home ; for to supply her loss^ he invited and received into
his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood^
the legal inheritor of the Norland estate^ and thd person to
whom he intended to bequeath it. In the sodety of his
nephew and niece^ and their children^ the old gentleman's
days were comfortably spent. His attachment to them all
increased. The constant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry
Dashwood to his wishes^ which proceeded not merely from
interest^ but from goodness of hearty gave him every degree
of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cheer-
fulness of the children added a relish to his existence.
By a former marriage^ Mr. Henry Dashwood had one
son : by his present lady three daughters. The son^ a
steady respectable young man^ was amply provided for by
the fortune of his mother^ which had been large^ and half
B
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
2 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of which, devolved on him on his coming of age. By his
own marriage^ likewise^ which happened soon afterwards^
he added to his lyealth. To him^ therefore^ the succession
to the Norland estate was not so really important as to his
Slitters ; for their fortune, independent of what might arise
to them from their father's inheriting that property, could
he hut small. Their mother had nothing, and their father
only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the
remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also se«
cured to her child, and he had only a Ufe-interest in it.
The old gentleman died: his will was read; and, like
almost every otherivill, gave as much disappointment as
pleasure. He was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateful, as
to leave his estate from his nephew ; hut he left it to him
on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest.
'Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his
wife and daughters than for himself or his son : but to his
son, and his stfn's son, a child of four years old, it was
secured, in such a way, as to leave to himself no power of
providing for those who were most dear to him, and who
most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, or by
any sale of its valuable woods. The whole was tied u^
for the benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with
his father and mother at Norland, had so far gained on the
afi^ections of his uncle, by such attractions as are by no means
unusual in children of two or three years old, — ^ an imper.
feet articulation, an earnest desire of having his own way,
many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, -— as to out.
weigh all the value of all the attention which, for years, he
had received from his niece and her daughters. He
meant not to be unkind, however, and, as a mark of his
affi^tion for the three girls, he left them a thousand
pounds apiece.
Mr. Dash wood's disappointment was, at first, severe;
but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might
reasonably hope to live many years, and by living econo*
inically, lay by a considerable sum from die produce of an
estate already large, and capable of almost immediate im-
provement. But the fortune, which had been so tardy in
coming, was his only one . twelvemonth. He survived his
d by Google
.6ENSB AND gENBIBILITT. i»
ttnde no longer; and ten thousand pounds^ including the late
l^acies^ was all that remained for his widow and daughters.
His son was sent for as soon as his danger was laiown^
and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended^ with all the
strength and urgency which illness could command^ the in*
terest of his mother-in-law and sisters«
Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of
the rest of the family ; hut he was affected hy a recom*
mendation of such a nature at such a time^ and he pro.
mised to do every thing in his power to make them
comfortahle. His father was rendered easy hy such an
assurance^ and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to
consider how much there might prudently he in his poww
to do for them.
He was not an iU-disposed young man, unless to be
rather cold-hearted and rather selfish is to he ill-disposed :
but he was, in general, well respected ; for he conducted
himself with propriety in the discharge of his ordinary
duties. Had he married a more amiable woman, he might
have been made still more respectable than he was: he
might even have been made amiable himself; for he was
.very young when he married^ and very fond of his wife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of him-
self ; more narrow-minded and selfish.
When he gave his {vomise to his father, he meditated
within himseljf to increase the fortunes of his sisters by the
present of a thousand pounds apieee. He then really
thought himself equal to it. The prospect of four thousand
a year, in addition to his present income, besides the re-
maining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed his
heart, and made him fed capable of generosity. ^'Yes,
he would give them three thousand pounds : it would be
liberal and handsome ! It would be enough to make them
completely easy. Three thousand pounds I he could spare
80 considerable a sum with little inconvenience. " He thought
of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he
did not repent.
No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John
Dashwood, without sending any notice of her intention to
her mother-in-law, arrived with her child and their attencL.
B 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
4 8EN8B AND SENglBIJLITY.
ants. No one could dispute her right to come ; the house
was her husband's from the moment of his father's de*
cease ; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater^ and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation,
with only common feelings, must have been highly un*
pleasing ; but in her mind there was a sense of honour so
keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence of the kind,
by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source of
immovable disgust. Mrs. John Dashwood had never been
a favourite with any of her husband's family ; but she had
had no opportunity, till the present, of showing them with
how little attention to the comfort of other people she could
act when occasion required it.
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious be^
haviour, and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-
law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she would have
quitted the house for ever, had not the entreaty of her eldest
girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going,
and her own tender love for all her three children determined
her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach
with their brother.
Elinor, this eldest daughter whose advice was so eflec
tual, possessed a strength of understanding, and coolness of
judgment, which qualified her, though only nineteen, to be
the counsellor of her mother, and enabled her frequently to
counteract, to the advantage of them aU, that eagerness cf
mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have led to
imprudence. She had an excellent heart ; — her disposition
was affectionate, and her fedings were strong; but she
knew how to govern them : it was a knowledge which her
mother had yet to learn, and which one of her sisters had
resolved never to be taught.
Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal
to £Iinor's. She was sensible and clever ; but eager in
every thing : her sorrows, her joys, could have no moder*
ation. She was generous, amiable, interesting: she was
every thing but prudent. The resemblance between her
and her mother was strikingly great.
Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sen-
sibility ; but by Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cher-
d by Google
SENSE AKD SENSIBILITY. O
isbed. They encouraged each other now in the violence of
their affliction. The agony of grief which overpowered
them at first was voluntarily renewed^ was sought for^ was
created again and again. They gave themselves up wholly
to their so^ow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every
reflection that could afford it^ and resolved against ever ad-
knitting consolation in future. £linor, too^ was deeply af-
flicted ; but still she could struggle^ she could exert hersdf.
She could consult with her brother^ could receive her sister-
in-law on her arrival^ and treat her with proper attention ;
and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion^
and encourage her to similar forbearance.
Mai^aret > the other sister^ was a good.humoured/ well-
disposed girl ; but as she had already imbibed a good deal
of Marianne's romance^ without having much of her sense^
she did not^ at thirteen^ bid fair to equal her sisters at a
more advanced period of life.
CHAPTER II.
Mas. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of
Norland; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded
to the condition of visiters. As suqh^ however, they were
treated by her with quiet civility; and by her husband
with as much kindness as he co\dd feel towards any body
beyond himself, his wife, and their child. He really pressed
them, with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their
home ; and, as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dash-
wood as remaining there till she could accommodate her-
sdf with a house in the neighbourhood, his invitation was
accepted.
A continuance in a place where every thing reminded
her of former delight was exactly what suited her mind.
.In seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more cheer-
ful than hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that sanguine
expectation of happiness which is happiness itself. But in
B 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
6 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy, and
as far beyond consolation as in pleasure ^e was beyond alloy.
Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her
husband intended to do for his sisters. To take three
thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy
would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject. How could
he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child
too, of so large a sum ? And what possible claim could
the Miss Dashwoods, who were related to him only by half
blood, which she considered as no relationship at all, have
on his generosity to so large an amount ? It was very well
known that no affection was ever supposed to exist between
the children of any man by different marriages ; and why
was he to ruin himself, and their poor littie Harry, by
giving away all his money to his half sisters }
" It was my father's last request to me, " replied her
husband,'^ that I should assist his widow and daughters.*'
''He did not know what he was talking off, I dare say;
ten to one but he was light-headed at the time. Had he
been in his right senses, he could not have thought of such
a thing as begging you to give away half your fortune from
your own child. "
'^ He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear
Fanny ; he only requested me, in general terms, to assist
them, and make their situation more comfortable than it
was in his power to do. Perhaps it would have been as
well if he had left it wholly to myself. He could hardly
suppose I should neglect them. But as he required the
promise, I could not do less than give it : at least I thought
so at the time. The promise, Aerefore, was given, and
must be performed.'Something must be done for them
whenever they leave Norland and settie in a new home. "'
^'YTell, then, let sometiiing be done for them ; but tJutt
something need not be three thousand poimds. Consider,*'
she added,''that when the money is once parted with, it
never can return. Your sisters will marry, and it will be
gone for ever. If, indeed, it could ever be restored to our
poor little boy "
fc Why, to be sure, " said her husband^ very gravelj^
Digitized by Google
SBNgB ANB SENSIBIIilTY. 7'
'" that woidd make a great difference. The time may
come when Harry will regret that so large a sum was
parte < l with. If he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would he a very convenient addition,*'
" To he sure it would.'*
''t'erhaps, then, it would he hetter for all parties, if the
sum were dimini^ed one half. Five hundred pounds
would he a prodigious increase to their fortunes !**
'^ Oh ! heyond any thing great ! What hrother on
earth would do half so much for his sisters, even if really
his sisters ! And as it is — only half blood ! — But you
have such a generous spirit 1 "
^'I would not wish to do any thing mean, " he replied.
'* One had rather, on such occasions, do too much than too
little. No one, at least, can think I have not done enough
for them : even themselves, they can hardly expect more. "
'^ There is no knowing what they may expect, " said the
lady, ^'hut we are not to think of their expectations : the
question is, what you can afford to do. "
'^ Certainly ; and I think I may afford to give them
five hundred pounds apiece. As it is, without any addi-
tion of mine, they will each have above three thousand
pounds on their mother's death — a very comfortable
fortune for any young woman. "
'^ To be sure it is ; and, indeed, it strikes me that they
can want no addition at all. They will have ten thousand
pounds divided amongst them* If they marry, they will
be sure of doing well, and if they do not, they may all live .
very comfortably together on the interest of ten thousand
pounds. " . ,
'* That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know
whether, upon the whole^ it would not be more advisable
to do something for their mother while she lives, rather
than for them — something of tne annuity kind I mean.
My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as her-
self. A hundred a year would make them all perfectly
Qpmfortable. "
. ms wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent
to this plan.
, . " To be sure, " ^d she, " it is better than parting ^with'
* b'4
^ Digitized by LjOOQIC
8 §^N8E AND SENSIBIIilTY.
fifteen hundred pounds at once. But^ then^ if Mrs. Dash-
wood should live fifteen years, we shall he completely
taken in. "
'^ Fifteen years ! my dear'Fanny ; her life cannot be
worth half that purchase. "
*^ Certainly not ; but if you observe^ people always live
for ever when th^sre is any annuity to be paid them ; and
she is very stout and healthy^ and hardly forty. An an.
nuity is a very serious business ; it comes over and over
every year^ and there is no getting rid of it. You are not
aware of what you are doing. I have known a. great deal
of the trouble of annuities ; for my mother was clogged
with the payment of three to old superannuated servants by
my father's will^ and it is amazing how disagreeable she
found it. Twice every year these annuities were to be
paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them ;
and then one of them was said to have died^ and afterwards
it turned out to be no such thing. My mother was quite
sick of it. Her income was not her own, she said^ with
such perpetual claims on it ; and it was the more unkind in
my father^ because, otherwise, the money would have been
entirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction
whatever. It has given me such an abhorrence of annui-
ties, that I am sure I would not pin myself down to the
payment of one for all the world. "
'^ It is certainly an unpleasant thing, " replied Mr. Dash-
wood, *'to have those kind of yearly drains on one's in-
come. One's fortune, as your mother justly says, is not
one's own. To be tied down to the regular payment of
such a sum^ on every rent-day, is by no means deairable :
it takes away one's independence. "
'^ Undoubtedly ; and, after all, you have no thanks for
it. They think themselves secure ; you do no more than
what is expected, and it raises no gratitude at all. If I
were you, whatever I did should be done at my own dis-
cretion entirely. I would not bind myself to allow them
any thing yearly. It may be very inconvenient some years
to spare a hundred^ or even fifty pounds from our own ex-
penses. "
''I believe you are right, my love ; it wUl be better that
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
e£N8E AND 8£N8IBILITT. ^
there should he no annuity in the case : whatever I may
give them occasionally will be of far greater assistance than
a yearly aUowance, because they would only enlarge their
style of living if they felt sure of a larger income^ and would
not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year. It
will certainly be much the best way. A present of fifty
pounds^ now and ihen^ will prevent their ever being dis-
tressed for money^ and will^ I think^ be amply discharging
my promise to my father. "
'^ To be sure it will. Indeed^ to say the truths I am
convinced within myself that your father had no idea of
your giving them any money at all. The assistance he
thought of^ I dare say^ was only such as might be reason-
ably expected of you ; for instance^ such as looking out for
a comfortable small house for them^ helping them to move
their things, and sending them presents- of fish and game,
and so fordi, whenever they are in season. I'll lay my
life that he meant nothing farther; indeed, it would he
very strange and unreasonable if he did. Do but consider,
my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your
mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the interest
of seven thousand pounds, besides the thousand pounds
belonging uf each of the girls, which brings them in
fifty pounds a year a piece, and, of course, they will pay
their mother for their board out of it Altogether, they
will have ^ye himdred a year amongst them, and what on
earth can four women want for more than that? — They
will live so cheap ! Their house-keeping will be nothing
at all. They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly
any servants ; they will keep no company, and can have
no expenses of any kind ! Only conceive how comfortable
they will be ! Five hundred a year ! I am sure I cannot
imagine how they will spend half of it ; and as to your
giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it They
will be much more able to give you something. "
*^ Upon my word, " said Mr. Dashwood, ** I believe you
are perfectly right My father certainly could mean no-
thing more by his request to me than what you say. I
clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fiilfil my en*
gagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
10
SBNSB AND SENSIBIUTT*
as you have described* When my moiher removes into
another house my services shall be readily given to accom*.
modate her as far as I can. Some little present of furniture
too may be acceptable then. "
** Certainly, " returned Mrs. John Dashwood.'* But,
however, one thing must be considered. When your father
and mother moved to Norland, though the furniture of
Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and linen was saved^
and is now left to your mother. Her house will therefore
be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it.''
'^ That is a material consideration undoubtedly. A va«
luable legacy indeed !. And yet some of the plate would
have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here. "
*'Yes ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as hand»
some as what belongs to this house. A great deal toa.
handsome, in my opinion, for any place they can ever afford
to live in. But, however, so it is. Your father thought
only of them. And I must say this, that you owe no parr
ticular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we
very well know that if he could, he would have left almost
every thing in the world to them "
This argument was irresistible. It gave to his intentions
whatever of decision was wanting before ; and he finally
resolved, that it would be absolutely unnecessary, if not
highly indecorous, to do more for the widow and children
of his father than such kind of neighbourly acts as his own
wife pointed out.
CHAPTER III.
Mbs: Dashwood remained at Norland several months;
not from any disinclination to move when the sight of
every well known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion
whidi it produced for a while ; for when her spirits began
to revive, and her mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by meian*
^dy remembrances^ she was impatient to be g < me > and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BN8B AlfD SBNHBILITY. 1 1
indefatigable in her enquiries for a suitable dwelling in the
neighbourhood of Norland; for to remove far from that
beloved spot was impossible. But she could hear of na
situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and
ease^ and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter^ whose
steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for
their income^ which her mother would have approved.
Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the
solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour^
which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections. She
doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than he
had doubted it himself^ and she thought of it for her
daughters'sake with satisfaction^ though as for herself she
was persuaded that a much smdler provision than 7000/*
would support her in affluence. For their brother's sake,
too^ for the sake of his own hearty she rejoiced ; and she
reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before^ in
believing him incapable of generosity. His attentive
behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their
wdfare was dear to him, and, for a long time^ she firmly
relied on the liberality of his intentions.
The contempt which she had, very early in their
acquaintance, felt for her daughter-in-law, was very much
inq^eased by the farther knowledge of her character^
which half a year's residence in her family afibrded;
and, perhaps, in spite of every consideration of politeness
or maternal affection on the side of the former, the two
ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together
so long, had not a particular circumstance occurred to give
still greater eligibility, according to the opinions of Mrs.
Dashwood, to her daughters'continuance at Norland.
This circumstance was a growing attachment between
her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a
gentlemanlike and pleasing young man, who was intro-
duced to their acquaintance soon after his sister's establish*
ment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest
part of his time there.
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from
motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son
of a man who had died very rich; and some might have
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
12 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
ifepressed it from motiTes of pradence^ for^ except a trifling
sum^ the whole of liis fortune depended on the will of his
i^iother. But Mrs. Dashwbod was alike uninfluenced by
either consideration. It was enough for her that he ap-
peared to be amiable^ that he loved her daughter^ and that
Elinor returned the partiality. It was contrary to every
doctrine of hers that diflerence of fortune should keep any
eouple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of dis-
position ; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknow-
ledged by every one who knew her was to her eomprehen-
sion impossible.
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good
cpinion^ by any peculiar graces of person or address. He
was not handsome^ and his manners required intimacy to
make them pleasing. He was too diffident to do justice
to himself ; but when his natural shyness was overcome^
his behaviour gave every indication of an open^ affectionate
heart. His understanding was good, and his education
had given it solid improvement. But he was neither fitted
by abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his
mother and sister, who longed to see him distinguiiEdied — -
88 — they hardly knew what. They wanted him to make
a fine figure in the world in some manner or other. His
mother wished to interest him in political concerns, to get
him into parliament, or to see him connected with some
of the great men of the day. Mrs. John Dashwood
wished it likewise; but in th'e mean while, till one of
these superior^ blessings could be attained, it would have
quieted her ambition to see him driving a barouche. But
Edward had no turn for great men or barouches. All his
wishes centered in domestic comfort and the quiet of
private life. Fortunately he had a younger brother who
was more promising.
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house'
before he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood*s attention ;
for she was, at that time, in such affliction as rendered
her careless of surrounding objects. She saw only that he
was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it. He
did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill.timed
ponveisation. She was first called to observe and approve
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BK8E AND SENSIBIUTT. 18
him farther^ by % reflection which Elinor chanced one day
to make on the difference between him and his sister. It
was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to
her mother.
^^ It is enough/'said she ;'^ to say that he is unlilse
Fanny is enough. It implies every thing amiable. I love
him already. "
" I think you will like him^ " said Elinor^ *^ when you
know more of him. "
'* Like him ! " replied her mother with a smile.'* I can
feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love. "
'^ You may esteem him. "
** I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem
and love. "
Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with
him. Her manners were attaching^ and soon banished his
reserve. She speedily comprehended all his merits ; the
persuasion of his regard for EUnor perhaps assisted her
penetration ; but she really felt assured of his worth : and
even thsit quietness of manner^ which militated against all
her established ideas Of what a young man's address ought
to be^ was no longer uninteresting^ when she knew his heart
to be warm and his temper affectionate.
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his
behaviour to Elinor than she considered their serious attach-
ment as certain, and looked forward to th^r marriage as
rapidly approaching.
*'In a few months^ my dear Marianne, " said she, " Elinor
wiU^ in all probability, be settled for life. We shall miss
her ; but she will be happy. "
. ^'Oh, mamma, how shall we do without her ? "
'^ My love, it will be scarcely a separation. We shall
live within a few miles of each other, and shall meet every
day of our lives. You will gain a brother, a real, affec-
tionate brother. I have the highest opinion in the world
of Edward's heart. But you look grave, Marianne ; do
you disapprove your sister's choice ? "
^'Perhaps, " said Marianne, " I may consider it with
'some surprise. Edward is very amiable, and I love hiih
tenderly. But yet — he is not the kind of young man-*-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
.34 8ENSB AND SSNSIBUiIIT.
there is a something wanting-— his figure is not striking ;
it has none of that grace which I should expect in the man
who could seriously attach my sister. His eyes want all
that spirit^ that fire^ which at once announce virtue and in*
telligence. And hesides all this^ I am afraid^ mamma, he has
no real taste. Music seems scarcely to attract him ; and^
though he admires £linor's drawings very much, it is not
the admiration of a person who can understand their worth.
It is evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her while
she draws, that, in fisict, he knows nothing of the matter.
He admires as a lover, not as a connoisseur. To satisfy
me, those characters must he united. I could not he happy
with a man whose taste did not in every point coincide
with my own. He must enter into all my feelings : the
same hooks, the same music must charm us both. Oh,
mamma, how ^iritless, how tame was £dward's manner in
reading to us last night ! I felt for my sister most severely.
Yet she bore it with so much composure, she seemed
scarcely to notice it. I could hardly keep my seat. To
hear tlrose beautiful lines which have frequently almost
driven me wild, pronounced with such impenetrable calm*
ness, such dreadful indifference! "
^'He would certainly have done more justice to simple
and elegant prose. I thought so at the time; but you
would give him Cowper. "
*'Nay, mamma, if he is not to be animated by Cowper ! —
but we must allow for difference of taste. Elinor has not
my feelings, and, therefore, she may overlook it, and be
happy with him. But it would have broken my heart, had I
loved him, tohearhim read with so little sensibility. Mamma,
the more I know of the world the more am I convinced that
I shall never see a man whom I can reaUy love. I require
so much ! He must have all Edward's virtues, and his
person and manners must ornament his goodness with every
possible charm. "
*'Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. It
is yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness.
Why should you be less fortunate than your mother? In
one circumstance only, my Marianne, may your destiny be
different from hers! "
'Digitized by Google
'gBNSE AND SENSIBILITY. 15
CHAPTER IV.
** What a pity it is, Elinor, " said Marianne, " that Edward
should have no taste for drawing. "
*'No taste for drawing ! " replied Elinor, *'why should you
think so ? He does not draw himself, indeed, but he has
great pleasure in seeing the performances of other people ;
and I assure you he is by no means deficient in natural
taste, though he has not had opportunities of improving it.
Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think he would
have drawn yery well. He distrusts his own judgment in
such matters so much, that he is always unwilling to give
his opinion on any picture ; but he has an innate propriety
and simplicity of taste, which, in general, direct him per.
fecdy right. "
Marianne was afraid of ofiending, and said no more on
the subject ; but the kind of approbation which Elinor de*
scribed as excited in him by the drawings of other people
was very far from that rapturous delight, which, in her
opinion, could alone be called taste. Yet, though smiling
within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for
that blind partiality to Edward which produced it.
*^ I hope, Marianne, " continued Elinor, *'you do not
consider him as deficient in general taste. Indeed, I think
I may say that you cannot, for your behaviour to him is
perfectly cordial, and if that were your opinion, I am sure
you could never be civil to him. "
Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would not
wound the feelings of her sister on any account, and yet to
say what she did not believe was impossible. At length she
replied, —
^^ Do not be ofiended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not
in every thing equal to your sense of his merits. I have
not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter pro-
pensities of his mind, his inclinations and tastes, as you
have ; but I have the highest opinion in the world of his
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
I
16 SENSE AMD SENSIBIUTT*
goodness and sense. I think him every thing that is worthy
and amiable. "
'^ I am sure^ " replied Elinor, with a smije, " that his
dearest friends could not be dissatisfied with such com-
mendation as that. - 1 do not perceive how you could ex-
press yourself more warmly. "
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so eittily
^^ Of his sense and his goodness, " continued Elinor, ^'no
one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him often
enough to engage him in unreserved conversation. The
excellence of his understanding and his principles can be
concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps him
silent. You know^enough of him to do justice to his solid
worth. But of his minuter propensities, as you call them,
you have, from peculiar circumstances, been kept more ig-
norant than myself. He and I have been at times thrown
a good deal together, while you have been wholly engrossed
on the most affectionate principle by my mother. I have
seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and
heard his opinion on subjects of literature and taste;, and,
upon the whole, I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-
informed, his enjoyment of books exceedingly great, his ima-
gination lively, his observation just and correct, and his taste
delicate and pure. His abilities in every respect improve
as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person. At
first sight, his address is certainly not striking ; and his
person can hardly be called handsome, till the expression of
his eyes, which are uncommonly good, and the general
sweetness of his countenance, is perceived. At present, I
know him so well, that I think him really handsome;^ or,
at least, almost so. What say you^ Marianne ? "
" 1 shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do
not now. When you tell me to love him as a brother, I
shall no more see imperfection in his face than 1 now dp
in his heart. "
Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the
warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him.
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion. She
believed the regard to be mutual ; but she required greater
^ Digitized by LjOOQIC
SBNBB Am BBNOBIUTT* 17
certain^ of it to make Marianoe's eorii^^on of their at*
tachmeat agreeable to her. She knew that what Marianoe
and her mother conjectured one moment^ they believed the
next — that with them, to wish was to hope, and to hope
vaa to expect. She tried to explain the real state of the
case to her sister.
" I do not attempt to deny/'said she, ^^ that I think
▼ery highly of him — that I greatly esteetti, that I like
him. "
Marianne here burst forth with indignation —
. ^'Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted £linor ! Oh I
worse than cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.
Use those words again, and I will leave the room this mo-
ment. "
£linor could not help laughing. ^^ £xcuse me, " said
she ;'^ and be assured that I meant no offence to ybu, by
speaking, in to quiet a way, of ray own feelings. Believe
them to be str(mger than I have declared ; believe them, in
diort, to be sudi as his merit, and the suspicion — the
hope of his affection for me may warrant, without impru-
dence or folly. But farther than this you must not believe.
I am by no means assured of his regard for me. There
are moments when the extent of it seems doubtful ; and till
his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder at my
wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality,
by believing or caUing it more than it is. In my heart I
feel litde — scarcely any doubt of his preference. But there
are other points to be considered besides his inclination. He
is very far from being independent. What his mother
really is .we cannot know; but, from Fanny's occasional
mention. of her conduct and opinions, we have never been
disposed to think her amiable ; and 1 am very much mis-
taken if £dward is not himself ^ aware that th^re would be
many difficulties in his way, if he were to wish to marry
a woman who had not either a great fortune or high
rank. "
Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagin-
atton of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth.
*^ And you really are not engaged to him! " said she.
*^ Yet it ceruinly soon will happen. But two advantages
c
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
IS BESSa AN] > SBNSIBIUTT.
will proceed from this delay, /shall not lose you so 8oai > >
and Edward will have greater opportunity of improving
that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be
so indispensably necessary to your future felicity. Oh ! if
he should be so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to
draw himself^ how delightful it would be ! "
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister. She
could not consider her partiality for Edward in so pros-
perous a state as Marianne had believed it. There waai, at
times^ a want of spirits about him which, if it did not de-
note indifference, spoke a something almost as unpromising.
A doubt of her regard, supposing him to fed it, need not
give him more than inquietude. It would not be likdy to
produce that dejection of mind which frequently attended
him. A more reasonable cause might be found in the
dependent situation which forbad the indulgence of his
affection. She knew that his mother neither behaved to
him BO as to make his home comfortable at present, nor. to
give him any assurance that be might form a home for
himself, without strictly attending to her views for his ag.
grandisement. With such a knowledge as this, it was im-
possible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject. Slie wa»
jar from depending on that result of his preference of her^
which her mother and sister still considered as certain.
Nay, the longer they were together the more doubtful
seemed the nature of his regard ; and sometimes, for a few
painful minutes, she believed it to be no more than friend-
ship.
But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy, and. at
the same time (which was still more common) to make
her uncivil. She took the first opportunity of affronting
her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to her so ex-
pressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs.
Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry wdl,
and of the danger attending any young woman who aU
tempted to draw him in, that Mrs. Dashwood could neither
pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavour to be calm. She
gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and in-
stantly left the room; resolving that, whatever might be
Digitized by Google
■ SBSBB Ain > 8IBiniIBILIT7. 19
the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal^ lier
beloved Elinor should not be exposed another week to such
insinuations.
In this state oif her spirits^ a letter was delirered to her
from the post^ which contained a proposal particularly well
timed. It was the offer of a smaU house^ on very easy
terms^ belonging to a relation of her own^ a gentleman of
consequence and property in Devonshire. The letter was .
from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spirit
of friendly accommodation. He understood that she was
in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offered
her was merely a cottage, he assured her that every thing
should be done to if which she might think necessary, if
the situation pleased her. He earnestly pressed her, after
giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come
with her daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own
residence, from whence she might judge, herself, whether
Barton Cottage, for the houses were in the same ^parish,
could, by any alteration, be made comfortable to her. He
seemed really anxious to accommodate them ; and the whole
of his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not
fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; more especially at a
moment when she was suffering under the cold and un-
feeling behaviour of her nearer connections. She needed
no time for deliberation or enquiry. Her resolution was
formed as she read. The situation of Barton, in a county
80 far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few
hours before, would have been a suiBcient objection to out-
weigh every possible advantage belonging to the place, was
now its first recommendation. To quit the neighbourhood
of Norland was no longer an evil; it was an object of
desire ; it was a blessing, in comparison of the misery of
continuing her daughter-in-law's guest : and to remove for
ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to
ii^bit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress^
She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledg-
ment of his kindness, and her acceptance of his piwposal;
and then hastened to show both letters to her daughters,
fhW she niight be! secure of their approbation before her
answer were sent
c 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
so .SEireE AND " SENfilBlLITT.
Elinor had alwa^d thought it would be raof^ prudent fo/t
them to settle at some distance from Nwland than immie-
diately amongst their present acquaintance. On that head^
therefore^ it was not for her to oppose her mother's in-
tention of removing into Devonshire. The house, too^^ ns
described by Sir John^ was on so simple a > soale^ and'thto
rent so uncommonly moderate^ as to leave her no right < ^
objection on either point; and, therefore, though it wa»
not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy^ though
it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her
wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from
'sending a letter of acquiescence.
CHAPTER V.
No sooner was her answer despatched, than Mrs. Dashwood
indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son«
in-law and his wife that she was provided with a house,
and should incommode them no longer than till every thing
were ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her with
surprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing ; but her
husband civilly hoped that she would not be settled ^
f^om Norland. She had great satisfaction in replying tiiat
she was going into Devonshire.— -Edward turned hast^y
towards her^ on hearing this, and, in a voice of surpriBe
and concern^ which required no explanation to her, repeated,
*'Devonshire ! Are you, indeed, going there ? So fup from.
'hence ! and to what part of it ? " She explained the- dtu-
ation. It was within four miles northward of Exeter^
" It is but a cottage, " she continued, " but I hope to see
many of my friends in it. A room or two can easily hsi
added ; and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so
far to see me, I am sure I will find none in accommodating
them. "
She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and
Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Barton ; and to £d«
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ward she gave one wttfa stifl greater affeedon. Though her
lale oomeraaJdioa witii her dai]ghter«iki*-] aw had made her
naelve < m remaiotDg at Noriand bo longer than was im*
avoidable, it had not produced the emaUest effect on her in
that point to which it prindpaUj tended. To separate £d*
ward and Elinor was as tkr from being her object aa ever ;
and she wished to show Mrs. John Dadiwood, by this
pointed imitation to her broCher, how totally she disregarded
her disapprobation of the match.
Mr. Jdan Dashwood told his mother again and again
how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house
at such a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of
any service to her in removing her forniture. He really
fdt Gonsciendously vexed, on the occasion ; for the very
exertion to which he had limited the performance, of his
proniise to his father was by this arrangement rendered
impracticable. — The furniture was aM sent round by water.
It chiefly consisted of household linen^ plate, china, and
books, with a handsome piano-forte of Marianne's. Mrs*
Jotm. Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh:
she could not help feeling it hard that, as Mrs. Dashwood's
ineome would be so trifling in comparison with thdr own,
ahe should have any handsome article of furniture.
Mrs. Dashwood took, the house'for a twelvemonth ; it
waa seady fundshed, and she might have immediate pos*
aessiim. No difficulty arose. on either side in the agree*
ment ; and she waited only for the disposal of her elects
at -Norland^ and to determine her future household, before
she set off for the west ; and this^ as she was exceedingly
rapid in the performance of every thing that interested her,
waa soon done. — The horses; which were left her by her
hurilMuid had been sold soon after his death, and'an oppor«
tunity now offering of disposing of her carriage, she agreed
to -sdl that likewise/ at the earnest advice of her eldest
daaght^. For the comfort of her children, had she oon-
•idted only her own wishes, she would have kept it; but
the diacvetion of Elinor prevailed. JTer wisdom, too, limited
the number of their servants to three ; two maids and a
man, with whom they were speedily provided from amongst
lIlOBa who had farmed their estabHsbmoit at Norhind.
3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
22 8EN8B AND 8BM81BIUTY.
The man and one of the maida were sent off immediately
into Devonshire, to prepare the house for their mistreaa's
arrival ; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown to
Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred going directly to the cottage
to heing a visiter at Barton Park ; and she relied so undouht*
ingly on Sir John's description of the house^ as to feel no
curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own.
Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserfed firom
diminution by the evident satisfaction of her daugbter-in»
law in the prospect of her removal; a satisfaction which
was but feebly attempted to be concealed under a cold in.
▼itation to her to, defer her departure. Now was the time
when her son-in-law's promise to .hia father might with
particular propriety be fulfilled. Since he had neglected
to do it on first coming to the estate^ their quitting hia
house might be looked on as the most suitable period for
its accomplishment But Mrs. Dashwood began, shortly, to
give over every hope of the land, and to be convinced, & oin
the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance ex^
tended no farther than their maintenance for six months
at Norland. He so frequently talked of the increasing ex-*
penses of housekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon
his purse, which a man of any consequence in the world
was beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed mther
to stand in need of more money himself than to have any
design of giving money away.
In a very few weeks* from die day whidi brought Sir John
Middleton's first letter to Norland, every thing was so far
settled in their future abode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood
and her daughters to begin their journey.
Many were the tears abed by them in their last adieus to
a place so much beloved. " Dear, dear Norland! " said
Marianne, as she wandered alone before the house, on the
last evening of their being thare ; *^ when shall I cease to
r^;ret you ! — when learn to feel a home else^ere 1 — Oh!
happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewing
you from this spot, from whence, perhaps, I may view you
no more ! — And you, ye well-known trees ! — but you will
continue the same. No leaf will decay because we are re^
moved, nor any branch become motionless although we eafi
Digitized by ViiOOglC
Aim gBNSlBIIiITT* ft9
ohmarre you na longer ! — No ; you will oontiiitte the Mine ;
unconscious of the plieasnre or the regret you occaaion^ and
insensible of any change in those who walk under your shade !
•— * But who will remain to enjoy you ? "
CHAPTER VI.
The first part of their journey was performed in too me^
lanchdy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and
unpleawnt. But as they drew towards the end of it, their
interest in the appearance of a country which they were to
inhabit OTcrcame tfadr dejection, and a view of Barton
Valley, as they entered it, gave them cheerfulness. It was
a pleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture.
After winding along it for more than a mile, they reached
their own house. A small green court was the whole of its
demesne in front; and a neat wicket gate admitted them
into it
As a house^ Barton Cottage, though small, was comfort-
able and com|)act; but as a cottage it was defective, for the
building was regular, the roof was tiled, the window shut,
lem were not painted green, nor were the walls covered with
lioneysuckles. A narrow passage led directly through the
bouse into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square ; and beyond
ttkeok were the offices and the stairs. Four bed > rooms and
two garrets formed the rest of the house. It had not been
built many years,'and was in good repair. In comparison
of Norland, it was poor and smaU indeed ! — but the tears
which recollection called forth as they entered the house
weie soon dried away. They were cheered by the joy of
the servants on their arrival, and each for the sake of the
others resolved to appear happy. It was very early in
September; the season was fine; and from first seeing the
|4ftce under the advantage of good weal^ier, they received
c 4p
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
an impictwavoniik kaliyaHft ifUcb v48 of malieiitl ferrmte.
xeoommending it to their luting approbation.
The.aitttatioii < ^ the lieiiae wa« ^ood. High biflft raw
immediately behind^ and at no ^eat diataiiiCe 6n eai^ aide;
some of which were open downs^ the others cultivated and
woody. The village of Barton was chiefly on one of these
hills^ and formed a pleasant view from the cottage windows.
The prospect in front was more extensive ; it commanded
the whole of the vaUey^ and reached into the country beyond.
The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the
valley in that direction ; under another name^ and in an-
other course^ it branched out again between two of the
aleepest of them.
With the size and fumitnre of the boose Mrs. Dashwood
xvas upon > the whc^ w^ satisfied ; fox though her fonnor
style of life rend^ed many additions to the latter indis.
fensable^ yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and
«he had at tMs time ready money enough to supply all that
was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments.'^ As for
ihe house itsdif^ to be sure^''said she^ ^'it is too small for
4mr family^ but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortafaie
£Dr the piesent, as it is too late in the year for improve^
ments. Perhaps in the springs if I have plenty of money,
«B I dme say I shall^ we may think about buildiag. These
parlours are both too small for such parties of our fnends as
X hope to see often collected here ; and I have some thoughts
of throwing the passage into one of them, with perhi^ a part
of the other, and so leave the reipainder of that other for aa
entranee; this, with a new drawing*room whieh may be easily
added, and a bed^chaiaiber and garret above, will make it a
very snug litde cottage. I could wish thestairs werehandsome.
But one nost notezpeet every thing ; though I suppose it
STimld be no difficult matter to widen them. I shall see
how much I am before-hand with die world m the spring,
and we wiU plan our improvements accordingly. "
In the mean time, till aU these alterations eould be made
from^savingsofanincemeoffivehundaredaycarbyawomaa
svho never saved in her Ufa, they wsre wise enough to be oon«
tented with the house as it was ; and eadi of diem was bqiy
in arrangipg th^ particular concerns, and endeavonrit^, by
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
.piaekig around them tbeup books and other poaaeanoiu^ to
form them^Tes a home. Marianne's piano-finte waa un*
packed and properly disposed of; and £linor'B drawioga
were affixed to the walk of their aitting room.
In such employments as theae they were interrupted mwa
after breakfast the next day by the entnmoe of their land-
lord^ who called to welcome them to Barton^ and to ofibr
diem every accommodation from his own houae and garden
in which theirs might at present be deficient. Sir J < ^
Middleton was a good looking man about forty. He had
f < »tnerly visited at Stanhill^ but it was too long ago for hia
-young cousins to remember him. His countenance waa
thoroughly good-humoured; and his manners were aa
friendly as the style of his letter. Their arrival sieemed
to afford him real satisfaction^ and their comfort to be an
olyect of real solicitude to him. He said much of hia
earnest desire of their living in the most sociable terms wiUi
his family^ and pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton
Park every day till they were better setded at home^ that,
though his entreaties were carried to a point of persever-
anee beyond civility, they could not give offence. Hia
kindness was not confined to words ; for within an hour
after he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and
fndt arrived from the park^ which was followed before the
end of the day by a present of game. He insisted, moreover,
on conveying all their letters to and from the post for them»
and would not be denied the satisfaction of sendiiig them his
newspaper every day.
Lady Middleton had sent a very dvil message by him,
denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood aa
soon as she could be assured iJiat her visit would be no
inconvenience ; and as this message was answered by an
invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introduced to
diem the next day.
They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on
wiiom so much of their comfort at Barton must depend ;
Mid the degance of her appearance was favourable to their
widiea. Lady Middleton was not more than six or seven
and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall and
striking, and her address graceful. Her manners had all the
Digitized'by
Google
2^ SfilftE AND SENBlBUilTT*
elegance which her husband's wanted. Bat they would
have been improved by some share of his frankness and
warmth ; and her visit was long enough to detract some*
tiling from their first admiration, by showing that, thou^
perfectly well bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing
to say for herself beyond the most common-place enquiry
or remark. ^
Conversation, however, was not wanted, for Sir John
was very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the wise
precaution of bringing wiih her their eldest child, a fine
little boy about six years old; by which means there was one
^subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of
extremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, ad-
mire his beauty, and ask him questions which his mother
answered for him, while he hung about her and held dowii
his head, to the great surprise of her ladyship, who won«
dered at his being so shy before company, as he could make
noise enough at home. On every formal visit a child
ought to be of the party, by way of provision for discourse.
In the present case it took up ten minutes to determine
whether the boy were most like his father or mother, aiid
in what particular he resembled either, for of course every
body differed, and every body was astonished at the opinion
of the others.
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods
of debating on the rest of the children, as Sir John would
not leave the house without securing their promise of dining
at the Park the next day.
CHAPTER VII.
Barton Pabk was about half a iblle from the cottage*
The ladies had passed near it in their way along the valley,
but it was screened from their view at. home by the pro*
jection of a hill. The house was large and handsome;
and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality .and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
gBNBK ▲!!] > 8BN8IBII1ITY. 27
(d^gance. The former was for Sir John's gnJdBetiidon, the
latter for that of his lady. They were scarcely ever with-
out some friends staying with them in the honse^ and they
Ifept more company of every kind than any other family in
the neighbourhood. It was necessary to the happiness of
both ; for however dissimUar in temper and outward be*
haviour^ they strongly resembled each other in that total
want of talent and taste which confined their employment^
unconnected with such as society produced^ widiin a very
nairow compass. Sir John was a sportsman^ Lady Middle-
ton a mother. He hunted and shot, and she humoured her
children ; and these were their only resourses. Lady Mid-
dleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children
all the year rounds while Sir John's independent employments
were in existence only half the time. Ck > ntinual engage-
ments at home and abroad^ however^ supplied all the defi.
dencies of nature and education ; supported the good spirits
of Sir John > and gave exercise to the good breeding of his
wife.
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her
table,, and of all her domestic arrangements ; and from this
kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in any of their
parties. But Sir John's satisfaction in society was much
more real; he delighted in collecting about him more
young people than his house would hold, and the noisier
they were the better was he pleased. He was a blessing
to ail the juvenile part of the neighbourhood; for in summer
he was for ever forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken
out of doors, and in winter his private balls were numerous
enough for any young lady who was not suifering under
the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.
The arrival of a new family in the country was always
a matter of joy to him ; and in every point of view he was
charmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for his
cottage at Barton. The Miss Dashwoods were young, pretty^
and unaffected. It was enough to secure his good opinion ;
for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl cocdd want
to make her mind as captivating as her person. The
friendliness of his disposition made him happy in acoom^
modatittg those, whose situation might be considered^ in
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
26 SBNSB AND SBSfOXajLTV.
< iompsxuum widi the past^ ag uirfortunate. In riiawii^
kindness to his couainsy therefore, he had the real satisiae-
tion of a good heart ; and in settling a f amUy of females
only in Ids cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a 8|»ortlC
man; for a sportsman, though he esteems o^ly those of
his sex who are sportsmen likewise, is not often desirous
of encouraging their taste hy admitting them to a residence
within his own manor.
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door
of the house hy Sir John, who welcomed > them to Barton
Park with unaffected sincerity ; and as he att^ided .th«m
to the drawing-room repeated to the young ladies tlie con*-
oem which the same subject had drawn from him the day
hefore, at being unable to get any smart young men to
meet them. They would see, he said, only one gendemaii
there besides himself; a particular friend who was staying
«t the Parl^ but who was neither very young nor very gayv
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party >
and could assure them it should never happen so again.
He had been to several families that morning, in hopes of
procuring some addition to their number, but it was moon»
light, and every body was full of engagements. Luckily
Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at Barton within the
last hour; and as she was a very cheerful, agreeable womtti,
he hoped the young iadies would not find it so very dull «a
Ihey might imagine. The young ladies, as well as ^eir
mother, were perfectly satisfied with having two entiie
strangers of the party, and wished for no more.
Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a goodi.
humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked a great
deal, seemed very happy, and rather vulgar. She was ^dl
of jokes and laughter, and before dinner was over had said
many witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands ;
hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex^
foid pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned
her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore these attadts^
with aneamestnesB which gave£linorfarmorepain thaneoidd
arise from such common-place raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.
Colonel Brandon, the ^end of Sir J4)hn, seemed no
d by Google
gBNSB AJO SCNSIBIIiITy. 29
more adapted by rteemblsnce of raanner to be his friend^
than Lady Middleton was to be his wife^ or Mrs. Jennings
to be Lady M iddleton's mother. He was silent and grave.
His appearance^ however^ was not unpleasing^ in spite of
bis being, in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret^ an abw
UfAxtte old bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of fire-
and-thirty ; but though his face was not handsome, his
countenance was sensible, and his address was particularly
gentlemanlike.
There was nothing in any of the party which coidd re-
commend them as companions to the Dashwoods ; but the
cold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly
repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel
Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and
his mother-in-law, was interesting. Lady Middleton seemed
to be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of her four
noisy children after dinner, who pulled her about, tore her
dothes, and put an end to every kind of discourse except
what related to themselves.
• In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be mud.
eal, she was invited to play. The instrument was unlocked^
every body prepared to be charmed, and Marianne, who
sang very wefll, at their request went through the chief of
the songs which Lady Middleton had brought into the
family on her marriage, and which, perhaps, had lain ever
since in the same position on the piano-forte ; for her lady-
ship had celebrated that event by giving up music, although^
by her mother's account, she had played extremely well^ and
by her own was very fond of it.
. Marianne's performance was highly applauded. Sir
John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song,
and as loud in his conversation with the others while every
song lasted. Lady Middleton frequently called him to or-
der^ wondered how any one's attention could be diverted
Irom music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a
pttrtieular song which Marianne had just finished. Colonel
Bmndon alone, of all the party, heard her v^thout being in
raptures. • He paid her only the compliment of attention ;
and she felt a respect for him on the occasion, which the
others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless want of
Digitized by Google
Sd flBNSE AND SEK8IBILITT.
taste.'His pleasure in music^ though it amounted not to
that ecstatic delight which alone could sympathise with her
own^ was estimahle when contrasted against the horrihle
insensibility of the others ; and she was reasonable enough
to allow that a man of five-and.thirty might well have ouu
lived all acuteness of feelings and every exquisite power of
enjoyment. She was perfectly disposed . to make every
allowance for the coloheFs advanced state of life which hu-
manity required.
CHAPTER VIII.
Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure. She
had only two daughters^ both of whom she had lived to see
respectably married, and she had now, therefore, nothing
to do but to marry all the rest of the world. In the pro-
motion of this object she was zealously active, as far as her
ability reached ; and missed no opportunity of projecting
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.
She was remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments,
and had enjoyed the advantage of raising the blushes and
the vanity of many a young lady hy insinuations of her
power over such a young man ; and this kind of discern-
ment enabled her, soon after her arrival at Barton, deci-
sively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much
in love with Marianne Dash wood. She rather suspected it
to be so, on the very first evening of their being together,
from his listening so attentively while she sang to them ;
and when the visit was returned by the Middletons dining
at the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to
her again. It must be so. She was perfectly convinced of
it. It would be an excellent match, for he was rich, and
the was handsome. Mrs. Jennings had been anxious to see
Colonel Brandon well married, ever since her connection
with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge ; and she
was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty
gitl.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
BBIfSE AND SfiimiBIUTT.'31
The immediate advantage to herself was by no means
inconsiderable^ for it supplied her wi & endless jokes |igain«A
them both. At the Park she laughed at the colonelj and
in the cottage at Marianne. To the former her raillery
was prohaUy^ as far as it regarded only himself, perfectly
indifferent ; but to the latter it was at first incomprehen-
sible; and when its object was understood^ she hardly
knew whether most to laugh at its absurdity^ or censure
its impertinence; for she considered it as an unfeeling
reflection on the colonel's advanced years^ and on his
forlorn condition as an old bachelor.
Mrs. Dashwood^ who could not think a man five years
younger than herself so exceedingly ancient as he appeared
to the youthful fancy of her daughter, ventured to dear
Mrs Jennings from the probability of wishing to throw
ridicule on his age.
^'But at leastj mamma, you cannot deny the absurdity of
the accusation, though you may not think it intentionally
ilL-natured. Colonel Brandon is certainly younger than
Mrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be mj( father ; and
if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must have
long outUved every sensation of the kind. It is too ridicu*
loos ! When is a man to be safe from such wit, if age
and infirmity wiU not protect him ? "
. ^^ Infirmity ! " said Elinor,'^ do you call Colonel Bran-
don infirm? I can easily 6up))ose that his age may
appear much greater to you than to my mother ; but you.
can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use of his
«imbsl "
" Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism ?
and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining
life? "
" My dearest child, " said her mother, laughing, ^^ at this
rate you must be in continual terror of my decay ; and it ,
must seem to you a miracle that my life has been extend,
ed to the advanced age of forty. "
'^ Mamma, you are not doing me justice. I know very
well that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to make his,
friends yet apprehensive of losing him in the course of
d by Google
52 SEKSE AND 8BN8IBlI«mr.
nature. He may lire twenty years longer. Bat thirty-
fire has nothing to do with matrimony. "
* ** Perhaps/'said Elinor^ -'thirty-five and seventeen had
better not have any thing to do with matrimony together.
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman
who is single at seven^nd-twenty^ I should not think*
Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to hi«
marrying her.'*
" A woman of seven-and-twenty/* said Marianne^ after
pansing a moment^ " can never hope to feel or inspire
affection again^ and if her home be uncomfortable^ or her
fbrtune small^ I can suppose that she might bring herself
to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the pr^
vision and security of a wife. In his marrying sudi ft
i^oman, therefore, there would be nothing unsuitable. I,t
would be a compact of convenience, and the world would
be satisfied. In my eyes it would be no marriage at all^
but that would be nothing. To me it would seem only a
commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited
at the expense of the other. "
'^ It would be impossible, I know, " replied Elinor,'^ to
convince you that a woman of seven-and^twenty could feel
for a man of thirty-five any thing near enough to love, to
make him a desirable companion to her. But I must object-
to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to the con*
stant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he
dianced to complain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a
riight rheumatic feel in one of his shoulders. "
'^ But he talked of fiaimel waistcoats, " said Marianne*; -
''and with me a fiannel waistcoat is invariably connected
with aches, cramps, rheumatisms, and every species of ail«
ment that can afflict the old and the feeble. "
'^ Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not
have despised him half so much. Confess^ Marianne, is
not there something interesting to you in the flushed chedc,
hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever } "
Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, " Mamma,'*
said Marianne, " I have an alarm on the subject of illness
which I cannot conceal from you. I am sure Edward
Ferrars is not welL We have now been here almost a
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BKBE AMD BVHSlBlUTr* S$
Ibrtnight^ and yet he does not come. Nothing but real in^
disposition could occasion this extraordinary dday. What
dbe can detain him at Norland ? "
^^ Had you any idea 4 > f his coming so soon ? " said Mrs*
Xktdiwood. *'I had none. On the contrary^ if I have felt
any anxiety at all on the subject^ it has been in recollecting
that he sometimes showed a want of pleasure and readiness
in accepting my invitation^ when I talked of his coming ta
Barton. Does Elinor expect him already? "
^'I have never mentioned it to her^ but of oonrse she
must. "
^^ I rather think you are mistaken^ for when I was talk-
ing to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare
bedchamber^ she observed that there was no immediate hurry
£(Hr it^ as it was not likely that the room would be wanted
for some time. "
'^ How strange this is ! what can be the meaning of it !
But the whole of their- behaviour to each other has beea
unaccountable ! How cold^ how composed were their last
adieus ! How languid their conversation the last evening
of their being together ! In Edward's farewell there was n0
distinction between Elinor and me : it was the good wishes
of an affectionate brother to both. Twice did I leave thera
purposely together in the course of the last morning, and
each time did he most unaccountably follow me out of the
room. And Elinor, in quitting Norland and Edward^ cried
not as I did. Even now her self-command is invariable.
When is she dejected or melancholy ? When does she try
to avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it? **
CHAPTER IX.
The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable
comfort to themselves. The house and the garden, with all
the objects surrounding them, were now become familial;,
and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland halif
D
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
S4 SkNSB AN] > SENSIBILITT.
ks chsrms were engaged in again with far greater enjoy-
ment than Norland had been able to afford since the loss of
their father. Sir John Middleton^ who called on them
every day for the first fortnight, and who was not in the
habit of seeing much occupation at home, could not con«
ceal his amazement on finding them always employed.
Their visiters, except those from Barton Park, were not
many ; for, in spite of'Sir John's urgent entreaties that
they would mix more in the neighbourhood, and repeated
assurances of his carnage being always at their service, the
independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of society for her children ; and she was resolute in
declining to visit any family beyond the distance of a
walk. There were but few who could be so classed; and
it was not all of them that were attainable. About a mile
and a half from the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, aa
formerly described, the girls had, in one of their earliest
Walks, discovered an ancient respectable-looking mansion,
which, by reminding them a little of Norland, interested
their imagination and made them wish to be betta:^
acquainted with it. But they learnt, on enquiry, that ita
possessor, an elderly lady of very good character, waa
unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world, and never
stirred from home.
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful
walks. The high downs, which invited them from almost
every window of the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoy.,
ment of air on their summits, were a happy alternative
when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior
beauties ; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and
Margaret one memorable morning direct their steps,
attracted by the partial sunshine of a showery sky, and
unable longer to bear the confinement which the settled
rain of the two preceding days had occasioned. The
weather was not tempting enough to draw the two others
from their pencil and their book, in spite of Marianne's
declaration that the day would be lastingly fair, and that
every threatening doud would be drawn off from their
hills ; and the two girls set off together.
Digitized by Google
ffBNSS AMD SBKSIBILITV^. S5'
They gaily aseended the downs^ rejoicing in their ovm
-penetration at every ^mpse of blue sky ; and when they
-caught in their faces the animating gales of a high south-
westerly Vind, they pitied the fears which had prevented
thdr mother and Elinor from sharing such delightful
saisations.
'* Is there a felicity in the world, " said Marianne,.
*'superior to this ? — Margaret, we will walk liere at leadt
•two -hours.**
Margaret i^eed, and they pursued their way against thk
wind, resisting it with laughing delight for about twenty
minutes longer, when suddenly the clouds united over their
heads, and a driving rain set full in their face. Chagrined
and surprised, they were obliged, though unwillingly, to
turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their own house.
One consolation, however, remained for them, to which thfe
exigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety, —
it was that of running with all possible speed down the steep
aide of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate.
They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage, but
a false step brought her suddenly to the ground; and Mar.
garet, unable to stop herself to assist her, was involuntarily
hurried along, and reached the bottom in safety.
A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing
round him^ was passing up the hill, and within a few yards
of Marianne > when her aecident happened. He put down
his gun and ran to her assistance. Bhe had raised herself
from the ground, but her foot had been twisted in the fall;
and she was scarcely able to stand. The gentleman offered
his services; and perceiving that her modesty declined wh)it
her situation rendered necessary, took her up in his arms;
without farther delay, and carried her down the hiU.
Then passing through the garden, the gate of which had
been left open by Margaret, he bore her directly into the
house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not
his hold'till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour.
• Elinor and bar mother rose up in amazement at theit
entrapce ; and while the eyes of both were fixed on him
with an evident wonder and a secret admiration which
equally sprung & om his appearance, he apologised for hi#
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
.36 BpNSB JiND 8SN8IBXUTT4
intrusion^ by relating its cause^ in a manner 90 frank and
so graceful^ that his person, which was uncommonly hand*
.some, received additional charms from his voice and ezprea*
•ion. Had he been even old^ ugly, and vulgar, the gratis
tude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood would have ben
secured by any act of attention to her child; but the
influence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest
to the action which came home to her fedings.
She thanked him again and again ; and, with a sweetness
.of address which always attended her, invited him to be
seated. But this he declined, as he was dirty and wet.
.Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to whom she wn
obliged. His name, he replied, was WiUoiighby, and his
present home was at Allenham, from whence he hoped she
would allow him the honour of calling to-morrow to en*
quire after Miss Dashwood. The honour was readfly
granted, and he then departed, to make himself still more
.interesting, in the midst of a heavy rain.
His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness
were instantly the theme of general admiration; and the
laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne recdved
particular spirit from his exterior attractions. Marianne
herself had seen less of his person than the rest, for the
confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting her
up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after
their entering the house. But she had seen enough of faim
to join in all the admiration of the others, and with an
energy which always adorned her praise. His person and
air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn for the
hero of a favoarite stery ; and in his carrying her into the
house with so little previous formality there was a ra^dity
of thought which particularly recommended the action to
her. Every circumstance belonging to him was interesting.
His name was good, his residence was in their favourite
. village, and she soon found out that of all manly dresses a
shooting-jacket was the most becoming. Her imaginadon
.was busy, her reflections were pleasant > and the pam of a
s| > rained ankle was disregarded, i , • >
Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of
is^ weather that morning allowed him to get out of dom ;
'■ Digitized by LjOOQIC
«BNn AND SnreiBItilTT. 91
ind Marianne's accident being related to him^ he was eageriy
aaked whether he knew any gentleman of the name of
Willoiighby at Allenham.
** Willoughby ! " cried Sir John ; *'what, is he in tb*
country ? That is good news however ; I will ride Over
to-mottow^ and ask him to dinner on Thursday. "
'^ You know him, then/'said Mrs. Dashwood.
'^ Know him ! to be sure I do. Why, he is down here
«Tery year. "
" And what sort of a young man is he ? " *
** As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you.
A very decent shot, and there is not a bolder rider in Eng-
land. "
•'^ And is that all yon can say for him ? " cried Marianne,
indignantly.''But what are his manners on more intimate
acquaintance ? What his pursuits, his talents, and genius ? "
Sir John was rather puzzled.
*^ Upon my soul, " said he, " I do not know much about
kfan as to all that. But he is a pleasant, good-humoured
fellow, and has got the nicest little black bitch of a pointer
I ever saw. Was she out with him to-day ? "
Bat Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour
«f Mr. Willoughby*8 pointer, than he could describe to her
the shades of his mind.
^ But who is he ? " said Elinor.'^ Where does he coma
ftmn ? Has he a house at Allenham ? "
On this point Sir John could give more certain intelli-
gence ; and he told them l^at Mr. Willoughby had no pro-
perty of his own in the country ; that he resided there only
while he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court, to
whom he was related, and whose possessions he was to in.
herit ; adding, ^* Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching, I
ean tell you. Miss Dashwood ; he has a pretty little estate
of his own, in Somersetshire besides ; and if I were yon,
I would not give him up to my younger sister, in spite of
all this tumbling down hills. Miss Marianne must not ex-
pect to have all the men to herself. Brandon will bt
jealous, if she does not take care. "
*'I do not believe, " said Mrs. Dashwood, with a good..
Imnoured smile, *^ that Mr. Willoughby will be incom-
p 8
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
^. ip^BB AND BE3!imBIS»rtT4»
i$kpded by the attempts of ei^^er of mp daughters^ towatdb
what you call catching him. It is not an employment to
which they have been brought up. Men are very safe
with us^ let them be ever so rich. I am glad to find^ how-
ever^ from what you say^ that he is a respectable youn^
man^ and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible.''
" He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe^ as ever lived/'
Ti^peated Sir John. ** I remember last Christmas^ i^t a
little hop at the Park, he danced from eight o'clock tSU
four without once sitting down. "
.'^ Did he, indeed? " cried Marianne^ with sparkling
eyes,'^ and with elegance^ with spirit ? "
^^ Yes ; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert. "'
'^ That is what I like ; that is what a young man Ought
tp be. Whatever be his pursuits, his eagerness in them
i^ould know no moderation^ and leave him no sense of
fatigue. "
, " Ay, ay, I see how it will be, " said Sir John, ^'I
see how it will be. You will be setting your cap at him
now, and never think of poor Brandon. "
*^ That is an expression. Sir John, " said Marianne, warmly^
^^ which I particularly dislike. I abhor every common-
^ace phrase by which wit is intended ; and'setting one's >
cap at a man,'or'making a conquest,'are the most odious
qf alL Their tendency is gross and illiberal ; and if their
construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long
ago destroyed all its ingenuity. "
. Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but he^
laughed as heartily as if he did, and then replied, —
'^ Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one
way or other. Poor Brandon ! he is quite smitten al.«
ready ; and he is very well worth setting your cap at, I can
tell you, in spite of aU. this tumbling about and spraining o£
ankles. "
d by Google
jSBNW ANO SENSIBILITl^
CHAPTER X.
Marianne's preserver^ as Margaret, with more el^;anee
than precision, styled Willoughby, called at the cottage
early the next morning, to make his personal enquitiec
He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with more than poN >
liteness ; with a kindness which Sir John's account of him
mad her own gratitude prompted; and every thing that
passed during the visit tended to assure him of the sense,
el^ance, mutual affection, and domestic comf(Hrt of the
family, to whom accident had now introduced him. Of
their personal charms he had not required a second inter^
view to be convinced.
Miss Dashwood had a delicate com^dexion, regular
features, and a remarkably pretty figure. Marianne was
tftall handsomer. Her form, though not so correct as her
sister's, in having the advantage of height, was more strik-
ing ; and her face was so lovely, that when > in the common
eant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was less
> i < ^ntly outri^d than usually happens. Her skin was
very brown, but, from its transparency, her complexion was
KDCommonly brilliant; her features were all good; her
smile was sweet and attractive; and in her eyes, which were
very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagerness, whieh
-could hardly be seen without ddight. From Willoughby
their expression was at first held back, by the embarrass^
ment which the remembrance of his assistance created.
But when this passed away, when her spirits became coL
lected, when she saw that to the perfect good breeding of
^e gentleman, he united frankness and vivacity, and above
all, when she heard him declare, that of music and dancing
he was passionately fond, she gave him such a look of apu
probation, as secured the largest share of his discourse to
herself for the rest of his stay.
It was only necessary to mention any favourite amuse*
ment to engage her to talk. She could not be silent when
attch. points were introduced, and she had neither shyness
i > 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
40 ^^-^ ^NSB A9I > SeySIBIUTY«
nor reserve in their discussion. They speedily discoTered
that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual^
and that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in
all that related to either. Encouraged hy this to a further
examination of his opinions^ she proceeded to question him
-on the subject of books : her favourite authors were brought
'forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a deli^t^ that
any young man of five-and-twenty must have been in*
sensible indeed^ not to become an immediate convert to
the excellence of such works^ however disregarded befoie.
• Their taste was strikingly alike. The same books^ the same
passives were idolised by each ; or if any difference ap-
peared^ any objection arose, it lasted no longer than till the
force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could
be displayed. He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught
all her. enthusiasm ; and long before his visit concluded^
they conversed with the familiarity of a long-established
acquaintance.
^'Well, Marianne, " said Elinor, as soon as he had left
them,'^ for ime morning I think you have done pretty
welL You have already ascertained Mr. Willoughby's opi*
nion in almost every matter of importance. You know
what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are certain of
his estimating their beauties as he ought, and you have
received every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than
is proper. But how is your acquaintance to be long sup.
ported, imder such extraordinary despatch of every subject
for discourse ? You will soon have exhausted each favourite
topic* Another meeting will suffice to explain his senti-
ments on picturesque beauty, and second* marriages, and
tiien you can have nothing farther to ask. "
*^ Elinor, " cried Marianne,'^ is this fair? is this just ^
•re my ideas so scanty ? But I see what you mean. I
have been too much at my ease, too happy, too frank. I
have erred against every common-place notion of decorum ;
I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been
reserved, spiritless, duU, and deceitful: — had I talked only
of the weather and the roads, and had I spoken only onoe in
ten minutes, this reproach would have been spared. " ^
v^ ^^ My love^ " said her mother, ^* you must not be of»
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBIUTV*. 41
fended with £]iiior — she was only in Jest. I should soM
her myself^ if she were capable of wishing to check the
ddight of your conversation with our new friend. " Ma^
sianne was softened in a moment.
Willoughby, on his side^ gave every proof of his pleasoro
in their acquaintance, which an evident wish of improving
it Gonld ofier. He came to them every day. To enquire
after Marianne was at first liis excuse ; hut the encourage.
xaeat of his reception, to which every day gave greater kind*
ness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceased
to be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery. She was
•confined for some days to the house ; but never had any
confinement been less irksome. Willoughby was a young
man of good abilities, quick imagination, lively spirits, and
open, afiectionate manners. He was exactly formed to en*
gage Marianne's heart; for with all this, he joined not only
a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind whi < ^
was now roused and increased by the example of her own^
and which recommended him to her afiection beyond every
thing else.
- His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoy-
ment. They read, l^ey talked, they sang tc^ther ; his
musical talents were considerable ; and he read with all the
aensibility and spirit which Edward had unfortunately
wanted.
• In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in
^Marianne's ; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him bat
a propensity, in which he strongly resembled and peculiarly
ddighted her sister, of saying too much what he thought
0 & every occasion, without attention to persons or circum-
stances. In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
people, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of
mdivided attention where his heart was engaged, and in
slighting too easily the forms of worldly propriety, he dis-
played a want of caution which Elinor could not approve^
in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in its
support.
'Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation
which had seized her at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing
a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection, had been
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
48 9ENSE AND SENSIBI]:jTT >
tash and unjustifiable. Willoughby was all ^at her fancy
had deHiieated in that unhappy hour^ and in every brighter
period^ as capable of attaching her ; and his behayiour de»
dared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest as hisabi-*
litres were strong.
Her mother^ too^ in whose mind not one speculative
thought of tlieir marriage had been raised^ by his prospect
of riches^ was led before the end of a week to hope and ex-»
pect it; and secretly to congratulate herself on having
gained two such sons-in-law as £dward and WUloughby.
Colonel Brandon s partiality for Marianne^ which had so
early been discovered by his friends^ now first became per^.
oeptible to £linor^ when it ceased to be noticed by them*
Their attention and wit were drawn off to his more fortu«
nate rival ; and the raillery which the other had incurred
before any partiality arose was removed when his feelings
began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to
sensibility. £linor was obliged^ though unwillingly, to be?*
lieve that the sentiments which Mrs. Jennings had assigned
him for her own satisfaction were now actually excited by
her sister ; and that however a general- resemblance of dis-
position between the parties might forward the affection of
Mr. Willoughby an equally striking opposition, of character
was no hinderance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. Sh«
saw it with concern ; for what could a silent man of five^
aod^thirty hope^ when opposed by a very lively one of & ye^
aad-twenty ? and as she could not even wish him succeffl-
£vl, she heartily wished him indifferent. She liked him -^
in spite of his gravity and r^serve^ she beheld in him an
abject of interest. His manners^ though serious^ were
oiild ; and his reserve appeared rather the result of some
oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess of
tcsnper. Sir John had dropped hints of past injuries and
disappointments^ which justified ber belief of his being an
unfortunate man > and she regarded him with respect and
compassion.
Perhtfps she pitied and esteemed him the'more because
he was slighted l^ Willoughby and Marianne, who^ preju-
diced against him for being neither lively nor young^
9eemed resolved to undervalue his merits.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
PKNSE AV1 > SBNSIBIUTT» AS
^^ Braodon is. jnst the kiftd of man/'said Willoughby
one dsLj, when they were talking of him together^'^ whom
every hody speaks well of^ and nobody cares aboat ; whom
all are delighted to see, and nobody remembers to talk to. "
'^ That is exactly what I think of him/'cried Marianne.
" Do not boast of it, however/'said Elinor, " for it is
injastice in both of you. He is highly esteemed by all the
£unily at the Park, and I never see him myself without
taking pains to converse with him. "
'^ That he is patronised by you " replied Willoughby^
'^ is certainly in his favour ; but as for the esteem of the
Others, it is a reproach in itdelf. Who would submit to
the indignity of being approved by such women as Lady
Aliddleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command the in-
difference of any body else ? " *
'^ But perhaps the abuse of such people as yoursdf
and Marianne will make amends for the regard of Lady
Middleton and her mother. If their praise is censure,
your censure may be praise, for they are not more undis*
oeming, than you are prejudiced and ui\ju8t. "
*'In defence of your protegS you can even be saucy. "
*'My protege, as you call him, is a sensible man ; and
aenae wiU always have attractions for me. Yes, Marianne,
even in a man between thirty and forty. He has seen a
great ideal of the world; has been abroad, has read, and
hsiB a thinking mind. I have found him capable of giving
me much information on various subjects; and he has
always answered my enquiries with the readineas of good
deeding and good nature. "
^'That is to say, " cried Marianne contemptuously, ^'he
1m» told you, that in the East Indies the climate is hot^
and the musquittos are troublesome. "
** He vxmld have told me so, I doubt not, had I made
any such enquiries, but they happened to be points on
which I had been previously informed. "
'^ Perhaps, " said Willoughby,''his observations may
have extended to the existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and
palanquins. "
'^ I may venture to say that At« observations have stretched
d by Google
44 6EK8B AND SENSIBILIlT.
much farther than ywir candour. But why should you
dislike him? "
'^ I do not dislike him. I consider him^ on the con-
trary, as a very respectable man, who has every body's
good word, and nobody's notice; who has more money
dian he can spend, more time than he knows how to em.
ploy, and two new coats every year. "
^^ Add to which, " cried Marianne, ^^ that he has neilher
genius, taste, nor spirit That his understanding has no
brilliancy, lids feelings no ardour, and his voice no ex«
pression. "
^^ You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass,*'
replied £linor, ^'and so much on the strength of your own
inu^nation, that the commendation / am able to give of
him is comparatively col^ and insipid. I can only pro-
nounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred, weU-informed^
of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable
heart. "
''Miss Dashwood, " cried Willoughby, " you are now
using me unkindly. You are endeavouring to disarm me
by reason, and to convince me against my will. But it
will not do. You shall find me as stubborn as you can be
artM. I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking
Colonel Brandon : he has threatened me with rain when I
wanted it to be fine ; he has found fault with the hanging
of my curricle, and I cannot persuade him to buy my
brown mare. If it will be any satisfaction to you, how.
ever, to be told, that I believe Ms character to be in other
respects irreproachable, I am ready to confess it And in
return for an acknowledgment, which must give me some
pain, you cannot deny me the privilege of disliking him ai»
much as ever. "
d by Google
8EK8E AND 8BN8TBIUT7. 4^
CHAPTER XI.
Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined;
when they first came into Devonshire^ that so many en-
g^ements would arise to occupy their time as shortly
presented themselves, or that they should have such fre-^
quent invitations and such constant visiters as to leave
Aem little leisure for serious employment. Yet such was
Ae case. When Marianne was recovered, the schemes of
amusement at home and abroad, which Sir John had been
previously forming, were put in execution. The private
balls at the Park then began ; and parties on the water
were made and accomplished as often as a showery Octo*
ber would allow. In every meeting of the kind Wil*
loughby was included ; and the ease and familiarity which
naturally attended these parties were exactly calculated t6
give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with the
Dashwoods^ to afford him opportunity of witnessing th^
excellencies of Marianne, of marking his animated admir-
ation of her, and of receiving, in her behaviour to himself,
the most pointed assurance of her affection.
£linor could not be surprised at their attachment. 8h6
only wished that it were less openly shown ; and once or
twice did venture to suggest the propriety of some self-com-
mand to Marianne. But Marianne ibhorred all concealment
where no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim
at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves
iliaudable, appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort,
bat a disgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and
mistaken notions. Willoughby thought the same; and
their behaviour, at all times, was an illustration of th^
opinions.
When he was present she had no eyes for any one else.
Every thing he did was right. Every thing he said waa
dever. If their evenings at the Park were concluded
with cards, he cheated himself and all the rest of the party
tQ get her a good hand. If dancing formed the amnsea^
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
46 SBNgB AND BBI(8IB1U1*7.
ment of the nighty they were partners for half the time ;
and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances^ were
careful to stand together^ and scarcely spoke a word to any
body else. Such conduct made them^ of course^ most ex-
ceedingly laughed at ; but ridicule could not shame^ and
seemed hardly to provoke them.
Mrs. Dashwood entered into aU their feelings with a
warmth which left her no inclination for checking this ex-
cessive display of them. To h^ it was but the natural
consequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent
mind.
This was the season of happiness to Marianne^ Her
heart was devoted to Willoughby; and the fond attachment
to Norland^ which she brought with her from Sussex^ was
more likely to be softened than she had thought it possible
befoie^ by the charms which his society bestowed on her
present home.
Elinor's happiness was not so great. Her heart was not
80 much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements
90 pure. They afforded her no companion that could
make amends for what she had left behind, nor that could
teach her to think of Norland with less regret than ever.
Neither Lady Middleton i > or Mrs. Jennings could supjdy
to her the conversation she missed; although the latter
was an everlasting talker, and from the first had regarded
her with a kindness which ensured her a large share of her
discourse. She had already repeated her own history to
Elinor three or four times; and had Elinor's memory
been equal to her means of improvement, she might have
known, very early in her acquaintance, all the particulars of
Mr. Jennings's last illness, and what he said to his wife a
few minutes before he died. Lady MiddUton was more
ilgreeable. than her mother only in being more silent
Elinor needed Uttle observation to perceive that her reserve
was a mere calmness of manner, with which sense had
nothing to do. Towards her husband and mother diie
was the same as to them ; and intimacy was, therefore,
neither to be looked for nor desired. She had nothing to
say one day that she had not said the day before. Her
Insipidity was invariable^ for even her spirits were alwi^t
Digitized by LjO.OQ IC
a^NSE AND BESBtBlJjlTr2 47
die same ; and though she did not oppose the pairties ar-
vanged by her husband^ provided every thing were con-'
ducted in style^ and her two eldest children attended
her, she never -appeared to receive more enjoyment fnan
them than she might have experienced in sitting at home ;
and so little did her presence add to the pleasure of the
others^ by any share in their conversation, that they weiv
.sometimes only reminded of her being amongst them by
her solicitude about her troublesome boys.
• In Colonel Brandon alone^ of all her new acquaintance,
did Elinor find a person who could, in any degree, claim
the respect of abilities, excite the interest of friendship,
or give pleasure as a companion. Willoughby was out of
the question. H^r admiration and regard, even her sisterly
regard, was all his own ; but he was a lover ; his attea > j
tions were wholly Marianne's, and a far less agreeable
man might have been more generally pleasing. Colonel
Brandon, unfortunately for himself, had no such encourage^
ment to think only of Marianne, and in conversing with
£linor he found the greatest consolation for the total indif-
ference of her sister.
Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had
reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love had
already been known to him. This suspicion was given by
some words which accidentally dropped from him one even^
ing at the Park, when they were sitting down together by
mutual consent, while the others were dancing. His eyes
were fixed on Marianne, and, after a silence of some mi#^
nutes, he said, with a faint smile,''Your sister, I under-
stand, does not apfMrove of second attachments. "
''No, " replied £linor, " her opinions are all romantic. "
^'Or rather; as I believe, she considers them impossible
to exist. "
'^ I believe she does. But how she contrives it without
reflecting on the character of her own father, who had
himself two wives, I know not. A few years, however,
will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis of common
flense and observation ; and then they may be more easy to
define and to justify than they now are, by any body bat
heredf. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
48 SBNMB AXD SBNBIBILITY*
" This will, probably, be the case/'he replied ; " and
yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a
young mind, that one is sorry to see them giye way to the
reception of more general opinions. "
'^ I cannot agree with you there, " said Elinor. ^'There
are inconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne's,
which all the charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the
world cannot atone for. Her systems have all the unfortu«
nate tendency of setting propriety at nought ; and a better
acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as
her greatest possible advantage. "
After , a short pause he resumed the conversation by
saying,—
'^ Does your sister make no distinction in her objections
against a second attachment ? or is it equally criminal in
every body? Are those who have been disappointed in
their first choice, whether from the inconstancy of its
object, or the perverseness of circumstances, to be equally
indifferent during the rest of their lives ? "
*'Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutite
of her principles. I only know that I never ytjt heard her
admit any instance of a second attachment's being par.
donable. "
''This, " said he,'^ cannot hold ; but a change, a total
change of sentiments — ^No, no, do not desire it; for
when the romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged
to give way, how frequently are they succeeded by such
opinions as are but too common and too dangerous ! ,1
speak from experience. I once knew a lady who in temper
and mind greatly resembled your sister, who thought and
judged like her, but who from an enforced change — - from
a series of unfortunate circumstances " Here he stopt
suddenly ; appeared to think that he had said too much,
and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures which
might not otherwise have entered Elinor's head. The
lady would probably have passed without suspicion had he
not convinced Miss Dashwood that what concerned her
ought not to escape his Mps: As it was, it required but a
slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tende
recollection of past regard. Elinor attempted no more
d by Google
8BNSE AND SSNSlBILiTY. 4^
Bat Marianne^ in her place^ would not have done so little.
The whole story would have heen speedily formed under
heir active imagination ; and every thing established in the
most melancholy order of disastrous love.
CHAPTER XII.
As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next
morning the latter communicated a piece of news to her
sister^ which^ in spite of all that she knew before of
Marianne's imprudence and want of thought^ surprised her
by its extravagant testimony of both. Marianne told her,
with the greatest delight, that Willoughby had given her a
horse, one that he had bred himself on his estate in Somer-
setshire, and which was exactly calculated to carry a woman.
Without considering that it was not in her mother's plan
to keep any horse, that if she were to alter her resolution
in favour of this gift, she must buy another for the servant,
and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable to
receive them, she had accepted the present without hesi-
tation, and told her sister of it in raptures.
'* He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire
immediately for it, " she added,'^ and when it arrives we
will ride every day. You shall share its use with me.
Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a
gallop on some of these downs. "
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of
felicity to comprehend all the unhappy truths which at-
tended the affair ; and for some time she refused to submit
to them. As to an additional servant, the expense would
be a trifle ; mamma she was sure would never object to it ;
and any horse would do for him ; he might always get one
at the Park ; as to a stable, the merest shed would be suffi-
cifnt. Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her
receiving such a present from a man so little, or at least so
lately, known to her. This was too much.
E
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
50 SmSBB AND SENSIBILITY.
" You are mistaken^ Elinor/'said she, wannly, " in
supposing I know very little of Willoughby. I have not
known him long indeed ; but I am much better acquainted
with him than I am with any other creature in the world;
except yourself and mamma. It is not time or opportunity
that is to determine intimacy ; it is disposition alone. Seven
years would be insufficient to make some people acquainted
with each other, and seven days are more than enough for
others. I should hold myself guilty of greater impropriety
in accepting a horse from my brother than from Wil-
loughby. Of John I know very little, though we have
lived together for years; but of Willoughby my judgment
has long been formed. "
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.
She knew her sister's temper. Opposition on so tender
a subject would only attach her the more to her own opi-
nion. But by an appeal to her affection for her mother^
by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the
case) she consented to this increase of establishment,
Marianne was shortly subdued ; and she promised not to
tempt her mother to such imprudent kindness by mention*
ing the offer, and to tell Willoughby, when she saw him
next, that it must be declined.
She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby
called at the cottage, the same day, Elinor heard her
express her disappointment to him in a low voice on being
obliged to forego the acceptance of his present. The rea-
sons for this alteration were at the same time related, and
they were such as to make further entreaty on his side
impossible. His concern, l^owever, was very apparent ; and
after expressing it with earnestness, he added, in the same
low voice, *'But, Marianne, the horse is still yours,
though you cannot use it now. I shall keep it only till you
can claim it. When you leave Barton to form your own
establishment in a more lasting home. Queen Mab shall
receive you. "
This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood ; and in the
whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it,
and in his addressing her sister by her Christian name
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SSNgB AND BBNSIBlIiITT. 51
alone, she instantlj saw an inttmacy so decided, a meaning
80 direct, as marked a perfect agreement between them.
From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged
to each other ; and the belief of it created no other surprise
tiian that she, or any of their friends, should be left by
telnpers so frank, to discover it by accident.
Margaret related something to her the next day, which
placed this matter in a still clearer light. Willoughby had
spent the preceding eyening with them ; and Margaret, by
being left some time in the parlour with only him and
Marianne, had had opportunity for observations, which,
with a most important face, she communicated to her
eldest sister, when they were next by themselves.
** Oh, £linor ! " sh^ cried, ^* I have such a secret to tell
you about Marianne. I am sure she will be married to
Mr. Willoughby very soon. "
''You have said so, " replied Elinor,'^ almost every day
since they first met on Highchurch Down ; and they had
not known each other a week, I believe^ before you were
certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck;
bot it turned out to be only the miniature of our great
undfc.'^
^^ But indeed this is quite another thing. I am sure
they will be married very soon, for he has got a lock of her
hair. "
** Take care^ Margaret It may be only the hair of some
great uncle of Am. "
^'But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost
sure it is, for I saw him cut it ofiP. Last night, after tea,
when you and mamma went out of the room, they were whia.
pering and talking together as fast as could be, and he
seemed to be begging something of her, and presently he
took up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for
itwaa all tumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and
folded it up in a piece of white paper ; and put it into his
podiet-book. "
From such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor
eonld not withhold her credit ; nor was she disposed to it,
for the circumstance was in perfect unison with wh'at she
had heard and seen herself.
E 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
6% SENSE AND 8BN81BIUTT.
JAwrg^xet's sagacity was not always displayed in a way
so satisfactory to her sister. When Mrs. Jennings attacked
her one eyening at the Park, to give the name of the young
man who was Elinor's particular favouxitej which had been
long a matter of great curiosity to her, Margaret answered
by looking at her sister, and saying, ^* I must not tell, may
I, Elinor? "
This of course made every body laugh ; and Elinor tried
to laugh too. But the effort was painful. She was codf-
▼inced that Margaret had fixed on a person whose name
she could not bear with composure to become a standing
joke with Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne felt for her most sincerely ; but she did moze
harm than good to the cause, by tunning very red, and say-
ing in an angry manner to Margaret, —
" Remember that whatever your coi^jectures may be, you
have no right to repeal them. "
" I never had any conjectures about it, " replied Mar*
garet ; ^^ it was you who told me of it yourself. "
This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret
was eagerly pressed to say something more.
^^ Oh, pray. Miss Margaret, let us know all about it, "
aaid Mrs. Jennings.'^ What is the gentleman's name ? "
^'I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what
it is ; and I know where he is too. "
^^ Yes, yes, we can guess where he is ; at his own house
at Norland to be sure. He is the curate of the parish, J
dare say. "
^'No, that he is not. He is of no profession at all. "
^'Margaret, " said Marianne, with great warmth, " you
know that all this is an invention of your own, and that
there is no such person in existence. "
" Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure
there was such a man once, and his name begins with
anF. "
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for ob-
serving, at this moment,'^ that it rained very hard, " though
she believed the interruption to proceed less from any aJb-
tention to her, than from her ladyship's great dislike of all
such inelegant subjects of raillery as delighted her hiisband
Digitized by LjOOQIC
samaB and tsNSiBiLiTr. 55
and modier. The idea^ however^ started by her^ was im-
mediately pmmied by Colonel Brandon^ who was on every
occasion mindful of the feelings of others ; and much was
said on the sulgect of rain by both of them. Willoughby
opened the piano-forte^ and asked Marianne to sit down to
it; and thus amidst the various endeavours of different
people to quit the topic it fell to the ground. But not so
easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had
thrown her.
A party was formed this evening for going on the follow*
ing day to see a very fine place about twelve miles from
Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon,
without whose interest it could not be seen, as the pro.
prietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders on that
head. The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful*;
and Sir John, who was particularly warm in their praise,
might be allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he had formed
parties to visit them, at least, twice every summer for the
last ten years. They contained a noble piece of water, — a
sail on which was to form a great part of the morning's
amusement : cold provisions were to be taken, open car-
riages only to be employed, and every thing conducted in the
usual style of a complete party of pleasure.
To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold
undertakings considering the time of year, and that it had
rained every day for the last fortnight ; and Mrs. Dash-
wood, who had already a cold, was persuaded by Elinor to
stay at home.
CHAPTER XIII.
Tbbir intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very dif-
ferently from what Elinor had expected. She was prepared
to be wet through, fatigued^ and frightened ; but the event
was still more unfortunate, for they did not go at all.
By ten o'clock the whole party were assembled at the
B 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
54) 8BK8K AND 8BN8ZBILITT.
Park^ where they were to breakfast. The morning was
rather favourable^ though it had rained all nighty as the
clouds were then dispersing across the sky^ and the sun fre-
quently appeared. They were all in high spirits and good
humour^ eager to be happy^ and determined to submit to the
greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be other-
wise.
While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon: — he
took it^ looked at the direction, changed colour, and imme,.
diately left the room.
'^ What is the matter with Brandon } " said Sir John.
Nobody could tell.
*'I hope he has had no bad news/'said Lady Middle-
ton. ^ < It must be something extraordinary that could
make Colonel Brandon leave my breakfast table so sud.
denly. "
In about five minutes he returned. .
^^ No bad news. Colonel, I hope ? " said Mrs. Jennings,
as soon as he entered the room.
'^ None at all, ma'am, I thank you. "
^^ Was it fron\ Avignon ? I hope it is not to say that
your sister is worse ? "
'* No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely a letter
of business. "
" But how came the hand to discompose you so much,
if it was only a letter of business? Come, come, this
won't do. Colonel ; so let us hear the truth of it. "
*'My dear madam, " said Lady Middleton, ^'recollect
what you are saying. "
^* Perhaps it is to teU you that your cousin Fanny is
married ? " said Mrs. Jennings, without attending to her
daughter's reproof.
*^ No, indeed, it is not. "
'^ Well, then, I know who it if from. Colonel. And I
hope she is well. " .
^^ Whom do you mean, ma'am ? " said he, colouring a
little.
*'Oh ! you know who I mean. "
*'Iam particularly sorry, ma'am, " said he, addressing
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENgB AND fiBNSIBILITT. 55
Lady Middleton^ ^'that. I should receive this letter to-day^
for it is on business which requires my immediate attend*
ance in town. "
'^ In town! " cried Mrs. Jennings. " What can you
have to do in town at this time of year ? "
" My own loss is great^ " he continued^ ^'in being obliged
to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the more concerned,
as I fear my presence is necessary to gain yoUr admittance
at Whitwell. "
What a blow upon them all was this !
" But if you write a note to the housekeeper^ Mr. Bran«
don, " said Marianne, eagerly, " will it not be sufficient ? "
He shook his head.
" We must go, " said Sir John. " It shall not be put
off when we are so near it. You cannot go to town till
to-morrow, Brandon, j;hat is all. "
" I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not in
my power to delay my journey for one day ! "
" If you would but let us know what your business is, "
said Mrs. Jennings^ " we might see whether it could be put
off or not. "
" You would not be six hours later, " said Willoughby,
" if you were to defer your journey till our return. "
" I cannot afford to lose one hour. "
£linor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to
Marianne,''there are some people who cannot bear a
party of pleasure. Brandon is one of them. He was
afraid of catching, cold, I dare say, and invented this trick
for getting out of it. I would lay fifty guineas the letter
was of his own writing. "
" I have no doubt of it, " replied Marianne.
^^ There is no persuading you to change your mind,
Brandon, I know of old, " said Sir John, " when once you
are determined on any thing. But, however, I hope you
wiU think better of it. Consider : here are the two Miss
X^areys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods
walked up from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby got up
two hours before his usual time, on purpose to go to Whit-
well "
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at. being the
E 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
56 SENSE AKD SEKSIBIIiITY.
cause of disappointing the party ; but at the same time
declared it to be unavoidable.
** Well, then, when will you come back again ? "
" I hope we shall see you at Barton, " added her lady-
ship,''as soon as you can conveniently leave town ; and
we must put olF the party to Whitwell till you return. "
^^ You are very oUiging. But it is so uncertain when I
may have it in my power to return that I dare not engage
for it at all. "
*'Oh ! he must and shall come back/'cried Sir John.
^^ If he is not here by the end of the week, I shall go after
him. "
''Ay, so do. Sir John, " cried Mrs. Jennings,'* and
then perhaps you may find out what his business is. "
*'I do not want to pry into other men's concerns. I
suppose it is something he is ashamed of. "
'Colonel Brandon's horses were announced.
''You do not go to town on horseback, do you ? " added
Sir John.
*'No. Only to Honiton. I shall then go post. "
''Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good
journey. But you had better change your mind. "
''I assure you it is not in my power. "
'He then took leave of the whole party.
'* Is th^re no chance of my seeing you and your sisters
in town this winter. Miss Dash wood ? "
''I am afraid, none at all. "
''Then I must bid you farewell* for a longer time than
I should wish to do. "
To Marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing.
" Come, Colonel, " said Mrs. Jennings, " before you go,
do let us know what you are going about. "
He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir
John, left the room.
The complaints and lamentations which politeness had
hitherto restrained now burst forth universally ; and they
all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so
disappointed.
''I can guess what his business is, however, " said Mrs.
Jenningil exultingly.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBNMB Ain > fiBKOBUUtTT. 5?
''Can you^ ma'am? " said almost every body.
** Yes ; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure. "
''And who is Miss WiQiams ? " asked Marianne.
* *^ What ! do not you know who Miss Williams is ? I
am sure you must- have heard of her before. She is a
fdalion of the Colonel's, my dear ; a very near relation.
We will not say how near, for fear of shocking the young
ladies. " Then, lowering her voice a little, she aaid to
Elinor,'^ She is his natural daughter. "
« Indeed! "
" Oh, yes ; and as like him as she can stare. I dare
•ay the Colonel will leave her all his fortune. "
When Sir Jdhn returned, he joined most heartily in the
general regret on so unfortunate an event; concluding,
however, by observing, that as they were all got together,
they must do something by way of being happy; and after
some consultation it was agreed, that although happiness
oould only be enjoyed at Wlbitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country.
The carriages were then ordered ; Willoughby's was first,
snd Marianne never looked happier than when she got
into it. He drove through the park very fast, and they
were soon out of sight ; and nothing more of them was
seen till their return, which did not happen till after the
letuin of all the rest. They both seemed delighted with
their drive ; but said only in general terms that they had
kept in the lanes, while the others went on the downs.
It was settled that there should be a dance in the even-
ing, and that every body should be extremely merry all day
long. Some more of the Careys came to dinner; and they
had the pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table,
which Sir John observed with great contentment Wil-
laoghby took bis usual place between ^he two elder Miss
Dashwoods. Mrs. Jennings sat on Elinor's right-hand;
wad ^bej had not been long seated, before she leant behind
her and Willoughby, and said to Marianne, loud enough
/or them both to hear, ^^ I have found you out in spite of
aU your tricks. I know where you spent the moraing. "
. Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, *'Where,
pr.y? "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
5B 8BNBE AND SBNflUBII/ITT.
" Did not you know/'said Willoughby >'^ that we bad
been out in my curricle ? "
'^ Yes^ yes^ Mr. Impudence, I know that very well^ and
I was determined to find out where you had been to.
I hope you lil^e your house^ Miss Marianne. It is a very
large one, I know ; and when I come to see you, I hope
you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much
whto I was there six years ago. "
Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mrs. Jen < ^
nings laughed heartily; and Elinor found that in her
resolution to know where they had been, she had actually
made her own woman enquire of Mr. Willoughby's groom ;
and that she had by that method been informed that they
had gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time there
in walking about the garden, and going all over the house.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true ; as it seemed
very unlikely that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne
consent, to enter the house while Mrs. Smith was in it^
with whom Marianne had not the smallest acquaintance.
As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired
of her about it ; and great was her surprise when she found
that every circumstance related by Mrs. Jennings was per«
fectly true. Marianne was quite angry with her for doubt,
ing it.
^f Why should you imagine^ Elinor, that we did not go
there, or that we did not see the house ? Is not it what
you have often wished to do yourself? "
^'Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smith
was there, and with no other companion than Mr. WiU
loi%hby. "
^^ Mr. Willoughby, however, is the only person who can
have a right to show that house; and as he went in aa
open carriage, it was impossible to have any other com-
panion. I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life. "
" I am afraid, " replied Elinor, " that the pleasantneas
of an employment does not always evince its propriety. "
'^ On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it,
Elinor; for if there had been any real impropriety in
what I did^ I should have been sensible of it at the time.
d by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 59
for we always know when we are acting wrongs and with
such a conyiction I could have had no pleasure. "
^* But^ my dear Marianne^ as it has already exposed you
to some very impertinent remarks^ do you not now hegin
to doubt the discretion of your own conduct ? "
''If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are to be
the proof of impropriety in conduct^ we are all offending
every moment of our lives. I value not her censure
any more than I should do her commendation. I am not
sensible of having done any thing wrong in walking over
Mrs. Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house. They will
one day be Mr. Willoughby's, and ■ "
^'If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you
would not be justified in what you have done. "
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly grati-
fying to her ; and after a ten minutes'interval of earnest
thought, she came to her sister again, and said with great
good humour,''Perhaps, Elinor, it was rather ill-judged
in me to go to Allenham ; but Mr. Willoughby wanted
particularly to show me the place ; and it is a charming
house, I assure you. There is one remarkably pretty sit*
ting room up stairs ; of a nice comfortable size for constant
use, and with modem furniture it wpuld be delightfuL It
is a comer room, and has windows on two sides. On one
aide you look across the bowling-green, behind the house,
to a beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a
▼iew of the church and village, and, beyond them, of
those fine bold hills that we have so often admired. I did
not see it to advantage, for nothing could be more forlom
than the fumiture; but if it were newly fitted up — a
eouple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make
it one of the pleasantest summer-rooms in England. "
Could Elinor have listened to her without intermpfion
from the others, she would have described every room in
the house with equal delight.
d by Google
60 SttNSB AND BBNSIBIUTY.
CHAPTER XIV.
The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the
Park^ with his steadiness in concealing its cause^ filled the
mind^ and raised the wonder, of Mrs. Jennings for two or
three days : she was a great wonderer, as every one must
be who takes a yery lively interest in all the comings and
goings of all their acquaintance. She .wondered, with litde
intermissionV what could be the reason'of it; was sure
there must be some bad news, and thought over every kind
ef distress that could have befallen him, with a fixed deter-
mination that he should not escape them all.
''Something very melanchely must be the matter, I am
sore, " said she. " I could see it in his face. Poor man !
I am afraid his curcumstances may be bad. The estate at
Delaford was never reckoned more than two thousand a
year, and his brother left every thing sadly involved. I do
think he must have been sent for about money matters,
for what else can it be? I wonder whether it is so. I
would give any thing to know the truth of it. Perhaps it
is about Miss WiUiams — and, by the by, I dare say it is,
because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.
May be she is ill in town ; nothing in the world more
likdy, for I have a notion she is always rather sickly. I
would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams. It is not
•o very likely he should be distressed in his circumstances
NOW, for he is a very prudent man, and to be sure must
have cleared the estate by this time. I wonder what it
ean be ! May be his sister is worse at Avignon, and has
sent for him over. His setting off in such a hurry seems
very like it. Well, I wish him out of all his trouble, with
all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain. " >
So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings. Her opinion
varying with every fresh conjecture, and all seeming
equally probable as they arose. Elinor, though she felt
really interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon,'could
d by Google
OBIfBB 4iim BISNSIBXIiITY. 6%
not bestow all the wonder on his going bo suddenlj away^
which Mrs. Jennings was desirous of her feeling ; for bo.
sides that the circumstance did not^ in her opinion, justify
sudi lasting amazement or variety of speculation^ her wonder
was otherwise disposed of. It was engrossed by the extra,
ordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on the sub-
ject > which they mu & t know to be peculiarly interesting to
them all. As this silence continued^ every day made it
appear more strange and more incompatible with the dis-
position of both. Why they should not openly acknow-
ledge to her mother and herself, what their constant beluu
viour to each other declared to have taken place^ £linor
could not imagine. *
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be
immediately in their power ; for though Willoughby was
independent^ there was no reason to believe him rich. His
estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or seven
hundred a year ; but he lived at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equals and he had himself often
complained of his poverty. But for this strange kind of
secrecy^ maintained by them relative to their engagement^
whicb^ in f & cty concealed nothing at all, she could not ac-
count ; and it was so wholly contradictory to their general
opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered her
mind of their being really engaged, and this doubt was
enough to prevent her making any enquiry of Marianne.
Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them
all than Willoughby *s behaviour. To Marianne it had all
the distinguishing tenderness which a lover's heart could
give, and to the rest of the family it was the affectionate
attention of a son and a brother. The cottage seemed to
be considered and loved by him as his home ; many more
of his hours were spent there than at Allenham ; and if no
general engagement collected them at the Park, the exer«
cise which called him out in the morning was almost oer.
tain of ending there, where the rest of the day was spent
by himself at the side of Marianne, and by his favourite
pointer at her feet.
One evening in piurticular, about a week after Colonel
Brandon had left the country^ his heart seemed more than
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
62 8EN8B AND 88N8IBILITT.
usually .open to every feeling of attachment to the objects
around him ; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happening to men-
tion her design of improving the cottage in the springs he
warmly opposed every alteration of a place which afiection
had established as perfect with him.
** What ! " he exclaimed — ** improve this dear cottage !
No. That I will never consent to. Not a stone must be
added to its wails^ not an inch to its dze^ if my feelings are
r^arded. "
** Do not be alarmed^*'said Miss Dashwood, ^'nothing
of the kind will be done ; for my mother will never have
money enough to attempt it. "
" I am heartily glad of it/'he cried. *^ May she
always be poor^ if she can employ her riches no better. "
" Thank you^ Willoughby. But you may be assured
that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment
of yours^ or of any one whom I loved^ for all the improve-
ments in the world. Depend upon it that whatever unem.
ployed sum may remain^ when I make up my accounts in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dig.
pose of it in a manner so painfull to you. But are yon'
really so attached to this place as to see no defect in it ? "'
" I am/'said he. ^^ To me it is faultless. Nay^ more^
I consider it as the only form of building in which happi-
ness is attainaUe^ and were I rich enoi^h I would instantly
pull Combe down^ and build it up again in the exact plan
of this cottage. "
'* With dark narrow stairs^ and a kitchen that smokes^ I
suppose^ " said £linor. ,
^'Yes " cried he in the same eager tone^ ^'with all and
every thing belonging to it j — in no one convenience or tn-
convenience about it^ should the least variation be percep*
tible. Then^ and then only^ under such a roof^ I m^t
perhaps be as l^ppy at Combe as I have been at Barton. "
'^ I flatter myself/'replied Elinor^ " that, even under
the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase^
you will hereafter find your own house as faultless as you
now do this. "
*^ There certainly are circumstances^ " said Willoughby,
** which might greatly endear it to me ; but this place will
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SXNSIBIUTr-.'6$
always have one claim on my afiection^ which no other can
possibly share. "
Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne^ whose
fine eyes were fixed so expressively on WiUoughby^ as
plainly denoted how well she understood him.
^'How often did I wish^ " added he^'^ when I was at
Allenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton cottage were
inhabited .'I never passed within view of it without ad-
miring its situation^ and grieving that no one should live in
it. How little did I then think that the very first news I
should hear from Mrs. Smithy when I next came into the
country, would be that Barton cottage was taken; and I felt
an immediate satisfaction and interest in the event, which
nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I should
experience from it can account for. Must it not have been
80^ Marianne ? " speaking to her in a lowered voice. Then
continuing his former tone, he said, " And yet this house
you would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood ? You would rob it of
Its simplicity by imaginary improvement ! and this dear
parlour in which our acquaintance first began^ and in which
so many happy hours have been since spent by us together,
you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,
and every body would be eager to pass through the room
which has hitherto contained within itself more real accom-
modation and comfort than any other apartment of the hand-
somest dimensions in the world could possibly afford. "
Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of
the kind should be attempted.
*^ You are a good woman, " he warmly replied. " Your
promise makes me easy. Extend it a little farther, and it
will make me happy. Tell me that not only your house
will remain the same, but that I shall ever find you and
yours as unchanged as your dwelling ; and that you will
idways consider me with the kindness w^ch has made
every thing belonging to you so dear to me.*,
The promise was readily given, and WiUoughby's be-
haviour during the whole of the evening declared at once
bis affection and happiness.
" Shall we see you to-morrow to dinner ? " said Mrs.
Dashwood, when he was leaving them.'^ 1 do not ask you
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
64 BBNaB AND sBnauuLixy.
to come in the morning, for we must walk to the Park^ to
call on Lady Middleton. "
He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.
CHAPTER XV.
Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took place the
next day, and two of her daughters went with her ; but
Marianne excused hertself from being of the party, under
some trifling pretext of employment ; and her mother, who
concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby
the night before of calling on her while they were absent,
was perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home.
On their return from the Park they found Willoughby's
curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs.
Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been
just. So far it was all as she had foreseen ; but on enter-
ing the house she beheld what no foresight had taught her
to expect. They were no sooner in the passage than Ma-
riahne came hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent
affliction, with her handkerchief at her eyes, and without
noticing them ran up stairs. Surprised and alarmed, they
proceeded directly into the room she had just quitted,
where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning
against the mantel-piece with his back towards them. He
turned round on their coming in, and his countenance
showed that he strongly partook of the emotion which
overpowered Marianne.
^'Is any thing the matter with her ? ** cried Mrs. Dash-
wood, as she entered : — " is she ill ? "
''I hope n»t, " he replied, trying to look cheerful ; and
with a forced smile presently added, " It is I who may
rather expect to be ill — for I am now suffering under a
very heavy disappointment ! **
''Disappointment ! **
''Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with
d by Google
SEiraE AND SlfiKSIBILITY. 65
you. Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised the privilege
of riches upon a poor dependent cousin, by sending me on
buoness to London. I have just received my despatches^
and taken my farewell of AUenham ; and by way of ex-
hilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you. "
" To London \ — and are you going this morning ? "
^^ Almost this moment. "
" This is very unfortunate. But Mrs. Smith -must be
obliged; and her business will not detain you from us
long, I hope. "
He coloured as he replied, ^* You are very kind ; but I have
no idea of retdming into Devonshire immediately. My visits
to Mrs. Smith are never repeated. within the twelvemonth. "
'^ And is Mrs. Smith your only friend ? Is AUenham the
only house in the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome ?
For shame, Willoughby, can you wait for an invitation here? "
His colour increased ; and, with his eyes fixed on the
ground, he only replied, " You are too good. "
Mrs. Dashwood looked at £linor with surprise. £linor
fdt equal amazement. For a few moments every one was
silent. Mrs. Dashwood first spoke.
*'I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome ; for I will not
press you to return here immediately, because you only can
judge bow far that might be pleasing to Mrs. Smith ; and
on this head I shall be no more disposed to question your
judgment than to doubt your inclination. " ,
*'My^ engagements at present, " replied Willoughby, con-
fusedly, *^ are of such a nature — that — I dare not
flatter myself "
He stopt Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished to
speak, and another pause succeeded. This was broken by
Willoughby, who said, with a faint smile,'* It is folly to
linger in this manner. I will not torment myself any
longer by remaining among friends whose society it is im.
possible for me now to enjoy.'*
He then hastily took leave of them all, and left the room.
They saw him step into his carriage, and in a minute it
was out of sight.
Mrs Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly
p
Digitized by Google
€6 SEIfSB ANB BEKSXBUiITT.
quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concern
and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned.
£linor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mollierV
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and dis.
trust. Willoughby's behaviour in taking leave of them^ his
embarrassment^ and affectltion of cheerfulness^ and^ above
all^ his unwillingness to accept her mother's invitation^ a
backwardness so unlike a lover^ so unlike himself, greatly
disturbed her. One moment she feared that no serious design
had ever been formed on his side ; and the next that some
unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him and her
sister : — the distress in which Marianne had quitted the
room was such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably
account for, though, when she considered what Marianne's
love for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.
But whatever might be the particulars of their separa-
tion, her sister's affliction was indubitable; and she thought
with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which
Marianne was in all probability not merely giving way to
as a relief, but feeding and encouraging as a duty.
In about half an hour her mother returned, and though
her eyes were red, her countenance was not uncheerful.
''Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton^
Elinor, " said she, as she sat down to work, " and with how
heavy a heart does he travel ? "
*^It,is all very strange. So suddenly to be gone ! It
seems but the work of a moment. And last night he was
with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate ? And now,
after only ten minutes'notice, — gone, too, without intend-
ing to return ! — Something more than what he owned to
us must have happened. He did not speak, he did not
behave like himself. You must have seen the difierenoe as
well as I. What can it be? Can they have quarrelled ?
Why else should he have shown such unwiltii^ness to
accept your invitation here ? "
''It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I
could plainly see that. He had not the power of accepdng
it. I have thought it all over, I assure you, and I can
perfectly account for every thing that at first seemed strange
to me as weU as to you. "
Digitized by Google
6BNSB AKD SENBIBIXiITY. 67
*'Canyon, indeed? "
^* Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most
satisfactory way ; but you, Elinor, who love to doubt
where you can — it will not satisfy y < m, I know; but
you shall not talk me out of my trust in it. I am per-
tfuaded that Mrs. Smith suspecffi his regard for Marianne,
disapproves of it (perhaps because «he has other views for
him), and on that account is eager to get him away ;
and that the business- which she sends him off to transact
is invented as an excuse to dismiss him. This is what I
believe to have happened. He is, moreover, aware that she
does disapprove the connection ; he dares- not therefore at
present confess to her his engagement with Marianne, and
he feels himself obliged, from his dependent situation, to
give in to her schemes, and absent himself from Devonshire
for a while. You will tell me, I know, that this may or
may not have happened; but I will listen to no cavil,
unless you can point out any other method of understand-
ing the affair as satisfactory as this. And now, Elinor,
what have you to say .? "
*^ Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer. •'
'^ Then you would have told me, that it might or might
not have happened. Oh,. Elinor, how incomprehensible
are your feelings ! You had rather take evil upon credit
than good. You had rather look out for misery for Ma-
rianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apdogy for
the latter. You are resolved to think him blamable,
because he took leave of us with less affection than his
usual behaviour has shown. And is no allowance to be
made for inadvertence, or for spirits depressed by recent
disappointment? Are no probabilities to be accepted,
merely because they are not certainties ? Is nothing due
to the man whom we have all so much reason to love, and no
reason in the world to think ill of ? To the possibility of mo-
tives unanswerable in themselves, though unavoidably secret
for a whUe ? And, after all, what is it you suspect him of? " •
•'I can hardly tell you myself. But suspicion of
BOmething unpleasant is the inevitable consequence of such
an alteration as we have just witnessed in him. There is
great truth, however, in what you have now urged of the
F 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
6s gBNSE AND 8EN8IBIIiIT7.
allowances which ought to be made for bim^ and it is my
wish to be candid in my judgment of eyery body. Wil.
loughby may^ undoubtedly^ have Tery sufficient reasons for
his conduct^ and I will hope that he has. But it would
have been more like WiUoughby to acknowledge them at
once. Secrecy may be advisable ; but still I cannot help
wondering at its being practised by him.''
'^ Do not blame him^ howeyer^ for departing from his
character, where the deviation is necessary. But you
really do admit the justice of what I have said in his de-
fence ? — I am happy — and he is acquitted.''
''Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their en-
gagement (if they are engaged) from Mrs. Smith; and
if that is the case, it must be highly expedient for Wil-
loughby to be but little in Devonshire at present. But
this is no excuse for their concealing it from us. "
'^ Concealing it from us ! my dear child, do you accuse
Willoughby and Marianne of concealment ? This is strange,
indeed, when your eyes have been reproaching them every
day for incautiousness. "
'^ I want no proof of their affection, " said Elinor, " but
of their engagement I do. "
'^ I am perfectly satisfied of both. "
" Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject
by either of them. "
''I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken
so plainly. Has not his behaviour to Marianne and to all
of us, for at least the last fortnight, declared that he loved
and considered her as his future wife, and that he felt for
us the attachment of the nearest relation ? Have we not
perfectly understood each other ? Has not my consent been
daily asked by his looks, his manner, his attentive and
affectionate respect? My £linor, is it possible to doubt
their engagement ? How could such a thought occur to
you ? How is it to be supposed that Willoughby, per*
suaded as he must be of your sister's love, should leave her,
and leave her perhaps for months, without telling her of
his affection, — that they should part without a mutual
exchange of confidence ? "
^'I confess; " replied £linor, ^^ that every circumstanoe.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITT. 6^
except one, is in favour of their engagement ; but that one
is the totid silence of both on the subject^ and with me it
almost outweighs every other. "
'^ How strange this is ! You must think wretchedly in-
deed of Willoughby^ if^ after all that has openly passed
between them^ you can doubt the nature of the terms on
which they are together. Has he been acting a part in his
behaviour to your sister all this time ? Do you suppose
him really indifferent to her ? "
^^ No, I cannot think that He must and does love her,
I am sure. "
" But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave
her with such indifference, such carelessness of the future,
as you attribute to him. "
** You must remember, my dear mother, that I have
never considered this matter as certain. I have had my
doubts, I confess; but they are fainter than they were,
and they may soon be entirely done away. If we find they
correspond, every fear of mine will be removed. "
" A mighty concession indeed ! If you were to see
them at the altar, you would suppose they were going to
be married. Ungracious girl ! But / require np such proof.
Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify doubt ;
no secrecy has been attempted ; all has been uniformly open
and unreserved. You cannot doubt your sister's wishes.
It must be Willoughby, therefore, whom you suspect But
why ? Is he not a man of honour and feeling ? Has there
been any inconsistency on his side to create alarm ? can he
be deceitful? "
'^ I hope not, I believe not, " cried Elinor.''I love
Willoughby, sincerely love him ; and suspicion of his in-
tegrity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me. It
has been involuntary, and I will not encourage it. I was
startled, I confess, by the alteration in his manners this
morning: he did not speak like himself, and did not
return your kindness with any cordiality. But all this may
be explained by such a situation of his affairs as you have
supposed. He had just parted from my sister, had seen
her leave him in the greatest affliction; and if he felt
obHged, from a fear of offending Mrs. Smith, to resist the
F 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
70 SENSE AND SENBIBIIJTT.
temptation of returning here soon^ and yet aware that by
declining your invitation^ by saying that he was going away
for some time^ he should seem to act an ungenerous^ a sus-
picious part by our family^ he might well he embarrassed
and disturbed. In such a case^ a plain and open avowal
of his difficulties would have been more to Ms honour^ I
thinkj as well as more consistent with his general character;
— but I will not raise objections against any one's conduct
on so illiberal a foundation^ as a difference in judgment
from myself^ or a deviation from what I may think right
and consistent. "
'^ You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly does
not deserve to be suspected. Though we have not known
him long, he is no stranger in this part of the world ; and
who has ever spoken to his disadvantage } Had he been
in a situation to act independently and marry immediately^
it might have been odd that he should leave us without ac-
knowledging every thing to me at once : but this is not the
case. It is an engagement in some respects not prosper-
ously begun^ for their marriage must be at a very uncertain
distance ; and even secrecy, as far as it can be observed^
may now be very advisable. "
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; and
£linor was then at liberty to think over the representations
of her mother, to acknowledge the probability of many, and
hope for the justice of all.
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner-time, yfhea
she entered the room and took her place at the table without
saying a word. Her eyes were red and swollen ; and it
seemed as if her tears were even then restrained with dif.
ficulty. She avoided the looks of them all, could neither
eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silently
pressing her hand with tender cpmpassion, her small degree
of fortitude was quite overcome, she burst into tears, and
left the room.
This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole
evening. She was without any power, because she was
without any desire of command over herself. The slightest
mention of any thing relative to Willoughby overpowered
her in an instant ; and though L & [ family were most ami "
d by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 71
oiisly attentiye to her comfort^ it was impossible for them^
if they spoke at all^ to keep clear of every 8ul:r|ect which
her feelings connected with him.
CHAPTER XVI.
Mabianne would have thought herself very inexcusable
had she been able to sleep at all the first night after parting
from Willoughby. She would have been ashamed to look
her family in the face the next mornings had she not risen
from her bed in more need of repose than when she lay
down in it. But the feelings which made such composure
a disgrace^ left her in no danger of incurring it. She was
awake the whole nighty and she wept the greatest part of
it. She got up with a headachy was unable to talk^ and
unwilling to take any nourishment ; giving pain every mo-
vaeat to her mother and sisters^ and forbidding all attempt
at consolation from either. Her sensibility was potent
enough !
When breakfast was over she walked out by herself, and
wandered about the village of Allenham^ indulging the re-
oc^ection of past enjoyment^ and crying over the present
reverse for the chief of the morning.
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling.
^le played over every favourite song that she had been
used to jJay to Willoughby, every air in which their voices
had been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gazing
on every line of music tiiat he had written out for her, till
her heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be
gained ; and this nourishment of grief was every day ap-
plied. She spent whole hours at the piano- forte, alternately
singing and crying ; her voice often totally suspended by
her tears. In books, too, as well as in music, she courted
the misery which a contrast between the past and present
was certain of giving. She read nothing but what they
had been used to read together.
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported
F 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
72 SENSB AND SENSIBILITY.
for ever ; it sunk within a few days into a calmer melan-
choly; but these employments^ to which she daily recurred,
her solitary walks and silent meditations^ stiU produced oc-
casional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.
No letter from Willoughby came ; and none seemed
expected by Marianne. Her mother was surprised^ and
Elinor again became uneasy. But Mrs. Dashwood could
find explanations whenever she wanted them^ which at
least satisfied herself. v
" Remember/ Elinor/* said she,''how very often Sir
John fetches our letters himself from the post, and carries
them to it. We have already agreed that secrecy may be
necessary, and we must acknowledge that it could not be
maintained if their correspondence were to pass through 3ir
John's hands. "
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried .to
find in it a motive sufficient for their silence. But there
was one method so direct, so simple, and in her opinion so
eligible of knowing the real state of the affair, and of in-
stantly removing all mystery, that she could not help sug.
gestin^ it to her mother.
''Why do you not ask Marianne at once, " said she,
" whether she is or is not engaged to Willoughby ? From
you, her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a mother, the
question could not give offence. It would be the natural
result of your affection for her. She used to be all unre-
serve, and to you mor6 especially. "
''I would not ask such a question for the world. Sup-
posing it possible that they are not engaged, what distress
would not such an enquiry inflict ! At any rate it would
be most ungenerous. I should never deserve her confi-
dence again,^ after forcing from her a confession of what is
meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one. I know
Marianne's heart : I know that she dearly loves me, and
that I shall not be the last to whom the affair is made
known', when circumstances make the revealment of it
eligible. I would not attempt to force the confidence
of any one ; of a child much less ; because a sense of
duty would prevent the denial which her wishes might
direct "
d by Google
I3EN8E AND SBN6IBILITT. 73
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained^ considering
her sister's youths and urged the matter farther^ but in
vain ; common sense^ common care^ common prudence^
were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's romantic delicacy.
It was several days before Willoughby's name was men-
tioned before Marianne by any of her family ; Sir John
and Mrs. Jennings^ indeed^ were not so nice ; their witti-
cisms added pain to many a painful hour; but one even-
ing^ Mrs. Dashwood, accidentaUy taking up a volume of
Shakspeare^ exclaimed^ — k
'^ We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne ; our dear
Willoughby went away before we could get through it. We
will put'it by, that when he comes again ; but it may
be months, perhaps, before that happens. "
" Months ! " cried Marianne, with strong surprise. " No
— nor many weeks. "
Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said ; but it
gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne
so expressive of confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of
bis intentions.'
One morning, about a week after his leaving the country,
Marianne was prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual
walk, instead of wandering away by herself. Hitherto she
had carefully avoided every companion in her rambles. If
her sisters intended to walk on the downs, she directly stole
away towards the lanes ; if they talked of the valley, she was
as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be found
when the others set ofi*. But at length she was secured by
the exertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such con-
tinual seclusion. They walked along the road through the
valley, and chiefly in silence, for Marianne's mtTid could not
be controlled, and Elinor, satisfied with gaining one point,
would not then attempt more. Beyond the entrance of the
valley, where the country, though still rich, was less wild
and more open, a long stretch of the road which they had
travelled on first coming to Barton lay before them ; and
on reaching that point they stopped to look around them,
and examine a prospect which formed the distance of their
view from the cottage, from a spot which they had never
happened to reach in any of their walks before.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
74 SENSE AND SENSIBUjITT.
Amongst the objects in the scene^ they soon discovered an
animated one; it was a man on horseback riding towards
them. In a few niinutes they could distinguish him to be
a gentleman ; and in a moment afterwards Marianne rap-
turously exclaimed^ — -^ •
" It is he — it is indeed; — I know it is! " and was
hastening to meet him^ when Elinor cried out^ —
*^ Indeed, Marianne^ I think you are mistaken. It is not
Willoughby. The person is not tall enough for him^ and
has not his air. "
" He has, he has, " cried Marianne, ^'I am sure h.e has.
His air, his coat, his horse. I knew how soon he would
c»me. "
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elinor, to screen
Marianne from particularity, as she felt almost certain of
its not being Willoughby, quickened her pace and kept up
witli her. They were soon within thirty yards of the gen-
tleman. Marianne looked again ; her heart sunk within
her ; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back,
when the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain ber;
a third, almost as well known as Willoughby's, joined them
in begging her to stop, and she turned round with surprise
to see and welcome Edward Ferrars.
He was the only person in the world who could at that
moment be forgiven for not being Willoughby ; the only
one who could have gained a smile from her ; but she dia-
persed her tears to smile on Aim, and in her sister's hap-
piness forgot for a time her own disappointment.
He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant,
walked back with them to Barton, whither he was purposely
coming to visit them.
He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but
especially by Marianne, who showed more warmth of regard
in her reception of him than even Elinor herself. To Ma-
rianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward and her sister
was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness whidi
she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour.
On Edward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiency
of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion.
He was confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 75
seeing them^ looked neidier rapturous nor gay^ said little
but what was forced from him by questions^ and distin-
guished Elinor by no mark of ajQPection. Marianne saw and
listened with increasing surprise. She began almost to feel
a dislike of £dward ; and it ended^ as every feeling must
end with her, by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby,
whose manners formed a contrast sufficiently striking;^ to
those of his brother elect.
After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise
and enquiries of meeting, Marianne asked £diivard if he
6ame directly from London. No, he had been in DeTon-
shire a fortnight.
^^ A fortnight ! *'she repeated, surprised at his being so
long in the same county with Elinor without seeing her
before.
He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had been
staying with some friends near Plymouth.
*^ Have you been lately in Sussex ? " said Elinor.
^^ I was at Norland about a month ago. "
^'And how does dear, dear Norland look ? " cried Ma-
rianne.
''Dear, dear Norland, " said Elinor,'* probably looks
mudi as it always does at this time of year. The woods
and walks thickly covered with dead leaves/'
*^ Oh, " cried Marianne, " with what transporting sen-
sations have I formerly seen them fall ! How have I de-
lighted, as I walked, to see them driven in showers about
me by the wind ! What feelings have they, the season, the
air altogether inspired ! Now there is no one to regard
them. They are seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily o%
and driven as much as possible from the sight. "
'^ It is not every one, " said Elinor, " who has your pas-
sion for dead leaves. "
'^ No; my feelings are not often shared, not often under-
stood. But sometimes] they are. " As she said this, she
sunk into a reverie for a few moments ; but rousing her-
self again,''Now, Edward, " said she, calling his attention
to the prospect,'^ here is Barton valley. Look up it, and
be tranquil if you can. Look at those hiUs. Did you ever
see their equals ? To the left is Barton Piurk, amongst those
Digitized by Google •
76 8EN8B AND SENSIBILITY.
woods and plantations. You may see the end of the house.
And there^ beneath that farthest hiU^ which rises with such
grandeur^ is our cottage. "
" It is a beautiful country/'he replied ; *'but these bot-
toms must be dirty in winter. "
" How can you think of dirt, with such objects before
you? "
'^ Because/'replied be, smiling, " among the rest of the
objects before me, I see a very dirty lane. "
'^ How strange ! " said Marianne to herself, as she
walked on.
*'Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here } Are the
Middletons pleasant people ? "
^'No, not all, " answered Marianne ; ^'we could not be
more unfortunately situated. "
** Marianne, " cried her sister,'^ how can you say so ?
How can you be so unjust ? They are a very respectable
family, Mr. Ferrars ; and towards us have behaved in the
friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne, how
many pleasant days we have owed to them ? "
*'No, " said Marianne, in a low voice, " nor how many
painful moments. "
Elinor took no notice of this ; and dfrecting her attention
to their visiter, endeavoured to support something like dis-
course with him, by talking of their present residence, its
conveniences, & c. extorting from him occasional questions
and remarks. His coldness and reserve mortified her se-
verely ; she was vexed and half angry ; but resolving to
regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the
prtoent, she avoided every appearance of resentment or dis-
pleasure, and treated him as she thought he ought to be
treated from the family connection.
CHAPTER XVII.
Mrs. Dabhwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing
him ; for his coining to Barton was, in her opinion, of all
• Digitized by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 77
things the most natural. Her joy and expressions of re-
gard long outUved her wonder. He received the kindest
welcome from her; and shyness^ coldness^ reserve could
not stand against such a reception. They had begun to
fail him before he entered the house^ and they were quite
overcome by the captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood.
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of
her daughters^ without extending the passion to her ; and
Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more
like himself. His affections seemed to re-animate towards
them aU^ and his interest in their welfare again became per-
ceptible. He was not in spirits^ however ; he praised dieir
honse^ admired its prospect^ was attentive and kind ; but
still he was not in spirits. The whole family perceived it;
and Mrs. Dashwood^ attributing it to some want of liberal
ity in his mother^ sat down to table indignant against all
sdfish parents.
''What are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present^ Ed-
ward? " said she^ when dinner was over, and they had
drawn round the fire ; ^'are you still to be a great orator
in spite of yourself? "
'* No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have
no more talents than inclination for a public life. "
'^ But how is your fame to be established ? for famous
you must be to satisfy all your family ; and with no incli-
nation for expense, no aflfection for strangers, no profession,
and no assurance, you may find it a difficult matter. "
*'I shall not attempt it. I have no vdsh to be distin-
guii^ed ; and I have every reason to hope I never shall.
Thank Heaven ! I cannot be forced into genius and elo-
quence. "
'* You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are
all moderate. "
'^ As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I be-
lieve. I wish, as well as every body else, to be perfectly
happy ; but, like every body else, it must be in my own
way. Greatness will not make me so. "
" Strange if it would I " cried Marianne. " What have
wealth or grandeur to do with happiness ? "
d by Google
78 SENSE AKD SENBIBILITT.
'^ Grandeur has but little/'said Elinory ^'but wealth has
much to do with it. "
^* Elinor, for shame ! " said Marianne ; " money can
only give happiness where there is nothing else to give it.
Beyond a competence, it can afford no real satisfaction, as
far as mere self is concerned.*'
'^ Perhaps, " said Elinor, smiling,''we may come to the
same point. Your competence and my wealth are very
much alike, I dare say ; and without them^ as the world
goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of external
comfort must be wanting^ Your ideas are only more noUe
tiian mine. Come, what is your competence ? "
^^ About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year ; not
more than thatr
Elinor laughed. " Two thousand a year ! Chie is my
wealth ! I guessed how it would end. "
*'And yet two thousand a year is a very moderate in-
oome, " said Marianne.''A family cannot well be main^
tained on a smaller. I am sure I am not extravagant in
my demands. A proper estabUshment of servants, a car.
riage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on
less. "
Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so
accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.
^* Hunters ! " repeated Edward — " but why must you
have hunters } Every body does not hunt. "
Marianne coloured as she replied, " But most people
do. "
^^ I wish, " said Margaret, striking out a novel thought,
*^ that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece ! "
'^ Oh that they would ! " cried Marianne, her eyes
sparkling with animation, and her cheeks glowing with the
delight of such imaginary happiness.
*^ We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose, " said
Elinor, " in spite of the insufficiency of wealth. "
*^ Oh dear ! " cried Margaret, " how happy I should be !
I wonder what I should do with it ! "
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.
^^ I should be puzzled to spend a large fortune myself, "
d by Google
8ENSB AND SENSIBILITY. 79
afid Mrs. Dashwood,'* if my children were all to be rich
without my help. "
*'You must begin your improvements on this house, "
observed Elinor, *'and your difficulties will soon vanish. "
" What magnificent orders would travel from this family
to London, " said Edward,'*in such an event! What a
happy day for booksellers, musicsellers, and print-shops !
You, Miss Dashwood, would give a general commission for
every new print of merit to be sent you — and as fbr Ma-
rianne, I know her greatness of soul, there would not be
music enough in London to content her. And books ! —
Thomson, Cowper, Scott — she would buy them all over
and over again : she would buy up every copy, I believe,
to prevent their falling into unworthy hands; and she-
would have every book that tells her how to admire an old
twisted tree. Should not you, Marianne ? Forgive me, if
I am very saucy. But I was willing to show you that I
had not forgot our old disputes. "
*'I love to be reminded of the past, Edward — whe-
ther it be melancholy or gay > I love to recall it — and you
will never ofifend me by talking of former times. You are
very right in supposing how my money would be spent —
some of it, at least — my loose cash would certainly be em-
ployed in improving my collection of music and books. "
" And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in an-
nuities on the authors or their heirs. " «
''No, Edward, I should have something elte to do
with it. "
''Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that
person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite
maxim, that no one can ever be in love more than once in
their life — for your opinion on that point is unchanged, I
presume ? "
*'Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are toler-
ably fixed. It is not likely that I should now see or hear
any thing to change them. "
'^ Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you sefr, " said Elinor,
^^ she is not at all altered. "
" She is only grown a little more grave than she was. "
d by Google
80 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
*'Nay, Edward, " said Marianne, ^* you need not re-
proach me. You are not very gay yourself. "
" Why should you think so? " replied he, with a sigh.
*^ But gaiety never was a part of my character. "
*'Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's,'* said £linor ;
'* I should hardly call her a lively girl — she is very
earnest, very eager in all she does — sometimes talks a great
deal, and tdways with animation — but she is not often
really merry. "
'* I believe you are right, " he replied, *^ and yet I have
always set her down as a lively girl. "
^'I have frequently detected myself in such kind of
mistakes,''said Elinor,'^ in a total misapprehension of cha-
racter in some point or other: fancying people so much
more gay or grave, or ingenious or stupid, than they really
are, and I can hardly tell why, or in what the deception
. originated. Sometimes one is guided by what they say of
themselves, and very frequently by what other people say
of them, without giving one's self time to deliberate and
judge. "
'^ But I thought it was right, Elinor, " said Marianne,
" to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people. I
thought our judgments were given us merely to be sub-
servient to those of our neighbours. This has always been
your doctrine, I am sure. "
" No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed
at the subjection of the understanding. All I have ever
attempted to influence has been the behaviour. You
must not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I confess,
of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in
general with greater attention ; but when have I advised
you to adopt their sentiments or conform to their judgment
in serious matters ? "'
'* You have not been able, then, to bring your sister over
to your plan of general civility, " said Edward to Elinor.
" Do you gain no ground ? "
'^ Quite the contrary, " refdied Elinor, looking expres-
sively at Marianne.
*'My judgment, " he returned, ^'is all on your side of
the question ; but I am afraid my practice is much more
d by Google
BENSB AND SEN8XBIUTY. 81
Oil your sister's. I neyer^ wish Ur oQend^ bat I am so
foolishly shy^ that I often seem negligent^ when I am only
kept back by my natural awkwardness. I have frequenUy
thought that I must have been intended by nature to be
fond .of low company^ I am so little at my ease among
strangers of gentility ! "
^'Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of
hers/'said Elinor.
'^ She knows her own worth too well for false shame^ "
replied Edward.'^ Shyness is only the effect of a sense of
inferiority in some way or other. If I could persuade my.
self that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful^ I
should not be shy.'*
^^ But you would still be reserved^ " said Marianne^
" and that, is worse. "
Edward started — *'Reserved ! Am I reserved. Ma
rianne? "
" Yes, very. "
*^ I do not understand you/'replied he, colouring.'^ Re-
served ! — how, in what manner ? What am I to tell you ?
What can you suppose ? "
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but trying to laugh
off the subject, she said to him,''Do not you know my sister
wdl enough to understand what she means ? Do not you
.know she calls every one reserved who does not talk as fast,
and admire what she admires as rapturously as herself? "
J^waid made no answer. His gravity and thoughtfLd-
ness returned on him in their fullest extent — and he sat
for aome time silent and dull.
CHAPTER XVIII.
EiiiKOB saw, with great uneasiness, the low spirits of her
friend. His visit afforded her but a very partial satis-
faction, while his own enjoyment in it appeared so imper-
fect. It was evident that he was unhappy ; she wished it
o
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
896 ASNlta AMl > BBlffiZBtli'nrP.
were equally evident that he still distingiiiahed her hf ike
same affection which once she had felt no douht of in-
spiring; hut hitherto the continuance of his preferenoe
seemed verj uncertain ; and the reservedness of his mannei'
towards her contradicted one moment what a more tflli-
mated look had intimated the preceding one.
'He joined her and Marianne in the hreakf»it-room'the
next morning before the others were down ; and MariaiAie^
who was always eager to promote their happiness as far as
she could^ soon left them to themselves. But befbre die
was half way up stairs she heard the parlour door open,
and, turning round, was astonished to see Edward hims^
came out.
'^ I am going into the village to see my horses/'said he,
" as you are not yet ready for breakfast ; I shaU be back
again presently. "
Edward returned to them with fresh admirfttkm of the
■nrrouniling country : in his walk to the village -he iMd
seen many parts of the valley to advantage ; and the village
itself, in a much higher situation than the cottage, affi > rded
a general view of the whole, which had exceedingly pleaM
him. This was a sul:ject which ensured Marianne's M-
tention ; and ishe was beginning to describe her oWti ad-
miration of these scenes, and to question him more minutefy
on the oljects'that had particularly struck him, wh«i Ed-
ward interrupted her by saying, " You ihust not enquire
too far, Marianne : remember I have no knowledge in tlie
picturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance and
want of taste if we come to particulars. I diall call hills
steep, which Ought to be bold ; surfaces strange and an < -
coudi, which ought to be irregular and rugged ; and distant
objects out of sight, which ought only to be indistinct
through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. You
must be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly
give. I call it a very fine country, — ^the hills are steep,
the woods seem full of fine timber, and the valley looks
comfortable and ^nug, — with rich meadows and several
-iieat farm liouses scattered here and there. It exactly an-
Digitized by Google
JklVD SEKUBUiFPT. SB
i^my idee < tf a fine eeundry^ becaose it unites Iwantgr
with utility — and I dfoe mj it is a pictufesqiie one too^
because you admire it ; I can easily believe it to be full of
roelte and premotiteries^ grey moss and broshwood^ but
these are all lost on me. I know nothing of ^e pic-
tuyesque. "
*^ I am afraid it is but too true^ " said Marianne; " but
*why ^buM you boast of it ? *'
'^ I isu9peet/'said Elinor, " that to avoid one Jdnd of
«ifeetBtion^ £dward here -falls into another. Because he
beUeves many people pretend to more admiration of the
beauties of nature than they really feel > and is disgusted
with -fluch pretensions^ he afiects greats indifierence and
l^aa ^dkcrimination in viewing them himself than he pos-
fie is fastidious^ and wiU hove an affectation of his
'^ It is very tme^ " said Marianne^'^ thact admiration of
kadsffiape scenery is become a mere jargon. Every body
pvetendiB to feel and tries to describe with the taste and
eieganoe of hiin who first defined what picturesque beauqr
was. I detest jargon of every kind; and sometimes I have
tlc^t my feelings to myself, because I could find no lan-
guage to describe them in but what was worn and hackneyed
oat of all sense and meaning. "
'^ I am convinced, " said Bdward^ ^'that yon really
feel aB the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to
feel. But, in return, your sister must allow me to feel no
more than I profess. I like a fine prospect, but not on
picturesque principles. I do not like crooked, twisted,
blasted trees. I admire them much more if they are tall^
straight, and flourishing. I do not like mined, tattered
eotti^es. 1 am not fond 6{ nettles or thistles, or heath
blossoms. I have more pleasure in a snug farm-house
•than a watdi^tower, — and a troop of tidy, happy villagers
please me better tlian the finest banditti in the world. "
Marianne'looked with amaaement at Edward, with com-
passion at her sister. Elinor only laughed.
The subject was contbiued no fardier ; and Marianne
remained thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly
engaged her attention. She was sitting by Edward, and,
o 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
,84 SENSB ANI > SBN8IBIIJTT.
in taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood^ his hand passed so
directly before her^ as to make a ring, widi a plait'of hair
in the centre^ very conspicuous on one of his fingers.
''I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward/* she cried.
*'Is that Fanny's hair ? I remember her promising to
give you some. But I should have thought her hair had
been darker. "
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt; but
when she saw how much she had pained £dward, her own
vexation at her want of thou^t could not be surpassed by his.
He cdoured very deeply, and, giving a momentary glance
at Elinor, repUed, " Yes ; it is my sister's hair. The
'setting always casts a different shade on it, you know.* "
Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise.
That the hair was her own, she instantaneously felt as well
satisfied ^ Marianne; the only difference in their con-
clusions was^ that what Marianne considered as a free gift
from her sister, Elinor was conscious must have been pro.
cured by some theft or contrivance unknown to heriself.
She was not in a humour, however, to r^ard it as an
affront ; and a£fecting to take no notice of what passed, by
instantly talking of something else^ she internally resolved
henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeing the hair
and of satisfying herself, beyond all doubt, that it was
exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time^ and it ended
in an absence of mind still more settled. He was par-
ticularly grave the whole morning. Marianne severely
censured herself for what she had said; but her own for-
giveness might have been more speedy, had she known bow
little offence it had given her sister.
Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir
John and Mrs. Jennings, who^ having heard of the arrival
of a gentleman at the cottage, came to take a survey of the
guest. With the assistance of his mother-in-law. Sit* John
was not Idng in discovering that the name of Ferrars began
with an F. And this prepared a future mine of raUlery
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness
of their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented
from being immediately sprung. But^ as it was, she only
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE JOTD SENSIBILITY. 85
learned, from some very significant looks, how far their
penetration, founded on Margaret's instructions, extended.
Sir John never . came to the Dashwoods without either
inviting them to dine at the Park the next day, or .to drink
tea with them that evening. On the present occasion, for
the hetter entertainment of their visiter, towards whose
amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them for both.
*^ You must drink tea with us to-night, " said he,'* for
we shaU be quite alone ; and to-morrow you must abso-
lutely dine with us, for we shall be a large party.'*
Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity.'^ And who knows
but you may raise a dance? " said she. " And that will
tempt you. Miss Marianne. "
" A dance 1 " cried Marianne.'^ Impossible ! Who is
to -dance? "
'^ Who ! why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers,
to be sure. What! you thought nobody could danc«
because a certain person that shall be nameless is gone ! " .
. ^^ I wish with all my soul, " cried Sir John, *^ that
Willoughby were amcmg us again. "
This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to
Edward. " And who is Willoughby ? " . said he, in a low
voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom he was sitting.
« She gave him a brief reply. Marianne's countenance was
more communicative. Edward saw enough to comprehend,
not only the meaning of others, but such of Marianne's
expressions as had puzzled him before; and when their
visiters left them he went immediately round her, and said,
in a whisper, " I have been guessing. Shall I teU you my
guess ? "
*'What do you mean ? "
" aiaUItellyou? "
''Certainly. "
''Well, then ; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts. "
Marianne was surprised. and confused, yet c^e could not
h^p smiling at the quiet archness of his manner, and, after
a moment's, silence, said,-^
" Oh, Edward! How can you? — But the time will
eome^ I hope — I am sure you wiH like him. "
o 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
80 8BNSB AND 8EN8IBimT7.
• *'I do not doubt it, " replied he, rather astomdied'at her
earnestness and wannth ; lor had he not imagined it to be
s joke for the good of her acquaintance in general, founded
only on a something or a nothing between Mr. Willoughbj
and herself, he would not have yentured to mention it
CHAPTER XIX.
EnwARB remained a week at die cottage; he was earnestly
pressed by Mrs. Dash wood to stay longer ; but, as if he
were bent only on self-mortificadon, he seemed resolved to
be gone when his enjoyment among his friends was at the
height. His spirits, during the last two or three days, though
Wtill very unequal, were greatly improved — he grew more
and more partial to the house and environs — never spoke
of going away without a sigh — declared his time to be
wholly disengaged — even doubted to what place he shouM
go when he left them — but sdll, go he must. Never had
any week passed so quickly — he eould hardly believe it to
be gone. He said so repeaifedly ; other iMngs he said^ too,
which marked the tarn of his. feelingB, and gave the lie to
};a & actions. He had no pleasure at N < H^nd; he detested
being in towv ; but either to Norknd or Londim he must
go. He vahied theii kindness beyond any thing, and Ms
greatest happiness was in being with them. Yet he Ba:ust
leave them at the end of a week, m sptte of their wishes and
his own, and without any restraint on his time.
Elinor placed all that was Astonishing in thia way of
acting to his mother*s account ; and it was happy for her
that he had a mother whose character was so imperfectly
known ta her, as to be the general excuse for every thing
strange on the part of her son. Disappointed, however,
and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased widk his
uncertain behaviour to herself, she was very well disposed
on the whole to regard his actions with aH ihe candid
allowances and genercaiS quaMfioations, whidi had hem
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
xsidieE nM»e paiofiiHy ei^tQr,ted; from her^ for Willou^by'a
service^ hj hex motb^r. His want of sgmpHy of openness^
aiid o£ consist^cx^ wer^ mosp itfually attributed to hioi
WADt of indepead^nce^ and his better knowledga of Mrs.
Ferrars's dispositioop and desigoa. The shcwtness of his
visits ih & steadiness o£ his purpose in leaving theip^ origin,
ated is. the same fettered^ inclination^ the same inevitable
necessity o£ temporising with bis mothen Xh« old > well-esta-
blished grievance c^ duty against wiil > parent agaii^tt child,
was tbe cause oi all-. She would have been glad to know wh^n
these diffijcohies were to cease^ this opposition was to yields
-*-wben Mrs. Fen^ars would be reformed^ and her sou
be at liberty to be hjappy. But from such vain wishes she
was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal of her oon»
idence iii Edward's aJ9ection > to the remembrance of evei^
BMrk of regard in look or word which feU from him while
at Barlon^ and above all^ to that flattering proof of it which
h^ constantly wore round his linger.
'* I think^ Edward^ " said Mrs. Dashwood^ as they werQ
al l»eakfa8t the last morning^ ^'you irould be a happier
iDfio if you bad any profession to ei^gage your time and
give an interest to your plans sod actioB^. Some incon.
veniienoe to your fj;ieuds, indeed^ might result from it—
you would not be able to give them so much of your timeir
But (with a smile) yoii would be materially benefited in
•B0 particular at least — you would know where to g9
when you left them. "
'^ I do assure you/'he i;ei4ied^''that I have Ipng thought
ail tihk point as you think npw. It h^ been^ and is^ and
l^bably will always be^ a k^avy misfprtone to me^ that I
have had no necessary buw.ess to engage me, no prpfessio^
lo gpive me employment^ or afford me any thing Hke indor
pendettfiew But unfortUDat^y np^ own nicety, and the
nicety of my friends, have made me what I am, an idle^
hapless beiug. We never could agi^eed in our choice of a
profession. I always pr^r^d the church, as I still d < v
But that was not smart enough for my family. They
leeojmmended the army* That was a great deal too smart
iox me. The law was aUowed to be genteel enough:
many yoong men, who had chambers in the Temple, mad^
a 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
S8 SENBE AND fiENBIBlLITT.
a very good appearance in the first drdea^ and drove about
town in very knowing gigs. But I had no incUnation foft
the law^ even in diis less a^truse study of it^ which my
famfly approved. As for the nayy^ it had fashion on its
side^ but I was too old when the subject was first started
to enter it ; and^ at lengthy as there was no necessity for
my having any profession at all^ as I mi^t be as dadhing
and expensive veithout a red coat on my back as with one^
idleness was pronounced on the whole to be the'most ad-
vantageous and honourable^ and a young man of eighteen
is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy as to
resist the solicitations of his friends to do nothing. I was
therefore entered at Oxford^ and have been properly idle
ever since. "
'*'The consequence of which, I suppose^ will be/* said
Mrs. Bashwood, ^* since leisure has not promoted your own
happiness, that your sons will be brought up to as many
pursuits, employments, professions, and trades as Cota-
inella's. "
'^ They will be brought up, " said he, in a serious accent;
'^ to be as unlike myself as is possible. In feeling, in
action, in condition, in every thing. "
'^ Come, come ; this is all an efiusion of immediate
want of spirits, Edward. You are in a melancholy hu-
mour, and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be
happy. But remember diat the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by every body at times, whatever be
their education or state. Know your own happiness. Tou
want nothing but patience— -or give it a more fasdnatiiig
name, call it hope. Your mother will secure to you, in
time, that independence you are so anxious for ; it is he»
duty, and it will, it must ere long become her happiness to
prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.
How much may not a few months do .^ "
" I think, " replied Edward, " that I may defy many
months to produce any good to me.'*
This desponding turn of mind, though it could not be
communicated to Mrs. Dashwood, gave additional pain to
them sH in the parting, which shortly took place, and kft
an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's fe^gs eipeciaDy,
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
BBNBE iLin > 8BN8IBII1ITT. 80
wlttdi reqnued some trouble and time to subdue. But as'
it was her detennination to subdue it^ and to prevent her-
adf from appearing to suffer more than what all her family
mi£fered on his going away^ she did not adopt the method'
ao judiciously employed by Marianne^ on a similar occasion^
to augment and ^x her sorrow^ by seeking silence, solitude,-
aiid idleness. Their means were as different as their olgects,
and equally suited to the advancement of each.
Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was
out of the house, busily employed herself the whole day,
neither soi^t nor ayoided the mention of his name, ap-
peared to interest herself almost as much as ever in the
general concerns of the family ; and if, by this conduct,
she did not lessen her own grief,'it was at least prevented
from unnecessary increase, and her mother and sisters weie
spared much solicitude on her account.
Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own,
appeared no more meritorious to Marianne, than her own
had seemed faulty to her. The business of self-command
she settled very easily : — with strong affections it was
impossible, with calm oneiB it could have no merit. That
her sister's affections were calm, she dared not deny, thou^
she blushed to acknowledge it ; and of the strength of her
own, she gave a very striking proof, by still loving tind
respecting that sbter, in spite of this mortifying con-
viction.
Without shutting herself up from her family, or leaving
the house in determined solitude to avoid them, or lying
awake the whole night to indulge meditation, Elinor found
every day afforded her leisure enough to think of Edward,
aad of Edward's behaviour, in every possible variety which
the different state of her spirits at different times could
produce, — with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure,
and doubt. There were moments in abundanee, when,
if not by the absence of her mother and sisters, at least by
the nature of their employments, conversation was for-
bidden among them, and every e£^ct of solitude was pro-
duced. Her mind was inevitably at liberty ; herthoughto
ootild not be chained elsewhere; and die past and the
foture, on a sulyect so interesting, must be before her.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
90 vmw, wKM^. 6w«pi & iac«i
Bilut forqe her a|iteiM«Nij. and eogron b«r mamoBj, haw
rflAktuH)^ and h^ & ncy.
FrqiD: a re^i^i^. o^ this kiAdv aa sh^ aUi a & hoc dnoring^
table, she waa. imiaed ana morniiig^ aooa after Bdaaards
leading th^n, hy tba imival o€ con^aoy. Sh« happened
to be qioijba idoo^» The dD9Uig oi the ]iUh gate, at iJie
efttranea of the. g^reeoL courti in ^smitoi the house, dsaw hes
eyes to the window, and she saw. a hu^e pacty waJUdug iq^.
to the doori Ani(mg^t them, wece Sir John and Liady
Middleton. and Mre. Jenninga, hut theae were two olberB,
a gend^nan and lady, vfho weaa quite unknowsi to. her*
She was sitting near die window; and as aooa as Sir John,
p^oelTed hev, he left the rest of the pacty to the oeconimy
of knocking U the door,, and stepping aci»6a the. tmf,
obliged her to open ihe caaeouwt lo speak to Mm^ tiboa^^
the space was so short between the dooe and the windom
aa to maire it hi»dly possible to c^eak all one widioui^ being
beerd aft the other.
" Well, " said he, " we hftve brought you some atruigeEB.
How do. you. lake them. ? "
*'Hush.! they will hear you. "
^^ Never mind i£ they do. It is only die Palmem.
Chadotte i» very pretty, I can tell yon. Yoil may see her
if you look this way. " "
As Elinor wja & eertain of seeing her ia a ooupfe of
minutes, without taking that liberty, she b^ged to be
eoicused.'
'^ Whejie ia Marianne ? Haa she ran away beeauae we
are come ? I see hei instrument is opea. "
^'She ia waJiking, I believe. "
They were bow joined hy Mrs. Jennings, who had not
patience enough to wait till the door was qiened before aba
told her story. She oame haUooing to the window,'^ Hew
do you do, my dear? How does MnuDashwood do?
And wheve are your sisters ? What ! all alone ! you will
be glad of a litde company to sit with you. i have brought
my (Mher son and daughter to see yoa. Only think of litoi
eoming so suddenly! I thought I heard a carriage last
night, while we were drinking our tea, but it never entered
nay head that it could be them. I thought of nothing bat
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
fosaaat Attn, smiaiasjvtr* 91
whether it might not be Ccdond Brandon come back again ;
90 I said to Sir John, I do think I hear a cavriage ; per.
hapa it is Colc«d Bnandon come back agpin-^****- "
EUnoF was oUiged to tum ftsom her^ in the middle of
her story, to seoeiya the rest oB the party : Lady Middie-
ton introduoed the two strangers; Mni« Pnshwood and
Margaret came down stairs at the same time, and they aii
ant down, to look at one another, whiie Mrs. Jennings con*
tioiied her stery as she walked through'the passage into
the parlour, attended by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than- Lady Mid-
^bton, and totally mhiGe her in every respeet. She was
short and plump^ had a very pretty faee, and the ftiest ex*
presson of good himoiir in. it that could possibly be. Her
manners were by no means saekgant as her sistet's, but they
wese much mose prepossessing. She came in with a smile,
sm & d all the time of her visit, except when she laughed,
and cmniled when she went away. Her hnsband- was a
gravtt looking young man of Ave or six and trwen^, with
aa air of more fEishion and sense than hie wife, b«t of leas
willingness to please or be pleased. He entered the room
with a look of self-consequence, slightly bowed to the
bdies, without speakhig a word, and, after briefly snrvey.
ing them and their apartments, took up a newspaper i^om
die toble, and continued to read it as long as he stayed.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was stvongly e & .
dowed by nature with a turn for being wniibrmly civil and
happy, was haidly seated before her admiratien of the par-
lour and every thing in it burst forth.
'* Well ! what a delightful room this is ( i never saw
asy thing ao charming J Only think, manuna, how it is
improved since 1 was here last ! i always thought it such
a sweet place, nui'am i (tarnkig to Mrs. Dashwood) but
yon have made it so charming f Oabf look, aister, how de^.
M^Mfhl every dung is ! How I should like such a house
liMr Bsysdf ! SitoukL not yon, Mr. Palmer ?'^
Mr. Pafan«: nsade her no answer, and dad not even raise
faia. eyes from the newi^aper.
. ^ Mr. Palm» does not hear me, " said she, laughhig ^
" he never does sometimes. It is so ridiculous I "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
96 ^ SENSK AND fiENSIBnilTT.
This was qmte a new idea to Mis. Dashwood ; she had
never been used to find wit in the inattention of any one^
and could not help looking with surprise at them hoit.
Mrs. Jennings^ in the mean time^ talked on as loud as
Ae eovld, and continued her account of their surprise^ the
eireniDg before, on seeing their friends, without ceasing till
every thing was told. Mrs. Palmer laughed heartily at the
recollection of their astonishment, and every body agreed,
two or three times over, that it had been quite an agreeable
surprise.
'^ You may believe how glad we all were to see them, "
added Mrs. Jennings, leaning forwards towards £linor,
and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to be heard by
no one else, though they were seated on different sides of
liie room ;'^ but, however, I can't help wishing they had
not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey
of it, f(nr they came all round by London upon account of
some business, for you know (nodding significantly and
pointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her situation.
I wanted her to stay at home and rest this morning, but
she would come with us ; she longed so much to see you
aU! "
Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any
harm.
'^ She expects to be confined in February,** continued
Mrs. Jennings. -
Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a con-
versation, and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer
if there was any news in the paper.
^^ No, none at all, " he replied, and read on. .
" Here comes Marianne, " cried Sir John. " Now,
Palmer, you shall see a monstrous pretty girl. "
He immediately went into the passage, opened the front
door, and ushered her in himself. Mrs. Jennings asked
her, as. soon as she appeared, if she had not been to Allen.
ham ; and Mrs. Palmer laughed so heartily at the question,
as to show she understood it. Mr. Palmer looked up on
hex entering the room, stared at her some minutes, and
then returned to his newspaper. Mrs. Palmer's eye was
d by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBILtTT. 9^
now caught by the drawings which hung lound'the room.
She got up to examine them.
** Oh dear, how beautiful these are ! Well, how dtf-
lightful ! Do but look, mamma, how sweet ! I declare
tbey are quite charmiug ; I could look at them for ever. "
And then sitting down again, she very soon forgot that
there were any such things in the room.
When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmer
rose also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himself, and
looked at them aU around.
''My love, have you been asleep ? " said his wife,
laughing. r
He made her no answer ; and only observed, after again
examining the room, that it was very low pitched, and
that the ceiling was crooked. He then made his bow, and
departed with the rest.
Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend
the next day at the Park. Mrs. Dash wood, who did not
-eboose to dine with them oftener than they dined at the
cottage, absolutely reused on her own accotmt; her
daughters might do as they ideased. But they had no
curiosity to see how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinnev,
and no expectation of pleasure from them in. any other
.way. They attempted, therefore, likewise to excuse them-
selves ; the weather was uncertain, and not likely to be
good. But Sir John would not be satisfied, — the carriage
should be sent for them, and they must come. Lady Mid-
dleton too, though she did not press their mother, pressed
thera. Mrs. Jennings and Mrs. Palmer joined their en-
treaties, — aU seemed equally anxious to avoid a family
•party ; and the young ladies were obliged to yield.
^* Why should they ask us? " said Marianne, as soon as
they were gone.'^ The rent of this cottage is said to be
low ; but we have it on very hard terms, if we are to dib/i
^t the Park whenever any one is staying either with them
or with us. "
'^ They mean no less to be civil and kind to us ndw, "
■aid Elinor,''^ by these frequent invitatiotis than by them
which we received from them a few weeks ago. The aL
d by Google
9$ tOEKWB iilVD UfiMHUnnilTy*
tBntkm h not in thera^ if their partiefl are grown tedkmM
and dull. We must look for the change eliewhere. "
CHAPTER XX.
As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the
P^ the next day^ at one door^ Mrs. Palmer came running
in at the other^ looking as good humoured and merry as
before. She took them all most afiecdonately by the hand^
mad expressed great delight in seeing them again.
^'I am so glad to see you! " said she^ aeating henelf
between Elinor and Marianne ; " for it is-so bad a day I was
afraid you might not come, which would be a shocking
things as we go away again to-morrow. We must go, for
the Westons eome to us next week, you know. It was
quite a sudden thing our coming at all; and I knew
nothing of it till the carriage was coming to the door >
and then Mr.'Palmer asked me if I would go with him
to Barton. He is so droll ! He never tells me any thing !
I am so -sorry'we cannot stay longer; however we ahall
meet again in town very soon^ I hope. "
Th^ were obliged to put an end to such an expec-
tation.
''Not go to town ! " cried Mrs. Palmer^ with a laugh;
"'I shall be quite disappointed if you do not. I could get
the nicest house in the world for you^ next door to oa» in
Hanover Square. You must come > indeed. I am sore I
shaU be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into
public. "
They thanked her ; but were obliged to resist all her
entreaties.
" Oh, my love, " cried Mrs. Palmer to her husband, who
just then entered the room, " you must help me to pei-
suade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter/'
d by Google
" flBNSB AND SlEMRBIXimr. Q6
Her love made no answer ; and after slightlj bowing
to the ladies^ began complaimng*of the weather.
*'How horrid all this is ! " said he. " Such weather
nuioes every thing and every body disgusting. Btdness is
as much produced within doors as without^ by rain. It
malces one detest all one's acquaintance. What the devil
does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his
house? How few people know what comfort is! Sir
John is as stupid as the weather. "
The rest of the company soon dropt in.'
^*I am afraid^ Miss Marianne/'said Shr John^''you
hare not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham
to-day. "
Marianne lodced very grave^ and said nothing.
''Oh, don't be so sly before us/'said Mrs. Pahner; " fbr
ire know all about it^ I assure you; and I admire jmt
taste very much, for I think he is extremely handsome.
We do not five a great way from him in the country, you
know. Not above ten miles, I dare say. "
" Much nearer thirty, " said her husband.
" Ah, well! there is not much difference. I never
was at his house; but they say it is a sweet pretty
" As vile a spot as I ever saw in my fife, " said Mt.
Plslmer.
Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her coun-
tenance betrayed her interest in what was said.
" Is it very ugly ? " continued Mrs. Palmer ;— " then
it must be some other place that is so pretty, I suppose.**
When they were seated in the dining-room. Sir John
observed with regret that they were only eight all together.
" My dear,*'said he to his lady, " it is very'provoking
that we should be so few. Why did not you ask the
Gilberts to come to us to-day ? "
" Did not I tell you. Sir John, when you spoke to me
about it before, that it could not be done ? They dined
with us last. "
" You and I, Sir John, " said Mrs. Jennings, " should
not stand upon such ceremony. "
" Then you would be very ill-bred, " cried Mr. Palmer.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
96 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
^'My love^ you contradict every body, " said his wife
with her usual kugh. ^'Do you know that you are quite
rude? "
" I did not know I contradicted any body in calling
your mother ill-bred.*'
^'Ay, you may abuse me as you please,'* said the good-
natured old lady;''you have taken Charlotte off my hands,
and cannot give her back again. So there I have the whip
hand of you. "
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband
could not get rid of her ; and exultingly said, she did not
care how cross he was to her, as they must live together.
It was impossible for any one to be more thoroughly good-
natured, or more determined to be happy, than Mrs. Pal«
mer. The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent
of her husband gave her no pain ; and when he scolded or
duused her, she was highly diverted.
''Mr. Palmer is so droll !'* said she, |n a whisper, to
Elinor.'^ He is always out of humour, "
Elinor was not inclined, after a litde observation, to
give him credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly
ill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to appear. His temper
might perhaps be a little soured by finding, like many
others of his sex, that through some unaccountable bias in
favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very silly
woman, — but she knew that this kind of blunder was too
conmoa for any sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it.
It was rather a wish of distinction, she believed, which
produced his contemptuous treatment of every body, and
his general abuse of every thing before him. It was the
desire of appearing superior to other people. The motive
was too common to be wondered at; but the means,
however they might succeed by establishing his superiority
in ill-breeding, were not likdy to attach any one to him
except his wife.
''Oh, my dear Miss Dashwood, " said Mrs. Palmer soon
i^terwards, " I have got such a favour to ask of you and
your sister. Will you come and spend some time at Cleve-
land this Christmas ? Now, pray do, — and come while the^
AVestons are with us. You cannot think how happy I shall
d by Google
SBOreB ANP SEN8IBILXTT.- ST
be ! It will be quite delightful ! — My love^ " applying to
her husband^''don't you long to have the Miss Dashwoods
come to Cleveland ? "
*'Certainly, " he replied, with a sneer; " I came into
Devonshire with no other view. "
''There now, " said his lady,'^ you see Mr. Palmer ex*
pects you ; so you cannot refuse to come. "
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation.
■ *^ But indeed you must and shall come. I am sure you
will like it of all things. The Westons will be with us,
and it will be quite delightful. You cannot think what a
sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gay now, for
Mr. Palmer is always going about the country canvassing
against the election; and so many people come to dine with
us that I never saw before, it is quite charming! But, poor
fellow ! it is very fatiguing to him, for he is forced to
make every body like him. "
£linor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented
to the hardship of such an obligation.
'^ How charming it will be, " said Charlotte, " when he
is in Parliament I — won't it } How I shall laugh ! It will
be 80 ridiculous to see all his letters directed to him with an
M.P.—'But do you know, he says, he will never frank for
me ? He declares he won't. Don't you, Mr. Palmer? "
Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.
'^ He cannot bear writing, you know, " she continued ;
** he says it is quite shocking.'*
*'No, " said he, *'I never said any thing so irrationaL
Don't palm all your abuses of language upon me. "
" There now ; you see how droll he is. This is alwayt
the way with him ! Sometimes he won't speak to me for
half a day together, and then he comes out with something
ap dn^ — all about any thing in the world. "
She surprised Elinor very much as they returned into
the drawing-room, by asking her whether she did not like
Mr. Palmer excessivdy.
" Certainly, " said Elinor ; " he seems very agreeable.''
'^ Well, I am so glad you do. I thought you would,
he is so pleasant ; and Mr. Palmer is exxsessively pleased
with you and your sisters, I can tell you; and you can't
B
■ Digitized by Google
98 BEXtBE AND SENSIBILITY*'
think how disappointed he will he if you don't come to'
Cleveland. I can't imagine why you should ohject to it.**
Elinor was again ohliged to decUne her invitation ; and,
by changing the subject^ put a stop to her entreaties. She
thought it probable that as they lived in the same county
Mrs. Palmer might be able to give some more particular
account of Willoughby's general character than could be
gathered from the Middletons'partial acquaintance with
him ; and she was eager to gain from any one such a con-
firmation of his merits as might remove the possibility of
fear from Marianne. She b^an by enquiring if they saw
much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland^ and whether they
were intimately acquainted with him.
''Oh dear, yes ; I know him extremely well, " replied
Mrs. Palmer; —''not that I ever spoke to Itim, indeed; but
I have seen him for ever in town. Some how or other I
never happened to be staying at Barton while he was at
AUraham. Mamma saw him here once before ; but I was
with my uncle at Weymouth. However, I dare say we
should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire, if it
had not happened very unluckily that we should never have
been in the country together. He is very littie at Combe,
I believe ; but if he were ever so much there, I do not
think Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he is in the oppo-
sition, you know, and besides it is such a way off. I know
why you enquire about him, very well ; your sister is to
marry him. I ain monstrous glad of it, for then I shall
have her for a neighbour, you know. "
'^ Upon my word, " replied Elinor,'^ you know much
more of the matter than I do, if you have any reason to
expect such a match. "
'^ Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what
every body talks of. I assure you I heard of it in my way
through town. "
«'My dear Mrs. Palmer ! "
" Upon my honour 1 did. I met Colonel Brandon
Monday morning in Bond Street, just before we left town^
and he t6ld me of it directiy. "
^^ You surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon tell
you of it! Surely you must be mistaken. To give such
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8ENSB AKD SENSIBILITY. 99
intelligence to a person who could not be interested in it;
even- if it were true^ is not what I should expect Colond
Brandon to do. "
*'But I do assure you it was so^ for all that^ and I will
tell you how it happened. When we met him^ he turned
tMick and walked with us ; and so we began talking of my
brother and sister^ and one thing and another; and I said to
him, * So, Colonel, there is a new family come to Barton
cottage, I hear, and mamma sends me word they are very
pretty, and that one of them is going to be married to
Mr. Willoughby of Combe Magna. Is it true, pray ? for
of course you must know, as you have been in Devonshire
so lately.'"
''And what did the Colonel say ? "
''Oh, he did not say much ; but he looked as if he
knew it to be true, so from that moment I set it down a»
certain. It will be quite delightful, I declare. " Wlien is it
to take place ? "
** Mr. Brandon was very well, I hope ? "
" Oh, yes, quite well ; and so fuU of your praises, he
did nothing but say fine things of you. "
'* I am flattered by his commendation. He seems an
exceDent man ; and I think him uncommonly pleasing. "
'^ So do I. He is such a charming man, that it is quite
a pity he should be so grave and so dull. Mamma says he
was in love with your sister too. I assure you. it was a
great compliment if he was, for he hardly ever falls in love
with any body. "
** Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of
Somersetshire ? " said Elinor.
'* Oh, yes, extremely weQ ; that is, I do not believe
many people are acquainted with him, because Combe
Magna is so far off; but they all think him extremely
agreeable, I assure you. Nobody is more liked than Mr.
Willoughby wherever he goes, and so you may tell your
sister. She is a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my
honour ; not but that he is much more lucky in getting
her, because she is so very handsome and agreeable, that
nothing can be good enough for her. However, I don't
think her hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you ;
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
100 SffirSE AND SENSIBILITT.
fot I think you both excessively pretty^ and so does Mr.'
Palmer too^ I am sure^ though we could not get him to own
it last night. "
Mrs. Palmer's information respecting WiUoughby was
Hot very material ; but any testimony in his favour^ how-
ever small^ was pleasing to heh
!'^ I am so glad we are got acquainted at last^ " continued
Charlotte.''And now I hope we shall always be great
friends. You can't think how much I longed to see you.
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage.
Nothing can be like it^ to be sure. And I am so glad your
«ister is going to be well married. I hope you will be, a
great deal at Combe Magna. It is a sweet place^ by all
accounts. "
'''You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon^
have not you ? "
'^ Yes, a great while ; ever since my sister married.
He was a particular friend of Sir John's. I believe, " she
added, in a low'voice, *'he would have been very glad to
have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady Middleton
wished it very much. But mamma did not think the match
good enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have men-
tioned it to the Colonel, and we should have been married
immediately. "
^^ Did not. Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal
to your mother before it was made ? Had he never owned
bis affection to yoursdf ? "
** Oh, no ; but if mamma had not objected to it, I dare
|»y he would have liked it of all things. He had not seen
me then above twice, for it was before I left school. How«i
ever, I am much happier as I am. Mr. Palmer is just the
kind of man I like. "
CHAPTER XXI.
tTHB Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the
two families at Barton were again left to entertain eadi
Digitized bj^'
Google
fffiNRE AND SBNglBIXilTV; 101
Other. But tlus did not last long; Elinor had hardly got
their last visiters out of hei* head^ — had hardly done won«
dering at Charlotte s heing so happy without a cause^ at
Mr. Palmer's acting so simply^ with good abilities^ and at
the strange unsuitableness which often existed between
husband and wife^ — before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings's
active zeal in the cause of society procured her some other
new acquaintance to see and observe.
In a morning's excursion to Exeter^ they had met with
two young ladies^ whom Mrs. Jennings had the satisfaction
of discovering to be her relations, and this was enough for
Sir John to invite them directly to the Park^ as soon as
their present engagements at Exeter were over. Their en^-
gagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such an
invitation ; and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little
alarm, on the return of Sir John, by hearing that she was
very soon to receive a visit from two girls whom she had
never seen in her life, and of whose elegance — whose
tolerable gentility even — she could have no proof; for the
assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went
for nothing at all. Their being her relations, too, made
it so much the worse ; and Mrs. Jennings's attempts at con-
solation were, therefore, unfortunately founded, when she
advised her daughter not to care about their being so
fashionable; because they were all. cousins, and must put
up with one another. As it was impossible, however, now
to prevent their coming. Lady Middleton resigned herself
to the idea of it with all the philosophy of a well-bred
woman, contenting herself with merely giving her husband
a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times every
day.
The young ladies arrived : their appearance was by no
means ungenteel or unfashionable. Their dress was very
smart, their manners very civil : they were delighted with
the house, and in raptures with the furniture ; and they
happened to be so doatingly fond of children, that Lady
Middleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before
they had been an hour at the Park. She declared them to
be very agreeable girls indeed, which, for her Ladyship,
I enthusiastic admiration, fo John'a confidence in bib
H S
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
;L02 SBNSB and 6BN8IBaiITT«
own judgment rose with this animated praise^ and he set off
directly for the cottage^ to tell the Miss Dashwoods of
the Miss Steeles'arrival^ and to assure them of their heing
the sweetest girls in the world. From such commendation
as this^ however, there was not much to be learned : Elinor
well knew that the sweetest girls in the world were to be
met with in every part of England, under every possible
variation of form, face, temper, and understanding. Sir
John wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly
and look at his guests. Benevolent, philanthropic man !
It was painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself.
^'Do come now, " said he —''pray come — you must
come — I declare you shall come. You can't think how
you will like them. Lucy is monstrous pretty, and so good
humoured and agreeable ! The children are all hanging
about her already, as if she was an old acquaintance.
And they both long to see you of all things ; for they have
heard at Exeter that you are the most beautiful creatures in
the world ; and I have told them it is all very true, and a
great deal more. You will be delighted vnth them, I am
sure. They have brought the whole coach full of playthings
for the children. Hqw can you be so cross as not to come ?
Why they are your cousins, you know, after a fashion.
Ymi are my cousins, and they are my wife's ; so you must
be related. "
% But Sir John could not prevail : he could only obtain a
promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two^
and then left them in amazement at their indifference, to
walk home and boast anew of their attractions to the Miss
Steeles, as he had been aheady boasting of the Miss Steeles
to them.'
. When their promised visit to the Park, and consequent
introduction to these young ladies, took place, they found in
.the appearance of the eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a
very plain and not a sensible face, nothing to admire ; but
in the* other, who was not more than two or three and
twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty : her fea«
tures were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, imd a
smartness of: air;, which, though it did not give actual
^elegance or grace^.gave distinction to her person. Their
Digitized ,
by Google
BBHSB AND 8BN8ZBILITT. .103
manners were particularly dvil^ and. Elinor soon allowed
.tiiem credit for some kind of sense^ when she saw with
what constant and judicious attentions they were making
themsdves agreeable to Lady Middleton. With her children
they were in continual raptures^ extolling their beauty^
courting their notice^ and humouring all^their whims ; and
snch of their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which this politeness made on it was spent in ad^
miration of whatever her Ladyship was doings if she hap-
pened to be doing any things or in taking patterns of some
eL^;ant new dress^ in which her appearance the day before
had thrown them into unceasing delight. Fortunately for
those who pay their court through such foibles^ a fond
mother^ though^ in pursuit of praise for her children^ the
most rapacious of human beings^ is likewise the most
credulous: her demands are exorbitant; but she will swallow -
any thing; and the excessive affection and endurance of
the Miss Steeles towards her offspring were viewed^ there-
fore^ by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise or
• distrust. She saw with maternal complacency all the im-
pertinent encroachments and mischievous tricks to which
her cousins submitted. She saw their sashes untied^ thdr
hair pulled about their ears^ their work-bags searched^ and
their knives and scissors stolen away, and felt no doubt of
its being a reciprocal eigoyment. It suggested no other
surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so com-
poeedly by, without claiming a share in what was passing.
''John is in such spirits to-day ! " said she, on his taking
Miss Steele's pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of
window —'* he is full of monkey tricks. "
And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinch-
ing one of the same lady's fingers, she fondly observed,
^'How playful William is ! "
*'And here is my sweet little Anna-maria, " she added,
tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old, who had
not made a noise for the last two minutes ;'^ and she is
always so gentle and quiet. Never was there such a quiet
little thing 1 "
But unfortunately in bestovring these embraces, a pinun
her Ladyship's head-dress slightly scratching the cbild't
B 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
104t tttKSA A.WD SEVrStBHilTT^
iieek^ produced from this pattern of gentleness such violent
screams^ as could hardly be outdone by any creature pro.
fessedly noisy. The mother's consternation was excessiTe ;
but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and
every thing was done by all three, in so critical an emer-
gency, which affection could suggest, as likely to assu^
the agonies of the little sufferer. She was seated in het
mother's lap, covered with kisses, her wound bathed with
lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who was on her
knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed with sugar
plums by the other. With such a reward for her tears,
the child was too wise to cease crying. She still screained
and sobbed lustily, kicked her two brothers for offering to
touch her; and all their united soothings were ineffectual, till
Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of
similar distress'last week some apricot marmalade had
been successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same
remedy was eagerly proposed for this unfortunate scratch,
and a slight intermission of screams in the young lady on
hearing it gave them reason to hope that it would not be
Tijected. She was carried out of die room, therefore, in
her mothers arms, in quest of this medicine; and as the
two boys chose to follow, though earnestly entreated by
their mother to stay behind, the four young ladies were
left in a quietness which the room had not known for many
hours.
''Poor little creature ! " said Miss Steele, as soon as they
were gone ; " it might have been a very sad acddent. "
" Yet I hardly know how,''cried Marianne, " unless it
had been under totally different circumstances. But this
18 the usual way of heightening alarm, where there is no*
^ng to be alarmed at in reality. "
'^ What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is ! " said Lucy
Steele.
Marianne was silent ; it was impossible for h & to say
what she did not feel, however trivial die occasion ; and
upon Elinor, therefore, the whde task of teUing lies, when
politeness required it, always fell. She did her best when
AvtB called on, by speaking of Lady Middleton with more
warmth tha^ idie felt, though with far less thap Mfss Luey»
• Digitized by LjOOQIC
SENfli Afn > VBNBIBtLTrTm 105
'^ And Sir John, too, " cried the elder sister^''what k
charming man he is I**
Here^ too^ Miss Dash wood's commendation, heing only
simple and just^ came in without any eclat. She merely
observed that he was perfectly good humoured and friendly.
*^ And what a charming little family they hare ! I never
saw such fine children in my life. I declare I quite doat
upon them already^ and indeed I am always distractedly
fond of children/'
''I should guess so/'said Elinor^ with a smile^ ^'from
what I have witnessed this morning. "
" I have a notion/'said Lucy,'^ you think the little
Middletons rather too much indulged ; perhaps they may
he the outside of enough ; but it is so natural in Lady Mid-
dleton ; and for my part I love to see children full of life
and spirits ; I cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet. "
*'I confess/'replied Elinor^ " that while I am at Barton
Park I never thiiJc of tame and quiet children with any
abhorrence. "
A short pause succeeded this speech^ which was first
broken by Miss Steele^ who seemed very much disposed
for conversation, and who now said, rather abruptly, ** And
how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood ? I suppoae
you were very sorry to leave Sussex. "
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or
at least of the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor re-
plied that she was.
*'Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it? "
added Miss Steele.
''We have heard Sir John admire it excessively, " said
Lucy, who iteemed to think some apology necessary for the
freedom of her sister.
''I think every one mtist admire it, " replied Elinor,
" who ever saw the place ; though it is not to be supposed
that any one can estimate its beauties as we do. "
** And had you a great many smart beaux there ? 1
-suppose you have not so many in this part of the world.
For my part, I think they are a vast addition always. "
''But 4Prhy should you think,''said Lucy, looking
d by Google
106
f^BNSB AND fiSNSIBIIilTr.
aflhamed of her sister^ " that there are not as many gented
young men in Devonshire as Sussex } "
*^ Nay, my dear, I'm sore I don t pretend to say that
there an*t. I'm sure there's a vast many smart beaux in
Exeter ; but you know, how could I tell what smart beaux
there might be about Norland; and I was only afraid
the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they
had not so many as they used to have. But perhaps you
young ladies may not care about the beaux, and had as
lief be without them as with them. For my part, I think
they are vastly agreeable, provided they dress smart and
behave civil. But I can't beav to see them dirty and nasty.
Now there's Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young
man, quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet
if you do but meet him of a morning, he is not fit to be
seen. I suppose your brother was quite a beau. Miss
Dashwood, before be married^ as he was so rich ? "
''Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " I cannot tell you,
for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word.
But this I can say, that if he ever was a beau before he
married, he is one stiU^ for there is not the smallest alter-
ation in him. "
'^^ Oh, dear .'one never thinks of married men's being
beaux — they have something else to do. "
'^ Lord ! Anne, " cried her sister^'^ you can talk of no-
ihing but beaux ; you will make Miss Dashwood believe
you think of nothing else. " And then, to turn the discourse,
she began admiring the house and the furniture.
This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. The
Tulgar freedom and foUy of the eldest left her no recom-
mendation ; and as Elinor was not blinded by the beauty,
or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want of reid
elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any
wish of knowing them better.
Not so the Miss Steeles. They came from Exeter
'well provided with admiration for the use of Sir John
Middleton, his family, and all his relations ; and no nigr
gardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair cousins,
whom ihey declared to be the most beautiful^ elegant, «c.
complished, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENflB AND SENSIBIIiITr* 107
with whom they were particularly anxious to be better ac-
quainted. And to be better acquainted^ therefore^ Elinor
«oon found was their inevitable lot ; for as Sir John was
entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles, their party would
he too strong for opposition^ and that kind of intimacy
must be submitted to^ which consists of sitting an hour or
two together in the same room almost every day. Sir
John could do no more; but he did not know that any
more was required : to be together was^ in his opinion^ to
he intimate; and while his continual schemes for their
meeting were effectual^ he had not a doubt of their being
established friends.
To do him justice^ he did every thing in his power to
promote their unreserve^ by making the Miss Steeles ac^
quainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins'
situations in the most delicate particulars; and £linor
had not seen them more than twice^ before the eldest of
them wished her joy on her sister's having been so lucky
as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came
to Barton.
^^'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young,
to be sure^ " said she^ " and I hear he is quite a beau^ and
prodigious handsome. And I hope you may have as good
luck yourself soon ; but^ perhaps^ you may have a friend
in the comer already. "
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more
nice in proclaiming his supicions of her regard for Edward^
than he had been with respect to Marianne ; indeed it was
rather his favourite joke of the two^ as being somewhat
newer and more conjectural ; and since Edward's visit, they
had never dined together without his drinking to her best
afiections with so much significancy and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. The letter F had been
likewise invariably brought forward, and found productive of
such countless jokes, that its character, as the wittiest letter
in the alphabet, had been long established with Elinor.
The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the
benefit of these jokes ; and in the eldest of them they raised
a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman alluded to,
.which, though often impertinently expressed, was perfectly
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
108 BBK8B AKD 6BKSIBItfmr»
of a piece with her general inquisitiveness into the concerns
of their family. But Sir John did not sport long with the
curiosity which he delighted to raise^ for he had at least as
much pleasure in telling the name^ as Miss Steele had in
hearing it.
''His name is Ferrars, " said he, in a very audible whis-
per ;''but pray do not tell it, for it's a great secret. "
" Ferrars ! " repeated Miss Steele ; " Mr. Ferrars is the
happy man, is he.^ What! your sister-in-kw's brother.
Miss Dashwood f a very agreeable young man to be sure ;
I know him very well. "
" How can you say so, Anne ? " cried Lucy, who gene^
rally made an amendment to all her sister s assertions.
** Though we have seen him once or twice at my uncle's,
it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well, "
£linor heard all this with attention and surprise. ** And
who was this uncle ? Where did he live ? How came they
acquainted ? " She wished very much to have the subject
continued, though she did not choose to join in it herself;
but nothing more of it was said, and, for the first time in her
life, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity
after petty information, or in a disposition to communicate
it. The manner in which Miss Steele had spoken of £d^
ward increased her curiosity ; for it struck her as being
rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of that lady^
knowing, or fancying herself to know, something to his dis-
advantage. But her curiosity was unavailing ; for no far-
ther notice was taken of Mr. Ferrars*s name by Miss Steele
when aUuded to, or even openly mentioned by Sir John.

CHAPTER XXII.
Mariannb, who had never much toleration for any thing
like impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or enia
difference of taste from henelf, was at this time partieolailgr
iU-disposed, from the stote of her spirits^ to b^ pleased with
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ffl^fSB'XST > SENSIBUiITT. 109
Uie Miss Stedes^ or to encourage their advances; and to
die invariable coldness of her behaviour towards them,
which checked every endeavour at intimacy on their side;,
Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself
which soon became evident in the manners of both^ but
especially of Lucy^ who missed no opportunity of engaging
ber in conversation^ or of striving to improve their ac-
quaintance by an easy and frank communication of her sen-
timents.
- Lucy was naturally clever ; her remarks were often just
and amusing ; and as a companion for half an hour £]inor
frequently found her agreeable ; but her pawers had re-
ceived no aid from education : she was ignorant and illite.
rate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement^ her want
of information in the most common particulars^ could not
be concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant
endeavour to appear to advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied
her for, the neglect of abilities which education might have
rendered so respectable ; but she saw, with less tenderness
pf feelings the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitude, and
integrity of mind, which her attentions, her assiduities, her
flatteries at the Park betrayed ; and she could have no last-
ing satisfaction in the company of a person who joined
insincerity with ignorance ; whose want of instruction pre-
Tented their meeting in conversation on terms of equality^
and whose conduct towards others made every show of at*
tention and deference towards herself perfectly valueless.
'^ Yon will think my question an odd one, I dare say,'*
gaid Lucy to her one day, as they were walking together
^m the Park to the cottage;'^ but, pray, are you person-
ally acquainted with your sister-in-law's mother, Mr8«
Ferrars? "
Elinor did think the question a very odd one, and her
orantenance expressed it, as she answered that she had
never seen Mrs. Ferrars.
*'Indeed ! " replied Lucy ; " I wonder at that, for I
tliought you must have seen her at Norland sometimes.
Then, perhaps, you cannot tdl me what sort of a woman
fibcis? "
*'No, " returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
110 SENSE AKD SENSIBlLITT.
opinion of £dward*8 mother, and not very desirous of satis-
fying, what seemed impertinent curiosity;''I know no-
thing of her. "
" I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiring
about her in such a way, " said Lucy, eyeing Elinor atten-
tively as she spoke ;''hut perhaps there may be reasons—
I wish I might venture ; but, however, I hope you wiU da
me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be im-'
pertinent. "
Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few
minutes in silence. It was broken by Lucy, who renewed
the subject again by saying, with some hesitation, —
'^ I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently
curious. I am sure I would rather do any thing in the
world than be thought so by a person whose good opinion
is so well worth having as yours. And I am sure I should
not have the smallest fear of trusting you ; indeed, I should
be very glad of your advice how to manage in such an un < «
comfortable situation as I am ; but, however, there is no
occasion to trouble you. I am sorry you do not happen to
know Mrs. Ferrars. "
*^ I am sorry I do not^ said Elinor, in great astonish-
ment, *'if it could be of any use to you to know my opinion
of her. But really I never understood that you were at
aU connected with that family, and therefore I am a little
surprised, I confess, at so serious an enquiry into her cha-
racter. "
*^ I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder
at it. But if I dared tell you all, you would not be so much
surprised. Mrs. Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at pre-
sent; but the time may come — how soon it will come
must depend upon herself — when we may be very inti-
mately connected. "
She looked down as she said this, amiably bashfol, with
only one side glance at her companion to observe its efiect
on her.
" Good heavens \ " cried Elinor, " what do you mean?
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrars ? Can you
be ? " And she did not feel much delighted with the idea
of such a sister-in-law.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SXSSE AKD SENSIBILITY/ 111
" No/'replied Lucy,''not to Mr. IMert Ferrars — I
never saw Wm in my life; but/'fixing her eyes upon
Elinor,''to his elder brother/'
What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, that
would have been as painful as it was strong, had not an
immediate disbelief of the assertion attended it. She
turned towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable to divine*
the reason or object of such a declaration ; and though her
complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt
in no danger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon.
'^ You may well be surprised, " continued Lucy ; ^'for
to be sure you could have had no idea of it before ; for I
dare say he never dropped the smallest hint of it to you or
any of your family; because it-was always meant to be a'
great secret, and 1 am sure has been faithfully kept so by
me to this hour. Not a soul of all my relations know of it
but Anne, and I never should have mentioned it to you, if
I had not felt the greatest dependence in the world upon
your secrecy ; and I really thought my behaviour in asking
so many questions about Mrs. Ferrars must seem so
odd, that it ought to be explained. And I do not think
Mr. Ferrars can be displeased, when he knows I have
tiusted you, because 1 know he has the highest opinion in
the world of all your family, and looks upon yourself and
the other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own sisters. " She
paused.
Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Her as-*
tonishment at what she heard was at first too great for
words ; but at length forcing herself to speak, and to speak
cautiously, she said, with a calmness of manner which
tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude, —
'^ May I ask if your engagement is of long standing ? "
^'We have been engaged these four years. "
'* Four years! "
*'Yes. "
Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to be*
Meve it.
. " I did not know, " said she, " that you were even ac-.
Attainted till the other day. "
''Our acquaintance, however, is of many years'date-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
IIS aiBNSB AND flEtrsntUiITT*
He was nsder mj nude's care^ 70a kiiow^ a considerable
whUe. " ,
" Yourimcle! "
''Yes ; Mr. Pratt. Did you never hear him talk of
Mr. Pratt? "
" I think I have/'replied Elinor^ with an exertion of
spirits^ which increased with her increase of emotion.
^'He was four years with my uncle^ who lives at Long-*
staple, near Plymouth. It 1 was there our acquaintance
begun^ for my sister and me was often staying vnth my
uncle^ and it was there our engagement was formed, though
not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil ; but he was
almost always with us afterwards. I was very unwilling
to enter into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge
and approbation of his mother ; but I was too young, and
loved him too well, to be so prudent as I ought to have
been. Though you do not know him so well as me. Miss
Dashwood, you must have seen enough of him to be sen*
sible he is very capable of making a woman sincerdy at-
tached to him. "
" Certainly, " answered Ehnor, without knowing wrfaat
die said ; but, after a moment's reflection, she added, with
revived security of Edward's honour and love, and her
companion's falsehood, —''Engaged to Mr. Edward Feiv
rars ! — I confess myself so totally surprised at what you
tell me, that really — I beg your pardon ; but surely there
must be some mistake of person or name. We cannot
mean the same Mr. Ferrars. "
''We can mean no other, " cried Lucy, smiling.'^ Mr.
Edward Ferrars, the eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars of Park
Street, and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dash-
wood, is the person I mean ; you must allow that / ant
not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on
whom all my happiness depends. "
'^ It is strange, " replied Elinor, in a most painful per«
plexity, ^ Ihat I tdiould never have heard him even menlion
your name. "
^ ^^ No; considering our dtuation, it was not strang e.
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret You
Imew nothing of me, or my family, and, therefore^ there
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
^^xk^ Ami dENdiBiLiTt. 113
oiKild be no otcasion f^ ever mentiomng my name to you ;
and^ as he was always particularly afraid of his sister's sus^
pecdng any things that was reason enough for his not men-
ttoning it "
'She was silent Elitiot-'s 8e < ;urity simk ; but her sdf-
oommand did not sink with it
*'Fottr years you have been engaged, " said she, with a
finn vdce.
" Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may
have to wait Poor £dward! It puts him quite out
of heart. " Then taking a small miniature from her pocket,
she added, " To prevent the possibility of mistake, be so
good as to look at this faee. It does not do him justice, to
he'sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the
^{lerson it was drew fl»r. I have had it above these three
years. "
She put it hi to her haoids as she spoke; and wheri £li < ior
saw the painting, whatever other doubts her feaf of a tOo
hasty decision, or her wish of detecting falsehood, might
stilfer to linger in her mind, she could have none of its
being Edwaord's face. She returned it almost instantly, ac-
knowledging the likeness.
** I have never been able, " continued Lucy, " to give
hint my picture in return, which I am very much vexed at,
for he has been always so anxious to get it ! But I am
deteormined to sit for it the very first opportunity. "
'^ You are quite in the right, " replied Elinor, calmly.
They ihea proceeded a few paces in silence. Lucy spoke
Brst.
** I ani sure, " said i*e, " I have no doubt in the world
of your faithftiUy keeping this secret, because y6u must
kBow of what importance it is to us, not to have it reach
hii mother ; for she would never approve of it, I dare say.
I shall have no fortune, and I fancy she is an exceeding
proad woman. "
'" I certainly did not seek your confidence, " said Elinor ;
^^ but you do me no more than justice in imagining that I
msy be depended on. Your secret is safe with me; but
pardm me if I expi*e8s some surprise at so unnecessai^ a
I
d by Google
114 SBNSB AND 8EN8IBIUTY.
communication. You must at least have felt that my.
being acquainted with it could not add to its safety. "
As she said this^ she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping
to discover something in her countenance; perhaps the
falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying ;
but Lucy's countenance suffered no change.
''I was afraid you would think I was taking a great
liberty with you, " said she, " in telling you all this. I
havB not known you long, to be sure, personally at least,
but 1 have known you and all your family by description a
great while ; and as soon as I saw you, 1 felt almost as if
you was an old acquaintance. Besides, in the present case^
I really thought some, explanation was due to you, after my
making such particular enquiries about £d ward's mother;
and I am so unfortunate, that I have not a creature whose
advice I can ask. Anne is the only person that knows of
it, and she has no judgment at all ; indeed, she does me a
great deal more harm dian good, for I am in constant fear
of her betraying me. She does not know how to hold her
tongue, as you must perceive ; and I am sure 1 was in the
greatest fright in the world t'other day > when Edward'^
name was mentioned by Sir John, lest she should out wkh
it all. You can't think how much I go through in my
mind from it altogether. I only wonder that I am alive,
after what X have suffered for Edward's sake these last four
years. Every thing in such suspense and uncertainty ;
and seeing him so sddom — we can hardly meet above
twice a year. X am sure I wonder my heart is not quite
broke. "
Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did
not feel very compassionate.
''Sometimes, " continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes,
'^ I tliink whether it would not be better for us both to
break off the matter entirely. " As she said this, she looked
directly at her companion.'^ But then, at other times, I
have not resolution enough for it. < 1 cannot bear the
thoughts of making him so miserable, as I know the yetj
mention of* such a thing would do. And on my own ac
count too — so dear as he isto me -r- 1 don't think I could
d by Google
SBN8E AND SENSIBILITY.'115
be equal to it. What would you advise me to do in sucbi
a case. Miss Dashwood ? What would you do yourself? "
''Pardon me, " replied Elinor, startled by the question ;
" but I can give you no advice imder such circumstances;
Your own judgment must direct you. "
^^ To be sure, " continued Lucy, after a few minutes*
silence on both sides,'^ his mother must provide for him
some time or other ; but poor Edward is so cast down about
it ! Did not you think him dreadful low-spirited when he
was at Barton ? He was so miserable when he left us at
Longstaple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would
think him quite ill. "
^ Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited
us? "
'^ Oh, yes-; he had been staying a fortnight with us.
Did you think he came directly from town ? "
" No, " replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every
fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity ;'^ I *re^
member he told us, that he had been staying a fortnight
with some friends near Plymouth. " She remembered, too,
her own surprise at the time, at his mentioning nothing
farther of those friends, at his total silence with respect
even to their names.
" Did not you think him sadly out of spirits ? " repeated'
Lacy.
'^ We didjj indeed, particularly so when he first arrived. "
f* *'I b^ged him to exert himself for fear you should
suspect what was the matter ; but it made him so me-
lancholy, not being able to stay more than a fortnight
with us, and seeing me so much affected. Poor fellow !
I am afraid it is just the same with him now ; for he
writes in wretched spirits. 1 heard from him just before
I left Exeter ;** taking a letter from her pocket, and care*
lessly showing the direction to Elinor.''You know hia
hand, I dare say, — a charming one it is; but that is not
written so well as usual. He was tired, I dare say, for
he had just filled the sheet to me as full as possible. "
Elinor saw that it was his hand, and she could doubt no
longer. The picture, she had allowed herself to believe,^
migh( have been accidentally obtained ; it might not have
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
1X6 flODflS AKB SEN'MBHiITTv'
taeea Edwtird's gift ; bal a oonespoiidaiee between ik & m bjp
letter could subsist only under a posidve ^gagementy
eould be authorised by BOthing else : for a f(Nr moments
she was almost overcome— * her heart sunk within her,
and she could hardly ^tand ; but exertion was indispensably
necessary ;'and she struggled so resohitely against the op-
pression of her feelings, that her success was apeedy, and
lor the time complete.
^^ Writing to each other/'said Lucy, returning die
letter into her pocket,'^ is the < nily comfort we hate in
such long separations. Yes, / have one other comfort in
his picture ; but poor £dward has not enren tiuU» If he
bad but my picture, he says he should be easy. I gave
him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Long«
staple last, and diat was same comfort to him, he said, bat
not equal to a picture. Perhaps you might notice- the ring
when you saw him ? "
«^ I did, " said Elinor^ with a composure of voice, mi-»
der which was concealed an emotion and distress beyond
any thing she had ever £eU before. She was mortified^
shocked, confounded.
Fortuuatdy for her, they had now reached the cottage,
and the conversation could be continued no farther. Aftev
sitting with them a few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned
to the Park, and £linor was then at liberty to think and
be wretched.
END OP THE FIBflrr VOLUME,
d by Google
SEKBG AN & SJBKBtBILITT. li?
VOLUME THE SECOND.
CHAPTER I.
HowBVEE small Elinors general dependence on Lttcy'a
Ycracity might be^ it was impossible for her^ on serious
reflection, to suspect it in the present case^ where no tempt*
ation coold be answerable to the folly of inrenting a falser
hood of such a description. What Lucy had asserted to
be true, therefore^ Elinor could not, dared not, longer
doubt ; supported as it was, too, on every side by such pro^
babilities and proofs, and contradicted by nothing but hei
own wishes. Their opportunity of acquaintance in the
house of Mr. Pratt was a foundation for the rest, at
once indisputable and alarming ; and Edward's visit near
Pljrmoutih^ his mdancholy state of mind, his dissatis*
heU & o. at his own prospects, his uncertain behaviour to-
wards herself, the intimate knowledge of the Miss Stedes
as to Norland and their family connectums, which had often
surprised her > the picture, the letter, the ring, formed alto-
gether such a body of evidence as overcame every fear of
oondemning him unfairly, and established as a fact, which
no partiality could set aside, his ill-treatment of hersei]£
Her resentment of such behaviour, her indignation at
having been its dupe, for a short time made her feel only
for hoaelf ; but other ideas, other considerations soon arose.
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her? Had he
feigned a regard for her which he did not feel ? Was his
engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart F No ;
whatever It might once have been, she coidd not believe it
such at present. His affection was all her own. She
ccNild not be deceived in that. Her motJwr, nsten^
I 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC "
118 SENSE AND SENSIBIUTY.
Fanny, all had been conscious of his regard for her at
Norland ; it was not an illusion of her own vanity. He
certainly loved her. What a softener of the heart was this
persuasion ! How much could it not tempt her to fbrgive !
He had been blamable, highly blamable, in remaining at
Norland after he first felt her influence over him to be more
than it ought to be. In that, he could not be defended ;
but if he had injured her, how much more had he injured
himself; if her case were pitiable, his was hopeless. His
imprudence had made her miserable for a while ; but it
seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever
being otherwise. She might in time regain tranquillity ;
but hCy what had he to look forward to ? Could he ever
be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele ; could he, were his
affection for herself out of the question, with his integrity,
his delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a
wife like her — illiterate, artful, and selfish ? *
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally
blind him to every thing but her beauty and good nature ;
but the four succeeding years — years which, if rationally
spent, give such improvement to the understanding — must
have opened his eyes to her defects of education, while the
same period of time, spent on her side in inferior society
and more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of
that simplicity which might once have given an interesting
character to her beauty.
If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself,
his difficulties from his mother had seemed great, how
much greater were they now likely to be when the object of
his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in connections,
and probably inferior in fortune to herself. These diffi.
culties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy,
might not press very hard upon his patience ; but melan-
dioly was the state of the person by whom the expectation
of family opposition and unkindness could be felt as a
reUef!
As these considerations occurred to her in painful sac-
cession, she wept for him more than for herself. Supported
by the conviction of having done nothing to merit her pre*
sent unhi^ppiness, and consoled by the belief that Edward
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENBIBIIiITY. 110
had done nothing to forfeit her esteem^ she thought she
ooiild even now^ under the first smart of the heavy hlovr^
commaild herself enough to guard every suspicion of the
truth from her mother and sisters. And so well was she
aUe to answer her own expectations^ that when she joined
them at dinner^ only two hours after she had first sufiered
the extinction of all her dearest hopes^ no one would have
supposed^ from the appearance of the sisters^ that Elinor
was mourning in secret over obstacles which must divide
her for ever from the object of her love^ and that Marianne
was internally dwelling on the perfections of a man^ of
whose whole heart she felt thoroughly possessed^ and
whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove
near their house.
The necessity of concealing from her mother and Mari-
anne what had been intrusted in confidence to herself^
though it obliged her to unceasing exertion^ was no aggra-
vation of Elinors distress. On the contrary^ it was a
relief to her^ to be spared the commimication of what would
give such affliction to them^ and to be saved likewise from
hearing that condemnation of Edward^ which would pro-
bably fiow from the excess of their partial afiection for her-
self^ and which was more than she felt equal to support.
From their counsel^ or their conversation, she knew she
could receive no assistance ; their tenderness and sorrow
must add to her distress, while her self-command would
neither receive encouragement from their example nor from
their praise. She was stronger alone ; and her own good
sense so well supported her^ that her firmness was as un-
shaken, her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as,
with regrets so poignant and so fresh, it was possible for
them to be.
Much as she had suffered from her first conversation
with Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an earnest wish of
renewing it; and this for more reasons than one. She
wanted to hear many particulars of their engagement re-
peated again ; she wanted more clearly to understand what
Lucy really felt for Edward, whether there were any sin-
cerity in her declaration of tender regard for him ; and
•he particularly wanted to convince Lucy, by her readiness
I 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
If^P 9IIK6P AND BBN8|BIIiITr»
to enter on the matter agajn, and her calmness in oo|i < p
versing on it^ that she was no otherwise interested in i%
than as a friend, which she T^ry much feared hear invor
liintary agitation, ip their morning discourse, must hav^
left at least douhtful. That Lucy w^s disposed to h^
jealous of her appeared very prohahle : it was plain tha(
!| & 4ward had always spoken highly in her praise, not merely
from Lucy's assertion, hut from her venturing to trust \k^
on so short a personal acquaintance with a secret so coa^
fessedly and evidently important. And even Sir John'fi
joking intelligence must have had some weight. But, io^
deed, while Elinor remained so well assnred within herself
of heing really heloved hy £dward, it required no other,
consideration of prohahilities to make it i^atural that Lu^
^ould he jealous ; and that she was so, her very confidence
was a proof. What other reason for Uie disclosure of ih^
affair could there he, hut that fllinor might he informed
hy it of Lucy's superior claims on Edward, and he taug^
to sivoid him iu future ? She had little difficulty in un^
derstanding thus much of her rival's intentions ; and while
she was firmly resolved to act by her as every principle of
honour and honesty directed, to combat her own s^ectioi^
for Edward, and to see him as little as possible, she. coul4
not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince
Lucy that her heart was un wounded. And as she coiiU
now have nothing more painful to hear on the subject ih^j^L
had already been told, she did not n^struat her own ahiUl^
of going through a repetition of particulars with eompofiureij
But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doin^
so could be commanded, though Lucy was as well disponed
as herself to Uke advantage. of any iixaX occurred; for the
weather was not often fine enough to allow of their joink]t|^
in a walk, where they might mgat easily separate them-
selves from the others ; and though tibiey met at least eveay
other evening either at the Park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they coxdd not be supposed to meet f < »; the
fake of conversation. Such a, thought would never enter
either Sir John or Lady Middleton's head ; and therefore
y^ry little leisure was ever given for general chat, md
npm at afi for particular discourse. They met. f(» the
d by Google
mm AXtn SBNtlBIIiITT. 121
sake of eftting^ drinking, and laughing together, playing at
eafds, or consequencei, or any other game that waa suffix
ciently noisy.
One or two meetings of this kind had taken plaoe, without
affi > rding Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private^
when 8ir John called at the cottage one morning, to heg,
in the name of charity, that they would all dine with Lady
Middlttton that day, as he was obliged to attend the dub
at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone, except
hst mother and the two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who fore-
saw a fairer opening for the point she had in view, in such
a party as this was likely to be, more at liberty among
themselves under, the tranquil apd well-bred direction of
Lady Middleton than when her husband united them to-
gether in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted ^
invitation ; Margaret, with her mother's permission, wa#
equally compliant ; and Marianne, though always unwilling
to join any of their parties, was persuaded by her mother,
who could not bear to have her seclude herself from my
chance of amusement, to go likewise.
The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily
{weserved from the frigh < iul solitude which had threatened
her. The insipidity of the meeting waa exactly such as
Elinor had expected ; it produced not one novelty of thought
or expression ; and nothing could be less interesting than
the. whole of thdr discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room : to the latter, the children accompanied
Ihem ; and while they remained there, she was too well
ooayinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucy's attention
to att^npt it. They quitted it only with the removal of
the tea-things. The card-table was then placed; and Elinor
began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a
hppe of finding time for conversation at the Park. They
«U rose up in preparation for a round game.
^'I am g]a4 " said Lady Middleton to Lucy, " you aie
not going to finish poor little Anna-mioda's basket this eve & v
ing; for I am sure it must hurt your eyes to work filigree
1^ caBcUelight. And we will make the dear little lov«
some amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and tb^
I hope she wiU. not mueh wmd it* "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
122 .SENSE AND SENSIBIUTT.
This hint was enough^ Lucy recollected herself instantly^
and replied^ " Indeed you are very much mistaken^ Lady
Middleton ; I am only waiting to know whether you can
make your party without me^ or I should have heen at my
filigree already. I would not disappoint the little angd
for all the world ; and if you want me at the card-table
now^ I am resolved to finish the basket after supper. "
*'You are very good^ — I hope it won't hurt your eyes :
— will you ring the bell for some working candles ? M»y
poor little girl would be sadly disappointed^ I know, if the
basket was not finished to-morrow ; for though I told her
it certainly would not^ I am ^ure she depends upon having
it done. "
Lucy directly drew her work-table near her^ and re.
seated herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness^ which
seemed to infer, that she could taste no greater delight
than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child.
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Cassino to the
others. No one made any objection but Marianne, who^
with her usual inattention to the forms of general civility^
. exclaimed, " Your Ladyship will have the goodness to ex-
cuse me — you know I detest cards. I shall go to the
piano- forte; I have not touched it since it was tuned. "
And, without farther ceremony, she turned away and walked
to the instrument.
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked Heaven that
Bhe had never made so rude a speech.
** Marianne can never keep long from that instrument^
you know, ma am, " said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth
away the offence ; ^'and I do not much wonder at it ; for
it is the very best toned piano-forte'I ever heard. "
The remaining five were now to draw their cards.
'^ Perhaps, " continued Elinor, " if I should happen to
cut out, I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele, In
rolling her papers for her ; and there is so much still to
be done to the basket, that it must be impossible, I think^
for her labour, singly, to finish it this evening. I should
like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share
in it. "
*'Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for.your
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILIT7. ISS
iielp/'cried Lucy, " for I find there is more to be done to
It than I thought there was ; and it would be a shocldiig
filing to disappoint dear Anna-maria after ail. "
*'Oh, that would be terrible, indeed/'said Miss Steele.
** Dear little soul, how I do love her I "
*^ You are very kind,** said Lady Middleton to Elinor *
*'and as you really like the work, perhaps you will be as
well pleased not to cut in till another rubber, or will you
take your chance now ? "
£linor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals^
and thus, by a little of that address, which Marianne could
never condescend to practise, gained her own end, and
pleased Lady Middleton at the same time. Lucy made
room for her with ready attention ; and the two fair rivals
were thus seated, side by side, at the same table, and with
the utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work.
The piano-forte, at which Marianne, wrapped up in her
own music and her own thoughts, had by this time forgot-
ten that any body was in the room besides herself, was
luckily 80 near them, that Miss Dashwood now judged she
might safely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the
interesting subject, without any risk of being heard at the
card-table.
CHAPTER II.
Ik a firm, though cautious tone^ Elinor thus began : •—
*'I should be undeserving of the confidence you have
honoured me with, if I felt no desire for its continuance,
or no farther curiosity on its subject I will not apologise,
therefore, for bringing it forward again. "
** Thank you, " cried Lucy, warmly,''for breaking the
ioe: you have set my heart at ease by it; for I was,
somehow or other, afraid I had offended you by what I
told you that Monday. "
''OiSended me ! How could you suppose so ? Believe
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
I2i BEarSE ANP SSNSIBIIim.
me^ " and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity^''no-
thing could be farther from my intention than to give yoti
such an idea. Could you have a motive for the trusty
that was not honourable and flattering to me ? "
*'And yet, I do assure you/'replied Lucy, her little
sharp eyes full of meaning, " there seemed to me to be a
coIdneBS and displeasure in your manna-, that made me
quite uncomfortaUe. I felt sure that you was angry wilii
me ; and have been quarrelling with mysdf ever since, for
having took such a Hberty as to trouble you with my afikirs.
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy, and
that you do not really blame me. If you knew what a
consolation it was to me to relieve my heart, by speaking to
you oi what I am always thinking of every moment of my
life, your oMnpassion would make you overlook every thing
else, I am sure. "
" Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very great
relief to you, to acknowledge your situation to me, and be
assured that you shall never have reason to repent it.
Your case is a very unfortunate one ; you seem to me to
be sonrounded with difficulties ; and you will have need of
1^ your mutual affection to support you under them.
Mr. Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother. "
" He has only two thousand pounds of his own: it would
be madness to marry upon that ; though, for my own part,
I could give up every prospect of more vnthout a sigh. I
have been always used to a very small income, and could
struggle with any poverty for him ; but I love him too
well to be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of aU
that his mother might give him, if he married to please
her. We must wait, it may be for many years. With
ahnost every other man in the world, it would be an alarm-
ing prospect; but Edward's affection and constancy no^
: thing can deprive me of, I know. "
'^ That conviction must be every thing to you ; and hft
iB, undoubtedly, supported by the same trust in yours.
If & e strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed, as
between many. people, and under many circumstances, ie
naturally would, during a four years'engagement, you*
atoation would have boHi.pitiaMe indeed. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
i^NSB AND ssSfsmtLrrr, 135
Lucy here looked up ; but Elinor was cweftd in gatad^
ing her countenance from every expression that coidd give
faer words a suspidous tendency.
'^ Edward's love for me/'said Lucy^ " has been pretty'
wd put to the test, by our long, very long absence, since
we wore first engaged, and it has stood the trial so vreOf
that I ^uld be unpardonable to doubt it now. I can
safely say that he has never gave me one moment's alarm
OQ that account from the first. "
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this as«
sertion.
Lucy went on. ^'I am rather of a jealous temper, too^^
by nature ; and from our difierent situations in life, froip
IdA being so much more in the world than me, and oinr
continual separation, I was enough inctined for suspicion^
to have found out the truth in an instant, if thete had been
the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met^
or any lowness of spirits that I covdd not account for, or if
be bad talked more of one lady than another, or seemed in
any respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to be. I
do not mean to say that I am particularly obsenranl or
quiclusighted in general, but in such a cose I am save I
could not be deceived. "
^^ AH this, " thought Ehnor,'^ is very pretty ; but it can
isipose upon neither of us. "
'^ But what, " said she, after a short silence,''are your
▼iews.^ or have you none but ihat oi waiting for Mok,
Ferrars's death, which is a melancholy and shocking ex < - >
tremity ? Is her son determined to submit to this, and to
aU the tediousness of the many years of suc^nse in whidi
it may involve you, rather than ran the risk of her ^Hb-*
pileasure for a while by owning the trath ? "
" If we could be certain that it would be only lor a
vhile ! But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrong proud we-
man, and in her first fit of anger upon hearing it would
imty likely secure every thing to Robert ; and die idea of
that, for Edward's sake, frightens away all my inclinalidB
for hasty measores. "
'^ And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your
disinterestedness beyond reason. "
d by Google
12 & SBNSB AND 6ENSIBII.ITT.
Lucy looked at Elinor again^ and was silent.
*'Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars ? " asked Elinor.
*'Not at all — I never saw him ; but I fancy he is very
unlike his brother — silly^ and a great coxcomb. "
** A great coxcomb ! " repeated Miss Steele^ whose ear
had caught those words by a sudden pause in Marianne's
music /^ Oh^ they are talking of their favourite beaux^
I dare say.'*
*^ No, sister/* cried Lucy, ^^you are mistaken there,— 7*
oor favourite beaux are not great coxcombs. "
^^ I can answer for it that Miss Dash wood's is not/'said
Mrs. Jennings, laughing heartily ; " for he is one of the
modestest, prettiest behaved young men I ever saw; but
as for Lucy, she is such a sly little creature, there is no
finding out who she likes. "
" Oh, " cried Miss Steele, looking significahtly round
at them, ^^ I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as modest and
pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood's. "
EUnor blushed in spite of herself. Lucy bit her lip, and
looked angrily at her sister. A mutual silence took place
for some time. Lucy first put an end to it by saying, in a
low^ tone, & ough Marianne was then giving them the
powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto, —
" ^ I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately
come into my head for bringing matters to bear ; indeed I
am bound to let you into the secret, for you are a party
ooDcemed. I dare say you have seen enough of Edward to
know that he would prefer the church to every other profes-^
sion ; now my plan is, that he should take orders as soon
aa he can ; and then, through your interest, which I am
sore you would be kind enough to use out of friendship for
him, and I hope out of some regard to me, your brother
naght be persuaded to give him Norland living, which I
understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent
not likely to live a great while. That would be enough fmr
us to marry upon^ and we might trust to time and chanGe-
for the rest "
''I should be always happy, " replied Elinor, " to sho«r
any mark of my esteem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars ;
but do not you perceive that my interest on such an <
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SSN8E AND SEN8IBIUTT. 127
sion would be perfectly unnecessary ? He is brother to
Mrs. John Dashwood — that must be recommendation
enough to her husband. "
'^ But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve of
Edward's going into orders. "
'* Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very
Utde. "
They were again silent for many minutes. At length
Ldicy exclaimed^ with a deep sigh^ •—
'^ I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to
the business at once by dissolving the engagement. We
seem so beset with difficulties on every side^ that though it
would make us miserable for a time, we should be happier
perhaps in the end. But you will not give me your advice.
Miss Dashwood ? "
^^No^ " answered Elinor^ with a smile, which concealed
Tery {^tated feelings ; *'on such a subject I certainly will
not. You know very well that my opinion would have no
weight with you, unless it were on the side of your wishes.**
*^ Indeed you wrong me/* replied Lucy, with great solem-
nity ; " I know nobody of whose judgment I think sa
highly as I do of yours ; and I do really believe, that if
you was to say to me,'I advise you by all means to put
aa end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will be
more for the happiness of both of you,* I should resolve
npon doing it immediately. "
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of £dward*s future
wife, and replied, " This compliment would effectually
irighten me from giving any opinion on the subject, had I
formed one. It raises my influence much too high : the
power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too
much for an indifferent person.**
"'Tis because you are an indifferent person,'* said Lucy,
with some pique, and laying a patticular stress on those
words,''that your judgment might justly have such weight
with me.'If you could be supposed to be biassed in any
respect by your own feelings, your opinion would not he
warth having.**
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest
they might provoke each other to an unsuitaUe increase of
d by Google
128 foaimm akd nmmBmttw,
t and unreserve ; and was even pardy deteHnined never
to mention the 8nl]gect again. Another panse^ therefore^ of
many minutes'duration, succeeded this speech, and Lucy
Was still the first to end it.
" Shall you he in town this winter, Miss Dashwood ? **
said she, with aU her accustomary complacency.
** Certainly not. "
" I am sorry for thatj " retuined the other, while her
eyes hrightened at the information ; " it would have gave
me such pleasure to meet you there ! But I dare say you
wiH go for all that. To be sure, your brother and dstet*
will ask you to come to them. "
- " It will not be m my power to accept thehr invitatioir
if they do. "
'^ How unlucky that is ! I had quite depended upon
meeting yon there* Anne and me are to go the latter end
•f January to some relations who have been wanting us to
visit them these several years. But I only go for the sake
Of seeing £dward. He will be there in February, other-
vise London would have no charms for me; I have not
spirits for it.*'
Elinor was sodn catted to the card^taUe by the conchi.
lion of the first rubber, and the confidcntiBl discourse of
t & e two la^es was therefore at an end ; to whieh both of
Ihem submitted without any reluctance, for nothing had
been'said on either side to make them dislike each other
lets than they had done before ; and Elinor sat down to
the card-taUe with the melancholy persuasion that Edward
Uras not only without affection fn* the person who was to
be his wife, but that he had not even the ehance of being
talerably happy in marriage, which sincere affisction on her
side woidd have given ; for self-interest alone could indnoe
a- worn An to keep a man to an engagement, of which she
•semed so thoroughly aware that he was weary.
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor f
and when'entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed aar
.Qp| > ortunity of introducing it, and was particularly careftd'
to inform her confidant of her happiness whenever Am
modved a letter from Edward, it was treated by die former
l^th calmness and caution, and disnuased as soon as tvnUtf
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
BfeNse ANi > fiiEa76i!Bitiirr; 129
would allow ; for she felt such conversations to be an
indulgence which Lucy did not deserve^ and which were
dangerous to herself.
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was
Imigthened far beyond what the first invitation implied.
Their favour increased; they could not he spared; Sir John
would not hear of their going ; and in spite of their numer-
ous and long arranged engagements in Exeter^ in spite of
the absolute necessity of their returning to fulfil them
immediately^ which was in full force at the end of every
week, they were prevailed on to stay nearly two months at
the Park, and to assist in the due celebration of that fes-
tival which requires a more than ordinary share of private
balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance.
CHAPTER III.
Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a
large portion of the year at the houses of her children
and friends, she was not without a settled habitation of her
own. Since the death of her husband, who had traded
with success in a less elegant part of the^ town, she had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near
Portman Square. Towards this home she began, on the >
iq > proach of January, to turn her thoughts ; and thither she
one day abruptly, and very unexpectedly by them, asked
the elder Miss Dashwoods to accompany her. Elinor,
without observing the varying complexion of her sister, and
the animated look which spoke no indifierence to the plan,
immediately ga\e a grateful but absolute denial for both, in
which she believed herself to be speaking their united
inclinations. The reason alleged was their determined
resolution of not leaving their moth» at that time of the
year. Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some fiur«
prise^ and repeated her invitation immediately.
.'^ Oh^ Lord ! I am sure your mother can spare you
K
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
iSO wmn jon^ sflino«iAOT«
¥cvy weU^ and I do beg yen wiH ftimiir me wilh ycnr
Qompanj^ for I'^e quite set my heort upon it.* Drnt't
fancy ^at you will be any inconyenieace to om, for 1
^Hia't put myaelf at all out of my way for yon. it- will
only be sending Betty by the coach, and I hope I (jin
affiMrd that We three shall be able to go rery well ia my
chaise ; and when we are in; town, if you do not ISfee ta g^
-ndiecever I do > well and good, you may always g» wkb
one of my daughters. I am sure your mother will not ob-
ject to it ; for I have had sach good luck in getting my
own children off my hands that flhe will think me a revy
iit person to hare the chai^ of you ; and if I doa't get one
of you at least well married before I have done with you ifc
shall not be my fanlt. I shall speak a good word fov yon
to all the young men, you may depend upon it. "
" 1 have a notion, " said Sir John,'^ that Miss Marianne
would not object tasuch a scheme if her dder sister would
come into it. It is very bard, indeed, that she should not
haye a little pleasure, because Miss Dashwood does not
wish it. So I would adnse you two to set off for town,
when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to
Miss Dashwood about it. "
^'Nay, " cried Mrs. Jennings,'^ I am sure t shall be
mpnstrous glad, of Miss Madanne's company, whether Miss
Baahwood will go or not, only the more the menier say I,
andi I thought it wpuld be more comfortable for them to be
togethep;^ because if they got tired of me they might talk to
4we anotiier, and laugh at my odd ways behind my hack.
But one or the other, if not both of them, I must luKFei.
Lord bless me ! how do you think I can live poking by
myselfi I who have beea always used, till this winter, to
We Charlotte with me. Come, Miss Marianne, let us
iltrike hands tq»on. the bargain, and if Miss Daahmod will
obange her mind by and by, why, so. much die better. "
" I thank you» ma'am, sincerely thank you, " said M»*
^ianne, with waxmlh : " your invitation has insured my
gratitude fw ever ;. and it would give me such haj^nness^
yes > almost the greatest happiness I am capable of, to be
able to accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest
mother*-^! feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
M she were i» be made test hftppy^ lesit comfortable by out
absence — < ^^ bo^ BOlMng should tempt me to leave hep.
ft i^onld not, must not be a straggle. "
Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dash.
unMd coold spai« them perfectly weU ; uid Elinor, who
UQiW imderstood her sister, and saw to what indifference
t0 almost every thing else ^e was carried by her ei^emesss
t & be with Wiiloughby again, made no farther direct oppo-
sition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother s
decision, from whom, however, she scarcely expected to re-
ceiTe any support in her endeavour to prevent a visit
which she could not approve of for Marianne, and which,
on her own account, she had puftieular reasons to avoid.
Whatever Mariaime was desirous of, her mother would be
eager to promote: — she could not expect to influence the
latter to cautiousness of conduet in an affair respecting
which she had never been able to inspire her vrith distrust ;
and she dared not explain the modve of her own disinclin-
ation fbr going to London. That Marianne, fasddious as
dio was, thoroughly acquainted with Mrs. Jennings's'
maimers, and- invariably disgusted by tibem, should over-
look every inconvenience of that kind, idiould disregard*
whatev^ must be most wounding to her irritable feelings^
in faer purstdc of one object, was such a proof, so strong, so
fiill x > f the importance of tibat objeet to her, as Elinor, in
spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to witness.
On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood,
penmaded that such an excurnon would be productive of
much amusem^it to both her daughters, and perceiving,
through all her affectionate attention to herself, how much
tlK heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of their
dedining the ofibr upon her account; insisted on their both
aooepting it direcdy; and then began to foresee, with her'
usual cheerfiilness^ a variety of advantages that would ac-
crue to them all from this separation.
** I am deMghted with the plan, " she cried ;'♦ it is ex-
actly what I could wish. Margaret and I shall be as much
bmeflted by it as yourselves. When you and the Middle-
tons- are gone, we shall'go on so quietly and happily toge-
ther with wa books and our music ! You will And
K 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
13^ 1|BN8H AND 8«N8tBIZJTT«
Margaret so improved when you come back again ! > Arid I
have a little plan of alteration for your bedrooms too^ which
may now be performed without inconvenience to any one.
It is very right that you ^uld go to town ; I would have
^very young woman of your condition in life acquainted^
with the manners and amusements of London. You wiH
be under the care of a motherly good sort of woman^ of
whose kindness to you I can have no doubt. And in all
probability you will see your brother ; and whatever may be
bis faults^ or the faults of his wife^ when I consider whdte
son he is^ I cannot bear to have you so wholly estranged
from each other. "
'^ Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness/'
said £linorj *'you have been obviating every impediment
to the present scheme which occurred to yon^ there is still
one objection which^ in my opinion^ caxmot be so easily
Removed. "
Marianne*8 countenance sunk.
'^ And what,** said Mrs. Dashwood, ^'is my dear, pm»^
dent Elinor going to suggest ? What formidable obstacle
ia she now to bring forward ? Do not let me hear a word
about the expense of it/*
*^ My objection is this : though I think very well of
Mrs. Jennings's heart, she is not a woman whose society
can afford us pleasure^ or whose protection will give ua
consequence.''
" That is very true, " replied her mother ; " but of her
society, separately from that of other people, you will
scarcely have any thing at all, and you will almost always
appear in public with X#ady Middleton.*'
^'If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs.
Jennings, " said Marianne, *'at least it need not prevent
my accepting her invitation. I have no such scruples ; and
I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of
that kind with very little effort. "
Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indiflfer-
eoce towards the manners of a person, to whom she had
often had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave witb
tolerable politeness; and resolved within herself, that if
her sister persisted in going, she would go likewise^ as she
d by Google
BKSSB AND B^KStBIllTT; l3i
did not diink it pfoper that Marianne should he left to the
sole guidance of her own judgment^ or that Mrs. Jenninge^
should he ahandoned to the mercy of Marianne^ for all the
icomfbrt of her domestic hours. To this determination she
was the more easily reconciled^ hy recollecting^ that Edward
FerrarSj hy Lucy's account^ was not to he in town hefore
February ; and that their visit, without any unreasonable
aMdgement, might be previously finished.
''I will have you both go,'* said Mrs. Dashwood ;
" these objections are nonsensical. You will have much
pleasure in being in Londoli, and especially in being toge-
ther ; and if Elinor would ever condescend to anticipate
enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
sources ; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving
her acquaintance with her sister-in-law's family. "
Elinor h & d often wished for an opportunity of attempt,
ing to weaken her mother's dependence on the attachment
of Edward and herself, th^t the shock might be the lest
when the whole truth were revealed ; and now, on this at.
tack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself
to begin her design, by saying, as calmly as she could,'^ I
like Edward Ferrars very much, and shall always be glad
to see him ; but as to the rest of the family, it is a matter
of perfect indifierence to me, whether I am ever known to
them or not. "
Mrs. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing. Marianne
lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor conjectured
that she might as weU have held her tongue.
After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled
that the invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs. Jennings
received the information with a gi^eat deal of joy, and many
assurances of kindness and care ; nor was it a matter of
pleasure merely to her. Sir John w^s delighted ; for to a
man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of being
alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants
in London^ was something. Even Lady Middleton took
the trouble of being delighted, which was putting herself
rather out of her way ; and as for the Miss Steeles, espe.
dally Lucy, they had never been so happy in their Uvea at
. this intelligence made them.
K 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
Etinor Bttbmitted to the amBfesMOt which oMntonuiM
her wishes with less reluctance than «be had expected Iq
feel. With r^;ard to herself^ it was now a matter ef iui«
eo9oem whether she went to town inr not ; and when ahc
saw her mother so thoronglily pleaaed with the plan^ aa^
her lister exhilarated by it in lo^, voiee, and mannfTj
i:estored to all, her usual animatkn^ and elevated to fnone
than her usual gaiety^ she could not he dissatisfied with th(t
cauiie > and would hardly allow herself to distnust ^e eon*
lequenoe.
Marianne's joy was almoat « d€$;fee beyond hafyinew^
«o great was the perturbation of her sjHrits^ and h«r imfii.
I^enee to be gone. Her imwiUingnefis to %uit her molher
iKTSs her on^ restorative to calmness ; and at the vMHoent
of parting her grief on that soow was «xGessive. Her
mother's afflietion was hai < dly less; and £]inor was the only
flue of Ibe three who seemed to eonsid^ the sepwpatioii aft
any ihing short of eternal.
Their departure took place in the first week in Januai^.
The MiddletOBS w^re to £ol)ow in about a week. The Miss
Bteeles kept their station at the Fsfk^ and weie to ^t it
only with the lest of the family.
CHAPTER IV.
£i«iM0R coi)14 not find hersdf in the carriage witib Mrs.
Jennings^ and beginning a journey to London under her
| > rot6etion > and as her guest^ widiout wondering at her own
situation^ so short had their acquaintance with that lady
been^ so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition^
and so many had been her objections against sudi a mea« >
sure only a few days before t But these olijections had aS,
with that happy ardour of youth whidi Marianne and her
mother equally shared^ been overcome or overlooked ; and
Elinor^ in spite of every occasional doubt of Wifloughby's
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
asNSB kxm gbrnshiiiiItv^ ISS
contttocyy bould not witneis itit mptnre of deii^tfiil et*.
fnetatkm wkidi ^filled the whole soul and beaffned in tlie
ejesxi Marianne^ without feeling htiw blank was her own
ynspecty how cheerless her own atate of mind in the oom«
fMunsoB, and how gladly she wocdd engage in the solicitude
«f Marianne's utaation to haye the same aniniating object
m view, the same possibiiity of hope. A shorty a Tery
nhort time, however^ must now decide wha[t Willoughl^'a
intenftioBs were ; in ail probability he was already in town^
MaiianBe's eageni^s to be gone declared her dependence
on finding him there ^ and £Iinor was resolved not only
npon gaining every «ew light as to his character which her
own obaeryation, or the intelligenoe of others could give
ha, but lilcewise opon watching his behaviour to her sister
witii such zealous attention^ aa to ascertain what he Wfis >
aM what he rtkeuA, before many meetings had taken place.
ShMdd the lesalt of her observations be nn & vouraUe^ shft
wis determined, at aU events^ to open the eyes of her sister ;
ahould it be otherwise^ her exertions would be of a different
Dlrt«re;-^8he mnst dien learn to avoid every selfish i»m»'
pariao^^ and banish every regret which might lessen hef
sattsfiKtion in the happiness of Marianne.
They were three days on their journey^ and Mariann^^a
bdiavioar, as they tnivelled, was a happy specimen of what
her fhtitfe complaisance and companionableness to Mrs.
Jennings might be oxpected to be. She sat in silence si*
moat all the way, wrapt in her own nieditations^ and scarcely
aver voluntarily speaking, except when any ol^ect of pic«»
toresqne beauty within their view drew from her an exda«*
mation of delight exclusivity addressed to her sister. To
atone for this conduct, therefore, Elinor took immediate
posKBsion of the post of civility which i^e had assigned
hersdf, behaved vrith the greatest attention to Mrs. Jen*
ninga. talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to
her whenever she coidd ; and Mrs. Jennings, on her side,
treated them both with all possible kindness, was solicitous
on every occasion for dieir ease and enjoyment, and only
diBtuibed that she could not make them choose their own
dinnen at the inn, nor extort a confession of their prefer*
ting sabnoo to ood, ot boiled fowla to veal eutiota. They
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
1 56 8BNSB AND SBmSBIUTr.
reached town |iy three o'dock the third day^ glad to be re*
leased^ after such a joomeyy from the confinement of a car«-
riage^ and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good fire.
The house was handsome and handsomely fitted up; and
the young ladies were immediately put in possession of a
▼ery comfortable apartment. It had formerly been Chai >
lotte's; and over the mantel-piece still htmg a landscape in
coloured silks of her performance^ in proof of her having
spent seven years at a great school in town to some eSecU
As dinner was not to be ready in less than two boon
from their arrival^ Elinor determined to employ the interval
•in writing to her mother^ and sat down for that purpooe*
In a few moments Marianne did the same. ^^ / am writA
ing home^ Marianne^ " said Elinor;'^ had not you better
defer your letter for a day or two? "
^ " 1 9m not going to write to my mother^ " replied Mari^
anncj hastily^ and as if wishing to avoid any farther enquiry^
Elinor said no more : it immediately struck her that she
must then be writing to Willoughby; and the condusicHt
which as instantly followed was^ that, however mysterioualy
they might wish to conduct the afiair > they must be eiw
gaged. This conviction^ though not entirely satisfactory^
nve her pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater
uacrity. Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes ;
in length it could be no more than a note ; it was then folded
up, sealed, and directed with eager rapidity. Elinor thought
she could distinguish a large W in the direction ; and no
sooner was it complete than Marianne, ringing the bell, re**
quested the footman who answered it to get that letter con-
yeyed for her to the two-penny post* This decided the
matter at once.
Her spirits still continued very high ; but there was a
flutter in them which prevented their giving much pleasure
to her sister, and this agitation increased as the evening
drew on. She could scarcely eat any dinner ; and when
they afterwards returned to the drawing.room, seemed anxi.
oudy listening to the sound of every carriage.
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings^
by being much engaged in her own room, could see little
«»f what was passing. The tea things were brought in, and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBNBEi AKI > BBNgkBTUTV; l3t
i^eady liad Marianne been disappointed more than 6nce by
a rap at a neighbouring door^ when a loud one was sud-
denly heard which could not be mistaken for one at any
otiher house. Elinor felt secure of its announcing Wil.
kmghby's approach^ and Marianne^ starting up, moved to-
wards the door. Every thing was silent: this could not
be borne many seconds ; she opened the door, advanced a
few steps towards the stairs; and after listening half a nu«
nute, returned into the room in all the agitation which a
conviction of having heard him would naturally produce t
in the ecstasy of her feelings at that instant she could not
help exclaiming, *'Oh, Elinor, it is Willoughby, indeed
it is ! " and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his
arms, when Colonel Brandon appeared.
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness ; and
ahe immediately left the room. Elinor was disappointed
too ; but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon
ensured his welcome with her ; and she felt particularly
iwrt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive
that she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment
in seeing him. She instantly saw that it was not un-
noticed by him ,* that he even observed Marianne, as she
quitted the room, with such astonishment and concern, as
hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded
towards herself.
" Is your sister ill ? " said he.
. Elinor answered in some distress that she was; and
then talked of headachs, low spirits, and over fatigues ;
and of every thing to which she cotdd decently attribute
her sister's behaviour.
He heard her with the most es^nest attention ; but
leeming to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,
and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them
in London^ making the usual enquiries about their journey,
ftnd the friends they had left behind. "
In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on
either side, they continued to talk ; both of them out of
spirits, and the dioughts of both engaged elsewhere. Elinor
nviahed very much to ask whether Willoughby were then
ia town, but she was afraid of giving him pain by any
d by Google
enquiry «fter his rival ; mad at lenglh^ fay way of myxng
BOBttfthing^ she aaked if he had Heen in London ever anoe
ahe had aeen him last. " Yes/'he replied, ivith some
emharrassment^ ^'almost ever since ; I have heen onee ov
twioe at Delaford for a few days, hat it has never been in
n^y power to return to Barton. "
This, and the manner in which it was said, immedtoely
hnrnght hack to her lemembrance all the droomstMEMes oi
his quittiiiig that place, with the uneasiness and snapidons
they had caused to Mrs. Jennings ; and she was teifid
that her question had imp]ied much more curiosi^ an the
subject than she had ever felt.
Mrs. Jennings soon came in.'^Oh, Colonel,*'said
she, with her usual noisy cheerfulness,'^ I am monstrous
gUd to see you — sorry I could not come before --^b^
your pardon, — but I have been forced to look ihomt me a
litde, and settle my matters ; for it is a long while ainoe I
have been at home, and you know one has always a wocld
of little odd things to do after one has been away for any
time; and (hen I have had Cartwright to set^ willL
JLtord, I have beea as busy as a bee ever since dinner !
But pray, €! < ^nel, how came you to ooiguie out that I
should be in town to-day ? "
'^ I had tiie pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's, whem
I have been dining. "
^'Oh, you did ; well, and how do they all do at their
house? How does Charlotte do? I warrant you ahe is
a fine size by this time. "
^^ Mrs, Pahner appeared quite wdl ; and I am com*
missioned to tell you, that you will certainly see her to*
morrow.'
" Ay, to be sure, I thought aa much. Well, C(dond«
I have iNTought two young ladies with me, you see, — - that
is, you see but one of them now, but there is another
somewhere. Your friend Miss Marianne, too — which yon
will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what you and
Mr. WiUoughby will do between you about her. Ay, it
15 a fine thing to be young and handsome. Well — I was
young once, but I never was very handsome — - worse luck
for me; However, I got a very good husband^ and I don't
d by Google
mrSE AKD VBNnBIUTT; Ui9
k & ow what Ae greatest beauty can 46 more. Ah^ iiMr
man ! he has been dead these eight years and better. Bvtt,
C^onel^ where have you been to sineenre parted? And
bow does yonr business go on? Come^ oone, let's ha/ft
BO aecvetB among friends.''
fie replied widi his aecustomary mildness to di faer
enquiries^ but without satisfying her in any. £Iinor now
b^an to maice the tea^ and Marianne was obHged to sp«
pear agaiB.
After her enlrance^Colond Brandon became more'diongbt^
fhl and aiient than he had been before^ and Mrs. Jennings
could not prerail on liim to stay long. No other visiter
appeared that evenings and the ladies were unanimotu ia
agieeing to go early to bed.
Marianne rose die next morning with recovered spirita
and happy looks. The disappointment of the eveniBg be-
fore seemed forgotten in the expectation of what was t»
hapfwn that day. They had not long finished their break-
£ut before Mrs. Paimer's baroudie stopped at the door, and
m a few mimites she came laughing hito the room : «0
deligfated to see them aU^ diat it was hard to say whether
she receiTed moat pleasure from meedng her mother or ^ & m
Miss Dashwoods again. So surprised at dieir coming to
town^ though it was what she had rather expected all
along ; 80 angry ait their accepting her mother's tnvitati(m
after having deislined her own^ though at the same time
she would never have forgiven them if they had not come J
^^ Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you/'said she : —
'^ what do you think he said yiihen he heard of your coming
vnth mamma ? I forget what it was now^ but it was som & i
thing so droll! "
After an hour or two spent in what her mother called
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variety of
enquiry concerning all dieir acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings'a
aide, and in laughter without cause on Mrs. Painter's, it
WBM proposed by the latter that they should all accompany
her to some shops where she had business that morning, to
whidi Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as
having likewise some purchases to make themselvea ; and
d by Google
140 8BNSB AND BENglBIUTT^
Marianne^ though dedining it at first, was induced to go
likewise.
Wherever they went, she was evidently always on the
watch. In Bond Street especially, where much of theii*
business lay, her eyes were in constant enquiry ; and ia
whatever shop the party were engaged, her mind was
equally abstracted from every thing actually before them,
from all that interested and occupied the others. Restless
and dissatisfied every where, her sister could never obtain
her opinion of any article of purchase, however it might
equally concern them both : she received no pleasure from
any thing ; was only impatient to be at home again, and
could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness
of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was caught by every thing
pretty, expensive, or new ; who was wild to buy all, could
determine on none, and dawdled away her time in rapture
and indecision.
'It was late in the morning before they returned home j
and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne
flew eagerly up stairs; and when Elinor followed, she found
her turning ft'om the table with a sorrowful countenance,
which declared that no Willoughby had been there.
" Has no letter been left here for me since we went out ? "
said die to the footman, who then entered with the parcels.
She was answered in the negative, ^'Are you quite sure of
it ? " die rephed. ^^ Are you certain that no servant, no
porter has left any letter or note ? "
The man replied that none had.
''How very odd I " said she, in a low and disappointed
voice, as she turned away to the window.
''How odd, indeed! " repeated Elinor within herself,
regarding her sister with uneasiness.'^ If she had not
laiown him to be in town she would not have written
to him, as she did ; she would have written to Combe
Magna'; and if he is in town, how odd that he should nei-
ther come nor write ! Oh, my dear mother, you must be
wrong in permitting an engagement between a daughter so
young, a man so little known, to be carried on in so doubt-
M, so mysterious a manner ! / long to enquire ; but how
will my int^erence be borne ? "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSS AND SBKSIBIXinrr. 141
She determined^ after some consideration^ that if appear J
Mices continued many days longer as unpleasant as they
now were, she would represent in the strongest manner to
her mother the necessity of some serious enquiry into the
affair.
Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings'^
intimate acquaintance^ whom she had met and invited in*
the morning, dined with them. The former left them soon
after tea to fulfil her evening engagements ; and Elinor was
obliged to assist in making a whist table for the others*
Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as she would
never learn the game ; but though her time was therefore at
her own disposal, the evening was by no means more pro*
ductive of pleasure to her than to Elinor, for it was spent
in all the anxiety of expectation and the pain of disappoitit*
ment. She sometimes endeavoured for a few minutes W
read ; but the book was soon thrown aside; and she returned
to the more interesting employment of walking backwards
and forwards across the room, pausing for a moment when,
ever she came to the window, in hopes of distinguishing the^
long-expected rap.
CHAPTER V,
^ If this open weather holds much longer,*'said Mrs*
Jennings, when they met at breakfast the following mom- •
ing,'^ Sir John wiU not like leaving Barton next week ;
'tis a sad thing for sportsmen, to lose a day's pleasure.
Poor souls ! I always pity them when they do ; they seem
to take it so much to heart. "
** That is true, " cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and.
walking to the window as she spoke, to examine the day«.
^^ I had hot thought of thaL This weather will keep
Aiany sportsmen in the country. "
It was a lucky recollection; all her good spirits were ic-
d by Google
14S nam
gjkwed by it. *'It is charming weather for them indeed/*
ahe contiBiied^ a» ahe sat dawn to the breakfast taUe with
a happy eoimtenaQee. ^'How much they must enjoy it !
Bat " (with a little return of anxiety)''it cannot be ex-
pected to last long. At this time of the year^ and afler
aofih a aeries'of rain^ we shall certainly have very little more
of it. Frosta will, soon set in^ and in all probalnlity with
aeverityj In another day or two^ perhaps ; thi» extreme
Huldaese eaa hardly last longer — nay^ perhapa it < may
ii«eae to^ghtl "
" At any rate,*'said Elinor^ wishing to prevent Afes.
Jenninga from sedng her sister s thoughts as clearly as she
did;,'^ I dare say we shall have Sir John and Lady Mid-
dktOB in town by the end of next week.'*
. " Ay^ my dear, I'll warrant you we do« Mary always
baa her own way.'*
'^And new,** silently oonjeetured Elinor,''she witt
write to Combe by this'day's post.**
Bat if she did, the letter was written and sent away wilh
^privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the
fact. Whatever the truth of it might be, and far aa Elinor
was from feeling thorough contentment about it, yet while
ahe saw Marianne in spirits, she could not be very uncom.
fortable herself. And Marianne was in spirits ; happy in
the mildness of the weather, and stiU happier in her expect-
ation of a frost
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the
houses of Mrs. Jenning8*s acquaintance, to inform them of
her being in town ; and Marianne was all the time busy in
observing the direction of the wind, watching, the variatsons
of the sky, and imagining an alteration in the air.
'^ Don't you find it colder than it waa in the momiiq^,
SlinoT ? There seems to me a very decided differenoeu I
can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff. It waa
not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem parting too;
the sun will be out in a moment, and we shaU have a clear
afternoon.**
EUnor waa alternately diverted and pained ; but Mari-
anne persevered, and saw every night in the brightness o£
d by Google
14»
ih^ ^a», mod every maniDg in the i^ppesrsnee of the ctmo-
aphere^ the certoiii symptoms of approaehi & g frost.
The MisB Dwhwoodm had no greater reason to he dis.
aiitt^ed with Mrs. Jennings'a style of livings and set of ai & .
quaintanoe > than with her behavionr to ^emselTes^ whicfr
wnaiiiTariahly kind. £very thing in her household arrange-
ments was conducted on the most liheral plan^ and except-
ing a few old city friends, whom^ to Lady Middleton's
r^re^ she had never dropped, she visited no one to whom
mi introduGtian could at all discompose the feelings of her
young companions. Pleased to find herself more comtot-^
ahly situated in that particular than she had expected,
BliiHnr was very willing to compound for the want of much
real enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which,
wihelh^ at home or alNKiad, formed only for cards, could
have little to amuse her.
Colonel Brandon^ who had a general invitation to the
house, was with them almost every day : he came to look
at Madonne, and talk to Elinor, who often derived more
aadfi£action from conversing with him than from any other
daily occunence, but who saw, at the same time, with
much concern his continued regard for her sister. She
fbued it wa» » strengthening regard. It grieved her to
aae'tiie earnestness with which he often watched Marianne ;
and his qiirits were certainly worse thiui when at Barton.
About a week after their arrival, it became certain that
WiUougfahy was also urived. His card- was on the- table
when Ibey came in from the morning s drive.
^'Good God! " cried Marianne,'^ he has been here
while we were out. " Elinor^ rejoiced to be assured of hia
being in. London, now ventured to say, " Depend upon^it,
he will call again to > .morrow. " But Marianne seemed
baldly to hear her, and, on Mrs. Jennings's entrance, escaped
with the precious card.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored
to. those of her sister all, and more than all, their formor
agitation. From this moment her mind was never quiet ;
the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day made^
her. unfit for any thing* She insisted on being left behind >
the next morning, when the others went out.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
l^ Wmm AND fiEKSIBlUlTf
. Elinor's thoughts were full of what might he paanng
in Berkeley Street during their absence ; but a moment's
glance at her sister, when they returned^ was enough to is^
form her that WiUoughby had paid no second visit there.
A note was just then brought in^ and laid on the taUe.
" For me ! " cried Marianne, stuping hastily forward.
*'No, ma'am^ for my mistress. "
'But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.
'^ It is, indeed, for Mrs. Jennings ; how provoking J "
< ^ You are expecting a letter, then ? " said £linor^ unaUe
to be longer silent.
"'Yes, a little-* not much. "
After a short pause, ^^ You have no confidence in me,
Marianne. "
^'Nay, Elinor, this reproach from you — - you who have
confidence in no one ! "
. ^^ Mel " returned Elinor, in some confusion ;'^ indeed,
Marianne, I have nothing to tell. "
" Nor I " answered Marianne, with energy ; ^^ our situ,
ations then arefslike. We have neither of us any thing t9
tell ; you, because you communicate, and I, because I con-
ceal nothing. "
Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself,
which she was not at liberty to do away, knew not how,
under such circumstances, to press for greater openness in
Marianne.
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given
her, she read it aloud. It was from Lady Middleton, bsu
nouncing their arrival in Conduit Street the night before,
and requesting the company of her mother and cousins the
following evening. Business on Sir John*spart, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in Berke-
ley Street. The invitation was accepted ; but when the
hour of appointment drew near, necessary as it was, in
conunon civility, to Mrs. Jennings that they should bodi
attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty in
persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen nothing
of WiUoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for
amusement abroad than unwilling to run the risk of hia
calling again ii^ her absence.
d by Google
flBKSB AND 8BiraiBIIiI3n^« 145
'Elinor founds when the evening was over^ that dispori*
tion is not materially altered hy a change of abode ; for,
although scarcely settled in town. Sir John had contrived
to collect around him nearly twenty yoiing people, and to
amuse them with a ball. This was an affair, however, of
which Lady Middleton did not approve. In the country,
an unpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in London,
where the reputation of el^ance was more important, and
less easily obtained, it was risking too much for the gratifi-
cation of a few girls, to have it known, that Lady Middle-
ton had given a small dance, of eight or nine couple, with
two violins, and a mere sideboard collation.
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party ; from the
former, whom they had not seen before since their arrival
hi town, as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any
attention to his mother-in-law, and therefore never came
near her, they received no mark of recognition on their en.
trance. He looked at them slightly, without seeming to
know who they were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings
ffom the other side of the room. Marianne gave one
^ance round the apartment as she entered ; it was enough,
be was not there — and she sat down, equally ill-disposed
to receive or communicate pleasure. After they had been
assembled about an hour, Mr. Palmer sauntered towards
the Miss Dashwoods to express his surprise on seeing
them in ^wn, thou^ Colonel Brandon had been first in-
formed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself
nid something very droll on hearing that they were to
oome.
'^ I thought you w^e both in Devonshire, " said he.
'^ Did you ? " replied Elinor.
. *'When do yoi^ go back again ? "
'^ I do not know. " And dius ended their discourse.
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her
life as she was that evening, and never so much fatigued
by the exercise. She complained of it as they returned to
Berkeley Street.
" Ay, ay, " said Mrs. Jennings, *'we know the reason
of all that very well : if a certain person, who shall be
nameless, had been there^ you would not have been a bit
h
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
146 w^ttsM JMn smsikiitnT*
tired ; tmd, to say the truths it ivM not very pretty of Mud
not to give you the meeting when he was invited. "
" Invited ! " cried Marianne.
^* 80 my daughter Middleton tdd me ; for it seems Sir
John met him somewhere in the street this momii|g« "
Marianne said no mote, but looked exceedingly hurt. Im-
patient in this situation to be doing something that mighl'
lead to her sister's relief^ Elinor resolved to write the next
morning to her mother^ and hoped^ by awakening her fears
for the health of Marianne^ to procure those enquiries
whidi had been so long delayed ; and die was still more
eagerly bent on ^is measure^ by perceiving, after breakfast
dn the morrow, that Marianne was again writing to- Wil-
loughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any ciher
person.
About the middle of the day Mrs. Jennings went out by
herself on business, and Elinor began her letter directly,
while Marianne, too restless for employment, too anxious
for conversation, walked from one window to the otiier, or
sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation. Elinor
was very earnest in her application to her mo^er^ relatng
all that bad passed, her suspidons of W^Hlonghby's inooa*
stancy, urging her, by every plea of duty and affection^ to
demand from Marianne an sicoount of her real situation
with respect to him.
Her letter was scarcely finidied, wh^ a rap foretold a
visiter, and Colond Brandon was annoui|ced. Marianike,
who had seen him from the window, and firho hated com.
pany of any kind, left the room before h^ entered it. He
looked more than usually grave; and though expressing
satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had
Somewhat in particular to tell her, sat for some time with-
out-saying a word. Elinor, persuaded that he had sobie
communication to make in which her sister was concerned,
impatiently expected its opening. It was not th & ftrst
time of her feeding l3ie same kind of conviction ; for more
than once before, beginning with the observation of, " Your
sister looks unwell to-day, " or,''Your sister seems oat of
spirits, " he had appeared on the point, either of disdoting,
or of enquiring, somdliing pazllcular lAwnt hisr. * Afmt a
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
pKOalb of l9evend ttiniifet tlieir silenee was faroloen, by his
ttddng her^ in a Toioe of lome agitadoR^ when he^ras t6
congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother ? EHnor
Was not prepared ^emt sudi a question ; and having no answer
rtedy^ was obliged to adopt die simple and common expe.
^ent of asking what he meant ? He tried to smile^ as he
isepiied^''Your sbtar's engagement to Mr. Willoaghby is
very generally known/*
*• It cannot be generally known, " retmned Elinor, " for
lter < iWn family do not know it. "
He looked surprised, and «aid, ^^ I beg your pardon, I
wUk afhdd my enquiry has been impertinent ; but I had not
snppoeed any secrecy intended, as they openly correspond,
and their marriage is universally talked of. "
" How cam that be ? By whom can you have heard it
mentioDed? "
- ** By many — by some of whom you know nothing, by
odiers with whom you are most intimate, Mrs. Jennings,
Mrs. Pahner, and the Middletons. But still I might not
have believed it, for where the mind is, perhaps, rather
miwilling to be convinced, it wiH always find something to
support its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in
to-day» accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to
Mr. Willoughby, in your sister's writing. I came to en.
quire, but I was convinced before I could ask the question.
Is every thing finally settled ? Is it impossible to >
But I have no right, and I could have no chance of suc-
ceeding. Excuse me. Miss Dashwood. I believe I have
been wrong in saying so much, but I hardly know what to
do, and on your prudence I have the strongest dependence.
Tell me that it is all absolutety resolved on, that any at-
tempt, that in short concealment, if concealment be possible.
Is all that remains. "
These words, whidi conveyed to £3inor a direct avowal
«f his love for her sister, aftcted her very much. She was
not immediately able to say any thing; and even when her
'spirits were recovered, 6he debated for a short time on the
answer it vroold be most proper to give. The real state of
Ikings between Willoughby and her sister was so little
Imown to hersdf, that, in endeavouring to explain it, sh^
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
148 ssNUE AND msMuaurv*
might be as liable to say too much as too little. Yet» as^dii^
vfs» convinced that Marianne a affection for WilloughbjF
could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon's success^ whateven
the event of that affection might be, and at the same time
wished to shield her conduct from censure, she thought it
most prudent and kind, after some consideration, to aay
more than she really knew or belieyed. She acknowled^dj
therefore, that though she had never been informed hj
themselves of the terms on which they stood with each
other, of their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of
their correspondence she was not astonished to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention; and on her eesft.
ing to speidc, rose direcdy from his seat, and after sayings
in a voice of emotion, ^^ To your sister I wish all imagin-
able happiness ; to WiUoughby that he may endeavour to
deserve her,''— took leave, and went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this convers.
ation to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points;
she was left, on the contrary, with a melancholy impression
of Colonel Brandon's unhappiness, and was prevented even
from wishing it removed, by her anxiety for the very even|
that must confirm it.
CHAPTER VI.
Nothing occurred during the next three or four days to
make Elinor regret what she had done, in applying to her
mother; for WiUoughby neither came nor wrote. They
were engaged about the end of that time to attend La4y
Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. Jennings was kept
away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and
for this party Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her
appearance, and seeming equdly indifferent whether she
went or stayed, prepared, without one look of hope, or one
expression of pleasure. She sat by the drawing-room fii«
after tea till the moment of Lady Middleton's arrival.
Digitized by Google
ttKSti AND sensibility; 14^
Mthoat once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude^*
lost in her own thoughts^ and insensible of her sister's pre«
Aence; and when at last they were told that Lady Middle*
ton waited for them at the door^ she started as if she had'
fei^tten that any one was expected.
They arrived in due time at the place of destination ;
ind as soon as the string of carriages before them would
allow^ alighted^ ascended the stairs^ heard their names an* >
Aoonced from one landing-place to another in an audible
fdoe; and entered a room splendidly lit up^ quite full of
company^ and insufferably hot. When they had paid their
tribute of politeness by oourtesying to the lady of the house^
Ihey were permitted to mingle in the crowds and take their
share of the heat and inconvenience to which their arrival
must necessarily add. After some time spent in saying little
and doing less^ Lady Middleten sat down to Cassino ; and
^ Marianne was not in spirits for moving about^ she and'
Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs placed themselves at no
great distance from the table.
They had not remained in this manner long, before Eli-
nor perceived Willoughby, standing within a few yards of
diem^ in earnest conversation with a very fashionable look-
ing young woman^ She soon caught his eye, and he imme.
diately bowed, hut without attempting to speak to her, or*
to approach Marianne, though he could not but see her ^^
and then continued his discourse with the same lady. Elinor
tamed involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could
be unobserved by her« At that moment she first perceived
kim; and her whole countenance glowing with sudden de-
light, die would have moved towards him instantly, had
sot her sister caught hold of her.
'* Good heavens! " she exclaimed, " he is there — he is
tiiere ! — Oh, why does he not look at me ? Why cannot
I speak to him? "
*'Pray, pray be composed, " cried Elinor,'* and do not
betray what you fed to every body present. Perhaps he
Ins not observed you yet. "
This, however, was more dian she could believe herself;
Mid to be composed at such a moment was not only beyond
£ 8
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
150 QBNSB AND 8BN8IBIUTY«
die reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wkb. & e sat^
in an .agony of impatience which affi^^ted every feature.
. At last he turned round again, and regarded them both :
she started up, and pronouncing his name m a tone of af« >
fection, held out her hand to Mm. He approadied ; and
addressing himself rather to ISinor than Marianne, as if
wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not to observe hok
attitude, enquired, in a hurried manner, after Mrs. Dash*
wood,^and asked how loi^ they had been in town. £lm < Hr was
robbed of all presence of mind by such an address, and wa»
unable to say a word. But the feelings of her sister weve^
instantly expressed. Her face was crimsoned over, and she
exclainuMi, in a voice of the greatest emotion^'* Good God i
M^illoughby, what is the meaning of this ? Have you not
received my letters ? Will you not shake hands with me? " -
He could not then avoid it; but her touch seemed painful
to him, and he held her hand cmly fw a moment. During
all this time he was evidently struggling for composure.
£linor watched his countenance and ^w its expression be*
coming more tranquiL After a moment's pause, he spdce
with calmness.
, *^ I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street
last Tuesday, and very much regretted that I was not for.
tunate enoi^h to find yourselves and Mrs. Jennings at;
home. My i^d was not lost, I hope. "
''But have you not received my notes ? " cried Marianne^
in the wildest anxiety. " Here is some mistake, J am sure
-*- some dreadful mistake. What ca;n be the meaning of
it ? Tell me, Willoughby ; for Heaven's sake tell me; what
is the matter ? "
He made no reply : his .comfdexion changed, and all hisr
embarrasanent returned; but as if, on catching the eye of
the young lady with whom he had been previously talkii^^
he felt the necessity of instant exertion, he recovered him.^
self again, and after saying,'''Yes, I had the pleasure of
receiving the information of your arrival in town, which'
you were so good as to send me, " turned hastily away with
a. slight bow, andjoined his friend.
Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable Wi
stand, sunk into her chair; an4 Elinor, expecting ev^ mo«
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
aBNaS AMD SSHnBJGMTl^ 151
neoft to ate her £unty tried to acreen her from the observe
ation of othera, while reviving her with lavender water.
. ^^ Go to himy EUnor, " ihe cried, aa soon aa she could
j^eak,'^ and force him to come to me. Tell him I muat
«ee him agaia — tmuat apeak to him inatantly. I cannot
teat — I ahall not. have a momenta peace till tbia ia ex«
plained — some dreadful miaapprehemdon or other. Oh^
go to him thia moment. "
^^ How can that be dcoe ? No > my dearest Marianne,
jou muat wait. This ia not a place for explanationa. Wait
Oily till to-morrow. "
With difficult, howevtr^ could she prevent her from foU
kming him herself ; and to persuade her to check her agi^
iation, to wait, at least, with the aj^pearance of composure,
till ahe mig^t speak to him with more privacy and more
efibet, waa impoasihle, for Marianne continued incessantly
to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings, by
•sdamations of wretdiedness. In a short time £linor saw
WilloHghby quit the room by the door towards the stairs
oaae; and telling Marianne that he waa gone, urged the im?
poaaibility of qiealdng to him again that evening, as a fresh
aigume & t for her to be calm. She instantly begged her
aiater would entreat Iiady Middleton to take them home^
aa she was too miserable to sta > a minute longer.
Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on
being informed that Marianne waa unwell, was too polite
to olgect for a moment to her wish of going away, and
making over her cards to a friend, they departed as soon as
the carriage could be foimd. Scarcely a word was spoken
during their return to Berkeley Street. Marianne was in a
silent agony, too mnch oppressed even for tears ; but as
Mrs. Jennings was luckily not come home, they could go di-
vactl^ to their own room, where hartshorn restored her a
tittle to hefself. She was soon undressed and in b^ ; and
aa she seemed desirous of being alone, her sister then left
her, and while she waited the return of Mrs. Jennings, had
leiwe eooii^ for tUnUng over the past. y
That some kind .of engagement had subsisted betweeo
Willo|i|^by and Marianne she could not doubt, and tha^
H^ilkwic^^ waa weaqr of il, aeemed equally clear; for hoi!r«
I. 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
]5£ BBN8B AIXD SiBNglBILITY*
ever Marianne might still feed her own wishei^ ^ odild not
attribute such behaviour to mistake or misapprehension of
uny kind. Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment
could account for it. Her indignation would have been still
stronger than it was^ had she not witnessed that embarnw*
ment which seemed to speak a consciousness oi his own
misconduct, and prevented her from believing him so im*
principled as to have been sporting with the afl^tions of
her sister from the first, without any design that would bear
investigation. Absence might have weakened his T^;ard^
and convenience might have determined him to overcome
it ; but that such a regard had formerly existed she eould
not bring herself to doubt.
As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a
meeting must already have given her, and on those still
more severe which might await her in its probable conse*
quence, she could not reflect without the deepest ooncera.
Her own situation gained in the compsrison; for whik
she could esteem Edward as much as ever, however they
might be divided in future, her mind might be always sup*
ported. But every circumstance that could embitter such
an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne.
in a final separation from Willoughby — * in an immediate
and irreconcilable rupture with him«
CHAPTER VII.
Bepobb the housemaid had lit their fire the next day, or
the sun gained any power over a cold, gloomy morning in
January, Marianne, only half dressed, was kneeling against
6ne of the window.seats for the sake of all the little light
she could command from it, and writing as fast as a conti«
nual flow of tears would permit her. In this situation,
Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs, first
perceived her ; and after observing her for a few momenti
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
4EN8B AND SENSIBILITV. 153
villi gitent anxiety^ said^ in a tone of th^ most considerate
geutleness^—
** Marianne^ may I ask ■ ? "
**No, Elinor/* she replied^''ask nothing; you will
soon know all. "
The sort of desperate calmness with which this was
said lasted no longer than while she spoke^ and was imme.
diately followed hy a return of the same excesdve aflliction.
It was some minutes before she could go on with her
latter; and the frequent bursts of grief which still obliged
faer, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough
of hor Reeling how more than probable it was that she was
writing for the last time to Willoughby.
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in
her power ; and she would have tried to soothe and tran.
qiBltise her still more, had not Marianne entreated her, with
an the eagerness of the most nervous irritability, not to
•peak to her for the world. In such circumstances it was
better for both that they should not be long together ; and
the restless state of Marianne's mind not only prevented
her from remaining in the room a moment after she wa^
dressed, but requiring at once solitude and continual change
of place, made her wander about the house till breakfasU
time, avoiding the sight of every body.
At breakfast she neither ate nor attempted to eat an^
thing; and Elinor's attention was then all employed, fiot
in urging her, not in pitying her, nor in appearing to re-
gard her, but in endeavouring to engage Mrs. Jennings'iij
notice entirely to herself.
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs* Jennings
it lasted a considerable time ; and they were just setting
themselves after it round the common working table, when
a letter was delivered to Marianne, which she eagerly
anight from the servant, and, turning of a death*like pale-/
Bess, instantly ran out of the room. Elinor, who saw as
I^ainly by this as if she had seen the direction that it
most come from Willoughby, felt immediately such a
aidmess at heart as made her hardly able to hold up her
heac^ and sat in such a general tremour as made her fear it
impossible to escape Mnu Jennings's notice. That good
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
154 .aCNSB iUTD SBNfllBlUnEi
ludyy however^ saw only tiiat Mftmnae had leeewadl a
letter from Willou^^y^ which appeared to bar a moff
good joke^ and which ahe toeated aeooxc & ig^y, by hopiiM^
with a laugh, that she would find it to her hkiag. Of
Elinor's distress she was too busily employed is maai:
swing lengths of worsted lor her rug to see any thing at
sSk ; and calmly continuyig her talk as soon as Marianas
disappeared, she said, — •
'^ Uppn my word, I never saw a young woman so disspegbm
ately in love in jmy life J My girls were nothing to bas^
and yet they used to be foolish enough ; InU as for Miv
Marianne she is quite an altered creature. I hope, fkam
the bottom of my heart, he won't keep her waiting mueh
)ong^, for it is quite grieyoua to see her look so iU and
forlorn. Pray, when are they to be married ? "
filinor, though never lesa di^Kwed to speak thsn at tibal
moment, obliged hers^ to answer such an attadc as tlii%
and, therefore, trying to smile, replied, ^^ And have you
really, ma'am, tallied yourself into a persuasion of my sis-
ter's being engaged to Mr. WiUoughby ? I thought it bad
been only a joke, b«t sp serious a question seems to imply
more ; and I must bjeg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any Ip^gev. I do assure yon that nothing would
surprise me more than to hear of their being going to be
manned. "
" For shame, for shavie. Miss Dashwood ! how can you
talk so ? Jikm't we all know that it must be a match, — thai
Ihey inrere over head uvl ears, in love with each other from'
the first moment they met ? Did not I see them together
in Devonshire every day, and < dl day long ; and did AOt I
Ipiow that your sister camui to town with me on purpose 1|9
buy wedding clothes ? Come, come, this won't do. Be«
eause you are so sly about it yoursdbf, you think nobody
dse has any senses ; but it is no such thing, I can tell yon,
for it has been known all over town this ever so long. X
lell every body of it, and so does Charlotte. "
; " Indeed, ma'am, " said Elinor very seriously,'^ you ai8
mistakeq. Indeed, yon are doing a very unkind. Uung in
spreading the report; and you will find that yoU'bav«»
though you ynU not b^eve m^ now. "
oSitized by Google
9VNSB AND 8SKSIBIUTT« ISS
. Ifak Jenni]^ laughed again^ bat £lia0r had not spirit*
Id say more; and eager^ at all events^ to know what Wil.
Iflfig^hy had written^ hurried away to their room^ where^
on opening the door^ she saw Mariiojdie stretched on the
body almost chpked by grief^ one letter in her hand^ and
two or three others lying by her. £linor drew near^ bat
without saying a word ; and seating herself on the bed^
took her hand^ kissed her affectionately several times, and
then gave way to a burst of tears, which at first was
^caicely less violent than Marianne's. The latter, though
unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness of thia
bdiaviour ; and, aft^r some time thus spent in joint affliction,
ahe put aU the letters into Elinor's hands, and then cover.;
ing her face with her handkerchief, almost screamed with
agony^ £linor, who kn^w that such grief, shocking as it
was to witness it, must have its course, watched by her till
this excess of suffering had somewhat spent itself, and then
Inniing eagerly to Willoughby s letter, read as follows : ^*
^ < Bond Street, January.
^'My dear Madam,
''I have just had the honour of receiving your letter^
for which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgments. 1
am much concerned to find there was any thing in my
bdiaviour last n^ht that did not meet your approbatimi j
and though. I am quite at a loss to disoovev in what point
I could be so unfortunate aa to oiSsnd you, I entreat yoof
tegiv^ess of what I can assure you to have been perfectly
unintentional. I shall never reflect on my former aci
quaintanoe with your family in Devonshire without the
most grateful pleasure, and flatter myself it will not be
broken by any mistake or misapprehoMion of my actions*
My esteem for your whole family is very sincere ; but if I:
bm beeti so unfortunate as to give rise to a bdief of more
ihanr I Mt, or meant to express, I shall reproach myself
for not having been more guarded in my professions of
tittt esteem. That I should ever have meant mere, you.
will allow to be imposaibLe, when you understand that my
aAsetums have been long ei^;aged elsewhere, md it wiU-
ikot \fe many weeks, I bdieve, before, this ^gagement lA
Digitized by LjOOQ[C
156 SENtB AND 6BKBIBIUT77
Iblfilled. It is with great regret that I obey y < > ar com*
mands of returning %e letters with which I have beetf
honoured from you^ and the lock of hair which you so
dbUgingly bestowed oil ice*
" I tun, dear Madam^
** Your most obedient
''humble servant,
'* John Willoughby. "
With what indignation such a letter as this must be^
read by Miss Dashwood may be imagined. Though aware,
before she began it^ that it must bring a confession of his
inconstancy, and confirm their separation for ever, she watf
fiot aware that such language could be suffered to announce
it; nor could she have supposed Willoughby capable of
departing so far from the appearance of every honouraUe
atad delicate feeling— ^ so far from the common decorunf
of a gentleman— as to send a letter so impudently cruel : a
letter which, instead of bringing with his desire of a release
any profiessi.ons of regret, acknowledged no breach of faith,
denied all peculiar affection whatever; — a letter of Which
erery line was ati insult, and which pmslaimed its writer
€0 be deep in hardened Tillany.
She paused over it for some time with indignant aston-
ishment ; then read it agiun and again ; but every perusal'
only served to increase her abhoirenoe of the man; and so
bitter were her feelings against him, that she dared not
trust herself to speak, lest she might wound Marianne still
deeper, by treating their disengagement^ not as a loss to her
of any possiUe good, but as an escape from the worst and'
most irremediable of all evils, — a connection for life with
an unprincipled man, as a deliverance the most real, a
blessing the most important^
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter,
dn the depravity of that mind which could dictate it, and,
probably, on the very different mind of a very different
person who had no other connection whatever with the
affair than what her heart gave him with every thing that
passed, Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her rister,
forgot that she had diree letters on her lap yet unread, and
Digitized by
Google
SSKSB AND SBNilfiXLITT. 1^7
80.^ttrdy foi^ot how long she had heen in the room > that
when^ on hearing a carriage driye up Ho the door^ she went
to the window to see who could he coming so unreasonably
early, she was all astonishment to percdye Mrs. Jennings's
diaiiot, which she knew had not been ordered till one*
Determined not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of con-
tributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to ex-
cose herself from attending Mrs. Jennings, on account of
her sister being indisposed. Mrs. Jennings, with a tho.
roughly good-humoured concern for its cause, admitted the
excuse most readily ; and Elinor, after seeing her safe o£^
returned to Marianne, whom she found attempting to rise
fin > m the bed, and whom she reached just in time to prevent
her from falling on the floor, faint and giddy from a long
want of proper rest and food ; for it was many days sinoe
she had any appetite, and many nights since she had really
slept ; and now, when her mind was no longer supported
by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this was feb
in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general ner*
vous faintness. A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for
her directly, made her more comfortable, and she was al
last able to express some sense of her kindness, by sayings
" Poor Elinor ! how unhappy I make you ! "
*'I only wish,''replied her sister, ^'there were any
thing I could do, which might be of comfort to you. "
. This, as every thing else would have been, was too much
for Marianne, who could only excLum, in the anguish of
her heart, " Oh, Elinor, I am miserable indeed, " before
her voice was entirely lost in sobs.
Elinor could no longer witness this torrrat of unresisted
grief in silence.
^^ Exert yourself, dear Marianne, " she cried,'^ if yoa
would not kill yourself and all who love you. Think of
your mother ; think of her misery while you suffer ; for her
sake you must exert yourself. "
'^ I cannot, I cannot, " cried Marianne ^ " leave me, leave
me, if I dislress you; leave me, hate me, forget me 1 but
do not torture me so. Oh, how easy for those who have
no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion ! Happy, happy
Elinor, you cannot have an idea of what I suffer. " .
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
15d 8SN8E ANB SENSIBILITT.
*'Do you call me hkppy, Marianne ? Ah, if you kiiew!
And can you bdieve me to be so, while I see you ad
wretched? "
" Forgive me, forgive me, " throwing her arms roosd
her 8ister*8 neck; " I know you feel for me ; I know whai^
a heart you have ; but yet you are — you must be ha|^j ;
Edward loves you — what, oh what, can do away such
iiappiness as that ? "
" Many, many circumstances,'* said EEnor, solemnly.
'^ No, no, no,*'cried Marianne, wildly : " he loves you,
and only you. You can have no grief. "
^'I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state. "
" And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is a
misery which nothing can do away. "
'^ You must not talk so, Marianne. Have yon no com*,
forts ? no Iriends ? Is your loss such as leaves no op^vng
for consolation ? Much as you suffer now, think of what
you would have su^ed, if the discovery of his character
had been delayed to a later period; — if your engagement
had been carried on for months and months, as it might
have been, before ^he chose to put an end to it. Every ad^
ditional day of unhappy confidence, on your side, wotddi
have made the blow more dreadful. "
''Engagement! " cried Marianne,''tiierehaa been no
engagement. "
'*'No engagement ! "
''No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him. He
has broken no faith with me. " •
''But he told you that he loved you. "
" *'Yes — no — never absolutely. It was every day im-
plied, but never professedly declared. Sometimes I thought
it had been, but it never was. "
" Yet you wrote to him ? "
''Yes : could that be wrong, after all that had passed?
But I cannot talk. "
EKnor said no more, and turning again to iJie three
letters which now raised a much stronger curiosity than
before, directly ran over the contents of all. The first,
which was what her sister had sent him on iheir arriTiA in
town, was to this effect : —
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SSN8E AND SENSIBILITY* 15$
** Berkeley Street, January.
" How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on receiving,
this; and I think you will feel something more than
surprise, when you know that I am in town. An opportu*
nity of coming hither, though with Mrs. Jennings, was a
temptation we could not resist. I wish you may receiye
this in time to come here to-night, but I will not depend
on it. At any rate I shall expect you to-morrow. For
the present, acQeu.
«M.D. "
Her second note, which had been written on the mom.
ing after the dance at theMiddletons', was in these words: — >
" I cannot express my disappointment in having missed
y^ the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment at not
^ving received any answer to a note which I sent you
above a week ago. I have been expecting to hear from
you, and still more to see you, every hour of the day.
Pray call agidn as soon as possible, and explain the reason
of tny having expected this in vain. You had better come
earlier another time, because we are generally out by one.
'We were last night at Lady Middleton's, where there was
a < lance. I have been told that you were asked to be of the
{MLrty. But could it be so? You must be very much
altered, indeed, since we parted, if that could be ihe case,
And you not there. But I will not suppose this possible,
and I hope very soon to receive your personal assurance of
its being otherwise.
The contents of her last note to him were tSiese : —
** What am I to imagine, ^WiUoughby, by your hef*
haviour last night ? Again I demand an explanation of it.
I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure which our
separation naturally produced, — with the familiarity which
oar intimacy at Barton appeared to me to justify. I was
repulsed indeed ! I have passed a wretched night in en*
deavouring to excuse a conduct which can scarcely be
called less than insulting ; but though I have not yet been
aUe to form any reasonable apology for your behaviour, I
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
160 8SNIB AXfV SBNUBtiaTT*
am perfectly reftdy to hew your justificatioii of it You
have perhaps been minoformed^ or purposely deceived, in
something concerning me, which may have lowered me in
your opinion. Tell me what it is ; explain the gnmnds
on which you acted, and I shall be satisfied, in being able
to satisfy you. It would grieve me, indeed, to be obliged
to think ill of you ; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn
that you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that
your regard for us all was insincere, that your behaviour
to me was intended only to deceive, let it be told as soon
as possible. My feelings are at present in a state of dread-
ful indecision; I wish to acquit you, but certainty on
either side will be ease to what I now suffer. If your
sentiments are no longer what ^hey were, you will return
my notes^ and the lock of my hair which is in yo^jr pos.
session.
" M.D. "
That such letters, so full of affection and confidence,
could have been so answered, Elinor, for TVilloughby's
sake, would have been unwilling to believe* But her con-
demnation of him did not blind her to the impropriety of
their having been written at all ; and she was silently
grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such
unsolicited proofs of tenderness, not warranted by any
thing preceding, and most severely condemned by the eveQt,
when Marianne, perceiving that die had finished the letters,'
observed to her diat they contained nothing but what any
one would have written in the same situation.
*'I fdt myself, " she added, ^'to be as solemnly engaged
to him as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us
to each other. "
^ < I can believe it,** said £linor ; f but unfortunatdy he
did not feel the same. "
^^ He did fed the same, Elinor — for weeks and weeks
he felt it. I know he did. Whatever may have changed
him now (and nothing but the blackest art employed
against me can have done it), I was once as dear to him
as my own soul could wish. This lock .of hair, which now
he can so readily give up, was begged of me with the most
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
Mf9 BmammiJax^ 161
^eaxnest 8ap]4icftt & »Bk Had ^rou seen Mi look, his maBBcr,
had you heard his voice at dtat momoDt ! Have yon foir-
.got the last evening of our bei & g together at Barton ? The
oiorniBg that we parted tool When he told me that it
might be many weeks before we met again — . his distms
. — can I ever foiiget his distress ? "
For a moment or two she could say no more ; but.when
this emotion had passed away, she added, in a firmer tone, —
'^ Elinor, I have been cruelly used ; but not by Wil-
loughby/'
^'Dearest Marianne, who but himself ? By whom can
lie have be^ instigated? "
'* By all the world, rather than by his own. heart, i
could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance
leagued together to ruin me in his opinion, than believe
his nature capable of such cruelty. This woman of whom
he writes — whoever she be — or any one, in short, but
your own dear self, mamma, and Edward, may have been so
barbarous to belie me. Beyond you three, is there a crea-
ture in the world whom I would not rather suspect of evil
than Willoughby, whose heart I know so weU ? "
Elinor would not contend, and only replied,'^ Whoever
may have been so detestably your enemy, let them be
cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sister, by
seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own innocence
and good intentions supports your spirits. It is a reasoifr-
able and laudable pride which resists such malevolence.'"
^^ No, no, " cried Marianne, " misery such as mine fan
no pride. I care not who knows that I am wretched. The
.triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world.
Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud and
independent as they like — may resist insult, or return
•mortification — but I cannot. I must feel — I must be
wretched — and they are welcome to enjoy the consciouft.
aess of it that can. "
''But for my mother's sake and mine "
^^ I would do more than for my own. But to appear
hftpfpy when I am so miserable -^ oh, who can Tequiie
U? "
Again they were both ailent. Elinor .was mnjj^yed m
d by Google
162 SENSE AND SENSIBIIiITir.
walking diou^htfully from the fire to the window^ from
the window to the fire, widiout knowing that she receiyed
-warmth from one^or discerning objects throii^h the other;
and Marianne^ seated at the foot of the bed^ with her
. head leaning against one of its posts^ again took up Wil**
loughby's letter^ and^ after shuddering over every sentence^
exdaimed^^
*'It is too much ! Oh, Willoughhy, Willoughby, could
•this be yours? Cruel, cruel — nothing can acquit yoo.
Elinor, nothing can. Whatever he might have heard against
me, ought he not to have suspended his belief? ought
he not to have told me of it, to have given me the power
of clearing myself ?'The lock of hair (repeating it from
the letter) which you so obligingly bestowed on me'—
that is unpardonable. Willoi^hby, where was your heart
when you wrote those words ? Oh, barbarously insolent !
^- £linor, can he be justified ? "
" No, Marianne, in no possible way. "
^'And yet this woman — who knows what her art may
have been ? — how long it may have been premeditated, and
how deeply contrived by her ! — Who is she > — Who can
she be ? — Whom did I ever hear^ him talk of as yoimg
and attractive among his female acquaintance ? — Oh^ no
one, no one : — he talked to me only of myself. "
Another pause ensued ; Marianne was greatly agitated,
and it ended thus : —
'^ Elinor, I must go home. I must go~ and comfort
mamma. Cannot we be gone to-morrow ? "
" To-morrow, Marianne ! "
^^ Yes ; why should I stay here ? I came only for Wil-
loughby's sake -^ and now who cares for me ? Who
regards me ? **
^^ It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe
.Mrs. Jennings much more than civility ; and civility of the
commonest kind must prevent snch a hasty removal as
that. "
< ^ Well then, another day or two, perhaps ; but I can-
•not stay here long; I cannot stay to endure die questions
and remarks of ail these people. The Middletons and
.Pahners — how am I to bear their pity ? The pity of such
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SJBNSB ANB BENSIBUiITT. l6S
a woman as Lady Middleton ! Oh^ what would he sslj to
that? "
£liDor advised her to lie down again^ and for a moment
she did so ; but no attitude could give her ease ; and in
restless pain of mind and body she moved from one posture
to another^ till^ growing more and more hysterical^ her sister
could with difficulty keep her on the bed at all^ and for
some time was fearful of being constrained to call for
assistance. Some lavender drops^ however^ which she waa
at length persuaded to take^ were of use ; and from that
time till Mrs, Jennings returned she continued on the bed
quiet and motionless.
CHAPTER VIIL
Mbs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her
return^ and without waiting to have her request of ad-
mittance answered^ opened the door and walked in with a
look of real concern.
^'How do you do, my dear ? " said she, in a voice of
great compassion to Marianne, who turned away her face
without attempting to answer.
''How is she^ Miss Dashwood ? Poor thing ! she
looks very bad. No wonder. Ay, it is bmt too true.
He is to be married very soon — a good-for-nothing fellow !
I have no patience with him. Mrs. Taylor told me of it
half an hour ago, and she was told it by a particular friend
of Miss Grey herself, else I am sure I should not have
bdieved it; and I was almost ready to sink as it was.
Well^ said I, all I can say is, that if it is true, he has
used a young lady of my acquaintance abominably ill, and
I wish with all my soul his wife may plague his heart out.
And so I shall always say, my dear, you may depend on it.
I have no notion of men's going on in this way ; and if
ever I meet him again^ I will give him such a dressing as
he has. not had ibis many a day. But there is one com*
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
164,
•flnrtS AKV flBiraUULElV.
ioTt, my < tear Miss Mariamile*— lie is not ike t > idy yoa^g
man in the world worth having; and with your pretty
face you will never want admirers. Well^ poor thing ! I
won't disturb her any longer, for die had better hate her
dy out at onoe and have done with it. The Parrys and
, Sandersons li^ckily are coming to-night, you know, «id
that will amuse her. "
She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of die
room, as if she supposed lier young bend's affliotioB could
be increased by noise.
Marianne, to the surprise cf her sister, determined on
dining with them. Elinor even advised her against it
But'^ no, she would go down ; she could bear it very
well, and the bustle about her would be less. " Elinor,
pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a
motive, though believing it hardly possible that she could
sit out the dinner, said no more ; and ac^usting her dress^
for her as well as she could, while Marianne still remained
on the bed, was ready to assist her into the dining room as
soon as they were summoned to it.
When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate
more, and was calmer than her sister had expected. Had
she tried to speak, or had she been conscious of half Mrs.
Jennings's well meant but ill-judged attentions to her, this
calmness could not have been maintained ; but not a
syllable escaped her lips ; and the abstraction of her thoughts
preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing
■before her.'
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness^
though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments, and
returned her those civilities, which her sister could not
make or return for herself. Their good friend saw that
Marianne was unhappy, and felt lihat every thing was due
to her which might make her at all less so. She treated
her, therefore, with sill the indulgent fondness of a parent
towards a favourite child on the last day of its holidays.
Marianne was to have the best place by die fire, was to be
tempted to eat by ^ery delicacy in the house, and to bfe
limused by the rehiticli of ail the news of the day. Had
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
sENtts. A2f9. wimmj*sm*
163
not £3iQor > in this a«d oouoteiiaiice oi hei oist^^ s^n a
eheck to all mirth^ she could havQ he^n enta*ti|ioed by
A(n. J^naings's ^deavovre to cmre a dlflappoiotmeiit in
Aoire, by a variety of aweetmeats audolives, and a good fvrtb
As stNHi, however^ aa the conscioHsneas of all this waa
focoed by ooAUmifal repetition on Marianne, she could atay^
ng > , longen With 9i hasty exiclanuttion of nvnery, and a
sign to her sister not to follow her, she directly got up and .
hurried out of the room.
'^ Poor soul ! " cried Mrs. Jenmngs, m soon as she was
gone, ^'how it grieves me, to see h^ ! And I declare if
she 18 not gone away without finishing her wine I And tho
dned cherries too ! LojEd I nothing seems to do her any
good. I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like, I
would send aU over the town for it Well, it is the oddest
tbing to me, that a man should use sudi a pietty girl so .
iU \ But when there is plenty of money on. one dde, and t
ne^t to , none« on the other^ Lord bless yoi^ ! they care no
more about such things ! "
. < ^ Tbo lady, then, — Miss Grey, I think you caUed her,
-^ia very rich? "
*^ Fifty thousand pounds, my clears Did yoiu ever see
her ? a smart, stylish girl, they say, but not handsome. I
roBiember her aunt very well^ l^ddy Henshawe; she
married a very wealthy man. But the family are aU ricb
together. Fifty thousand pount & s ! and by all accounts it .
won't conao before it's wanted ; for they say he is all to.
pieces. No wondei? I dasUng about wiith his curricle and.
Iwnters ! WeU, it don't signify talking; but when a young
man > be he who be will, comes and makes love to a pretty
girl, and p^misea marriage, he has no burinesa to fly off.
from bia word, only because he grows poor, and a richev
gill 10 ready to have him. " Why don't he^ in such a caa^
sell bis horses, let his house, turn off his servants, and.
make a thorough refonn at once ? I warrant you, Misis^
Mai^anne would have been ready to wait tUl matters camoi
round. Bsat that won't do now-a-days ; nolhing in tb«
way of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men o£
tlik age. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
166 SBfrsK AKD sKystBiLrrf^'
''Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grrey is ? Is
she said to be amiable ?''
^'I never heard any harm of her ; indeed I hardly eyer
heard her mentioned ; except that Mrs. Taylor did say this ^
mornings that one day Miss Walker hinted to her^ that she
believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would not be sorry to have
Miss Grey married^ for she and Mrs. £llison could never
agree. "
'^ And who are the Ellisons ? "
*'Her guardians^ my dear. But now she is of age^ and
mfty choose for herself; and a pretty choice she has
made ! — What now, " after pausing a moment,'^ your
poor sister is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by
herself. Is there nothing one can get to comfort her?
Poor dear, it seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well,
by-and-by we shall have a few Mends, and that will
amuse her a little. What shall we play at ? She hates
whist, I know; but is there no round game she cares
for? "
. ** Bear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary.
Marianne, I dare say, vnll not leave her room again this
evening. I shall persuade her, if I can, to go early to
bed, for I am sure she wants rest. "
*'Ay, I believe that will be best for her. Let her
name her own supper, and go to bed. Lord ! no wonder
ahe has been looking so bad and so cast down this last
wtek or two, for this matter I suppose has been hanging
over her head as long as that. And so the letter that came
tO*day finished it ! Poor soul ! I am sure if I had had a
notion of it, I would not have joked her about it for all my
money. But then, you know, how should I guess such a
thing ? I made sure of its being nothing but a common
love letter, and you know young people like to be laughed
at about them. Lord ! how concerned Sir John and my
daugl^ters will be when they hear it ! If I had had my
senses about me I might have called in Conduit Street in
my way home, and told them of it. But I shall see them
to-morrow. "
" It would be unnecessary, I am sure, for you to caution
Mrs. Palmer and Sir John against ever naming Mr. Wil-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
QENSE ANH SENSIBILITT. . l6^'
Ifughbj, or making the slightest allusion to what has passed^
before my sister. Their own good-nature must point out
to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing *
about it when she is present ; and the less that may ever •
be said to myself on the subject^ the more my feelings will •
be spared^ as you, my dear madam^ will easily believe. "
^^ Oh, Lord ! yes, that I do indeed* It must be terri^
ble for you to hear it talked of; and as for your sister, I
am sure I would not mention a word about it to her for'
the world. You saw I did not all dinner time. No more i
would Sir John nor my daughters, for they are all very -
thoughtful and considerate ; especially if I give them a hint,
as I certainly will. For my part, I think the less that is
said about such things the better, the sooner''tis blown'
over and forgot. And what good does.taticing ever do, you'
know } "
" In this afiair it can only do harm ; more so, perhaps,
than in many cases of a similar kind; for it has been attended
by circumstances, which, for the sake of every one con-
cerned in it, make it unfit to become the public conversation*
I must do thU justice to Mr. Willoughby'— he has broken L
no positive engagement with my sister. "
^^ Law, my dear ! Don't pretend to defend him. No .
positive engagement indeed ! after taking her all over Allen-'
bam House, and fixing on the very rooms they were to live
in hereafter! "
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject'
farther, and she hoped it was not required of her for Wil-
loughby's; since, though Marianne might lose much, he^
could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings, with all'
her natural hilarity, burst ibrth again.
'^ Well, my dear, *tis a true saying about an ill wind,
for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He will
have her at last ; ay, that he will. Mind me, now, if they >
an't married by Midsummer. Lord ! how he'll chuckle oven
this news ! I hope he will come to-night. It will be all
to one a better match for your sister. Two thousand a^
year without debt or drawback -— except the little love^:
child, indeed ; ay, I had forget her ; but she may be'pren^
K 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
1(8 sBNU jurn XEKnBmnv,
tUed ont at nnaU Gost, aad ihca what doe» it sigMify?''
Bdafocd is a nice plaoe, I can t^ you ; eaaetly what I
dfl a nke old fuBhioned place^ fall of comfiorts and oodto-
niesoes ; quite abut in with, great garden walls that aW'
CDTcred with the hest fruit-trees in the country ; and such
a mulberry tree in one comer ! Lord ! how Charlotte and
I did stuff the only time we were there ! Then, there is
a doveoate, some delightful stewpon^, aad a Tery pretty*/
canal ; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for:
and, moreover, it is dose to the churchy and only a quarter
of a mife from the turapike-road, so'tis never duU, for if
you only go and sit up in an old yew {arbour behind the
house, you may see all the cania^^es that pass along. Ob,
'tm a nice plaee ! A butcher hard by in the village, and the
parsonage-house within a stone's throw. To my fancy, a
thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they ave
forced to sand tiiree miles for their meat, and have not a
neighbour nearer than your mother. WeU, I shall spirit
up the Coionel as soon as I can. One shoulder of mutton,
you know, drives another down. If we can hut put Wil-
longhby out of h^ head J "
" Ay, if we can but do that, ma'am, " said £iinor, " we
shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandcm. " And
then rising, she went away to join Marianne, whom she
found, as she ^Lpected, in her own room, leaning, in nlent
misery, over the small remains of a fire, which, till Eiincv's
entrance, had been her only light.
'* You had better leave me, " was all the notice that her
flister received from her.
'* I will leave you, " said Elinor, ** if you wffl go to .
bed. " But this, from the momentary perverseness of im-
patient suffering, she at first refused to do. Her sister's
earnest, though gentle persuasion, however, soon softened
ber to compliance ; and Elinor saw ^er lay her aching head
on the pillow, and saw her, as she hoped, in a way to get
some quiet rest before she left her.
In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was
aoon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine glass, full of
iemething, in her hand.
» ** My dear, " aaid Bhe» entering,''I have just recolleoted'
Digitized by Google
I6ff
tlMtf. I b*T« sMne of the finest old CoOBtantui wui« ib tlie
house that ever was tasted^ so I have brought a g^ss of ^
for your sister. My poorhmband! how fond he was of it !
Whenever ho had a touch of hk old colickj gont^ he said
h £d hiaa more good tJiaa any things else in the world.
Jhi take it to your sister. "
^ Dear ma'am/'replied Elinor^ smiling at the difibrenoe
o£ ^e complaints for wldch it was recommended^ ^^ how
good you are ! But I have just left Marianne in bed^ and^
I hopo^ almost asleep; and as I think nothings will be of soi
nindi service to her as rest» if you wiH give me leave^ I will
drink the wine myself. "
Mrs. Jcimings, though regretting that she had not been
fife minutes earHer^ was satisfied with the oompvomise;
and Elinor^ as she swallowed the chief of it > reflected^ thai
thongfa its good effects on a coMeky gout were^ at present^
of little importaDoe to her, its healing powers, on a disap*
poinled heart, might be as reasonably tried on herself as on
hersioter.
Cc^nel Brandon came in while the party w»e at tea;
and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne,
Elinor immediately fancied that ho neither expected nor
wished lo see her diere, and, in short, ^t he was already
aware of what occasioned her absence. Mrs. Jennings wa &
not struck by the same thought ; for, soon after his en«
trance, she walked across the room to the tea-table where
Elinor presided, and whispered, ^^ The Colonel looks as
grave as ever, you see : he knows nothing of it ; do tell him,
my dear. "
He shortly afterwards drew a chair dooe to hers, and,
with a look which perfectly assured her of hia good inform-
ation, enquired after her sister.
" Marianne is not well, " said she. " She has been in-«
diiposed all day, and we have persuaded her to go to bed. "
** P^haps, then, " he hesitatingly replied, *'what I heard
this morning may be — there may be more truth in it than
I oonld believe possible at first "
** What did you hear? "
.''That a gentleman, whom I had leason to think --^in
short, that a man, whom I Imew. to be engaged*-^ but hov
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
170 SENSE AKD «BM8IBILmr«
shall I tell you ? If yoa know it ab^ady^ as surely you'
must^ I may be spared. "
''You mean/'answered £linor^ with forced calmnesSj
" Mr. Willoughby*8 marriage with Miss Grey. Yes, we
do know it alT. This seems to have been a day of general
elucidation, for this very morning first unfolded it to us.
Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable ! Where did you hear it ? "
'^ In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I had business*
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage, and one of
them was giving the other an account of the intended
match, in a voice so little attempting concealment, that it was
impossible for me not to hear all. The name of Willoughby,
John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention ; and what followed was a positive assertion that
every thing was now finally settled respecting his marriage
with. Miss Grey — it was no longer to be a secret — it would
take place even within a few weeks, with many particulars
of preparations and other matters. One thing, especially,
I remember, because it served to identify the man still more:
-^as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to
Combe Magna, his seat in Somersetshire. My astonish.*
ment ! — but it would be impossible to describe what I felt.
The communicative lady I learnt, on enquiry, — for I stayed
in the shop till they were gone, — was a Mrs. Ellison, and'
that, as I have be^ since informed, is the name of Miss
Grey's guardian. "
'^ It is. But have you likewise heard that Miss Giey
has fifty thousand pounds ? In that, if in any thing, we
may find an explanation. "
^'It may be so ; but Willoughby is capable — at least I
think " He stopped a moment ; then added, in a voice
which seemed to distrust itself, " And your sister,— how ^
did she "
^'Her sufferings have been very severe. I have only
to hope that they may be proportionably short It has
. been, it is a most cruel affliction. Till yesterday, I be-
lieve, she never doubted his regard ; and even now, per-
haps — but /am almost convinced that he never was reaDy
attached to her. He has been very deceitful! and, in
some points, there seems a hardness of heart about hino*''f
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8EKSE AND SENSIBILITY* 171
^'Ah ! " said Colonel Brandon^'* there is^ indeed ! But
your sister does not — I think you said so — she does not
oonsider it quite as you do? "
'* You know her (Usposition, and may believe how eagerly
At would still justify him if she could. "
He made no answer ; and soon afterwards, by the re- >
moval of the tea-things, and the arrangement of the card
parties^ the subject was necessarily dropped. Mrs. Jennings^
who had watched them with pleasure while they were
talking, and who expected to see the effect of Miss Dash*
wood's communication^ in such an instantaneous gaiety on
Colonel Brandon's side, as might have become a man in
the bloom of youth, of hope^ and happiness, saw him, with
amazement, remain the whole evening more serious and
thoughtful than usual*
CHAPTER IX.
From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Ma-
rianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of
misery in which she had closed her eyes.
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of
what she felt; and before breakfast was ready they had
gone through the subject again and again ; widi the same
steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side^
the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on
Marianne's, as before. Sometimes she could believe Wil-
loughby to be as .unfortunate and as innocent as herself^
and at others lost every consolation in the impossibility of
acquitting him. At one moment she was absolutely in«
different to the observation of all the world ; at another^
ahe would seclude herself from it for ever^ and at a thirds
could resist it with energy. In one thing, however, she
was uniform^ when it came to the point, in avoiding,
where it was possible, the presence of Mrs. Jennings, and
in a determined silence when obliged to endure it. Her
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
1-7% manm. juib wBMKmaxer^
beavt waa hardeDed against the belief off'Mn. Jexinkig8*8
entering into hei bqivowb witk any compassion.
''No^ no^ no^ it cannot be/'she cried ; *^ she casooti
feeL Hev kindness is not sympadiy ; her good^^natore is
not tenderness. All thai she wants is gossip ; and she only
liloes me now because I sapi^y it. "
Elinor had not needed this to be assured of tiie itguatioe
to which her sister was often kd in her opinioa of othei%
by the irritable refinement of her own mind, and the too.
great importance placed by her on the delicacies of a stvong
sensibility, and the graces of a polished manner. Like
half Ae rest of the worlds if more than half there be that
are dever and good, Marianne, with excellent abiUtiea and an
eKcellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor caadidL
She expected from other people the same opimons and feel-%
ings as her own, and she judged of their motives by the
immediate effect of their actions on herself. Thus a cir-
cumstance occurred, while the sisters were together in their
own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mrs.
Jennings still lower in her estimation; because, through
her own weakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh
pain to herself^ though Mrs. Jennings was governed in it
by an impuhe of the utmost good-will.
With a letter in her out-stretched hand, and countenance
gaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she
entered their room, saying, —
^'Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure
will do you good. "
Marianne heard enough. In one moment her imagination
placed before her a letter from Willoughby, full of ten-
derness and contrition, explanatory of all that had passed,
satisfactory, convincing; and instantly followed by Wil-
loughby himself, rushing eagerly into the room to enforce^
at her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances
of his letter. The work of one moment was destroyed by
the next. The hand. writing of her mother, never till then
unwelcome, was before her ; and, in the acuteness of the
disappointment which followed such an ecstasy of more
than hope, she felt as if, till that instant, she had never
suffered.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
HHNM Atm sfOfmBamv. ITS
Tbe craelty of Mrci. ^tiitixigs 9io longvage^ witl^in hfilr
reach in her moments of hap^pdest eloquence^ could have
< exp»ii669ed ; and now the could reproach her only hy the
tears which streamed from her eyes with pasSEonate violence;
— a reproach; however^ so entirely lost on its object^ that,
after many expressions of pity^ ihe withdrew, still referring
her to the letter for comfort. But the letter^ when she was
calm enoagh to read it^ brought little copifort. Willoughhy
filled every page. Her mocher^ still confident of their en-
gagement; and relying as warmly as ever on his constancy^
had only been roused by Elinor's application^ to entreat
tcom Marianne greater openness towards them both ; and
this, with such tenderness towards her^ such affection for
WiUoughVy, and nsuch a conviction of their future hap*
piness in each other^ that she wept with agony through the
whole of it.
All her impatience to be at home again now returned ;
her mother was dearer to her than ever ; dearer through
* & e very excess of her mistaken confidence in Willoughhy^
and she was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor^ unable her-
self to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be
in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own, ex-
cept of patience till their mother's wishes could be known ;
and at length she obtained her sister's consent to wait for
that knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual ; for she could
not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were able to
grieve as much as herself; and positively refusing Elinor's
offered attendance, went out alone for the rest of the mom*,
ing. Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the pain
«he was going to communicate, and perceiving, by Marianne's
letter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundadon
for it, then sat down to write her mother an account of what
had passed, and entreat her directions for the future ; while
Marianne, who came into the drawing-room on Mrs. Jen-
nings's going away, remained fixed at the table where Elinor
wrote^ watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over
her for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more
fondly over its eflfect on her mother.
In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
174 SBSSB AND SBNSPtXIiITy.
hour^ when Marianne^ whose nerres could not then bear
any sudden noise^ was startled by a rap at the door.
" Who can this be? " cried Elinor.''So early too! I
thought we had been safe. "
Marianne moved to the window.
'^ It is Colonel Brandon ! " said she^ with vexation, ^^ We
are never safe from him "
" He will not come in as Mrs. Jennings is from home. "
*^ I will not trust to that/'retreating to her own room.
^^ A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no
conscience in his intrusion on that of others. "
The event proved her conjecture rights though it was
founded on injustice and error ; for Colonel Brandon did
come in ; and Elinor^ who was convinced that solicitude for
Marianne brou^t him thither^ and who saw that solicitude
in his disturbed and melancholy look^ and in his anxious
though brief enquiry after her^ could not forgive her sister
for esteeming him so lightly.
^^ I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street, " said he, after
the first salutation, ^^ and she encouraged me to come on ; .
and I was the more easily encouraged, because I thought it
probable that I might find you alone, which I was very
desirous of doing. My object — my wish — my sole wish
in desiring it — I hope, I believe it is — is to b^ a means
of giving comfort ; — no, I must not say comfort — * not
present comfort — but conviction, lasting conviction to your
sister s mind. My regard for her, for yourself, for your
mother — will you allow me to prove it, by relating some
iurcumstances which nothing but a very sincere regard —
nothing but an earnest desire of being useful — I think
I am justified — though where so many hours have been
spent in convincing myself that I am right, is there not
jsome reason to fear I may be wrong ? " He stopped.
*'I understand you, " said Elinor. ^^ You have some-
thing to tell me of Mr. Willoi^hby, that will open his cha-
racter farther. Your telling it will be the greatest act of
friendship that can be shown Marianne. 3f]y gratitude wiU
be ensured immediately by any information tending to that
end, and J^ers must be gained by it in time. ^ Pray^ pray
Jet me hear it "
d by Google
SENSE AVD SENSIBILITr. 175
^'You shall ; and, to be brief, when I qtiitted Barton
hut October, — but this will give you no idea — I must go
farther back. You will find me a very awkward narrator.
Miss Dashwood ; I hardly know where to begin. A short
account of myself, I beUeve, will be necessary, and it shall
be a short one. On such a subject, " sighing heavily, ^^ I
can have little temptation to be diffuse. "
He stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another
sigh, went on.
^^ You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation —
(it is not to be supposed that it could make any impression
on you) — a conversation between us one evening at Barton
Park — it was the evening of a dance — in which I alluded
to a lady I had once known, as resembling, in some mea-
sure, your sister Marianne. "
'^ Indeed, " answered £linor, " I have not forgotten it. "
He looked pleased by this remembrance, and added, —
" If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality
of tender recollection, there is a very strong resemblance
between them, as well in mind as person. The same
warmth of heart, the same eagerness of fancy and spirits.
This lady was one of my nearest relations, an orphan from
her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father. Our
ages were nearly the same, and from our earUest years we
were playfellows and friends. I cannot remember the time
when I did not love £liza ; and my affection for her, as we
grew up, was such, as, perhaps, judging fromj my present
forlorn and cheerless gravity, you might think me incapable
of having ever felt. Hers,* for me, was, I believe, fervent
as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby, and it
was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate. At
seventeen she was lost to me for ever. She was married —
married against her inclination to my brother. Her fortune
was large, and our family estate much encumbered. And
this, I fear, is all that can be said for the conduct of one,
who was at once her imde and guardian. My brother did
not deserve her ; he did not even love her. I had hoped
that her r^ard for me would support her under any diffi*-
4nilty, and for some time it did; but at last the. misery of her
aitoation^ for she experienced great unkindness, overcame
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
176 Mmsaa anb SBNUBiutT*
all b€fr reMiudon, amd though she had promned tne that
nothing -^ but how blindly I relate! I have never told
you how this was brought on. We were within a few
hours of eloping together for Scotland. The treachery^ er
the folly, of my cousin's maid betrayed us. I was bani^ied
to the house of a relation far distant, and she was allowed
no liberty, no society, no amusement^ till my father's point
was gained. I had depended on her fortitude too far, and
the blow was a severe one ; — but had her marriage been
ha^y, so young as I then was, a few months must have
reconciled me to it, or at least I should not have now to
lament it. This, however, was not the case. My iNrother
had no regard for her ; his pleasures were not what tihey
ought to have been, and from the first he treated her un-
kindly. The consequence of tibis, upon a mind so young,
so lively, so inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too
natural. She resigned herself at first to all the misery of
her situation ; and happy had it been if she had not lived
to overcome those regrets which the remembrance of me
occasioned. But can we wonder that, with such a husband
to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to advise or
restrain her, (for my father lived only a few months after
their marriage, and I was with my regiment in the East
Indies,) she should fall ? Had I remained in England, per-
- haps, — but I meant to promote .the happiness of both l^
removing from her for years, and for that purpose had pro-
cured my exchange. The shock which her marriage had
given me, " he continued, in a voice of great agitation, ^'was
of trifling weight — wks nothing to what I felt when I
heard, about two years afterwards, of her divorce. It was
that, which threw this gloom, — even now the recoUeetioa
of what I suffered "
He could say no more, and, rising hastily, walked for a
few minutes about the room. Elinor, affected by his n-
lation, and still more by his distress, could not speak. He
saw her concern, and coming to her, took her hand, pressed
it, and kissed it with grateful respect. A few minutes nnwe
of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure*
''It was ikqarly three years after this unhappy period
before I returned to Engluid. My first car^ when I M
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 177
arrive, was of course to seek for her ; but the search was
as fruitless as it was melancholy. I could not trace her
beyond her first seducer, and there was every reason to fear
that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a
life of sin. Her legal allowance was not adequate to her
fortune, nor sufficient for her comfortable maintenance ;
and I learnt from my brother that the power of receiving
it had been made over some months before to another per« >
son. He imagined, and calmly could he imagine it, that
her extravagance, and consequent distress, had obliged her
to dispose of it for some immediate relief. At last, how-
ever, and after I had been six months in England, I did
find her. Regard for a former servant of my own, who
had since fallen into misfortune, carried me to visit him in
a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt ; and
there, in the same house, under a similar confinement, was
my unfortunate sister. So altered — so faded — worn
down by acute suffering of every kind ! hardly could I
believe the melancholy and sickly figure before me, to be
the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on whom
I had once doted. What I endured in so beholding her
— but I have no right to wound your feelings by attempt-
ing to describe it — I have pained you too much already.
That she was, to all appearance, in the last stage of a con-,
sumption, was — yes, in such a situation, it was my greatest
comfort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving
time for a better preparation for death ; and that was given,
I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and under proper
attencjants ; I visited her every day during the rest of her
short life : I was with her in her last moments. "
Again he stopped to recover himself ; and Elinor spoke
her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern at the fate
of his unfortunate friend.
''Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended, " said he^
** by the resemblance I have fancied between her and my
poor disgraced relation. Their fates, their fortunes, cannot
be the same ; and had the natural sweet disposition of the
one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happier marriage,
she might have been all that you will live to see the other
be. But tQ what does all this lead ? I seem to have been
N
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
178 SENSE AND SENSXBIUTT.
distressing you for nothing. Ah ! Miss Dashwood -^ ft
subject such as this — untouched for fourteen years — it is
4angei;ous to handle it at all 1 I wiU be more collected —
more concise. She left to my care her only child^ a litde
girl, tlie offspring of her first guilty connection, who was
then about three years old. She loved the child, and had
always kept it with her. It was a valued, a precious trust
to me ; and gladly would I have discharged it in the strict-
est sense, by watching over her education myself, had the
nature of our situations allowed it ; but I had no family,
no home; and my little Eliza was, therefore, placed at
school. I saw her there whenever I could ; and after the
death of my brother (which happened about five years ago»
and which left to me the possession of the family property,)
she frequently visited me at Delaford. I called her a dis-
tant relation ; but I am well aware that I have in general
been suspected of a much nearer connection with her. It
is now three years ago (she had just reached her fourteenth
year) that I removed fkex from school, to place her under
the care of a very respectable woman, residing in Dorset,
shire, who had the charge of four or five other girls of
about the same time of life ; and for two years I had every
reason to be pleased with her situation. But last February,
almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared. I
bad allowed her, (imprudently, as it has since turned out,)
at her earnest desire, to go to Bath with one of her young
£iends, who was attending her father there for his health.
I knew him to be a very good sort of man, and I thought
yftXL of his daughter — better than she deserved ; for, vnth
a most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy, she would teO
nothing, would give no due, though she certainly knew alL
He, her father, a well-meaning, but nc^ a quick-sighted
man, could really, I'believe, give no information ; for hs
had been generally confined to the house, while the girls
were ranging over the town, and making what acquaintanos
they chose ; and he tried to convince me, as thoroughly as
he was convinced himself, of his daughter's being entirely
unconcerned in the business. In short, I could learn no-
thing but that she was gone ; all the rest, for eig^t loog
d by Google
'SBKSK AND SENgCBILITT. 179
months^ was left to conjecture.. What I thought^ what I
feared^ may he imagined ; and what I suffered too. "
^'Good heavens ! " cried Elinor^ *'could it he — could
Willoughby! " —
*'The first news that reached me of her^ " he continued,
** came in a letter from herself^ last October. It was for-
warded to me from Delaford^ and I received it on the very
morning of our intended party to Whitwell ; and this was
the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly, which I am
9nre must at the time have appeared strange to every hody,
and which I believe gave offence to some. Little did
Mr. WiUoughby imagine, I suppose, when his looks cen-
gored me for incivility in breaking up the party, that I
was called away to the relief of one whom he had made
poor and miserable ; but had he known it, what would it
have availed P Woidd he have been less gay or less happy
in the smiles of your sister ? No, he had already done that,
which no man who can feel for another would do. He
had left the girl whose youth and innocence he had se-
duced in a situation of tibe utmost distress, with no cre«
ditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his address !
He had left her, promising to return ; he neither returned,
nor wrote, nor relieved her. "
*'This is beyond every thing !** exclaimed £linor.
" His character is now before you, — expensive, dissi.
pated, and worse than both. Knowing all this, as I have
now known it many weeks, guess what I must have felt on
Beeing your sister as fond of him as ever, and on being
assured that she was to marry him : guess what I must
have felt for all your sakes. When I came to you last
week and found you alone, I came determined to know the
truth ; though irresolute what to do when it wa^ known*
My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then ; but
now you will comprehend it. To suffer you all to be so
deceived ; to see your sister — but what could I do ? I had
no hope of interfering with success; and sometimes I
thought your sister's influence might yet reclaim him. But
now, after such dishongurable usage, who can tell what
were his designs on her ? Whatever they may have been,
however, she may now, and hereafter doubtless tot//, turn
^ Digitized by LjOOQ IC
180 irarsB iun > safmBtLnHt.
tdth gratitude towards her own condition^ when she com-
pares it with that of my poor £liza ; when she considera
ihe wretched and hopeim situation of this poor girl^ and
pictures her to herself, Yfitb. an affection for him as strongs
4till as strong as her own^ and with a mind tormented hy
«eif.reproach > which must attend her through life. Surely
this comparison must have its use with her. She will ieel
Jier own sufferings to he nothing : they proceed from no
SBiisconduct^ and can bring no disgrace. On the contrary,
every friend must he made still more her friend by them.
Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for her fortitude
under it^ must strengthen every attachment. Use your
own discretion, however, in ix)mmunicating to her what I
have told you. You must know best what will be its effect ;
Imt had I not seriously, and from my heart believed it
might be of service, might lessen her regrets, I would not
have suffered mysdf to trouble you with this account of
my family afflictions, — with a recital whidi'may seem
to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of
others. "
^JBlinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful ear-
nestness ; attended, too, with the assurance of her expecting
material advantage to Marianne from the communication
of what had passed.
" I have been more pained, " said she, *'by her endea-
vours to acquit him than by aU the rest ; for it irritates her
mind more than the most perfect conviction of his nn-
worthiness can do.^ Now, thoi:^h at first she will suffer
much, I am sure she will soon become easier. Have you, "
she continued, after a short silence, ^'ev^ seen Mr. W^-
loughby since you left him at Barton ? "
*'Yes,*'he replied gravely, " once I have. One meeting
was unavoidable. "
Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,
toying,—
" What ! have you met him to "
''I could meet him in no other way. Eliaa had con-
fessed to me, though most reluctantly, the name of her
lover ; and when he returned to town, which was within a
totnight after myself, we piet by appointment; he to de-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
fiKfix Axtf 9mtm»vfdTv. 18]f
fead, I to punish bis conduct. We returned unwounde^y
«Bd the meeting, therefore, nerer got abroad. "
EliiUM'si^ed over the fanded necessity of this ; but to
a man and a soldier she presumed not to censure it.
'^ Such, " said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, " has
been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of mother
and daughter ; and so imperfectly have I discharged my
trust. "
" Is die still in town? "
'^ No ; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for I
found her near her delivery, I removed her and her child
into the country, and there she remains. "
RecoUecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably di«
viding £linor from her sister, he put an aid to his visits
receiving from her again the same grateful acknowledge
ments, and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for
bim.
CHAPTER X.
When the particulars of this conversation were repeated
by Miss Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon were^
the effect on her was not entirely such as the former had
hoped to see. Not that Marianne appeared to distrust the
truth of any part of it, for she listened to it all with the
most steady and submissive attention, made neither objecf^
tion nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby,
and ^seemed to show by her tears that she felt it to be im«
possible. But though this behaviour assured Elinor that
the conviction of this guilt vhu carried home t» her mind,
though^ sh% saw with satisfaction the effect of it, in her no
longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called, in her
speaking to him^ even voluntarily speaking, with a kind of
compassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits lesa
violently irritated than Ijefore, she did not see her less
wretched. Her mind did become settled, but it was settled
v*3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
192 gENSB AKD SENSIBILirr.
in a gloomy dejection. She felt the loss of Willoughby's
character yet more heavily than she had felt the loss of his
heart ; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams, the
misery of that poor girl, and the douht of what his designs
might once have heen on herself, preyed altogether so
much on her spirits, that she could not bring herself to
speak of what she felt even to Elinor ; and, brooding over
her sorrows in silence, gave more pain to her sister than
could have been communicated by the most open and most
frequent confession of them.
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwood
on receiving and answering Elinor s letter would be only
to give a repetition of what her daughters had already felt
and said; of a disappointment hardly less painful than
Marianne's, and an indignation even greater than Elinor's.
Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought ; to express
her anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would
bear up with fortitude under this misfortune. Bad^
indeed, must the nature of Marianne's affliction be, when
her mother could talk of fortitude ! mortifying .and humili-
ating must be the origin of those regrets, which she could
wish her not to indulge !
Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs.
Dashwood had determined that it would be better for
Marianne to be any where, at that time, than at Barton,
where every thing within her view would be bringing back
the past in tlie strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing Willoughby before her, such as she had
always seen him there. She recommended it to her
daughters, therefore, by all means not to shorten their visit
to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which, though never
exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at least
five or six weeks. A variety of occupations, of objects^
and of company, which could not be procured «t Barton^
would be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped, cheat
Marianne, at times, into some interest beyond herself, and
even into some amusement, much as the idea of both
might now be spumed by her.
From all danger of seeing Willonghby again, her mo«
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSB AND SENSIBILITT« 18$
Qier considered her to be at least equally safe in town as in
the country, since his acquaintance must now be dropped
by all who called themselves her friends. Design could
never bring them in each other's way : negligence could
never leave them exposed to a surprise ; and chance had
less in its favour in the crowd of London than even in the
retirement of Barton, where it might force him before her
while paying that visit at Allenham on his marriage, which
Mrs. Dashwood, from foreseeing at first as a probable
event, had brought herself to expect as a certain one.
She had yet another reason for wishing her children to
remain where they were ; a letter from her son-in-law had
told her that he and his wife were to be in town before the
middle of February, and she judged it right that they
should sometimes see their brother.
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's
opinion, and she submitted to it, therefore, without oppo-
sition, though it proved perfectly different from what she
wished and expected, though she felt it to be entirely
wrong, formed on mistaken grounds ; and that, by requiring
her longer continuance in London, it deprived her of the
only possible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal
sympathy of her mother > and doomed her to such society
and such scenes as must prevent her ever knowing a mo-
ment's rest.
But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that
what brought evil to herself would bring good to her sister ;
and Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that it would
not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely, comforted
herself by thinking, that though their longer stay would
therefore militate against her own happiness, it would be
better for Marianne than an immediate return into De«
Yonshire.
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing^
Willoughby's name mentioned was not thrown away.
Marianne, though without knowing it herself, reaped all
its advantage ; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor Sir John^
nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before
her. Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have
extended towards herself, but that was impossible^ and she
N 4
Digitized by CjOOQ IC
:Wa8 obliged to listen^ day alter day^ to the mdignation ^
Ihem all.
Sir John could not have thought it possiUe. ^'A man
of whom he had always had such reason to think wdl!
Such a good-natured fellow ! He did not hdieve there
was a bolder rider in £ngland ! It was an unaccountable
business. He wished him at the devil with all his heart
He would not speak another word to him, meet him whane
he mighty for*all the world ! No, not if it were to be by the
side of Barton covert, «id they were kept waiting for two
hours together. Such a scoundrel of a fellow ! sa < ^ a
deceitful dog ! It was only the last time they met that
he hiad offered him one of Folly's puppies ! and this was
the end of it ! "
Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry.''She
was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately, and
she was very thankful that she had never been acquainted
with him at all. She wished with all her heart Combe
'Magna was not so near Cleveland ; but it did not signify,
for it was a great deal too far off to visit ; she hated him
80 much that she was resolved never to mention his name
again, and she should tell every body she saw, how good^
for-nothing he was. "
The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shown in prou.
curing all the particulars in her power of the approaching
marriage, and communicating them to Elinor. She could
Boon tell at what coachmaker's the new carriage was build*
hlg, by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait was drawn,
and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be seen.
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the
occasion was a happy relief to Elinor's spirits, oppressed as
they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others.
It was a great comfort to her to be sure of exciting no in«
terest in one person at least among their circle of friends ;
a great comfort to know that there was 0ne who would meet
ber without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any
anxiety for her sister's health.
Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances
of the moment, to irm-e than its real value; and edie wa«
aometimes worried down by officious condolence to rato
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENBB ANP n^BIBIIiITT. 185
goocUbreediBg as more indispensable to comfort than good
nature.
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about
once every day^ or twice^ if the subject occurred very often^
by saying,''It is very shocking^ indeed ! " and by the means
of this continual, though gentle, vent, was able not only to
see the Miss Dashwoods, from the first, without the smallest
emotion, but yery soon to see them without recollecting a
word of the matter ; and having thus supported the dignity
of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrcmg in the other, ^e thought herself at liberty to attend
to the interest of her own asserobUes, and therefore deter*
mined (though rather against the opinion of Sir Jotm) that
as Mrs. Willoughby would at once be a woman of el^ance
and fortune, to leave her card with her as soon as she
married.
Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries .were
never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood. He had abundantly
earned the privilege of intimate discussion of her sister's
disappointment, by the friendly zeal with which he had
endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence. His chief reward for the painful exertion of
disclosing past sorrows and present humiliations was given
in die pitying eye with which Marianne sometimes ob«
served him, and the gentleness of her voice, whenever
(though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or could
oblige herself to speak to him. These assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good- will towards
himself, and these gave £linor hopes of its being farther
augmented hereafter ; but Mrs. Jennings, who knew nothing
of all this, who knew only that the Colonel continued as
grave as ever, and that she could neither prevail on him to
make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
him, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not be married till Michaelmas^
and by the end of a week that it would not be a match at
all. The good understanding between the Colonel and
Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the honoura
of the mulberry-tree, the canal^ and the yew arbour^ would
d by Google
186 SEKSE AND SENSIBILIT7.
all be made over to her; and Mrs. Jennings had^ for some
time^ ceased to think at all of Mr. Ferrars.
Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of
Willoughby's letter, Elinor had the painful office of inform-
ing her sister that he was married. She had taken care to
have the intelligence conveyed to herself, as soon as it waa
known that the ceremony was over, as she was desirous that
Marianhe should not receive the first notice of it from the
public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every
morning.
She received the news with resolute composure ; made
no observation on it, and at first shed no tears ; but after a
short time they would burst out, and for the rest of th6
day she was in a state hardly less pitiable than when she
first learnt to expect the event.
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were mar-
ried ; and Elinor now hoped, as there could be no danger
of her seeing either of them, to prevail on her sister, who
had never yet left the house since the blow first fell, to go
out again, by degrees, as she had done before.
About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at
their cousin's house in Bartlett*s Buildings, Holbom, pre-
sented themselves again before their more grand relation^
in Conduit and Berkeley Street ; and were welcomed by
them all with great cordiality.
Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence al-
ways gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to make a
very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy in
finding her still in town.
" I shoidd have been quite disappointed if I had not
found you here still, " said she repeatedly, with a strong
emphasis on the word. " But I always thought I should*
I was almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile;
though you told me, you know, at Barton, that you should
not stay above a month. But I thought, at the time, that
you would most likely change your mind when it came to
the point. It would have been such a great pity to have
Went away before your brother and sister came. And now,
to be sure, you will be in no hurry to be gone. I am
amazingly glad you did not keep to your word. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8EK8E AND SENSIBILITY. 187
Elinor perfectly understood her^ and was forced to use
all her self-command to make it appear that she did not.
'* Well, my dear, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did
you travel? "
'* Not in the stage, I assure you, " replied Miss Steele,
with quick exultation ; *'we came post all the way, and
Had a very smart heaii to attend us. Dr. Davies was com*
ing to town, and so we thought we'd join him in a post-b
chaise ; and he hehaved very genteelly, and paid ten or
twelve shillings more than we did. "
" Oh, oh ! " cried Mrs. Jennings ; " very pretty, indeed I
and the Doctor is a single man, I warrant you. "
" There now, " said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering^
'^ every hody laughs at me so about the Doctor, and I can-
not think why. My cousins say they are sure I have made
a conquest ; but for my part I declare I never think about
him from one hour's end to another.'Lord ! here comes
your beau, Nancy,* my cousin said t'other day, when she saw
him crossing the street to the house. My beau, indeed 1'
said I — I cannot think who you mean. The Doctor is no
beau of mine. "
*'Ay, ay, that h very pretty talking — but it won't do
—the Doctor is the man, I see. "
*'No, indeed ! " replied her cousin, with affected earnest-
ness,''and I beg you will contradict it, if you ever hear it
talked of. "
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance
that she certainly would not, and Miss Steele was made
completely happy.
*'I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and
sister. Miss Dashwood, when they come to town, " said
Lucy, returning, after a cessation of hostile hints, -to the
charge.
*'No, I do not think we shall. "
" Oh, yes, I dare say you will. "
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.
" What a charming thing it is diat Mrs. Dashwood can
spare you both for so long a time together ! "
^* Long a time, indeed ! " interposed Mrs. Jennings.
" Why, their visit is but just begun ! "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
188 fionrts an] > 8bn«ibzutt.
Lucy was silenced.
** I am sorry we cannot see your sbter^ Miss Dashwood, " *
said Miss Steele. " I am sorry she is not well; " for Ma.
rianne had left the room on their arrival.
" You are very good. My sister will be equally sorry
to miss the pleasure of seeing you ; but die has be^i very
much plagued lately with nervous headachs^ which mako
her unfit for company or convo'sation.'*
" Oh, dear, that is a great pity ! but such old friends as
Lucy and me ! — I think she might aee us ; and I am sure
we would not speak a word. "
Elinor^ with great civility^ declined the proposal. Her
sister was^ perhaps^ laid down upon the bed^ or in h^
dressing gown^ and therefore not able to come to them. | r^
''Oh, if that's all/'cried Miss Steele^ *'we can just as
wdl go and see ker "
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for
her temper - but she was saved the trouble of checking it,
by Lucy's sharp reprimand^ whidi now^ as on'many
occasions^ though it. did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sister^ was of advantage in governing those
of the other. .
CHAPTER XI.
After some opposition^ Marianne yielded to her sister's
entreaties^ and consented to go out with her and Mrs. Jen^
nings one morning for half an hour. She expressly con-
ditioned, however, for paying no visits, and would do no
more than accompany them to Gray's in Sackviile Street,
where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the ex-
change of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollect-
ed that there was a lady at the other end of the street on
whom she ought to call ; and as she had no business at
Gray's, it was reserved, that while her young friei^ds
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
OESOi AND SBNeXBIlITT. 18$
tensacted theirs^ she should pay her visits and return for
them.
On ascending the stairs^ the Miss Dashwoods found so
many people before them in the room^ that there was not a
person at liberty to attend to their orders ; and they were
obliged to wait. All that could be done was^ to sit down
at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the
quickest succession; one gentleman only was standing
there^ and it is probable that Elinor was not without hope
of exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch. But the
correctness of his eye, and the delicacy of his taste, proved
Co be beyond his politeness. He was giving orders for a
toothpick-case for himself; and till its size, shape, and
ornaments were determined, all of which, after examining
and debating for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-
case in the shop, were finally arranged by his own inven-
tive fancy, he had no leisure to bestow any other attention
on the two ladies than what was comprised in three or four
very broad stares ; a kind of notice which served to im-.
print on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face of
strong, natural, sterling insignificance, though adorned in
the first style of fashion.
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of
contempt and resentment, on this impertinent examination
of their features, and on the puppyism of his manner in
deciding on all the different horrors of the different tooth-
pick-cases presented to his inspection, by remaining uncon-
scious of it all; for she was as well able to collect her
thoughts within herself, and be as ignorant of what was
passing around her, in Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own
bed-room.
'At last the affair was decided. The ivory, the gold,
and the pearls, all received their appointment; and the
gentleman having named the last day on which his exist-
ence could be continued without the possession of the
toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care, and
bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but
snob a one as seemed rather to demand than express ad-
miration, walked off with a happy air of real conceit and
affected indifference.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
190 8BNBE AND SBNUBII^ITT.
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward^
and was on the point of concluding it^ when another gen.
tleman presented himself at her side. She turned her eyes
towards his face^ and found him, with some surprise^ to be
her brother.
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough
to make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop.
John Dashwood was really far from being sorry to see
his sisters again ; it rather gave them satisfaction ; and
his enquiries after their mother were respectful and at~
tentive.
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two
days.
''I wished very much to call upon you yesterday, " said
he; ^'but it was impossible, for we were obliged to take
Harry to see the vrild beasts at Exeter Exchange : and we
spent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrara. Harry was
vastly pleased. Thi8 morning I had fuUy intended to call on
you, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has
always so much to do on first coming to town. I am come
here to bespeak Fanny a seal. But to-morrow I think I
shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street, and be in-
troduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings. I understand she
is a woman of very good fortune. And the Middletons, too,
you must introduce me to them. As my mother-in-law's
relations, I shall be happy to show them every respect.
They are excellent neighbours to you in the country, I
understand. "
" Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfort,
iheir friendliness in every particular, is more than I can
express. "
'^ I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word ; e & «
tremely glad indeed. But so it ought to be; they are
people of lai^e fortune; they are related to you; and every
civility and accommodation that can serve to make your
situation pleasant might be reasonably expected. And m
you are most comfortably settled in your little cottage, and
want for nothing ! Edward brought us a most channing
account of the place : the most complete thing of its kind,
he said, that ever was, and you all seemed to enjoy it be.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8EN6E A](r0 SBNSIBILIT7. IQl
^nd any thing. It was a great satisfaction to us to hear
ity I assure you. "
£linor did feel a little ashamed of her brother ; and was
not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him^ by
{he arrival of Mrs. Jennings's servant^ who came to tell her
that his mistress waited for them at the door.
Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs^ was introduced
to Mrs. Jennings at the door of her carriage^ and repeating
his hope of being able to call on them the next day^ took
leave.
His visit was duly paid. . He came with a pretence at
an apology from their sister-in-law^ for not coming too;
''but she was so much engaged with her mother^ that really
she had no leisure for going any where. " Mrs. Jennings^
however^ assured him directly^ that she should not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all cousins^ or something like
it^ and she should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood
Tery soon, and bring her sisters to see her. His manners
to them, though calm, were perfectly kind ; to Mrs. Jen-
nings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel Brandon's
coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
inrhich seemed to^ say, that he only wanted to know him to
be rich, to be equally civil to him.
After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor
to walk with him to Conduit Street, and introduce him to
Sir John and Lady Middleton. The weather was remarkably
fine, and she readily consented. As soon as they were out
of tibe house, his enquiries began.
'^ Who is Colonel Brandon ? Is he a man of fortune ? "
" Yes; he has- very good property in Dorsetshire. "
'''^ I am glad of it. He seems a most gentlemanlike man ;
and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect
of a very respectable establishment in life. "
'^ Me, brother ! what do you mean ? "'
'^ He likes you. I observed him narrowly, and am con-
vinced of it. What is the amount of his fortune ? "
'^ I believe about two thousand a year. "
*'Two thousand a year ! " and then working himself up
to a pitch of enthusiastic generdsity, he added, ^'Elinor^ I
wish^with all my heart it were twice as much for your sake. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
19^ SSKSE AND 8BiNfiaBIt.ITT*
*'Indeed I believe you/'replied Elinor ; ^'but I am ferf
sure that Colonel Brandon has not the sroaUest wish of
marrying me "
'^ You are mistaken^ Elinor ; you are very much mis-
taken. A very little trouble on your side secures him.
Perhaps just at present he may be undecided ; the smaUness
of your fortune may make him hang back ; his friends may
all advise him against it.* But some of those little atten*
tions and encouragements which ladies can so easfly give
will ^x him^ in spite of himself. And there can be no
reason why you should not try for him. It is not to be
supposed that any prior attachment on your side; — in shorty
you know^ as to an attachment of that kind^ it is quite out
ef the question, the objections are insurmountable — you
have too much sense not to see all that. Colonel Brandon
must be the man ; and no civility shall be wanting on my
part to make him pleased with you and your family. It
is a match that must give universal satisfaction. In short,
it is a kind of thing that, " lowering his voice to an im-
portant whisper, " wiU be exceedingly welcome to all
parties/'Recollecting himself, however, he added,'* That
is, I mean to say — your friends are all truly anxious to see
you. well settled ; Fanny particularly, for she has your
Interest very much at heart, I assure you. And her mother
too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman, I am sure
it would give her great pleasure; she said as much the
other day. "
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
*'It would be something remarkable, now, " he continued,
'^ something droll, if Fanny should have a broker and I
a sister settling at the same time. And yet it is not very
unlikely. "
''Is Mr. Edward Ferrars, " said Elinor, with resolution^
< ^ going to be married ? "
''^ It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in
agitation. He has a most excellent mother. Mrs. Ferrars^
with the utmost liberality, will come foiward, and settle on
him a thousand a year, if the match takes place. The
kdy is the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughter of the late
liOrd Morton, with thirty thousand pounds. A very desirl
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BNSB AND SENSIBIUTY. 193
Me connection on both sides^ and I have not a doubt
of its taking place in time. A thousand a year is a great
deal for a mother to give away^ to make over for ever ;
but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spirit. To give you another
instance of her liberality : — The other day^ as soon as we
came to town^ aware that money could not be very plenty
with us just nowj she put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to
the amount of two hundred pounds. And extremely ac«
ceptable it is^ for we must live at a great expense while we
are here. "
He paused for her assent and compassion ; and she forced
herself to say, —
" Your expenses both in town and country must cer-
tainly be considerable ; but your income is a large one. "
'* Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. I
do not mean to complain, however ; it is undoubtedly a
comfortable one, and I hope will in time be better. The
enclosure of Norlan4 Common, now carrying on, is a most
serious drain. And then I have made a little purchase
within this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must
remember the pla^, where old Gibson used to live. The
land was so very desirable for me in every respect, so im-
mediately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my
duty to buy it. I could not have answered it to my con-
science to let it fall into any other hands. A man must pay
for his convenience; and it has cost me a vast deal of
money. "
''More than you think it reaHy and intrinsically worth ? "
" Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again,
the next day, for more than I gave : but, with regard to
the purchase-money, I might have been very unfortunate
indeed ; for the stocks were, at that time, so low, that if I
bad not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's
hands, I must have sold out to very great loss. "
Elinor could only smile.
''Other great and inevitable expenses, too, we have had
on first coming to Norland. Our respected father, as you
well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill effects that remained
at Norland (and very valuable they were) to your mother.
Far be it from me to repine at his doing so ; he had an ua.
o
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
194i SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
doubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose.
But^ in consequence of it^ we have been obliged to make
large purchases of linen^ china^ & c. to supply the place of
what was taken away. You may guess, after all these ex-
penses^ how very far we must be from being rich, and how
acceptable Mrs. Ferrars's kindness is.'*
^'Certainly^ " said Elinor ; " and, assisted by her liber-
ality, I hope you may yet live to be in easy circum-
stances. "
" Another year or two may do much towards it, " he
gravely replied ; " but, however, there is still a great deal
to be done. There is not a stone laid of Fanny's green-
house, and nothing but the plan of the flower-garden
miu'ked out. "
''Where is the green-house to be ? "
^^ Upon the knoll behind the house. The old walnut
trees are all come down to make room for it. It will be a very
fine object from many parts of the park ; and the flower-
garden will slope down just before it, and be exceedingly
pretty. We have cleared away all the old thorns that grew
in patches over the brow. "
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself ; and
was very thankful that Marianne was not present to share
the provocation.
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and
to do away the neces^y of buying a pair of ear-rings for
each of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray's, his thoughts
took a cheerfuller turn, and he began to congratulate Elinor
on hiving such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.
" She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her
house, her style of living, all bespeak an exceeding good in-
come ; and it is an acquaintance that has not only been of
great use to you hitherto, but in the end may prove mate,
rially advantageous. Her inviting you to town is certainly
a vast thing in your favour; and indeed it speaks alto-
gether so great a regard for you, that in afl probability
when she dies you will not be forgotten. She must haTe
9 great deal to leave. "
''{Nothing at all, I should rather suppose ; for she hcs
only her jointure, which wiD descend to her children/'
Digitized by Google
'SENBB AKD SENSIBILITT. 195
'^ But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her
income. Few people of common prudence will do tJuitj
and whatever she saves she will be able to dispose of. "
''And do you not think it more likely that she should
leave it to her daughters^ than to us .? "
" Her daughters are both exceedingly well married^ and
therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of her remember-
ing them farther. " Wliereas^ in my opinion^ by her taking
so much notice of you^ and treating you in this kind of way^
she has given you a sort of claim on her future consider-
ation^ which a conscientious woman would not disregard.
Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can
hardly do all this^ without being aware of the expectation
she raises. "
*'But she raises none in those most concerned. Indeed^
brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries
you too far. "
" Why, to be sure/* said he, seeming to recollect himself,
" people have little, have very little in their power. But,
my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne.^ — she
looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is grown quite
thin. Is she ill? "
*'She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint on
her for several weeks. "
*'I am sorry for that. At her time of life, any thing of
an illness destroys the bloom for ever ! Hers has been ft
very short one ! She was as handsome a girl last Sep.
tember as any I ever saw, — and as likely to attract the
men. There was something in her style of beauty to
please them particularly. I remember Fanny used to say^
that she woi^d marry sooner and better than you did ; not
but what she is exceedingly fond of you, but so it happened
to strike her. She will be mistaken, however. I question
whether Marianne, now, will marry a man worth more than
five or six hundred a year at the utmost, and I am very
much deceived if you do not do better. Dorsetshire ! I
know very little of Dorsetshire; but, my dear Elinor, I
shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it ; and I think
I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the
earliest and best pleased of your visiters. "
o 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
196 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was
no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon ; hut it was
an expectation of too much pleasure to himself to he relin-
quishedy and he was really resolved on seeking an intimacy
with that gentleman^ and promoting the marriage hy every
possible attention. He had just compunction enough for
having done nothing for his sisters himself^ to he exceed.
ingly anxious that every body else should do a great deal ;
and an offer from Colonel Brandon^ or a legacy from Mrs.
Jennings^ was the easiest means of atoning for his own
neglect.
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at
home^ and Sir John came in before their visit ended.
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides. Sir John was
ready to like any body ; and though Mr. Dashwood did not
seem to know much about horses^ he soon set him down as
a very good-natured fellow : while Lady Middleton saw
enough of fashion in his appearance to think his acquaint-
ance worth having ; and Mr. Dashwood went away de*
lighted with both.
'^ I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny, "
said he^ as he walked back with his sister.'^ Lady Mid-
dleton is really a most el^ant woman ! Such a woman as,
I am sure, Fanny will be glad to know. And Mrs. Jen-
nings too, an exceeding well-behaved woman, though not
so elegant as her dail^hter. Your sister need not have
any scruple, even of visiting her, which, to say the truth,
has been a little the case, and very naturally ; for we only
knew that Mrs. Jennings was the widow of a man who
had got all his money in a low way ; and Fanny and Mrs.
^ferrars were both strongly prepossessed, that neither she
nor her daughters were such kind of women as Fanny
would like to associate with. But now I can carry her a
most satisfactory account of Both. "

d by Google
SBNIB AND SENglBIUTT. 1:97
CHAPTER XII.
Mrs. Johk Dashwood had so much confidence in her hus-
band's judgment^ that she waited the Tcry next day both on
Mrs. Jennings and her daughter ; and her confidence was
rewarded by finchng even the former^ even the woman
with whom her sisters were staying^ by no means unworthy
of notice ; and as for Lady Middleton^ she found her one
of the most charming women in the world 1
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dash-
wood. There was a kind of cold-hearted selfishness on
both sides^ which mutually attracted them ;] and they sym-
palinsed with ekch other in an insipid propriety of de-
meanour, and a general want of understanding.
The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs.
John Dashwood to the good opinion of Lady Middleton
did not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jennings, and to her she
appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking woman,
of uncordial address, who met her husband's sisters without
any affection, and almost without having any thing to say
to them ; for of the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berke-
ley Street, she sat at least seven minutes and a half in
silence.
£linor wanted very much to know, though she did not
ehoose to ask, whether Edward was then in town ; but no-
diing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his
name before her, till able to tell her, that his marriage with
Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband's ex-
pectations on Colonel Brandon were answered ; because she
believed them still so very much attached to each other,
that they could not be too sadulously divided in word and
deed on every occasion. The intelligence, however, which
she would not give soon flowed from another quarter.
Lucy came very shortly to daim Elinor's compassion on
being unable to see Edward, though h#-had arrived in town
with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood. He dared not come to
Bartlett's Buildings for fear of detection; and though their
S
d by Google
19S SENSE AND 8BN8IBILITT,
mutual impatience to meet was not to be told^ they could
do nothing at present but write.
£dward assured them himself of - his being in town^
within a very short time, by twice calling in Berkeley
Street. Twice was his card found on the table, when they
returned from their morning's engaganents. £linor was
pleased that he had called ; and still more pleased that she
had missed him.
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the
Middletons, that, though not much in the habit of giving
any thing, they determined to give them — a dinner ; and
soon after their acquaintance began, invited them to dine in
Harley Street, where they had taken a very good house for
three months. Their i^stefs and Mrs. Jennings were in*
vited likewise ; and John Dashwood was careful to secure
Colonel Brandon, who, always glad to be where the Miss
Dashwoods were, received his eager civilities with some
surprise^^but much more pleasure. They were to meet
Mrs. Ferrars ; but Elisor could not learn whether her sons
were to be of the party. The expectation of seeing her,
however, was enough to make her interested in the engage-
ment ; for though she could now meet £dward's mother
without that steong anxiety which had once promised to
attend such an introduction, though she could now see her
with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself, her
desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars, her curi-
osity to know what she was like, was as lively as ever.
The interest with which she thus anticipated the party
was soon afterwards increased, more powerfully than plea*
santly, by her bearing that the Miss Stedes were also'to be
at it.
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady
Middleton, so agreeable had their assiduities made them to
her, that lliough Lucy was certainly not elegant, and her
sister not even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John to ask
them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street ; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Stedes,
as soon as the Dashwoods'invitation was known, that their
visit should begin a few days before the party took plaoe.
Their claims to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood, a«
Digitized by Google
SESSB AND 6ENSI3ILITT. 199
the nieces of the gentleman who for many years had had
the care of her brother^ might not have done much^ how-
ever^ towards procuring them seats at her table ; but as
Lady Middleton's guests they must be welcome ; and Lucy,
who had long wanted to be personally known to the family,
to have a nearer view of their characters and her own dif-
ficulties, and to have an opportunity of endeavouring to
please them, had seldom been happier in her life than she
was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwood's card.
On Elinor its effect was very different. She began im«
mediately to determine, that £dward, who lived with his
mother, must be asked^ as his mother was, to a party given
by his sister ; and to see him, for the first time, after all
that passed, in the company oL Lucy ! — she hardly knew
how she could bear it 1
These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely
on reason, and certainly not at all on truth. They were
relieved, however, not by her own recollection, but by the
good will of Lucy, who believed herself to be inflicting a
severe disappointment, when she told her, that Edwai^d
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and
even hoped to be carrying the pain still farther, by per-
suading her that he was kept away by that extreme affec
tion for herself, which he could not conceal when they were
together.
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the
two young ladies to this formidable mother-in Jaw.
" Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood! " said Lucy, as they
walked up the stairs together — for the Middletons arrived
80 directly after Mrs. Jennings, that they all followed the
servant at the same time : — " there is nobody here but
you that can feel for me. 1 declare I can hardly stand.
CkK)d gracious ! In a moment I shall see the person that
all my happiness depends on — that is to be my mother !''
Elinor could have given her immediate relief, by sug-
gesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton's mother,
rather than her own, whom they were about to behold;
but instead of doing that, she assured her, and with great
sincerity, that she did pity her, — to the utter amazement
o 4
d by Google
SCO gEKSE AND BENglBIUTT.
of Lucy^ who^ though really uncomfortahle herself^ hoped
at least to he an ohject of irrepressihle envy to £Iinor.
Mrs. Ferrars was a little^ thin woman^ upri^t^ even to
formality^ in her figure^ and serious, even to sourness^ in
her aspect. Her complexion was sallow ; and her features
small^ without heauty, and naturally without expression ;
but a lucky contraction of the brow had rescued her coun-
tenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it the
strong characters of pride and ill-nature. She was not a
woman of many words ; for, unlike people in general, she
proportioned them to the number of her ideas ; and of the
few syllables that did escape her, not one fell to the share
of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyed with the spirited de«
termination of disliking her at all events.
Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this be-
haviour. A few months ago it would have hurt her ex-
ceedingly ; but it was not in Mrs. Ferrars's power to distress
her by it now ; and the difference of her manners to the
Miss Stedes, a difierence which seemed purposely made to
humble her more, only amused her. She could not but
smile to see the gradousness of both mother and daughter
towards the very person — for Lucy was particularly dis-
tinguished—whom of all others, had they known as much
as she did, they would have been most anxious to mortify ;
while she herself, who had comparatively no power to
wound them, sat pointedly slighted by both. But while
she smiled at a gradousness so misapplied^ she could not
reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which it sprung^
nor observe the studied attentions with whic]i the Miss
Steeles courted its continuance^ without thoroughly de-
spising them all four.
Lucy was all exultation on being so honourably dis-
tinguidied; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teazed
about Dr. Davis to be perfectly happy.
The dinner was a grand one, the servants were nu-
merous, and every thing bespoke the mistress's inclination
for show, and the master's ability to support it. In spite
of the improvements and additions which were making to
the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner having once
been within some thousand pounds of bdng obliged to sell
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSB AKD BEKSIBILITT. 201
cidt at a lo88^ nothing gave any symptom of that indigence
which he had tried to infer from it; no poverty of any
kind^ except of conversation^ appeared ; but there the de-
ficiency was considerable. John Dashwood had not much
to say for himself that was worth hearing, and his wife
had still less. But there was no peculiar disgrace in this ;
for it was very much the case with the chief of their visiters^
who almost aJl laboured under one or other of these dis-
qualifications for being agreeable — want of sense^ either
natural or improved — want of elegance — want of spirits
-— or want of temper.
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after
dinner, this poverty was particularly evident, for the gen-
tlemen had supplied the discourse with some variety — the
variety of politics^ enclosing land, and breaking horses -—
hut then it was all over ; and one subject only engaged
the ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative
heights of Harry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton's second
son William, who were nearly of the same age.
Had both the children been there, the affair might have
been determined too easily by measuring them at once;
but as Harry only was present, it was all conjectural as-
sertion on both sides ; and every body had a right to be
equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and
over again as often as they liked.
The parties stood thus : —
The two mothers, though each really convinced that her
own son was the tallest^ politely decided in favour of the
other.
The two grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more
rincerity, were equally earnest in support of their own de-
scendant.
Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent
liian the other^ thought the boys were both remarkably tall
ibr their age, and could not conceive that there could be
the smallest difference in the world between them ; and
Miss Steele, with yet greater address, gave it, as fast as she
cofoLd, in favour of each.
£linor, having once delivered her opinion on William's
side^ by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
aOz SENSE AND SEN8I9IUnr.
more^ did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any
farther assertion ; and Marianne^ when called on for hers^
offended them all^ by declaring that she had no opinion to
give^ as she had never thought about it.
Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted
a very pretty pair of screens for her sister-in Jaw, which
being now just mounted and brought home, ornamented
her present drawing-room; and these screens, catching
the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gen*
tlemen into the room, were officiously handed by him to
Colonel Brandon for his admiration.
^^ These are done by my eldest sister, " said he ;'^ and
you, as a man of taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with
them. I do not know whether you ever happened to see
any of her performances before, but she is in ^neral
red^oned to draw extremely well. "
The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to ooa-
noisseurship, warmly admired the screens, as he would have
done any thing painted by Miss Dashwood ; and the cu^
liosity of the others being of course excited, they were
handed round for general inspection. Mrs. Ferrars, not
aware of their being Elinor s work, particularly requested
to look at them ; and after they had received the grati-
fying testimony of Lady Middleton's approbation, Fanny
presented them to her mother, considerately informing her,
at the same time, that they were done by Miss Dashwood.
'^ Hum " — said Mrs. Ferrars — ^'very pretty, " — and,
without r^arding them at all, returned them to her
daughter.
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother
had been quite rude enough; for, colouring a little, she
immediately said, —
*'They are very pretty, ma am — an't they ? " But
then again the dread of having been too civil, too encour-
aging herself, probably came over her, for she presently
added, —
^^ Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton's
style of painting, ma'am ? — She does paint most delight-
fiilly ! — How beautifully her last landscape is done ! "
^'Beautifully indeed ! But ^he does every thing welL*'
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SEN8IBILITT. 208
Mariitmie could not bear this. She was already greatly
displeased with Mrs. Ferrars ; and such ill-timed praise of
another^ at Elinor s expense^ lliough she had not any notion
of what was principally meant by it^ provoked her irnme*
diately to say^ with warmth^ —
^'This is admiration of a very particular kind ! what is
Miss Morton to us ? who knows^ or who cares^ for her ?•—
it is Elinor of whom we think and speak. "
. And 80 sayings she took the screens out of her sister-in.
law's hands to admire them herself as they ought to be
admired.
Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry^ and drawing
herself up more stiffly than ever^ pronounced^ in retort^ this
bitter philippic^'^Miss Morton is Lord Morton's daughter. "
Fanny looked very angry too^ and her husband was all
in a fright at his sister's audacity. Elinor was much more
hurt by Marianne's warmth than she had been by what
produced it ; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as they were
fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only what
-was amiable in it^ the affectionate heart which could not
bear to see a sister slighted in the smallest point.
Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold inso.
lence of Mrs. Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister,
seemed to her to foretell such difficulties and distresses to
Elinor as her own wounded heart taught her to think of with
horror ; ond^ urged by a strong impulse of affectionate sen-
sibility, she moved, after a moment, to her sister's chair,
and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek dose
to hers, said in a low, but eager, voice, —
''Dear, dear Elinor, don't ndnd them. Don't let them
make you unhappy. "
She could say no more : her spirits were quite overcome;
and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into
tears. Every body's attention was called, and almost every
body was concerned. Colonel Brandon rose up and went
to diem without knowing what he did. Mrs. Jennings,
with a very intelligent'^ Ah ! poor dear, " immediately
gave her her salts ; . and Sir John felt so desperately en-
raged against the author of this nervous distress, that he
instantly changed his seat to one dose by Lucy Stede, and
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
204 SENSE AND SENSIBHiITT.
gave her^ in a whisper^ a brief account of the whole shock«-
ing afiair.
In a few minutes^ however, Marianne was recovered
enough to put an end to the bustle, and sit down among
the rest; diough her spirits retained the impression of
what had passed the whole evening.
" Poor Marianne !*'said her brother to Colonel Brandon,
in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his attention:
" she has not such good health as her sister, — she is very
nervous, — she has not £linor's constitution ; — and one
must allow that there is something very trying to a young
woman who has been a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions. You would not tiiink it, perhaps, but Marianne
was remarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as
handsome as Elinor. Now you see it is all gone. "
CHAPTER XIII.
Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied. She
had found in her every tiling that could tend to make a
farther connection between the families undesirable. She
had seen enough of her pride, her meanness, and her de«
termined prejudice against herself, to comprehend all the
difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage of Edward and herself, had he been
otherwise free ; and she had seen almost enough to be
tiiankful, for her own sake, that one greater obstacle preserved
her from suffering under any otiier of Mrs. Ferrars's crea.
tion, preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice,
or any solicitude for her good opinion. Or at least, if she
did not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's being
fettered to Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been
more amiable, she ought to have rejoiced.
She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very much
elevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferrars ; that her interest
and her vanity should so very much blhid her as to make
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY^ 205
the attention which seemed only paid her because she was
not Elinor, appear a compliment to herself^ — or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a preference only given
her^ because her real situation was unknown. But that it
was 90, had not only been declared by Lucy's eyes at the
time^ but was declared over again the next morning more
openly ; for at her particular desire Lady Middleton set her
down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing £linor
alone^ to tell her how happy she was.
The chance proved a lucky one ; for a message from Mrs.
Palmer soon after she arrived carried Mrs. Jennings away.
*'My dear friend, " cried Lucy, as soon as they were by
themselves,''I come to talk to you of my happiness.
Could any thing be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's way of
treating me yesterday ? So exceeding ^flable as she was !
You: know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her ; but
the very moment I was introduced, there was such lan affa-
bility in her behaviour as really should seem to say, she
had quite took a fancy to me. Now was not it so ? You
saw it all ; and was not you quite struck with it } "
^'She was certainly very civil to you. "
'^ Civil! — Did you see nothing but only civility.? — I
saw a vast deal more. Such kindness as fell to the share of
nobody but me ! — No pride, no hauteur, and your sister jusi
the same — all sweetness and affability ! "
Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still
pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness ;
and Elinor was obliged to go on.
'^ Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement, "
said she, " nothing could be more flattering than their
treatment of you ; — but as that was not the case "
*'I guessed you would say so, " replied Lucy, quickly; —
'^ but there was no reason in die world why Mrs. Ferrars
should seem to like me, if she did not, and her Uking me is
every thing. You shan't talk me out of my satisfaction. I
am sure it will all end well, and there will be no difficulties
at all, to what I used to think. Mrs. Ferrars is a charm-
ing woman, and so is your sister. They are both delight-
ful women indeed! — I wonder I should never hear you
atLj how agreeable Mrs. Dasihwood was ! "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
206 SENSE AND SESSSBTLTIlt,
To this Elinor had no answer to hiake^ and did not at-
tempt any.
" Are you ill. Miss Dashwood? — you seem low — you
don't speak ; — sure you an't well. "
^^ I never was in better bealth. "
*'I am glad of it with all my heart ; hut really you did
not look it. I should he so sorry to have you ill ; you, that
have heen the greatest comfort to me in the world! —
Heaven knows what I should have done without your
friendship. "
Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her
own success. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she di-
.rectly replied, —
'^ Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your r^ard for
me, and, next to Bdward's love, it is the greatest comfort I
have. Poor Edward ! But now there is one good thing,
we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty often, for Lady
Middleton's deh'ghted with Mrs. DaShwood, so we shall be
a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends
half his time with his sister — besides, Lady Middleton and
Mrs. Ferrars will visit now ; — and Mrs. Ferrars and your
sister were both so good to say, more than once, [they
should always be glad to see me. They are such charming
women ! — I Itm sure if ever you tell your sister what I
think of her, you cannot speak too high. "
But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to
hope that she shatUd tell her sister. Lucy continued, —
'^ I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs.
Ferrars had took a dislike to me. If she had only made
me a formal courtesy, for instance, without saying a word,
and never after had took any notice of me^ and never looked
at me in a pleasant way — you know what I mean — if I
had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should
have gave it all up in despair. I could not have stood it.
For where she does dislike, I know it is most violent. "
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to diis
civil triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the servant's
announcing Mr. Ferrars, and Edward's immediately walk-
ing in.
It was a very awkward moment; and the oountenance
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILIT7. 20T
of each showed that it was so. They all looked exceed-
ingly foolish ; and £dward seemed to have as great an in-
clination to walk out of the room again as to advance farther
into it. The Very circumstance^ in its unpleasantest form,
which they would each have heen most anxious to avoid,
had fallen on them. They were not only all three together,
hut were together without the relief of any other person.
The ladies recovered themselves first. It was not Lucy's
business to put herself forward^ and the appearance of se-
crecy must still be kept up. She could therefore only look
her tenderness, and after slightly addressing him, said no
more.
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious was she, fo^
his sake and her own, to do it weD, that she forced herself,
after a moment's recollection, to welcome him, with a look
and manner that were almost easy, and almost open ; and
another struggle, another effort still improved them. She
would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the conscious-
ness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from
saying that she was happy to see him, and that she had
very much regretted being from home, when he called be-
fore in Berkeley Street. She would not be frightened from
paying him those attentions which, as a friend and almost
a relation, were his due, by the observant eyes of Lucy,
though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching
her.
Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and he
had courage enough to sit dovm ; but his embarrassment
still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion which the
case rendered reasonable, though his sex might make it
Tare ; for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy's, nor
eoiuM his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor s.
Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined
to make no contribution to the comfort of the others, and
would not say a word ; and almost every thing that was
said proceeded from Elinor, who was obliged to volunteer
aQ the information about her mother a health, their coming
to town, & c. which Edward ought to have enquired about,
but never did.
Her exertions did not stop here ; for she soon afterwards
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
20B SENSE AND 8ENSIBIIJT¥.
felt herself so heroically disposed as to determiiie^ undor
pretence of fetching Marianne^ to leave the others by them,
selves; and she really did it^ and that in the handsomest
^lanner^ for she loitered away several minutes on the land-
ing.place^ with the most high-minded fortitude^ before she
went to her sister. When that was once done^ however^ it
was time for the raptures of Edward to cease; for Mari-
anne's joy hurried her into the drawing.room immediately.
Her pleasure in seeing him was like every other of her feel > «
ings, strong in itself^ and strongly spoken. She met him
with a hand that would be taken^ and a voice that ex-
pressed the affection of a sister.
" Dear £dward! " she cried^'^ this is a moment of great
happiness ! This would almost make amends for every
thing! "
Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved^ but
before such witnesses he dared not say half what he really
felt. Again they all sat down^ and for a moment or two
all were silent ; while Marianne was looking with the most
speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward and sometimes
at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each other
should be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward
was the first to speak, and it was to notice Marianne's al-
tered looks, and express his fear of her not finding London
agree with her.
" Oh, don't think of me ! " she repUed with spirited
earnestness, though her eyes were filled with tears as she
spoke,'^ don't think of my health. Elinor is well^ you see.
That must be enough for us both.'*
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the good will of Lucy^
who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant ex-
pression.
'^ Do you like London ? " said Edward, willing to say
any thing that might introduce another subject.
'^ Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but I
have found none. The sight of you, Edward, is the only
comfort it has afibrded; and, thank Heaven! you are wh»k
you always were! "
She paused — no one spoke.
'Digitized by Google
SENR jaxD fflwraiSBiinr. 309
'^ I ^Bk^ Elimr, " ahe presently aMed, " we must
employ £dward to take care of us in our ycfeurn to Bartoiu
in a week or tmo, I guppose^ we shall be going v; and^ I
trusty £dwavd will not be yery .anwiBing to accept the
eharge. "
Poor £dward muttered something, but what it was
nobody knew^ not even himself. But Marianne, who saw
his agitation, and could easily trace it to whatever .cause
best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied, and soon talked
of something else.
'^ We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street
yesterday ! So dull, so wretchedly dull ! But I have
much to say to you on that head, which cannot be said
now, "
And with this admirable discretion did she defer the
assurance of her finding their mutual relatives more dis«
agreeable than ever, and of her being particularly disgusted
with his modier, till they were more in private.
*'But why were you not there, Edward ?.4 Why did
you not come ? "
^^ I was engaged elsewhere. "
'^ Engaged ! But what was that, when ~ such frienda
were to be met ? "
'^ Perhaps, Miss Marianne, " cried Lucy, eager to take
some revenge on her,'^ you think young men never stand
upon engagements,, if they have no mind to keiep them^
little «s well as great. "
Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely
insensible of the sting ; for she calmly replied, —
'^ Not so, indeed ; for, seriously speaking, I am very
sore that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street.
And I really believe he ha8 the most dddcate conscience in
the world ; the most scrupulous in performing every en«
gageroent, however minute, and however it may make
i^inst -his interest or pleasure. He is the most fearful of
giving pain,, of wounding expectation, and the most in > «
capable of being selfish, of any body I ever saw. Edward,
it is 8o, and I will say it. What ! are you never to hear
yourself praised ? — Then you must be no friend of mine ;
p
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SIO 8EN8B AND gENSIBIUTT.
for those who will accept of my love and esteem must
submit to my open commendation. "
The nature of her commendation, in the present case,
however, happened to be particularly ill suited to the feeU
ings of two Uiirds of her auditors, and was so very un-
exhilarating to £dward, that he very soon got up to go
away.
'f Going so soon ! " said Marianne; ^^ my dear £dward,
this must not be. "
And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her per-
suasion that Lucy could not stay much longer. But even
this encouragement failed, for he would go ; and Lucy,
who would have outstayed him had his visit lasted two
hours, soon afterwards went away.
''What can bring her here so often ? " said Marianne,
on her leaving them. ^^ Could she not see that we wanted
her gone ! — how teazing to Edward ! "
''Why so ? we were all his friends, and Lucy has
been the longest known to him of any. It is but natural
that he should lil^e to see her as well as ourselves. "
Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, " You know,
Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear.
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted, as I
must suppose to be the case, you ought to reooUect that I
am the last person in the world to do it« I cannot descend
to be tricked out of assurances that are not really wanted. "
She then left the room ; and Eiindr dared not follow her
to say more, for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy
to Lucy, she could give no information that would convince
Marianne; and painful as the consequences of her still
continuing in an error might be, she was obliged to submit
to it. All that she could hope was, that Edward would
not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing
Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any
other part of the pain that had attended their recent meet*
ing — * > and this she had every reason to expect

d by Google
SBNSB AND 8EN8ZBIIJTY.'Sll
CHAPTER XIV.
Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers
announced to the world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer,
Esq. was safely delivered of a son and heir ; a very in-
teresting and satisfactory paragraph, at least to all those
intimate connections who knew it before.
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's hap-
piness, produced a temporary alteration in the disposal of
her time, and influenced, in a like degree, the engage^
ments of her young friends ; for as she wished to be as
much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither every
morning as soon as she was dressed, and did not return till
late in the evening ; and the Miss Dash woods, at the par-
ticular request of the Middletons, spent the whole of every
day in Conduit Street. For their own comfort, they wcNild
much rather have remained, at least all the morning, in
Mrs. Jennings's house ; but it was not a thing to be urged
against the wishes of every body. Their hours were there-
fore made over to Lady Middleton and the two Miss
Steeles, by whom their company was, in fact, as little
vahied as it was professedly sought.
They had too much sense to be desirable companions to
ihe former ; and by the latter they were considered with a
jealous eye, as intruding on ffieir ground, and sharing the
kindness which they wanted to monopolise. Though no-i
thing could be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour
to Elinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children, she
eouid not bdieve them good natured ; and because they
were fond of reading, she fancied them satirical : perhaps
without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical ; but
that did not signify. It was censure in common use, and
easily given.
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.
It checked the idleness of one, and the business of the other. -
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them,
» 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
21£
and the flattery which Lucy was proud to thinlc of and ad-
minister at other times she feared they would despise
her for oiiering. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of
the three by their pres6nce ; and it was in their powo* to
reooncfle her to it entirely. Would either, of them only
hi^giren her a full and minute ncoount of the whole aflyr
hetipeen Marianne and Mr. Willoi^kby she would have
thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the beat
I^ace foy the fire after dinner^ which their arrival occastoned.
But this conciliation was not granted ; for though she t»fien
threw out expressionsi of {oty for her sister to Elinor^ and
more than once dropt m reiection on the inconstancy tif
beaux before Marianne ; no «ficet was produced^ but a look
of indiflerence from the former^ or of disgust in the latter.
An efibrt even yet lighter might have made her di^r friend:
— would they only have laughed at her about the Doctor !
But so little were they, any mere than the others, inclined
to oblige her, that if Sir Jdm dined from home she night
spend a whde day without hearing any other raiUery on the
subject than what she was kind enou^ to besftew on torself.
AH diese jealousies and discontents,. however, were so
totally unsuspected by Mrs. JenningB > that she tfaanght it a
delightful thing for the girls to be together ; and generally
coti^atttlated her young ft-iends every nig^t on having es-
caped the company of a stupid oid wom^n so long. She joined
them sometimes at Sir John's, and sometimes at her own
house ; but wherever it vras, die always came in ezcdlent
spirits, full of dalight and importance, attributing Charlotte's
well doing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, «o mi*
nute a detail of her »taation, astmly Miss Stede had cmdority
enough to desire. One thing < did disturb her ; Mid of that
she made her daily oomphnnt. Mr. Palmer mnntaioed the
common, but unfatfaaiy -opinion among his sex, of dU kifiteta
being alike ; and thoi]^ she could plainly perceive, ift dtf.
ibrent times, the most striking resenddance between this
baby and every one of his rebttions on boih sides, there was
no convincing his father of it ; no persuading him to be.
lieve Chat it was not exactly like every other baby of the
same age.; nor could he even be bvoi^ht to adcnowkclge
d by Google
thr sksple pvo)poBilioii of its being die fiiiesli c^iM in ibe
wotUL
1 toila» BOW to tbe reMoB of % mi & fbrtitne yrlMk about
tids time beMi Mm. John Dasbwood. It so happened that
wlule ber two sisteia with Mvs. Jennings were first calling on
her in Harief Street, another of ber acquaintance had dropt
i» — a dreometance in itself not apparently Hkely to pro-
dnee evil to her. But whttethe imaginations of other peo.«
pie will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
oonduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's
hi^pinesa must in some measure be always at the mercy of
ciianee. In the present tnStanoe, this last-arrived kdy al.
lowed ber fancy so far to outrun truth and probability, that
on naerriy hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods, and
understan^ng them to be Mr. Dashwood*s sisters, she im-
mediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street ;
and this miseonstmetion produced, within a day or two
afterwards, cards of invitation for them, as well as for their
brother and sist^, to a small musical party at her house;
the consequence of which was, that Mrs. John Dashwood
was oUiged to submit not only to the exceedingly great in-
convenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dash,
woods, but, what was stiU worse, must be subject to all
the unpleasantness of appearing to-treat them with attention;
and who could tell that they might not expect to go out
with her a second time ? The power of ^sappointing them^
it was true, must always be hers. But that was not enough;
fi)r when people are determined on a mode of conduct which
they know to be wrong, they fed injured by the expectation
oi any thing better from them.
Marianne had now been brought, by degrees, so much
into the habit of going out every day, that it was become a
matter of indifference to her whether she went or not ;
and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every even,
ki^'s engagement, though without expecting ^e smallest
amusement from any, and very often without knowing^ tin
tho last moment, where it was to take her.
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly
iadiffevent as not to bestow half the consideration on it,
during the whole of her toilet, which it received from
p S
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SI 4 8EN8E Ain > SENnBIUTT.
Miss Steele in the first five minutes of their being together,
when it was finished. Nothing escaped her minute observ-
ation and general curiosity ; she saw every things and asked
every thing ; was never easy till she knew the price of every
part of Marianne's dress ; could have guessed the numbor
of her gowns altc^ether with better judgment than Marianne
herself; and was not without hopes of finding out, befoi^
they parted, how much her washuig eost per week, and
how much she had every year to spend upon herself. The
impertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was
generally concluded with a compliment, which, though
meant as its douceur, ^was considered by Marianne as the
greatest impertinence of all; for after undei^ing an er-
amination into the value and make of her gown, the colour
of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair, she was
almost sure of being told, that upon " her word she looked
vastly smart, and she dared to say would make a great
many conquests.'*
With such encouragement as this was she dismissed, on
the present occasion, to her brother's carriage ; which they
were ready to enter five minutes after it stopped at the
door, a punctuality not very agreeable to their sister-in-
law, who had preceded them to the house of her acquaint-
ance, and was there hoping for some delay on their part,
that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman.
The events of the evening were not very remarkable.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended a great
many people who had real taste for the performance, and a
great many more who had none at all ; and the performers
themselves were, as'usual, in their own estimation, and
that of their immediate friends, the first private performers
in England.
As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting ta be ao,
she made no scruple of turning away her eyes from the
grand piano-forte whenever it suited her, and unrestrained
even by the presence of a harp, and a violoncello, would
i^x them at pleasure on any other object in the room. In
one of these excursive glances she percdved, among a group
of young men, the very he who had given them^ a lecture
on toothpick-cases at Gray's. She perceived him soon
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 215
afterwaids looking at herself^ and speaking familiarly to her
brother; and had just determined to find out his name
from the latter, when they both came towards her, and
Mr. Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert
Ferrars.
He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his
bead into a bow, which assured her, as plainly as words
could have done, that he was exactly the coxcomb she had
beard him described to be by Lucy. Happy had it been
for her, if her regard for Edward had depended less on his
own merit than on the merit of his nearest relations ! For
then his brother's bow must have given the finishing stroke
to what the ill-humour of his mother and sister would have
b^un. But while she wondered at the difference of the
two young men, she did not find that the emptiness and
conceit of the one put her at all out of charity with the
modesty and worth of the other. Why they were different^
Robert explained to her himself, in the course of a quarter
of an hour's conversation ; for, talking of his brother, and
lamenting the extreme gaucherie which he really believed
kept him from mixing in proper society, he candidly and
generously attributed it much less to any natural deficiency
than to the misfortune of a private education ; while he
himself, though probably without any particular, any ma«
terial superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of
a public school, was as well fitted to mix in die world as
any other man.
'^ Upon my soul, " he added, " I believe it is nothing
more ; and so I often tell my mother, when she is grieving
about it. ^ My dear madam,'I always say to her,'you
must make yourself easy. The evil is now irremediable,
and it has been entirely your own doing. Why would
you be persuaded by my uncle. Sir Robert, against your
own judgment, to place Edward under private tuition,
at the most critical time of his life ? If you had only sent
him to Westminster as well as myself, instead of sending
him to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have been prevented/
This is the way in which I always consider the matter^
and my mother is perfectly convinced of her error. "
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever
p 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
£18 SBVBK AKD > BBamamank
iQ%bt be \k & general esliiiBatiMi^ of the adv^tittge- of «
public school^ she could not think of Edwaod'a abode ia
Ms* Pratt's family vfk^ aay satisfbctioii.
''You reside in Devonahine^ I thinJc/'was- hk nszt ebi«
servation, ^'in a cottage near Dawlish. "
Elinor set him right a & to it8 < situation ; and it seemed
zather surprising to him that any body oould live iiitDeiFon««
aype with < Mit living; near Dawlish^ He bestowed hia
hearty approbation!, however^ on their speciee of house.
" For my own part > " said he^''I am excessively fkmd
of a cottage ; there is sdways so sauch comfort^ so mu < dk
elegance about them. And I protest^ if I had any money
to spare, I should buy a little land and build one myself^,
within a ^hort distance of London^, where I n^ight drive
myself down at any time, and collect a few friends about
jae, and be happy. I advise every body who is goiag to >
build, to build a cottage. My friend Lord Courtland
cjune to me the other day on purpose to a^ ray advilce,
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's. I was
to decide on the best of them.'My dear Courtland,'said
1^ immediately throwing them all into the fire, ^ do not
adopt either of them, but by all means build a cottage.'
And that, I fancy, will be the end of it.
''Some people imagine that there can be no aecommo«
dations, no space in a cottage ; but this is all a mistake. I
was last month at my friend Elliott's, near Dartfbid.
Lady Elliott wished to give a dance. ^ But how ean it be
done ?'said she : ^ my dear Ferrass, do tell me how it is
to be manned. There is not a room in this cottage that
will hold ten* couple ; and where ca,n the supper be .'^'/
immediately saw that there could be no difficulty in it, so
I said, ^ My dear Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy* The
dining^parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card*-
tal^s may be placed in the drawing-room; the library
may be open for tea and other refreshments ; and let the
supper be set out in the saloon.'Lady'EUiott was de»
lighted with the thought. We measured the diniag^
room, and fouitd it would h < dd exactly eighteen'coupl^ —
and the affair was arranged precisely after my pJan. So
that, in fact, you see, if people do but know how to set
d by Google
about it, erery comfort may be as wdl eirjoyed in a cottagie
as in the most spacionft dwelling. "
Elinor agreed to k all, for she did not think he deserved
ike eomfliiaent of rational opposition.
As J < ^ & Dashwood had no more pleasure in musi€ than
his ddest sister^ his mind was equally at liberty to fix on
any thing else; and a thought struck him^ dudng the
eTeningf which he commonieated to his wife, for her ap-
probation, when they got home. The consideration of
Mrs. Dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their
guests, bad siq^ested die propriety of their being really in^
¥ited to beeome suek, whil & Mrs. Jennings's engagements
Icept her from- home. The expense would be nothing; the
ineanTenience not more ; and it was altogether an atten-
tion which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its comptete enfraiMdiisement from his promise
to his £athei. Fanny was startled at the proposal.
** I do not see how it can be done, " said she, *^ without
affronting Lady Middleton, for they spend every day with
her ; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it. You
know I am always ready to pay them any attention in my
power^ as my taking them out this evening shows. But
they are Lady Middietoa's visiters. How can I ask them
away from her ? "
Her husband; but with great humility, did not see the
force of her objection. " They had already spent a week
in this mansier in Conduit Street, ai»i Lady Middleton^
could not be displeased at their giving the same number of
days to such near relations. "
Fansiy paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigour,
8«id,-
^^ My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it
was in my power. But I had just settled within myself to
ask die Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us. They
are very well behaved, good kind of girls ; and I thmk die
attention is due to them, as their unele did so very wdl by
Edward. We can ask your sisters some other year, you
know ; but die Miss Steeles may not be in town any more.
I am sure you will like them ; indeed, you do like then*.
d by Google
SI 8 SBNSB AND SENSIBILITT.
you know^ very much already^ and so does my mbtfaer;
and they are such favourites with Harry! "
Mr. Dashwood was convinced. He saw the necessity of
inviting the Miss Steeles immediately ; and his conscience
was pacified by the resolution of inviting his sisters another
year ; at the same time^ however^ slily suspecting that an-
other year would make the invitation needless^ by bringing
Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife^ and Marianne as
their visiter.
Fanny^ rejoicing in her escape^ and protld of the ready
wit that had procured it^ wrote the next morning to Lucy,
to request her company and her sister's, for some days, in
Harley Street, as soon as Lady Middleton could spare
them. This was enough to make Lucy really and reason,
ably happy. Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for
her herself ; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her
views ! Such an opportunity of being with Edward and
his family was, above all things, the most material to her
interest, and such an invitation the most gratifying to her
feelings ! It was an advantage that could not be too grate-
fully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and the
visit to Lady Middleton, which had not befcnre had any
precise limits, was instantly discovered to have been always
meant to end in two days'time.
When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within
ten minutes after its arrival, it gave her, for the first time,
some share in the expectations of Lucy ; for such a mark
of uncommon kindness, vouchsafed on sO short an acquaint-
ance, seemed to declare that the good will towards her
arose from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be brought, by time and address, to do
every Uiing that Lucy wished. Her flattery had already
subdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entry
into the dose heart of Mrs. John Dashwood ; and these
were effects that laid open the probability of greater.
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street ; and all that
reached Elinor of their influence there strengthened her
expectation of the event. Sir John, who called on them
more than once, brought home such accounts of the favour
they were in as must be universally striking. Mrs. Dash-
d by Google
8ENgB AND SENSIBILITT. 219
wood had never been so much pleased with any young
women in her life as she was with them ; had given each
of them a needle-book made by some emigrant; called
Lucy by her Christian name ; and did not know whether
she should ever be able to part with them.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
d by Google
S9d( SBNSB ANn BmrttmiMOf'ti
VOLUME THE THIRD.
CHAPTER I.
Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight that
her mother felt it no longer necessary to give up the whole
of her time to her ; and^ contenting herself with visiting her
once or twice a day^ returned from that period to her own
home^ and her own hahits, in which she found the Miss
Dashwoods very ready to re-assume their former share.
About the third or fourth morning after their being thus
resettled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning
from her ordinary visit to Mrs. Palmer, entered the draw-
ing-room, where Elinor was sitting by herself, with an air
of such hurrying importance as prepared her to hear some-
thing wonderful ; and giving her time only to lorm that
idea, began directly to justify it by saying, —
*'Lord ! my dear Miss Dashwood ! have you heard the
news } "
" No, ma am. WTiat is it ? "
'^ Something so strange ! But you shall hear it all.
" When I ^ot to Mr. Palmer s, I found Charlotte qidte in a
fuss about the child. She was sure it was very ill — it
cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples. So I looked
at it directly, and, ^ Lord ! my dear,'says I,'it is nothing
in the world but the red gum ;'and nurse said just the
same. But Charlotte, she would not be satisfied, so Mr.
Donavan was sent for ; and luckily he happened to be just
come in from Harley Street, so he stepped over directly,
and as soon as ever he saw the child he said just as we did^
that it was noth^ig in the world but the red gum, and then
Charlotte was easy. And so, just as he was going away
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
AjTB smffSKBiaufT* 821
agam, it came into my head, I am sure I do not loiow how
I happened to think of it, bat it came into my head to ask
him if there was any news. So upon that he smirked, and
simpered^ -and looked grave, and seemed to know some*
thing or other, and at last he said in a whisper,'For fear
any unpleasant report should reaoh the young ladies under
your oare as to their sister's indisposition, I think it ad-
visable to say, that I believe there is no great reason for
alarm ; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will do very weU. "
''What! isFwnyiH? "
''That is exactly what I said, my dear.'Lord !'says
I^'^i$ Mrs. Dashwood ill?'3o then it all came out;
and the long and the short of the matter, by all I can learn,
seems to be this. Mr. Edward Ferrars, the very young
m«i I used to joke widi you about, (but, however, as it
turns out, I am monstrous glad there never was any thing
in it,) Mr. Edward Ferrars^ it seems, has been engaged
above this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy ! There's for
you, my dear ! And not a creature knowing a syllable of
the matter except Nancy ! Could you have believed such
a thing possible ? There is no great wonder in their liking
one another ; but that matters should be brought so for-
ward between them, and nobody suspect it 1 That is
strange i I never happened to see them togethev, or I am
sure I should have found it out directly. Well, and so
this was kept a great secrot, for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and
neither she nor your brother or sister suspected a word of
the matter ; till this very morning, poor Nancy, who, yon
know^ is a well-^meaning creature, but no coi^jurer, popt it
all out.'Lord!'thinks she to herself,'they are all so fond
of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'
and so away she went to your sister, who was sitting s^
alone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to come
—for $hf» had just been saying to your brother, only five
minutes before, that she thought to make a match between
Edward and some Lord's daughter or other, I forget who.
So you may think what a blow it was to aU her vanity and
pride. She fell into violent hysterics immediately, widi
neb screams as reached your brother's ears, as he was sit.
tj0g in liis own dressing-joom down utairs, .thinking about
Digitized by Google
232 SENSE AND SBNSIBIZilTir.
writing a letter to his steward in the country. So up h6
flew directly/ and a terrible scene took place^ for Lucy was
come to them by that time^ little dreaming what was going
on. Poor soul I I pity her. And I must say, I think she
was used very hardly ; for your sister scolded like any fury,
and soon drove her into a fainting fit. Nancy, ^e fell
upon her knees, and cried^bitterly ; and your brother, he
walked about the room, and said he did not know what to
do. Mrs. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute
longer in the house; and your brother was forced to go down
upon his knees, too, to persuade her to let them stay till they
had packed up their clothes. Then she fell into hysterics
again, and he was so frightened that he would send for
Mr. Bonavan, and Mr. Donavan found the house in all this
uproar. The carriage was at the door ready to take my
poor cousins away, and they were just stepping in as 1^
came off; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says, she
could hardly walk ; and Nancy, she was almost as bad. I
declare, I have no patience with your sister ; and I hope,
with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her. Lord!
what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when he hears
of it ! . To have his love used so scornfully ! for they say
he is monstrous fond of her, as well he may. I should
not wondsr, if he was to be in the greatest of a passicm !^-
and Mr. Donavan thinks just the same. He and I had a
great deal of talk about it ; and the best of ail is, that he is
gone back again to Harley Street, that he may be within
call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it; for she was sent for as
soon as ever my cousins left the house^ for your sister was
sure she would be in hysterics too ; and so she may, for
what I care. I have no pity for either of them. I have
no notion of people's making such a to-do about money and
greatness. There is no reason on earth why Mr. £dward
and Lucy should not marry ; for I am sure Mrs. Ferrars
may afford to do very well by her son; and though Lucy
has next to nothing herself, she knows better than any body
how to make the most of every thing ; and I dare aaf, if
Mrs. Ferrars would only allow him five hundred a year,
she would make as good an appearance with it as any hody
else would with eight. Lord ! how snug they might live
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBNSE AND SBNglBILZTY. 223.
in such another cottage as yours — or a little bigger — with
two maids and two men ; and I believe I could help them
to a housemaid^ for my Betty has a sister out of place^ that
would fit them exactly. "
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased; and as Elinor had had time
enough to collect her thoughts^ she was able to give such
an answer, and make such observations^ as the subject might
naturally be supposed to produce. Happy to find that she
was not suspected of any extraordinary interest in it ; that
Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be the
case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward;
and happy above all the rest^ in the absence of Marianne^
she felt very well able to speak of the affair without embar.
rassment^ and to give her judgment^ as she believed^ with
impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it.
She could hardly determine what her own expectation of
its event really was; though she earnestly tried to drive
away the notion of its being possible to end otherwise at
last^ than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy. What
Mrs. Ferrars would say and do^ though there could not be
a doubt of its nature^ she was anxious to hear ; and still
more anxious to know how Edward would conduct himself.
For him she felt much compassion ; — for Lucy very little
— and it cost her some pains to procure that little ; — for
the rest of the party none at all.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject^ Elinor
soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its dis-
cussion. No time was to be lost in undeceiving her, in
making her acquainted with the real truth, and in endea-*
vouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others, without
betraying that she £dt any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against Edward.
Elinor s office was a painfiil one. She was going to re.
move what she really believed to be her sister's chief con«
solation, — to give such particulars of Edward as she feared
would ruin him for ever in her good opinion, — and to make
Bfarianne, by a resemblance in their situations, which to her
fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointment
over again. But unwelcome as such a task must be, it was
d by Google
SS4 BKN8B AKB nUtKBtUTT,
necessary to be done^ and Elinor therefore hastened to per.
form it.
She was very far from wishing to dwdl on her own fed-
ings^ or to represent herself as suffering much, any other.
Wise than as the self-command she had practised since her
first knowledge of Edward's engagement might surest a
hint of what was practicable to Marianne. Her narration
was clear and simple ; and though it could not be given
without emotion^ it was not accompanied by violent agi-
tation^ nor impetuous grief. That belonged rather to tiie
hearer, for Marianne hstened with horror, and cried exces-
sively. Elinor was to be the comrforter of others in her
own distresses, no less than in theirs ; and all the comfort
that could be given by assurances of he^ own composure of
mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from eyery
charge but of imprudence, was readily offered.
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither.
Edward seemed a second Willoughby ; and acknowledging
as Elinor did, that she had loved him most sincerely, eovld
she feel less than herself! As for Lucy Steele, she ton.
sidered her so totally unamiable, so absolutely incapable of
attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded
Bt first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former af-
fection of Edward for her. She would not even iidmit it
to have been natural ; and Elinor left her to be convinced
that it was so, by that which only could convince her, a
better knowledge of mankind.
Her first communication had reached no farther than to
state the fact of the engagement, and the length of time it
had existed. Marianne's feelings had then broken in, and
put an end to all i^gularity of detail ; and for some'-time
all that could be done was to soothe her distress, lessen her
alarms, and combat her resentment. The first question on
her side, which led to farther particulars, was, —
" How long has this been known to you, Elinor ? has he
written to you ? "
''I have known it these four months. When Lucy first
came to Barton Park last November, lAe told me in xMn-
fidence of her engagement. "
At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonish-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
flBNflB Am > SDffBlBIIiITT* 92$
aieat which her lips could not utter. After a pause oi
wonder^ she exclaimed^ —
*'Four months ! Have you known of this four months? *'
Elinor ctrnfirmed it.
^'What ! while attending me in all my misery^ has this
been on your heart ? and 1 have reproached you for being
happy T'
''It was not fit that you should then know how much I
was the reverse. "
" Four months ! " cried Marianne again. " So calm !
80 cheerful ! How have you been supported ? "
^'By feeling that I was doing my duty. My promise
to Lucy obliged me to be secret. I owed it to her, there*
fore^ to avoid giving any hint of the truth ; and I owed it
to my family and friends, not to create in them a solicitude
about me, which it could not be in my power to satisfy. "
Marianne seemed much struck.
" I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and
my mother, " added Elinor ;'^ and once or twice I have
sttempted it; but without betraying my trust, I never
could have convinced you. "
*'Four months ! and yet you loved him ! "
'^ Yes. But I did not love only him ; and while the
comfort of others was dear to me, 1 was glad to spare them
from knowing how much I felt. Now, I can think and
9peak of it with Utile emotion. I would not have you
aufier on my account ; for I assure you I no longer suffer
materially myself. I have many things to support me. I
am not conscious of having provoked the disappointment
by any imprudence of my own, and I have borne it as much
as possible without spreading it farther. I acquit Edward
of all essential misconduct. I wish him very happy ; and
I am so sure of his always doing his duty, that though
now he may harbour some regret, in the end he must be*
eome so. Lucy does not want sense; and that is the
foundation on which every thing good may be built. And
aHer all, Marianne, after all that is bewitching in the idea
of a single and constant attachment, and all that can be
said of one's happiness depending entirely on any par-
ticular person, it is not meant — it is not fit — it is not
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
possible that it should be so. £dward will marry lmef > ,
he will marry a woman superior in person and understandu
ing to half her sex ; and time and habit will teach him to
forget that he ever thought another superior to her/'
" If such is your way of thinking, " said Marianne^ " if
.the loss of what is most ralued is so easily to be made up
by something else^ your resolution, your self-command^
are, perhaps, a little less to be wondered at. They are
brought more within my comprehension. "
• *'I understand you. You do not suppose that I have
ever felt much. For four months, Marianne, I have had
all this hanging on my mind, without being at liberty to
apeak of it to a single creature; knowing that it would
make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were
explained to you, yet unable to prepare you for it in'the
least. It was told me, -— it was in a manner forced on me
by the very person herself, whose prior engagement ruined
aU my prospects ; and told me^ as I thought, with triumph.
This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to oppose,
by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been
most deeply interested ; and it has not been only once ; I
have had her hopes and exultation to listen to again and
hgain. I have known myself to be divided from Edward
for ever, without hearing one circumstance that could make
me less desire the connection. Nothing has proved him
unworthy ; nor has any thing declared him indifferent to
me. I have had to contend against the unkindness of bis
sister, and the insolence of his mother ; and have suffered
the punishment of an attachment, without enjoying its
advantages. And all this has been going on at a time,
when,, as you too well know, it has not been my only un-
happiness. If you can think me capable of ever feelings
(rarely yon may suppose that I have suflefed now. The
composure of mind with which I have brought myself at
present to consider the matter, the consolation that I
ha ve^ been willing to admit, have been the effect of constftnt
and painful exertion; they did not spring up of them*
idlves ; they did not occur to relieve my spirits at ftrst.
No, Marianne. 2%«n, if I had not been bound to sileiiee,
perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely — not even
*
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
d£NSE AND SSNSIBILIT7. SS?
vrhBt I owed to my dearest friends — from openly showing
that I was very unhappy. "
'Marianne was quite subdued.
" Ohj Elinor/'she cried,'^ you have made me hate
toyself for ever. How barbarous have I been to you ! —
you, who have been my only comfort, who have borne
with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
stifiering for me ! Is this my gratitude ? Is this the
only return I can make you ? Because your merit cries
out upon myself, I have been trying to do it away. "
The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In such
a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor had no diffi-
culty in obtaining from her whatever promise she required;
ifind, at her request, Marianne engaged never to speak of
the aflPair to any one with the least appearance of bitter-
ness; to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest in-
crease of dislike to her ; and even to see Edward himself,
if chance should bring them together, without any dimi.
nution of her usual cordiality. These were great con-
.cessions ; but where Marianne felt that she had injured,
no reparation could be too much for her to make.
She perfornaed her promise of being discreet, to admir-
ation. She attended to all that Mrs. Jennings had* to say
upon the subject, with an unchanging complexion, dissented
from her in nothing, and was heard three times to say^
*'Yes, ma'am. " She listened to her praise of Lucy with
only moving from one chair to another ; and when Mrs.
Jennings talked of Edward's affection, it cost her only a
spasm in her throat. Such advances towards heroism in
her sister, made Elinor feel equal to any thing herself.
The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit
from their brother, who came with a most serious aspect
to talk over the dreadful affair, and'bring them niews of
his wife.
'* You have heard, I suppose, " said he, with great
solemnity, as soon as he was seated, " of the very shocking
discovery that took place under our roof yesterday. "
They all looked their assent ; it seemed too awful a
moment for speech.
" Your sister, " he continued,'^has suffered dreadfully;
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ftQ8^ 8BN8B AND BENnBIUTT^
Mrs. Ferrars too — in short it has been a scene of snciL
complicated distress — but I will hope that the storm ma]|j
be weathered without our being any of us quite overcome.
Poor Fanny ! she was in hysterics all yesterday. But I
would not alarm you too much. Donavan says there ia
nothing materially to be apprehended ; her constitution is
a good one, and her resolution equal to any thing. Sh^
has borne it all with the fortitude of an angel ! She says
she never shall think well of any body again; and one
cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived ! — meeting
with such ingratitude, where so much kindness had been
shown, so much confidence had been placed ! It was quite
out of the benevolence of her heart, that she had asked
these young women to her house; merely because she
thought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-
behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions; for
otherwise we both wished very much to have invited you
and Marianne to be with us, while your kind friend there
was attending her daughter. And now to be so rewarded !
'I wish, with all my heart,'says poor Fanny, in her
affectionate way, ^ that we had asked your sisters instead of
them. "'
Here he stopped to be thanked ; which being done^ he
went on.
*'What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered, when first Fanny
broke it to her, is not to be described. While she with the
truest affection had been planning a most eligible con-
nection for him, was it to be supposed that he could be all
the time secredy engaged to another person ! — such a
suspicion could never have entered her head ! If she
suspected any prepossession elsewhere, it could not be in
that quarter.'7%ere, to be sure,'said she, * I might have
thought myself safe.'She was quite in an agony. We
consulted together, however, as to what should be done^
and at last she determined to send for Edward. He came.
But I am sorry to relate what ensued. All that Mrs.FerTacs
could say to make him put an end to the engagement, aa-
aiated too, as you may well suppose, by my arguments, and
Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail. Duty, affection, every
.tlnng- was disregarded. I never thought Edward so stub-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
dCKBB AKD SEKSXBHittT. z29
bom, 80 unfeeling before. His mother explained to bim
her liberal designs, in case of his marrying Miss Morton ;
told him she would settle on him the Norfolk estate^
which, dear of land-tax, brings in a good thousand a year ;
offered even, when matters grew desperate, to make it
twelve hundred ; and in opposition to this, if he still
persisted in this low connection, represented to him the
certain penury that must attend the match. His own two
thousand pounds she protested should be his all ; she
would never see him again ; and so far would she be from
affording him the smallest assistance, that if he were to
enter into any profession with a view of better support,
the would do all in her power ^to prevent his advancing
in it. "
Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped
her hands together, and cried,''Gracious God ! can this be
possible ? "
" Well may you wonder, Marianne, " replied her brother,
** at the obstinacy which could resist such arguments as
these. Your exclamation is very natural. "
Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her
promises, and forbore.
'* All this, however, " he continued, " was urged in vain.
Edward said very little ; but what he did say was in the
most determined manner. Nothing should prevail on him
to give up his engagement. He would stand to it, cost him
what it might. "
*'Then, " cried Mrs. Jennings with blimt sincerity, no
longer able to be silent,'^ he has acted like an honest man !
I. beg your pardon, Mr. Dash wood, but if he had done
otherwise, I should have thought him a rascal. , I have
some little concern in the business, as well as yourself, for
Lucy Steele is my cousin ; and I believe there is not a better
idnd of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband. "
John Dashwood was greatly astonished ; but his nature
was calm, not open to provocation ; and he never wished to
ofiend any body, especially any body of good fortime. He
therefore replied without any resentment, —
* *'I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any re«»'
a S
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
$8Q SENSE AND SENSIBILITY^
latien of yours^ madam. Miss Lucy Steele is^ I dare sajj
a very deserving young woman ; but in the present case^
you kaow^ the connection must be impossible. And to have
entered into a secret engagement with a young man under
her uncle's care, the son of a woman especially of sacb
▼ery large fortune as Mrs. Ferrars^ is^ perhaps, altogether a
little extraordinary. In short, I do not mean to reflect
upon the behaviour of any person whom you have a regard
for, Mrs. Jennings. We all wish her extremely [happy;
and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout the whole has
been such as every conscientious, good mother, in like cir-*
cumstances, would adopt. It has been dignified and liberal
Bdward has drawn his own lot, and I fear it will be a bad
one. "
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension ; and
Elinor's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward, while
braving his mother's threats, for a woman who could not
reward him.
''Well, sir, " said Mrs. Jennings, ^^ and how did it
end.J^ "
^'I am sorry to say, ma am, in a most imhappy rupture :
— Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's notice.
He left her house yesterday, but where he is gone, or
whether he is still in town, I do not know ; for toe of
course can make no enquiry. "
" Poor young man ! and what is to become of him ? "
^'" What, indeed, ma'am ! It is a mdancholy con-
sideration. Born to the prospect of such affluence ! 1
eannot conceive a situation more deplorable. The interest
of two thousand pounds — how can a man Hve on it !
And when to that is added the recollection that he might,,
but for his own folly, within three months, have been in
the recdpt of two diousand five hundred a year (for
Miss Morton has thirty thousand pounds)^ I cannot picture
to myself a more wretched condition. We must all fe^
for him ^^ and the mare so, because it is totally oat of our
power to assist him. "
^^ Poor young man !''cried Mrs. Jennings, ^'I am suie.
he should be very welcome to bed and board at my house ;
wd so I woidd tell him if I could see him. It is not fit
d by Google
^m9J & AND 8£»f8IBIUTY«'$31'
that he should be living about at his ownchu'ge now^ at
lodgings and taverns. "
£linor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards
Edward, though she cpuld not forbear smiling at the form
of it.
'^ If he would only have done as well by himself,''said
John Dashwood, ^^ as all his friends were disposed to do by
him, he might now have been in his proper situation^ and
would have wanted for nothing ; but as it is, it must be out
of any body's power to assist him. And there is one thing;
'more preparing against him, which must be worse than all,
— his mother has determined, with a very natural kind of
spirit, to settle theU estate upon Robert immediately, which,
might have been Edward's, on proper conditions. I left
her this morning with her lawyer, talking over the business.''
*'Well ! " said Mrs. Jennings, " that is her revenge..
Every body has a way of their own* But I don't think
mine would be, to make one son independent because^
another had plagued me. "
Marianne got up and walked about the room.
*^ Can any thing be more galling to the spirit of a man,'*
continued John,'^ than to see his younger brother in pos.;
session of an estate which might have been his own ?* Poor-
Edward 1 I feel for him sincerely. "
A few minutes more, spent in the same kind of efl^ision,.*
concluded his visit ; and with repeated assurances to his
sisters that he really believed there was no material danger
i & Fanny's indisposition, and that they need not therefore
be very uneasy about it, he went away, leaving the three
ladies UBanimous in their sentiments on die present occasion*-
as far at least as it regarded Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the,
Dashwoods', and Edward's.
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted >
the room ; and as her vehemence made reserve impossible
in Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jennings, they all joine4
Vk a very spirited critique upon the party»
q 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
2S» flJtofSB AST > SBlTBUJSiiJTY**
CHAPTER II.

Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's
conduct^ but only Elinor and Marianne understood its trae
merit. They only knew how little he had had to tempt him
to be disobedient^ and how small was the consolation^ beyond
the consciousness of doing rights that could remain to him
in the loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried in his in-
tegrity ; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassicm
for his punishment. But though confidence between diem
was^ by this public discovery^ restored to its proper state^ it
was not a subject on which either of them were fond of
dwelling when alone. Elinor avoided it upon principle^ as
tending to fix still more upon her thoughts^ by the too
Warm^ too positive assurances of Marianne^ that belief of
Edward's continued affection for herself which she rather
wished to do away; and Marianne's courage soon failed her^
in trying to converse upon a topic which always left her more
dissatisfied with herself than ever^ by the comparison it ne»
cessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison ; ^ but not as her
sister had hoped^ to urge her to exertion now ; she felt it
with all the pain of continual self-reproadi^ r^;retted most
bitterly that she had never exerted herself before ; but it
) > rought only the torture of penitence^ without the hope of
amendment. Her mind was so much weakened^ that she
still fancied present exertion impossible^ and therefore it
only dispirited her more.
Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two after-
wards, of affairs in Harley Street or Bartlett's Buildings.
But though so much of the matter was known to them al*
ready, that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in
spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking after
more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of com.
fort and enquiry to her cousins as soon as she could ; and
nothing but the hinderance of more visiters than usual had
prevented her going to them within that time.
Digitized by Google
8BKMI AND fiSNSIBILinr* S3S
^ The third day succeeding their knowledge of the par*
ticokrs was so fine^ so heautiful a Sunday^ as to draw many
to Kensington Gardens^ though it was only the second
week in March. Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the
numher ; hut Marianne^ who knew that the WiUoughhys
were again in town^ and had a constant dread of meetini^
^em, chose rather to stay at home^ than venture into so
puhlic a place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined them
soon after they entered the Crardens ; and Elinor was not
sorry that hy her continuing with them^ and engaging all
Mrs. Jennings*s conversation^ she was herself left to quiet
reflection* She saw nothing of the WiUoughhys^ nothing
of Edward^ and for some time nothing of any hody who
could hy any chance, whether grave or gay, he interesting to
her. But at last she found^herself, with some surprise, ac-
costed hy Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy, ex«
pressed great satisfaction in meeting them; and on receiving
encouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs. Jen-
nings, left her own party for a short time, to join theirs.
Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor, —
** Get it all out of her, my dear. She will tell you any
thing, if you ask. You see I cannot leave Mrs. Cburke. "
It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity and
Elinor's too, that she would tell any thing without being
asked; for nothing would otherwise have heen learnt
''^ I am so glad to meet you, " said Miss Steele, taking
her familiarly hy the arm — *^ for I wanted to see you of
all things in the world. " And then lowering her voice,'* I
suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all ahout it. Is she angry ?**
" Not at all, I helieve, with you. "
''That is a good thing. And Lady Middleton, is she
angry? "
''I cannot suppose it possible that she should. "
''I am monstrous glad of it. Good gracious ! I have
had such a time of it ! I never saw Lucy in such a rage
in my life. She vowed at first she would never trim me up
a new bonnet, nor do any thing dse for me again, so long as
she lived ; but now she is quite come to, and we are as good
ftiends as ever. Look, she made me this bow to my hat»
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
954 9PNBB Ain > «BN8IBXLITT.
and put in the feather last, night. There now^ ywu are go-
ing to laugh at me too. But why should not I wear pink,
lihands? I do not care if it i« the Doctor's favourite
odour. I am sore, {for my part^ I should never have
known he did like it better than any other colour^ if he had
not happened to say so. My cousins have been so plaguing
me ! I declare^ sometimes I do not know which way to
look before them. "
She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had
nothing to say, and therefore soon judged it expedient to
find her way back again to the first.
^^ Well, but Miss Dashwood, " speaking triumphantly,
'^ people may say what they choose about Mr. Ferrars's de-
daring he would not have Lucy, for it's no such thing, I
can tdl you ; and it*s quite a shame for such ill-natured re-^
ports to be spread abroad. Whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know, it was no business of other peo«
pie to set it down for certain. "
''I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before,
I assure you, " said EUnor.
''Oh, did not you } But it toaa said, I know, very
well, and by more than one ; for Miss Godby told Miss
Sparks, that nobody in their senses could expect Mr. Fer«
rars to give up a woman like Miss Morton, with thirty
thousand pounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele, that had
nothing at all; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself..
And beddes that, my cousin Richard said himself, that when
it came to the point, he was afraid Mr. Ferrars would be off r
and when Edward did not come near us for three daya, I
could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in my
heart Lucy gave it up all for lost ; for we came away from
your brother's Wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not
all Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, and did not know what,
was become with him. Onoe Lucy thought to write to
him, but then her spirit rose against that. However^ this
morning he came juat as we came home from church ; and
then it all came out, how he had been sent for Wednesday
to Harley Street, and been talked to by his mother and all
of them, jmd how he had declared before them all that
he loved nobody but Lucy, and nobody but Lucy would he
d by Google
S6NSE AND SENglBILITT. SSS*
h^ve. And how he had been so worried hj what passed^
that as soon as he had went away from his mother's house,
he had got upon his horse^ and rid into the country^ some
where or other ; and how he had stayed about at an inn all
Thursday and Friday^ on purpose to get the better of it.
And after thinking it all over and over again^ he said^ it
seemed to him as if^ now he had no fortune^ and no nothing
at all^ it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the en-
gagement^ because it must be for her loss^ for he had no-
thing but two thousand pounds^ and no hope of any thing
else ; and if he was to go into orders^ as he had some
thoughts^ he could get nothing but a curacy; and how was
they to live upon that ? He could not bear to think of her
doing no better^ and so he begged^ if she had the least
mind for it^ to put an end to the matter directly^ and leave
him to shift for himself. I heard him say all this as plain
as could possibly be. And it was entirely for her sake,
and upon her account^ that he said a word about being off,
and not upon his own. I wUl take my oath he never
dropt a syllable of being tired of her^ or of wishing to
marry Miss Morton^ or any thing like it. But^ to be sure^
Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking ; so she
told him directly (with a great deal about sweet and love,
you know^ and all that — Oh^ la ! one can't repeat such
kind of things you know) — she told him directly^ she had
not the least mind in the world to be off^ for she could live
with him upon a trifle, and how little soever he might have,
she should be very glad to have it all, you know, or some-
thing of the kind. So then he was monstrous happy, and
talked on some time about what they should do, and they
agreed he should take orders directly, and they must wait
to be married till he got a living. And just then I could
not hear any more, for my cousin called from below to tell
me Mrs. Richardson was come in her coach, and would take
one of us to Kensington Gardens; so I was forced to
go into the room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if she
would like to go, but she did not care to leave Edward ; so
I just run up stairs and put on a pair of silk stockings, and
came off widi the Richardsons. "
^^ I do not understand what you mean by inteixupting
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ftSS iMareS AND BBttUtBOitTT,
them/'said Elinor ;'* you were all in the same room tog & «
ther, were not you ? "
*'No, indeed, not us. La ! Miss Dashwood, do yoa
think people make love when any body else is by ? Oh for
shame! To be sure you must know better than that
(Laughing affectedly.) No, no ; they were shut up in the
drawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listen-
ing at the door. "
'^ How ! " cried Elinor; " have you been repeating to
me what you only learnt yourself by listening at the door?
I am sorry I did not know it before ; for I certainly would
not have suffered you to give me particulars of a convers-
ation which you ought not to have known yourself. How
could you behave so unfairly by your sister ? "
** Oh, la ! there is nothing in that. I only stood at the
door, and heard what I could. And I am sure Lucy would
have done just the same by me ; for a year or two back,
when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together,
she never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or behind
a chimney.board, on purpose to hear what we said.''
Elinor tried to talk of something else ; but Miss Steele
could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes, from what
was uppermost in her mind.
''Edward talks of going to Oxford soon,'* said she; *'bat
now he is lodging at No. — , Pall Mall. What an ill-na-
tured woman his mother is, an*t she ? And your brother
and'sister were not very kind ! However, I shan't say any
thing against them to you; and to be sure they did send
us home in. their own chariot, which was more than I
looked for. And for my part, I was all in a fright for fear
your sister should ask us for the huswifes she had gave ns
a day or two before ; but, however, nothing was said about
them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight. Edward
have got some business at Oxford, he says ; so he must go
there for a time ; and after that, as soon as he can light
upon a bishop, he will be ordained. I wonder what curacy
he will get ! Good gracious ! (giggling as she spoke) I'd
lay my life I know what my cousins will say, when they
hear of it. They wiU tell me I should write to the Doctor,
to get Edward the curacy of his new living. I know tfaey
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
OBSSK AND fiSNSIBIUTT« 237
^U; but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all
{he world.'La !'I shall say directly,'I wonder how
you could think of such a thing. / write to the Doctor,
indeed!'"
*'Well, " said Elinor, " it is a comfort to be prepared
against the worst. You have got your answer ready. "
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but
the approadi of her own party made another more neces-
aary.
^'Oh, la ! here come the Richardsons. I had a vast deal
more to say to you, but I must not stay away from them
not any longer. I assure you they are very genteel people.
He makes a monstrous deal of money, and they keep their
own coach. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings
aiboxxt it myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear
she is not in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the
same; and if any thing should happen to take you and
jour sister away, and Mrs. Jennings should want company,
I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay with
her for as long a time as she likes. I suppose Lady Middle-
ton won't ask us any more this bout. Good-by; I am
aorry Miss Marianne was not here. Remember me kindly
to her. La ! if you have not got your spotted muslin on !
I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn. "
Such was her parting concern ; for after this she had
time only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jen-
nings, before her company was claimed by Mrs. Richard-
son ; and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge which
might feed her powers of reflection some time, though she
had learnt very little more than what had been already
foreseen and foreplanned in her own mind. Edward's mar-
riage with Lucy was as firmly determined on, and the time
of its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain, as she
had concluded it would be : — every thing depended, exactly
after her expectation, on his getting that preferment, of
• which, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance.
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings
was eager for information ; but as Elinor wished to spread
as little as possible intelligence that had in the first place
^been so unfairly obtained, she confined herself to the brief
Digitized by CjOOQ IC
258 SENSE AKD SEKSiBIUTy.
repetition of such simple particulars^ as she felt assured
that Lucy^ for the sake of her own consequence^ wovU
choose to have known. The continuance of their engage*
ment^ and the means that were to he taken for promoting
its end^ was all her communication ; and this produced from
Mrs. Jennings the following natural remark : —
*'Wait for his having a living ! — ay, we all know how
that will end :— they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding
no good comes of it, will set down upon a curacy of fifty
poimds a year, with the interest of his two thousand pounds,
and what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr. Pratt can give
her. Then they will have a child every year ! and. Lord
help'em ! how poor they will he ! I must see what I can
give them towards furnishing their house. Two maids and
two men, indeed ! as I talked of t* other day. No, no, they
must get a stout girl of all works. Betty's sister would
never do for them now "
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the twou
penny post from Lucy herself. It was as follows : —
•• Bardett's Buildings, March.
*'I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the lihertjr
I take of writing to her; but I know your friendship for
jne will make you pleased to hear such a good account of
myself and my dear Edward, after all the troubles we
have went through lately, therefore will make no more
apologies, but proceed to say that, thank Grod! though we
have suffered dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and
as happy as we must always be in one another's love. We
have had great trials, and great persecutions, but, however,
at the same time, gratefully acknowledge many friends,
yourself not the least among them, whose great Hndness I
shall always thankfully remember, as will Edward too,
who I have told of it. I am sure you will be glad to
hear, as likewise dear Mrs. Jennings, I spent two happy
hours with him yesterday afternoon : he would not hear of
our parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my duty
required, urge him to it for prudence sake, and would
have parted for ever on the spot, would he consent to it;
but he said it shotdd never be, he did not r^ard his mo-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
IIENSB AND SEK^BILITT'. " SSp
tfaer's anger^ while he could have my affections ; our pros-
pects are not very bright^ to be sure, but we must wait,
and hope for the best ; he will be ordained shortly ; and
should it ever be in your power to recommend him to any
body that has a living to bestow, am very sure you will
not forget us ; and dear Mrs. Jennings too, trust she will
Bpeak a good word for us to Sir John, or Mr. Palmer, or
imy firiend that may be able to assist us. — Poor Anne was
much to blame for what she did, but she did it for the
best, 80 I say nothing ; hope Mrs. Jennings won't think
it too much trouble to give us a call, should she come this
way any morning,'t would be a great kindness, and my
cousins would be proud to ^ow her. — My paper reminds
me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully and re-
•spectfully remembered to her, and to Sir John, and Lady
Middleton, and the dear children, when you chance to see
them, and love to Miss Marianne,
''I am, & c. & c. "
As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what
she concluded to be its writer's real design, by placing it
in the hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read it aloud with
many comments of satisfaction and praise.
*'Very well, indeed! — how prettily she writes! — ay,
that was quite proper to let him be off if be would. That
was just like Lucy. Poor soul ! I wish I could get him
a living, with all my heart. She calls me dear Mrs. Jen.
'nings, you see. She is a good-hearted girl as ever lived.
Very well, upon my word. That sentence is very prettily
turned. Yes, yes, I will go and see her, sure enough,
fiow attentive she is, to think of every body! — Thank
you, my dear, for showing it me. It is as pretty a letter
gs ever I saw, and does Lucy's head and heart great
credit. "
d by Google
240 gBNSB AKD SBNOBILITV.
CHAPTER III.
The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two
months in town, and Marianne's impatience to he gone
increased every day. She sighed for the air^ the libarty >
the quiet of the country ; and fancied^ that if any place
could give her ease^ Barton must do it. £linor was hardly
less anxious than herself for their removal^ and only so
much less bent on its being effected immediatdy^ as that
she was conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey^
which Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge. She
began^ however^ seriously to turn her thoughts towards its
accomplishment ; and had already mentioned their wishes
to their kind hostess^ who resisted them with all the elo«
quence of her good-will^ when a plan was euggested,
which^ though detaining them from home yet a few wedu
longer^ appeared to Elinor altogether much more eligible
than any other. The Palmers were to remove to Cleve-
land, about the end of March, for the Easter holidays;
and Mrs. Jennings, with both her friends, received a very
warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them. This
would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacy
of Miss Dashwood; but it was enforced with so mudi
real politeness by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the
very great amendment of his manners towards them mnee
her sister had been known to be unhappy, induced her to
accept it with pleasure.
When she told Marianne what she had done, however^
her first reply was not very auspicious.
** Cleveland!*'she cried, with great agitation.''No,
I cannot go to Cleveland. "
''You forget, " said Elinor, gently, " that its situation
is not — that it is not in the neighbourhood of "
''But it is in Somersetshire. I cannot go into Somer.
■etshire. There, where I looked forward to going ; — no,
Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there. "
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of over-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8»f«B AKD SENSIBILITY^ £41
tomrig itoch fedings; she eniy endeavoured to mm*'
teract them hy working on others; and represented it^
therefore^ as a measure whi < ^ would fix the time of her
returning to that dear modier^ whom she so much wished
to see^ in a more eligihle, more comfortable manner^ than
any other plan oould do^ uid perhaps without any greats
delay. From Cleveland^ which was within a few miles of
Bristol^ the distance to Barton was not beyond one day,
though a long day's journey ; and their mother's servant
in:^ht easily come there to attend them down ; and aa
tiiere could be no occasicm for their staying above a week
at Cleveland, they might now be. at home in little more
than three weeks'time. . As Marianne's affection for her
mother was sincere, . it must triuinph, with little difficulty,
over the imaginary evils she had started.
Mrs. Jennings was so fair from being weary of her
guests that she pressed them very earnestly to return with
her again from Cleveland. Elinor was grateful for the
attention, but it could not alter their design ; and their
mother's concurrence being readily gained, every thing
relative to their return was arranged as far as it could
be; and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a
;Btatement of the hours that were yet to divide her from
Barton.
'^ Ah ! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall
do without the Miss Dashwoods, " was Mrs. Jennings's
address to him when he first called on her, after their
leaving her was settled ; " for. they are quite resolved
upon going home frOm the Palmers; and how forlorn
we shall be when I come back ! Lord ! we shall sit and
gape at one another as dull as two cats. "
Peiiiaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous
sketch of their future ennui, to provoke him to make that
offer, which might give himself an escape from it ; and
if so, she had aoon afterwards good reason to think her
object gained ; for, on £linor's moving to the window to
take .more expeditiously the diitiensions of a print, which
•ahe was going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it
with. a look of particular meaning, and conversed with her
there for several minutes. The effect of hla discourse on
d by Google
te43 4nNIE AND SSIfaiBIUTr*
the fftdy, too^ could not escape lier obflerralion ; fbr tboagli
she was too honourable to listen^ and had even changed
her seat^ on purpose that she might net hear^ to one dose
by the piano-forte on which Marianne was playing^ she
could not keep herself from seeing that Elinor dianged
colour, attended with agitation, and was too intent on
what he said to pursue her employment Still farther
in confirmation of her hopes, in the interval of Mariannes
turning from one lesson to another, some words of the
Colonel's ineyitably reached her ear, in which he seemed
to be apologising for the badness of his house. This set
the matter beyond a doubt. She wondered, indeed, at Ms
thinking it necessary to do so ; but supposed it to be the
proper etiquette. What Elinor said in reply she could not
distinguish, but judged, from the motion of her lips, that
she did not think that any material objection ; and Mrs.
Jennings commended her in her heart for being so ho*
nest. They then talked on for a few minutes longer with-
out her catching a syllable, when another lucky stop in
Marianne's performance broi^ht her these words in the
Colonel's calm voice, —
'^ I am afraid it cannot take place very soon. "
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,
she was almost ready to cry out,''Lord ! what should
hinder it.^ " but checking her desire, confined herself to
this silent ejaculation, —
" This is very strange ! — sure he need not wait to be
older. "
This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem
to ofi^end or mortify his fair companion in the least ; for
on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards, and
moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings very plainly heard
Elinor say, and with a voice which showed her to feel
what she said, —
''I shall always think myself very much obliged to
you. "
Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and
only wondered, that, after hearing such a sentence, the
Colonel should be able to take leave of them, as he imme*
diately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go away witb-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
«nKfiB JkVn SBNSIBIIiZTT^ ^4S
out mdking her any reply ! She hud not thought har old
fjiend could have made so indi£ferent a suitor.
What had really passed hetween them was to this effect*
" I have heard, " said he, with great compassion,'^ of
the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from
his family ; for, if I understand the matter right, he has
been entirely cast off by them for persevering in his en^
gagement with a very deserving young woman* Have X
))een rightly informed ? Is it so ?''
Elinor told him that it was.
** The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty, " he replied, with
great feeling,'^ of dividing, or attempting to divide, tw < >
young people long attached to each other, is terrible. Mrs^
ferrars does not know what she may be doing — what she
may drive her son to. I have seen Mr. Ferrars two or
three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased with
Mm. He is not a young man with whom one can be
intimately acquainted in a short time, but I have seen .
.enough of him to wish him well for his own sake, and as
a friend of yours, I wish it still more. I understand that
he intends to take orders. Will you be so good as to tell
him that the living of Delaford, now just vacant, as I
am informed by this day s post, is his, if he think it worth
his acceptance; but that, perhaps, so unfortunately cirr
cumstanced as he is now, it may be nonsense to appear to
doubt ; I only wish it were more valuable. It is a rectory,
but a small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did not
make more than 200/. per annum; and though it is cer.
.tainly. capable of improvement, I fear not to such an
amount as to afford him a very comfortable income^ Such
-as it is, however, toy pleasure in presenting him to it
-will be very great. Pray assure him of it. "
Elinor s astopishment at this commission could hardly
have been greater had the Colonel been really making
her an offer of his hand* The preferment, which only
two days before she had considered as hopeless for Edward,
-was already provided to enable him to marry; BXid she,
of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it!
Her emotion was such as Mrs. Jennings had attributed to
.A very different cause; but whatever minor feelings less
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
$44 ^tatOA AXti BWieiBitJTfti
fju & , less pleasing, migbt have |i share in that emoiioii,
her esteem for the general benevolence, and her gratitude
for the particular friendship, whidi together prompted
Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmly
expressed. She thanked him for it with all her heartj
spoke of £dward*s principles and disposition with that
praise which she knew them to deserve; and promised
to undertake the commission with pleasure, if it wen
really his wish to put off so agreeable an office to anothen
But at the same time she could not help thinking that no
one could so w^ perform it as himself. It was an office,
in short, from which, unwilling to give Edward the pain
of receiving an obligation from her, she would have been
yery glad to be spared herself; but Colonel Brandon, on
motives of equal delicacy, declining it likewise, still seemed
80 desirous of its being given through her means, that shfe
urould not, on any account, make farther opposition. Ed-
ward, she believed, was still in to^n, and fortunately she
had heard his address from Miss Steele. She could un.
dertake therefore to inform him of it, in the course of the
day. After this had been settled. Colonel Brandon began
to talk of his own advantage in securing so respectaUe
and agreeable a neighbour, and then it was that he men-
tioned, with r^ret, that the house was small and indi£^-
«nt ; an evil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings had supposed
her to do, made very light of, at least as far as regarded
Its size.
^^ The smallness of the house,''said dhe, " I cannot
imagine any inconvenience to them ; for it will be in pro-
portion to their family and income. "
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that she was
considering Mr. Ferrais's marrii^ as the certain conse-
quence of the presentation ; for he did not suppose it pos-
sible that Delafbrd living could supply such an income as
any body in his style of life would venture to setde on, and
he said so.
*'This little rectory can do no more than make Mr. Femifs
comfortable as a bachelor; it canffotMiable him to many.
I am sorry to say that my patronage ends with this ; ami
my interest is hardly more extensive. If, however, by m
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBim Am 8EiraiBiiiXT7. 245
niifbreseen dianee it shofuld be in my power to serre him
hriher, I must diink very differently of bim from what I
now do^ if I am not as ready to be useful to him then as I^
siaeerely wish I could be at present. " ^Fhat I am now
doing, inde^^ seems nothing at all^ since it can advance'
him so Httb towards what must be his principal, his only
object of happiness^ His marri%e must still be a distant
good; at leasts I am afraid it cannot take place very-
soon. "
" Such was the sentence which > when misunderstood^ so
justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings ; but,^
after this narration of what really passed between Colonel
Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the window, the
gratitude expressed by & e latter on their parting may per*
haps appear, in geheral, not less reasonably excited, nor less
pi^perly wdrded, than if it had arisen from an offer of
marriage.
CHAPTER IV.
" Well, Miss Dashwood, " said Mrs. Jennings, sagaciously'
smiling, as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn, " I do,
not ask you what the Colonel has ,been saying to you ; for'
though, upon my honour, I tried to keep out of hearing, I;
c^uld not help catching enough to understand his business ;
and I assure you I never was better pleased in my life» and^
I wish you joy of it with aU my heart. "
.'^ Thank you, ma'am, " said Elinor. ^'Itia sl matter of
gceat joy to me, and I feel the goodness of Colonel Bran-\
don most fensibly. There are not many men who would
ac^ as he has done. Few people who have so compassionate
a heart ! I never was more astonished in my life. "
" Lord ! my dear, you are very modest I an't the
least astonished at it in the world; for I have often
thought, of. late, there was nothing more likely to .
happen.*'
» 3 "'
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
5246 BEttm Jam mmttBixJTr^
♦'You judged from your knowledge of the OoIoneVv
general beneYolence ; but at least you could not foresee that
die opportunity would so very soon occur. "
'^ Opportunity ! " repeated Mrs. Jennings. ** C*, as -to
that^ when a man has once made up his mind to such
a thing, somehow or other he will soon find an opporta*
nity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
again; and if ever there was a happy couple in the
world, I think I shall soon know where to look for them. "
'^ You mean to go to Delaford after thooa, I suppose,**
said Elinor, with a faint smile.
'^ Ay, my dear, that 1 do, indeed ; and as to the lioase
being a bad one, I do not know what the Colonel wMdd be
at, for it is as good a one as erer I saw.*'
^'He spoke of its being out of repair.*'■*
'« Well, and whose fault is that ? Why don*t be vepsir
it ? Who should do it but himself? "
They were interrupted by the servant's coming in to ia.
nounce the carriage being at the door ; and Mrs. Jennings,
immediately preparing to go, said,— •
" Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half
my talk out. But, however, we may have it all over in die
evening ; for we shall be quite alone. I do not ask jou to
go with me, for I dare say your mind is too full of the rnait*
ter to care for company ; and, besides, you must long to teU
your sister all about it "
Marianne had left the room before the conversadon
began.
'^ Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it ; Imt I
shall not mention it at present to any body else. "
''^Oh, very well, " said Mrs. Jennings, rather disap-
pointed. ** Then you would not have me tell it Lucj^ for
I think of going as far as Holbom to-day. "
*'No, ma'am, not even Lucy, if you please. One day's
dfelay will not be very material ; and, till I have written to
Mr. Ferrars, I think it ought not to be mentioned to any
body else. I shall do ^t directly. It is of importance
that no dme should be lost with him ; for he wiH of course
have much to do relative to his ordinadon. "
This speech at first puzzled Mrs, Jennings ezoeedinf^y.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
gBNIB Am SBiraiBIUTT. 347
Why Mr. Ferran was to be written to about it in such a
hiirry she could not immediately comprehend, A few mo«
ments'reflection^ however^ produced a very happy idea ;
and die exdaimed, —
'f Oh^ ho ! I understand you, Mr. Ferrars is to be the
ti»n. Well, 80 much the better for him. Ay, to- be
sore, he must be ordained in readiness ; and I am very
gM to find things are so forward between you. But, my
dear, is not this rather out of character ? Should not the«
Cdonel write himself? Sure, he is the proper person. "
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs.
i^emungB's speech, neither did she think it worth enquiring
filtD; ttid therefore only repUed to its conclusion.
" Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather
wished any one to announce his intentions to Mr, Ferrara
tittn himself. "
" And so you are forced to do it. Well, that is an odd
kind of delicacy ! However, I will not disturb you (seeing
her. piepating to write). You know your own concema
best So good-by, my dear. I have not heard of any
thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought
tobed*'*
And away she went; but returning again in a mo^
ment, —
*'I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear,.
I should be very ^d to get her so good a mistress. But
whether she would do for a lady's maid, I am sure I can't
teU. She is an excellent housemaid, and works very well
at her needle. However, you will think of aH that at your
leisure. "
" Certainly, ma'am, " replied Elinor, not hearing much of
what she said, and more anxious to be alone than to be mia^
tress of the subject
How she should begin, — how she should express herself
in her note to Edward, — was now all her concern. The
particular circumstances between them made a difficulty of
that which to any other person would have been the easiest
thing in the world ; but she equally feared to say too much
vr too litde, and sat deliberating over her paper > with the
B 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
248 tBKKBE AND IBNIIBUilTr.
pen in her buid^ tiH broken in on by the entrance of
Edward himself.
He had met Mrs. Jennings at ihe door, in her way to
the carriage, as he came to leave his farewell card ; and sh^
after apologising for not returning herself, had oUiged him
to enter, by saying that Miss Dashwood was above, .and
wanted to speak with him on very particular business.
£linor had just been congratulating herself, in die midst
of her perplexity, that however difficult it might be to ex*
press hersdf properly by letter, it was at least preferable to
giving the information by word of mouth, when her visiter
^teted^ to force her upon this greatest exertim of aU. Her
astonishment and confusion were very great on his so sud--:
den appearance. She had not seen him befbre since his
engagement became public, and therefore not since laa
knowing her to be acquainted with it ; which, with die
oonsdousness of what she had been thinking of, and what
die had to teQ him, made her feel pardcularly uncomfort-
able for some minutes. He, too, was much distressed; and
diey sat down together in a most promising state of embar-
nusment. Whether he had asked her pardon for his intru-
sion on first coming into the room, he could not recollect ;
but, determining to be on the safe side, he made his apology
in form, as soon as he could say any thing, after taking a
chair.
''Mrs. Jennings told me, " said he, ** that you wished
to speak with me, at least I understood her 00, — or I cer*
tainly should not have intruded on you in such a manner ;
though, at the same dme, I should have been actremcly
sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister ;i
especially as it will most likely be some time — it i^ not
probable that I should soon have the pleasure of meeting'
you again. I go to Oxford to-morrow. "
.'^ You would not have gone, however,*'said Elinor, re.
covering herself, and determined to get over what she so
much dreaded as soon as possible, ^'without receiving our
0ood wishes, even if we had not been able to give them in
person. Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she satd^
I have something of consequence to inform you of, whidii
I was on the point of communicating by paper. I am
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
9BV8S AND SBNOBUiITT. £49
charged with a most agreeahle office (breathing rather
faster than udual as she spoke). Colonel Brandon^ wha
-was here only ten minutes ago^ has desired me to say, that^
imderstandJing you mean to take orders, he has great pleasure
m offering you the living of Pelaford, now just vacant, and
only wishes it were more valuable. Allow me to congratulate
you on having so respectable and well-judging a friend,,
and to join in his wish that the living-^ it is about two
hundred a year -^ were much more considerable, and such
as might better enable you to — as might be more than a
temponiry accommodation to yourself — such, in short, aa
might establish all your views of happiness. "'
What £dward felt, as he could not say it himself, it
canuot be expected that any one else diould say for him.
He koked all the astonishment which such unexpected,
such unthought of information could not fail of exciting ;
but he said only these two words, -~
''^ Cdonel Brandon I "
*^ Yes, " continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, aa
some of the worst was over ;'^ Colonel Brandon means it
as a testimony of his concern for what has lately passed,— «
for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of
your family has placed you, — a concern, which I am sure
Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share ; afid,
likewise, as a proof of his high esteem for your general
character, and his particular approbation of your, behaviour
on the present occasion/'
''Colonel Brandon give me a living ! Can it be pos.
able.? "
*^ The unkindness of your own relations has made yoa^
astonished to fiod friendship any where. " ^
" No, " replied he, with sudden consciousness,'^ not to
find it in you; for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to
your goodness, I owe it alL I feel it — I would express
it if I could — but, as you well know, I am no orator. "
^'You are very much mistaken. I do assure you that
you owe it entirely, at least almost entirely, to your own
merit, and Colonel Brandons discernment of it. I. have
had no hand in it. I did not even know, till I understood
bis d^signj that the living was vacant; nor had it ever
d by Google
t50 SBNM AifB SENfilBILlTT^
occurred to me that he might have had such a Imng in )ak
gift. Ab a friend of mine^ of my family^ he may^ perhaps,
indeed I know he has, still greater pkaaure in bestowing it ;
but, upon my word, you owe nothing to my solicitation*''
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in
the action ; but she was at the same time so unwilling to
appear as the benefactress of Edward, that she acknow-
ledged it with hesitation; which probably contributed to
fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently entered
it. For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor
bad ceased to speak; at last, and as if it were rather- an
effort, he said, —
'^ Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and
reqpectability. I have always heard him spoken of as such^
and your brother I know esteems him highly. He is un*'
doubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners perfectly the
gentleman. "
^'Indeed, " replied Elinor, " I believe that you will find
him, on farther acquaintance, all that you have heard him
to be ; and as you will be such very near neighbours (for
I understand the parsonage is almost close to the mansion-
house) it is particularly important that he shauid be all
this. "
Edward made no answer; but when she had tamed
away Jier head, gave her a look so serious^ so earnest, so
nncheerful, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter wish
the distance between the parsonage and the mansion-houac
much greater.
'^ Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James's Street, "
said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.
Elinor told him the number of the house.
^'I must hurry away, then, to give him those thanks
which you will not allow me to give pou; to assure him
that he has made me a very — an exceedingly happy man.**
Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted^
with a very earnest assurance on her side of her unceasing
good wishes for his happiness in every change of situatum.
that might befiEdl him ; on his, with rather an attempt to
return the same good will, than the power of expreaaiag it
^* When I see him again, " said Elinor to herself^ at ifafr
d by Google
8XNSB XSn SBKSIBILItr^ 851
door shut him out,'^ I shall see him the hushand of
Lticy/'
And with this pleasing anticipation she sat down to re»
consider the past^ recall the words^ and'endeaYOur to
comprehend all the feelings of Edward ; and^ of course^ to
leiect on her own with discontent.
When Mrs. Jennings came home^ though she retomed
^m seeing people whom she had nerer seen before, and of
whom, therefore,'she most have a great deal to say, het
mind was so much more occupied by the important secret
in her possession, than by any thing else, that she reverted
to it i^ain as soon as EHnor appeared.
'* Well, my dear, " she cried, " I sent yon up the young
man. Did not I do right ? And I suppose you had no
great difficulty — you did not find him very unwilling to
accept your proposal? "
'^ No, ma'am ; that was not very likely. "
'* Well, and how soon will he be ready ? For it seema
all to depend upon that. "
*'Really, " said Elinor, ^'I know so little of these kind
of forms, that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time,
or the preparation necessary ; but, I suppose two or three
months will complete his ordination. "
** Two or three months I " cried Mrs. Jennings :'^ Lord !
my dear, how calmly you talk of it ; and can the Colonel
wait two or three months ! Lord bless me ! I am sure it ,
would put me quite out of patience! And though one
would be very glad to'do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars,
I do think it is not worth while to wait two or three
months for him. Sure, somebody else might be found that
would do as well ; somebody that is in orders already. "
^'My dear ma'am, " said EUnor,'^ what can you be
thinking of? Why, Colonel Brandon's only olject is to
be of use to Mr. Ferrars. "
''Lord bless you, my dear ! Sure yon do not mean
ta persuade me Uiat the Colonel only marries you for the
sake of giving ten guineas to Mr. Ferrars ! "
The deeeption could not continue after this; and an
ex|ilanation immediately took place, by which both gained
eoondaraiUe amusement for the moment^ without any
Digitized by LjOOQIC
itSft turn anb sBiraiBiitiTT*
material loaa of happiness to ei & er; for Mrs. Jennings onlf
exchanged one form of delight for another^ and still wtth- >
oat forfeiting her expectation of the first
^^ Ay > ay, the parsonage is hut a small one/'said she,
a£ter the first ehuflition of surprise and satisfaction was
over, " and very likely map he out of repair ; hat to hear
a man apologising, as I thought, for a house that to my
knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor, and
I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen
beds! and to you, too, that had heen used to live in
Barton Cottage! It seemed quite ridiculoas. But, my
dear, we must touch up the Cdonel to do something ta
Uie parsonage, and make it comfortahle for them, befbre
Lucy goes to it "
'^ But Colonel Brandon does not seeni to have any idea
of the living's being enough to allow them to marry/'
'* The Coloiiel is a ninny, my dear ; because he has
two thousand a year himself, he thinks that nobody else
can marry on less. Take my word for it, diat, if I am
adive, I shall be paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage before
Michadbaas; and I am sure I shan't go if Lucy an*t
there. "
£linor was quite of her opinion as to the probability of
their not waiting for any thing more.
CHAPTER V.
Edward, having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon,
proceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and such was the
excess of it by the time he reached Bartlett's Buildings,
that die was able to assure Mrs. Jennings^ who caUed on
her again the next day with her congratulations, diat she
had never seen him in such spirits before in her life.
Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least
very certain ; and she joined Mrs. Jennings most heartily
in her expectation of their being all comfortaUy tc^getfaer'
Digitized " by LjOOQ IC
▲NO SBNttBUaTW S5$
in Ddaford Pahnnage before Mtcbaelinas. So far l^as
she^ at the same time, from any backwardneEs to giv«
£liiior that credit which Edward w & uki give her^ that she
spoke of her frioAdship for them both with the most grate-
ful warmth^ was ready to own all their obligation to her^
and apeoly declared that no exertion for their good on
Miss Dashwood^a part^ either present or future, would ever
surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing
in the world for thote she really valued. As for Colonel
Brandon, abe was not only ready to worship him as a
saint, but was, moreover, truly anxious that he should b^
treated as one in all w(»ldly concerns ; anxious that his
tithes should be raised to the utmost ; and secretly resolved
to avail herself, at Delaford, as far as she possibly could,
of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.
It was now above a week since John Pashwood hadi
called in Berkeley Street, and as since that time no notice
bad been taken by them of his wife's indisposition, beyond
one verbal enquiry, Elinor b^an to feel it necessary to pay
her a visit. This was an obligation, however, which not
only opposed her own indiination, but which had not the
aasistaBce of any encouragement fh > m her companions.
Marianne, not contented with absolutely refusing to. go
herself, was very urgent to prevent her sister s going at all;
and. Mrs. Jennings, though h» carriage was always at
Eliner's service, so very much disliked Mrs. John Dash-
wood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked
after the late discovery, nor her strong desire to affl-ont
her by taking Edward's part, could overcome her unwiL
lingness to be in her company again. The consequence
was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit, for
which no one could really have less inclination, and to
run the risk of a tete.^tete with a woman whom neither
of the others had so much reason to dislike.
Mrs. Pashwood was denied ; . but before the carriagi^
could turn from the house, her husband accidentally came
out. He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor, told
her that, he had been just going to call in Berkeley Streetj
and assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to sef
her^ invited her to come in.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
254 «BK82 AND aBNflIBIUTr»
They walked up stain into the drawing-nxmu Ho^
body was there.
" Fanny is in her own room > I suppose/'said he:
^^ I will go to her presently^ for I am sure she will not
have the least objection in the world to seeing you. Very
far from it^ indeed. Now especially there cannot be — bu^
however^ you and Marianne were always great favourites.
'Why would not Marianne come ? "
Elinor made what excuse she could for her.
** I am not sorry to see you alone, " he replied^ " for I
have a good deal to say to you. This living of Colond
Brandon's — can it be true ? has he really given it to
Edward ? I heard it yesterday by chance, and was com-
ing to you on purpose to enquire farther about it. "
^'It is perfectly true. Colonel Brandon has given the
living of Delaford to Edward. "
^'Really ! Well, this is very astonishing ! — no re-
lationship ! — no connection between them ! — and now
that livings fetch such a price! — what was the value of
this? "
^^ About two hundred a year. "
•'* Very well — and for the next presentation to a living
of that value — supposing the late inctunbent to have been
oid and sickly, and Ukely to vacate it soon — he might
have got, I dare say — fourteen hundred pounds. And
how came he not to have settled that matter before this
person's death ?'Now, indeed, it would be too late to sell
it, but a man of Colonel Brandon's sense ! I wonder he
should be so improvident in a point of such common, such
natural, concern ! Well, I am convinced that there is a
vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human character.
I suppose, however — on recollection — that the case may
probably be this. Edward is only to hold the living till
the person to whom the Colonel has really sold the present*
ation is old enough to take it Ay, ay, that is the fact,
depend upon it. "
Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively ; and by
relating that she had herself been employed in conveying
the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward, and thereforv
d by Google
0SNSB ANO SBKBIBIUTT. 255
miiBt understand the terms on which it was glyeo^ ob%ed
him to submit to her authority.
'^ It is truly astonidiing \ " he cried^ after hearing what
she said : ^'what could be liie Colond's motive. "
" A very simple one, — to be of use to Mr. Ferrars.**
'* Well, well ; whatcrcr Colbnd Brandon may be, Ed-
ward is a very lucky man. You will not mention the
matter to Fanny, however ; for though I have broke it to
her, and she bears it vastly well, she will not like to hear
it much talked of. "
Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing,
that she thought Fanny might have borne with composure
an acquisition of wealth to her brother, by which neither
she nor her child could be possibly impoverished.
** Mrs. Ferrars, " added he, lowering his voice to the
tone becoming so important «a subject, " knows nothing
about it at present ; and I believe it wiU be best to keep it
entirely concealed from her as long as may be. When the
marriage takes place, I fear, she must hear of it all. "
** But why should such precaution be used } Though it
is not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have the
smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son has money
enough to live upon, for that must be quite out of the
question-; yet why, after her late behaviour, is she supposed
to feel at all ? She has done with her son, — she has cast
him off for ever, and has made all those over whom she bad
any influence cast him off likewise. Surely, after doing so,
she cannot be imagined liable to any impression of sorrow
or of joy on his account : she cannot be interested in any
thing that befalls him. She would not be so weak as to
throw away the comfort of a chOd, and yet retain the
anxiety of a parent ! **
'^ Ah ! Elinor,*'said John, ^* your reasoning is very
good ; but it is founded on ignorance of human nature.
When Edward's unhappy match takes ]Jace, depend upon
it, his mother will feel as much as if she had never dis.
carded him; and therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event must be concealed from her as
much as possible. Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that £d^
ward is hei^ son*'
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
I
S56 SEN8B AND SBN6IB11.ITT.
''You surprise me : I should think it must nearly h«t^
escaped her memory by this time. "
"'You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs. Ferrars is one of
the most affectionate mothers in the world.*'
EHnor was silent.
** We ihink now, " said Mr. Dashwood^ after a short
pause^ " of Robertas marrying Miss Morton. "
£linor^ smiling at the grave and dedsiye importance of
her brother*s tone^ calmly replied^ —
'* " The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair. "
'^ Choice ! how do you mean ? "
'^ I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of
speaking, it must be the same to Miss Morton whether dife
marry Edward or Robert. "
" Certainly, there can be no difference ; for Robert will
now, to all intents and purposes, be considered as the dde^
son ; and, as to any thing else, they are both verj agree*
able young men : I do not know that one is superior to ihe
other. "
Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time
silent His reflections ended thus : —
'^ Of one thing, my dear sister, " kindly taking her hand,
and speaking in an awful whisper, ^'I may assure you ; and
I foiil do it, because I know it must gratify you.* I have
good reason to think — indeed I have it from ike best an.
Ihority, or I should not repeat it ; for otherwise it would be
Tory wrong to say any thing about it, — but I have it from
die very best authority, — not that I ever precisely heard
Mrs. ferrars say it herself, but her daughter did, and I
liave it from her, — that, in short, whatever objections there
might be against a certain — a certain connection, you an.
derstand me, — it would have been far preferable to her, —
it would not have given her half the vexation that this
does. I was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. F^rais
oonmdered it in that light ; a very gratifying drcumstanoe,
you know, to us all. ^ It would have be«n beyond oompa.
rison,'she said,'the least evil of the two ; and she would
be glad to compound now for nothing worse.'But, how-
ever, all that is quite out of the question^ * < ^ not to be
thought of, or mentioned. As to any attachment, jam.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
flSZrgB Am > SBNUBUiITT. 257
know, it never could be : all that is gone by. But I
thought I would just tell you of tfais^ because I knew how
much it must please you. Not that you have any reasoa
to r^ret^ my dear £]inor : there is no doubt of your doing
exceedingly weU^ — quite as well, or better^ perhaps^ all
things considered. Has Colonel Brandon been with you
lately? "
..^nor had heard enough^ if not to gratify her vanity
and raise her sdf-importanoe, to agitate her nerves and fill
her mind ; and she was therefore glad to be spared from
the necessity of saying much in reply herself^ and froip
Ae danger of hearing any thing more from her brother^ by
the entrance of Mr. Robert Perrars. After a few mo-
ments'chat^ John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was
yet uninformed of his sister s being there, quitted the room
in ^ quest of her; and £linor was left to improve her
acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay unconcern, the
happy self-complacency of his manner, while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother 8 love and liberality, to the
prejudice of his banished brother, earned only by his own
dissipated course of life and that brother's int4;rity, was
confirming her most unfavourable opinion of his head and
heart.
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, be-
fiDore he began to speak of Edward; for he, too, had heard of
the living, and was very inquisitive on the suliject. Elinor
repeated the particulars of it, as she had given them to
•Mm ; and their efibct on Robert, though very difibrent^
was not less striking than it had been on him. He
laughed most immoderately. The idea of Edward's being
a clergyman, and living in a small parsonage-house, di.
verted him beyond measure ; and when to that was added
the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white
surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between
John Smith and Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing
more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovable gnu-
vity the conclusion of such foUy, could not restrain her eyea
from being fixed on him with a look that spoke all the con-
tempt it excited. It was a look, however^ very well.be.
s
Digitized by Google
S58 . 8BNSB AND BBN8IBILITT*
Stowed; for it relieyed her own feelings^ and gave no
intelligence to him. He was recalled from wit to wisdom^
not by any reproof of hers^ bat by his own sensibility.
'^ We may treat it as a joke, " said he^ at last^ recovering
from the affected laugh which had considerably lengthened
out the genuine gaiety of the mcxnent ; ^^ but^ upon my
soul^ it is a most serious business. Poor £dward ! he is
ruined for ever. I am extremely sorry for it ; for I know
him to be a very good-hearted creature^ — as welLmeaning
a fe11o#^ perhaps^ as any in the world. You must not
judge of him^ Miss Dashwood^ from your slight acquaint,
ance. Poor Edward ! His manners are certainly not the
happiest in nature. But we are not all bom^ you know^
with the same powers^ — the same address. Poor fellow !
to see him in a circle of strangers ! To be sure it was
pitiable enough ; but^ upon my soul, I believe he has as
good a heart as any in the kingdom ; and I declare and
protest to you, I never was so shocked in my life as when
it all burst forth. I could not believe it. My mother was
the first person who told me of it ; and I, feeling myself
called on to act with resolution, immediately said to her, —
'My dear madam^ I do net know what you may intend to
do on the occasion ; but as for myself, I must say, that if
Edward does marry this young woman, / never will see
him again.'That was what I said immediately. I was^
most uncommonly shocked, indeed. Poor Edward ! he has
done for himself completely, — shut himself out for ever
from an decent society ! But, as I directly said to my mo*
ther. Lam not in the least surprised at it : from his style of
education, it was always to be expected. My poor mother
was half frantic. "
" Have you ever seen the lady ? "
" Yes ; once, while ^he was staying in this house, I
happened to drop in for ten minutes; and I saw quite
enough of her: the merest awkward country girl^ > with-
out style, or elegance, and almost without beauty. I
remember her perfectly. Just the kind of girl I should
suppose likely to captivate poor Edward. I offered imme*
diatdy, as soon as my mother related the affidr to me, to
talk lo. him myself^ and dissuade him from. the match ; but
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ffBSSB AND SENSIBILITY* 259
it was too late then, I found, to do any thing ; for, un-
luckily, I was not in the way at first, and knew nothing of
it till after the hreach had taken place, when it was not for
me, you know, to interfere. But, had I been informed of
it a few hours earlier, I think it is most probable that
something might have been hit on. I certainly should haye
represented it to Edward in a very strong light.'My
dear fellow,'I should have said, ^ consider what you are
doing. You are making a most disgraceful connection,
and such a one as your family are unanimous in disap.
proring.'I cannot help thinking, in short, that means
might have been found ; but now it is all too late. He
must be starved, you know^ that is certain; absolutely
starved. " ;
He had just settled this point with great composure,
when the entrance of Mrs. John Dash wood putiin end to
the subject. But though she never spoke of it out of her
own family, Elinor could see its influence on her mind in
the sometldng like confusion of countenance with which she
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to
herself. She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find
that Elinor and her sister were so soon to leave town, as she
had hoped to see more of them ; an exertion in which her
husband, who attended her into the room, and hung en-
amoured over her accents, seemed to distinguish every thing
that was most affectionate and graceful.
CHAPTER VI.
One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor
received her brother's congratulations on their travelling so
far towards Barton without any expense, and on Colonel
Brandon's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or
two, completed the'intercourse of the brother and sisters
in town ; and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to
JN'orland whenever it should happen to be in their way,
s 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
360 S9N0B AND 8ENSIBIUT¥.
which of all things was the most unlikely to occur^ with
a more wann^ though less public^ assurance^ from John to
£linor^ of the promptitude with which he should come to
see her at Delaford^ was all that foretold any meeting in
the country.
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed
determined to send her to Delaford; a place^ in which,
of all others, she t^uld now least choose to visit, or wish
to reside; for not only was it considered as her fiiture
home by her brother and Mrs. Jennings^ but even Lucy,
when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit
her there.
Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the
two parties from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set
out from their respective homes, to meet, 1^ appointmoit,
on the road. For the convenience of Charlotte and her-
child, they were to be more than two days on their journey ;
and Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colond
Brandon, was to join them at CleveUmd soon after Hidr
arrival.
Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in
London, and eager as she had long been to quit it, could
not, when it came to the point, bid adieu to the house in
which she had for the last time enjoyed those hopes, and
that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now extin.
guished for ever, without great pain. Nor could she leave
the place in which Willoughby remained^ busy in new
engagements, and new schemes, in which she could have
no share, without shedding many tears.
Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was
more positive. She had no such object for her lingering
thoughts to fix on ; she left no creature behind, from whom
it would give her a moment's regret to be divided for
ever ; she was pleased to be free herself from the persecu.
tion of Lucy's friendship ; she was grateful for bringing
her sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage ;
and she looked forward with h(^ to what a few months
of tranquillity at Barton might do towards restoring Ma-
rianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.
Their journey was safely performed. The second daj
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
, BBNSE AND SEKBIBIUTT. 26l
brought them into the cherished^ or the prohibited^ county
of Somerset ; for as such was it dwelt on by turns in Ma-
rianne's imagination ; and in the forenoon of the third
they droTe up to Cleveland.
CleveUnd was a spacious^ modem-bidlt house^ situated
on a sloping lawn. It had no park^ but the pleasure-
grounds were tolerably extensive; and, like every other
place of the same degree of importance, it had its open
shrubbery, and closer wood walk ; a road of smooth gravel,
winding round a plantation, led to the front ; the lawn was
dotted over with timber ; the house itself was under the
guardianship of the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia,
and a thick screen of them altogether, interspersed with
tall Lombardy poplars, shut out the offices.
Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with
emotion from the consciousness of being only eighty miles
from Barton, and not thirty from Combe Magna; and
before she had been ^ve minutes within its walls, while the
others were busOy helping Charlotte to show her child to
the housekeeper, she quitted it again, stealing away through
the winding shrubberies, now just beginning to be in
beauty, to gain a distant eminence ; where, from its Gre-
cian temple, her eye, wandering over a wide tract of coun*.
try to the south-east, could fondly rest on the farthest ridge
of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from their summits
Combe Magna might be seen.
In such moments of precious, of invaluable misery, she
rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ; and as she
returned by a different circuit to the house, feeling all the
happy privil^e of country liberty, of wandering from
place to place in free and luxurious solitude, she resolved
to spend almost every hour of every day, while she remained
with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary
rambles.
She returned just in time to join the others, as they
quitted the house, on an excursion through its more im-
mediate premises ; and the rest of the morning was easily
whiled away in lounging round the kitchen garden, ex-
amining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to the
gardener's lamentations upon bhghts, — in dawdling through
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
262 BEN8B AKD SENSIBILmr.
the greenhouse^ where the loss of her favourite plants^ mt-
warily exposed, and nipped by the lingering frost, raised
the laughter of Charlotte, — and in visiting her poultry-
yard, where, in the disappointed hopes of her dairy.maid^
by hens forsaking their nests, or being stolen by a fox^ or
in the rapid decease of a promising young brood, sbe
found fresh sources of merriment.
The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in her
plan of employment abroad, had not calculated for any
change of weatlier during their stay at Cleveland. With
great surprise, therefore, did she find herself prevented, by
a settled rain, from going out again after dinner. She
had depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple^
and perhaps all over the grounds, and an evening merely
cold or damp would not have deterred her from it ; but a
heavy and settled rain even she could not fancy dry or
pleasant weather for walking.
Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly
away. Mrs. Palmer had her child, and Mrs. Jennings
her carpet. work : they talked of the friends they had left
behind; arranged Lady Middleton's engagements, and
wondered whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would
get farther than Reading that night. Elinor, however
little concerned in it, joined in their discourse ; and Ma-
rianne, who had the knack of finding her way in every
house to the library, however it might be avoided by the
family in general, soon procured herself a book.
Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side that con.
stant and friendly good-humour could do, to make them
feel themselves welcome. The openness and heartiness
of her manner more than atoned for that want of recoU
lection and elegance which made her often deficient in
the forms of politeness ; her kindness, recommended by so
pretty a face, was engaging; her folly, though evident,
was not disgusting, because it was not conceited ; and
Elinor could have forgiven every-^ thing but her laugh.
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late
dinner, affording a pleasant enlargement of the party, and
a very welcome variety to their conversation, which a long
d by Google
SENSE AND SENSIBIIilTT.. 263
liaoniing of the. same continued rain had reduced very
low.
Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer^ and in that
little had seen so much variety in his address to her sister
and herself, that she knew not what to expect to find him
in his own family. She found him, however, perfectly
the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visiters, and only
occasionally rude to his wife and her mother ; she found
him very capable of being a pleasant companion, and only
prevented from being so always, by too great an aptitude
to fancy himself as much superior to people in general,
as he must feel himself to be to Mrs. Jennings and Char-
lotte. For the rest of his character and habits, they were
mariced, as far as £linor could perceive, with no traits at
all unusual in his sex and time of life. He was nice in
his eating, uncertain in his hours ; fond of his child, though
afiecting to slight it; and idled away the mornings at
billiards, which ought to have been devoted to business.
She liked him, however, upon the whole, much better than
she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that she
ooiuld like him no more ; not sorry to be driven by the
observation of his epicurism, his sdfishness, and his con-
cseit, to rest with complacency on the remembrance of
£dward*s generous temper, simple taste, and diiSident
feelings*
Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now
received intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been
into Dorsetshire lately ; and who, treating her at once as
the disinterested friend of Mr. Ferrars, and the kind con-
fidant of himself, talked to her a great deal of the parson-
age at Delaford, described its deficiencies, and told her
what he meant to do himself towards- removing them.
His behaviour to her in this, as well as in every other
^particular, his open pleasure in meeting her after an absence
of only ten days, his readiness to converse with her, and
his deference for her opinion, might very well justify
Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment, and would
have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still, as from
die first, believed Marianne his real favourite, to make her
Buspect it herself. But as it was, such a notion had
8 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
£64 8EN8B AND S£K8IBIUTY»
icurody ever entered her head, except by Mrs. Jennings's
suggestion ; and she could not help believing herself the
nicest observer of. the two : she watched his eyes, while
Mrs. Jennings thought only of his behaviour ; and while
his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in
her head and throat, the beginning of a heavy cold, b^
cause unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the latter
lady's observation, — the could discover in them the quick
feelings, and needless alarm of a lover.
Two delightful twilight walks on the third and foarth
evenings of her being there, not merely on the dry gravel
of the shrubbery, but all over the grounds, and especiaHy
in the most distant parts of them, where there was some-
thing more of wildness than in the rest, where the tsees
were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
had — assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting
'in her wet shoes and stockings — given Marianne a cold so
violent, as, though for a day or two trifled with or denied,
would force itself by increasing ailments on the concern of
every body, and the notice of herself. Prescriptions
poured in from all quarters, and, as usual, were aU dedined.
Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest was to cure
her entirely ; and it was with difliculty that Elinor pre-
vailed on iier, when she went to bed, to try one or two of
the simplest of the remedies.
CHAPTER VII.
Mariannb got up the next morning at her usual time ; to
every enquiry replied that she was better, and tried to prove
herself so, by enaging in her accustomary employments. But
a day spent in sitting shivering over the fire with a book la
her hand, which she was unable to read, or in lying, weaiy
and languid, on a sofa^ did'not speak much in favour of .he| >
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BNSB AMD SEMSIBIIiITY.'26d
amendment; and when^ at last^ she went early to bed^
more and more indisposed^ Colonel Brandon was only afr*
tonialied at her sister's composure^ who^ though attending
and nursing her the whole day^ against Marianne's inclin-
ation^ and forcing proper medicines on her at nighty trusted^
like Marianne^ to the certainty and efficacy of ideep^ and
felt uo real alarm.
A very restless and feverish nighty however^i disappointed
the expectation of both ; and when Marianne^ after per-i
siating in risings confessed herself unable to sit up^ and
returned voluntarily to her bed^ Elinor was very ready to
adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice^ of sending for the Palmers'
apothecary.
He came^ examined his patient^ and though encouraging^
Miss Dash wood to expect that a very few days would re- >
store her sister to healthy yet^ by pronouncing her disorder
to have a putrid tendency^ and allowing the word'^ infec-^
tion " to pass his lips^ gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer^
on her baby's account. Mrs. Jennings^ who had been
inclined from the first to think Marianne's complaint more
serious .than Elinor^ now looked very grave on Mr. Harris's
report^ and confirming Charlotte's fears and caution, iu*ged
the necessity of her immediate removal with her infant ;
and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as
idle, found the anxiety* and importunity of his wife too
great to be withstood. Her departure, therefore, was fixed
cm ; and, within an hour after Mr. Harris's arrival, she set
6S, with her little boy and his nurse, for the house of a
near relation of Mr. Palmer's, who lived a few miles on the
other side of Bath ; whither her husband promised, at her
earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two ; and whither
she was almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany
her. Mrs. Jennings, however, with a kindness of heart which ^
made Elinor really love her, declared her resolution of not
stirring from Cleveland as long as Marianne remained ill,
and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care, to supply
to her the place of the mother she had taken her from ;
and Elinor found her, on every occasion, a most wUling and
active helpmate, desirous to share in all her fatigues, and
often, by her better experience in nursing, of material use.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
S66
SBKBE AVm BElNSIBILITr.
Poor Marianne^ languid and low from the nature of hef
malady^ and feeling herself universally ill^ could no longer
hope that to-morrow would ^nd her recovered ; and the
idea of what to-morrow would have produced^ hut for this
unlucky illness^ made every ailment more severe ; for on
that day they were to have hegun their journey home ; and,
attended the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings,
were to have taken their mother by siH^rise on the follow*
ing forenoon. The little that she said was all in lament-
ation of this inevitable delay ; though £linor tried'to raise
her spirits, and make her believe, as she then really be-
lieved herself, that it would be a very short one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in the state
Of the patient ; she certainly was not better, and^ except
that there was no amendment, did not appear worse. Their
party was now farther reduced ; for Mr. Palmer, though
very unwilling to go, as well from real humanity and good*
nature as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by his wife, was persuaded at last, by Colonel Brandon, to
perform his promise of following her ; and while he was
preparing to go. Colonel Brandon himself, with a much
greater exertion, began to talk of going likewise. Here >
however, the kindness of Mrs. Jennings interposed most
acceptably ; for to send the Colonel away while his love
was in so much uneasiness on her sister s account would
be to deprive them both, she thought, of ^ every comfort;
and, therefore, telling him at once that his stay at Cleveland
was necessary to herself; that she should want him to play
at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dashwood was above
with her sister, & c. she urged him so strongly to remain^
that he, who was gratifying the first wish of his own heart
by a compliance, could not long even affect to demur ;
especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty was warmly seconded
by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself io
leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or adviae
Miss Dashwood in any emergence.
Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these
arrangements. She knew not that she had been the means
of sending the owners of Cleveland away, in about seven
days from the time of their arrival. It gave her no sur-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENBtBIunT. i & f
prise that she saw nothing of Mrs. Pabner ; and as it
gave her likewise no concern^ she never mentioned her
name.
Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's
departure; and her situation continued^ with little van!
ation^ the same. Mr. Harris^ who attended her every day^
stiil talked boldly of a speedy recovery ; and Miss Dash-
wood was ^ually sanguine; but the expectation of th^
others was by no means so cheerful. Mrs. Jennings had
determined^ very^early in the seizure^ that Marianne would
never get over it ; and Colonel Brandon, who was chiefly
of use in listening to Mrs. Jennings's forebodings, was not
in a state of mind to resist their influence. He tried to
season himself out of fears, which the different judgment
of the apothecary seemed to render absurd ; but the many
hours of each day in which he was left entirely alone were
but too favourable for the admission of every melancholy
idea; and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion
that he should see Marianne no more.
On the morning of the third day, however, the gloomy
anticipations of both were almost done away; for when
Mr. Harris arrived, he declared his patient materially
better. Her pulse was much stronger, and every symptom
more favourable than on the preceding visit. Elinor, con*
finned in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; re-
joicing that, in her letters to her mother, she had pursued
her own judgment rather than her friend's, in making very
light of the indisposition which delayed < them at Cleveland ;
and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be
Me to travel.
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began.
Towards the evening Marianne became ill again, growing
more heavy, restless, and uncomfortable than before. Hev
sister, however, still sanguine, was willing to attribute the
change to nothing more than the fatigue of having sat up
to have her bed made; and careAilly administering the
cordials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction, sink at last
into a slumber, from which she expected the most bene-
ficial effects. Her sleep, though not so quiet as Elinot
wished to see it^ lasted a considerable time ; and anxiousi
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
HGS OBRBB AND SBMBIBILITir.
to obserre the result of it herself, she resolved to sit with
her during the whole of it. Mrs. Jennings^ knowing ii < »-
thing of any change in the patient^ went unusually early to
bed ; her maid, who was one of ihe principal nurses^ wss
recreating herself in the housekeeper's rocHn^ and £3inor
remained alone with Marianne.
The repose of the latter became more and more dis-
turbed ; and her sister, who watched, with unremitting at-
tention, her continual change of posture, and heard the
frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint which passed
her lips, was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a
slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some acci-
dental noise in the house, started hastily up, and^ with
feverish wildness, cried out, —
'^ Is mamma coming ? "
" Not yet, " replied the other, concealing her terror^ and
assisting Marianne to lie down again ; ^'but she will be
here, I hope, before it is long. It is a great way, you
know, from hence to Barton. "
'" But she must not go round by London, " cried Ma-
rianne, in the same hurried manner.''I shall never see
her, if she goes by London. "
£linor perceived^ with alarm, that she was not quite her-
sdf, and, while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her
pulse. It was lower and quicker than ever. ,And Ma.
rianne, still talking wildly of mamma, her alarm increased
•0 rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantly for Mr.
Harris, and despatching a messenger to Barton for her
mother. To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best
means of effecting the latter was a thought which imme^
diately followed the resolution of its performance ; and as
soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by her
sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she
knew he was generally to be found at a much later hour
than the present.
It was no time for hesitation. Her fears and her diffi-
culties were immediately before him. Her fears, he had
no courage, no confidence, to attempt the removal of : he
listened to them in silent despondence ; but her difficulties
were instantly obviated ; for, with a readiness that
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AKD rnKStBllATVi ^6^
to speak the occasion, and the service pre^ail'anged'in his
niind, he offered himself as the messenger who should
fetch Mrs. Dashwood. £linor made no resistance that was
not easily overcome. She thanked him with hrief, though
fervent gratitude ; and while he went to hurry off his
servant with a message to Mr. Harris, and an order for
post-horses directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel
Brandon, — of such a companion for her mother, — hew
gratefully was it felt ! a companion whose judgment would
guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose friendship
might soothe her ! As far as the shock of such a summons
o & iM be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his
assistance, would lessen it.
JETe, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all
the firmness of a collected mind, made every necessary ar.
rangement with the utmost despatch, and calculated with
exactness the time in which she might look for his return.'
Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind. The horses
arrived, even before they were expected ; and Colonel
Brandon only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity,
and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear, hurried
into the carriage. It was then about twelve o'clock, and
she returned to her sister s apartment to wait for the
arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of
the night. It was a night of almost equal suffering to
both* Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and
delirium on Marianne's side, and in the most cruel anxiety
on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared. Her apprehen-
sions once raised paid by their excess for all her former
security ; and the servant who sat up with her, for she
would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured
her more, by hints of what her mistress had always thought.
Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed inoohe-.
lently on her mother ; and whenever she mentioiTed her
name it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor, who, le-
pxoaching herself for having trifled with so many days of
iUnesst and wretched for some immediate relief, fancied
that all relief might soon be in yain, that every diing had
been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her sufSex "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
^0 BBK8E AND SEKSIBIUTY.
ing mother arriying too late to see this darling ehild^ oKto
see her rational.
She was on the p < Hnt of sending again for Mr. Harris,
or if Ae could not come, for some other advice, when the
former — but not till after five o'clock -— arrived. His
opinion, however, made some little amends for his delay;
for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleai*
sant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the
danger to be material, and talked of the relief which a fr«b
mode of treatment must procure, with a confidence which^
in a lesser degree, was communicated 4;o Elinor. He pro*
mised to call again in the coarse of three or four hours ;
tjtid left both the patient and her anxious attendant more
composed than he had found them.
With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not
being called to their aid, did Mbb. Jennings hear in the
morning of what had passed. Her former apprehensions,
now with greater reason restored, left her no doubt of die
ev & at ; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, her
conviction of her sister's danger would not allow her to
offer the comfort of hope. Her heart was really grieved.
The rapid decay, the early death of a girl so young, so
lovely as Marianne, must have struck a less interested per-
son with concern. On Mrs. Jennings's compassion she had
other claims. She had been for three months her compa*
nion, Was still under her care, and she was known to have
been'greatly injured, and long unhappy. The distreis of
her sister, too, particularly a favourite, was before her;
and as for their mother, when Mrs. Jennings considered
that Marianne might probably be to her what Charlotte
was to herself, her sympathy in her sufferings was vtery
sincere.
I Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit; bat he
came to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would
produce. His medicines had failed; the fever was un-
abated ; and Marianne on]^ more quiet — not more hersdf
— • remained in a heavy stupor. Elinor, catching all, and
mo-'e than, all, his fear in a moment, proposed to call in
farther advice. But he judged it unnecessary : he had
still something more to try^ some'fresh appl^catioDj of
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND 6EN6IBILITT. B?!
whose success he was almost as confident as the last ; and
his visit concluded with encouraging assurances which
readied the ear hut could not enter the heart of Miss
Dashwood. She was calm^ except when she thought of
her mother ; hut she was almost hopeless ; and in this state
she continued till noon^ scarcely stirring from her sister's
bed, her thoughts wandering from one image of grief, one
safiering friend to another ; and her spirits oppressed to the
utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings, who scrupled
not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to
the many weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne's
disappointment had brought on. Elinor felt all the rea-
sonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to her
reflections.
About noon, however, she began — but with a caution
— a dread of disappointment which for some time kept
her silent even to her friend — to fancy, to hope she could
perceive a slight amendment in her sister's pulse: she
waited, watched, and examined it again and again ; and at
last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior
calmness than all her foregoing distress, ventured to com-
municate her hopes. Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on
examination, to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to
keep her young friend from indulging a thought of its
continuance ; and Elinor, conning over every injunction of
distrust, told herself likewise not to hope. But it was too
late. Hope had already entered ; and feeling all its
anxious flutter, she bent over her sister to watch — she
hardly knew for what. Half an hour passed away, and
the favourable symptom yet blessed her. Others even arose
to confirm it. Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered
Elinor with signs of amendment ; and Marianne fixed her
eyes on her with a rational, though languid, gaze. Anxiety
and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees, and left her
BO moment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr. Harris at
four o'clock; when his assurances, his felicitations on a
recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation, gave
her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.
Marianne was in every respect materially better ; and he
4eclaied her entirely Wt of danger. Mrs. Jennings, per*
^Digitized by LjOOQ IC
279 SENSE AND SBN8IBIUTY.
haps satisfied with the partial justification of her forebod*
ings which had heen found in their late alarm^ allowed
herself to trust in his judgment^ and admitted^ with un-
feigned ioj, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness^ the
prohahility of an entire recovery.
Elinor could not he cheerful. Her joy was of a cBfferent
kind^ and led to any thing rather than to gaiety. Marianne,
restored to life^ healthy friends^ and to her doting mother^
was an idea to fill her heart with sensations of exquisite
Gomfort^ and expand it in fervent gratitude; but it led
to no outward demonstrations of joy^ no words^ no smiles.
All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.
She continued by the side of her sister^ with little in-
termission^ the whole afternoon ; calming every fear^ satis-
fying every enquiry of her enfeehled spirits^ supplying
every succour^ and watching almost every look and every
breath. The possibility of a relapse would^ of course^ in
some moments^ occur to remind her of what anxiety was ;
hut when she saw^ on her frequent and minute examin-
ation^ that every symptom of recovery continued^ and saw
Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet^ steady, and to
all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every doubt.
The time was now drawing on when Colonel Brandon
might be expected back. At ten o'clock, she trusted, or at
least not much later, her mother would be relieved from
the dreadful suspense in which she must now be travelling
towards them. The Colonel, too! — perhaps scarcely less
an object of pity ! Oh, how slow was the progress of time
which yet kept them in ignorance !
At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep,
she joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. Of
breakfast she had been kept by her fears, and of dinner hy
their sudden reverse, from eating much ; and the present
refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of content as
she brought to it, was particularly welcome. Mrs. Jennings
would have persuaded hei;^ at its conclusion, to take some
rest before her mother's arrival, and allow her to take her
place by Marianne ; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue,
no capability of sleep at that moment about her, and she
was not to be kept away from her sister an unnecesniy
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
instant. Mrs. Jennings^ therefore^ attending her up stairs
into the sick chamber^ to satisfy herself that all continued
rights left her there again to her charge and her thoughts^
and retired to her own room to write letters and sleep.
The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared round
the house^ and the rain beat against the windows ; but
Elinor^ all happiness within^ regarded it not. Marianne
slept through every blast ; and the travellers^ they had a
rich reward in store, for every present inconvenience.
The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor would
have been convinced that at that moment she heard a car-
nage driving up to the house ; and so strong was the per-
suasion that she did, in spite of the almost impossibility of
their being already come, that she moved into the adjoining
dressing..^set and opened a window shutter, to be satisfied o£
the Uruth.. She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived
her. The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in
view. By their uncertain light she thought she could
discern it to be drawn by four horsed ; and this, while it
told the excess of her poor mother's alarm, gave some
explanation to such unexpected rapidity.
Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be
calm as at that moment. The knowledge of what her
mother must be feeling as the carriage stopped at the door,
— of her doubt — her dread, — perhaps her despair I —
and of what she had to tell ! with sudi knowledge it was
impossible to be calm. All that remained to be done was
to be speedy ; and, therefore, staying only till she could
leave Mrs. Jennings's maid with her sister, she hurried
dawn stairs.
The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner
lobby^ assured her that they were already in the hous^.
She rushed forwards towards the drawing-room : she en-
tered it, — and saw only WiUoughby.
d by Google
274 SENSE ANir SENSIBIXiITT.
CHAPTER VIII.
Elinor^ starting back with a look of horror at the sight of
him^ obeyed the first impulse of her heart in turning in-
stantly to quit the room ; and her hand was already on
the lock^ when its action was suspended by his hastily
advancing^ and sayings in a voice rather of command than
supplication, —
*'Miss Dashwood, for half an hour — for ten minutes
— I entreat you to stay. "
'^ No, sir/'she replied with firmness, *'I shall not stay.
Your business cannot be with me. The servants, I sup.
pose, forgot to tell you that Mr. Palmer was not in the
house. "
'* Had they told me, " he cried with vehemence, *'that
Mr. Palmer and all his relations were at the devil, it would
not have turned me from the door. My business is with
you, and only you; "
" With me I " — in the utmost amazement : — " wdl,
sir — be quick — and if you can — less violent. "
" Sit down, and I will be both. "
She hesitated ; she knew not what to do. The possi-
bility of Colonel Brandon's arriving and finding him there
came across her. But she had promised to hear him ; and
her curiosity no less than her honour was engaged. Ailer
a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding that prudence
required despatch, and that her acquiescence would best
promote it, she walked silently towards the table, and sat
down. He took the opposite chair ; and for half a minute
not a word was said by either.
'^ Pray be quick, sir, " said Elinor, impatiently; ^'I have
no time to spare. "
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and
seemed not to hear her. *
'^ Your sister, " said he, with abruptness, a moment
afterwards,'^ is out of danger. I heard it from the servant.
God be praised i But is it true } is it really true ? "
d by Google
8ENSB AND SENSIBIUIir. 275
Elinor woiild not speak. He repeated the enquiry with
yet greater eagerness.
" For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she
not? "
" We hope she is. "
• He rose up, and walked across the room.
" Had I known as much half an hour ago; — hut since I
cm here,*'speaking with a forced vivacity as he returned to
his seat, — " what does it signify ? For once. Miss Dash-
wood — it will he the last time, perhaps — let us be cheer-
ful together. I am in a fine mood for gaiety. Tell me
honestly, " a deeper glow overspreading his cheeks, ^\ do you
think me most a knave or a fool ? "
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than
ever. She began to think that he must be in liquor ; —
the strangeness of such a visit, and of s < ich manners,
seemed no otherwise intelligible ; and with this impression
she immediately rose, saying, —
^'Mr. Willoughby, I advise you, at present, to return to
Combe. I am not at leisure to remain with you longer.
Whatever your business may be with me, it will be better
recollected and explained to-morrow. "
" I understand you, " he replied, with an expressive smile,
and a voice perfectly calm ; ^* yes, I am very drupk. A
pint of porter with my cold beef at Marlborough was
enough to overset me. "
^^ At Marlborough ! " cried Elinor, more and more at a
loss to understand what he would be at.
'^ Yes — 1 left London this morning at eight o'clock,
and the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise
since that time procured me a nunchion at Marlborough. "
The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his
eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other un-
pardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland, he was not
brought there by intoxication, she said, after a moment's
recollection, —
'^ Mr. Willoughby, you ought to fed, and I certainly do,
that after what has passed, your coming here in this man-
gier, and forcing yourself upon my notice, . requires a very
particular excuse. What is it that you mean by it ? "
T 2
Digitized by Google
fi76 ffMBB JifD «ENSIBUiITr«
'^ I. mean/'said he^ with serious energy. < ^ if I can^ to
make you hate me one degree less than you do wiUB, I
soean to offer some kind of explanation, 8 < »ne kind of
apology, for the past ; to open my whole heart to you, and
by convincing you^ that though I have been always a
blockhead^ I hare not been always a rascal, to obtain some-
thiiig like forgiyeness from Ma i from your sister. "
^^ Is this the real reason of your coming ?''^
** Upon my soul it is/'was his answer, with a warmth
which brought all the former Willoughhy to her remem**
brance^ and^ in spite of herself^ made her think him sin.
oere.
''If that is all^ you may be satisfied already ; for Mari«
■nne does, she has long forgiven you.*'
^ Has she P " he cried, in the same eager tone.'^ Then
she has forgiven me before she ought to have done it.
But die shall forgive me again, kA on more reasonable
grounds. Now will you listen to me ? "
imittor bowed her assent.
'^ I do not know,''said he^ after a pause of expectation
on her side, and thoughtfulness on his own, ^^ how you
may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister^ or
what diabdical motive you may have imputed to me.
Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me, — it is
worth the trial, however, -^^ond you shall hear every thing.
MHien I first became intimate in your family, I had no
«ther intention, no other view in the acquaintance, than to
pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remain in
Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done before.
Your sister 8 lovdy person, and interosting manners, could
not but please me ; and her behaviour to me almost from the
first w«s of a kind — it is astonishing, when I reflect on what
it was, and what sfte was, that my heart should have been go
insensible f But at first, I must confess, my vanity cmly
was elevated by it. Caisless of her happiness, thinking
only of my own amusement, giving way to feetings whidi
I h^d always been too much in the habit of indulging, I en-
deavoured, by every means in my power, to make mysdf
pleasing to her, without any design of returning her aff^
tion. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
BEirdE AND SBKSiBlSLtft. ^^7
Miss Dashwood^ at this pointy turning her eyes on him
with the most angry contempt, stopped him, hy saying, —
** It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for you t6
relate, or for me to listen any longer. Such a beginning
as this cannot be fb & owed by any thing. Do not let me
be pained by hearing any thing more on the subject.*'
'* I insist on your hearing the whole of it, " he repliled.
*'My fortune was never large, and 1 had always been ex-
pensive, always in the habit of associating with people of
better income than myself. Every year since my coming
of age, or even before, I bieBeve, had added to my debts ;
and though the dea^ of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to
set me free, yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far
distant, it had been for some time my intention to re-establish
my circumstances by marrying a woman of fortune. To
attach myself to your sister, therefore, wa« not a thing to be
bought of; and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty,
which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours.
Miss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much, — I was act-
ing in this manner, trying to engage her regard, without a
thought of returning it. But one thing may be sAid for
me : even in that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I did
not then know what it was to love. But have I ever known
it ? " Well may it be doubted ; for, had I really loved,
could I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity, to avarice ?
or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers ? But
I have done it. To avoid a comparative poverty, which
her affection and her society would have deprived of all its
horrors, I have, by raising myself to affiuenee, lost every
thing that could make it a blessing. "
" You did, then, " said Elinor, a little softened, *'be-
lieve yourself at one time attached to her ? "
''To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood
6uch tenderness ! Is there a man on earth who could
have done it? Yes, I found myself, by insensible de-
grees, sincerely fond of her; and the* happiest hours ^ of
my Kfe were what I spent with her when I felt my inteh-
fions were strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless.
£ven tbeUf however, when fully determined on paying my
T 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
278 6BN8B AND 8EK8IBII1ITT.
ftddresses to her; I allowed myself most improperly to pat
off, from day to day^ the moment of doing it, from an un-
willingness to enter into an engagement while my circum-
stances were so greatly embarrassed. I will not reason
here ^ nor will I stop for you to expatiate on the ab«
surdity, and the worse than absurdity, of scrupling to en-
gage my faith where my honour was already bound. The
event has proved that I was a cunning fool, providing with
great circumspection for a possible opportunity of making
myself contemptible and wretched for ever. At last, how-
ever, my resolution was taken ; and I had determined^ as
soon as I could engage her alone, to justify the attentions
I had so invariably paid her, and openly assure her of an
affection which I had already taken such pains to display.
But in the interim — in the interim of the very few hours
that were to pass before I could have an opportunity of
speaking with her in private — a. circumstance occurred— *•
an unlucky circumstance — to ruin all my resolution^ and
with it all my comfort. A discovery took place, " — here
he hesitated and looked down. *'Mrs. Smith had some-
how or other been informed, I imagine by some distant
relation, whose interest it was to deprive me of her favour,
of an affair, a connection — but I need not explain myself
farther, " he added, looking at her withj a heightened co-
lour and an enquiring eye, —'^ your particular intimacy —
you have probably heard the whole story long ago. "
" I have, " returned Elinor, colouring likewise^ and
hardening her heart anew against any compassion for him,
" I have heard it all ; and how you will explain away
any part of your guilt in that dreadful business I confess
is beyond my comprehension. "
'^ Remember, " cried Willoughby, " from whom you re-
ceived the account. Could it be an impartial one? I
acknowledge that her situation and her character ought to
have been respected by me. I do not mean to justify my-
self, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that
I have nothing to urge — that because she was injured she
was irreproachable, and because / was a libertine, Mc must
be a saint. If the violence of her passions, the weakness
of her understanding — I do not mean^ however, to defend
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8EN8B AND SENgIBIUT7. 279
myself. Her affection for me deserved better treatment ;.
and I often^ with great self-reproach^ recall the tendemesa
which^ for a very short time^ had tlie power of creating
any return. I wish — I heartily wish it had never been.
But I have injured more than herself; and I have injured
one, whose affection for me (may I say it ?) was scarcely
less warm than hers; and whose mind — oh, how in.
finitely superior ! "
''Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate
girl — I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of
such a subject may well be — your indifference is no
apology for your cruel neglect of her. Do not think your-*
self excused by any weakness, any natural defect of un-
derstanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident
on yours. You must have known, that while you were
enjoying yourself in Devonshire, pursuing fresh schemes^
always gay, always happy, she was reduced to the ex«
tremest indigence. "
''But, upon my soul, I did not know it, " he warmly
replied :'^ I did not recollect that I had omitted to give
her my direction ; and common sense might have told her
how to find it out. "
" Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith ? "
" She taxed me with the offence at once, and my con-
fusion .may be guessed. The purity of her life, the for-
mality of her notions, her ignorance of the world, — every
thing was against me. The matter itself I could not deny,
and vain was every endeavour to soften it. She was pre-
viously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my
conduct in general, and was, moreover, discontented with
the very little attention, the very little portion of my time
that I had bestowed on her in my present visit. In short,
it ended in a total breach. By one measure I might have
saved myself. In the height of her morality, good woman !
she offered to forgive the past, if I would marry £liza.
That could not be ; and I was formally dismissed from her
favour and her house. The night following this affair — I
was to go the next morning — was spent by me in deliber-
ating on what my future conduct should be. The struggle
was great, but it ended too soon. My affection for MariannCj
T 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ftS9 tsji$im ANt > smmtBiiLrtY*
my thorough oonyietidn of her attachment to me — it wm
all insulHcient to outweigh that dread of poveny^ or get di^
better of those fake ideas of the necessity of riches^ which
I was naturidly inclined to feel^ and expensive society had
increased. I had reason to helieve mysdf secure of my
present wife^ if I chose to address her^ and I persuaded
myself to think that nothing else in common prudence
remained for me to do. A heavy scene^ however, awaited
me hefore I could leave Devonshire : I was engaged to
dine with you on that very day ; some apology was there-i
fore necessary for my hreaking the engagement. But
whether I should write this apolc^y, or deliver it in person,
was a point of long debate. To see Marianne I felt would
be dreadful ; and I even doubts whether I could see her
again. and keep to my resolution. In that point, however,
I undervalued my own magnanimity, as the event de-
clared ; for I went, I saw her, and saw her miserable, and
left her miserable ; — and left her hoping never to see her
again. "
''Why did you call, Mr. Willoughby ? " said Elinor, re-
proachfully; " a note would have answered every purpose.
Why was it necessary to call ? "
^'It was necessary to my own pride. I could not bear
to leave the country in a manner that might lead you, or
the rest of the neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what
had really passed between Mrs. Smith and myself, and I
resolved, therefore, on calling at the cottage, in my way to
Honiton. The sight of your dear sister, however, was
really dreadful ; and, to heighten the matter, I found her
alone. You were all gone I < do not know T^here. I had
left her only the evening before, so fully, so firmly resolved
within myself on doing right ! A few hours were to have
engaged her to me for ever ; and I remember how happy,
how gay were my spirits, as I walked from the cottage tc
Allenham, satisfied with myself, delighted with every body!
But in this, our last interview of friendship, I approached
her with a sense of guilt that almost took from me the
power of dissembling. Her sorrow, her disappointment,
her deep regret, when I told her that I was obliged to
leave Devonshire so immediately — I never shall forget it —
'Digitized by LjOOQ IC
united^ too, witk saeh reiiance, such confidence in me!
Oh^ God I what a hard-hearted rascal I was ! "
They vfete both sOent for a few moments. Elinor first
vpoke.
'^ Did you tell her that you should soon return ? "
^'I do not know what I told her, " he replied, impa-
tiently ;'* less than was due to the past, beyond a doubt,
and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the
future. I cannot think of it. It won't do. Then came
your dear mother to torture me farther, with all her kind-
ness and confidence. Thank Heaven ! it did torture me^
I was miserable. Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea
of the comfort it gives me to look back on my own misery.
I owe such a grudge to myself for the stupid, rascally folly
of my own heart, that all my past sufferings under it ai*e
only triumph and exultation to me now. Well, I went, left
all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I was
only indifferent. My journey to town — travelling with my
own horses, and therefore so tediously — no creature to
speak to — my own reflections so cheerful — when I looked
forward every thing so inviting! — when I looked back at
Barton, the picture so soothing! — oh, it was a blessed
journey! "
He stopped.
''Well, sir, " said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew
impatient for his departure,''and this is all i^'
''All ! — no : — have you forgot what passed in town ?
That infamous letter ? Did she show it you } "
" Yes, I saw every note that passed. "
'^ When the first of hers reached me, (as it immediately
did, for I was in town the whole time,) what I felt is, in
the common phrase, not to be expressed ; in a more simple
one, perhaps too simple to raise any emotion, my feelings
were very, very painful. Every line, every word, was — in
the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she
here, would forbid — a dagger to my heart. To know that
Marianne was in town was, in the same language, a thun-
derbolt. Thunderbolts and daggers ! what a reproof would
ihe have given me! Her taste, her opinions — I believe
d by Google
S82 8ENBB AND SENnBIUTY.
they are better known to me th^n mj own^ and I am sore
they are dearer. "
Ellinor's heart, which had undergone many changes in
the course of this extraordinary conversation, was now soft,
ened again ; yet she felt it her duty to check such ideas
in her companion as the Uuit.
** This is not right, Mr. Willoughby. Remember that
you are married. Relate only what in your conscience you
think necessary for me to hear. "
** Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still as
dear to her as in former days, — that in spite of the many,
many weeks we had been separated, she was as constant in
her own feelings, and as full of faith in the constancy of
mine as ever, — awakened all my remorse. I say awakened,
because time and London, business and dissipation, had in
some measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine
hardened villain^ fancying mysdf indifferent to her, and
choosing to fancy that she too must have become indi^rent
to me ; talking to myself of our past attachment as a mere
idle, trifling, business; shrugging up my shoulders in proof
of its being so, and silencing every reproach^ overcoming
every scruple, by secretly saying now and then,'I shall
be heartily glad to hear she is well married.'But this note
made nie know myself better. I felt that she was infi-
nitely dearer to me than any other womaii in the world,
and that I was using her infamously. But every thing wad
then just settled between Miss Grey and me. To retreat
was impossible. All that I had to do was to avoid you
both. I sent no answer to Marianne, intending by that
means to preserve myself from her farther notice ; and for
some time I was even determined not to call in Berkeley
Street ; but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of a
cool, common acquaintance than any thing else, I watched
you all safely out of the house one morning, and left my
name. "
^'Watched us out of the house ! "
" Even so. You would be surprised to hear how oflai
I watched you, how often I was on the point of falling in
with you. I have entered many a shop to avoid your
sight as the carriage drove by. Lodging as I did in Bond
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 283
Street^ there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a
glimpse of one or other of you ; and nothing but the most
eonstant watchfulness on my side^ a most invariably pre-
vailing desire to keep out of your sights could have jsepar-
ated us so long. I avoided the Middletons as much as
possible^ as well as every body else who was likely to
prove an acquaintance In common. Not aware of their
being in town, however, I blundered on Sir John, I
believe, the first day of his coming, and the day after I
had called at Mrs. Jennings's. He asked me to a party, a
dance at his house in the evening. Had he not told me as
an inducement that you and your sister were to be there, I
should have felt it too certain a thing to trust myself near
him. The next morning brought another short note from
Marianne — still affectionate, open, artless, confiding — ^
every thing that could make my conduct most hateful. I
could not answer it. I tried — but could not frame a
sentence. But I thought of her, I believe, every moment
of the day. If you can pity me. Miss Dashwood, pity my
situation as it was tJien. With my head and heart full of
your sister, I was forced to play the happy lover to an-
other woman ! Those three or four weeks were worse
than all. Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were
forced on me ; and what a sweet figure I cut ! what an.
evening of agony it was ! Marianne, beautiful as an
angel on one side, calling me Willoughby in such a tone !
Oh, God ! holding out her hand to me, asking me for an
explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such
speaking solicitude on my face I and Sophia, jealous as the
devil on the other hand, looking all that was — Well, it
does not signify ; it is over now. Such an evening ! I
ran away from you all as soon as I could ; but not before
I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white as death. That
was the last, last look I ever had of her ; the last manner
in which she appeared to me. It was a horrid sight ! Yet
when I thought of her to-day as really dying, it was a kind
of comfort to me to imagine that I knew ej^actly how she
would appear to those who saw her last in this world. She
was before me, constantly before me, as I travelled, in the
same look and hue. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
284 fOAv^ ANi > SiStffSBIUTT*
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded*
Willoughby first rousing Mmself, broke it thus : —
*'Well, let me mabe haste and bte gone. Yoin: sister is
(Jertainly better, certainly out oi danger ? "
<'We are assured of it. "
'^ Your poor mother too !'doting on Marianne. "
^'But the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter : have
you any thing to say about that ? "
" Yes, yes, that in particular. Your sister wrbte to
me again, you know, the very next morning. You saw
what she said. I was breakfasting at the Ellisons,
— and her letter, with some others, was brought to me
there from my lodgings. It happened to catch Sophia's
eye before it caught mine; — and its size, the elegance of
the paper, the handwriting altogether, immediately gave her
a suspicion. Some vague report had reached her before of
my attachment to some young lady in Devonshire, and
what had passed within her observation the preceding even-
ing had marked who the young lady was, and made her
more jealous than ever. Affecting that air of playfulness,
therefore, which is delightful in a woman one loves, she
opened the letter directly, and read its contents. She was
well paid for her impudence. She read what made her
wretched. Her wretchedness I could have borne, but her
passion — her maHce — at all events it must be appeased.
And, in short, wliat do you think of my wife's style of
letter- writing ? — delicate — tender — truly feminine —
was it not ? "
'^ Your wife ! The letter was in your own hand-
writing. "
" Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying
such sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to. The
original was all her own — her own happy thoughts and
gentle diction. But what could I do ? We were engaged,
every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed — but I
am talking like a fool. Preparation ! I > ay ! In honest
words, her money was necessary to me, and in a situation
Hke mine any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture.
And after all, what did it signify to my character, in the
opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what language my
Digitized by CjOOQIC
answer was couched ? It must have been only to < Hxe end.
My business was to declare myself a scoundrel; and
whether I did it with a how or a bluster was of little
importance.'I am ruined for ever in their opinion/
said I to myself: ^ I am shut out for ever from their so-
ciety ; they already think me an unprincipled fellow ; this
letter will only make them think me a blackguard one.'
Sudi were my reasonings as^ in a sort of desperate careless*
ness^ I copied my wife's words^ and parted with the last
relics of Marianne. Her three notes^ — unluckily they
were all in my pocket.boQk, or I should have denied their
existence^ aaid hoarded them for ever^ — I was forced to
put them up, and could not even kiss them. And the
lock of hair — that^ too^ I had alwaiys carried about me ii^
the same pocket-book, which was now searched by madam
with the most ingratiating virulence, — the dear lock, -^
|ill, every memento was torn from me. "
^'You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby ; very blam*
able/'said Elinor ; while her voice, in spite of herself,
betrayed her compassionate emotion ; " you ought not to
speak in this way, either of Mrs. Willoughby or my sister.
You have made your own dioice. It was not forced coi
you. Your wife has a claim to your politeness, to your
respect, at least. Sbe must be attached to you^ or she
would not have married you. To treat her with unkindf <
ness, to speak of her slightingly, is no atonement to
Marianne; nor can I suppose it a relief to your own
conscience. " »
*'Do not talk to me of my wife, " said he with a heavy
«gh ; ^'she does not deserve your ooiupassion. She knew
I had no regard for her when we married. Well, married
ve were, and came down to CkM & be Magna to be happy^
and afterwards returned to town to be gay. And now do
you pity me. Miss Dashwood ? Or have I said all this
to no purpose ? Am I, — he it only one d^ree, — am I less
guilty in your opinion than I was before ? My intentions
were not always wrong. Have I explained away any part
of my guilt ? "
^* Yes, you have certunly removed something — a little.
You have proved yo^aelf, on the wiiole > less & ulty than I
• Digitized by Google
286 BBirSB AKD SKNBIBIIXTT*
had believed you. You have ptoved your heartless wicked,
much less wicked. But I hardly know — the misery that
you have inflicted — I hardly know what could hare made
it worse. "
''Will you repeat to your sister^ when she is recovered^
what I have been telling you ? Let me be a little lightened,
too, in her opinion as well as in yours. You tell me that
she has forgiven roe already. Let me be able to fancy that
a better knowledge of my heart, and of my present feelings,
will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural,
more gentle, less dignifled, forgiveness. Tell her of my
misery and my penitence ; — tell her that my heart was
never inconstant to her; and, if you will, that at this
moment she is dearer to me than ever. "
*'I will tell her all that is necessary to what may com-
paratively be called your justification. But you have not
explained to me the particular reason of your coming now,
nor how you heard of her illness. "
^'Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against Sir
John Middleton ; and when he saw who I was, for the first
time these two months, he spoke to me. That he had cut
me ever since my marriage, I had seen without surprise or
resentment. Now, however, his good-natured, honest,
stupid soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for
your sister, could not resist the temptation of telling me
what he knew ought to, though probably he did not think
it would, vex me horridly. As bluntly as he could speak
it, therefore, he told me that Marianne Dashwood was dying
of a putrid fever at Cleveland — a letter that morning re-
ceived from Mrs. Jennings declared her danger most im.
minent — the Palmers all gone off in a fright, & c I was
too much shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible
even to the undisceming Sir John. His heart was softened
in seeing mine suffer ; and so much of his ill. will was done
away, that when we parted, he almost shook me by the
hand while he reminded me of an old proouse about a
pointer puppy. What I felt on hearing that your sister
was dying, and dying, too, believing me the greatest villain
upon earth, scorning, hating me in her latest moments —
JTor how could I tell what horrid projects might not have
• Digitized by Google
BEN8B AND SENSIBILITY. 287
been imputed ? One person I was sure would represent
me as capable of any thing. What I felt was dreadful !
My resolution was soon made^ and at eight o'clock this
morning I was in my carriage. Now you know all. "
Elinor made no answer. Her thoughts were silently
fixed on the irreparable injury which too early an inde- >
pendence^ and its consequent habits of idleness^ dissipation^
and luxury^ had made in the mind^ the character^ the hap-
piness^ of a man who^ to every advantage of person and
talents^ united a disposition naturally open and honesty and
a feelings affectionate temper. The world had made him
extravagant and vain — extravagance and vanity had made
him cold-hearted and selfish. Vanity^ while seeking its
own guilty triumph at the expense of another^ had involved
him in a real attachment^ which extravagance^ or at least
its pffspring^ necessity^ had required to be sacrificed. Each
faulty propensity in leading him to evil^ had led him like-
wise to punishment. The attachment^ from which against
honour^ against feelings against every better interest he had
outwardly torn himself^ now^ when no longer allowable^
governed every thought ; and the connection^ for the sake
of which he had^ with little scruple^ left her sister to
misery^ was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to
himself of a far more incurable nature. From a reverie of
this kind she was recalled at the end of some minutes by
Willoughby^ who^ rousing himself from a reverie at least
equally painful^ started up in preparation for goings • and
said^ —
'^ There is no use in staying here ; I must be off. "
'^ Are you going back to town ? "
''No — to Combe Magna. I have business there ; from
thence to town in a day or two. Good-by. "
He held out his hand. She could not refuse to give him
hers : he pressed it vnth affection.
" And yeu do think something better of me than you
did.^ " said he, letting it fall^ and leaning against the
mantel-piece^ as if forgetting he was to go.
Elinor assured him that she did; — that she forgave^
pitied^ wished him well — Was even interested in his hap«
pinessr-r ai^d added some gentle counsel ai| to the. behaviour
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
ftU ^ BBN8B AXn > iOBHef^UJTtn
most likely to promote it His aniwer wu boC y^
encouraging.
'^ As to that/'said he^ " I must rub through the woild
as well as I can. Domestic happiness is out of the questioiu
If^ however, I am allowed to think that you and youra fed
an interest in my fate and actions, it may be the means —
it may put me on my guard — at least it will be something
to live for. Marianne, to be sure, is Jost to me for ev^«
Were I even by any blessed Aance at liberty again — — "
£Unor stopped him with a r^uroof.
'^ Well/'he replied, " once more good-by. I shall sow
go away and live in dread of one event,**
''What do you mean? "
" Your sister s marriage. "
''You are very wrong. She can never be mooe lost to
you than she is now. "
" But she will be gained by some one else. And if that
aome one should be the very he whom, of all others, I
could least bear — but I will not stay to rob myself of all
your compassionate good-will, by showing that where I
have most ii^jured I can least forgive. Good-by, — God
Uess you ! "
And widi these words he ahoost ran out of the room.
CHAPTER IX.
£likob, for some time afier he left her, iar some time even
after the sound of his carnage had died away, reaaained
too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas, widely dii^iog
in themselves, but of which sadness was the general result
to think even of her sister.
Wilioughby, — he whom only half an hour ago she bad
abhorred as the most wortUess of men, -sr WiUdbg^bbjr, in
■pite of all his faidts, excited a degree of oommiaenilioii
for the sufferings jMEoduoed by them, which made her liniik
«f Jumaa-nowaqianted iar «r«r firom her fimlf » jnlii a
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND 8ENBIBCUTT. 289
tenderness, a regret^ rather in proportion, as she soon ac-
knowledged within herself, to his wishes than to his merits.
She felt that his influence over her mind was heightened
by drciunstances which ought not in reason to have weight :
by that person of uncommon attraction, that open, affec- >
tionate, and Hvdy manner, which it was no merit to pos-
sess ; and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it
was not even innocent to indulge. But she felt that it was
so, long, long hefore she could feel his influence less.
When at last she returned to tiie unconscious Marianne,
she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet
a sleep to the extent of her hopes. Elinor's heart was full.
The past, the present/ the future, Willoughby's visit,
Marianne's safety, and her mother's expected arrival, threw
ber altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept off
every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful of
betraying herself to her sbter. Short was tiie time, how.
ever, in which that fear could affect her ; for within half
an hour after Willoughby's leaving the house, she was
again called down stairs by the sound of another carriage.
Eager to save her mother from every imnecessary mo-
ment's horrible suspense, she ran immediately into the-
hall, and reached the outward door just in time to receive
and support her as she entered it.
• Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the
house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne's
being no more, had no voice to enquire after her, no voice
even for Elinor : but she, waiting neither for salutation nor
enqiury, instantiy gave the joyful relief; and her mother,
catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as
much overcome by her happiness as she had been before by
her fears.'She was supported into the drawing-room be-
tween her daughter and her friend ; and there, shedding
tears of joy, though still unable to speak, embraced Elinor
again and again, turning from her at intervals to press
Colonel Brandon's hand, witii a look which spoke at once
her gratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with her-
fldf in the bUss of tiie moment. He shared it^ however, in
a silence even greater than her own. .
< As soon as Mrs* Dashwood had recovered herself, to see
u
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
290 8KNBB AVO SBNSIBIUTr.
Marianne was her first desire ; and in two minutes she was
with her hdoved child^ rendered dearer to her than e?er
hy ahsence, nnhaptonesa^ and danger. Elinor's delight^ as
she saw what each felt in the meetings was only checked hy
an apprehensi < m of its robhing Marianne of farther sleep :
but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm^ could he even prudent^
when the life of a child was at stake ; and Marianne, satis,
fied in knowing her mother was near her, and consdoua of
being too weak for conversation, submitted readily to the
silence and quiet prescribed by eveiy nurse around her.
Mrs. Dashwood would sit up with her all night; and Eli-
nor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to bed.
But the rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many
hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed to make requi*
kite, was kept off by irritation of spirits. WiUoug^iby,
*^ poor Willoughby, " as she now allowed herself to ciJl
him, was constantly in her thoughts: she would not but
have heard his vindication for the world, and now Uamed,
now acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly
before. But her promise of relating it to her sister was
invariably painful. She dreaded the performance of it,
dreaded what its*effect on Marianne might be; doubted
whether, after such an explanation, she could ever be hi^^y
with another ; and for a mmnent wished Willoughby a
widower. Then, remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved
herself, fdt that to his sufferings and his constancy, far
more than to his rival's, the reward of her sister was due,
and wished any thing rather than Mrs. Willoughby's death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had
been much softened to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous
alarm ; for so great was her uneasiness about Marianne,
that she had already determined to set out for Cleveland
on that very day, without waiting for any fartho: intdli.
gence, and had so far settled her journey before his ar-
rival, that the Careys were then expected every moment to
fetch Margaret away, as her mother was unwilling to take
her where there might be infection.
. Marianne continued to mend every day; and the brilliant
cheerfulness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved
her to be, as she repeatedly dedared herself, one of the
d by Google
8EN8B AND SXN8IBILIT7. 29^
happiest women in the world. £linor cotild not hear the
declaration^ nor witness its proofs^ without sometimes won-
dering whether her mother ever recoUected Edward. But
Mrs. Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of her
own disappointment^ which Elinor had sent her^ was led
away hj the exuberance of her joy to think only of what
would increase it. Marianne was restored to her^ from a
danger in which^ as she now began to fed^ her own mis-
taken judgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment
to Willoughby had contributed to place her ; and in her
recovery she had yet another source of joy^ unthought of
by fSinbr. It was thus imparted to her^ as soon as any
opportunity of private conference between them occurred.
" At last we are alone. My Elinor^ you do hot yet know
all my happiness. Colonel Brandon loves Marianne. He
has told me so himself. "
Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained,
surprised and not surprised, was all silent attention.
'^ You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should won-
der at your composure now^ Had I sat down to wish for
any possible good to my family, I should have fixed on
Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you, as the object moat
desirable; and I believe Marianne will be the most happy
with him of the two. "
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking
80, because satisfied that none, founded on an impartial con-
sideration of their age, characters, or feelings, could be
given: but her mother must always be carried away by
her imagination, on any interesting sulgect; and, thercfore^^
instead of an enquiry, she passed it off with a smile.
''He opened his wh < de heart to me yesterday as we
travelled. It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.
I, you may well believe, could talk of nothing but my
ddld: — he could not conceal his distress; I saw that it
equalled my own; and he, perhaps thinking that mere
ftiendshlp, as the world now goes, would not justify so
warm a sympathy; or rather, not thinking at all, I suppose,
giving way to irresistible feelings, made me acquainted
with his earnest, tender, constant, affection for Marianne*
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
29^ SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
He has loved her^ my Elinor^ ever since the first moment of
seeing her. " i
Here > however^ Elinor perceived^ not the language^
not the professions of Colonel Brandon^ hut the natural
emhellishments of her mother's active fancy^ which fsEushion^
ed every thing delightful to her as it chose.
.''His regard for her^ infinitely surpassing any thing that
Willoughhy ever felt or feigned, as much more wann^ as
more sincere or constant^ whichever we are to call it^ has
subsisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne s
unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man ! and
without selfishness^ without encouraging a hope! could
he have seen her happy with another. Such a noble mind !
such openness^ such sincerity I No one can ,be deceived in
himr.
'^ Colonel Brandon's character^ " said Eh'nor^ ^^ as an
excellent man^ is well established. "
" I know it is, " replied her mother, seriously, ^^ or, after
such a warning, / should be the last to encourage such af-
fection, or even to be pleased by it. But his coming for
me, as he did, with such active, such ready friendship, is
enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men. "
''His character, however, " answered Elinor,'^ does not
rest on (me act of kindness, to which his afiection for Ma*
rianne, were humanity out of the case, would have prompted
him. To Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he has been
long and intimately known : they equally love and respect
him ; and even my own knowledge of him, though Jatdy
acquired, is very considerable ; and so highly do / vaUie
and esteem him, that if Marianne can be happy with him,
I shall be as ready as yourself to think our connection the
greatest blessing to us in the world. What answer did you
give him ? Did you allow him to hope ? " .
''Oh, my love! I could not then talk of hope to him or
to myself. Marianne might, at that moment, be dying. But
he did not ask for hope, or encouragement. His was an
involuntary confidence, an irrepressible effusion to a sooth,
ing friend, not an application to a parent. Yet, after a
time, I did say, for, at first, I was quite overcome, that if
she lived, as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 29^
irovld lie in promoting their marriage; and since our'ar-
rival^ since our delightfdl security^ I have repeated it to*
him more fnlly, have given him every encouragement in
my power. Time, a very little time, I tell him, will do
every thing ; Marianne's heart is not to be wasted for ever
on such a man as Willoughby. His own merits must soon
secure it "
^^ To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however, you
have not yet made him equally sanguine. "
''No. He thinks Marianne's afibction too deeply
rooted for any change in it under a great length of time;
and even supposing her heart again free, is too diffident of
himself to bdieve, that with such a difference of age and
disposition he coidd ever attach her. There, however, he
is quite mistaken. His age is only so much beyond hers
as to be an advantage, as to make his character and prin-
ciples fixed; and his disposition, I am well convinced,
is exactly the very one to make your sister happy. And
his person, his manners, too, are all in his favour. My
partiality does not blind me : he certainly is not so hand-
some as Willoughby; but, at the same time, there is
something much more pleasing in his countenance. There
was always a something, if you remember, in Willoughby's
eyes at times, which I did not like. "
£lin6r could not remember it ; but her mother, with,
out waiting for her assent, continued, —
'^ And his manners, the Colonel's manners are not only
more pleasing to me than Willoughby's ever were, but
they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attach,
ing to Marianne. Their gentleness, their genuine atten-
tion to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity,
is much more accordant with her real disposition than the
liveliness, often artificial, and often ill-timed, of the other.
I am very sure myself, t & at had Willoughby turned out
as really amiable, as he has proved himself the contrary,
Marianne would yet never have been so happy witii him
as she wiU be with Colonel Brandon. "
'She paused. Her daughter cotdd not quite agree with
her ; but her dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no
u 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
29^ SaKBB AND SENSIBTIiITT.
*'At Ddaford^ she will be within an easy distanee of
Bie/'added Mrs. Dashwood^'^ even if I remain at Barton;
and in all probability^ -^ for I hear it is a large Tillage, -*
indeed there certainly must be some small house or cottage
dose by^ that would suit us quite as well as our preaenl
situation. "
Poor Elinor ! -—here was a new scheme for getting her
to Delaford I — but her spirit was stubborn.
'^ His fortune too ! — for at my time of life^ you know,
erery body cares about that ; — and though I neither know,
nor desire to know, what it really is, I am sure it mnst.be
a good one. "
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third
person ; and Elinor withdrew to think it all orer in private,
lo wish success to bar friend, and yet, in wishing it, to fed
a pang for Willoughby.

CHAPTER X.
Mabiannb's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not
been long enough to make her recovery stow ; and with
youth, natural strength, and her mother's presence in aid,
it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her to remove, within
four days after the arrivd of the latter, into Mrs. Palmer's
dressing-room. When there, at her own partieular re.
quest, for she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to
him for fetching her mother, Cdond Brandon was invited
to visit her.
His emotion in entering the room, in seeing her altered
looks, and in recdving the pale hand which she immediatdy
hdd out to him, was sudi ss, in Elinor's conjecture, mnat
arise from something more than his aflfection for Marianne,
or the oonsdbusness of its bdng known to others ; and the
soon discovered, in his melancholy eye and varying oom«
plexion as he boked at her sister, the probable reaurencB
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
sBirai AKD sBNsiBnirrp. 29^
of many past toenes of misery to his mind^ brought back
by that retemUance between Marianne and Eliza already
aeknowledged^ and now strengthened by the hollow eye^
the sidcly skin^ the posture of reclining weakness^ and th^
waim acknowledgment of pecaliar obligation.
Mrs. Dashwood^ not less watchful of what passed than
her daughter, but with a mind very differently influenced,
and therefore watching to very different effect, saw nothing
in the Colonel's behaviour but what arose from the roost
simple and self-evident sensatioiis, while in the actions and
vrords of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that
something more than gratitude already dawned.
At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing
visibly stronger every twelve hours, Mrs. Dashwood, urged
equally by her own and her daughter's wishes, began to
talk of removing to Barton. On her measures depended
those of her two friends : Mrs. Jennings could not quit
Cleveland during the Dashwoods'stay ; and Colonel Bran-
don was soon brought, by their united request^ to consider
his own abode there as equally determinate, if not equally
indiapensable. At his and Mrs. Jennings's united request
in return. Mm. Dashwood was prevailed on to accept the
use of his carriage on her journey back, for the better ac
commodation of her sick child ; and the Colonel, at the
joint invitation of Mrs. Dashwood ,and Mrs. Jennings,
whose active good-nature made her friendly and hospitoble
for other people as well as herself, engi^ed with pleasure
to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the course of a
few weeks.
The day of separation and departure arrived; and
Marianne, after taking so particular and lengthened a
leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so earnestly grateful, so full
of T«q > ect and kind wishes as seamed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and
bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with the cordiality of a
ftiend, was carefully assisted by him into the carriage,
of which he seemed anxious that she should engross at
least half. Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor then followed, and
the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travel-
lers, and feel their own dulness, till Mrs. Jennings was
u 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
296 BBX8B AND 8EN8imiilTT.
BumiBoned to her chaise to take comfort in the goenp of
her maid for the loss of her two young companions ; jnd
Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took his solitary
way to Delaford. .
The Dashwoods were two days on the road^ and Mari-
anne :hQre her journey on hoth without essential fatigue.
Every thing that the most zealous affection, the moat
solicitous care, could do to render her comfortahle, was
the office of each watdiful > companion, and each temd
their reward in her hodily ease, and her calmness of
spirits. To. £linor, the ohservation. of the latter was
particularly grateful. She, who had seen her week after
week so constantly suffering, oppressed hy angiHsh of heart
which sheiiad neither .courage to speak of, nor fortitude
to conceal, now. saw with a joy, which no other could
equally share, an apparent composure of mind, which, in
heing the result, as she trusted,, of serious reflection, must
eventually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness.
• As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on
scenes, of whiph every field and every tree brought some
peculiar, some painful recollection, she grew silent and
thoughtful, andi turning away her face from their notice,
.sat earnestly gazing through the window. But here,
£linor could neither wonder nor blame; and when she
saw, as she assisted Marianne from the carriage, that she
had been crying, she saw only an emotion too natural'in
itself to raise any thing less tender than pity, and in its
unobtrusivenesB entitled to praise. In the whole of her
subsequent manner, she traced the direction of a mind
awakened to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner had tiiey
entered thdr common sitting-room, than Marianne tamed
her eyes around it with a look of resolute firmness, as
if. determined at once to accustom herself to the sig^t of
every object with which the remembrance of Willoug^by
could be connected. She said little, but every soitenoe
aimed at cheerfulness; and though a sigh sometimes
escaped her, it never passed away without the atonemaat
of a smile. After dinner she would- try her piano-fiirte.
She went to it ; but the music on which her eye first rested
was an opera,, procured for her by Willoughby, oontaumig
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
fiENSB AND SENSIBILITY. 297
some of their favourite duets^ and bearing on its outward
leaf her own name in his hand. writing. That would not
do.. She shook her headj put the music aside^ and^
after running over the keys for a minute^ complained of
£aeldenes8 in her .fingers^ and closed the instrument again ;
dedaring^ however^ with firmness^ as she did so, that she
should in future practise much.
The next morning produced no abatement in these happy
symptoms. On the contrary, with a mind and body alike
strengthened by rest, she loolced and spoke with more
genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of Mai^aret's
return, and talking of the dear family party which would
then be restored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful
society, as the only happiness worth a wish.
" When the weather is settled, and I have recovered
my strength,''said she, ** we will take long walks to.
gether every day. We will walk to the farm at the
edge of the* down, and see how the children go on; we
will walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross;
and the Abbeyland ; and we will often go to the old ruins
ci the Priory, and try to trace its foundations as far as we
are told they once reached. I know we shall be happy.'I
know the summer will pass happily away. I mean never
to be later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner
I shall divide every moment between music and reading.
I have formed my plan, and am determined to enter on a
course of serious study. Our own library is too well
known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyond mere
amusement. . But there are many works well worth read-
ing at the Park; and there are others of more modem
production, which I know I can borrow of Colonel Bran,
don. By reading only six hours a day, I shall gain in the
eourse of a twelvemonth a great deal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want. "
£linor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly
as this ; though smiHng to see the same eager fancy which
had been leading her to the extreme of languid indolence
and sdifish repining now at work in introducing excess
into a scheme of such rational employment and virtuous
self-control. Her smile, however, changed to a sigh when
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
298 BKHBB AND SrafflBIXiXTr*
she remembered tlut h & c promise to Willougfaby Was yet
unfulfilled^ and feared she had that to communicate which
might again unsettle the mind of Marianne, and ruin, at
least for a time, this fair prospect of busy tranquiliity.
Willing therefore to delay the evil hour, she resoWed to
wait till her sister s health were more secure, before she
appointed it. But the resolution was made only to be
broken.
Marianne had been two or three days at home before
the weather was fine enou^ for an invalid like herself to
venture out. But at last a soft, genial morning appeared,
such as might tempt the daughter's wishes and the mo*-
ther's confidence ; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's arm,
was authorised to walk ae long as she could widiout
fatigue, in the lane before the house*
The sisters set out at a pac^, slow as the feebleness of
Marianne in an ex^cise hitherto untried since her illness
required ; and they had advanced only so far beyond the
house as to admit a full view of the hill, the important hiU
behind, when pausing with her eyes turned towards it,
Marianne calmly said,^-
" There, exactly there, " pointing with one hand,'* on
that projecting mound, there I feU ; and there I fint saw
WiDoughby. "
Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving,
she added,—--
'^ I am thankM to find that I can look with so little
pain on the spot ! Shall we ever talk on that subject, £li« >
nor? " hesitatingly it was said.'''Or will it be wrong?
I can talk of it now, I hope, as I ought to do. "
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.
" As for regret, " said Marianne, ** I have done with
that, as far as Ae is concerned. I do not mean to talk to
you of what my feelings have been for him, but what they
are now. At present, if I could be satisfied on one point,
if I could be allowed to think that he was not alwap9 act-
ing a part, not akoaps deceivii^ me ; but above all, if I
could be assored that he never was so very wicked as oiy
fears have sometimes fancied him, since the stmry of that
unfortunate girl "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBNSa AKH 8BN8IBlIiITT»
She stopped. £liiic»r joyfully treasured her words as she
answered^'—
^'If you could be assured of that^ you think you should
be easy. "
" Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it;
for not oAly is it horrible to suspect a uerson^ who has been
what he has been to me, of such designs^ but what must
it make me appear to myself ? What^ in a situation like
imae^ but a most shamefully unguarded afi^ction could ex^^
poeeme to— -— - "
^^ How, then/'asked her sister^ ^* would you account fbr
his behaviour? "
'^ I would suppose him— oh, how gladly would I sup*
pose him ! — only fickle, very, very fickle. "
Elinor said no more. She was debating within herself
cm the eligifaility of beginning her story directly, or postpon-
ing it till Marianne wore in stronger health ; and they crept
on for a few minutes in siknce.
'^ I am not wishing him too much good, " said Mari-
anne at last, with a si^, ^^ when I wish his secret reflec*
tions may be no more unpleasant than my own. He will
sttfibr enough in them. "
*'Do you compare yoiur conduct with his ? "
" No. I compare it with what it ought to have been ;
I compare it with yours. "
" Our situations have borne little resemblance. "
'^ They have borne more than our conduct Do not,
my dearest Elinor, let your kindness defend what I know
ysur judgment must censure. My illness has made me
think. It has .given me Insure and calmness for seri-
ous recollection. Long bdbre I was enough recovered to
talk, I was perfectly able to reflect. I considered the past :
I saw in my own behaviour, since the b^inning of our ac-
quaintanoe with him last autumn, nothing but a series of
imprudence towards myself, and want of kindness to others.
I saw that my own fleelings had prepared my suflerings,
and that my want of fortitude under diem had almost led
me to the grave. My illness, I well knew, had beeh en«.
titdy brought on by myself by such negligence of my own
health, as I had felt, even at the time, to be wrong.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
300 SENSE AND SBNSIBIUTT.
Had I died^ it woidd have been self-destructioii. I did not
know my danger till the danger was removed ;. but witji
such feelings as these reflections gave me, I wonder at my re-
oovery, — wonder that the very eagerness of my desire to live,
to have time for atonement to my (rod, and to you all, did
not kill me at once. Had I died, in what peculiar misery
should I have left you, my nurse, my friend, my sistef !
You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my latter
days ; who had known all the- murmurings of my hearti
How should I have lived in ymtr remembrance ! My mo-
ther, too ! How oould you have consoled her ! I cannot
express my own abhorrence of myself. Whenev^ I looked
towards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some fail-
ing indulged. Every body seemed injured by me. The
kindness, the unceasing kindness, of Mrs. Jennings, I had
repaid with ungrateM contempt. To the Middletons, the
Palmers, the Steeles, to every common acquaintance evoi,
I had been insolent and unjust; with a heart hardened
against their merits, and a temper irritated by their very
attention. To John, to Fanny, yes, even to them, little
as they deserve, I had given less than their due. But you^
you above all, above my mother, had been wronged by
me. I, and only I, knew your heart and its sorrows;
yet, to what did it influence me?— not to any compa^on
that could benefit you or myself. Your example was be-
fore me ; but to what avail ? Was I more considerate of
you and your comfcnrt ? Did I imitate your forbearance,
or lessen your restraints, by taking^ any part in those oflices
of general complaisance or particular gratitude which- you
had hitherto been left to dischai^ alone?'■ No; not less
when I knew you to be imhappy, than when I had believed
you at ease, did I turn away from every exertimi of duty
or Mendship; scarcdy allowing sorrow to exist but with
me, regretting only that heart which had deserted and
wronged me, and leaving you, for whom I professed an
.imbounded affection, to be miserable for my sake. "
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit;
and £linor, impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatto*,
gave her instantly that praise and support which her frank-
d by Google
8BN8E AND SBN8IBII.ITY. 301
ness and her contrition so well deserved. Marianne pressed
IfuBT hand and replied^ —
'^ You are very good. The fiiture must be my proof. 1
have laid down my.plan^ and if I am capable of adhering to
h^.my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved.
They shall no longer worry others^ nor torture myself. I
shall now live solely for my family. You^ my mother^ and
Margaret^ must henceforth be all the world to me; you
will share my affections entirely between you. From you^
from my home^ I shall never again have the smallest in*
dtement to move ;'and if I do mix in other society, it
will be only to show that my spirit is humbled^ my heart
amended, and that I can practise the civilities, the lesser,
duties of life, with gentleness and forbearance. As for
Willoughby, to say that I shall soon, or that I shall ever
forget him, would be idle. His remembrance can be over-
come by no change of circumstances or opinions. But it
shall be regulated, it shall be checked by religion, by reason,
by constant employment. "
She paused — and added, in a lower voice,''If I could
but know hU heart, eVery thing would become easy. "
Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on^
the propriety or impropriety of speedily hazarding her nar-
ration, without feeling at all nearer decision than at first,
heard this ; and perceiving that as reflection did nothing
resolution must do all, soon found herself leading to the
fact.
She mani^ed the recital, as she hoped, ¥rith address;
prepared her anxious listener with caution ; related simply
and honestly the chief points on which Willoughby grounded
his apology; did justice to his repentance, and softened
only his protestations of present regard. Marianne said
not a word. She trembled : her eyes were fixed on the
ground; and her lips became whiter than even sickness had
left them. A thousand enquiries sprung up from her heart,
but she dared not urge one. She caught every syllable
with panting eagerness : her hand, imknowingly to herself,
closely pressed her sister s, and tears covered her cheeks.
Elinor, dreading her bdng tired, led her towards home ;
and till they reached the door of the cottage, easily con-
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
302 SBN8E AND SBNSIBILITY.
jeeturing wkat her cnrioeity must be^ though no question
was suffered to speak it^ talked of nothing but Willougfaby >
and their conyersation together; and was carefully minute
in every particular of speech and look, where minuteness
could he safely indulged. As soon as they entered the
house, Marianne, with a kiss of gratitude, and these two
words just articulate through her tears, *'Tell mamma/'
withdrew from her sister, and walked slowly ut > stairs.
Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable
as what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously pre-
arranging its result, and a resolution of reviving the subject
again, should Marianne fail to do it, she turned into the
parlour to fulfil her parting injunction.
CHAPTER XI.
Mrs. Dasbwood did not hear, unmoved, the vindication of
her former favourite. She rejoiced in his being cleared
from some part qf his imputed guilt ; she was sorry for
him; she wished him happy. But the feelings of the
past could not be recalled. Nothing could restore hkn
with a faith unbroken, a character unblemi & ed, to Mari-
anne. Nothing could do away the knowledge of what the
latter had suffered through his means, nor remove the guilt
of his conduct towards Eliza. Nothing could replace him,
therefore, in her form^ esteem, nor injure the interests of
Colonel Brandon.
Had Mrs. Dasbwood, like her daughter, heard Wil-
loughby's story from himself, — had she witnessed his dis-
tress, and been under the influence of his countenance and
his manner,-^ it is probable that her compassion would
have been greater. But it was neither in Elinor's power,
nor In her wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her
retailed explanation^ as had at first been called forth in
herself. Reflection had given calmness to her judgment,
and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts.;
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BN8B AND SENSIBIUTy. SOS
ahe wished^ therefore^ to declare only the drople truths and
lay open such facts as were really due to l^is character^
without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy
astray.
In the evenings when they were all three together,
Marianne b^;an yoluntarily to speak of him i^ain ; but
that it was^ not without an effort, the restless, unquiet
thoughtfiilness in which she had been for some time pre-
▼iously sitting, her rising colour, as she spoke, and her
unsteady voice, plainly showed.
*'I wish to assure you both, " said she, ** that I see
every thing as you can desire me to do. "
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly
with soothing tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished
to hear her sister s unbiassed opinion, by an eager sign,
engaged her silence. Marianne slowly continued, —
" It is a great relief to me, what Elinor told me this
morning; I have now heard exactly what I wished to hear. "
For some moments her voice was lost; but recovering
herself, she added, and with, greater calmness than before,
— ^^ I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change.
I never could have been happy with him, after knowing, as
sooner or later I must have known, «11 this. I should have
had no confidence, no esteem. Nothing could have done it
away to my feelings. "
''I know it, I know it, " cried her mother. " Happy
with a man of libertine practices ! With one who had so
injured the peace of the dearest of our friends, and the best
of men ! No — my Marianne has not a heart to be made
happy with such a man ! |ier conscience, her sensitive
oonscience, would have felt all that the conscience of her
husband ought to have felt. "
Marianne- sighed, and repeated, ^'I wish for no change. "
^'You consider the matter, " said Elinor, ** exactly as a
good mind and a sound understanding must consider it ;
and I dare say you perceive, as well as myself, not only in
this, but in many other circumstances, reason enough to be
convinced that your marriage must have involved you in
many certain troubles and disappointments, in which you
would have hem poorly supported by an affection, on hi»
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
304 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
side^ much less certain. Had you married^ you must have
been always poor. His expensiveness^ is acknowledged
even by himself; and his whole conduct declares^ that self-
denial is a word hardly understood by him. His demands^
and your inexperience together^ on a small^ very small in-
come^ must have brought on distresses which would not be
the less grievous to you^ from having been entirdy unknown
and unthought of before. Your sense of honour and honesty
would have led you^ I know^ when aware of your situ-
ation^ to attempt all the economy that would appear to you
possible ; and^ perhaps^ as long as your frugality retrenched
only on your own comfort^ you might have been suffered to
practise it^ but beyond that — and how little could the
utmost of your single management do to stop the ruin
which had begun before your marriage? beyond thaty
had you endeavoured^ however reasonably^ to abridge his
enjoyments^ is it not to be feared^ that instead of pre-
vailing on feeUngs so selfish to consent to it, you would have
lessened your own influence on his hearty and made him
regret the connection which had involved him in such
difficulties? "
Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word
" Selfish ? " in a tone that impUed,''Do you really think
him selfish? "
" The whole of his behaviour,'* replied Elinor, ^^ fiom
the beginning to the end of the affair, has been groimded
on selfishness. It was selfishness which first made him
sport with your affections; which afterwards, when his
own were engaged^ made him delay the confession of it,
and which finally carried him from Barton. His own
enjoyment, or his own ease, was, in every particular, his
ruling principle. "
''It is very true. My happiness never was his object. "
^^ At present, " continued Elinor,'^ he regrets what • he
has done. And why does he regret it ? Because he finds
it has not answered towards himself. It has not ipade
him happy. His circumstances are now unembarrassed
— he suffers from no evil of that kind; and he thinks
only that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper
than yourself. But does it thence follow that had he
d by Google
gENSE AND SENfiSBILITT. 305
married you^ he would have been happy? The incon-*
veniences wonld have been different. He would then
have suffered under the pecuniary distresses which, because
they are removed^ he now reckons as nothing. He would
have had a infe of whose temper he could make no com-
plaint^ but he would have been always necessitous — always
poor ; and probably would soon have learned to rank the
innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income
as of far more importance, even to domestic happiness,
than the mere temper of a wife. "
^'I have not a doubt of it/'said Marianne ;'^ and I
have nothing to regret — nothing but my own folly. "
''J^ther say your mother s imprudence^ my child/'said
Mrs. Dashwood : ^'she must be answerable. "
Marianne would not let her proceed ; and Elinor^ satis-
fied that each felt their own error^ wished to avoid any
survey of the past that might weaken her sister's spirits ;
she, therefore, pursuing the first subject^ immediately con-
tinued, —
'^ One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from
the whole of the story — that all Willoughby's difficulties
have arisen from the first offence against virtue, in his
behaviour to Eliza Williams. That crime has been the
origin of every lesser one, and of all his present dis-
contents. "
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and
lier mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel
Brandon s injuries and merits, warm as friendship and
design could unitedly dictate. Her daughter did not look,
however, as if much of it were heard by her.
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw, on the two or
three following days, that Marianne did not continue to
gain strength as she had done ; but while her resolution
was unsubdued, and she still tried to appear cheerful and
easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon
her health.
Margaret returned, and the family were again all re-
stored to each other, again quietly settled at the cottage;
and if not pursuing their usual studies with quite so mucb
d by Google
306 SENSE AND SENgnSIUIT.
Tigour as when ihej first came to Barton^ at least planning
a vigorous prosecution of them in future.
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving London^
nothing new of his plans^ nothing certain even of his
present ahode. Some letters had passed between her and
her brother^ in consequence of Marianne's illness ; and in
the first of John's there had been this sentence: —'^We
know nothing of our unfortunate Edward^ and can make
no enquiries on so prohibited a subject^ but conclude him
to be still at Oxford; " which was all the intelligence of
Edward afforded her by the correspondence, for his name
was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.
She was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of
his measures.
Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter
on business ; and when, as he waited at table, he had
satisfied the enquiries of his mistress as to the event of his
errand, this was his voluntary communication, —
'^ I suppose you know, ma am, that Mr. Ferrars is
married. "
Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon
Elinor, saw her turning pale, and fell back in her chair in
hysterics. Mrs. Dashwood, whose eyes, as she answered
the servant's enquiry, had intuitively taken the same direc-
tion, was shocked to perceive, by Elinor's countenance, how
much she really suffered; and, in a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by Marianne's situation, knew not on
which child to bestow her principal attention.
The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was
taken ill, had sense enough to call one of the maids, who,
with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance, supported her into* the
other room. By that time Marianne was rather better;
and her mother, leaving her to the care of Margaret and
the maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much dis-
ordered, had so far recovered the use of her reason and
voice as to be just beginning an enquiry of Thomas, as to
the source of his intelligence. Mrs. Dashwood immedi-
ately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinor had the
d by Google
8BN8B AND ttBNBIBIUTT. 307
benefit of the information without the exertion of seek-
. ing it.
" Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married^ Thomas ? "
^'I see Mr. Ferrars myself^ ma'am^ this morning in
£xeter^ and his lady too^ Miss Steele as was* They was
stopping in a chaise at the door of the New London Inn >
as I went there with a message from Sally at the Park to
her brother^ who is one of the post-boys. I happened
to look up as I went by the chaise^ and so I see directly
it was the youngest Miss Steele ; so I took off my hat^
and she knew me and called to me^ and enquired after you^
ma am^ and the young ladies^ especially Miss Marianne^
and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. Fer»
rars's^ their best compliments and service, and how sorry
they was they had not time to come on and see you ; but
they was in a great hurry to go forwards, for they was
going fuhher down for a little while, but howsever, when
they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you. "
''But did she tell you she was married, Thomas ? "
" Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she had
changed her name since she was in these parts. She was
always a very affable and freeutpoken young lady, and
very civil behaved. So, I made free to wish her joy. "
'^ Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her ? "
" Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it, but he-
did not look up: he never was a gentleman much fot
talking. "
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting
himself forward ; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the
same explanation.
^'Was there no one else in the carriage ? "
^* No, ma'am, only they two. "
*'Do you know where they came from ? "
*'They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy-— Mrs,
Ferrars told me. "
" And are going & rther westward ? "
^^ Yes, ma'am — but not to hide long. They will so0i
be back again, and then they'd be sure and call here. "
Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter ; but Elinor
knew better than to expect them. She recognised the
X 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
308 SBKn AND BEirSIBILnT*
whole of Lucy in the message^ and was very confident
that Edward would never come near them. She ohserred,
in a low yoice^ to her mother^ that they were prohahly
going down to Mr. Pratt's^ near Plymouth.
Thomas's intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked as if
she wished to hear more.
" Did you see them off, before you came away ? "
*'No, ma'am — the horses was just coming out, but I
could not bide any longer ; I was afraid of being late. "
''Did Mrs. Perrars look wdl ? "
''Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well ; and
to my mind she was always a very handsome young lady
— and she seemed vastly contented. "
Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question ; and
Thomas and the table-cloth, now alike needless, were soon
afterwards dismissed. Marianne had already sent to say,
that she should eat nothing more. Mrs. Dashwood's and
Elinor s appetites were equally lost ; and Margaret might
think herself very well off that, with so much uneasiness as
both her sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as
Ihey had often had to be careless of their meals, she had
never been obliged to go without her dinner before^
When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and
Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves, they
remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness
and silence. Mrs. Dashwood feared to hazard any remark,
and ventured not to offer consolation. She now found that
she had erred in relying on Elinor's representation of her-
self ; and justly concluded that every thing had been ex-
pressly softened at the time, to spare her from an increase
of unhappiness, suffering as she then had suffered for
Marianne. She found that she had been misled by the
careful, the considerate attention of her daughter, to think
the attachment, which once she had so weU understood,
much slighter in reality than she had been wont to believe,
or than it was now proved to be. She feared that under
this persuasion she had been unjust, inattentive, nay^ almost
unkind, to her Elinor ; that Marianne's affliction, because
more acknowledged, more immediately before her, had too
much engrossed her tenderness^ and kd her away to forgiet
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SBN8B AND SENSIBILITY. SOQ
that in Elinor she might have a daughter suffering almost
as much^ certainly with less self.provocation and greater
fortitude.
CHAPTER XII.
EiiiNOR now found the difference between the expectation
of an unpleasant erent, however certain the mind may be
told to consider it^ and certainty itself. She now found
that^ in spite of herself, she had always admitted a hope,
while Edward remained single^ that something would occur
to prevent his marrying Lucy ; that some resolution of his
own, some mediation of friends^ or some more eligible op-
portunity of establishment for the lady^ would arise to assist
the happiness of alL But he was now married ; and she
condemned her heart for'the lurking flattery which so much
heightened the pain of the intelligence.
That he should be married so soon^ before (as she
imagined) he could be in orders, and consequently before
he could be in possession of the Uving, surprised her a little
at first ; but she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy, in
her self-provident care, in her haste to secure him, should
overlook every thing but the risk of delay. They were mar-
ried, — married in town, — and now hastening down to her
uncle's. Wh & t had Edward felt on being within four
miles of Barton, — on seeing her mothers servant, — on
hearing Lucy's message ! s
They would soon, she supposed, be settled atDelaford: -^
Delafn-d, — that place in which so much conspired to give
her an interest ; which she wished to be acquainted with,
and yet desired to avoid. She saw them in an instant in
their parsonage-house : saw in Lucy the active, contriving
manager ; uniting at once a desire of smart appearance
with the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of
half her economical practices; pursuing her own interest in
X 3
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SIO asm Ain > saifBtBiLiTT.
every thought ; courting the faTOur of Colonel Brandon^ of
Mrs. Jennings^ and of every wealthy friend. In Edward,
she knew not what she saw, nor what she wished to see.
Happy or unhappy, nothing pleased her : she turned away
her head from every sketch of him.
Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connec-
tions in London would write to them to announce the
event, and give farther particulars; but day after day
passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings. Though
uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or
indolent.
*'When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am > "
was an enquiry which sprung from the impatience of her
mind to have something going on.
*'I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect
to see than to hear from him again. I earnestly pressed his
coming to us, and should not be surprised to see him walk
in to-day, or to-morrow, or any day. "
This was gaining something, — something to look for-
ward to. Colonel Brandon must have some information to
give.
Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a
man on horseback drew her eyes to the window. He stop-
ped at their gate. It was a gentleman, — it was Colonel
Brandon himself. Now she should hear more, and she
trembled in expectation of it. But it was not Colonel Bran-
don ; neither his air, nor his height. Were it possible, she
should say it must be Edward. She looked again. He had
just dismounted : she could not be mistaken, — it was Ed-
ward. She moved away, and sat down.''He comes from
Mr. Pratt's purposely to see us. I toiU be calm, — I will be
mistress of myself. "
In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise
aware of the mistake. She saw her mother and Marianne
change colour, — saw them look at herself, and whisper a
few sentences to each other. She would have given the
world to be able to speak, and to make them understand
that she hoped no cookiess, no slight, would appear in their
d by Google
SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY. SI I
behaviour to him; but she had no utterance^ and was
obliged to leave all to their own discretion.
Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in silence
for the appearance of their visiter. His footsteps were
heard along tSe gravel path : in a moment he was in the
passage^ and in another he was before them.
His countenance^ as he entered the room^ was not too
happy^ even for £linor. His complexion was white with
agitation ; and he looked as if fearful of his reception, and
conscious that he merited no kind one. Mrs. Dashwood^
however^ conforming, as she trusted^ to the wishes of that
daughter, by whom she then meant, in the warmth of her
heart, to be guided in every thing, met him with a look of
forced complacency, gave him her hand, and wished him
joy-
He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.
£Unor's lips had moved with her mother's ; and, when the
moment of action was over, she wished that she had shaken
hands with him too. But it was then too late ; and, with
a coimtenance meaning to be open, she sat down again^ and
talked of the weather.
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sights
to conceal her distress ; and Margaret, understanding some
part, but not the whole of the case, thought it incumbent
on her to be dignified, and therefore took a seat as far from
him as she could, and maintained a strict silence*
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the
season, a very awful pause took place.'It was put an end
to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope that he had
left Mrs. Ferrars very well. In a hurried manner, he
replied in the affirmative.
Another pause.
Elinor, resolving to exert herself, though fearing the
sound of her own voice, now said,-—
< ^ Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple ? **
" At Longstaple ! " he replied, with an air of surprise.
*'No ; my mother is in town. "
^'I meant, " said Elinor, taking up some work from the
table,'^ to enquire after Mrs. Edward Ferrars. "
She dared not look up ; but her mother and Marianne
X 4
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
dlS 8BN8B AND BENRIBILITY.
both turned their eyes on him. He coloured, seemed
perplexed, looked doubtingly, and, after some hesitation,
■aid, —
** Perhaps you mean my brother: you mean Mrs. —
Mrs. Robert Ferrars. "
*'Mrs. Robert Ferrars ! " was repeated by Marianne and
her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement; and
though Elinor could not speak, even her eyes were fixed on
him with the same impatient wonder. He rose from his
seat, and walked to the window, apparently from not know-
ing what to do ; took up a pair of scissors that lay there ;
and, while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting
the latter to pieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice, —
*'Perhaps you do not know : you may not have heard
that my brother is lately married to — to the youngest — to
Miss Lucy Steele.''
His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment
by all but Elinor, who sat, with her head leaning over her
work, in a state of such agitation as made her hardly know
where she was.
'^ Yes,*'said he : ^'they were married last week, and are
now at Dawlish. "
Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out of the
room ; and, as soon as the door was closed, burst into tears
of joy, which at first she thought would never cease. Ed-
ward, who had till then looked any where, rather than at
her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw, or even heard,
her emotion; for immediately afterwards he fell into a
reverie, which no remarks, no enquiries, no afiectionate
address of Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate; and at last,
without saying a word, quitted the room, and walked out
towards the village, leaving the others in the greatest
astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation so
wonderful and so sudden, — a perplexity which they had
no means of lessening but by their own ccxijectures.
d by Google
8EKBE AND SENSIBILITY. 315
CHAPTER XIII.
Unaccountable^ however^ as the circumstances of his re-
lease might appear to the whole family^ it was certain that
Edward was free; and to what purpose that freedom would
he employed was easily pre-determined by all; — for after
experiencing the blessings of one imprudent engagement^
contracted without his mother's consent^ as he had already
done for more than four years^ nothing less could be ex-
pected of him in the failure of that, than the immediate ^
contraction of another.
His errand at Barton^ in fact^ was a simple one. It
was only to ask Elinor to marry him ; and considering that
he was not altogether inexperienced in such a question^ it
might be strange that he should feel so uncomfortaUe in
the present case as he really did^ so much in need of en-
couragement and fresh air.
How soon he had walked himself into the proper reso-
lution, however, how soon an opportunity of exercising it
occurred, in what manner he expressed himself, and how
he was received, need not be particularly told. This only
need be said; — that when they all sat down to table at
four o'clock, about three hours after his arrival, he had
secured his lady, engaged her mother's consent, and was
not only in the rapturous profession of the lover, but, in the
reality of reason and truth, one of the happiest of men.
His situation indeed was more than commonly joyful. He
had more than the ordinary triumph- of accepted love to
swell his heart, and raise his spirits. He was released,
without any reproach to himself, from an entanglement
which had long formed his misery, from a woman whom
he had long ceased to love ; and elevated at once to that
security with another, which he must have thought of
almost with despair, as soon as he had learned to consider
it with desire. He was brought, not from doubt or sus*
pense, but from misery to happiness; and the change
1 Digitized by LjOOQIC
314 SBNgB AXIJk 8BNaiBILIT7.
was openly spoken in such a genuine^ flowing^ grateful
cheerfulness^ as his friends had never witnessed in him
before.
His heart was now open to Elinor ; all its weaknesses^
all its errors confessed^ and his first boyish attachment to
Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty-
four.
^Mt was a foolish^ idle inclination on my side^ " said he^
*'the consequence of ignorance of the world, and want
of employment. Had my motlier given me some active
professibn when I was removed at eighteen from the care
of Mr. Pratt, I think, nay, I am sure, it would never
have happened ; for though I left Longstaple with what I
thought, at the time, a most unconquerable preference for
his niece, yet, had I then had any pursuit, any object to
engage my time and keep me at a distance from her for a
few mondis, I should very soon have outgrown the fancied
attachment, especially by mixing more with the world, as
in such a case I must have done. But instead of havings
any thing to do, instead of having any profession chosen
for me, or being allowed to choose any myself, I returned
home to be completely idle ; and for the first twelvemonth
afterwards I had not even the nominal employmeuty
which belonging to the university would have given me,
for I was not entered at Oxford till I was nineteen. I had
therefore nothing in the world to do, but to fancy mysdf
in love ; and as my mother did not make my home in
every respect comfortable, as I bad no friend, no companion
in my brother, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not
unnatural for me to be very often at Longstaple, where I
always felt myself at home, and was always sure of a weL
come ; and accordingly I spent the greatest part of myi
time diere from eighteen to nineteen : Lucy appeared every
thing that was amiable and obliging. She was pretty too
— at least I thought so then ; and I had seen so little of
other women, that I could make no comparisons, and see
no defects. Considering every thing, therefore, I hope,
foolish as our engag'ement was, foolish as it has since in
every way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural
or an inexcusable piece of folly. "
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 315
The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds
and the happiness of the Dashwoods^ was such— so great—
as promised them all the satisfaction of a sleepless night.
Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to be comfortable^ knew not how
to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, how to be
enough thankful for his release without wounding his de«
licacy, nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained
conversation together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the
sight and society of both.
Marianne could speak her happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur — regrets would arise ; and her
joy, though sincere as her love for her sister, was of a kind
to give her neither spirits nor language.
But Elinor — how are her feelings to be described?
From the moment of learning that Lucy was married
to another, that Edward was free, to the moment of his
justifying the hopes which had so ipstantly followed, she
was every thing by turns but tranquil. But when the second
moment had passed, when she found €very doubt, every
solicitude removed, compared her situation with what so
lately it had been, — saw him honourably released from his
former engagement, — saw him instantly profiting by the re-
lease, to address herself and declare an affection as tender,
as constant as she had ever supposed it to be, — she was
oppressed, she was overcome by her ow^ felicity ; and
happily disposed as is the human mind to be easily fami-
liarised with any change for the better, it required several
hours to give sedateness to her spirits, or any degree of
tranquillity to her heart.
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for
a week; for whatever other claims might be made on
him, it was impossible that less than a week should be
given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or suffice
to say half that was to be said of the past, the present, and
the future ; for though a very few hours spent in the
hard labour of incessant talking will despatch more subjects
than can really be in common between any two rational
creatures, yet with lovers it is difierent. Between them no
subject is finished, no communication is even made, till it
has been made at least twenty times over.
Digitized by LjOOQIC
Sl6 8BNSB AND SENglBIIJTT.
Lucy's marriage^ the unceasing and reasonable wonder
among them all^ formed of course one of the earliest discus,
sions of the lovers ; and Elinor's particular knowledge of
each party made it appear to her^ in every view^ as one of the
most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstances she
had ever heard. How they could be thrown together^ and by
what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl^
of whose beauty she had herself heard him speak without
any admiration, — a girl, too, already engaged to his bro-
ther, and on whose account that brother had been thrown
off by his family, — it was beyond her comprehension to
make out. To her own heart it was a delightful affair, to
her imagination it was even a ridiculous one, but to her
reason, her judgment, it was completely a puzzle.
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing,
that, perhaps, at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of
the one had been so worked on by the flattery of the odier,
as to lead by degrees to all the rest. Elinor remembered
what Robert had told her in Harley Street, of his opinion
of what his own mediation in his brother s afiairs mi^t
have done, if applied to in time. She repeated it to
Edward.
^'That Was exactly like Robert, " was his immediate
observation. " And that " he presently added,'* might
perhaps be in kis head when the acquaintance betweoi
them first b^;an. And Lucy, perhaps, at first might think
only of procuring his good offices in my favour. Other
designs might afterwards arise. "
How long it had been carrying on between them, how-
ever, he was equally at a loss with herself to make out ;
for at Oxford, where he had remained by choice ever since
his quitting London, he had had no means of )iearing of
her but from herself, and her letters to the very last were
neither less frequent nor less affectionate than usual. Not
the smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to pre-
pare him for what followed ; and when at last it burst
on him in a letter from Lucy herself, he had been for some
time, he believed, half stupified between the wonder, the
horror, and the joy of such a deliverance. He put the
letter into Elinor's hands.
d by Google
8BNSB AND SENSlBILItT* 317
''Dear Sir,
" Being very sure I have long lost your affections^ I have
thought myself at liberty to bestow my own on another^
and have no doubt of being as happy with him as I once
used to think I might be with you ; but I scorn to accept
a hand while the heart was another's. Sincerely wish you
happy in your choice^ and it shall not be my fault if we
are not always good friends^ as our near relationship now
makes proper. I can safely say I owe you no ill.willy
and am sure you will be too generous to do us any ill
offices. Your brother has gained my affections entirely ;
and as we could not live without one another^ we are just
returned from the altar^ and are now on our way to Dawlish
for a few weeks ; which place your dear brother has great
curiosity to see, but thought I would first trouble you with
these few lines, and shall always remain,
" Your sincere wellwisher, friend, and sister,
''LuoT Ferrabs.
^^ I have burnt all your letters, and will return your
picture the first opportunity. Please to destroy my scrawls
— but the ring with my hair you are very welcome to
keep. "
Elinor read and returned it without any comment.
'^ I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition, "
said Edward.''For worlds would not I have had a
letter of hers seen by you in former days. In a sister it
is bad enough, but in a wife ! how I have blushed over
the pages of her writing ! and I believe I may say that
since the first half year of our foolish business this is the
only letter I ever received from her, of which the sub-
k.i;.ace made me any amends for the defect of the style.'*
'* However it may have come about, " said Elinor, after
a pause,''they are certainly married ; and your mo-
ther has brought on herself a most appropriate punish-
ment. The independence she settled on Robert, through
resentment against youy has put it in his power to make
his own choice ; and she has actually been bribing one son
with a thousand a year to do the very deed which she
disinherited the other for intending to do. She will hardly
\
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
318 8BN8E A^D SBN6IBU.IT7.
be less hurt^ I suppose^ by Robert's marrying Lucy^ than
she would have been by your marrying her. "
" She will be more hurt by it^ for Robert always was
her favourite. She will be more hurt by it, and on the
same principle will forgive him much sooner. "
In what state the affair stood at present between them
£dward knew not, for no communication with any of his
family had yet been attempted by him. He had quitted
Oxford within four-and-twenty hours after Lucy's letter
arrived^ and. with only one object before him, the nearest
road to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of
conduct, with which that road did not hold the most inti-
mate connection. He could do nothing till he were assured
of his fate with Miss Dashwood ; and by his rapidity in
seeking that fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the
jealousy with which he had once thought of Colonel Bran-
don, in spite of the modesty with which he rated his own
deserts, and the politeness with which he talked of his
doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect a very cruel
reception. It was his business, however, to say that he
did, and he said it very prettily. What he might say on
the subject a twelvemonth after must be referred to the
imagination of husbands and wives.
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off
with a flourish of malice against him in her message by
Thomas, was perfectly clear to Elinor ; and Edward him.
self, now thoroughly enlightened on her character, had no
scruple in believing her capable of the utmost meanness of
wanton ill-nature. Though his eyes had been long opened,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her
ignorance and a want of liberality in some of her opinions^
Ihey had been equally imputed, by him, to her want of
education; and till her last letter reached him, he had
always believed her to be a well-disposed, good-hearted
girl, and thoroughly attached to himself. Nothing but
such a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end
to an engagement, which, long before the discovery of it
laid him open to his mother's anger, had been a continual
Source of disquiet and regret to him.
''1 thought it my duty, " said he,''independent of my
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SENSIBILITT. 319
feelings^ to give her the option of continuing the engage-
ment or not^ when I was renounced hy my mother, and
stood to all appearance without a friend in the world to
assist me. In such a situation as that, where there seemed
nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living
creature, how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so
warmly insisted on sharing my fate, ^whatever it might he^
tiiat any thing hut the most disinterested affection was her
inducement? And even now, I cannot comprehend on
what motive she acted, or what fancied advantage it could
be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not
the smallest regard, and who had only two thousand
pounds in the world. She could not foresee that Colonel
Brandon would give me a living. "
*'No; but she might suppose that something would occur
in your favour ; that your own family might in time relent.
And at any rate, she lost nothing by continuing the engage*
ment, for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclin-i
ation nor her actions. The connection was certainly a
respectable* one, and probably gained her consideration
among her friends; and, if nothing more advantageous
occurred, it would be better for her to marry you than be
single. "
£dward was, of course, immediately convinced that
nothing could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct,
Mor more self-evident than the motive of it.
Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold the
imprudence which compliments themselves, for having
spent so much time with them at Norland, when he must
Lave felt his own inconstancy.
" Your behaviour was certainly very wrong, " said she ;
^'because, to say nothing of my own conviction, our rela-
tions were all led away by it to fan6y and expect whtU, as
you were then situated, could never be.''
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and
a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement.
'^ I was simple enough to think, that because my faith
was plighted to another, there could be no danger in my
being with you ; and that the consciousness of my engage-
ment was to keep my heart as safe and sacred aq my honour
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
flBNU AND SBNBIBIUT7.
I felt that I admired you^ but I told myself it was only
friendship ; and till I b^^an to make comparisons between
yourself and Lucy^«I did not know bow far I was got.
After that^ I suppose^ I wtu wrong in remaining so much
in Sussex; and the ai^^uments with which I reconciled
myself to the expediency of it were no bettar than these :
— The danger is my own; I am doing no injury to any
body but myself. "
Elinor smiled, and shook her head.
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon s being
expected at the cottage^ as he really wished^ not only to be
better acquainted with him, but to have an opportunity of
convincing him, that he no longer resented his giving him
the living of Ddaford.'^ Which, at present, " said he, ^^after
thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occa.
sion, he must think I have never forgiven him for offering. "
Now he felt astonished himself that he had never yet
been to the place. But so. little interest had he taken in
the matter, that he owed all his knowledge of the house,
garden, and glebe, extent of the parish, condition of the
land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herself, who bad
beard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard it
with so muph attention, as to be entirely mistress of the
subject.
One question after this only remained undecided between
them ; one difficulty only was to be overcome. They were
brought together by mutual affection, vrith the warmest
approbation of their real friends ; their intimate knowledge
of each other seemed to make their happiness certain, and
they only wanted something to live upon. Edward had
two thousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Dela-
ford living, was all that they could call their own ; for it
was impossible that Mrs. Dashwood should advance any
'thing ; and they were n & ther of them quite enough in love
to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a year would
supply them with the comforts of life.
Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favour,
able change in his mother towards him ; and on that he
rested for the residue of their income. But Elinor had no
such dependence ; for, since Edward would still be unable
d by Google
flliimi AlTD SBNUBIUTT* 5fl]
to mtarj Miss Morton, and his choosing herself had been
qioken of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering language as only a
lesser evil than his dioosing Luey Steele, she feared that
Robert's offence would serve no other purpose than to
enrich Fanny.
About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon
appeared^ to complete Mrs. Dashwood*s satisfaction, and to
give her the dignity of hayings for the first time since her
living at Barton, more company with her than her house
Would hdd. Edward was allowed to retain the privilege
of first comer, and C^nel Brandon, therefore, walked
every night to his old quarters at the Park ; from whence
he usually returned in the morning, early enough to inter-
rupt the lovers'first tete-^-tete before breakfast.
A three wedcs'residence at Delaford, where, in his
evening hours at least, he had little to do but to calculate
the disproportion between thirty.six and seventeen, brought
lum to Barton in a temper of mind which needed all the
improvement in Marianne's looks, all the kindness of her
welcome, and all the encouragement of her motlier's Ian*
guage, to make it cheerful. Among such friends, however,
and such flattery, he did revive. No nmiour of Luc/s
marriage had yet reached him : he knew nothing of what
had passed; and the first hours of his visit were conse-
quently spent in hearing aqd in wondering. Every thing
was explained to him by Mrs. Dashwood ; and he found
fresh reason to rejoice in what he had done for Mr. Ferrars,
aince eventually it promoted the interest of Elinor.
It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced
in the good opinion of each other, as they advanced in each
other's acquaintance, for it could not be otherwise. Their
resemblance in . good. jHinciples and good sellse, in dispo-
sition and manner of thinking, would probably have been
aufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and
two sisters fond of each other, made that mutual regard
inevitaUe and immediate, which mi^t otherwise have
waited the effect of time and judgment.
The letters from town, which a few days before would
hare made every nerve in Elinor's body thrill with trans-
Y
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
I S2S WKKtM Ain > 8nitBIBIU[TT«
\
port^ now arrived to be read with less emotion ihan mirth.
Mrs. Jennings wrote to, tell the wonderful tale^ to vent her
honest indignation against the jilting girl^ and pour forth
her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward^ who^ she was
sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy^ and Was
now, by all accounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.
*'I do think,'* she continued, *^ nothing was ever car'*
ried on so dy ; for it was but two days before Lucy called
and sat a couple of hours with me. Not a soul suspected
any thing of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul^.
came crying to me. the day after, in a great fright for fear
of Mrs. Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to get to
Plymouth ; for Lucy, it seems, borrowed all her money
before she went off to be married, on purpose, we suppose,
to ^ake a show with, and poor Nancy had not seven shil-
lings in the world ; so I was very glad to give her ^rt
guineas to take her down to Exeter, where she thinks of
staying three or four weeks with Mrs. Burgess, in hopes,
as I tell her, to fall in with the Doctor again. And I
must say that Lucy's crossness not to take her along with
t^em in the chaise is worse than all. Poor Mr. Edward!
I cannot get him out of my head, but you must send for
him to Barton^ and Miss: Marianne must try to comfort
him. "
Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn. Mrs. Fer.
Tars was the most unfortunate of women — poor Fanny
had suffered agonies of sensibility — and he considered
the existence of each, under such a blow, with grateftd
wonder. Robert's offence was unpardonable, but Lucy's
was infinitely worse. Neither of them was ever again to
be mentioned to Mrs. Ferrars ; and even, if she might
hereafter be'induced to forgive her son, his wife should
never be acknowledged as her daughter, nor be permitted
to appear in her presence. The secrecy with which every
thing had been carried on between them was; rationally
treated as enormously heightening the crime, because, had
any suspicion of it occurred to the others, proper mea-
sures would have been taken to prevent the marriage;
mid he called on Elinor to join with him in r^;ret-
ting that Lucy s engagement with Edward had not rather
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
9BN8B ANb SENSIBILITY. 325
been fdlfilledj than that she should thus be the means
of spreading misery farther in the family. He thus con.
turned : —
^^ Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name^
which does not surprise us ; but^ to our great astonishment^
not a line has beep received from him on the occasion.
F^haps^ however^ he is kept silent by his fear of offending ;
and I shall^ therefore^ give him a hint^ by a line to Oxford,
that his sister and I both think a letter of proper submis-
sion^ from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her
shown to her mother, might not be taken amiss ; for we
all know the tenderness of Mrs. Ferrars's heart, and that
she wishes for nothing so much as to be on good terms
with her children/*
This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects
and conduct of Edward. It determined him to attempt a
reconciliation, though not exactly in the manner pointed
out by their brother and sister.
*'A letter of propor submission ! " repeated he;'^ would
they have me beg my mother's pardon for Robert's ingra. <
titude to her, and breach of honour to me^ I can make
no submission. I am grown neither humble nor penitent
by what has passed. I am grown very happy; but that
would not interest. I know of no submission that is pro-
per for me to make. "
'^ You may certainly ask to be forgiven, " said Elinor,
*'because you have offended ; and I should diink you might
tioto venture so far as to profess some concern for having
ever formed the engagement which drew on you your mo-
ther's anger. "
He agreed that he might.
^'And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little hu-
mility may be convenient while acknowledging a second
engagement, almost as imprudent in her eyes as the first. "
He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the
idea of a letter of proper submission ; and, therefore, to
make it easier to him, as he declared a mudi greater wil^
lingness to make mean concessions by word of mouth than
< m paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing to Fanny,
he should go to London, and personally entreat her good
Y 2
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SM aaan and samaBXUTtM
offices in hit £iTOur, ^ And if they feaJly do tnterest
themadyes^ " said Marianne, in her new character of can*-
dour, " in bringing about a reconciliation, I shall think that
even John and Fanny are not entirely without merit. "
After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or
four days, the two gentlemen quitted Barton together.
They were to go immediately to Delaford, that Edward
might have some personal knowledge of his futuie home,
and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what im-
provements were needed to it; and from thence, after
staying there a couple of nights, he was to proceed on his
journey to town.
CHAPTER XIV.
Afceb a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars,
lust'so violent and so steady as to preserve her from that
reproach which she always seemed fearful of incurring, die
reproach of being too amiable, Edward was admitted to her
presence, and pronounced to be again her son.
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating.
For many years of her life she had had two sons ; but the
crime and annihilation of Edward, a few weeks, ago, had
robbed her of one ; the simflar annihilation of Robert had
left her for a fortnight without any ; and now, by the re-^
susdtation of Edward, she had one again.
In spite of his being allowed once more to live, however,
he did not fed the condnui^nce of his existence secure till
he had revealed his present engagement;- for the publi-
cation of that drcumstance, he feared, might give a sudden
turn to his constitution, and carry him off as rapidly as be-
fore. With apprdie & sive caution, therefore, it was revealed;
and he was listmied to with unexpected calmness. Mrs.
Ferrars at first reasonaUy endeavoured to dissuade him
from aair jripg 3iisa Daahwood, by every argument in her
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8BN8B AlfB SENEXBIUTT* 3S5
power ; told him, thst in Miss Morton he would have a
woman of higher rank and larger fortune; and enforced
the assertion^ hy ohserving that Miss Morton was the
daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds^
while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a private
gentleman with no more than three; but when she found
that^ though perfectly admitting the truth of her represent-
ation^ he was by no means inclined to be guided by it, she
judged it wisest, from the experience of the past, to sub.
mit ; and, therefore, after such an ungracious delay as she
owed to her own dignity, and as served to prevent every
suspicion of good- will, she issued her decree of consent to
the marriage of Edward and Elinor.
What she would engage to do towards augmenting their
income was next to be considered ; and here it plainly ap-
peared, that though Edward was now her only son, he wa9
by no means her ddest ; for while Robert was inevitably
endowed with a thousand pounds a year, not the smallest
objection was made against Edward's taldng orders for the
sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost ; nor was any
thing promised either for the present or in hiture, beyond ^
the ten thousand pounds, which had been given with*
Fanny.
It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than
was expected, by Edward and Elinor; and Mrs. Ferrars
herself, by her shuffling excuses, seemed the only person
surprised at her not giving more.
With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus
secured to them, they had nothing to wait for after Edward
was in possession of the living but the readiness of the
house, to which Colonel Brandon, with an oager desire for
the accommodation of Elinor, was making considerable
improvements ; and after waiting some time for their com-
pletion, — after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disap-
pointments and delays, from the unaccountable dilatoriness
of the workmen, — Elinor, as usual, broke through the first
positive resolution, of not marrying till every thing was
ready ; and the ceremony took place in Barton church early
in the autumn.
The first month after their marriage was spent with their^
Y S
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
9^6 »ENdE AND 8EN8TBILITT*
friend at the mansion-house ; from whence they could su«
perintend the progress of the parsonage, and direct every
thing as they liked on the spot ; could choose papers, pro-
ject shruhberies, and invent a sweep. Mrs. Jennings's
prophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly
fulfilled ; for she was able to visit £dward and his wife in
their parsonage by Michaelmas ; and she found in Elinor
and her husband, as she really believed, one of the happieist
couple in the world. They had, in fact, noting to wish
for^ but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Mariaime^
and rather better pasturage for their cows.
They w^ visited on their first settling by almost aQ
their relations and friends. Mrs. Ferrars came to inspect
the happiness which she was almost ashamed of having
authorised ; and even the Dashwoods were at the expense
of a journey from Sussex to do ^em honour.
" I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister^'*
said John, as they were walking together one mornings
before the gates of D^laford House,'^ that would be saying^
too much ; for certainly you have been one of the most for-
tunate young women in the world, as it is. But, J coafess,
it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon
brother. His property here, his place, his house, — every
thing in such respectable and excellent condition ! And his
woods, — I have not seen such timber any where in Dorset-
shire as there is now standing in Delaford Hanger ! And
though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly the person
to attract him, yet I think it would altogether be advisable
for you to have them now frequently staying with you ; for,
as Colond Brandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can
tell what may happen ; for, when people are much thrown
t(^ether, and see little of any body else, — and it will
always be in your power to set her ofi^to advantage, and so
forth. In short, you may as well give her a chance : yoa
understand me.*'
But though Mrs. Ferrars did come to see them^ and
always treated them with the make-believe of decent aiFec^
tion, they were never insulted by her real favour and pre-
ference. That was due to the folly of Robert, and the
cunning of his wife ; and it was earned by them before
fflgitized by Google
ffBKSE ANI > «EKSIBIUTT4 ^2?
many months had passed away. The selfish sagacity of th6
latter^ which had at first drawn Rohert into the scrape^ was
the principal instrument of his deliverance from it ; for her
respectful humility, assiduous attentions, and endless fla1 >
teries, as soon as the smallest opening was given for their
exercise, reconciled Mrs. Ferrars to Jiis choice, and re-
established him completely in her favour.
. The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the afiair, and the
prosperity which crowned it, therefore, may be held forth
as a most encouraging instance of what an earnest, an
unceasing attention to self-interest, however its progress
may be apparently obstructed^ will do in securing every
advantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that
of time and conscience. When Robert first sought her
acquaintance, and privately visited her in Bartlett's Build,
ings, it. was only with the view imputed to him by hi»
brother. He merely meant to persuade her to give up the
engagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome
but the affection of both, he naturally expected that one
or two interviews would settle the matter. In that point,
however, and that only, he erred ; for though Lucy soon
gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in
time, another visit, another conversation, was alwuys wanted
to produce this conviction. Some doubts always lingered
in her mind when they parted, which could only be re-
moved by another half hour's discourse with himself.
His attendance was by this means secured, and the rest
followed in course. Instead of talking of Edward, they
came gradually to talk only of Robert, — a subject'oii
which he had always more to say than on any other, and
in which she soon betrayed an interest even equal to his
own; and, in short, it became speedily evident to both,
that he had entirely supplanted his brother. He was
proud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and very
proud of marrying privately without his mother s consent.
What immediately followed is known. They passed some
months in great happiness at Dawlish ; for she had many
relations and old acquaintance to cut — and he drew several
plans for magnificent cottages ; and from thence returning
tp town procured the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by the
Y 4
• Digitized by CiOOglC
S28 SBirtB AKD •fiBN8IBIl«I'nr«
simple expedient of asking it^ which^ at Lucy's instigatioii^
was .adopted. The forgiveness^ at firsts indeed, as was
reasonaUe^ comprehended only Robert; and Lucy, who
had owed his mother no duty, aiid therefore could have
transgressed none, still remained some weeks longer tra-
pardoned. But perseverance in humility of conduct and
messages, in self-condemnation for Robertas offence, and
gratitude for the unkindnesa she was treated with, pro-
cured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her
by its graciousness, and led soon afterwards, by rapid
degrees, to the highest state of affection and influence.
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars as either
Robert or Fanny ; and while Edward was never cordially^
forgiven for having once intended to marry her, and Eli-
nor, though superiw to her in fortune and birth, was
spoken of as an intruder, she was in every thing con-
sidered, and always openly acknowledged^ to be a favourite
child. They settled in town, received very liberal assist-
ance from Mrs. Ferrars, were on the best terms imaginable
with the Dash woods ; and, setting aside the jealousies and
iU-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy,
in which their husbands of course took a part, as well as
the frequsnt domestic disagreements between Robert and
Lucy themselves, nothing could exceed the harmony in
which they all lived together.
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest
son might have puzzled many people to find out; and
what Robert had done to succeed to it might have puzzled
them still more. It was an arrangement, however, jus-
tified in its effects, if not in its cause ; for nothing ever
appeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to give a
suspicion of his regretting the extent of his income, as
either leaving his brother too little, or bringing himsdf .
too much ; and if Edward might be judged from the ready
discharge of his duties in every particular, from an in-
eroasing attachment to his wife and his home, and firom
the regular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be sap-
posed no less contented with his lot, no less free fkom
every wish of an exchange.
Elinor^s marriage divided her as little from her fiuiiii^^
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
8EN8B AND BENSXBIZSTY. $29
«B oouM well be oontriTed^ without rendering the cottage
at Barton entirely useless^ for her mother and asters
spent much more than half their time with her* Mrs.
Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as wdl as
pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaford; for
her wish of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandcm to.
gether was hardly less earnest, though rather more liberal
than what John had expressed. It was now her darling
ol:g^ < ^* Precious as was the company of her daughter
to her, she desired nothing so much as to give up its
constant enjoyment to her valued friend ; and to see Ma-
rianne settled at the mansion-house was equally the wish
of Edward and Elinor. They each felt his sorrows, and
their own obligations, and Marianne, by general consent,
was to be the reward of all.
With such a confederacy against her — with a know-
ledge so intimate of his goodness-^ with a conviction of his
fond attachment to herself, which at last, though long
after it was observable to every body else — burst on her —
what could she do ?
Marianne Dashwood was bom to an extraordinary fate.
She was bom to discover the falsehood of her own opi-
nions, and to counteract, by her conduct, her nioet favourite
maxims. She was bom to overcome an afiection formed
so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment su-
pericnr to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily
to give her hand to another !-^and that other, a man who
had suffered no less than herself under the event of a
former attachment, whom, two years before, she had con-
sidered too old'to be married, — and who still sought the
constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat !
But so it was. Instead of falling a sacrifice to an ir.
resistible passion, as once she had fondly flattered herself
with expecting, instead of remaining even for ever with
her mother, and finding her only pleasures in retirement
and study, as afterwards in her more calm and sober
judgment shs had determined on, — she found herself at
nineteen submitting to new attachments, entering on new
duties, placed in a new home, a wife, the mistress of a
family, and the patroness of a village.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
3S0'SENtnr akd sensibiutt.
Colonel Brandon was now as happy as all those wh < l
best lovefi him believed he deserved to be : in Marianne
he was consoled'for every past affliedon : her regard and
her society restored his mind to animation^ and his spirits
to cheerfulness ; and that Marianne found her own hap-
piness in forming his, was equally the persuasion and
delight of each observing friend. Mariaime could nevar
love by halves ; and her whole heart became, in time, as
much devoted to her husband as it had once been to Wil-
loughby.
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a
pang ; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete^
in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith, who, by stating
his marriage with a woman of character as the source of
her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had he
behaved wilii honour towards Marianne he might at once
have been happy and rich. That his repentance of mis-
conduct, which thus brought its own punishment, was sin-
.cere, need not be doubted; nor that he long thought of
Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret
But that he was for ever inconsolable, that, he fled from
society, or contracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died
of a broken heart, must not be depended on — for he did
neither. He lived to exert, and frequently to enjoy him-
self. His wife was not always out of humour, nor his
home always uncomfortable ; and in his breed of horses and
dogs, and in sporting of every Idnd, he found no inconsi-'
derable degree of domestic felicity.
For Marianne, however, in spite of his incivility in sur-
viving her loss, he always retained that decided regsrii
which interested him in every thing that befell her, and <
made her his secret standard of perfection in woman;
and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him in
after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.
Mxs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the
cottage without attempting a removal to Deiaford ; and,
fortunately for Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, when Ma-,
rianne was taken from them, Margaret had reached an age
highly suitable for dandngy and not very ineligible for
being supposed to have a lover.
Digitized by LjOOQ IC
SENSE AND SBNBIBIIiITT. SSI
Between Barton and Delaford there was that constant
communication which strong family adSection would na-
turally dictate ; and among the merits and the happiness of
Elinor and Marianne^ let it not he ranked as the least con-
siderable^ that^ though sisters^ and living almost within
sight of each other^ they could live without disagreement
between themselves^ or producing coolness between their
husbands.
r
THE END.
d by Google

London :
Printed by A. & R. Spotttewoode,
New.Street.Square.
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
d by Google
