

,\-


7 < ?6
To be returned
23 NO; ;949
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
r^
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
M.?. 1. M«(
ithly Vol*., Pdt* Si. k«wl i#clo < h, nlftiml; nith Ih
AN IMP-ROVED EDITION OP THE
PLAYS AND POEMS
SHAKSPEARE,
WITH A LIFE, GLOSSAftlAl HOTES,
AND OTTE HOSBRED AND SBVBHTT ILLIWTIUTIOira
BOYDELL'S EDITION.
The text of Maloke, as published id 1821 , in 21 volumei
8v», ia adopted ; Olossahial Notbs on all obsolete wordi
aiegiTco; and a brief Historical Digest prefixed to
each Ptay.
Iji addition to the maay adraotages offered in the present
editioB, it will be embelliobed with One Hundbbu AND
Sbvsntt Illustrations, executed mi steel in tbe first
style of outline engraving, designed from the Plates in
Boydell's SBAKSPBAaE, which vaa orieinaliy published
at £63, and kmgt paper at £1A0.
The youthful reader will be directed to the most
striking and brilliant passages by an Index, to
be {Hinted at the sod of the work, which will form a com-
pleta nfereooa to the Beautibs of SuAKsrEARB.
Ilie number and excellence of the illustrations, the style
of the ietler-presB, the portability of the form, and the
i»oclerate terms, will readei the preeeut edition aaperior to
any yet publMied.
Volome Ul. will b« pnbluhed on tbe lat of Jannirr, 1B33, containiBg
■ea'*L»i*, vitk tke & llowias Elvrea Ii.L(imATiaMe.
MEItCSANT OF VEmCE.
1. Sbylock, Jesiica, and Lsuncelot, from « PsuUini; b; Smirk,
t. BnMnie, fortit, and AttenAaBts.— Wutall.
3. Sbytock, Srianio. Antonio, mi Jnhr.— OiHv.
4. Lorenzo and J«aii(is. — Hadgtt.
" (
DoliiHihyCoOgle
'SHAKSPBARG.
MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM.
5. A Wood. Poet— Fa««.
6. Robin Uoodfellow^-^ScynoUi.
LOVE'S LABOR'S LOST.
9. Princess. Rossline, & b,— Hnmiiton.
to. Dull. HolofemeH, Sir NHthtmiel, and Jaqoonetts.— ITAotlcy.
11. Princess and Ladies.— Ditto.
The lUnstTstiona are printed on fine tinted paper, end may be had
leparaltly at 4 > . p«i Number.
Each volume will contain on the aTerage eleven Flatra, and the work
will ba completed in fifteen Talamee.
Printed and published by A.'J. Talpt, Red Lion Conrt,
Fleet Street; and sold bj all Booksellen.
OPINIONS.
■ It is at once the most deligbtJul and arailable fbrm in whid Shak-
■peare has eror appeared.'— Morning Pnt.
'An admirable idea, and oamlally pot in ezeontian. The outline en-
gravings abound, and am eioellentlT done ; type rood, siae eonreniest,
price next to nathiog. the subject'Shakspeare.'If this combioatioD do
not attract, there ia neither taste nor patriotinn in England.'— (/niiid
StrviceJournat.
'The Tolume contains a great nombeT of illnstratioiis, after many of
oar celebrated artiBts, executed with fidelity and trutii. Uie whole
work gives promise of a moat delightful companion to every librar j,
where taste and beauty, combined with correctnesa of typography, foim
a leading object with Uie reader.'— 8alirif(.
'Looking on the work bb a whole, on the portrait and the thirteen
ovtlines, which really come for nothing, and yet stand for mooh, we
cannot deny that thU work is worthy of its source, and we have not a
doubt that the public will appreciate the labor.'— AtUa.
'Mr. Valpy has ennferred a great benefit by tbia cheap and graceful
editioa of the works of the'world's first wit.'Its mechanical depart-
ment, auch as paper, print, & c., ia perfect, and the addition of Boydell'a
embeUiahments renders it the most finished work of the sort we have.'
price at which it may be purchased will render the work a mostdeairable
■od ornamental acquisition to the family library.'— We^Iy Timtt.
'Tltia edition bids & irto be the moat interesting of any yet published.
Iluiae who recollect the Shakspsare Gallery in Pedl BIUI, or ths splendid
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SHAESPKARB. 3
■eriei of eogrsTings published from thoao pictures by Aldermu Boydell,
will rejoice to knoir that fsilhful antline copies of them will tppeir in
this new editioa. We run do risk in «a;iag that (he engnTiugs vill be
worth the money chared for the whole work.'— New Dnln-toiBinj Frai.
'The immortal Bard of Avon never wh introdaced to the public in ■
form morepleuing tban in this edition. It ii ihe most useful, orna-
m«utsl, and eoonomical editioa of Sbakapeara extant.'— £««'• Batfc
'One of the chief attraetioni of Mr. Valpr's editioa istheiUaitntioiu,
executed in the best strle of oatline engraviog, from the magnificent
Sbalcgpeareof Boydetl, the labor of ti life, and the result of an expenditure
which perhaps wai nsTer before or since laid out on one suthor.* —
fVolvtrliainpim CkrmicU.
" he booli is n
J which can b ..,...„, ,
gmtttlakmtnti of the text, produced id a spirited maBnar, in a fiiat atfle
of outline engmring.'— Plymouth Herald.
'Amongst the mimeroua worlis that hsTo lately iasoed from the preM,
none possesses a greater claim to public pstronsge than Valpy's edition
of Shakspeare. The execution is most splendid, both in the typDiraphical
departmeDt, and also in tb« beauty of the engiaTings. W« have seldom
witnessed soch a manifaatstion of talent and exertion aa the Grat Tolome
contains.'— NvrthampUm Frel Prai.
• This ia the moat desirable edition of Sbakspaare that haa yet been
launched iuto the literary world. It will be found an acquisition which
aearoely leatea any room for improvemant.'— Brighloii Herald.
• What we admire aboye all things in thia edition i > , the alwenee of
those learned and tiresome commentaries which used to bora na so much
in Theobald and'the rest.'Id the place of vile pagea of closely-printed
prose, we sre every DOW and [hen called to admire a masterly etching,
which illnatrsCes some beautiful pesssge, and gires'a local habitation
and a name'to the floatii^ fancies of the poet.'— NorthuaiberUmd Ad~
'There ia a singularity in this publication which redeama it from
either identity or analogy of character with the countleas editiona which
hsTB preceded it.'— Tattnton Courier.
'The volume before ua must be allowed te be of a superior description:
the platea are beantifnl specimeDS of ait.'— Well Bn'ttm.
'Those who desire to possess an elegant, convenient, and cheap edition
of the works of Sbaksneare, will do well to arail themaelTos of the
preaent opportnnity.'— Brirtoi Gaiette.
'This beai^ful edition redecta the highest credit on the publisher fcer
the very elegant manner in which the work ia brought ont. Withoutit.
no gentleman's library csu be perfect.'— Stuiex Advertiier.
'Though there are numerous editions of Sbakapeare extant, yet we
believe the present one, from its beauty and cheapness, will become a
bvorite. Mr. Valpy has adopted tbe plan of the popular prodaetionB of
the day,— we mean uie Weverley novels. Lord Byron's works, and others,
with lidB exception, that hia illoattatioDS ere more numerous, and eijual
n graphic excellence.'— £iilli > n ChrimicU.
'We call the attention of our readera to this edition of Sbakapeare,
perhaps the most complete that has e < er appeared.'— Eon Indepeadeat,
PubliBhiu; Monthly, wkh > BiognfUcat Sketch, ■ Portnit of Mcb
Author, Not*s,Mapi, & e. Price 4i. 6d. Small 8vo, ia cloth,
THE .
FAMHY CLASSICAL LIBRARY
ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS
U09T VALUABLE CIt££K AND LATIN CLASSICS.
It scholar, to read and ralaet,
, , .., ^d8 tba I'"'■■ "'■
CUitimt Audum?— Db. Fut > .
Ai (lia leaned laugnageB do not foTm part of the edncatjoii
Of Female*, the oal; aocew which ihej have to the valuable
■tores of antiquity is through the medium of correct translattOH ;
aud the present Selection ia intendad to ioclvde Ihaae Authors
(Mly, wtiOBe irorka tnay be read iy lA > jfputA »f hoik *****.
[owing Authors; which may be purcbaaed separately:
end PERSIUS, by ^ W.
Dbummohd.
SO-M. THUCYDIDfiS, Shitb.
J5-». PLUTARCH'S LIVES;
with EagrariiiKB.
». HESIOD, bT C. Gltoh,
Em ■ ; al» the CASSANDRA of
LYCOPHRON. bj Lord Boia-
ia«: with BION, MOSCHUS.
MUSiEUS, and SAPPHO.
SI, 3!. CjESiAR'a COMMEN-
LUSf , by Row.
3, 4. XENOPHON'S Akababis
and CiBoruiii, b > SriLnur
and Cooper.
4-r. HERODOTD3. Bawi.
«, 9. VIRGIL, bj W & uiaaiM,
SOTHEBT, & DrTDEN.
With ANAC:
TruuIntiDa, br Bou,
It— la. TACITUS. Mubphv.
16. THEOPHRASTtS ; with 30
Ckaraoteriatio SognTiags.
ir, 18. HORACE and FIL£-
DRUfi.
19. JUVENAL, by Dr. Badhamj
33. SOPHOCLES- Fbancimn.
34-36. EURIPIDES. PoniB.
37-99. HOMER. Poi-e. fa lie
Pr«a.
LONGIKUS, OVID, & c. wilt
Mlow.
Bach Vol. ii daliverad Bonthly with the HasaaHiM.
7AMILY CLASSICAL LtBSABT- S
OPINIONS.
'From 1 careful eiRioination of the volnmeB now before tbe public, wb
do not hesitate to doclare our conviction thit a nore importMit or • suue
intersiting acoeuiou than this Libiary to our utitioDBl literature haa not
propoaed, before tbia lime, for placing the treaaiirea of the claSBiF irriten
in the hsnda of readara who were unacquainted with the original Isn-
EfBcn in which they wrote. How eaaily sot* a plan could be accom-
pliBhed— howadmirtblj it eouW be executed— with what a well-foanded
•Murmnceitttiiht be»nd«rtaken,of produiinggmxi of etery kind— solid
inatraction with tba moet ennobling delight — Un > Tolumes before u* sie
at once the axample and the proof. We might ptaiae the elegUDce and
aceuraoy of the work ; but* feature of greater importance than ii con-
nected with «iteraai merita demands a»r warmeat approbatiOD,— we
-L . . . ■ - Tery thing (tfonaiie to virgin inoooaDce- Thui,
for the Siat time in the oonrae of agei, aU the inteHactnal Bpleadora of
Greece and Rome are opened to the modeat contemplation of the gentler
eei ; aod a lady can acknowlege an acquaiutance with the treaeurea of
ancient poetry withmt the emalleet eempnuBiu of her delieaoy.'—
llmihly lUvieai.
'We know of DO periodical more richly deaerring of patreiuge, and
tee should eiteem it .a disgrace (o ai|r eBtabliabment for the edueation
of either sex, in the library of which, this beautifnl edition of the most
appTBTed tranalatioiui of the andenla waa not to be fouad,'— Tk« Bft.
THEOPHRASTUS, with 60 Engrarings.
'A better atage-coach companion, or one for a weary fireaida on a wet
day, we could not recommend to those who delight is atudjing the rast
varieties of human oharaotor.'— Alhtnaum.
PLUTABCHS LIVES.
Mena^ aaya, if all the bookete tbe »orld wire in the fire, there ia not
nne which he would to eagerly snatch from the flamea as Plutarch.
That author never tires bim: be reads him often, and always finds new
beauties.
'Wbo, that reads at all, has not read Plnterehl attd wbe, that has Mad
him, does not lelnni to him again and again with renewad deli^U!
Plutarch is tbe idol of tlie sohaol-bey, the pe^et'Companion of the
lonely shepherd on the hill-side, aad tbe friend and monitor of the war-
rior and staCesmaa ; and it ia difficult to aay which of these veij dis-
aimilar classes of readers profits most largely by bis pemaal.'— Wattm
CESAR'S COMMENTARIES.
'Hese begina one of the moat iBlereating of all Roman Classics, whose
narrative has made many a warrinr, whose facts throw so important a
light on tbe history of every European nation, and whose style ia a model
for writers in all languages. — Litsriiry Giaetit,
araPHocLES.
'It ii exacnted with great spirit and fidelity. It is, nd«ad, a version
wortby of a place in the Family Classical Library, and higker piaiae H
DoliiHihyGoOgle
e FAMILY CLASSICAL LIBRAKY.
could Bcucel^ reeeiva ; fot that series hu been bilherto condueled with
■i) much spirit, taale, and judgment, that we are st'niid of wearyinir our
readers b; ao often repeeting oar conunendation* uid our hearty wishes
for its coutiaaed snoceia.'— Atheaatim.
HORACE.
In No. XVIII. Traiulations of differeot puts of HORACE
■re introdueed from the peas of the foUowing Poets :
Addieon— Atterbarjr, Bp.— Badhem, C—Besttie, F.— Beeamoat, Sir
J.— Beatley, Dr.— Bernal, B.— Byron, Lord— Csrter, Eliiabath— ChM-
lertoQ — Conffere, W.— Cowley — Cowpei— Creech— Croly — Dnden —
ETelyn— Hastings, WarreQ— Herbert, Hon. W.— HobhousB, Sir J. Cam
—Hunt, Leigh— Johnaon, Dr.— Jonson, Ben— Joy. H. Hall— LytUeton.
Lord — MeriTBle, J. — Miltoa — Mootgomery, Robert— Otway — Paper—
PorsoD— Barry Corawall — Roscommon, Earl of— Rowe, N. — Sidney, Sir
P Swift, Dean — Wakefield. Gilbert — Warton, J. — Warton, T.-
Wtangham, & c. he.
Earif M Jawury , 18U, mU bt pnUiiifd, in 1 vol. Stu. I6i.
SKELETONS OR SUMMARIES
OF THE SERMONS AND DISCOURSES
OF THE FOLLOWING BHIHBNT DIVINES:
SBEBtOCI, I OODSH,
Babrow, Powell,
JiBBHT TaTLOB, I FaWCETT.
Bj the ReT. T. 3. HUGHES, B. D.
Q[ Emmanael College ; Chaplain lo tlie Bishop of Petei borough, and lute
ChriBtiaii Advocale at CambTidge.
These Sumroariei will be found highly ussful to iLo Clergy, and well
calcalated to outfl Iht gouMg DictM in «i > iiijMnltMi.
The work will bo piintad in a liie unifonu with Mr. Slnioii'i
SlELITOtrS.
SELF-ADVANCEMENT ;
Or, ExtraordinaFT Tiansitioaa from Obscahty to GreatiieaB ; exemplified
in the Lives vid History of Adrian Fourth, the Emperor Basil, Kieozi
the Tribune, Alexander Fifth, Cardinal Xintenes, Adrian Sixth, Cu-
dinal Wolsoj, Thomas Lord Cromwell, Siitna Fifth, Masaniello, Car-
dinal Alheioni, Doctor Fraojclia, asd the King of Sweden.
By the Author of " Practical Wisdom. " l^mo. 4i. 6d.
The above has been published with e view of exciting in the minds of
-youth a spirit of emulation and laudable ambition.
'This i > one of the best booka for the reading of young people that has
jret been intradnced into tehools.'— Atlm.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
ABRIDGMENTS.
In one to). Small 8to. A
PALEY'S MORAL AND POLITICAL
PHILOSOPHY,
Id one toI. Snull Bra. 3i. 6d. bound in oloth,
PALEY'S EVIDENCES OF CHRISTIANrTY,
'All tbe argumeutB of the great philowipheT are IsithiullT preienred,
and DOtblag omitted for whicli Paiey'a work ia worth peruaing. To a
coDauierablfl eiteni tha langiuge of tJio ari^inHl ii adhered to, HJid in
Bome inBtBuceB the prosreaB of the u^ament materially aiaiited.'—
Menthly Retiiea.
'Vie only lesret that we were bom s geiieration too bood. This work,
with its portrait and very eioellont biographical akatofa, will bs welcome
lo many a fieahman, either in or ont of the UnirerBitiei.'— Athttunan.
'A learned critic, in the life-time of Paley, expTeiaed aa hie opinion
of the excellent work above named, that it would suffer do injury, but be
moch (mpioTed. fay a uidicious Rbridement : we look on thia volume aa
a coUTincing proof of ita truth.'— BalfiJoumoi,
Is oae v(d. Small 8to. 5i. 6d. bonnd in cloth, with a Portrait,
LOCKE ON THE HUMAN UNDERSTANDING,
ADDRESS from a. CLERGYMAN to his
PARISHIONERS.
Sixth EA. 4i. 6d. bda.
With a MoBMiNO and Etehiho pHivEa. By R. VALPY, D.D., F.A J.
CosTENTS :— Of God— The Son of God— The Hoi* Ghoat— The Trinity
— Read Ihe Scriptnrea — The Incarnation of Jesua Chriat — The Doctrinea
of Jeaos Chriat— The Reeurrection— Redemption— Justification— Faith
— Worta- Worka without Faith— Faith without Works— Union of Faith
and Works- Merit and Reward— HumiUt; —The Influence of the Holy
Spirit— Repentance— Regeneration. Renewal. Conyeraion — Delay of
ConTarBioD— Our Endeavors- Predestination, Free Will— Of Prayer—
Puhlio Worahip- Family Prayer — The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper —
Forgiveness of Injuries — Veneration to the Name of God — Relativf
Dutis»— Exhortation to Piety- Prospect in Life~~Uae of Time— Death.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
Pint of Ptbnuiy, No. I. fsyri are. St. W. Kwn, «f «
ABRIDGMENT OF THE
COMMENTARIES
OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.
Bv THB Rev. T. S. HUGHES, B.D.
Of Emntuael College i Chsplaia to the Bishop of Peterborooilb, ud lata
CbrJBtiao Advocata at Cimbridce.
AUTHORS TO BE COHDENSED :
TheAuembly— R. Baxter— Burkitt—Campbell.MMknight, and Wood-
hone— A. Cluka— Clarke and P^le — Coka — Dimlati — Doddridsa—
D'Ojly BDd Mant, b; Bishop Hobsrt — Gilpin —OiiTB»—Hiinmoiid—
Hanrr — Hewlett — Iieish — Arofabp. Newconie — Job Orion — Fau-ick,
Lowtb; Amid, Wh^br, and LomMD— H. Forie— Soott— Wiiaon.
PLAN.
1. Tbe Work will contain the Notes of tlie abore select and Talaable
Eogliah Commenlalaia, who bave conjmented on the wbole of iho Old
or New Teatament. or both ; and these > o condensed as to giye the
Aubatance briefly, but wilhont obBCnrity.
S. The Not* of eachComnentalarwilthe in alphafcetiol order, chapter
bf chapter; so that reference maybe directly made to the opiniona of
any tavoHte Author.
3. At the end of the woil will tie giren a list of the most celebrated
«aci«at and modem pnblubed Sermons, adapted to the a»»i T«iits, botli
IB the Old aod New Teituoent.
4. The work will commence with the New Teatament, pristad in royal
OCtaOD, double columns, iu Monthly Numbers , averaiinglflO pages, St. 6d.
each, and it ia presumed the whole will form sbuot 40 parts. The
New Testament will he complete in itself, to suit any who rasa; wiah to
ttiscontinue the woit before the whole Bitde is fimshed.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
STANDARD
NOVELS.
N» XXIII.
Ufb ud Dunneri, uid Stoiiei of adventure^ ue mon eogeriy rrctiTvil
the muy tJi > a tnTn pnducHfiiu, hoirvvtr ImporUpt tbne Ivttn hut'
Jill > bAnu« FUConIc vrttiiigf i «nd tlie Dectmetim of Boccacciq bH cr
Ured the IMio TrEitUei, and dtha lamed wraki of th«i »itha.~ ^
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
BT JANK AC8TKN.
LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
(LATE COLBURN AND BENTLEY):
BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDlNBURGDi
CCUMINO, DUBLIN ; AND
OALIONANI, PARIS.
183S.
HihyGoogle
Ilia Bat Numbd of -The SUndud tloreli, " to be puMlibed ea tbt
lit of FebriuT;, win cxnUIn ■ u« tnulukui, bj Urn IttfiML Hat, of
«ADAH£ DE STAZL-S nMntad Bdudw,
CORINNE ; OH, ITALY,
cODipleU in One Vuliuiic, irltta metiiul vaUfaia of Uie " Chuta,*'or OdH,
bjHiH LAiraoni mi gnphic iDiotntiaoi, coaiMlnc of u enjnTlni (torn
the injl known fdocuie of Qeiud, (nd ■ view of Ccfipet (tlw ifiklaKC al
FHMadbr A.AB. apoHtamcdf,
DoliiHihyGoOgle
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
^^:^u?sini: " ;r„s'i-T.


Cookie
,G(Hinlc


.i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SENSE
SE N S I BI LI:T Y:
BY JANE AUSTEN.
LONDON:
RICHARD BEKTLEY, NEW BURLINOTON STREET,
(LATE COLBUBN AND BENTLET):
BELL AHD BRASFCT^ EDIMBOSaH i
cuuuaia, dubliHi and
[, PARIS.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
HihvGoonlc
Memoir
MISS AUSTEN.
Jans Austen was bom on the 16th of December,
177S, at Sterenton, in the county of Hants. Her
fether was rector of that parish upwards of forty
years. There he resided in the consdentious and un-
assisted discharge of his ministerial duties undl he was
turned of seventy years. Then he retired with his
wife, our authoress, and her sister, to Bath, for the
remainder of his life, a period of about four years.
Being not only a profound scholar, but possessing a
most exquisite taste in every species of literature, it is
not wonderful that his daughter Jane should, at a very
early age, have become sensible to the charms of style,
and enthusiastic in the cultivation of her own language.
Or tlie death of her & ther, she removed, with her
mother and sister, for a short time, to Southampton;
and finally, in 1809, to the pleasant village of Chawton
in the same county. From this place she sent her
novels into the world. Some of them had been the
gradual performances of her previous life ; for though
in composition she was equally rapid and correct, yet
A 3
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
vi MEMOIR OF HISS ADSTKN.
an invinciUe distnut of her own judgment induced
her to withhold her works from the public, till time
and many perusals had satisfied her that the chann of
recent composition was dissolved. The natural con-
stitution, the regular habits, the quiet and happy occu-
pations of our authoress, seemed to promise a long
succession of amusement to the public, and a gradual
increase of reputation to herself. But the symp-
toms of a decai^, de^ and incurable, b^an to show
themselves in the comtnencement of 1816- Her
decline was at first deceitfully slow ; but in the month
of May, 1817, it was found advisable that she should
be removed to Winchester for the benefit of constant
medical aid, wbidi none, even then, dared to hope
would be permanently beneficiaL She supported, dur-
ing two months, all the varying pain, irJcsomeness, and
tedium, attendant on decaying nature, with more than
resignation — with a truly elastic cheerfiilness. She
retained her & culties, her memory, her & Dcy, her
temper, and her affections, warm, dear, and unim-
paired, to the last. Her last voluntary speech con-i
veyed thanks to her medical attendant; and to the
final question asked of her, purporting to know her
wants, she replied, " I want nothing but death. " She
expired shortiy after, on Friday, the 18th of July, 1817.
in the arms of her sister; and was buried, on the24tb
of the same month, in the cathedral church of Win-
Of personal attractions she possessed a consider-
able share ; her stature rather exceeded the. middle
height; her carriage and deportment were quiet, but
grace & l ; her features were separately good ; their as-
semblage produced an unrivalled ezpresuon of that
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
HBMOia or HISS AUSTBK. Til
ebeerfulness, unsibility, BDd benevolence, which wen
her real diuacteriBtica ; her craiplexbn was of the
finest texture — it nught with tnidi be said, that her
eloquent blood spoke throogfa her modest dieek; her
voice was sweet ; she delivered herself with fluency and
precisioD ; indeed, she was formed for degant and ra-
tional soaety, excelling in conversation as much as in
emnposition. Id die present age it is hazardous to
menticoi accomplishments; our authoress would pro-
baUy have been inferior to few in such acquire-
ments, had she not been bo superior to most, in higher
things.
It remains to make a few observations tm that which
her friends deemed moi^ important, on those en-
dowments which sweetened every hour of dior lives.
If there be an opini(xi current in the world that a per-
fectly amiable temper is not recondli^e to a lively
ima^ation, and a keen relish for wit, such an i^inion
will be rejected for ever by those who had the happi-
ness of knowing the authoress^ of the following work.
Thoi^ the frailties, foibles, and fbllieB of others, could
not escape her immediate detection, yet even on their
vices did she never trust herself to comment with
unkindnesB. Hie affectation of candour is not un-
common, hut she had no afiectation. Faultless herself,
as nearly as human nature can be, she always sought,
in the & ults of others, something to ezx;use, to fin^ive,
or forget. Where extenuation was impossible, she
had a sure refiige in silence. She never uttered either
a hasty, a silly, or a severe expression. In short, her
temper was as polished as her wit ; and no one could
be often in her company without feeling a strong desire
of obtainiog her friendship, and cherishing a hope < f
A 4
DoliiHihyGoOgle
TlU HZMOIB 07 MISS AUSXBH.
having obtained it. She became an authored estitdj
from taste and inclination. Neither the hope of finite
por profit mixed with her early motives. It woa with
extreme difficulty that her friends, whose partiaUty she
suspected, whilst she honoured their judgment, onild
j)ersu3de her to publish her first worlu Nay, so per-
suaded was she that the sale would not repay the ex-
pense of publication, that she actually made a reserve
from her moderate income to meet die expected losa.
She could scarcely believe what she termed her great
good fortune, when " Seuse and Sensibility " produced a
clear profit of about 150/, Few so gifted were so truly un-
pretending. She regarded the above sum as a prodigious
recompense for that which bad cost her nothing. Her
readers, perhaps, will wonder that such a work pro-
duced BO little, at a time when some authors have
received more guineas than they have written lines.
But the public has not been unjust ; and our authoress
was far from thinking it so. Most gratifying to her
was the applause which from lime to time reached her
ears from those who were competent to discriminate.
When " IVide and Pr^udice " made its appearance,
a gentleman, celebrated for his literary attainments,
^vised a friend of the authoress to read it, adding, with
more point than gallantry, " I should like to know who
is the author, for it is much too clever to have been
written by a woman. " Still, in spite of such applause
so much did she shrink from notoriety, that no inorease
of feme would have induced her, had she lived, to affix
hername to any productions of her pen. In the bosom
of her femily she talked of them freely ; thankful for
prmse, open to remark, and submissive to triticiBm. But
in public she turned away from any allusion to the cha-
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
MBHOIR Of UISS AUSTKH. IX
ncter of an audioress. In fotvof of thU, the Mowing
drcumstance, otherwise unimportsnt, ia stated. Mist
A < uteii was on a visit in London soon after the publi-
catuHi of Mansfield Park: a nobleman, personally
unknown to her, but who had good reasons for con-
udering her to be the authoress of that woik, was
deurous of her joming a literary circle at hia houae > He
communicated his wish in the politest maoner, through
a mutual friend, adding, what his Lrndshlp douhlleM
thought would be an irresistible indacement, that the
celebrated Madame de Stael would be of the party.
Miss Austen immediately declined the invitation To
her truly delicate mind such a display would have given
pain instead of pleasure.
. Her power o£ inventing cdiariBers seems to have
been intuitive, and almost unlimited. She drew from
nature ; but, whatever mi^ have been surmised to the
contrary, never from individuals.'The style of her ta-
miliar correspondence was in all req > ecta the same as
that of her novels. Every thing came finished from
her pen ; fi > r on all subjects she had ideas as dear as
her expressions were well chosen. It is not too much
to say that she never despatched a note or letter un-
worthy of publication. I^e fallowing few short extracts
from her piivate correspondence are submitted to the
public without apology, as being more truly descriptive
of her temper, taste, and feelings, than any thing which
the pen of a biographer can produce. The first is a
]dayful defence of herself from a mock charge of
having pilfered the manuscripts of a young relation.
" What should I do, my dearest R, with your manly,
vigorous sketches, so full of life and spirit ?'How could
I powibly join them on to a little bit of ivory, two
DoliiHihyGoOgle
X MEMOIE or HISS AUSTElf.
inches wide, on which I work with a brush so fine) as
to produce little effect after much labour ? " The re-
■nuning extracts are from a letter written a few weeks
before her death. " M7 medical attendant is encourag-
ing, and talks of making me quite well. I live chiefly
on the sofe, but am allowed to walk from one room to
the other. I have been out once in a sedan chur, and
am to repeat it, and be promoted to a wheel-chur as
the weather serves. On this subject I will only say
& rther, that my dearest sister, my tender, watchfid, in*
dfl & tigible nurse, has not been made ill by her exer-
tions. As to what I owe to her, and to the anxious
affection of all my beloved & mily on this occasion, I
can only cry over it, and pray to God to bless them
more and more. " She next touches with just and gen-
tle animadversion on a subject of domestic disappoint-
ment. Of this, the particulars do not concern the
public Yet, injustice to her characteristic sweetness
and reugnation, the concluding observation of our au-
thoress thereon must not be suppressed. " But I am
getting'too near cmnplunt. It has been the i^ipoint-
ment of God, however secondary causes may have
operated. "
The above brief biogr^ical sketch has been, in
substance, already publiahed^with Miss Austen's post-
humous novels. It is a natter of deep regret to the
writer, that materials for a more detailed account of M
talented a woman cannot be obtained ; therefore, as a
tribute due to her memory, he subjoins the following
Doli/fdhyGoOHlc
MEMOIR OF MISS AUBTKIT. U
extracts from a. critical journal of the highest reput-
atitm: —
" Unlike tbat t^many writers, Miss Austen's & me has
grown & Btest since she died ; there was no ^clat about
her first appearance: the public took time to make up
its miod ; and she, not having ptaked her hopes of hap-
piness on succera or failure, was content to wut for the
decision of her daima. Those claims hare long been
established beyond a question; but the merit o£Jirrt
recognigii^; them belongs less to reviewers than to
general readers. So retired, so unmarked by literary
notoriety, was the life Miss Austen led, that if any
Ukenets was ever taken of her, none has ever been
n^raved.* With regard to her genius, we must ad-
venture a fewremarks. She herself compares her pro-
ductions to a little bit of ivory, two inches wide, worked
upon with a brush so fine, that little effect is produced
after much labour. It is so: her portraits are perfect
likenesses, admirably finished; many of them gems, but
it is all miniature punting; and, satisfied with being in-
imitable in one line, she never essayed canvass and oils;
never tried her hand at a majesUc daub. Her « two
inches of ivory " just describeB her preparations for a
tale of three volumes. A village — two families con-
nected together — three or four interlopers, out of
whom are to spring a little tracaaserie; — and by means
of village or country town visiting and gossiping a real
plot shall thicken, and its " rear of darkness " never be
scattered till six pages oS^nts. The plots are simfJe
* Kulikcnen nerwaa taken of Min Amtcn; vhieb the editor
mnch lament*, as fae li tbenbj precluded fiom the gntiflcidail
of prefixing her paitnit to this editian.
r,. i., < i'-,G00J^lc
XU MSMOIR 0¥ HISS AUSTEM.
in construction, and yet intricate in devetc^ienient ; —
the main characters, those that the reader feela sure are
to love, marry, and make mischief, are introduced in the
first or second chapter ; the work is ell done by half a
dozen people ; no person, scene, or sentence, is ever in-
troduced nee^ess to the matter in hand : — no catas-
trophes, or discoveries, or surprises of a grand nature,
are allowed — neither children nor fortunes are lost or
found by accident — the mind is never taken off the
level sur & ce of life — the reader breakfasts, dines,
walks, and gossips, with the various worthies, till a pro-
cess of transmutation takes place in him, and he abso-
lutely & ncies himself one of the company. Yet the
winding up of the plot involves a surprise : a few inci-
dents are entangled at the beginning in the most simple
and ndtural manner, and till the close one never feela
qnite sure how they are to be disentai^led. Disen-
tangled, however, they are, and that in a most satisfac-
tory manner. The secret is, Miss Austen wasa thorough
mistress in the knowledge of human character ; hoW it
is acted upon by education and circumstance; and how,
when once formed, it shows itself throu^ every hour
of every day, and in every speech to every person.
Her conversations would be tiresome but for this; and
her personages, the fellows to whom may be met in the
streets, or drank tea with at half an hour's notice,
would excite no interest ; but inMiss Austen's hands
we see into their hearts and hopes, their motives, their
stru^Ies within themselves ; and a sympathy is induced,
which, if extended to daily life, and the world at large,
would make the reader amore amiable person ; and we
must think it that reader's own & ult who does not
dose her pages with more charity in his heart towards
DoiiiHihv Google
UBWOIR OF Hna AIT8TBH. Xlll
anpretendh^, if prosing, worth ; with a higher esti-
ntation of simple kindnesB, aod sincere good-wiil ; with
a quickened sense of the duty of bearing and forbear-
ing, in domestic intercourse, and of the pleasure of
addiog to the little comforts even of persons who are
neither wits itor beauties, — who, in a word, does not
feel more disposed to be benevolenL In the last post-
humous tale ('Persuasion') there is a stram of a higher
mood; there is still the exquisite deli neatioo of common
life, such life aa we hear, and see, and make part of,
with the addition of a finer, more poetic, yet equally
real tone of thought and actions in the principals. If
Miss Austen was sparing in her introduction of nobler
diaracters, it was because they are scattered sparingly
in life. Her death has made a chasm in our light liter-
ature, — the domestic novel, with its home-bom in-
ddents, its'fanullar matter of to^ay,'its slight
array of names, and great cognisance of people and
things, its confinement to country life, and total obli-
vion of costume, manners, the great world, and < the
mirror of fashion.'Every species of composition la,
when good, to be admired in its way ; but the revival
of the domestic novel would m^e a pleasant interlude
to the showy, sketchy novels of high Yifk.
" Miss Austen has the merit (in our judgment most
essential) of being evidently a Christian writer; a
merit which is much enhanced, both on the score of
good taste and of practical utility, by her religion
being not at all obtrusive. She might defy the most
fastidious critic to call any of her novels (as Ccelebs
was designated) a dramatic sermon. The subject is
rather alluded to, and that incidentally, than studiously
brought forward and dwelt upon. In fact, she is mftre
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■XIV MZHOIB or IifUl AUSTSV.
sparing of it than would be thought desirable bj some
persona ; perhaps even by herself, had she consulted
merelfher owd sentiments; but she probably intro-
duced it as & r as she thought would be generally pro-
fitable ; for when the purpose of inculcating a religious
principle is made too palpably promineDt,«aany readers,
if they do not throw aside the book with disgust, are
^t to fortify themselves with that respectful kind of
apathy with which they undergo a regular sermon,
and prepare themselTes as they do to swallow a dose
of medicine, endeavouring to get it down In la^
gulps, without tasting it more than is necessary. "
• *•*••«
Perhqn these volumes may be perused by some
readers who will feel a solidtude respecting the author-
ess, extending beyond the perishable qualities of tem-
p^,maDnerB, taste, and talents. — We can assure all such
(and the being able so to do gratifies us more than the
loudest voice of human praise) that Jane Austen's
hopes of immortality were built upon the Rock of ages.
That she deeply ielt, and devoutly acknowledged, the
insignificance of all worldly attainments, and the worth-
lessness of all human services, in the eyes of her
heavenly Father. TTiat she had no other hope of
mercy, pardon, and peace, but throu^ the merits and
auSerings of her Redeemer.
October 5. 18S2.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
HKHOia or MISS ACSTKN.
The Editor of " Tlie Standard Novels " feels happy
in being able to state, that arraDgementa hare b^,
made for including several other of the works of Miss
Austen in this collection. Miss Austen is the founder
oi a school of novelists ; and her followers are not con-
fined to her own sex, but comprise in their number
some male writers of considerable merit. The au-
thoress of " Sense and Sensibility " had for her con-
temporaries several female novelistSt whose works
attained instant popularity — Madame D'Arblay, Miss
Edgeworth, Mrs. (^ie, Miss Porter, and others, most of
whose novels preceded hers in order of time : but,
notwithstanding the temptation which nearly all writers
are under (especially at the commencement of their
vocation) to imitate that which has commanded dis-
tinguished success, Mias Austen at once ireed herself
from such influence, and, with combined boldness and
modesty, struck into a path of her own, of which she
remains, to this day, the undisputed mistresa. The
truth, spirit, ease, and refined humour of her con-
versaUons have rarely been equalled. She is, em-
phatically, the noveUst of home. One of the most
remarkable traits of her genius may be found in the
power by which, without in the slightest degree violat-
ing the truth of portraiture, she is able to make the
veriest every-day person a character of great interest.
This is, indeed, turning lead into gold ; but it would
be difficult to detect the secret of the process.
HihyGoonlc
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
VOLUME THE FIRST.
CHAPTER I
Xh8 ftmily of Duhwood haA been long tetded in Sus-
sex. Their eaUte wu large, and their reiidenee wu tt
Norland Park, in the centre of their property, where, & a
manj generationa, they had lived in to reipectable a
inanner ai to engage the general good opinion of their nir-
rounding acquaintance. The late owner of tbia eatate naa
a ^gle man, who lived to a very advanced age, and who,
for many yeara of hia life, had a conitant companion and
bouaekeeper in fala aiater. But her death, which happened
ten years before hit own, produced a great alteration in hti
home ; for to mpply her loss, he inriied and received into
faig house the family of hia nephew Mr. Henry Dssbwood,
the legal inheritor of tlie Norland eatate, and the peKon to
whom he intended to bequeath it In the aodety of his
nephew and niece, and their cluldren, the old gentleman'i
days were comfortably spenL Hia attadiment to them all
increased. The constant attention of Mr. and Mrs. Henry
Daihwood to hia wishes, which proceeded not merely from
intereat, bat from goodness of heart, gave him erery degree
of aolid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cbeer-
fulneai of the children added a relish to hia existence.
By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one
Bon ; by his present lady three daughters. The son, a
steady respectable yoong man, was amply provided for by
ibe fortune of his mother, wldch had been lai^, and half
B
DoliiHihyGoOgle
of vliidt devolved on him on hia coming of age. Sj hia
own niarrii^, likewiw, which happened soon kfterwuda,
lie added to hit wealth. To him, therefore, the raccoson
to the Norland estate waa not so really important aa to hia
naten ; for theiT fortuaa, independent of wtiat mig^t ariae
to them from their falhei'a inheriting that ptopertj, could
be hot small. Their mother had nothing, and their father
only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the
remaining moiety of his first wife's fortune wai also se-
nired to her child, and he had only a life-interest in it.
The old geptlema]] died : hia will was read ; and, like
almost every other will, gave as much disappointment aa
pleasure. He was neither so niijusi, nor so ungrateful, aa
to leave his estate from his nephew ; but he left It to him
on such terms as destroyed half the value of the beqoen.
Mn Dashwood had wished for it more for the salfC of hit
wife and daughters than for himself or hia son : hut to his
son, and hia son's son, a child of four years old, it was
secured, in auch a way, as to leave to himself no power of
providing for those who were most dear to him, and who
most needed ft provision hy any charge on the estate^ or by
any sale of ica valuable woods. The whole was tied up
for the benefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with
bis father and mother at Norland, bad so far gwned on the
affections of bis uncle, by such attracdons aa are by no means
unusual in children of two or three years old, — an imper-
fect articolatioii, an earnest desire of having hia own way,
many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, — ss to ouU
wei^ all the value of all the attentioo which, for years, he
had tecdved from his niece and her daughters. He
meant not to be unkind, however, and, as « mark of his
affection for the three girls, he left them a thousand
pounds ^ece.
Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe;
but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might
reasonably hope to live many years, and by living econo«
mically, Uy by a considerable sum from the produce of an
estate already large, and capable of almost immediate im-
provement. But the fortune, nhicb had bean so tardy iu
«oming, was hia onlj one twelvemonth. He survived bis
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BDcle no longer; and Kb thaiiMiidpMuida, iDoIudiog tbekle
legadM, vu all that lemtined for hit widgw Bnil daughttn.
Hit aon wu sent for u Mon u Ui (Unger Ka« known,
■nd to him Mr. Dashwood reooounaided, with sU the
■trength and ui^nc; which iUnen could command, the in-
tetwt of hii mother.in-lBw and aiaters.
Mr. John Daehwood had not Um atrong fiwUnga of
the Mat of the family ; but he wu aSbcted by a reoom-
mendatioa of such a nature at luch a time, and ha pna
miaed to do eMry thing in hi« power to make them
oootfortaUe. Hia father wai rendered euy by toch an
aiaunmoe, anil Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to
consider how mncb there might prudently be in hia pown
te do Cn theiD.
He wu net an ill-dispased young matt, nnleu to be
rather cold-hearted and rather aelflih is to be ill-disposed :
tmt he waa, in gaieral, well retpectcd ; for he conducted
himself with propriety in the diadiarge of his ordinsry
duties. Had he married a more amiable woman, he might
IwTe b«en made still more leapectaUe than he wu: ha
might even have been made amiable himaelf ; for he wu
very yow^ when he married, and very fond of hia wife.
Btu Mrs. John Duhwood wu a strong caricature of him'*
adf ; more narrow-niinded and selfish.
When be gave hia promise to hia father, he meditated
within himself to increase the fortunes of his listers by the
present of a thousand pounds apiece. He then really
thought himself equal to it. The prospect of four thousand
a year, in addition to hia present income, beaidea the re*
majning half of his own mother's foitane, warmed his
heart, and made him feet ci^ble of generoaity. " Yea,
he would give them three thousand pounds : it would be
liberal and handsome ! It would be enough to make them
completely easy. Three thousand pounds I he jconld apaie
so considerable a sum with little inconvenience. " He thought
of it all day long, and for many days locceMivdy, and he
did not fepeot.
No sooner was his father's fiinertJ over, than Mrs. Joha
Daahwoodi without sending any notice of her intention to
Iwr mother-ia-law, arrived with hex child and their attenL
•nti. No one could diipnte her right to come ; the home
WM her husband's hoia the moment of hi* & ther'B de-
ceMe ; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the
greater, and to a woman in Mrs. Dasnwood's dtustion,
with only common feelinga, must have heen highly an-
pleaung; but in her mind there was a sense of honour so
keen, a generositj'so romantic, that any o%nce of the kind,
^ whomsocTcr given or recdTed, was to her a source of
immovable disgUBt. Mrs. JohnDashwood had never been
■ favourite with any of her husband's family ; but she had
had no opportunity, till the present, of showing them widi
how little attention to the comfort of other pMpIe she could _
kct when occasion required it.
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this nngradous he*
bavioui^ and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-
law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she would have
quitted the'house for ever, had not the entreaty of her eldest
girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going,
and her own tender love for all her three children determined
her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a bread
with their brother.
Bhnor, diis eldest daughter whose advice was so eSbc-
tnal, poiseased a strength of understanding, and coolness of
judgment, which qualified her, thot^ only nineteen, to be
the counsellor of her mother, and ensbled her frequently to
eonnteract, to the advantage of them all, that eagerness of
mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have led to
imprudence. She had an excellent heart ; — her diapodtion
was affectionate, and her feelings were strong ; but she
knew how to govemthem ; it was a knowledge which her
mother had yet to leam, and which one of her sisters had
resolved never to be taught.
Marianne's abilitlei were. In many respects, quite equal
to Elinor's. She was sensible and clever ; but eager in
every thing : her sorrows, her joys, could have BO moder-
aliim. She was generous, amiable, interesting: she was
every thing but prudent. The resemblance between her
aad her mother was strikingly great
Elinor aaw, with concern, ^ excess of her sister's sen-
•ihiltty ; but by Mrs. Dashwood it waa valoed and cher >
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
■enib Ins aBfaBiurr. 9
labed. They encouraged each other now In tlie Tiolence of
ibeir affliction. The agony of grief which overpowered
them at Aral waa Toluntuily renewed, was sought for, waa
created again and again. They gave thenuelvea np wholly
to thdr soTTOw, seeking increase of wretchedoesa in every
reflectiDn that could afford it, and resolved againat ever ad-
mitting conaolatioD in future. Elinor, too, was deeply af-
flicted ; hut itill she couU itruggle, she could exert herself.
She could conault with her brother, could receive her aiater-
in-law on her arrival, and treat her with proper attention ;
and could strive to rouse her mother to nmilar exertion^
and encourage ber to similar forbearuice.
Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humoured, well-
diaposed girl ; but aa she had already imbibed a good deal
of Marlanne'a rotnance, without having much of her sense,
she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal her aiatera at k
aoie advanced period of life.
CHAPTER II.
Mrs. John Dahhwoot) now installed herself i
Norland; and her mother and dsters-in-law were degraded
to the condition of visiterB. As such, however, they were
treated by her with quiet civility; and hy her husband
with as much kindness as he could feel towards any body
beyond himself, his wife, and their child. He reaUy pressed
them, with some eamestnesa, to consider Norland aa their
home; and, as no plan appeared ao eligible to Mrs. Dash-
wood as Kmuning there till she could accommodate her-
self with a house in the neighbourhood, his ini'
A continuance in a place where every thing reminded
tier of former delight was exactly what suited her mind.
In seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more cheer-
ful XitKa hers, or possess, in a greater degrecj that sanguine
expecution of happiness whidi is happineaa itself. But ii'
B 3
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
O BENtB AMD BIKSIBIUTT.
MUTOW she must be equally carried away by her fincy , and
aa far beyond consolation aa in pleasure d)c waa beyond alloy.
Mra. Joho Dubwood did not at all approve of what hia
husband intended to do for hia nsten. To take three
thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy
-would be impoverishing him. to the most dreadful degree.
She begged him to think again on the subject. How could
he answer it to bliDsclf to rob his child, and his only child
too, of so large ■ sum? And what possible claim could
the Miss Dashwoods, who were related to him only by half
blood, which ahe considered as no rdationsbip at all, have
on bis geueiosity (o so large an amount i It was very wdl
known that no aSfection was ever supposed to exist between
the diildreti of any man by different manuges ; and why
waa he to ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by
giving away all his money to his half sisters ?
" It waa my father's last request to me, " replied her
husband, " that I should assist his widow and daughters. " ,
" He did not know what he wjw talking off, I dare sayj
ten to one but he was light-headed at the time. Had he
been in his right senses, he could not have thought of such
a thing as bulging you to give away half your fortune fiom
yonr own child. "
" He flid not atipulate for any particular anm, my dear
Fanny ; he only requested me, in general terms, to assist
them, and make their situation more comfortable than it
was in his power to do. Perhaps it would have been u
well if he had left it wholly to myself. He could hardly
suppose I should neglect them. But as he required the
promise, 1 could not do less than give it': at least I thought
so at the time. The promise, therefore, was given, and
must be performed. Something must be done for them
whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new home. "
" Well, then, let something be done for them ; but that
something need not be three thousnnd pounds. Consider, "
ahe added, " that when the money is once parted with, it
never can return. Your sisters will marry, and it will be
gone for ever. If, indeed, it could ever be restored to oui
poor little boy ■ "
" Why, to be sare, " taid her buaband, very gravdy,
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
" that would mAe ■ gnat difibmee. He time aiMj
ame when Hurp wiU regret thtt w large b iiim wu
parted with. If he should have ■ numeroiu family, tot
ilutaDce, it would be a Terj cmvenknt addition. "
" To be mre it would. "
" Pelhapi, then, It would be better for all partiei, if die
nm Were diminiihed one half. Five hundred pounds
wonld be • prodigioiii incieaae to thur CortniMa ! "
" Oh t beyond any thing great I What brother on
earA would do half lo much for hii niten, even if rwUg
hia litten ! And ai it it — only half Uood ! — But you
have such a generoiu tpirltl "
" I would not wi^ to do any tiling mean, " he replied,
''One had rather, mi roch oocaaiwu, do too much than too
little. No one, at katt, can think I have not done enough
fl > r dtem : eren thausdvea, they can hardly expect more. "
" There la no knowing what Iheff may expect, " laid die
lady, " but we are not to think of thdr expectationi : the
qontion i*, what ym can aflbrd to do. "
" Certainly ; and 1 think I may aflbrd to giro them
fire hundred ponndi apiece. Ai it ii, without any addi-
tion of mine, they will each hare aboYc three ihoiuand
pounds on their mother's death— -a rery comteruHa
twtaat tor any yoimg woman. "
" To be sore it ii ; and, indeed, it atriket me thtt they
etn want no tdditioH at all They Will have ten thoiuand
ponndi divided amongtt them. If they marry, they will
be mre of doing well, and if Aey do not, they may ^ live
TRy comfortably t^ether on the iotereat of ten thonaand
pounds.
" That is very true, aad, therefore, I do not know
tfbether, upon the whole, it would not be more adviMble
t» do eomedring for their mother wtdle she livee, rather
thtt) for them — something of tne annuity kind I mean.
Hy ^ten would feel the good effiwti of it at well at her-
a^. A hundred a year w«idd make them all perfitcdy
comfbrtable. "
- Hit wife hesitated t Uttle, however, in giving her content
to thit plan.
- " T» be sore, " laid the, " !t It better dun pnting widi
B 4
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
fifteen hnadred poandi at once. But, then, if Mrs. Daah.
wood should live fifteen ye*rt, we ilull b$ completely
Uliea in. "
" Fifteen yem I my dear Fumy ; her life cannot be
worth half that purchase. "
" Certainly not j but if you obaerre, people alwayt lire
for ever when there is any annuity to be paid them; and
■he i« very stout and beallby, and hardly forty. An an-
nuity is a very serioua bosineas ; it cornea ovei^ and orer
every year, and there is no getting rid of it. You are not
aware of what you are doing. I have known a great deal
of the trouble of annuities ; for my mother was ckgged
irilh the payment of three to old superannuated servants by
lay father's will, and it is amating how disagreeable the
found it. Twice every year theiie anniuties were to be
paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them ;
and then one of them was said to have died, and afterwards
it tunied out to be no such thing. My mother wss quite
sick of it Her income was not her own, she said, with
■ndi popetual daims on It ; and it was the more nnkind in
my father, because, otherwise, the money would have beat
entirdy at my mother's disposal, without any restriction
whatever. It has given me sndi an abhorrence of umni»
ties, that I am sure 1 would not {to myself dawn to the
payment of one for all the world, "
" It is certainly an un^easant thing, " repUed Mr. Dash-
wood, " to have those kind of yearly drains on one's in-
come. One's fortune, aa your mother justly says, is not
one's own. To be tied down to the r^ulttr payment of
such a sum, on every rent-day, Is by no meana deairaUe :
It takea away one's independence. "
" Undoubtedly ; and, after all, you have no thanka tm
it. They think themaelvea secure ; yon do no more than
what is expected, and it raisea no gratitude at alL If 1
were you, whatever I did should be done at my own dis-
cretion entirdy. I would not bind myielf to allow them
any thing yearly. It may be very inconvenient some years
to spare a hundred, or ^en fifty pounds from our own ex-
penses. "
" J beltereyou mi^^ my love; it will be better that
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
Aett ihoiild be no uiinritf in the ctw : whaterer I nuy
give tfaem occuioiully will be of ftr grMter Mnatanc* dm
k jearlj allowance, became Aey would odIj enlarge ihdr
Btyle of liTJDg if tbey felt anre of a larger income, and would
not be sixpence the richa for it at the end of the jear. It
will cotalalj be mnch the beat waj. A [weaent of fifty
ponndi, now and then, will pierent their ever being dia*
Ireaaed fbr money, and will, I think, be amply diadiargiDg
Otj promiie to my father. "
" To be sure it wilL Indeed, to aay the truth, I am
Amvinced within myKlf that jour father had no idea of
yttnr giving them any money at all. The aaciatance he
thonght of, I dare aay, waa only nich aa migbt be retaon-
aUj expected of you ; for inatance, nieh aa kMAing oat for
a comfortable email houae for them, helping tbem to movo
tbdr things, and sending them preaenta of flab and game,
and so forth, whcnerer they are in aeaaon. I'll lay my
life that he meant nothing farther; indeed, it would b«
very strange and nnreaaonable if he did. Do but consider,
my dear Mr. Da^wood, haw exceaairely cranfbitable your
mother-in-law and her dangfatera may live on the intereat
of seren tbooaand pmmds, besides the thouaaud pounda
belonging to eac & of the girla, which bringa them in
fifty pounds a year a piece, and, of course, they will pay
their mother for their board out of it. Altogether, they
will hare fire hundred a year amongst them, and what on
earth can four women want for more than that ? — They
will live so cheap .'Thdr houae > keeping will be nothing
at all. They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly
any servanta ; they will keep no company, and can have
no expenses of any kind 1 Only conceive how comfortaUe
they will be I Five hundred a year ! I am sure I cannot
imagine how they will spend half of it; and as to your
giving them more, it is quite absurd to ttdnk of it. They
will be much mora able to give you something. "
" Upon my word, " said Mr, Daahwood, " I believe yoa
are perfecdy rigbt. My father certainly could mean no-
thing more by hia requeat to me than what you say. I
clearly noderstand it now, and I will strictly folfll my eua
It by KiBkr «cU of aitiatanoe and Undnesi to theni
DoliiHihyGoOgle
10 iKKu Am SBintBiunr.
M you ban aescribed. Wlai nj nwther ilfinom inn
•nother honsa my aervices Hhall be Teadily giroi M aectHD-
inodate her as far as I can. Some litde praent of fnnitnra
loo may be acceptaUe then. "
" .Certainly, " retuned Mn. John Dadnrand. " But,
however, one ddag muBt be oondderBd. When yoor fatha "
rad mother moved to Norland, though the fumiture of
Stuihill was sold, all the china, plate, and lineti was saved,
and U now left to your mother. Her honte will therefom
be almrat completely fitted np as soon as ahe tiket iL "
" That ia a matirial condderation ondonbtedly. A Tk >
Inatde l^;aoy indeed I And yet aooie of the plate would
liare been a very pleuaut addition to oar own stock here. "
'" Yea ; and the set of breakfaat china ia twice aa hand-
some as what bdooga to thia honae. A great deal too
btutdsoin^in my opinion, for any place tkey can ever affiird
to live in. Bnt, however, ao it is. Your father thought
only of tkem. And I must say this, that you owe no p0-
Cioilar gratitude to hini, nor attention to his widiea ; for ws
very well know that if he could, he would have left almgat
erery thipg in the world to than. "
This ii^nment was irrcsiatible. It gave to hii intenlionB
whatever of fleddon was wanting before ; and he finally
resolved, that it would be abstdutely onnecessaTy, if not
hi^y indeooroHS, to do more for the widow and children
of his father than audi lund of neighbourly acta ai his own
wife pointed out.
CHAPTEH III.
Haa. Dabbwoos remdned at Norland several monthe ;
not from any disinclination to move when the sight of
every well Itnown spot ceased to raise the violent einotion
which it produced for a while; for when her spirits b^n
to revive, and her mind became capable of some other
exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melan-
tixAj retoembnnee*, afae wm impatient to be gone, and
HihyGooj^lc
11
l & defadgBble In her enqidrieB for k mitable dwelling in dw
ndghboorhood of Norland; for to remove far from that
beloved apot was impoudUe. But she could bear of no
■Jtoatian that at once aoBwered her noCioni of comfbrt and
cue, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose
Meadier jadginent r^ected - several hauMa as too large for
llieii income, whidi her mother would have approved.
Mrs. DathwDod had been informed bj her husband of tlw'
solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour,
which gave comfort to his last earthly reflectionH. She
doubted the mncerity of this assurance no more than he
Bad doubted it himself, and she thought of it fbr her
cUnghtera'sake with aatisfaetion, though as fbr herself she
was persuaded that a much sm^er providon than 7000/.
would support her in afluenee. For their brother's sake,
too, for tiie sake of hia own heart, the r^oiced ; and she
reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before, in
believing Um incapable of generosity. Hi > attentive
behaviour to herarif and bis- sisters convinced her Aat their
welfare was dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmlj
relied on the liberality of his intentions.
The contempt which she had, very eariy in their
acquaintance, felt tor her dat^hter-in > law, waa very moeh
increased by the farther knowledge of her duracter,
which half a year's readence in her Amily afforded;
«nd, perhaps, in spite of every eonsideratioti of politeness
or mateniBl sfiVction on the side of tfie former, the two
Udiee might have found it imposrible to have lived UtgeQiet
so long, had not a partinilar drcamstance occurred to giva
MiQ greater digibility, according to the opinions of Mrs.
Dashwood, to her daughters'continuance at Norland.
This circumstance waa a growing attachment betweoi
her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a
gentlemanlike and pleasing young man, who was Intro-
duced to their acqudntance soon after his dster'i estsUiah-
ment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest
part of his time there.
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from
motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son
of a man who had died very ridi ; and aome might have
DoliiHihyGoOgle
I'S'iBKaB Aim sunmLRT.
rejirewed it ftom modTei of prndene^ for, except & trifling
■am, th« vhok of his fortune depended on the will of hii
mother. But Mn. Dadiwood wu alike uninfluenced by
either conndentiMi. It wu enm^ for her that he ap-
peared to be uniable, that he loved her daughter, and that
Elinor returned the pvdalitj. It wai oontruy to every
doctrine of hen that diSereoce of fbrtone ibould Iceep any
couple aaonder nho weie attracted by leiemblanee of di^
position ; and that £linor'i merit ihould not be ac]ni«w«
ledged by every one who knew her wu to her comprehen*
uon impowible.
£dward Ferran wu not recommended to their good
opinion by any peculiar graces of person or addreu. He
was not handsome, and his manners required intimacy to
inake them pleasing. He was too diffident to do justice
to himself; but when his natural shyoeai wa* overcome,
his behaviour gave -every indication of an op^, afieetioaate
heart- Hia undentanding wa* good, and hii education
had given it solid improvement. But he waa neither fitted
by abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of Ua
mother and sister, who longed to see him distinguiflbed —
aa — they hardly knew what. They wanted him to make
a fine figure in the world in some manner or other. Hi»
mother wished to interest him in nolitical concerns, to grt
him into parliament, or to see mm connected with tome
of the great men of the day. Mn. John Dashwood
wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of
these superior Uessings could be attained, it would have
quieted her ambition to aee him driving a barouche. But .
Edward had no tnm for great men or barouches. All hia
wishes centered in domeitie comfort and the quiet of
private life. Fortunately he had a younger brother who
ws* more prominng.
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house
befbre he engaged much of Mta. Dashwood's attention ;
fiir she was, at that time, in such affliction as rendered
her careless of surrounding otyects. She saw only that be
wu quiet and UDobtmsive, and she liked him for iL He
did not disbiri) the wretchedness of her mind by ilUtimed
GonverHtitm. Sbt wu first called to observe and ap^ve
HihyGoonlc
TS
him farther, by b refiection which Elinor ekmtei one d»j
to make on tlie difltrenee between him and hia aiater. It
was a contraat which recommended him moat fnrcibly to
bt^ mother.
" It ia mough, " Aid ihe; " to laj that he is unlike
Fanny is enoagh. It implies fcrj thing amiaUe. I love
htm alieadj. "
" I think yon will like him, " aaid Elinor, " when 71m
know more of him. "
" Like him ! " replied her moUier wiA a smile. " I can
fed no sentiment of approbation inferipr to love.'*
" You may eeteem him. "
" I have never yet known what it waa to separate eateem
and love. "
Mr*. Dashwood now took'pains to get acquainted with
him. Her raannera were attaching, and soon banished hia
reserve. She speedily comprehended ail hie merits; the
pennasion of hfa r^ard tor Elinor perhaps assisted her
penetration ; bat she really fdt aaaured of hia worth : and
•Tfli that qnietneaa of manner, which miUtated against aH
her eatabliihed ideas of what a young roan's address ou^t
to he, was no longer nninteietting, when she knew his heart
to be warm and his temper affbctionate.
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his
behaviour to Elinor than she considered their serious attach^
mciit as certain, and looked forward to their marriage as
tmpidly approaching,
" In a few months, my dear Marianne, " said abe, " Elinor
will, in all probahiUty, he settled for life. We shall misa
her ; hut * & e will he happy. "
^ " Oh, mamma, how diall we do without her? "
" My love, it will be scarcely a separation. We shaR
live widiin a few miles of each other, and shall meet every
day of onr lives. You will gain a brother, a real, affec-
tionate brother. J have the highest opinion in the world
of Edward's heart Bnt you look grave, MarianDe ; do
yon diaapprove your siater'a choice ? "
" Ferhapa, " said Marianne, " I may consider it with
some surprise. Edward is very amiable, and I love hira
tenderly. But yet— he ia not the kind ol yovng man-—
DoliiHihyGoOgle
14 exHSB ADD iaar < iBiLiT¥.
there it t eometluDg winting — his 6gaie is not striidng';
it hu none of ttuC grace which I should expect in the man
who could Benously aCCach my sister. His e;es wuit all
that spirit, that fire, which at once announce virtue and in >
telligence. And betide* all thi*, I am afraid, muima, he haa
no real taste. Music seemi scarcdy to attract him ; and,
though he admires Bliuor*! drawings very much, it ia not
the admiration of a person who can understand their worth.
It is evident, in spite of hia Sequent attention to her whib;
she draws, that, in fact, he knows nothing of the matter.
He admkea as a lover, not as a coonoisaeur. To sadafy
me, thoae characters must be united. I could not be happy
with a man whose taste did not in every poiikt coindite
with mjr own. He must enter into all my feeUoga: tin
tuoe ioAx, the same music must charm us both. Oh,
mamma, how spiritless, how tame was Edward's manner in
reading lo us last night I I fdt for my sister most severely;^
Yet she bore it with so much composure, she seemed
•carcely to notice it. I could hardly keep my seat. To
hear those beautiful lines which have frequently alnaoat
driven me wild, pronounced with such impowtiable calm-
ness, such dreadful indifference I "
" He would certainly have done more justice to Bim[dc
and elegant prose. I thought so at the time; but yon
vtmJd give him Cowper. "
" Nay, mamma, if he is not to be animated by Cowpei!—
hot we must allow for difference of taste. £linor hat not
my fedinga, and, therefore, she may overlook it, and be
happy with him. But it would have broken my heart, bad I
.loved him, tohearhimreadwithBoUttlesenubility. Mamma,
the more 1 know of the world the more am I convinced that
I shall never see a man whom I can really love. I requite
•0 much 1 He must have all Edward's virtues, and hil
person and manners must oniament hia goodness with every
passible charm. "
*'Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. It
is yet too early in life to de^iair of such a happineaa.
Why should you be less fortunate than yoor mother f Jn
ince only, my Marianne, may yam destiny be
a hera! "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
'CHAPTER IV.
" What apitj it is, EUoor, " wid Muiuute, " ihit Edward
should have no taste for drawing. "
" No taste for dnwingi " lepUed Elinor, " why should jou
think so ? He do«a not draw himself, indeed, but he has
great pleanue in eeang the perfonnsnces of other peaplej
and I assure you he is by no means deBdent in natoial
taste, tluHigh he has not bad opportunitiea of improTing it.
Utd he ever been in the way of karning, I think he would
have drawn very well. He distnista his own judgment in
such nutters so much, that he is always vnwilling to give
hia opinion on any picture; but he has an innate propriety
and simplicity of taste, which, in general, direct him per^
iectly riglit. "
Uariaune wm afraid of ofiending, and ssid no more on
the raltject ; but the kind of approbation which E^ot de-
scribed as excited in him by the drawings of other peopla
was T»y far from that iqiturous delight, which, in her
opinion, could altme be called taste. Yet, thon^ smiling
within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for
that hliod partiality to Edward which produced it
" I hope, Marianne, " continued Elinor, " you do not
GOQsider him as deficient in general taste. Indeed, I think
I may ssy that you cannot, for your bebaTiour to him is
perfectly cordial, and if ^at were your (pinion, I am anr*
jaa could never be civil to him. "
Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would not
wonnd the feelings of her sister on any account, and yet to
say what she did not bcdiere was impossible. At length aha
" Do udt be oSbided, Elinor, if my praise of him is not
in every thing equal to your sense of his merits. I have
nothad 80 many opportunities of estimsting the minuter psa <
poiuties of his mind, his inclinsdons and tastes, sa yon
bare; but I have the highest tqpininn in the wo^ of Itii
DoliiHihyGoOgle
goodness and loiie. I think him every thing that is wordiy
and amiable. "
" I ftm Hure, " replied EUnor, with a smile, " that hia
deareat friends could not be dissatisfied with anch com-
mendBtioQ u that. I do not perceiTe how you could ex-
press yourself more warmly. "
Marianne was r^oiced to find her liiter so easily
" Of bis sense and his goodness, " condnned Elinor, " no
one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him often
enough to engage him in unreserved conversatiiH). The
excellence of bis nnderslanding and bis principles can be
concealed only by that shyness which too often keqw bim
allent You know enough of him to do jnstice to bis solid
worth. But of his minuter prDpensities, as you eaU them,
yon have, from peculiar drcumitances, been kept more ig-
'norant than myself. He and I have been at times thrown
a good deal together, while you have been whdiy engrossed
on the matt afibctionate principle by my mother. I have
eeeil a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and
heard hia opinion on sul^ecta of literature and taste ; and,
upon thewhole, I venture to pronounce that bis mind is well'
informed, his enjoyment of books exceedingly great, hia ima-
gination lively, ^observation Jnst and correct, and his taste
delicate and pure. Hii atulities in every reepect improve
as much upon acquaintance aa his manners and person. At
first sight, his address is certainly not striking ; and his
person can hardly be called handsome, dll die expression of
his eyes, which are uncommonly gcwd, and the goiod
aweetneaa of hia countenance, is percdved. At present, I
know him so well, that I think him really handsome; or,
at least, tdmott so. What say you, Marianne ? "
" I shall very soon dtink idm handsome, Elinor, if I da
not now. When you tell me to love him as a brother, I
shall DO more see iroperfecdon in his face than I now do
in his heart. "
EUnor started at thia declaration, and was sorry fbi the
warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him.
8he fdt that Edward atood very high in her opinion. She
jMieved the rsgwd to be mntotil; but she required gieatei
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SBHB AND BENUBIUTT. 17
cerC«intf of it to make Marianoe'a convicdon of thdr at-
tachment agreeable to her. She knew that what MariUDe:
and her mother conjectured one moment, ibey believed the
nest — ^ ihat niih them, to wish was to hope, and to hope
was to expect. She tried to explain the real state of tha
case to her sister.
" I do not attempt to deny, " laid she,''that I thitilc
very highly of him — that J greatly eaCeem, thai I like
. " Esteem him.! Like him ! Cold-beaited Elinor ! Oh !
worse than cold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.
Use those words again, and I will leave the room this mo-.,
mait. "
Elinor could not help lai^hing. " Excuse me, " said
she; " and be assured that 1 meant no ofience to you, by
speaking, in so quiet a way, of tny own feelings. Believe
them to be stronger than I have declared ; believe them, ill
short, to be euch as hia merit, and the suspicion — the
hope of his affection for me may warrant, witiiout impru-
dence or folly. Uut farther than this you must not beUeve.
I am bjc no meana assured of his regard for me. There
aie moments when the extent of it seems doubtful ; and Ull
his sentiments are fuUy known, you cannot wonder at my
wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality,
by believing or caliitig it more than it is. In my heart I
feel tittle -T— scarcely any doubt of bis preference. But there
are other points to be considered besides his inclination. He
i» very far from being independent. What his mother
neally is we cannot know ; but, from Fanny's occasional
UKnlioi) of her conduct and opinions, we have never been
disposed to think her amiable; and 1 am very much mis-
taken if Edward is not himself aware that there would be
many difficulties in his way, if he were to wish to marry
a woman who had not either a. great fortune or hi^
Marianne was aalonished to find how much the imagin-
ation of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth.
" And you really are not eng^ed to him ! " said she.
" Yfft it certainly aoon will happen. Bat two advantages
DoliiHihyGoOgle
18 aron i
win proceed ftotb tliis d^j. /ihall not Iok yon h moo,'
ftod Edwrnrd will bare greater opportunity of improTiog
that natural taate for your favourite pnmiit which moat be
to indispenaably neeeMary to your & tare felicity. Oh ! if
)ie should be ao far ttimukled by your genius aa to leam to
draw himselfj how delightful it would be I "
Elinor had given her real opinion to her uster. She
eould not condder her ptrtitlity for Edward in ao proa-
peroui a atste aa Marianne had believed it There was, at
times, a want of apirita about hiro which, if it did not de-
note lodiKrence, spoke a Bometbing almoat aa unpromidiig.
A doubt of her r^[ard, auppoiing him to feel it. Deed not
give bim more than inquietude, it would not be Ulcely to
produce that dejection of mind which frequently attended
him. A more reasonable cause might be found in the
dependent situation which forbad the indulgence of hii
■fiection. She knew that his mother nritiier behaved to
him BO as to make hia home comfortable at present, nor to
give him any asanrance that be might form a home for
himself, without strictly attending to her views for his i^_
grandisement. W^itb such a knowledge as this, it was im~
possible for Elinor to feel easy on the aul:gect. She was
far from depending on that result of his preference of her,
which her mother and sister atill considered as certain.
Nay, the longer they were tt^ther the more doubtful
seemed theliature of his r^ard ; and sometimes, for a few
painful minutes, she believed it to be no more than frkiid-
ship.
But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enoug^r
when perceived by his lister, to make her uneasy, and at
the same time (which was still more common) to miA«
her uncivil. She took the first opportunity of affronting
her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to her so ex-
pressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mra.
Ferrars'a resoluEloa dutt both her sons should marry weU,
and of the danger attending any young woman who at-
tempted to draiB bim in, that Mrs. Dadiwood could neither
pretend to be nnconadous, nor endeavoui to be calm. She
gave her an answer which marked her c«itempt, and in-
stantly _left the room; resolnng that, whatever might .be
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
ttte toemwnl CTC c or expeuM of «o cndden ■ remova], h«r
bdoved Elinor diotild not be expowd another week to lucfi
In thU itttft of her ipirlti, a liitter was dehvired to het
fivm die pott, which contained a propoaal particularly'irell
timed. It wu the offer of a email house, on yerj easy
tenne, belcwgii^ to a Telatioa of her own, a gentleman of
consequence and propraty in DeTonshire, The letter was
from this gentleman hirasdf, and written in the true ipirit
of friendly accommodation. He understood that ihe wb*
in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offered
her wai merely a cottage, he assured her that every thing
should he done to it wtiich she might think necessary, if
the sitnation pleased her. He earnestly pressed her, ^ter
giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come
with her daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own
residence, from whence she might judge, here^, whether
Barton Cottage, for the hoases were in the same parish,
could, by any iteration, be made comfortable to her. He
seemed really anxious to accommodate them ; and the whole
of hia letter was written in so friendly a style as could not
Gail of giving plesinre to his cousin ; more especially at a
moment when she was suffering under the cold and un-
feeling behaviour of her nearer connections. She needed
no time for deUberation or enquiry. Her resolution was
formed as she read. The ritaation of Barton, in a county
•0 Hr distant from Sasiex as Devonshire, which, but a few
hours before, would have been a tufficient objection to out-
w^h every possible advantage belonging to the place, was
now its first recommendation. To quit the neighbourhood
tt Norland was do longer an evil ; it was an object of
desire ; it was a blesrang, in comparison of the misery of
conttnning her daaghter^-in-law's guest : and to remove for
ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to
inhalnt or visit it while such'a woman was its mistress-
She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledge
luent of his kindness, and her acceptance of his propoaal ;
and then hastened to show both letters to her daughters,
diat she might be secure of their approbation before her
" ^ I ,-. < i..,G(Hiylc
Elinor liad:alwaya ihoi^t it would be more ^udent for
them to EEti^ at Home diECtmce from Norkad diaa imme-:-
diatdy amongst their present acquaintance. On fAaf head,
therefore, it was not for her to oppose her mother's in-
tention of remorinii; into Devonshire. The house, too, as
described hy Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the
rent bo uncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of
objection on either point; and, therefore, though it waa
not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy, though;
it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her
wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from;
sending a letter of acquiescence.
CHAPTER V.
No sooner was her answer despatched, than Mrs, Dashwood.
indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her ion.
in-law and his wife that she was provided with a houBe >
and should incommode ihem no longer than till every ihiuf;;
were ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her with
surprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her
husband civilly hoped that she would not be settled far
from Norland. She had great satisfaction in replying that
she was going into Devonshire. — Edward turned hastily
towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surprise
■and concern, which required no explanation to her, repealed^
" Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far fronx
hence ! and to what part of it ? " She explained the situ-.
ation. It was within four miles northward of Exeter.
" It is but a cottage, " she continued, " but 1 hope to see
many of my fiiends in it. A room or two can easily be
added ; and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so
far to see me, I am sure 1 will find none in accommodating
She concluded with a very land invitation to Mr, and
Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Barton ; and to iBdn
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SKm AND BEiraiBIUIT: St
Irani she g»ve one with idll greato- Rffection. Though her
Ute eoDverBadcin with her daugfater-in-kw h & d made her
rew)l«e on lemuiiing U Norland too longer thad was un-*
avoidable, it had not prodnced the ■miUcEt efiect on her in
that point to which it prindpallj tended. To separate Ed-*
ward and Elinot was aa far from being her object aa ever ;
and she wiahed to ahow Mra. John Daahwood, bjr this
peinted inTttation to her brother, how totally she diaregarded
ber diaapprobatioa of the match.
Mr. John Duhwood told his mother again and again
how exeeedinglf boitj he was that she had taken a house
Bt sndi adiatancefroni'NvIand as to prevent hia being of
any service to her in removing her fumitare. He really
felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion ; for the very
exertion to which be had Hinited the performance of his
promiie to his father was by this arrangement rendered
impracticable. — The furniture was all sent round by water.
It < ^iiefly consisted of hoasehold linen, plate, chins, and
hooka, with a handsome piano-forte of Marianne's. Mrs.
John Daahwood saw the packages depart with a ugh:
she could not help feeling it hard that, as Mra. Dashwood's
income would be ao trifling in compariBon with their own,
she should have any handeoroe article of furniture
Mrs. Daahwood took the house for a twelvamondi ; it
was ready furnished, and die might have immediate pos-
session. No difficulty arose on either side in the agree-
ment ; and she tvaited only for tlie disposal of her effects
at Norland, and to determine her future househbld, before
the set off for the West ; and- this, as she waa exceedingly
rapid in the performance of every thing that interested her,
, waa acion done.— The horses which were left her by her
husband had been sold soon after his death, and an oppof
tunity now offering of disposing of her caniage^ she agreed
to sdl that likewise, at the earnest advice of her eldest'
dnghtet. For the comfort of her children, had she con-
sulted only her own wishes, she would have kept it; but
ibe discretion of Elinor prevailed. Her wisdom, too, limited
the number of their servants to three; two maids and a
maUj vrith whom they were speedily provided from amongst
IboM who had fonned their establishment at Nwland.
■ S
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
The man and one of the mndi wm teat off hDmediitdy
into Devonsbiie, to prepare the honw ftr their iniBtnna
arrival; for as Lady Middleton was entirely nnknowti to
Hrs. DMhwood, ihe preferred going directly to the cott^a
to being a ririt^ at Barton Park ; and she Tcdied so ondovht*
ingly on Sir John's datcriptian of the bouse, as to fed a»
eurionty to examine it hsself till she entned it ■■ her om.
Her eagernew to be gone from Norland wia prcMrVed ttotn
diminution by the evident satisfactiMi of her daughler-ik^
hw in the protpect of her remoral ; a satiifaction which
was but feebly attempted to he concealed nnder a txili 1q-
Vitation to her to defer her departure. Now was the time
when her son-in-law-'s promise to hia father mi^t with
particular propriety be fulfilled. Since he had ne^oted
to do it on Snt coming to the estate, their quitting hte
house might be looked on as the most luitable period fot
its aceomplifihneuL But Mrs. Dashwood began, ahbr^, to
give over every hope of the kind, and to he eonvinced, froni
the general drift of his disdrarae, that hia ai^tanee ex-
tended no'farther than their maintenance for liz months
at Noriaad. He so frequently talked of the inoeaaing el-
penaes of hooBekeeping, and of the perpetual demands upon
his purse, which a mas of any conBeqnence in the world
waa beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather
to stand in need of more money himseff Ihsn to haTS any
design of giving money away.
In avery few weeks, from the day which brought Sir JokR
Middleton's first letter to Norland, every thing was ao far
aettled in their future abode as to enabie Mrs. Da^wood
and her daughters to b^n their joamey.
Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to
a place ao much bdoved. " Sear, dear Norland ! " s^
Marianne, as she wandered alone before the houae, on ths
laat evening of dieir bdng there ; " when shall I cease to
t^ret you]— when learn to feela home elsewhere) — Ohl
happy house, could you know what I pufibr in now viewl^
70a from this spot, from whence, perhaps, I may view yoU
no more I — And yra, ye we]l-known trees ! — bat you will
continne the same. No leaf will decay becaitse we are re-
moved, nor any brandi become motionless although we tua
DoliiHihyGoOgle
uuns Atm nirauiLim SS
< A»Bnejon no longer! — Ko; yoa will continiw die Mum t
nnconsdooB of the pleuure or the icgret you occuian, ud
isMDuble of any cbai^ in tho«e who walk under you ihide I
— But who wiU remain to eiiiioj yon i "
CHAPTER VI.
The fint part of their journey waa perfonned in too me-.
lancholy a dispontion to be otherwise thin tedious and
nnpleaianL But ai they drew towards the end of it, dieir
interest in the app^amnce of a country which they were to
inhabit, overcame their d^eciion, and a view of Barton
Valley, as they entered it, gave them dieerfulness. It waa
a pleasant fertile spo^ well wooded, and ridi in pasture.
After winding along it for ntore than a mile, diey reached
tiieir own house. A small green court waa the whole of ita
daneane in front ; and a neat wicket gate admitted them
into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, waa comfbrta
able and compact; but as a cottage it waa defectire, for the
building waa r^ular,. the roof was tiled, the window shut-
ten were not painted green, nor were the walla covered with
honeysuckle*. A narrow passage led directly through th«
houae into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting room, about sixteen feet square ; and beyond
tbem were the offices and the atain. Four bed-rooms and
two garrets formed the real of the house. It had not been
built many years, and waa in good repair. Id comparison
pf Norland, it was poor and small indeed ! — but the tears
which recollection called forth as they entered the housa
mn aoon dried away. They were cheered by the joy of
the servanta on their arrival, and each for the sake of th6
odlera resolved to appear happy. It was very early in
September; the season waa fine; and ftom first seeing the
place under the advantage of good weather, they received
S4 MKmB i
va imprtenonin its favour irbichwaa of matenal tenVxia
!recoitiinending it to their luting approbation.
The situatioa of the hQuee was good. High hi]la roM
immediately behind, and at no great digtance dd each.side ;
some of which were open downs, the others cultivated and
wood;. The village of Barton was chiefly on one of these
hills, and formed a pleasant view from the cottage vindaws.
The prospect in front was more extenaive ; it commanded
the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond.
The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the
valley in that direction ; under another name, and in an-
other course, it branched out again between tvo of the
steepest of Ihem.
With the size and. furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood.
was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former
style of Ufe rendered many additions to the latter india-
pensable, yet to add and improve was a delight to her; and
she had at this time ready money enough to supply all that
was wanted of greater el^nce to the apartments. " As iai
the house itself, to be sure, " said she, " it is too small for
our family, but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable
for the present, as it is too late in the year for improve-
ments. Perhaps in the spring, if I have plenty of nion^,
'«s I dare say I shall, we may think about building. These
parlours are both too small for such parties of our friends at
J hope to see often collected here ; and I have some thoughts
nfthiowing the passage into oneof them, witb perhaps apart
of the other, and so leave the remainder of that other for an
entrance; this, with a new drawing-room which may be CMlly
added, and a bed-chamber and garret above, will make it a
Very snug little cottage. Icouldwish thesturswerehandaome.
But one must not expect every thing ; Aough I aupposeit
would be no difGcult matter to widen ihem. I shall sea
how much I am before-hand with the world in the ■priDg >
and we will plan our improvements accordin^y. "
In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made
from the savings of an incomeof five hundredayesr by Bwonian
who never saved in herlife, they were wise enough to be con-
tentedwith thehouseasit was; and each of ifaem waa busy
in turangiiig their particular concerns, and. endeavouring, by
DoliiHihyGoOgle
plkdng arOnnd ihem their books ud othtr po«Mutoin, to
forai themteiTea a borne. Mtuisnne'a piuio-forte was un-
packed and properly dispoKd of; and Elinor'H drawiogt
were affixed to the walla of their sitting^ room.
In such cmpkiTmentB as these they were interrupted toon
after breakfaat tlie next daj hy the entrance of their iand-
lordj who called to welcome them to Barton, and to ofier
them every tccommoHlation from his own houae and garden
in which theirs might at present be deficient. Sir John
Middletoa was a good looking man about ioAy. He had
formerly visited at SUnhill, but it was too long ago for his
young cousini to remember him. His couDtenance was
thoroughly good-humoured; and hia manners were a*
friendly as the style of hie letter. Their arriTsl seemed
to afibrd him real satisfaction, and their comfort to be an
ohject of real solidiude to him. He said much of hid
eameat deaire of tbeir living in the most sociaUe terms with
hia familyj and preaaed tbem so cordially to dine at Barton
Park every day till they were better settled at home, thati
though his enOreaties vete carried to a point of •pene^et'-
mux beyond civility, they could not give offence. His
kindness was not confined to worda ; for within an.hoiU
after he left them, a large basket full of garden stuff and
fruit arrived from the park, which was followed before the
Old of the day by a present of game. He insisted, moreover,
on conveying all their letters to and from the post for them,
«nd would not be denied the satisfaction of sending them hia
newapaper every day.
Lady Middleton bad aent a very civil mesa^ by him,
denoting her intention of wuting on Mrs. Daabwood as
aoon at she could be asBured that her visit would be no
1 as thia message was answered by an
1 eqaally poUte, her ladyship was introduced to
tbem the next day.
They were, of course, very anxious to aee a person on
whom ao miich of their comfort at Barton must depend ;
and the elegance of her appearititee was favonrsble to their
wishes. Lady Middleton was hot more than six or seven
bnd twenty ; her face was handsome, her figure tall and
Mriklng, and her address gtaceM. Het Uumnert bod all the
DoliiHihyGoOgle
So flia»l AMD SENBtBILlTt'.
elegance which her husb & nd'a uranted. Bnt tbef novM
have been improTed hj Mnne ehue of hia frankness and
warmth ; and htr visit was long eiioiigh to detract sotne-
thing trom their fine admiration, by ahovlng that, thongh
perfectly well bred, she waa reserved, etAd, and had nothing
to Bay for herself beyond the most comtnon-place enqtury
or remark.
Converaation, however, was not wanted, for Sir Jtdin
vn very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the triae
piecaution of bringing with her their eld^t child, a fine
little boy about six year« old ; by which meatia there was doe
■ubject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of
extremity, for they had (o enquire his name and age, ad.
mire his beauty, and ask him questions which hia mother
answered for him, while he hung about her and held down
his head, to the great surprise of her ladyabip, who won-
dered at his being so shy before company, as he could make
tioise enough at home. On every fonntd visit a child
ought to be of ^e party, by way of provision (or discourse.
In the present case it took up ten minutes to determine
whether the boy were moat like his father or mother, and
in what particular he reiembled ei^r, for of course ever^
body differed, and every body was astonished at the opinion
of Uie others. -
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dadwooda
of debating on the rest of the children, as Sir Jobn would
not leave the house without securing their promise of dining
at the Park the next day.
CHAPTER VII.
Barton Pabk was about half a mile from the cottage.
The ladies had passed near it in their way along the valley,
but it was tcreened fiom their view at home by tlw pro-
jection of a hill. The house was large and hmdaome j
and the Middletoiu lived in a style of equal hoapitdity and
,G(Hinlc
dciguiM^ Tbt fooMT «M tat Sir Jolu'i gratUcation, the
Utter £» tlut of hit Udy. The; wen wwcdy ercr with-
out some friends stBjring with tbem in the bowe, and ihef
kept more amnfmtj of every Und dum aoj other & adty 1b
the ndghboMriuwd. It wu necesairjr to the hai^lMM of .
hotii ; for bomrcr « < i«fanil«T in tamper sitd outward bc >
havionr, Aej Hran^y leaemUed each odier in that total
want of taleot and taste which confliicd their emplojrmaitt,
nmionnected widi such as socie^ produced, within a very
■arrow compass. Sir John WM asportattait. Lady Middle^
ton a mother. He hunted and shot, md she humomed her
AildrcB ; aad thBM were thdr only resoonea. LadyMid-'
dietMihad the advantage of bdng able to ^mil her children
•11 dte year round, while Sit John's indqiendent employments
were in existence only half the time. Continual engage-
tneots at home and alvoad, however, supplied all the defl.
dencies of nature and edncatiaii ; supported the good qiiritB
of Sir John, and gave exerdK to the good breeding of his
Lady Middlaton piqued hendf upon the elegance of her
table,.and of all herdomeatic arrangements; and from diia
kind of vanity waa her greatest eiyoyinent in any of their
parties. But Sir John's satisfactioo in aociety was mndi
more real; he delisted in coUectii^ aboot him mere
young people than his kouae would hold, and the noisier
tiiey were the better waa he pleaoed. He was a Ueadag
toall the juvaiile part of the neighbourhood; fbrinsummo
he was for ever forming parties to eat cold ham and dn^ea
out of doors, and in winter bia private balls were numerous
enough for any young Udy who wu not mfibing under
die. nniatiable appetite of fifteen.
The arrival of a new family in the country was always
a matter of joy to him; and in every point of view he waa
diaimSd with the inhabituUs he had now procured for his
cottage at Barton. The Miss Dasbwooda were young, pretty,
and unafifected. It was enough to secure his good opinion ;
te to be iina%eted waa all that a pretty gU could want
to make her mind aa captivating aa her penmi. The
fiitedUness of hia di^oaition made hin bqtpy tai acoom-
SDodati^ ttose, whow ntnatioo mi^ be caaMtnd, in
DoliiHihyGoOgle
«}mpaiisoii vidi the past, u nnftntuAote. In ihowiiig
IcJndneM to hJa conrini, therefore, he hid the real utUfae-
tion of a good heart; and in setdiiig« family of females
only in liia cott^, he had all the utiifaction o( a iportsi
taan ; for a sptirlsman, though he esteenu only those of
his Bex who are sportimen likewise, is not often deairon*
bf encouragjhg their taste hy admitting them to a residence
within his own manor.
Mrs. Daahwood and her daughters were tnet at tbe door
of the house by Sir John, who welcomed them to fiaitOU
f ark with unaffected sincerity ; and as he attended them
to the drawing-room repeated to the young ladies the con'
cem which the same subject had drawn from him the day
before, at being nnable to get an; smart young men to
meet dietn. They would see, he said, only one gentlemaa
there besides himself; a particular friend who was staying
At the Park, but who was nether very young nor very gayi
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party,
and could assure them it should never happen so again:
■Hi had been'to several families Ihat morning, in hopes of
procuring some addition to their number, but it was moMi^
light, and every body was full of engagements. Lucidly
I > ady Middleton's mother had arrived at Barton within the
last hour; and as she was a very cheerful, agreeable woman,
he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very di^ as
they might imagine. The young ladies, as well as their
mother, were perfectly satisfied with having two mtirt
atrangers of the pait^, and wished tor no more.
Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a good'
humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked a great
deal, seemed very happy, and rather vulgar. She was Adl
of jokesand.lau^ter, and before dinner was over had said
many witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands;
bopei they had not left theit hearts behind them in SusaeXi
foid pretended to see theita blush whether they did or noti
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned
her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore these attai^,
with aneamestnesswhich gave EUnorfarmorepain than could
anse from such common-place rullery as Mrs. Jennings's.
Ctdonel Bnadon > the friend of Sir John, seemed nA
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SBHSR AKO UHnBIUTV. 1^
more adapted bj resemblance of manner ta be hii friend,
tbaa Lady Middleton was to be bis wife, or Mri, Jeonings
to be Lady Middleton's mother. He was lilent and grave.
Bis appesramK-, bowerer, was not unpleaaing, in spite of
Ua being, in tbe opinion of Marianne and Margaret, an ab,
solute old bachelor, for be was on the wrong side of five-
and-thirty ; bot though bia face was not handsoine, biq
GonnteDance was sensible, and his address was particularly
gentlemanlike.
There was nothing in any of tbe party which could re-
oommend them as companions to the DBsbwoode; but the
oold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly
repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel
Brandon, and even, the . boisterous mirth of Sir John and
bis mother-in-law, was interesting. Lady Middleton seemed
to be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of her fonr
noisy children after dinner, who polled her about, tore her
clothes, and put an end to every kind of diacourse except
what related to themselves.
In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musi-
cal, she was invited to play. The instrument was unlocked,
every body prepared to be charmed, and Marianne, who
sang very well, at their request went through the chief of
tbe songs nhich Lady Middleton had brought into the
family on her marriage, and which, perhaps, had lain ever
uneein the same position on the piano-forte ; fof her lady-
ship had celebrated that event by giving up music, although,
by her mother's account, she had played extremely weU, and
1^ her own was very fond of it.
Marianive's performance was highly applauded. Sir
John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song,
and as loud in his conversation with the others while every
song lasted. Lady Middleton frequently called bim to or-
der, wondered bow any one's attention could be diverted
from music ibr a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a
particular song which Marianne bad just finished. Colonel
Brandon alone, of all the party, heard her without being in
raptures. He paid her only ^e compUment of attenUon ;
tnd she felt a respect for him on tlie occasion, which tho
others bad reasonaUy forfeited by their shameless want of
DKiliiHinvGoOgIc
tute. Hb pleunre is mtuie, though It aaiotiftted not to
^t eeatade delight niueh idone could sftnpadfise wiih- hoF
0wn, wu eatiiBalde ivhen cotitruted agminst the hoiriUe
Insenubility of the othen ;'and she tra* reuonahle enough
to allow that a man of flve-and -thirty might well have ontl
lived all acuteneas of feeling, and eyety exquirite power ol
enjoyment. She was perfecd^ diapoted'to make eveiy
^wance for the wJonel's adTam^d state of life which hn-
manity required.
CHAPTER VIII.
Hb8. Jenninob was ft widow with an ample jointure. She
had only two daughters, both of whom she had lived to see
respecUbly mamed, and she had now, therefore, nothing
to do but to marry all the reit of the world. In the pro-
notion of this oliject she was zealoualy active, as far as her
ftbility reached ; and missed no opportunity of ptcgecling
weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.
She was remarlcably quick in the diseoTcry of attachments,
atid had enjoyed the advantage of rusing the blushes and
the vanity of many a young lady by insinuations of her
power over audi a young man ; and this kind of discern-
ment enabled her, soon after her arrival at Barton, deci-
■ively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much
in love with Marianne Dashwood. She rather suspecEed it
to he so, on the very first evening of their being ti^tber,
trata his listening so attentively while die sang to them ;
hnd when the visit was returned by the Middletona dining
at the cottage, the fact waa ascertained by his listening to
her again. It must be so. fihe was perfectly ctmvlnced of
it. It would be an excellent match, for Aewas ridi, and
rte was handsome. Mrs. Jennings had been anxious to see
Cdqnel Brandon well married, ever since her cotmectjon
wilh Sir John first brought him to her knowledge ; " and she
was always anxioQs to get a good husband for every pretty
girl.
DoiiiHi^vGoogle
■KKSS 4MB BUnUILlTT. 31
Tlie i«Hn < 4iate advtnlage to hencdf wu b; no meuu
inconsideralile, for it BUpplied ber with endless jokes •gaillBf
ibem bfrih. At the Park ihe laughed at the colonel, and
in the cottage at Marianne. To the former her iiiller];
was piobaUj, as far aa it regarded only himself, perfectly
iDdifieient ; but to tl^e latter it vaa at first incomprdieii.
fible ; and when its ol^ect ww understood, the hardly
knew whether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure
ita impertinence j for ihe ctxiaidered it as an unfeeling
reflection on the colonel's advanced yean, and on hit
fitrlom conditioD as an old badielor.
Mrs. Daahwood, irho could not think a man five years
youngs than herself so exceedingly andent as he appeared
to the yonthful fancy of her daughter, ventured to clear
Ura Jennings from the probability of wishing to throw
ridicule on his age.
" But at least, mamma, yoa cannot deny the absurdity of
the accusation, though you may not think it iulenCioBally
SLjiatured. Colonel Brandon is certainly younger than
Mrs. Jennings, but be is old enough to be my father ; and
if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must have
long oulhved every sensation of the kind. It is too ridicu-
lotu ! When is a man to be safe from such wit, if age
and infirmity will not protect him i "
„ " Infirmity ! " aaid Elinor, " do you call Colonel Bran-
don infirm ? I can eatUy suppose that his age may
tpfeaz much greater to you than to my mother ; but you.
can hsrdly deoeiTe yourself as to his having the use of his
imbs! "
" Did not you hear him compUin of the rhenmatism P
and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining
life ? "
" My deireit child, " said her mother, laughing, " at this
nt« you must be in continual terror of my decay ; and it
xaiut seem to yoa a miracle that my life has been extend-
ed to the advanced age of forty. "
" Mamma, you are not doing me justice. I know very
weU that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to make his
friends yet apprehensive of losing him in the course of
DoliiHihyGoOgle
natnre. He may live twenty yean longer. But ihirty-
five has nothing to do with matrimony. "
" Vahetpt, " said Elinor, "'thirty-five and seventeen had
better not have any thing to do with matrinioay together.
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman
who 1b tingle at seven -and.twenty, I should not think
Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to hig
tnarryitig her. "
" A woman of seven-and-twenty, " said Marianne, aAer
pausing a moment, " can never hope to fed or inspire
affection again, and if her home be uncomfortable, or her
fortune small, I can suppose that she might bring herself
to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the pro-
vision and security of a wife. In his marrying an^ a
woman, therefore, there would be nothing unsuit^le. It
would be a compact of convenience, and the world would-
be satisfied. In my eyes it would be no marriage at all,
but that would be nothing. To me it would seem only B
commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited
at the expense of the other. "
" It would be impossible, I know, " replied Khnor, " to
conTince you that a woman of seven-and-twenty could feel
for a man of thirty-five any thing near enough lo love, la
make him a desiraUe companion to her. But I must dtyect
to your dooming Colonel Brandon and hia wife to the con-
stant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he
ehanced to complaili yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a
slight rheumatic feel in oneof l^s shoulders. "
" But he talked of flannel waistcoats, " said Marianne';
" and with me a flannel waistcoat is invadably connected
with aches, crainps, rheumatisms, and every qiecies of mI-
ment that can afflict the old and the feeble. " .
" Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not
have despised him half so much. Confess, Marianne, is-
not there something interesting to you in the flushed cheek,
hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever ? "
Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, " Mamma, "
said Marianne, " I have an alarm on the subject of illness
which 1 cannot conceal from you. I am .sure Edward-
Fertars is not well. }Ve have now been here almost a
DoliiHihyGoOgle
fortnight, mnd yet he doe* not come. Nothing bat leil in-
disposition could occasion this e^tiatadinaxj delay. What
dae can detain him at Norland ? "
" Had yon any idea of his coming ao aoon ? " said Mn.
Saabwood. " / had none. On the contiary, if I have f^
any anxiety at all on the sutiject, it has been in lecoUectiDg
Aat he sometiincs showed a want of [dea*are and leadinen
in accepting my invitation, when I talked of hit coming to
Barton, Does Elinor expect him already? "
" I have never mentioned it to her, hat of ooune di«
" 1 rather think yon are miataken, for wh^ I hu talk'
ing to her yetterday of getting a new grate for the'spare
bedchamber, she observed that there was no immediate hurry
for it, as it was not likely that the room would b* wanted
for aome time. "
" How strange this is .'what can be the meaning of it !
But the whole of their behaviour to each other has been
imaccountable ! How odd, bow composed were their Ust
adieus ! Hoir languid their conversation the last evening
of their being together I In Edward's & rewe]l there was no
distinction between Elinor and me : it was the good wishea
of an affectionate brother to l > oth. Twice did I leave them
purposely together in the conrse of die last morning, and
eadi time did he most unaccountably follow me out erf tha
room. And Elinor, in qnitting Norland and Edward, cried
not as 1 did. Even now her self-command ii invariaUei
When is ^le dqected or melancholy ? When does the try
to avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it? "
CHAPTER IX.
The Daahwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable
comfort to themeelves. The house and the garden, with all
the objects surrounding them, were now become familiar,
and die ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland half
I .i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
54 sniflft AHD uBifiiBiLiTT*
its channi were engaged in again with far gi^ater cnjoj-
ment than Norland had been able to aSbrd rince the Iom of
their father. Sir John Middieton, vho called on them
every daj for the first fortnight, and vho wai not in the
habit of seeing much occupation at home, could not Con >
oeil his atnazeinent on finding them alwaji employed.
Their viiitera, except thoie from Barton Park, were not
many ; for, in spile of Sir John's argent entreatiea that
they would mix more in the neighbomhood, and repeated
aamrancea of his carriage being always at their lervice, the
independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame the
wish of sodety for her children ; and she was resolute in
declining to Tidt any family beyond the distuioe of a
walk. There were but few who could be so classed ; and
It was not all of them that were attainable. About a mile
and a half irom the cottage, along the narrow winding
valley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as
formerly described, the girls had, in one of thdr earheet
walks, discovered an ancient respectable'Jooking mansion,
which, by reminding them a Utile of Norland, interested
their imagination and made them wish to be better
acquainted with it. But they leamt, on enqniry, that ila
powesBOr, an elderly lady (^ very good character, was
unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world, and never
stirred from home.
The whole country about them abounded in beautiftil
walks. The high downs, which invited thera from ahnoM
every window of the cottage to leek the exquisite enjoy-
ment of air on their aummits, were a happy altemativw
when the din of the valleys beneath shut up their lapetior
beauties ; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and
Mai^aret one memorable morning direct their steps,
attracted by the partial sunshine of a showery sky, and
anable longer to bear the confinement which the settled
rain of the two preceding days bad occanoned. The
weather was not tempting enough to draw the two other*
fVora their pencil and their hook, in spite of Marianne's
declaratioD that the day would be lastingly fair, and that
every threatening cloud would be drawn off from their
hiUs; and the two girla.set off tt^tber.
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
ss
Tbey g*ily •Mended the downs, rqoicing in their own
-penetntioii > t eieij glimpie of blue dcj ; and when they
MBg^t in their fmces the animating gales of a high louth-
msterlj wind, they pitied the feara which had prevented
liieir mother and Elinor from Bharing such delightful
" Is there a felicity in the world, " raid Marianne,
" Buptriw to thia?— Mai^aretj we will walk here at leaat
two honrt. "
Margaret agreed, and they panned their way against tiK
wind, resitting it with laughing delight for about twenty
minutea longer, when suddenly the clouds united over their
beads, and a driving rain aet fiill in their face. Chagrined
and surprised, they were obliged, thoi^b unwillingly, to
torn back, for no shdter was nearer than their own house.
One consolation, however, remained for them, to which the
exigence of the moment gave more thin usual propriety, —
it was that of running with all possiUe speed down the steep
aide of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate.
They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage, but
a false step brought her suddenly to the ground; and Mar-
gsret, unable to stop henelf to auist her, was involuntarily
hnrried along, and reached the bottom in safety.
A gentlemui carrying a gun, with two pointers playing
round him, was passing up the hill, and widiin a few yards
of Marianne, when her accident h^pened. He put down
his gun and ran to her asaialance. 9w had raised herself
fram the ground, hut her foot had been twisted in the fall,
and ahe was scarcely able to stand. The gentleman offeied
fait aervicei; and perceiving that her modesty declined what
faer situation rendered noceaaary, toiA her np in his arma,
without larther ilelay, and carried her down the hill.
Then passing through the garden, the gate of which had
heM) left open by Margaret, he bore her directly into the
house, whither Maigaret was just arrived, and quitted nfit
hit hold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour.
Elinor and her mother rose up in amaiement at their
oitrance ; and while the eyes of both were fixed on him
with an evidoat wonder and a secret admiration whid^
equally sprung from hit appearance, he apologised for his
" 2 HYlk
:96 mm a
^ntruaion, b; lelating its cftiue, in a manneT so frank and
tn graceful, that his person, which was uncommonly tund-
.lome, received additional charms from his voice and expre^
aion. Had he been even old, ugljr, and vulgar, the grati-
tude and kindnesB of Mrs. Dashwood would have been
■ecured by any act of attention to her chil4 > bnt tbe
influence of youth, beauty, and el^ance, gave an interest
to the action which came home to her feelinga.
She thanked him again and again j and, with a BweetncM
of addresa which always attendad her, invited him to be
Mated. But this he declined, aa he was dirty and wet.
Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to whom ahe wn
obliged. Hia name, he replied, was WiUoughby, and hia
present home was at Allenham, hoai whence he hoped ahe
would allow him the honour of calling to-morrow to en-
quire after Miss Dashwood. The honour was readily
.granted, and he then departed, to make himself still more
jnterestii^, in the midst of a heavy rain.
Hia manly beauty and more than common gracefnlneai
arere instantly the theme of general admiration; and the
^Qgh which his gallantry raised against Marianne leceived
{larlicular spirit from his exterior attractions. Marianne
heraelf bad. seen lesa of his person than the rest, for the
confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting hs
up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after
their entering the house. But she bad seen eno)^ of him
to join in all the admiration of the others, and with an
mergy which always adorned her praise. His perstm and
air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn for the
hero of a favoarite story'; and in his carrying her into the
house with so little previous formality there was a r^dity
of thought which particularly recommended the action to
her. Every circumstance belonging to him was interesting.
His name was good, his residence was in their favourite
village, and she soon found out that of all raanly dresses a
diootiag-Jacket was the most becoming. Her imaginatioti
jras buiy, her reflection! were pleasant, and tbe pain of a
sprained ankle was disregarded, 4
Sir John called on them aa soon as the next interval of
f^ weather that morning allowed him to get out of doors j
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
tamx Am mmiKLrrr, ST
tnd Huianne'i ■ccident being related to him, he wu eageriy*
uked whether he knew u)y gentleman of the name i^
Willoughby at Allenham.
" Willoughby! " cried Sir Jolm; " what, i« he in dW
eonntrj ? That ia good newa however ■ I will ride ovei'
to-monvw, and aak him to dinner on Thuraday. "
" Yoa know him, then, " said Mn. Daahwood.
" Know him ! to be sure I do. Wbj, he is down here-
every year. "
" And what sort of a young man ia he ? "
" Aa good a kind of fellow sa ever lived, I asmre you.
A very decent shot, and there ia not a bolder rider in Eng-
land. "
" And ia that all you can say for him ? " cried Marianne,
aequaintance P What his pursuits, hit talenia, and genius f "
Sir John was rather puzzled.
" Upon my soul, " uid he, " I do not know much about
Um a» to all that. Bat he ia a pleasant, good-humoured
fellow, and haa got the nicest little black bitch of a pointer
I ever aaw. Was ahe out with him to-day ? "
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the coUnu'
tf Mr. Willoughby's pointer, than he could describe to het-
the shades of his mind.
*■ But who is he f " aud Elinor. " Where does he com*
from ? Has he a house at Alleuham ? "
On tbia point Sir John could give more certain JnlelH-
gence ; and he told them that Mr. Willoughby had no pro-
poty of his own in the cotmlry ; that he resided there only
idiile he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court, to
wliom be was related, and whose possessions he was to in-
herit ; adding, " Yes, yes, he Is very well worth catching, I
oui tell you. Miss Daahwood ; he has a pretty little estate
of his own, in Somerselahire besides ; and if 1 were you,
I would not give him up to my younger sister, in spite of
■U this tumbling down hilli. Miss Marianne must not ex-
pect to have all the men to herself. Brandon will be
jealous, if she does not take care. "
*'I do not believe, " said Mra. Daahwood, with a good.'
bnmoured smile, " that Mr. Willou^by will be iocom-
98 nNn akb BennaiLur.
moded by the attempta of either of rap daughters, towaHa
what yo > call catching him. It ia not an emi^ojDieDt to
which thej have been brought up. Hen are very Mife
with us, let them be ever so rich. I am glad to find, how >
ever, from what yon M.y, that he ia a reipectaUe young
rasD, and one whose acquainluice will not be ineUgiUe. "
" He is as good a sort of fellow, I beliere, as ever lived, "
repeated Sir John. " I remember lut Christmas, at a
UUle hop at the Park, he danced from eight o'clock till
four without once sitting down. "
" Did he, indeed? " cried Marianne, nidi apsrkUng
eyes,- " and with el^ance, with spirit? "
" Ym ; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert "
" That ia what I like ; that is what a young man ought
to be. Whatever be hii pursuits, hia eagemeas in them
diould know no moderation, and leave him no sense of
fatigue. "
" Ay, ay, I see how it will be, " said Sir John, " I ,
see how it will be. You will be setting your cap at him
BOW, and never think of poor Brandon. "
" That is an expression. Sir John, " said Marianne, warmly,
*'whidb I particularly dislike. I abhor every commotb.
^ace phrase by whidi wit is intended ; and'setting one'a
cap at a man,'or * making a conquest,'are the most odiooa
of alL Their tendency ia gross and Illiberal ; and if their
construction could ever be deemed clever, tiBie has long
ago destroyed all its ingenuity. "
Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but be
laughed as heartily as if he did, and then replied, —
" Ay, you will make conquesta enough, I dare say, on*
way or other. Poor Brandon ! he is quite oaitten al-
ready ; and he is very well worth setting your cap at, I can
tell you, in spite of tdl this tumbling about and spraining of
DoliiHihyGoOgle
CHAPTER X.
Mauanhh'h pTMerrer, u Maiguet, irith more eleguiae
thftn precuion, stjled Willoughby, called at the cottage
early the Dext morning, to make his pertonal enquirlM.
He wM received by Mrs. Dathwood nith more than po-
litenew ; with a kindneM which 3ir Jobn'a account of him
end her own gratitude prompted; and ererjr thing that
pMsed during the visit tended to assure hiia of the seiwe,
device, mutual affection, and domestic comfort of the
fkmilj, to whom accident had now introduced him. Of
their peraonal charms be bad not required a second inter-
view to be conviDced.
Miss DashwDod had a delicate complexion, regaiar
features, and a remarkabl; pretty figure. Mariftnne was
■till handsomer. Her form, though not so correct sa her
■isler'a, in having the adrantsge of hdght, was more strik-
ii^ ; and her face was so lovely, that when, in the common
cant of ptftiae, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was less
violently outraged than usually happens. Her tkin was
way brown, but, irom its transparency, her complexion waa
uncommonly brilliant; her features were all good; her
mile was sweet and attractive; and in her eyes, which were
very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagemeiB, which
conld hardly be seen without ddi^t. From Willoughby
their expresaion was at first held back, by tbe embamus-
ment which the remembrance of his aasiBtance created.
But when this jiasaed away, when her spirits became col-
lecled, when she saw that to the perfect good breeding of
tbe gentleman, he united frankness and vivacity, and above
all, when she heard him declare, that of music and dancing
he waa passionately fond, she gave him such a look of ap-
probation, as secured tbe largest share of his discourse to
faendf for the rest of his sUy.
It was only necessary to mention any favourite amuse-
ment to engage her to talk. She could not be silent when
mcb points werf introduced, and abe had neither shyness
D 4, I
40 «BNBB J
nor reserve in their discuMuon. They ipeedily diicovered
that their enjoyment of dancing and muue wu matiul,
and that it arose irom a general conformity of judgment in
all that related to either. Encouraged by this to a fiirthH'
examinatioD of hia opinions, she proceeded to question him
on the subject of booki : her faTonrite aatbon were bnnigfat
forward and dwelt upon with to rapturona a delight, that
any young man of five-and-twenty most have iytea in-
aensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to
the excellence of such works, however disregarded before^
Their taste was strikingly alike. The aame books, the same
passages were idolised by eadi ,- or if any difierence ai^
peared, any olfjection arose, it lasted no longer than till the
force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could
be displayed. He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught
all her euthusiasm ; and long before his visit cxtnCluded,
they conversed with the familiarity of a long-estahUahed
■cquaintanoe.
" Well, Marianne, " said £]inor, as soon as he bad left
" them, " for one morning I think you hare d < Hie piet^
wdl. Yon have already ascertained Mr. Willonghby's opi-
nion in almoat every matter of importance. Vou know
what he thinks of Cowper and Scott ; you ore certain rf
his estimating their beauties as he oi^ht, and you have
received every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than
is propCT. But how is your acquaintance to be long sup-
ported, under such estroordinary despatch of every subject
for discourae ? You will soon have exhausted each favouiita
•topic. Another meeting will suffice to explain his senti-
Inents on picturesque beauty, and second marriages, and
then you can have nothing farther to ask. "
" Elinor, " cried Marianne, " isthisfair? isthisjuat?
■re my ideas so scanty } But I see what you mean. I
have been too much at my ease, too happy, too frank. I
have erred ^;ainst every common-place notion of decorum ;
'I hare been open and sincere w^ere I ought to have been'
reserved, spiritless, dull, and decdtful ; — had I talked only
«f the weather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in
Va minutes, this reproach would have been spared. "
. < . " My love, " said bet mother, " you muM not be of'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
fended with Elinor — ihe nu onlj in Jeat. I ihoold aoM
faer myeelf, if tlie were capitde of witliing to theck tha
ddighc of joax conversation with our new ftiend. " Ha-
lianne wu (oftened in a moment.
Willoughbj, on bi« ude, gave eroy proof of hi* pleame
in their acquaintance, which an evident wish of improving
it could offer. He came to diem every day. To enquire
after Marianne waa at first hit esciue ; but the enconrsge-
Uent of hii recepdon, to which erery day gave greater Und-
IMM, made inch an exeute unneceiaary before it had ceased
to he pogaible, by Marianne's perfect recovery. She waa
•onflned for wme day« to the bouK ; but never bad mj
CMiflnement been leas irksome. Willoi^by waa a yoni^
nan of good abilitiea, quick imaginatian, lively apiriti, and
Open, a & ctionate manner*. He waa exactly formed to en-
gi^ Marianne's heart; fiir with all this, he joined not only
m eaptivadng person, but a natural ardour of mind whidi
waa now roused and increased by the example of her own,
«nd which recommended bim to her affixtion beyond every
thing else.
- Hii society became gradually her most esqnidte enjoy-
ment. They read, they talked, they sang together ; bii
tnndcal talents were considerable ; and he read widi all the
■endUlity and spirit whidi Edward had nnfortunately
wanted.
In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation be was as faultles* as in
Uarianne's ; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in bim but
a propensity, in which he strongly resembled and peculiaiiy
ddighted her sister, of laying too much what he thought
< ni every occasion, without attention to persons or drcnm-
gtan ceg . In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other
pec^le, in saeriflcing general politeness to the enjoymoit of
undivided attention where bis heart waa engaged, and in
■ligbting too easily the forms of worldly propriety, be dis.
played a want of caution which Elinor could not approve,
in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in iu
support.
'Marianne began now to percdve ^at the desperation
which had sdied ber at sixteen and a half, of ever seejng
1 man who conU satiafy her ideal of perfection, had beta
I .i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
4X HtKn AKD BEHBtBIUlT.
nth and nqjiutifiable. Willoo^by vm all that her fancy
had delineated in tbat unb^tpj hoar, and in eveiy brightei
period, as capable of attaching her ; and hia behaviour de- >
d & red his wiihea to be in that reipect ai eftrneat aa hii abia
litiea were itrong.
Her mother, too, in nhoBc mind not one tpeenlativt
, thonght of their raairiage had been railed, by his proapect
(rf riches, waa led before the end of a week to hope and exi
pect it ; and secretly to congratulate herself on haying
gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.
Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had M
early been discovered by his friends, now first became pet >
ceptible to Elinor, when it ceased tg be noticed by them.
Their attention and wit were drawn off to his more fortu-
nate rival ; and the raillery which the other had incuned
before any partiality arose was remored when hia feeling*
began re^y to call for the ridicule so justly annexed t»
sensibility. Elinor waa obliged, though unwillingly, to be >
lieve that the sentiments which Mrs. Jenningahad BBaigned
him for her own satisfaction were now actually excited bj
her sister ; and that however a general reeemblance of dis-
pOBition between the parties might forward the affection of
Mr. Willoughby an equally striking opposition of charactei
was no hinderance to the r^ard of Colond Brandon. Sbt
saw it with concern ; for what could a silent man of fivtt.
and-thiriy ht^, when opposed by a very lively one of flve-
md-twenty ? and aa she could not even wish him succeaa-
ful, she h^rtily wished him indifierent. She liked him —
in spite of his gravity and reserve, she beheld in him so
object of interest. His manners,'thou^ serioos, wetc
mild ; and liis reserve appeared rather the result of aome
oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess of
temper. Sir John had dropped hints of past injuries and
dia^^Miindnents, which justified her belief of bis being an
unfcntunate man, and she r^arded him with respect and
Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more becaui^
be was ^ghted by Willoughby and Marianne, who, prcyu-
diced gainst him for being neither hvely nor young,
■eemed resolved to nndervahie his moils.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
48
" BrandoD ii jut the kind of nun, " nid WlUoaghbj
one day, when diey were talking of him tt^etber, " whom
every bodj ipealu well of, and nobody caret about ; whom
■11 are ddi^ted to ice, and n»bod} remembert to talk to. "
" That ii exactly what I think of him, " cried Marianne.
" Do not boast of it, however, " aaid EUnor, " for it Ii
injmtice in both of yon. He is highly eiteemed by all the
& niily at the Park, and 1 never ite him myMlf withoat
taking pains to convene with him. "
" That he is patronised by you, " replied WiUonghby,
" is certainly in his favour ; but as for the esteem of the'
Others, it is a reproach in itielf. Who would submit to
the indignity of being qtproved by such women as Lady
UiddletOD and Mrs. Jennings, diat could command the in <
difiference of any body else ? " -
" But pofiapa the abuse of such people as yourself
and Marianne will make amends for the regard of Lady
Middleton and her mother. If dieir pruse is ceniare,
yimr censure may be praise, for they are not more uudi»-
oeming, than you are prqudiced and unjust. "
" In defence of your prottgi you cu even, be lancy. "
" Hy ptvteg^, as you call him, la a tcniible man ; and
sense will always have attractioni for me. Yea, Marianne,
even in a man between thirty and forty. He has seen a
greet deal of die world ; has been abroad, has read, and
has a thinking mind. I have found him triable of giving
me much information on various subjects ; and he has
always answered my enquiries with the readinesa of good
breeding and good nature. "
" That ia to aay, " cried Marianne MHitcmptuously, " ha
has bdd yon, that in dte East Indies the climate is hot,
and the mnaqnittoa are troublesome. "
" He would have told me so, I donbt not, had I made
any such enquiries, hut they happened to be points on
which I had been previously informed. "
" Perhaps, " ssid WiUonghby, " his obeervationB maj
have extended to the existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and
palanquina. "
" I may venture to say that kit obaervations have stretched
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ranch futher dura your candour. Bot whj Bhonld you
dialike him ? "
'* I do not diililce him. I consider him, on the con-
tmy, u s verj respectable man, who haa eveiy bod;'*
good word, and nobody's notice; who has more mott^
than he can spend, more time thui he knows how to em-
ploy, and two new coats every year. "
" Add to which, " cried Marianne, " that he has neither
genius, taste, nor apirit. That his onderBtanding has iM
brilliancy, his feelings no ardour, and his voice no ex-
fveaaion. "
" Yon decide on hii iropCTfections so much in the mas*, "
replied Elinor, " and so much on the strength of your own
imagination, that the commendation / am able to give of
him is comparatively cold and insipid. I can only pro-
mmnce him to be a senaiUe man, wdl^lved, well-iufonned,
of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an aroiatfe
be«rt. "
" Misa Dashwood, " cried Willonghby, " yon are now
using me unkindly. You are endeavouring to disarm me
1^ reason, and to convince me against my will. But it
irill not do. You shall find me as stubborn a« you can be
. «rtfuL I have three uninawerable reasons for disliking
Colonel Brandon : he has threatened me with rain when I
wanted it to be fine ; he has found fault with the hanging
of my curricle, and I cannot persuade hfm to buy my
brown mare. If it will be any satisfaction to you, how-
ever, to be told, that I beUeve bit diaracier to be tn other
Tttpeeta irreprtwchable, I am ready to confess iL And in
fenm for an acknowledgment, which must give me some
pain, yon cannot deny me the privily of diaUking him tm
much as ever. "
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
CHAPTER XI.
LiTTi,E had Hra. Dubwood or her danghten imagined,
vtien ibej first cune into Deroniihire, th«t ao many en-
{jagementB would ■!!■£ to occupy their time aa ahortly
pieaetited themselTcs, or that they ihould hsTe aadi fre-
qaent invitations and nich eonatant viiiters as to leave
diero little leisuie for wrioiu employment. Yet such wh
" die case, When Marianne was recoTered, the Bchetneg of
•fflUHement at home and abroad, which Sir John had been
ptenoudy forming, were put in execution. The private
faalla at the Park then began ; and parties on the water
were made and aecompUahed as often as a showery Oeto-
ber would allow. In every meeting of the kind WU-
loQ^by was included ; and the ease and familiarity which
naturally attended these parties were exactly calculated to
give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance wiA the
Dashwoods, to affijrd him opportunity of witnessing the
«zcellencies of Marianne, of marking his animated admir-
ation of her, and of receiving, in her behaviour to himself^
the most pointed assurance of her affection.
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. She
only wished that it were less openly shoivn ; and once or
twice did venture to suggest the propriety of some self-com-
mand to Marianne. But Marianne abhorred all concealment
vrtiRV no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim
at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselvea
illaudable, appeared to her not merely an unnecessary eSbrt,
bat ft disgraceful subjection of reason to comnton-plaoe and
mistaken notions. Willoughby thought the same ; and
their behaviour, at all times, was an illustration of their
< q > inions.
When he was present she had no eyes for anv one elaf .
'Every thing he did was right. Every thing be said mm
dever. If thrir evenings at the Park were concluded
with cards, he cheated himself and all the rest of the party
to get her a good hand. If dancing formed the amiise-
r. .HfT.GoO^lc
meat of the oi^t, tbe^ were partneN tor half the time ;
and when oUiged to separate for a couple of dances, were
careful to itand together, and scarcely spoke a word to any
body else. Such conduct made them, of course, roost ez-
ceedingly laughed at ; hot ridicule could not ihame, and
seemed hardly to proroke them.
Mn. Dashwood entered into all their feeUngi with a
warmth which left her no inclination for checking this e & -
Cessiye display of them. To her it wsa but the natural
ooDBcquencc of a strong affection in a young and ardent
This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Ha
heart was devoted to Willougtiby ; and the fond attachment
to Norland, which she brought with her from Sussex, was
more likely to be softened than she had thought it possible
before, by the charms which his society bestowed on h < r
present home.
EUnor's h^ipinesa was not so great Her heart was not
K much at ease, nor her satlsfactioD in their amusementa
so pure They afforded her oo companion that conld
make amends ioi what she had left behind, nor that conld
teach her to think of Norland with less regret than ever.
Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jenniogs could Bup[dy
to her the conveisation she missed ; although the latter
was an ererlasting talker, and from the first had regarded
her with a kindness which ensured her a large sbsre of her
discourse. She had already repeated her own history ta
EUnor three or four times; sod had Elinor's memory
been equal to her means of improTement, she might haiw
known, very early in her acquaintance, all the particulars of
Mr. Jennings's last illness, and what he said to bis wife a
few.minules before he died. Lady Middleton was more
agreeahle than her mother only in being more sUhiL
Elinor needed Uttle observation to perceive that her reserve
was a mere calmness of manner, with which sense had
nothing to do. Towards her husband and moths she
was the laihe as to them ; and intimacy was, therefrai^
neither to be looked for nor desired. She had nothing to
My one day that she had not said the day before. Hw
^pldity was invariable, for even her spirits woe alwayi
DoliiHihyGoOgle
HNU AMD noniBtLm. 47
die sune ; uid though «he did not oppoK the ptrtlci u.
ranged by her huBband, pravided every thing were con-
ducted in style, end her two eldest children attended
}as, ihe never appe & red to receive more enjoyment frma
them than she might have experienced in dtting at home ;
and 10 little did her presence add to the pleaaure of the
others, fay any share in their conversation, that they were
iometimea only reminded of her being amongst them by
her solicitude about her troublesome boys.
In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance,
did Elinor find a person who could, in any degree, claim
the respect of abilities, excite the interest of friendship,
or give pleasure as a companion. Willoughby was out of
the question. Her admiration and regard, even her sisterly
Kgard, was all hia own ; but he was a lover ; his atten-
tions were whoUy Marianne's, and a far less agreeable
nan might have been more generally pleasing. Colonel
Brandon, unfortunately for himself, had no such encourage-
ment to think only of Marianne, and in conversing with
Elinor he found the greatest consolation for the total indif-
ference of her sister.
'Elinor's compission for him increased, as she had
Teason to suspect that the misery of disappointed lore had
already been known to him. This suspicion was given by
■ome words which accidentally dropped from him one even-
ing at the Park, when they were sitting down together by
mutual consent, while the others were dancing. His eyea
were fixed on Marianne, and, after a silaice of some mi-
nntes, he aaid, with a faint smile, " Your sister, I under-
stand does not approve of second attachments. "
" No, " replied Elinor, " her opinions are all romantic. "
" Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impossible
to enst. "
" I believe she does. But how she contrives it without
teflecting on the character of her own father, who had
bimself two wives, I know not A few years, however,
wW. settle her opinions on the reasonable bsda of common
tenae and observation ; and then they may be more easy ta
deCne and to justify than they now are, by any body but
, DoliiHihyGoOgle
48 ntna awd suniBiuTr.
" Thb will, pmlwU^, be the caw, " he replied; " an^
yet there is Mmetbing m > amiable in the prejudices of a
young mind, that one i« torry to see them give wiy to the
leception of more generkl opinions. "
" I cannot agree with you there, " said Elinor. " There
•re inconTeniences atteDding nich feelings as Marianne'a,
which all {he chamis of enthusiasm and ignorance of the
world cannot atone for. Her lystems bare all the unfortn-
nate tendency of setting propriety at nought; and a better
acquaintance nith the world is what I look forward to as
her greateit possible advantage. "
Attei a fjiort pause he resumed the cnnversation by
•aying,—
" Does your sister make no distinction in her otgections
against a second attachment ? or is it equally criminal in
every body? Are those who have been disappointed in
their first choice, whether from the inconstancy of iu
otgect, or the perversenese of circumBtances, to be equally
indifibrent during the rest of their lives ? "
" Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutis
of her principles. I only know that I never yet heard her
admit any instance of a second attachment's being par-
donable. "
" This, " said he, " cannot hold; but a change, a total
change of sentiments — No, no, do not desire it; for
when the romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged.
to give way, how frequently are they succeeded by such
amnions as are but too common and too dangeroug ! ^I
^eak from experience. I once knew a lady who in temper
and mind greatly resembled your sister, who thought and
judged like her, but who from an enforced change — from
a series of unfortunate circumstances " Here he stopt
aaddenly ; appeared to think that he had said too much,
and by his countenance gave rise to coiuecturea which
might not otherwise have entered Ehnor's head. The
lady would probably have passed without suspicion had he
not convinc^ Miss Dashwood that what concerned her
ought not to escape his lipa. As it was, it required but a
•light -effiirt of fancy to coimect his emotion with the tende
tecollection of paat regard.'Elinor attempted no more
DoliiHihyGoOgle
♦9
But M*riaiine, In her place, would not hare done to little.
The whde sUMy weald hare heen ipeedily fgrmed ander
ba actiTe imftginatioD ; and every tMng establiahed in the
moat melancholy ordeT of diuitroiu lore.
CHAPTER XII.
As Elinor and Mtuiuine were walking h^tti» the next
nioming the latter communicated ■ piece of news to her
sister, which, in apite of ail that ihe knew before of
Marianne's imprudence and want of thought, aurpriied her
fay its extravagant testimony of both. Marianne told her,
with the greatest delight, that Willougbby had given her a
horse, one that he had bred himself on his estate in Bomer-
setsbire, and which was exactly calculated to carry a woman.
Without conddeiiDg that it was not in her mothw'a plan-
to keep any horse, that if she were to alter her rescdution
in favoiu'of this gift, she moat buy another fur the servant,
and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable to
receive them, she had accepted the present without heal-
tation, and told her aster of it in raptures.
, " He intends to send his groom into Somenetsbire
immediaUily for it, " she added, " and when it arrivea we
will ride every day. You shall diare its use with me.
Imi^ine to yourself, my dear £linor, the ddight of a
gallop on some of these downs. "
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of
felicity to comprehend all the unhappy truths which at-
tended the affair ; and for some time she refused to submit
to them. As to ati additional servant, the expense would
be a trifle ; mamma she was sure would never ol^ject to it ;
and any hor% would do for him ; he might always get one
at the Park ; as to a stable, the merest shed would be suffi'
cient. Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her
receiving such a present from a man so littl^ or at leaat w
lately,, known to her. This was too much.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
" You are mUtaken, Elinor, " add Ae, warmly, " in
mppoaing I know very little of Willonghby . I have not
known tiira long indeed ; but I am much better acquainted
with him than I am with any other creature in the world,
except yourself and maouna. It is uot time or opportunity
tiiat ia to determine intimacy ; it is diipodtion alone. Seven
years would be iniufficient to make some people acquainted
with each other, and seven days are more than enough for
others. 1 ahould hold myself guilty of greater impropriety
in- accepting a horse from my brother than from Wi£-
longhby. Of John I Jmow rery litde, though we have
lived together for yean; but of Willonghby my jndgm^it
has long been formed. "
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.'
She knew her sister's temper. Opposition on bo tender
a snbject would only attach her the more to her own opi-
m < m. But by an appeal to her afifection for her mother,
by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent
mother must draw on herself, if (as would probably he the
case) she consented to this increase of establishment,
Marianne was shortly subdued ; and she promised not lo
tempt her mother to such imprudent kindness by mention-
ing the ofFer, and to tell Willoughby, when she saw him
next, that it must be declined.,
She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby
called at the cottage, the Mme day, Elinor heard her
express her diaappointmeat to him in a low voice on being
ohliged to forego the acceptance of his present. The rea-
sons for tbia alteration were at the same time related, and
they were such aa to make farther entreaty on his side
impossible. His concern, however, was very apparent ; and
after expressing it with earnestness, he added, in the same
low voice, " But, Marianne, the horse is still yours,
though you cannot use it now. I shall keep it only tUl yon
can claim it. When yon leave Barton to form your own
eslxblishment in a more lasting home. Queen Mab shall
receive you. "
'This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood ; and in the
whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it,
and in hia addiMsiog her aiater bj her Christian name
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ffltmn Aso samiBiuTT. 51
■lone, she instantly hw ui intimac; u > decided, a meaning
«o direct, as marked a perfect agreement between theoj.
Frnm that moment she doubted not of their being eng^ed
to each other ; and the beUef of it created no other surprise
than that she, or an; of thdr friends, should be left by
tempera bo irank, to discover it by accident.
Margaret related something to her the next day, which
]daced this matter in a still clearer light Willoughby had
sprait the preceding evening with them ; and Mai^aret, by
bHng left some time in ^e parlonr with only him and
Marianne, had had opportunity for obserrations, whi < A,
with a most important face, she communicated to her
eldest aiater, when they were next by themselves.
" Oh, Elinor ! " she cried,''I have such a secret to tell
yon about Marianne. I am sore she will be married to
Mr. WiUonghby very soon. "
" You have said so, " replied Elinor, "'almost every day
since they firat met on Highchurch Down ; and they had
not known each other a week, I believe, before you were
eaiain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck;
but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great
" But indeed this ia quite another thing. I am sure
Aey will be married very soon, for he has got a lo«k of her
'■ Take care, MargareL It may be only the hair of some
great .uncle of Au. "
" But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost
anre it ia, for I saw him eat it off. Last night, after tea,
when you and mamma went out of the room, they were whis.
pering and talking together as fast aa could be, and he
■eemed to be be^ng something of her, and presently he
took op her edisora and cut off a long lock of her hair, for
it was all tumbled down her back ; and he kissed it, and
folded it up in a piece of white paper ; and put it into his
pocket-hook. "
From such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor
eould not withhold her credit ; nor was she disposed to it,
fbr the circumstance was in perfect unison with what she
had heard and seen herself.
a i
DoliiHihyGoOgle
52 SXKBI AND SBKRIBIUTT.
Margaret's lagadty wu Dot alwajra diqila^ed ia- a vaj
ao aatid'actor; to her aisler. WheD Mtb. JenoiDgs attacked
het one evening U the Park, to give die Dame of the youDg
maD who was Elinor's particular favourite, which had been
loDg a matter of great curioaitj to her, Ma^aret angwoed
by looking at her rister, and saying, " I mnst not tell, may
I, Elinor? "
This of course made every body langh ; and Elinor tried
to laugh too. But the effort wai painfuL She was ccm-
vinced that Ma^aret had fixed on a person whose name
■he could not bear with eonipomire to become a standing
joke vrith Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne felt for her most sincerely j but she did more
barm than good to the cause, by turning very red, and say-
ing in an angry manner to Margara, —
" Remember that whatever your coqjectnreB may be, you
have no right to repeal tliem. "
" I never bad any conjectures aboat it, " replied Mar-
garet ; " it was you who told me of it yourself. "
This increased the mirth of the company, and Mai^iaret
was eagerly pressed to say something more.
" Oh, pray. Miss Margaret, let ns know all about it, "
said Mrs. Jennings. " What is the gentleman's name P "
" I must not tell, ma'am. But 1 know very well what
it is; and I know where he is too. "
" Yes, yes, we can gueas where he is ; at his own hoiuie
at Norland to be sure. He is thf corate of the pariah, 1
dare Bay. "
■'No, thai he ia not. He is of no profeuion at all. "
" Margaret, " said Marianne, with great warmth, " you
know that all this is an invention of your own, and that
there is no such person in eueience. "
" Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure
there was such a man once, and hia name begins with
an F. "
. Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for ob-
aerting, at this moment, " that it rained very hard, " though
she believed the interrupdon to proceed less from any at-
tention to her, than from her ladyship's great dislike of all
auch inelegant sutgects of raillery as delisted her husband
DoliiHihyGoOgle
anna and sEiraiBiUTr. 5S
and mother. The idea, however, started bj her, wu im-
mediately pnrmed by Cohmel Brutd < »i, who was on ei^ry
occasion mindful of the fechnga of others ; and mnch waa
aaid on the roligect of rain hj both of them. Willong^by
opened the piano-forte, and asked Marianne to ait down to
it ; and thus amidit the variouB endeaTDnra of difl^rent
people to quit the topic it fell to the ground. But not ao
easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into wliich it had
thrown her.
A party was formed thia evening for going on the follow-
ing day to see a very fine place about twelve miles from
Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon,
without whose interest it could not be seen, as the pro-
prietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orders on that
head. The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful';
and Sir John, who waa particularly warm in their praiae,
m^ht be allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he bad framed
parties to visit them, at least, twice every summer for the
last ten years. They contained a noble piece of water, — a
sail on which was to form ■ great part of the morning's
amuBcnient ; cold provisions were to be taken, opea car-
riages only to be employed, and every thing conducted in the
uaual style of a complete party of pleaiure.
To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold
undertaking, considering the time of year, and that it had
nined every day for the laat fortnight ; and Mrs. Dash-
WDod, who bad already a (xdd, was persuaded by Elingr to
attty at home.
CHAPTER XIII.
Thbib intended excursion to Wbitwell turned out very dif-
ferently from what Elinor had expected. She was prepared
to be wet through, fatigued, and frightened ; but the event
was still more unfortunate, for they did not go at aU.
By ten o'clock the whole party were asaemUed at dw
• 3 f.oo.jlo
54 MWSm AND BEHUBIUIT.
Pu-k, where they were to breakfast.'The moming wm
rafher faTourable, . thongh it had rained all night, as the
doudt were then dispersing across the sky, aod the aun tre-
quendy appeared. They were all in high apirila and good
humour, eagei to be happy, and determined to Bubinit to the
greatest InconvenienceB and hardships rather tbao be other.
While they were at breakfaat the letters were brou^t in.
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon :■ — be
took it, looked at the direction, dianged cobnr, and iintne-
diately left the room.
" What is the matta with Braadmi ? " said Sir John.
Nobody could tell.
" I hope he has had no had news,''said Lady Middle,
ton. " It must be something extraordinary that could
make Colonel Brandon leave my breakfast table so sud >
denly. "
In about five minutes he returned.
" No bad news. Colonel, I hope? " sfud Mrs. Jennings,
•a soon as he entered the room.
" None at all, ma'am, I thank you. "
" Was it from Avignon ? I hope it is not to say that
your sister is worse ? "
'L. It came from town, and is merely a letter
" But how came the hand to discompose yon so maeb,
if it was only a letter of business? Come, come, this
won't do. Colonel ; so let us hear the truth of it. "
" My dear madam, " said Lady Middleton, " recollect
what you are saying. "
" Perhaps it is to t^ yon that your couun Fanny is
married ? " said Mrs. Jennings, without attending to her
daughter's reproof.
" No, indeed, it is not. "
" Well, then, I know who it is from. Colonel. And I
hope she is well. "
" Whom do you mean, ma'am ? " said he, colonring a
little.
" Oh I yon know who I mean. "
" 1 am particultriy sorry, ma'am, " said he, addressing
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
NNU AKD HBNSIBILITT. 55
Lady Middkton, " that I should receive this letter to > daf ,
for iti.U on buuaeu which lequirea my immediate attend-
" In town! " cried Mrs. Jennings. " What can yon
b«Te to do in town at this time of year? "
" My own loss ia great, " he continned, " in being obliged
to leave so ^reeaUe a party ; but I am die more concerned^
aa I fear my prenence ia necessary to gain your admittance
at Whitwell. "
What a blow upon tbem all was thii !
" But if you write a note to the houeekeeper, Mr. Bran-
don, " said Marianne, eagerly, " will it not be sufficient ? "
He shook his bead.
" We must go, " aud Sir Jrfin. " It shall not be put
off when we are so near it. You cannot go to town till
to-morrow, Brandon, that is all. "
" I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not in
my power to delay my journey for one day ! "
" If you would but let us know what your business is, "
said Mrs. Jenninga, " we might see whether it could ba put
off or not. "
" You would not b« six hours later, " .said Willoughby,
" if you were to defer your journey till our return. "
" 1 cannot afibrd to lose one hour. "
Elinor then heard Wilbughby say, in a low voice to
Marianne, " there are some people who cannot bear a
party of pleasure. Brandon is one of tbera. He was
afraid of catching cold, I dare say, and invented this trick
for getting out of it. 1 would lay fifty guineas the letter
was of his own writing. "
" I have no doubt of it, " replied Marianne.
" There is no persuading you to change your mind,
Brandon, I know of old, " said Sir John, " when once you
are determined on any thing. But, however, I hope you
will think better of it. Conuder : here are the two Miss
Careys aftae over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods
walked up from the cottage, and Mr. WiUoi^hby got up
two hours before hut usual time, on purpose to go to Whit-
welL "
Gdonel Brandon affoin repeated his- sorrow at being the
■ 4
HihyGoogle
56 UtKSX J
CMiBe of disappoiDdng the party ; but at the same time
declared It to be unavoidable.
" Well, then, when will you come back again ? "
" I hope we shall see you at Barton, " added her ladj-
thip, " aa soon aa you can conveniently leave town ; and
we must put off the party to WUtwell till you rctuni. "
" Yon are very obligiDg. But it ia so uncertain when I
may have it in my power to retum that 1 dare not engage
for it at all. "
" Oh ! he must and shall come back, " cried Sir John.
" If he is not here by the end of the week, I ahall go after
" Ay, BO do, Sir John, " cried Mrs. Jennings, " and
then perhaps you may find «ut what hia buaineaa ia. "
" I do not want to pry into other men'a concerns. I
suppose it w something he is ashamed of. "
Colonel Brandon's horses were announced.
" You do not go. to town on hoTaebock, do ]wu f " added
Sii John.
" Jfo. Only to Honiton. 1 shall then go post. "
" Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good
journey. But you had better change your mind. "
" I assure you it ia not in my power. "
He then took leave of the whole party.
" Is there no chance of my seeing you and yonr aialers
in town this winter, Mias Dashwood? " -
" I am afraid, none at aU. "
" Then I must bid you farewell for a. longer time than
I ahoold wish to do. "
To Marianne, he merdy bowed and said nothing.
" Come, Colonel, " said Mrs. Jennings, " befoK yon go,
do let US know what you are going about. "
He wiahed her a good morning, and, attmded by Bir
John, left the room.
The complaints and lamentations which politenest had
hitherto restrained now burst forth nnivetsally ; and they
all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so
disappointed.
" 1 can gueaa what hia boldness is, however, " said Mrs.
Jennings exullingly.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
«7
" Cao yon, mk'am ? " uid almost every body.
" Yes ; it is about Miu Willinmt, I am sure. "
" And who is Mils W^illikiDK } " uked Marianne.
" What ! da not you know who Miss Williams is ? I
am sure yon must have besri of her befbie. She is a
relation of the Colond'a, my dear ; a very near relation.
We will not say how aeaz, for fear of shocking the yoang
ladies. " Then, lowering her voice a little, she said to
£linor, " She is his natural daughter, "
" Oh, yes ; and as like him as she can Htare. I dare
say the Colonel will leave her all his fortune. "
When Sir John returned, he joined moat heartil]'in the
general r^ret on so unfortunate an event; concluding,
however, by observing, that as they were all got together,
they must do something by way of being happy ; and after
aotae consultation it was agreed, that although happinesa
oould only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure a
tolerable composnie of mind by driving about the country.
The carriages were then ordered ; Willou^by's was first,
and Marianne never looked ha^^ier than when she got
into it. He drove through the park very fast, and ibej
were soon out of dght ; and nothing more of them was
seen tdll their return, which did not happen till after the
return of aU the'rest. They bodi seemed delighted with
thdr drive ; but said only in general lermH that they had
kept in the lanes, while the others went tm the dowsa.
It waa settled that there should be a dance in the even-
ing, and that every body should be extremely merry all day
long. Some more of the Careys came to dinner ; and they
bad the pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table,
which Sir John observed with great contentment. Wil-
looghby toolL his usual place between the two elder Misa
Da^woods. Mrs. Jennings sat on £linor'B r%ht > hand ;
and ibey bad not been long seated, before she le«it behind
her and WiUoughby, and said to Marianne, loud enough
& r them both to hew, " I have ftnnd you out in spite of
all your tricks. I know where you spent the morning. "
Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, " Where,
pray?-'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S8 SKMB AMD SIKSIBILmr.
" Did not you know, " said Willoughbyj " tlut we had
been out in my curricle ? "
" Yes, ye», Mr. Impudence, I know that very well, and
I was detennined to fiod out where yon had been'to.
I hope you like your houK, Miss Marianne. It is a very
large one, I know ; and when I come to see you, I hope
you will have new- furnished it, for it wanted It Tcry much
when I was there six yeus ago. "
Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mn. Jen-
nings laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in her
lesoIutioD (o know where they had been, she had actually
made her own woman enquire of Mr. WiUoughby's groom ;
and that she had by that method been informed that they
had gone to Allenham, and spent a consideraUe time there
in walldi^ about the garden, and going all over the honM.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true ; as it seemed
very unlikely that Willoughby should propose, or Marianne
eonsent, to enter the house while Mrs. Smith was in it,
with whom Marianne bad not the smallesC acquaintance.
As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired
of her about it ; and great was her surprise when she found
that every circumstance related by Mrs. Jennings was per-
fectly true. Marianne waa quite angry with her for doubt-
ing It.
" Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go
there, or that we did not see the house ? Is not it vlut
you have often wished to do yourself f "
" Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smidi
was there, and with no other companion than Mr. Wil-
loughby. "
" Mr. Willoughby, however, ia the only person who can
have a right to show that honse ; and as he went in an
open carriage, it was impossible to have any odier com-
panion. I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life. "
" 1 am afraid, " replied Elinor, " that the pl^aantnew
ot an employment does not always evince its propriety. "
" On & e contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it,
Elinor; for if there had been any real impropriety i«
what I did, I should have been sensible of it at the time.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
■BmE Airs aairaiBiU'nr. 59
for we always know when we & re acting wrong, and wilh
Bnch a conviction I could have hod no pleasure. "
"'But, mj dear Marianne, aa it has already exposed yon
to some very impertinent remarks, do you not now b^in
to doubt the discretion of yonr own conduct? "
" If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are lo ha
die ftaof of impropriety in conduct, we are all ofinding
erery moment of our Utm. I vahie not her ceDBure
aoy more than I shduld do her commendation. 1 am not
seniiUe of having done any thing wrong in walking ova-
Hrs. Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house. They will
one day be Mr. Willoughhy's, and "
" If they were one day to be ;fonr own, Mariaime, yon
would not be justified in what you ha*e done. "
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly grati-
^ing to her ; and after a ten minutes'interval of earnest
thought, she came to her sister again, and said with great
good humour, " Perhaps, Elinor, it uiu rather ill-judged
in me to go to Allenham ; bat Mr. WiUoughby wanted
particulftrly to show me the place ; and it is a cbarming
house, I HBBure you. There ia one remarkably pretty sit-
ting room up stairs ; of a nice comfortable size for constant
use, and with modem furniture it would be delightful. It
is a comer room, and has windows on two sides. On one
aide you look across the bowling'green, behind the house,
to a beautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a
view of the church and village, and, beyond them, of
those fine bold hills that we have so often admired. I did
not «ee it to advantage, for nothing could be more forlorn
than the fumiture; but if it were newly fitted up — a
couple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make
it one of the pleasanteat summer-rooms in England.'
Could Elinor have listened to her witbout interniption
& om the others, she would have described every room in
the house with equal delight.
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
CHAPTER XIV.
The cndden terminatioii of Colonel Brsndon'* Tint at the
Park, with his sleadinesB in concealing iu cause, filled the
mind, and raieed the wonder, of Mn. Jennings for two or
three days : she was a great wonderer, as every one must
be who takes a very livelj interest in all the comingB and
gcnnga of all their acquaintance. She wondered, with little
intermiiaioa, what could be the reason of it; was enie
there must be some bad news, and thought orer eTery kiod
of distresB that could have befallen him, with a fixed deter,
tninstion that he ahonid not escape them all.
" Bomething very melanchely must be the matter, I am
ante, " said she. " I could see it in his face. Poor man I
I am afraid his circumstances may be bad. The estate at
Delaford was never reckoned more than two thousand a
year, and his brother left every thing sadly involved. I do
think he most hate been sent for about money matters,
for what else can it be ? I wonder whether it Is so. I
would give any thing to know the truth of it. Perhaps it
is about Miss WlUiama — and, by the by, I dare say it is,
because he looked so conscious when I mention^ her.
May be she ia ill in town ; nothing in the world more
likely, for I have a notion she ia always rather sickly. I
would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams. . It is not
•0 very likely he should be distressed in his circtimstancas
MOV, for he ia a very prudent man, and to be sure must
have deared the estate by this time. I wonder what it
can be I May be bis sister is worse at Avignon, and haa
•ent for him over. His setting off in such a hurry seems
very like it. Well, I wish him out of all his trouble, with
all my heart, and a good wife into the ba^ain. " .,
So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings. Her opinion
varying with every fresh conjecture, and all seeming
equally probable as they arose. Elinor, though she felt
really interested in the welfare of Col < mel Brandon, could
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mfn Am bbdubiutt. 61
not bestow all the wonder on his going so aoiddeidy m*j,
which Mn. Jennings wu dednnu of her feeling ; For be >
tides diat the circumBtance did not, in her opinion, jostifT'
such luting amaiemeDt < x variety of (peculation, her wonder
was otherwise disposed of. . It was engrossed by the extn.
ordinary silence of her sister and Willoiighby on the sub-
ject, which they mnst know to be peciili«rly interesting to
them all. As this silence conlinaed, evoy day made it
appear more strange and more ineompadble with the dis-
position of both. Why they should not openly acknow*
ledge to her mother and hereelf, what their constant fadu-
viow'to each other declared to have taken place, Elinor
eould not imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might not bt:
immediately in their power ; for though Willonghby was
independent, there was no reason to beliere him rich. His
estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or seven
hundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equal, and he bad himself often
complained of his poverty. But for this strange kind of
secrecy, muntained by them relative to thdr engagement,
which,'iin fact, concealed nothing at all, she could not acr
count; and it was so wholly contradictory to their gener^
opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered her
mind of ibeir being really engaged, and this doubt was.
enough to prevent her making any enquiry of Marianne.
Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them
all than Willougbby's behaviour. To Marianne it had all
the distinguishiug tenderness which a lover's heart conld
give, and to the rest of the family it was the aStetionam
attention of a son and a brother. The cottage seemed to
be considered and loved by him as his home ; many mtve
of his hours were spent there ^an at Allenham ; and if no
general engagement collected them at the Park, the exer-
cise which c^ed him out in the morning was almost cer.
tain of ending there, where the rest of the day was spent.
by himself at the side of Marianne, and by his favourite
pointer at her feet.
One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel
Brandon bad left the country, his heart seemed more than
DoliiHihyGoOgle
08 asn AKD asNUBiuTT.
nnnlly open to erery feeling of attuhmetit to the ol:{jecta
around him ; and on Mrs. Daihwood's hnppening to men-
tion her de«gn of Improvini; the cottage in the spring, he
wannly opposed every situation of a place which affitctitm
had eatabUshed as perfect with ium.
'" What ! " he exclaimed — " improve thii dear cottage I
No. That I will never consent to. Not a stone mnst be
added to its walla, not an inch to its lize, if itiy feelmga are
" Do not be alanned,** said Mies Dsshwood, " nothing
of the kind will be done ; for mj mother wiU never have'
money enough to attempt iL "
" I am heartily glid of it, " he cried. " May she
always be poor, if she can employ her riches no better. "
" Thank you, Willoughby. But you may be auured
that I would not sacrifice one eendment of local attachment
of yours, or of any one whom I loved, for all the improve-
ments in the world. Depend upon it that whatever unem-
ployed sum may remun, when 1 make up my accounts in
the spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dia-
pose of it in a manoer bo painfiil to you. But are yon
really so attached to this place as to see no defect in it ? "
" I am, " said he. " To me it is faultless. Nay, more,
J consider it as the only form of building in which happi-
ness ii attainable, and were I rich enough I would instantly
, pull Combe down, and build it up again in the exact plan
of this cottage. "
" With dark narrow stairs, and a kitchen that smokes, I
mppoae, " said Elinor.
" Yes, " cried he in the same eager tone, " with all and
every thing belonging to it; — in no one convenience or in-
oonvenience about it, should the least variation be percep-
tib^ Then, and then only, under such a roof, I might
perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton. "
" I flatter myself, " replied Elinor, " fliat, even under
the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase,
yon will hereafter find your own house as faultless as yon
now do this. "
" There certainly are drcumatances, " said Willoughby,
" which might greatly endear it to me ; but this place will
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
63
slwajt have one cUiin on my afiectioii, which no other cu
poadblj abaie. "
Mn. Paihwood looked with pleanue at Mariume, whose
fine eyea were fixed so expressively on Willoughbj, a*
plainly denoted how well she understood him.
" How often did I wish, " added he, " when I wa* at
Allenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton cott < ^ were
inhabited 1 I never passed within view of it without id-
miring ita situation, and grieving th & t no one should live in
it. How little did I then thiol that the very first news I
should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I nest csme into the
eonntry, would be that Barton cottage was taken ; and I felt
an immediate satisfaction and interest in the event, which
nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I should
experience from it can account for. Must it not have been
■o, Marianne? " Bpealdng to her in a lowered voice. Then
OWtinuing his former tone, he said, " And yet this honae
you would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood ? You would rob it of
its simplicity by imaginary improvement ! and this dear
parlour in which our acquaintance first began, and in which
so many happy hours have been since spent by us together,
you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,
and every body would be eager to pass through the room
which has hitherto contained within itself more real accom-
modation and comfort than any other apartment of the hand-
somest dimensions in the world could posdbly afford. "
'Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of
tbe kind thoold be attempted.
" You are a good woman, " he warmly replied. " Yout
promise makes me easy. Extend it a httle farther, and it
will make me happy. Tell me that not only your bonse
wiU remain the same, but that I shall ever find you and
jimia as unchanged as your dwelling ; and that you will
always consider me with the kindness which has made'
every thing bdonging to you so dear to me. "
The promise was readily given, and'Willougfahy'i be-
haviomr during the whole of the evening declared at once
bis afifac^on and happiness.
" Shall we see you to-roorrow to dinner? " said Mn.
Dashwood, when he was leaving them. " 1 do not ask you
DoliiHihyGoOgle
g AND S > MeiBILir7.
o come in the morning, for we niut wilk to the Park, t9
»U on L & d; Middleton. "
He ei^aged to be with tbein hj fonr o'clock.
CHAPTER XV.
Mas. Dashwood'b Tint to Lady Middleton took place tbe
next day, uid two of her daughters went with her ; but
Marianne eixcused herself from being of the party, under
some trifling pretest of employment ; and her morher, who
concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby
the night before of calling on her while they were abaent,
was perfectly tatiafled with her remuning at home.
On their return from the Park they found Willoughbj's
curricle and Bervant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs.
Dalhwood was convinced that her conjecture had heea
JQBt. So far it was all aa she had foreseen ; but on enter-
iDg the house she beheld what no foresight hod taught her
to expect, They were no sooner in the passage than Ma-
rianne c & me hastily out of the parlour apparently in vioLeot
affliction, with her handkerchief at her eyes, and without
noticing [hem ran up stairs. Surprised and alarmed, they
proceeded directly into the room she had just quitted,
where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning
■gainst the manlel-piece with his back towards them. He
turned round on their coming in, and hie countenance
thowed that he strongly partook of the emotion which
overpowered Marianne.
" Is any thing the matter with her ? " cried Mn. Dash-
wood, as she entered : — " is she ill ? "
" I hope not, " be replied, trying to look cheerful ; and
with a forced smile presently added, " It is I who may
rather expect to be ill — for I am now suffering under a
yery heavy disappointment ! "
" Disappointment ! "
" Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
BDd taken my farewell of AIleDhun ; and by wsy of ex-
bilaratioi) I am now come to take mjr farewell of you. "
" To London I — and are you going this morning ? "
" Almost this moment. "
" Thia is very unfortunate. But Mra. Smith mnat be
obliged; and ber buuneaa will not iletBin you from ua
long, I hope. "
He Golonred as he replied, " You are very kind; but I have
DO ides of returning into Devonihire immediately. My viaits
to Mrs. Smith are never repeated within the twelTemonth. "
" And is Mrs. Smith your only friend p la Allenham the
only housein the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome?
For shame, Willoughby, can you wait for an invitation here? "
His colour increased ; and, with hia eyea fixed on ^e
ground, he only replied, " Yoa are too good. "
Mrs. Dashnood looked at Elinor with surprise. Elinor
felt equal amazement. For a few moments every one was
silent Mrs. Sashvood flrat spoke.
" I have only to add, my dear Wiilou^by, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome ; for I will not
preas you to return here immediately, because you only can
judge how far that might be pleasing to Mrs. Smith ; and
on this head I ahall be no more disposed to question your
judgment than to donbt your inclination. "
" My et^agementa at present, " replied Willoughby, con-
fusedly, " are of such a nature — that — I dare not
flatter myself "
He stopt. Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished to
apeak, and another pauae succeeded. This was broken by
Willoughby, who said, with a faint smile, " It is folly to
linger in this manner. 1 will not torment myself any
longer by remaining among frienda whose society it is im.
possible for me now to enjoy. "
He then hastily took leave of them all, and left the room.
Tbey saw him step into his carriage, and in a minute it
yna out of sight.
Ura Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly
06 gBNSB Ain >
quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concera
SDd alarm which this sudden departure oecasioned.
Elinor's imeaiiinesg was at least equal to her mother's.
She thought of what had jiut passed with ansietj and dis-
trust. Willougbby'a behaviour in taking leave of them, his
embarrassment, and affectation of cheerfulness, and, above
all, his unwiUingnesa to accept her mother's invitation, a
backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike himself, greatly
disturbed her. One moment ehe feared that no lerious design
had ever been formed on his side ; and the next lha.t some
unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him and her
■iEter : — the distress in which Marianne had quitted the
room was such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably
account for, though, when ihe considered what Marianne's
love for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.
But whatever might be the particulars of their separa-
tion, her sister's affliction was indubitable; and she thoi^ht
with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which
Marianne was in all probability not merely giving way to
as a relief, but feeding and encouraging a« a duty.
In about half an hour her mother returned, and thou^
her eyes were red, her count^iance was not uncheerful.
" Our dear Willonghby is now some miles from Barton,
Elinor, " said she, as she sat down to work, " and with how
heavy a heart does he travel!'"
" It is all very strange. So suddenly to be gone .'It
seems but the work of a moment. And last night he was
with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate i* And now,
after only ten minutes'notice, — gone, too, without intend-
ing to return ! — Something more than what he owned to
us must have happened. He did not speak, he did not
behave like himself. You must have seen the difference as
well as i. What can it be P Can they have quarreled ?
Why dse should he have shown such unwillingness to
accept your invitation here? "
" It was not inclination that he wanted, EUdm-; I
could plainly see UuU. He had not tlie power of accepting
it. I have thought it al) over, I assare you, and I can
perfectly account for every thing that at first seemed strange
to roe as well a« to tou. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
" Cm yon, indeed? "
" Yea. I hare expUincd it to myself in the moat
Mtii & ctory way ; but yon, Elinor, who love to doubt
wfaeM yon can — it will not satisfy j/ou, I know; bat
you aball not talk me out of my truBt in it. I am po-
maded that Mrs. Smith iuipects hii regard for Marianne,
disapproveB of it (pwhapf! because ahe has other views fbr
him), and on that aceonnt is e^er to get him away ;
and that the bnainess which she sends him off to transact
it invented as an excuae to diamias him. Thia is what I
believe to bave happened. > He is, moreover, aware that die
Ales diaapprove the connection ; he darea not therefore at
present confess to her his engagement with Marianne, and
he feels himself obliged, from his dependent situation, to
give in to her schemes, and absent himself & om Devonshire
for a while. You will tfU me, I know, that this may or
may not have happened; but I will iislen to no cavi),
unless yon can point out any other method of understand-
ing the affair as satisfactory as this. And now, Elinor,
what have you to say f "
" Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer. "
" Then yon would have fold me, that it might or might
not have happened. Oh, Elinor, how ineoroprebensibk:
ore your feelings I You had rather take evil upon credit
than good. You had rather look out for misery for Ma-
rianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apolt^y for
the latter. You are resolved to think him blamable,
because he took leave of us with lesa affection than his
usual behaviour haa shown. And is no allowance to be
'made for inadvertence, or for spirits depressed by recent
disappointment? Are n« probabilities to be accepted,
merely because ^ey are not certainties? Is nothing due
to dte man whom we have all so much reason to love, and no
leaaaain the world to think ill of ? To thepoEsibility of mo-
tives unanswerable in themselvea, though unavoidably secret
far a while ? And, after all, what is it you suspect him of? "
" I can hardly tell yon myself. But suspicion of
■ometbing unpleasant is the inevitable consequence of such
an alteration as we bave just witnessed in him. There is
fpeat tnitb, however, in what you have now urged of the
p S
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
aUoRBiiceB which ou^t to be made for htm, and it is my
wish to be candid in my judgment of every body. Wil.
loughby may, undoubtedly, have very Bufficient reaaotta tot
his conduct, and I will hope that he haa. But it would
have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at
once. Secrecy may be advisable ; but atill I cannot hdp
wondering at its being praotised by him. "
" Do not blame him, however, for departing from hla
character, where the deviation is necessary. But you
really do admit the justice of what I have said ia bis de-
fence ? — I am happy —7 and he is acquitted. "
" Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal thdr en-
gagement (if they are eng^;ed) from Mrs. Smith ; and
if that is the case, it must be highly expedient for Wil-
loughby to be but little in Devonshire at present. But
this is no excuse for theii concealing it from us. "
" Conceahng it from us ! my dear child, do you accuse
WilloughhyandMarianue of concealment? This is strange,
indeed, when your eyes have be«i reproaching them every
day for incautiousness. "
" I want DO proof of their affection, " said Elinor, " but
of their engagement I do. "
" I am perfectly satisfied of both. "
" Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject
by either of them. "
" I have not wanted syllaUes where actions have spoken
so plainly. Has not his bdtavbur to Marianne and to all
of us, for At least the, last fortnight, declared that he loved
and considered her as his future wife, and that he felt for
us the attachment of the nearest relation f Have we not
perfectly uudenttood each other ? Haa not my conient been
daily aaked by his looks, bia manner, hia attentive and
affectionate reQ > ect f My Elinor, is it poaaible to doubt
their engagement ? How could such a thought occur Ut
you ? How is it to be supposed that Willoughby, per-
suaded as he must be of your sister's love, should leave her,
snd leave her perhaps for months, without telling ho'of
his affection, — that they should part without a mutual
«xchange of confldence ? "
" I confess, " replied Elinor. " that every circnmstanee.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
eicept one, ii in faTom- of their eDgagement ; bat that one
is the total ulence of both on the mlgect, and with me it
aliDoit outweighs every other. "
" How strange this ia ! You roust think wretchedl; in.
deed of Willoughby, if, after alt that hu openly passed
between them, you can doubt the nature of the terms on
which diey are together. Has he been acting a part in hii
behaTiouT to your siater all this timef Do you suppose
him really indiffirent to her P "
" No, I cannot think that He must and does love her,
" But with a strange Idnd of tendeneai, if he can leave
her with such indifference, such carelessnesa of the future,
U yon attribute to him. "
" You must remember, my dear mother^ that I have
Iltyer considered this matter as certun. I have had my
d < n]bts, I confess; but they are fainter than they were,
and they may soon be entirely done away. If we find they
eorre^Kind, every fear of mine wiU be removed. "
. " A mighty concession indeed t If you were to see
diem at the altar, you would suppose they were going to
be married. Ungracious girl 1 But I require no such proof.
Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify doubt ;
no secrecy has been attempted ; all has been uniformly open
md nnrefterred. You cannot doubt your sister's wishes.
It must be'Willonghby, therefore, whom you suspect. But
why ? Is he not a man of honour and feeling f Has there
been any inconsistency on his side to create alarm ? can he
be deceitful ? "
" I hope not, I believe not, " cried Elinor. " I love
Willoughby, sincerely love him ; and suspicion of his in-
t^rity cannot be more painful to yourself than to me. It
has been involuntary, and I will not encourage it. I was
startled, I confess, by the alteration in bis manners this
morning: he did not speak like himself, and did not
return your kindness with any cordiality. But all this may
be CTtpUined by such a utuation of his affairs as yon have
supposed. He had just parted from my siater, had seen
ker leave him in the greatest affliction; and if be fdt
< At^;td, from « few of offending Mrs. Smith, to reiiBt the
F 3 C'Xwk
70 BENBE i
tempUtton of returning here soon, and yet aware tliat by
declining your invitation, by saving that he was goii^ away
for some time, he should seem to act an nngenerouB, a «u-
picious part by our family, he might well be embamsaed
and disturbed. In Buch a case, a pltun and open avowal
of bis difficulties would have been more to his honoui, I
think, as well as more consistent with his general character;
— but I will not raise oligections against any one's conduct
on BO illiberal a foundation, as a difierenoe in judgment
from myself, or a deviation from what I may think right
and consistent. "
" You apeak very properly. Willoughby certuoly does
not deserve to be suspected. Thot^ we have not known
him long, he is no stranger in this part of the wortd ; and
who has ever spoken to his disadvantage? Had he been
in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,
it might have been odd that he should leave us without ac-
knowledging every thing to me at once: but this is not the
case. It is an engagement in some respects not prosper-
ously begun, for their marriage must be at a very uncertain
distance ; and even secrecy, as far aa it can be observed^
may now be very advisable. "
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret ; aitd
Elinor was then at liberty to think over the representationB
of her mother, to acknowledge the probability of many, and
hope for the justice of all.
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner-time, when
she entered the room and took her place at the table without
saying a word. Her eyes were red and swollen ; and it
seemed as if her tears were even then restrained with dif-
ficulty. She avoided the looks of them all, could nrather
eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silently
pressing her hand with tender compassion, her small degree
of fortitude was quite overcome, she burst into tears, and
left the room.
This violent oppression of spirits continued the whide
evening. She was without any power, because she ww
without an]'desire of command over herself. The alighteM
mention of any thing relative to'^illoughby overpowered
her in an instant ; and though her family were most ansi-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
oiuly sttraidTe to her comfort, it wm imponible fot them,
if they spoke at tU, to keep cleir of every auttject whidi
her feelings connected with him.
CHAPTER XVI.
Mariannb would have thought herself very inexcusable
had she been able to sleep at all the first n^ht after parting
from Willonghby. She would have been ashamed to look
her family in the ftce the next rooming, had she not risen
from her bed in more need of repose than when she lay
down in it. But the feelings which made such composure
a dif^jace, left her in no danger of incurring it. She was
swalce the whole night, and she wept the greatest part of
it. She got up with a headach, was unable to talk, and
unwilling to take any nourishment; giving pain every mo-
taeat to her mother and sisters, and forbidding all attempt
at consolation from either. Her seDsibiUty was potent
enough I
WTien breakfast was over she walked out by herself, and
wandered about tiie village of Alleoham, indulging the re-
collection of past enjoyment, and crying over the present
reverse for the chief of the morning.
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feding.
fbe played over every favourite song that she had been
Bsed to play to WiUotighby, every air in whit^ their voices
had been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gating
on every line of music that he bad written out for her, till
her heart was so heavy tb^t no fartho'cadness could be
gained ; and this nourishment of grief was every day ap <
plied. She spent whole hours at the piano-forte, altematMy
nn^ng and crying ; her voice often totally suspended by
her tears. In books, too, as well as in music, she courted
the miaery which a contrast between the past and present
was certain of giring. She remd noting but what they
had been uied to read u^ther.
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported
F 4,
H. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
tot ever ; it nink within a flew days Into a Hlmer rodan^
choly; but these employments, to which she d«ilj recurred,
faer solitary walks and ailent meditations, still produced oc*
caaional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.
No letter from WiUoUKhby came ; and none seemed
expected by Marianne. Her mother wu surprised, and
Elinor again became uneasy. But Mrs. Dashwood could
find expUnationa wbenevei she wanted them, which at
least BstiBfied herself.
" Remember, Bliaor, " said she, " bow very often Sir
John fetches our letters himself Irom the post, and cames
them to it. We have already agreed that secrecy may he
necessary, and we must acknowledge that it could not be
malhtained if their correspondence were to pass thtough Sif
John's hands. "
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried to
find in it a motive sufficient for their silence. But there
was one method so direct, so simple, and in her opinion so
digihle of knowing the real state of the afiir, and of in-
•lantly removing ill mystery, that she coold not help sugj
gesting it to her mother.
" Why do you not ask Marianne at once, " said die,
" whether she is or is not engaged to Willoughby ? From
you, her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a mother, the
question could not give oSeace. It would be the natural
result of your affection for her. She used to be all uiure*
serve, and to you, more especially. "
" I would not ask such a question for the vrorld. Sup-
posing it posaiUe that they are not engaged, what distress ,
vrould not such an enquiry inflict ! At any rate it woold
be most ungenerous. I should never deso^e hv craifl-
dence again, after forcing from her a confesdon of what it
meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one. 1 know
Marianne's heart : I know that she dearly bves me, and
that I shall not be the last to whom the sfikir is made
known, when circumstances make the revealment of it
eligible. 1 would not attempt to force the confidence
of any one ; of a diild much less ; because a aense of
doty would prevent the denial which her wishes illicit
direct. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
sum AND mniBiuTV. 7S
Elinor thon^t thii geaertmtj oraitrained, coniideriiig
ha dster's youth, mnd urged the matter farther, hut in
Tain ; common lense, common care, common prudence,
woe all luiik in Mn. Daihwood's romantic ddicacy.
It was several days hefore Willoughby's name was men-
tioned before Marianne hj any of her & roily ; Sir Joba
and Mrs. Jennings, indeed, were not bo nice ; their wilti-
ciiinB added pain to many a painful hour ; but on« even-
ing, Mrs. Duliwood, accidentally taldng up a volame of
Sfaakspeare, exclaimed, —
" We have never finished Mamlet, Marianne; our dear
Willoughby went away before we could get through it. W»
will put^it by, that when he cornea agun ; but it may
be months, perhaps, before that happens. "
" Months I " cried Marianne, with strong surprise. " No
— nor many weeks. "
Mrs. Da^wood wu sorry for what die had said ; hut it
gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne
so expresdve of confidence in Willougbby and knowledge of
his intentions.
One morning, about a week after his leaTing the eonntryj
Marianne was prevailed on to join her dsters in their usual
walk, inatead of wandering away by herself. Hitherto shi
had carefully avoided every companion in her ramblei. If
her sisters intended to walk on the downs, she directly stole
away towards the lanes ; if they talked of the valley, she waa
as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be found
when the others set off. But at length she was secured by
the exertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such oon-
tinnal seclusion. They walked along the road through the
valley, and chiefly in silence, for Marianne's mind could not
be cotitTolled, and Elinor, satisfied with gaining one point,
would not then attempt more. Beyond the entrance of the
valley, where the country, though atHI rich, was less wild
and more open, a long atretch of the road which they had
traveled on first coming to Barton lay before them ; and
an reaching that point they stopped to look around them,
and examine a ^ospect wUch formed the distance of tbeir
.dew irom the cottage, from a spot which they had nevM
happened to reach in any of their walk* befote.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
Tt UNSE J
Amoii^t the objects in die scene, they soon diacovered an
ammated one; it vas a man on horseback riding tonardi
diem. In a few minutes they could distinguish him to be
a gentleman ; and in a moment afterwards Marianne np-
turoualy exclaimed, —
" It is he^it is indeed; — I know it is! " and wi*
hastening to meet him, when Elinor cried out, —
" Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken. It is not
Willoughby. The person ia not tall enough for him, and
has not his air. "
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elinor, to screen
Marianne from particularity, as she felt almost certain of
its not beiog Willoughby, quickened her pace and kept up
with her. They were soon within thirty yards of the gen-
tleman. Marianne looked again ; her heart sunk within
her i and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back,
when the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain her;
8 third, almost as well known as Willoughby's, joined them
in begging her to stop, and she turned round with surprise
to see and welcome Edward Ferrars.
He was the only person in the world who could at that
moment be forgiren for not being Willoughby ; the only
one who could have gained a smile from her ; but sbe dis-
persed her tears to smile on him, and in her sister's hap-
{onesa forgot for a time her own disappointment.
He dismounted, and goring his horse to his servant,
walked back with them to Barton, whither he was purpoaely
coming to visit them.
He was welcomed by them aU with great cordiality, bnt .
especially by Marianne, who showed more warmth of r^;ard
in her reception of him than even Elinor herself. To Ma-
rianne, indeed, the meeting between Edward and her sister
was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness which
she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour.
On Edward's aide, more particularly, there was a deficiency
of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion.
He was confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in
DoliiHihyGoOglc
■BNBB AMD UMBIBILITK. 7S
ceeing ibem, looked neither rapturous nor gtjj said little
but what waa forced from him by quebtions, and distin-
guished EUnor by no mark of affection. Marianne aavand
listEHed with increasing surprise. She began almost to feel
ft dislike of Edward ; sod it ended, as everj feeling muit
end with hei, by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby,
whose manners formed a contrast aufficiently striking to
those of bia brother elecL
After a short silence which succeeded the first aurpriae
and enquiries of meeting, Marianne asked Edward if he
carae directly from London. No, he had been in I > eTOD-
abire a fortnight.
" A fortnight ! " she repeated, surprised at bis being ao
long in the tame county widi Elinor without seeing her
He looked rather distreased as he added, that he had been
staying with some friends Aear Plymouth.
''Have you, been lately in Sussex ? " said Elinor.
" I was at Norland about a month ago. "
" And how does dear, dear Norland look? " cried Ma-
" Dear, dear Norland, " said Elinor,''probably looks
moch as it always does at this time of year. The woods
and walks thickly coTerad with dead leaves. "
" Oh, " cried Marianne, " with what transporting len-
aations have I formerly seen them fall ! How have I de-
lighted, as 1 walked, to see them driven in showers about
me by the wind ! What feelings have they, the season, the
fur altogether inspired ! Now there is no one to regard
them. They are seen only aa a nuisance, swept hastily off,
and driven as much as possible from the sight. "
" It is not every one, " said Ehuor, " who haa your pas.
aion for dead leaves. "
" No; my feelings are not often shared, not often under-
stood. But tometiTiies they are. " As she said this, ahe
sunk into a reverie for a few moment^ ; but rousing her-
self again, " Now, Edward, " said she, caUing his attention
to the prospect, " here ia Barton valley. Look up it, and
be tranquil if you can. Look at those hills. Did you ever
■ee ituai eqnala f To (be left ia Barton Park, amongst those
D,™i,;f < ih.;Goonlc
76 n
woods and planudons. You may see the end of die house.
And there, beneath that farthest hill, which riieG with nidi
grandenr, ie oui cottage. "
" It is a beftutifnl country, " he replied; " but these bot-
toms must be dirty in winter. "
" How can you think of dirt, with such otgects before
" Because, " replied he, smiling, " among die rest of the
olgects before me, I see a very dirty lane. "
" How strange ! " said Marianne to herself, as she
iralked on.
" Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here ? Are the
MiddletoDB pleasant people ? "
" No, not all, " anawered Marianne ; " we could not be
more unfortunately situated. "
" Marianne, " cried her uster, " how can you say bo?
How can you be so unjust? They are a very respectable
family, Mr. Ferrars ; and towards us have behaved in the
liiendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne, how
many pleasant days we have owed to them P "
" No, " said Marianne, in a low voice, " nor how many
painful moments. "
Elinor look no notice of this ; and directing her attention
to their visiter, endeavoured to support something like dis.
course with him, by talking of their present residence, its
cODveniences, & c. extorting from him occasional questions
and remarks. His coldness and reserve mortified her se-
verely ; she was vexed and half angry ; hut resolving to
regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the
present, she avoided every appearance of resentment or dis-
pleasure, and treated hi in as she thought he ought to be
treated tram the family o
CHAPTER XVII.
Mbs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing
him ; for his coming to Barton wasj in her opinion, of all
DoliiHihyGoOglc
BBHU AND BBSOBILnX. 77
dtinga the most natural. Her joy and exprewioDS of te-
gard long outlived her wonder. He received the kindeU
welcome from her ; and shyoeBi, eoldnesi, rcBerve could
not stand against such a reception. They had begun to
fiul him before he entered the house, and they were quite
overcome bj the captivating manners of Mrs. Duhwood.
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of
her daughters, without extanding the passion to ber ; and
Elinor bad the satisAction of seeing him soon become more
Eke himself. His afiectiuna seemed to re-animate towards
them all, and his interest in their welfare again became per-
ceptible. He was not in spirits, however ; be praised Uieir
bouse, admired its prospect, was attentive and kind; but
still he was not in spirits. The whole family perceived it ;
■nd Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of liberal
itj in his mother, sat down to table indignant agunst all
■elfish parents.
" What are Mrs. Ferran's views for you at prewnt, lid-
ward ? " said she, when dinner was over, and they had
drawn round the fire ; " are you still to be a great orator
in spite of yourself? "
" No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have
no more talents than inclination for a public life. "
" But how b your fame to be estsblished ? for famous
yon most be to aatisfy all your family ; and with no incli-
nation for expense, uo affection for strangers, no profearion,
and no aannance, 70U may find it a difficult matter. "
" I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be dittin-
gnished ; and I have evny reason to hope I never shall.
Thank Heaven ! 1 cannot be forced into genins and do'
quence. "
" You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are
all moderate. "
" As moderate aa those of the rest of the world, I be-
lieve. 1 wish, aa well as every body else, to be perfectly
happy ; but, like every body else, it most be in my own
way. Greatness will not make me so. "
" Strange if it would I " cried Marianne. " What have
wealth or grandeur to do with happineas 7 "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
78 Hwra t
" Grandeur bas but little, " lud Elinor, " but wealth hu
much to do vith it. "
" Elinor, for shame! " «dd Marianne; " money can
only give happineeB where there is nothing else to give it.
Beyond a competenoe, it can afibrd no real Batiafaction, aa
far as mere self is concerned. "
" Perhaps, " aaid Elinor, imiling, " we may come to the
same point. Temr competence and mj/ wealth are very
much alike, I dare say ; and without them, as the woiid
goes now, we shall both agree that every kind of exWmal
comfort must be wanting. Your ideas are only more noble
& an mine. Come, what is youi competence? "
" About eif^teen hundred or two thousand a year ; not
more than that. "
Elinor laughed. " Two thousand a year ! One ie my
wealth ! 1 guessed how it would end. "
" And yet two thousand a year is a very moderat« in.
come, " said Marianne. "'A family cannot well be main-
tained on a smaDer. I am sure I am not eKtravagaut in
my demands. A proper establishment of serranta, a car-
riage, . perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on
leas. "
Ellinor smiled again, to hear her sister descriUng so
accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.
" Hunters ! " repeated Edward — " but why must you
have hunters ? Every body does not hunt. "
Marianne coloured as she replied, " But most people
dp. "
. " I wish, " said Margaret, strikii^ out a novel thon^t,
" that somebody would give us all a lai^ fortune apiece ! "
" Oh that they would! " cried Marianne, her eyes
qwjkling with animation, and her cheeks glowing with the
delight of such imaginary happiness.
" We are all unanimoua in that wish, I suppose, " said
Binor, " in spite of the insufBciency of wealth. "
" Oh dear ! " cried Margaret, " how happy 1 should be !
I wonder what J should do with it I "
Maiianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.
" I should be puzzled to spend a large fortime myself, "
DoliiHihyGoOJ^Ic
79
said Mrs. Daahwood, " if my children were all to be rich
without my help. "
" You must begin your impravemeDtB on this house, "
observed Elinor, " and your difficulties wilt soon vanish. "
" What magniAcent orden wotdd tnvet from thii family
to London, " said Edward, " in such an event ! What a
happy day for booksellers, music Beliers, and print-shops !
You, Miss Dashwood, would give a general cammiBaion for
every new print of merit to be sent you — and as tor Mtr-
riaDne, f know her greatness of soul, there would not be
music enough in London to content her. And books !^
Thornton, Covrper, Scott — she would buy them all over
and over ^ain : she would buy up every copy, I believe,
to prevent thdr falliiig into unworthy bands; and she
would have every book that tells her how to admire an old
twisted tree. Should not you, Marianne? Forgive me, if
I am very saucy. But I was willing to show you that I
had not forgot our old disputes. "
" I love to be reminded of the past, Edward — whe-
ther it be melancholy or gay, 1 love to recall it — and you
will never ofi^d me by talking of former ^mes. You are
very right in auppoaing how my money would be spent —
soma of it, at Irast — my loose cash would certainly be em-
ployed in improving my collection of music and books. "
" And the bulk of your fortune would he lud out in an-
nuities on the authors or their hdrs. "
" No, Edward, I s & onld have something else to do
with it. "
" Perhaps, then, yoa would bestow it as a reward on tliat
person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite
maxim, diat no one can ever be in love more than once in
(heir life — Ah- yonr opinion on that point is unchanged, I
presume ? "
" Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are toler-
aUy fixed. It is not likely that I should now see or hear
any thing to change them. "
" Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see, " said Elinor,
" slie is not at all altered. "
" EBie is only grown a little more grave than she was. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
80 uoiaB A
" Nfty, Edward, " uud Mamnne, " yow need not re-
proach me. You «re not very gay yonreelf. "
" Why ghonld yow think so?, " repUed he, with a sigh.
" But gaiety nev«r waa a put of my character, "
" Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's, " aaid Elinor ;
" I should hardly call her a lively girl — she. ia verjr
earnest, very eager in all dse does — sometimes talks a great
deal, and always with animation — but she is not often
leaHy merry. "
" I believe you are right,'" he replied, " and yet I have
always set her down aa a livdy girL "
" I have frequendy detected myself in mch land of
mistakes, " aaid Elinor, " in a total misapprehension of ch» <
racter in some point or other: fancying people so muoh
more gay or grave, or ingenious or stupid, than they really
are, arid I can hardly tell why, or in what the deception
originated. SometiineB one is guided by what they uy of
themselves, and very frequently by what other p«iople s > y
of them, without giving one's self lime to deliberate and
jndge. "
" But I thought it was r^ht, EUinor, " said Marianne,
" to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people. I
thought our judgments were given us merely to be sub-
servient to those of our neighbours. This has always been
your doctrine, I am sure. "
" No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed
at the subjection of the understanding. All J have ever
attempted to influence has been the behaviour. Yon
must not confound my meaning. I am guUty, I confeas,
of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in
general with greater attentinn ; but when have I advised
yon to adopt their sentiments or conform to their ixidgaaat
" You have not been tHe, then, to laing your aister over
to your plan of general dvility, " said £dward to Elinor.
" Do you gain no ground ? "
" Quite the contrary, " rqiUed Elinor, looking ex^mes-
nvely at Marianne.
" My judgment, " he returned, " is all on your dde of
the question ; btit I am afraid my practice is much more
DoliiHihyGoOgle
81
ui jaar nater'a. I never wuh to ofifand, but I tin m
fooliihly shj, that I often uem De^^ent, when I am only
k^ lutck by mj natural avkwardneu. I haTe frequentlj
thought that I muit ha?e beea intended by nature to tn
fond of lov company, I am « > little at my eata whm^
ingen of gentility ! "
" Marianne hat not ibyneM to exeuae any inattenlifa of
ben, " aaid Elinor.
" She knows her own worth too weU for fyit ahame, "
Ml^ied Edward. " Shyueaa it only the effect of a lense of
inferiority in wme way or other. If I could peraoade my.
uif that my manners were perfectly easy and gracefiil, I
■hould not be shy. "
" But yon would sdll be reaerred, " said Marianne,
*'and that is worse. " *
Edward started — " Reserred 1 Am I ittserred. Mi
" I do not understwd yon, " replied he, colouring. " Re-
served I — how, in wh & t manner? What am 1 to tell you?
What can you suppoM ? "
Elinor looked surprised at Mb emotiMj but trying to laugb
off the Butgect, she ssid to him,''Do not you know my sister
wen enough to understand what she means ? I > o not you
know she calls every one reserved who does not talk as fast,
and admire what she adnuie* as rapturously as herself? "
Edwatd made no answer. His gravity and thoughtful-
neM returned on him in their fullest extent — and he sat
for aome time silent and dull.
CHAPTER XVIII.
ELnroB saw, with great uneasiness, the low spirits of her
friend. His visit afforded her hut a very partial satis-
foction, while his own ei^qyment in it appeared so imper-
fect. It was evident that be was unhappy j she wished it
,G(Hinlc
S8
were eqnallf evident that 1m •tift diitingnUlied her bj ths
lamesflGCllliii wbich once ihe bad felt no doabt of vn
■piringj but hitherto the cmitintiancc of his prefercnw
■eenied Ter; uncertain ; and the rMcrvedneH of hii manner
towards her oootFadicted one moment iriut a mtwe atliU
mated look had intimated the precedinf; one.
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfaat-rpoai the
next morning before the olfaera were down < ; and MariaaaB,
who was always eager to promote their faappioesB aa for as
ahe could, soon left them to tbemidve«. Bnt before ite
waa half way up staira she heard die parlour door opoi,
and, tumii^ round, was aEtoniihed to aee Edward himsdf
" I am going into the TtUage to aee my horeei, " said he,
" as you are not yet ready for breakfaatj I BhaU be badt
again presently. "
Edward returned to them with fresh admiratian ot the
nUTOunding country : in his walk to the village he had
seen many parts of the valley to advant^e ; and the village
itself J in a much higher situation than the cottage, afibrded
a general view of the whole, which had exceedingly pleased
him. This was a sutgect which ensured Marianne's at.
teotion ; and she was beginning to describe ha own ad-
miration of these scenes, and to question him more mitratdy
on the olgecta that had partici^ly struck him, when Ed-
ward intnrnpted her by saying, " You must not enqmre
too far, Marianne : remember I have no knowledge in. tlie
picturesque, and I shall ofiend you by my ignorance and
want of taste if we come to particulars. I shall call hills
ateep, whit^ ought to be bold ; surfaces strange and un-
couth, which ought to be irregular and rugged ; and distant
objects out of sight, which ought only to be indistinct
through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. You
must be satiafied with such admiration as I can honestly
give. 1 call it a very fine country, — the hills ate steep,
the woods seem full of fine timber, and the valley looks
comfortaUe and snug, — wi^i rich meadows and Mveral
neat farm houses scattered here and there. It exactly an*
DoliiHihyGoOgle
8»
■wen Bty idck of a'fine oaaatrj, becnue it Bhitei lieautir
with utilitj -— ind I dare uy it is a pictuieaqne one too,
because you adnlire it ; I can easily bdiere it to be full of
toAt and protnoatoriea, grey nioia and brushwood, but
theae arc aU lost «n me. I know nothing of tbe pic-
" I un afraid it is but too true] " said Marianne ; " b«t
why sbouM you boast of it i* "
" I suspect, " said fXitor, " that to avoid one kind of
tSetWioaf Edwud here falls into another. Because be
bdieret many people pretend to more admiration of the
beauties of nature than fhey really fed, and is di^uBted
with such ptetensions, he ^fects grester indifierence and
leas discrimination in viewing th«n himself than he pos-
•esees. He is faatidiona, and will have an afectation of his
" It is Tcry true, " said Marianne, " that admiratian at
laodHcspe scenery u become a mere jargoo. Every body
pretend* to fieel and tries to describe with the ta«te snd
elegance of him who first defined what picturesque beauty
WBS, I detest jargon of every kind; and sometime* I have
kept my feelings to myself, becanse I could find no lan-
gnjge to describe them in but what waa worn and hackneyed
out < tf all sense and meaning. "
" I am convinced, " said Edward, " that you really
teA all the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to
feeL But, in retam, your sister must allow me to feel no
more than I profess. I like a fin^ prospect, but not on
picturesque principles. I do not like crooiced, twisted,
blasted trees. I admire them much more If they are tall,
straight, and flourishing. 1 do not like rained, tattered
MtUgcs. 1 am not fond of nettlea or thistles, or heath
Uomoms. I have more pteamre in a snug farm-house
than a watch-tower, — and a MMp of tidy, happy villagers
please me better than ibe finest banditti in the world. "
Marianne looked with amaxement at Edward, wilh com-
passion at tier sister. Elinor only laughed.
The sutqect was continued no farrier ; and Marianne
remained tlioughttuUy silent, till a new object suddenly
engaged her attention. She was sitting by Edward, and,
i-.d " ,G(Hinlc
fit SBNIB J
in taking his tea from Mr. Da^wood, hi* hand patted to
directlj before her, u to make a ring, with a plait of hair
in the centre, very conipicnous od one of his fingen.
" I never sair you near a ring before, Edward, " she cried.
" Is that Fanny'i hur? I reoiember har promiiing to
give jou some. But I abould have thought her hair ha4
been darker. "
Marianne spoke inconraderately whit Bherealljielt; but
when Ae «aw how much she had pained Edward, ho'own
vexation at herwant of thought could not be mrpaned by Us,
He cdoured very deeply, and, giving a momentarj glance
at Elinor, replied, " Yea ; it is my sister's hair. The
•etting always catta a difierent shade on it, yon know. "
Elinor bad met his eje, and looked consdous likewiK.
That the hair was her own, ghc instantaneously felt as well
satisfied as Marianne; the only difference in their eon-
clnsitHii was, that what Marianne considered as a free gift
from her sister, Elinor was consdons must have been pro-
cured bf aame theft or contrivance nnknown to bemit.
Bhe was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an
affi«nt ; and afiecting to take no notice of what passed, by
instantly talking of something else, die intmiaDy resolved
henceforward to catch every opportunity of eydng the hair
and of satiafying herGelf, beyond all donbt, that it was
exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended
in an absence of mind still more settled. He was pai-
ticulariy grave the whole'morning. Marianne sevnely
oeuBured herself for what she had said ; but her own for-
giveness might have been more speedy, had she known haw
little oStnte it had given her sister.
Before the middle of the day, they w«e visited by Sr
John and Mrs. Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival
rf a gentleman at the cottage, came to take a survey of the
goesL With the assistance of his mother-in-law. Sir John
was not long in discovering that the name of Ferrars began
with an F. And this prepared a future mine of raillray
against the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness
of their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented
from being immediately sprung. But, a* it was, she only
DoliiHihyGoOgle
8S
letrned, from tome Tery dgniflcant looks, how far their
penetration, founded on Mugkrel's instructions, extended.
Sir John nerer ctme to the Dashwoods without either
inviting tb«n to dine at the Park the next day, or to drink
tea wi & them that evening. On the preKnt occuion, for
the better entertainment of their visiter, towards whose
amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them & t both.
" Yon miut drink tea with us to-night, " said he, " for
we shall be quite alone ; and to-morrow you must abso-
hiUiy dine with as, for we shall be a large party. "
Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity. " And who knows
taut you may raise a dance 7 " said she. " And that will
tempt jwu. Miss Marianne. "
" A dance I " cried Marianne. " Impossible ! Who it
)0 dance? "
" Who I why yourselres, and the Careys, and Whitsken,
to be sure. What ! you thought nobody could danc*
because a certain person that shall be nameless is gone ! "
" I wish with all my soul, " cried Sir John^ " that
Willo«^|hby were among us again. "
This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to
Edward. " And who is Willonghby i " said he, in a low
voice, to Miss Daahwood, by whom he was sitting.
She gave him a brief reply. Marianne's countenance waa
more communicative. £dward saw enough to ccnnprehend,'
not only the meaning of others, but such of Marianne's
^presflions sa had piuxled him before; and when theit
Visiters left them he went immediately nmnd her, and said,
in a whispCT, " I have been guessing, ffiiall I tdl you my
guess ? "
" What do yon mean i "
" ShaUI tellyonP "
" Certainly. "
" WdJ, then ; I guess that Mr. Willonghby hunt*. "
. Marianne was surprised and confused, yet d > e could not
hdp smiling at the quiet archness of his manner, and, after
a moment's silence, a*xd, —
" Oh, EdwardI How can yon? — Bnt the time will
eonM^ I hope— I am sure you will like him. "
a S
HihyGoogle
I AND SENOBIUTT.
" I do not doubt it, " replied be, ntber RBtonished at bei
eamestnesB and narmlh; for had he uot imagined it to be
a joke for the good of her acquaintance in geueial, founded
only OD a Nmething or a nothing between Mr. Willou^bj
and herself, he would not have Tentured to mentioD it.
CHAPTER XIX.
Edward remained a week at the cottage ; he traa sametllj
presBed by Mrs. Daehwood to stay longer; but, as if he
were bent only oa telf-mortiflcation, be leemed reaoWed to
be gone when bin enjoyment among his friends waa U the
height. Hia apirita, during the lait two or three days, thongh
Mill very unequal, were greatly improred'^be grew more
and more partial to the house and enrironi — never spolce
of going away without s sigh — declared his time to be
wholly disengaged — even doubted to what place he should
go wlien he left them — but still, go he must. Never had
any wedi pasted so quickly — he could hardly believe it to
be gone. He said so repeatedly ; other things he said, too,
which marked ihe turn of bis feelings, and gave die lie to
hia actions. He had no pleasure at Norland ; he detested
being in town ; but either to Norland or London he mnst
go. He vahied their kindness beyond any thing, and his
greatest bappineas was in being with them. Yet he muat
leave thetn at the end of a week, iu spite of their wiahea and
nls own, and without any restraint on his time.
Elinor placed all that was astonidiing in this way of
acting to his motlier's account ; and it was happy for her
diat he had a mother whose character was so imperfectly
known to her, as (o be the general excnse for every thing
Strange on the part of her son. Diaappointed, howeier,
and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased with his
uncertain behaviour to berBelf, she was very wdl disposed
on . the whole to regard his aclioni with all the candid
sUowancta and generous. qualifieMivna, which had be««L
DlniliiHihyGoOgle
mraB Am ONnBiLtTTi 87
nther ukrv painfallf extorted froni ber, for Willoughby'i
•errice, by faer motW. Hi* want of (piriti, of cpenneH,
and of coniiataic]', were moat luiuUy attributed to hie
Mtnt of independence, and hii better knowledge of Mn.
Ferrwa'i di^NMticm and dengni. The ihortnen of bii
vuit, the tteadinen of hii purpoee in leavii^ tbem, origin.
ittd ia die Bune Eettered inclinalioa, the same ineTitaUe
iWMMitjrofiemporiiingwithhiBmother. The old, well-eitAa
bliabed grievknoe of dutf gainst will, parent against child,
waatbecanaeof alL 9he woold have beeo glad to know when
dieae difficuhiea wera to ceaae, this oppodlion was to ]rield,
—when Mrt. FerrarB would be i^onned, and her mhi
be at Ubert; to be happy. But from lach vain wiihes ah*
was forced to turn for cmnfort to the renewal of her eon.
fldence in Edward's afibciion, to the iMoeinbrance of erety
made of regard in lode or word whidi fell from him while
tX Biuton, and above all, to diat flattering proof of it which
be eanstantl]r wok Tonnd his finger.
" I think, Edward, " uid Mra. Daahwood, a* they were
at'btcakfait Ae last morning, " you would be a happier
man if yon bad any [ovfession to engage your time and
give an intereM to your plana and aciiona. Some inooot.
TCnience to yonr Mendt, indeed, might result from it —
ytn would not be aUe to give them ao much of your lima^
But (with a imUe) you would be materially benefited in
oae particnlar at least — yoo. would know where to go
when you left then. "
" I do asanre you, " he replied, " that 1 have long thought
oa diia p(rint aa you think now. It baa been, and ia, and
pcobably will always be, a heavy miafortune to me, that I
have hf^ no necessary buanesa to ntgage me, no profeaaion
to give me employment, or afibrd me any thing like inde-
pondence. Bnt nnfartnitatdy my own nicety, and the
nicety of my friends, have made me what 1 am, an idle,
belpkaB being. We never could agreed in our choice of a
profeaaion. 1 slwaya preferred the church, at I still do.
Bnt that waa not smart enough foe my family. They
eecomraended the army. That was a great deal too smart
for me. The law was allowed to be genteel enough:
Buny yonng men, who had ctumbers in the Templ^ made
Q 4
r,. i., < i-,G00J^lc
« Ter; good appearance in the firat drdea, and drore abtnit
town in very laiowing giga. But I h«d no inclination fte
the law, eren in this leas ibatnue itnd; of it, which my.
family approved. As for the navy, it had fashion on ita
■ide, bnt I waa too old when the aubgect was flrat atarted
b) enter it; and, at length, as there was no neeesuty for
my having any profesdon at all, as I mi^t he as dadiing
and expensive without a red coat on my back as with ODe >
idleneaa was pronounced on the whole to be the moat > d >
vantageous and banonrable, and a yonng man of dgbteen
u not in general bo earnestly bent on hdng busy as to
redst the BcJidtationg of his fiienda to do noUiing. I was
therefore entered at Oxford, and have been properly idltf
" The consequence of which, I roppose, will be, " said
'Mrs. Da^wood, " since leisure has not promoted your own
happinesa, that your sons will be brou^t up to aa many
pursuits, employments, professions, and trades as Colu >
" They will be brought up, " said he, in a seiions accenlt
" to be aa unlike myself as is possible. In fteling, in
^ion, in condition, in every diing. "
" Come, come ; this is all an efiiiaion of immediaie
want of «piritB, Edward. You are in a melancholy ho*
rooHT, and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be
happy. But remember that the pain of parting from
friends will be felt by every body at times, whatever .be
their education or slate. Know your own happiness. You
want nothing but patience — or give it a more fascinating
name, call it hope. Your mother will secure to you, in
time, that independence you are so anxious for ; it is ha
duty, and it will, it must ere long become her happiness to
prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.
How much may not a few months do? "
" I think, " replied Edward, " that 1 may defy many
months to produce any good to me. "
This desponding turn of mind, though it could not he
communicated to Mn. Dashwood, gave additional pain to
them dl in the parting, which shortly took place, and left
aa luicmnfortable impreaaion on EUnoi'a fedioga especially,
DoliiHihyGoOgle
^Mdi required Wbm troahle nd time to mMoe. But «
it was her deternuomtion to labdue it, tad b) preTent her-
■If from appearing la matla imm tluui what aU her family
mfibred on his going away, ihe did not tioft the mediod
•0 jndidonaly employed by Marianne, on t aimilar occasion,
toaagment and fix her Borrow, by lecking Jl»ce, aolitodg,
MtdidleiMsi. Tfacdr meana wen u different Htbrirtttgecta,
■nd eqnaUy suited to the adrancemcnt of eadi.
Elinor sat down to her drawing-taUe aa aoon ■• he waa
out of the botue, busily employed beradf the whole day,
neither tought nor aroided the mentioii of hit name, ap-
peared to intereit heraelf almoit aa mudi ai ejtt in tlM
general ccmcema of die family ; and if, by titia ctmdnet,
■he did not leaaen her own grief, it was at least prevented
fmm nnoeoessary increase, and her mother and sisten weM
qiaied mudi soHcitude on her account.
Such hehanmir as this, so exactly theremMof bar own,
speared no more meritorimiB to Marianne, than her own
bad seemed faulty to her. The bnaineat of self-command
she settled rery eaiily : — with strong afibctiona it waa
impossible, with calm onei it could have no merit That
ber sister's afibctionB were calm, she dared not deny, thon^
■he blushed to aclmowledge it ; and of the itiength of her
own, she gave a very striking proof, by itiD loving and
Teq > ecting that sister, in spite of this mortifying con-
viclion.
Without shutting'hcnelf ap from her family, or leaving
the house in determined solitude M avoid them, or lying
*wske the whole night to indulge meditation, Elinor found
every day afibided her Insure enough to think of Edward,
and of Edward's bduviour, in every poaaitde variety which
die diffirent itate of her s^ts at dififerent timea could
pnduce, — with tendemeti, pity, aj^robation, ccnanre,
and doubL There were moments in abundance, when,
if not by the absence of faer mother and sisters, at least by
the nature of thdr employments, convcnation was for*
bidden amgng them, and every efiect of lolitude was pro*
duced. Her mind was inevitably at liberty ; her thoughts
«cnild net be chained elsewhere ; and the past and the
/nture, on s. subject aa inlerestiiig, moit b« before her >
DoliiHihyGoOgle
so aBNU AXfl SKKHBIUTK
miut force her attendai, and engroM bet mmitrj, bar
reflection, mod her fancy.
From a rCTeiie of tida kind, aa ake aat at her drawing
t*Ue, she wu reuied one moming, kmui after Edward'*
leaving than, hj Uie wrifal of company. She hai^ened
to be qniie akuc. The dosing of die little gate, at ths
entrance of the grBen court in front of & t house, drew her
eyet to the window, and ibe saw a lai^ party walking i^
to the door. AmongB then were Sir John and Lady
Middleton and Mn. Jennings, but there were two Otfaen^
a geotleinan and lady, who were quite unknown to her.
^e was dttiDg near the window; and as won ai Kr John
perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the oermMOj
of knocldng at the door, and stepping acraas die tnrf^
obliged her to open the easement to speak to him, tho^h
the space wu so short between the door and (he windotv'
aa to make it hardly possible to speak at one without being
heard at the other.
" Well, " laid he, " we have brongfat yon aonie stnogcn.
How do you like them ? "
" Huah ! they will hear yon. " i
" Never mind if they do. It is only the FatmaTa >
Charlotte is very pretty, 1 can tell yon. Yon may see hw
if yon look thi* way. "
As Ehnor wa* certain of seeing bei in a eonpte of
minutes, without taking tiist liberty, she b^ged to be
" Where is Alarianne i Has she mn away beeanae wt
are come ? I see her instrument is open. "
" Site is walking, I believe. "
They were now joined by Mn. Jennings, who bad not
patience enoi^ to wait tJU the door was opened before she
told her story. She came hallooing to the window, " How
do yeu do, my dear } Hbw doea Mrs. Dsbhwood do t
And where are your sisters ? What ! all alone I you will
be glad of a little company to sit with. you. I have breught
tny other aon and daughter to see yon. Only think of their
emniog so suddenly I 1 thought I heard a carriage last
ni^t, while we were drinking our tea, but it never entered
toy head that it cmdd be Utem. I thought of nothing bat
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
whether it inigtit not be Colonel Brindon come back agiia ;
BO I said to Sir John, I do think I hear a esrriage; per.
baps it is Colonel Brandon come back again "
Eiiaot wu oUiged to turn from her, in the middle of
her atory, to receive the rest of the party : Lady Middle-
ton introduced the two ■tringerB ; Mrs. Disfawood and
MsTgaret came down stain at the same time, and ihey lE
aat down to loek at one another, while Mrs. Jennings con-
tinued her story ai she walked thtoogb the passage inta
the parlour, attended by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer was sernal years younger & aa Lady Mid-
dleton, and totally unlike her in erery respect. She waa
abort and plnmp, had a very pretty face, and the flneat exf-
pfeadoD of good hnmourin it that could poatibly be. Her
manners were by no means so elegant as her eister't, but they
were much more prepossessing. She esme in with a smile,
■niiled all the time of her visit, except when she laughed,
and smiled when she went away. Her husband waa a.
grave looking young man of five or six and twenty, with
an sir of more fashion and senae than his wife, but of less
willingneM to please or be pleased. He entered the room
with a look of self-consequence, eiighcly bowed to the
ladies, without speaking a word, and, after briefly survey-
ing them and their apartments, took up a newspaper fnun
tbe table, and continued to read it as long as he stayed.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly en >
dowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and
happy, was hardly seated before her admiration of the par-
lour and every thing in it burst forth.
" Well 1 what a delightful room this is 1 1 never saw
any tiling so charming j Only think, mamma, how it is
improved since 1 was here last i 1 always thought it sndi
% aweet place, ma'am I (turning to Mrs. Dashwood) but
you have made it so cbarming 1 Only look, sister, how de-
li^thil every thing is 1 How 1 should like sudi a house
fill myself! Should not you, Mr. Palmer > "
Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise
bia eyes from the newspaper.
" Mr. Palmer does not hear me, " said she, laughing;
" he never does sometimes. It is so ridicolovs 1 "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
Tbia VM quite ■ new idet to Mn. Duhwood ; ahe bad
Devet been used to find wit in the inattention of any otie,
and could not help looking with snrpriie at them bodi,
Mrs. Jennings, in the mean time, talked on a* loud «■
lite could, and continned her account of tbeit mrpriae, the
evening before, on seeing tfadr fiiendi, without ceaaing till
evety thing waa told. Mn. Palmer laughed beartil] > at the
reodlection of their aatoniabment, and ever; bodj ^r^ed}
two or three timei over, that it had been quite an agreeable
" You may believe how ^ad we all were to aee them, "
added Mn. Joininga, . leaning forwards towards Elinor,
and speaking in a low Toice aa if ahe meant to be heard bj
no one else, though they were aeated on difierent aidea'ot.
tlie room ; " but, howerer, I can't help wiahiog they bad
not travelled quite to fast, nor made audi a long journey
of it, for they came all round by London upon account 4^
.aooie businesa, for you know (nodding a^iflcantly and
pointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her aituation.
I wanted her to atay at home and reat this morning, bat
die would come with ua ; she longed bo much to aee you
all! "
Mrs. Palmer laughed, and aaid it would not do ha vtj
" She expects to be confined in February, " continued
Mra. Jennlnga.
Lady Middleton could no longer endure auch a con-
veraation, and therefore exerted herself to aak Mr. Palmtf
if there was any newe in the paper.
" No, none at all, " he replied, and read on.
" Here comes Marianne, " cried Sir John. " Now,
Palmer, you shall aee a monstrous pretty girL "
He immediately went into the paaaage, opened the front
door, and uahered her in himself. Mrs. Jennings aaked
her, aa aoon aa ahe appeared, if she had not been to Allen-
ham ; and Mrs. Palmer laughed ho heartily at the questian,
aa to diow she tinderatood it. Mr. Palmer looked np on
her entering the room, atared at her some minntea, and
then returned to his new^per. Mrs. Palmer's eye was
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■XlfBE AHD iXNEIBILITr. 99
aaw etitglit by tbe drBwing* which bung round the room.
She got up to ecamine them.
" Oh dear, how beantifiil theae ue ! Well, how di >
ligfatfiil I Da but look, mamma, how aweet .'I deduc
they ue quite charming ; I could look at them for even. "
And then uMdng down agun, ahe very soon forgot that
there were any such thiDgs in the room.
When Lady Middleton foec to go sway, Mr. Pahaer
rose bIbo, laid down the newspaper, stretched himself, and
looked at them all aronnd.
" My love, have yon been aaleep ? " aaid hia wUe,
laughing.
He made her no answer ; and only obserred, After ^;ain
examining the room, that it was very low pitched, and
that the ceiling waa cn > oked. He dien made hia bow, and
departed with the Teat.
Sir John had been very oi^nt with them all to apend
Ae next day at the Park. Mra. Daahwood, who did not
dioose to dine with them oflenei than they dined at ttiB
cottage, absolutely refaaed on ker own account; her
daughtera might do aa they pleaaed. But they bad do
cnrioaity to see how Mc and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner,
and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other
way. They attempted, therefore, likewise to excuae tbenu
aelves ; the weadier was uncertain, and not likely to bi
good. But Sir John would not be aatiafted, — the carri^a
diould he aent for them, and they must come. Lady Mid-
dleton too, though she did not press their mother, preaiad
dam. Mra. Jennings and Mra. Palmer joined their en-
-beatiea, — all lenned equally anxious to avoid a bmily
party ; and the young ladies were obliged to yield.
" Why should they aak us i " said Marianne, as soon ai
diey were gone. " The t«it of this cottage is said to b«
low ; but we have it on very hard terms, if we are to dtbt
at the Park whenever any one is staying either widi them
" They mean no lesa to be civil and kind to ua sdw, "
■aid Elinor, " by dieae fluent invitations than by ttmea
which we received from than a few weeks ago. The at.
DoliiHihyGoOgle.
Q them, if their pirtieB ore grown tedlon
must look for the change elsewhere. "
CHAPTER XX.
Ab the MiEB Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of ihe
Park the Uext Aaj, at one door, Mr«. Palmer came ninning
in at the other, looldDg as good humoured and meny aa
before. She took (hem all most aflectionately by the hand,
and expreBBed great delight in seeing them again.
" I am so glad to see you ! " aaid abe, leating herself
between Elinor and Marianne ; " for it is ao bad a day 1 waa
afrud yon might not come, which would be a Bhocking
thing, as we go away again to-morrow. We must go, for
the Westons ra«ne to ua nest week, you know. It wai
quite a sudden thing oUr coming at all; and 1 knew
nothing of it till the carriage waa coming to the door,
and then Mr. Palmer asked me if I would go with hhn
to Barton. He ia bo droU ! He never tells me any thing !
I am BO Borry we cannot stay longer ; however we shall
nteet again in town very soon, 1 hope. "
They were obliged to put an end to Buch en ezpec-
" Not go to town! " cried Mrs. Pidraer, with a lai^h;
" £ shall be quite disappointed if you do not. I could get
the nicest house in the world for you, next door to ours in
Hanover Square. Yon must come, indeed. 1 am sore I
ihall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into
public. "
They thanked her; bat were obliged to redat aU her
entreaties.
" Oh, my love, " cried Mra. Palmer to her husband, who
just then entered the room, " yoa must help me to per-
suade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
Her loTe made no answN ; and aAer sU^dy bawing
to the ladies, began complaining of tbe weather. ,
" How horrid all thia h ! " said he. " Such weather
mskes every thing and every body di^usting. Dulnesa ia
as much produced within doors bb without, by THin. It
makes one deteat all one's acquaintance. What the devil
does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in hit
house ? How few people know what ccHnfint ia ! Sir
John is aa stupid as die weaiher. "
The rest of the company sood dropt In.
" I am afraid, Miia Marianne, " aaid Kr John, " you
have not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham
- Marianne looked very grave, and said nothing.
" Oh, don't beaoslybeforena, " said Mrs. Pabner; " for
we know all'abont it, I assure yon ; and I admire your
taste very much, for I think he ia extremely handsome.
We do not live a great way from him iff the country, you
know'. Not above ten miles, I dare say. "
" Much nearer thirtj, " said her husbani].
" Ah, well! there is not much difference. I neve*
was at his house ; but they say it is a sweet pretty
" As vile a spot aa I ever saw in my life, " said Mr.
Psimer.
Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her coun-
tenance betrayed her interest in what was said.
" Is it very ugly ? " continued Mrs. Palmer; — " then
it must be some other place that is so pretty, I suppose. "
When d)ey were seated in the dining-room. Sir John
«baerved with regret that they wAe only eight tdl together.
" My dear, " said he to his lady, " it is very provoking
diat we should be so few. Why did not you ask the
GOberts to come to us to-day ? "
* " Did not I tell you, 8ir John, when you spoke to me
about it before, that it could not be done ? They dined
with us last. "
" You and I, Sir John, " said Mrs, Jennings, " should
not stand upon such ceremony. "
" Then you would be very ill-bred, " «ied Mr. Palmer.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
go niiHi Aim BBNnBiuTTt
" Mjr lore, jon contradict ererj body, " laid hi* wife
with her onud lough. " Bo you know that yaa are quit?
Hide? "
" I did not know I contradicted any body in calling
four tnotber ill-bred. "
" Ay, you may abuse me aa you pleaae,''aaid the good-
natured old lady ; " yon have ttJcen Charlotte off iny handa,
md cannot gJTe her l^ck again. So diere 1 have the whifi
hand of you. "
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her hnsband
oonld not get rid of her ; and exultingly laid, she did not
cxie how cTon he was to her, as they must live tt^ether.
It WM impossible for any one to be more thoroughly goodt
natored, or more determined to be happy, dian Mrs. PaU
mer. The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent
of her husband gave her no pain ; and when ha scolded or
■bused her, she was h^i;hly diverted.
" Mr. Palmer ia so droll! " said she, in a whispeTi to
Elinor. " He is always out of humour. " ,
Elinor was not inclined, after a Utde observatian, to
give hhn credit for bring so genilinely and unaffectedly
ilL > natured or ill-bred as be wished to appear. His tempra
might perhaps be a little soured by finding, like many
odieni of his sex, that through some unaccountable Inas in
favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very silly
woman, — ^ but she knew that this kind of blunder was too
cammon for any sensible man to be lastiogly hnit by itt
It was rather a wish of distinction, she believed, which
produced his contemptuous treatment of every body, and
his general abuae of every thing before him. It was the
deaire of appearing superior to other people. The motin
was too common to be wondered at; but the means,
however they might succeed by establishing his superiority
in ill-breeding, were not likely to attach any one to him
eXEept hi* wife.
" Ob, my dear Miss Dashwood, " said Mr*. Paliner soon
^terwards, " I have got such a favour to ask of you an4
yonr aister. Will you come and spend some time at Cleve.
land this Christmas i Now, pray do, — and come while the
^Vestoni are with lu. You cannot think how luq > py I diall
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
ke I It will bt quite delightful I — Hy love, " Rpplying ta
her hiubMid, " don't you long to bare die Mitt Baibiroods
«imt to Cleveland f "
" Certainly, " be wpUed, with « Mieer; " I oame into
Deronihire with m other Tiew. "
" There now, " wd bis bdy, " yon we Mr. Palmtr et-
pecta yon ; ao you Mnnot refiiae to comb "
They bodi ei^erly and reMlntely dediued her invltafjon.
" But indeed yon must and diall tome. I am mrt j < m
frill tike it rf all thingi. The Weat«na will be with vt,
and it will be qoite deHghtfoL Vou eannot think what *
sweet place Clevel^l is; an4 we are w gay now, fov
Hr. Palmer ii dways giring about tbe country canvuring
agaimt dieelecti < Mi; and M many people eotne to dine with
aa that I nersr aawbrfore, it iaqiHte eharming! But, poor
fellow 1 H ie Tety fatiguing to him, for he ia forced t*
aabe every body like him. "
EKnm'could hardly keep hf cowaieUDice aa ehe nwwiteJ
to the bardahip of meh an ol^igation.
" How ebanniiig it will be, " Bid Charlotte, " when he
ia n Parikment t — won't it t How I riiall hugb ! It will
be ao iMiculoM toaee all Us letttts directed lo him with M
M.P. — Bat da you know, he svya, he will never frank tot
ne ? He dedares he won't. Don't yon, Mr. Palmw? "
Hr. Palmer took Monothse of bar.
" He cannoC bear writing, you knew, " die eoatiBund';
■* ha layi it ieqwte ahoeking.''
" No, " said be, " I never nid any ihif^ so imliaiiaL
fion't i^M all your abnaea of language upen me. "
" There now ; yo« aee h»w ^t & he ia. Thia is alwayi
die way with him t Sometimes he won't ape^ ta iatU»
half a day together, and then he eomea o« witk aamethlng
9 droll — > all about aDy- thing in the > roild. "
^e aarpriaed Elinor very mnt^ as they lenmed inM
tbe drawing-room, by asking ha: wbetbar she did not Ufce
Hr. P^ner eKeeedve^.
- " Certumty, " and Elinor ; " he aeemt vary agieeable. "
" Well, I am M gbtd you d». I *aa|^ yon would,
ba ia 10 {rfaaaaarl ; and Mr. Palmer ia exaaaaiTCly |ileued
with yoB and your aisters, I cm tell yov; and you can't
H
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
98 - BBNOB AHD SBHUBIUTr.
think how diMppoioted he will be if yoa don't come to
Cleveland. I can't imagine why yon should olgect to it. "
Elinor was again obUged W decline har invitation ; and,
hy changing the labject, pnt a stop to her entreaties. She
thought it probable that as they lived in the same county
Mrs. Palmer might be able to give some more particulv
accomit of WUloughby's general character than could be
gathered from the Middletona'partial acquaintance with
lum ; and she was eager to gain from any one such a con-
firmation of his merits as might remove the possibility of
fear from Marianne, She began by enquiring if they saw
much of Mr. Willougbby at Cleveland, and whether they
were intimately acquainted with him.
" Oh dear, yes ; I know him extremely well, " replied
Jdrs. Palmer; — " not diat I ever spoke to him, indeed; but
■I have seen him for ever in town. Some how or other I
never happened to he staying at Barton while he wai at
AOoihan). Mamma saw him here once before ; hut I was
with ray uncle at Weymouth. However, I dare say we
■honld have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire, if it
bad not happened very unluckily that we should never have
been in the country together. He is very httle at Combe,
I beUeve ; but if he were ever so much diere, I do not
diink Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he is in the oppo-
sition, you know, aod besides it is such a way off. I know
why you enquire about him, very well ; your aster is to
marry him. I am monstrous glad of it, for then I shall
have her for a neighbour, you know. "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " you know mudi
more of the matter than I do, if you have any reason to
expect such a match. "
'" Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what
every body talks of. I assure you I beard of it in my way
throng town. "
■ ■. " My dear Mrs. Palmer ! "
" Upon my honour ) did. I met Colond Brandon
Monday morning in Bond Street, just before we left town,
•nd he told me of it directly. "
" You surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon tdl
jou of it ! Burdy yon must be mistakm. To give audi
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
I AND SBHmMILTTY.
10 could not be i
It what I should expect Colond
Brandon to do. "
" But I do EBsure yon it wm so, for all that, and I will
tell you how it happened. When we met him, he turned
tmck and walked with us ; and so we bc^n talking of my
brodier and sistei, and one thing and another, and I Baid to
him,'So, Colonel, there is a new family come U > Barton
cottage, I hear^ and mamma aenda me word they are very
pretty, and that one of them is going to be married to ^
Mt. Willoughhy of Combe Magna. la it true, pray i for
of coune you must know, as you have been in Devonshire
" And what did the Colonel aay ? "
" Ob, he did not say much ; but he looked as if he
knew it to be tme, so from tbat moment I set it down u
fsertain. It will be quite delightful, I declare. When is it
-to take (dace i "
" Mr. Brandon was very well, I hope t "
. i'Oh, yea, quite well ; and so hdl of your praises, he
did nothing hut aay fine things of you. "
" I am flattered by hia commendation. He seems an
excellent man ; and I think him uncommonly pleasing. "
" So do I. He is such a charming man, " Coat it is quite
a pity he should be so grave and bo dulL Mamma aaya Ac
was in love with your lister too. I assure you it was a
great compliment if he was, for he hardly ever fnlla in lore
with any body. "
" Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of
Somersetdiire ? " said Elinor.
" Ob, yes, extremely well ; that is, I do not believe
many people are acquainted with him, because Combe
Magna is so far off; hut they all think him extremely
agreeable, I assure yoo. Nobody is more liked than Mr.
Willoughby wherever he goes, and so you may tell your
lister. She is a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my
honour ; not but that be is much more lucky in getting
her, because she is so very handsome and agreeable, th^
nothing can be good enough for her. However, I don't
think her hardly at all handsomer dun yoii, 1 aasnte you;
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
100
iiir I think joa both exconTely fiettj, and m doea Ur^
Palmer too, I aci wmn, thei^ we could not get hjm to om
it last night. "
Mts. Palmer's infbnmdoB lespeotiiig WiUoogbby was
sot ytarf material ; bat anj teatimony in hia & vanr, faow-
■rer small, waa pieaaiDg to her.
" I am BO ^ad we are got acqnaintod at last, " contiiiiied
Charlotla. " And now 1 hope we ahall always be great
friends. You can't think how much I Imged to see yoa.
It ii to delight^ that yon ahould live at the cottage.
Nothing can be like it, to be sure. And I am so glad jaar
mBttx is going to be well married. I hope jon will be* >
great deal at Combe Magna. It ii a sweet place, by aH
" You bare been long acquainted with Celonal Bnndon,
have not yoo ? "
" Yes, a great while ; ever since my sister maniedi
He was a puticular friend of Sir John's. I believe, " she
added, in a low Toiee, " he would have been vary ^lad to
have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady Middleton
wished it very much. But mamma did net think the match
good enou^ for me, otherwise Sir John would have men-
tioned it to the Coli»ie1, and we ahould have been mairied
immediately. "
" Did not Colonel BiandoB know of St John's proposd
to your mother before it was made } Had he never owned
Ua afficdoD to yourself ? "
" Oh, no ; but if mamma had not objected to it, I daic
•ay he would hare liked it of all things. He had net leeQ
me then above twice, for it was before I left sdiool. Hoi«»
•ver, I am much happier as I am. Hr. Palmo'ia jutt the
land of nan I like. "
CHAPTEil XXL
Thb Palmen returned to Cleveland die next day, and tltc
two families at Barton were again left to ento'lain c«di
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
m« Atm BMHKBiurr. 101
•dier. Bat tUa did not Iwt long ; Elinor hid tuiHj got
dteir Uit riiitera oat pf her head, —had hatdlj done woo-
dning at CharlottE's bang bo iMppy witboot t, casae, at
Ht. Filmer's acdng bo simply, with good abilities, and at
dte itrange luiBniUbleneM which often existed betwem
iMsband Mid wife, — before Sir John's snd Mrs. Jennings's
active sell in thf cause of society procured her some other
sew acquaintance to Bee and observe.
In a Kimning's excuraion to Exeter, the; had met with
two yonng ladies, whom Mrs. Jennings had the satis & ction
of discovering to be her relations, and this was enough for
Sir John to invite them directly to the Park, as soon as
Acir present engagements at Exeter were over. Their eo'
gagemeTUB at Exeter instantly gave way before such aa
invitation ; and Lady Middkton was thrown into no little
alarm, on the return of Sir John, by bearing that she waa
Tery toon to receive a visit from two gii^ whom die bad
never seen in her life, and of whose elegance — whoa*
tolerable gentility even — she could have no proof; for ib%
aasuiances of her husband and mother an that subject went
for nathing at aU. Their being btr relations, too, made
it BO mneh Ae worse ; and Mrs. Jetmings's attempts at con-
BoUtian were, therefore, unfortunately founded, when she
advised her daughter not to care about tfaeir being an
fashionable ; because they were all cousins, and mnat p«t
«p with one ano^m. As it waa impossible, however, now
to prevent their coming. Lady Middleton resigned hersdf
W the idea of it with all the philosophy of a wtU-brad
womati, contenting henclf with merely giving her buiband
a gende reprimand on die subject Ave or six timaa every
The yonng ladies snived : their i^tpearance was by no
neani ungenteel or unfashionable. Their dreas waa verf
■toart, tfaeir manners very Civil; they were ddi^ted with
the bonae, and in raptures with the fdmltnre ; and they
h^pamed to be so doatingly fond of children, that Lady
Hiddieton's goodopinian waa engaged in their favour hafbre
tiiey had been an hour at the PaA. 9ie dedarad Aem to
ba vary agreeable giris ludaed, which, for her Ladyriii^
WW enthwiailic adisiratiMi. Sir John's oonfldenM In bia
a a
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
102 BmraE J
I own judgment rose with tMa animated praise, and he set off
directly for the cottage, to tell the Misa DaahnoodB of
the MiBS Sieeles'arrival, and to aaaure them of their being
the sneet«Bt girls in the world. From Euch commeodation
aa this, however, there was not much to be learned : Elinor
well knew that the sweetest girls in the world were to be
met with in every part of England, under every possible
variation of form, face, temper, and understanding. Sir
John wanted the whole family to walk to the I'ark directly
and look at his guests, benevolent, philanthropic man 1
It was painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself. -
" Do corae now, " said he — " pray come — you must
come — I declare you shall come. You can't tiiink how
you will like them. Lucy is monstrous pretty, and so good
humoured and agreeable ! The children are all hanging
about her already, as if ahe was an old acquaintance.
And they both long to see you of all things ; for they have
heard at Exeter that you are the most beautiful creatures in
the world; and 1 have told them it is all very true, and ■
great deal more. You will be dehghted with them, I ua
sure. They havebroughtthawhole coach full of playthings
for the children. How can you be so cross as not to come f
why they are your cousins, you know, after a fashion.
Tou are my cousins, and they are my wife's; so you must
be related. "
But Sir John could not prevail : he could only obtain a
promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two,
and then left them in amaiement at their indifference, to
walk home and boast anew of their attractions to the Misa
Steeles, as he had been aheady boasting of the Miea Stedea
to them.
When their promised viat to the Park, and consequent
introduction to the«e young ladies, took place, they found in
the appearance of the eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a
Tery plain and not a sensible face, nothing to admire ; but
in the other, who was not more than two or three and
twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty : her fea-
tures were pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, and a
■martnesc of air, which, though it did not give actnal
eleganee or grace, gave distinction to her person. Th^
DoliiHihyGoOgle
atNu JOB asSBBihiTw.- 103
mannerfi wen particulirl; dvil, and £liiii > i soon tllowed
them credit for lome kind of senie, when she mw with
what constant and judicious attentioQi they were making;
thcmselTes agreeable to Lady Middleton. With her childroi
they were in contEniud raptures, extolling their beauty,
courting their notice, and humouring all their whims ; and
auch of their time as could be spared from the importunate
demands which diis politeness mode on it was spent in ad-
miration of whatever her Ladyship was doing, if she hap-
pened to be doing any thing, or in taking patterns of some
elegant new dresa, in which her appearance the day before
had thrown them into unceasing delight. Fortunately for
those who pay their court tbrongh such foibles, a fond
mother, though, in pursuit of praise for her children, ihe
OMM n^cious of hnman beings, U likewise the mogt
credulous: her demands areeKorbitant; but she will swallow
any thing; and the exeesaive affection and endurance of
the Miss Steelea towards her ofispting were viewed, there-
fore, by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise or
distrust. She saw with maCemal complacency all the im-
pertinent encroachments and mischievous tricks to which
her cousins submitted. She saw their sashes untied, their
hair pulled about their ears, their work-bags searched, and
thdr knives and sdasors stolen away, and felt no doubt of
its being a reciprocal enjoyment. It suggested no other
surprise than thu Elinor and Marianne should sit so com-
posedly by, without claiming a share in what was passing.
" John is in such spirits to-day ! " said she, on his tsking
Miss Steele's pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of
window — " he is full of monkey tricks. "
And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinch-
ing one of the some lady's fingers, she fondly obaervei^
" How playfiil William is ! "
" And here is my sweet little Anna-maria, " she added,
tendarly caresting a little girl of diree years old, who had
not made a noite for the kst two minutes ; " and she is
always so gentle and quiet. Never was there such a quiet
little thing I "
But unfortunately in bestowing theae embraces, a pin in
her Ladyship's head-dress sli|^dy scratching the < AUld'»
B *
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
nedc, produced front tbu pattern of geadeneH muA, vialat
■cre«n)i, m could hoidly be outdone by Kij cmtnre pra-
tme^ mti»j. The miMlier'H Donateniatioii w«i txremin ;
but it could not HUrpwa ^e alann of the Miia St«(lca, ukl
arery thing iru done b; all three, in aa ctitieal au tsaita^
geacj, wbjch sSbclioQ could mggeit, u Ukdy to " ™f
the loonies of the little Buffia^r. She vaa seated in bar
motber'a 1^, covered with kisses, her wound bathed widi
JaTsmlM.watei, by one of the Mies Steelea, who was on her
knees to atieRd her, and her mouth atufied with sugar
plums by the oUier. With Buch a levard for hw tean,
Uie child wu too wise to cease crying. She still screained
and sobbed lustily, kieiied her two Iffoihers for ofiering to
to«oh her; and all their united soothings were ineffectual, till
Lady Middleton luckily r^nembering Uiat in a. scene rf
Hmilar distress last week some apricot jnarmaJade bad
been successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same
Temedy w«a sagerly proposed for this unfortunate scrauA,
Nid a idight intennisHon of scieama in the young ladj on
hetiing it gave them reason to hope that it would not be
reacted, ^e was carried out of the room, therefore, in
)ler mother's ama, in quest of Ihis medicine; and as die
two boys choae to follow, thou^ earnestly entKated by
their mother to stay bdtind, the ionr young ladies wew
left in a qnietneas wUch the room had not known far > uuiy
" Poor little creature ! " teid Miss Steele, M sotm aa ihej
were gone ; " it might have been a very sad accident. "
" Yet I hardly know how, " cried Marianne, " linleM tt
had been under totally diSbrent circumstances. But this
is the usual way of heightening alarm, when tbwe is no-
Aing to be alarmed at in reality. "
" What a sweet woman Lady Middleton it !'" said Lncy
Steele.
Marianne was silmt ; it was imposaiUe for bet to aaj
what die did not feel, however trinal the ocsMOO; ud
apon Elinor, therefore, the whole tadc of tdling lies, whcB
politeness required it, always fell. 8be did her best whei
thus called on, by speskiug of Lady Middlefam with mors
warmth thui dw Mt, dwHij^ with tu 1«m than Miss Luej.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
MM!
" And Sb idm, too, " cried the ddcr viter, * wbat «
clianning man he ia I "
Here, too, Min Daafawood'* romiaendaliiin, bnog only
nm^ and jmt, eune in withoat any adat. She inerdf
■ h i t i v ed that he nu perfectly good htuDoaied and friendly.
" And whst a channii^ litde family they hare ! I aerer
MW nich fine childrm in my life. 1 dedara I quite doat
upon them already, and indeed I am alwsya distractedly
6md of children. "
" 1 sbonld gueM so, " said Elinor, with a amile, " fh > ga
vhat I have witnnaed thia maming. "
" J have a nodoo, " said Lncy, " yon think dte little
Hiddletons rather too nndi indulged ; pnfa^n they may
ba the ontside of eoovgh ; but it is so natoral in Lady Mid >
dieton ; and for my part I love to see children fidl of life
■nd apirita ; I cannot bear (hem if they are tame anil quiet. "
" I confess, " replied Elinor, " that while I im at Barton
PbH( I never think of tame and quiet chUdnn with any
A ihort pauBe aicceeded ihia ipeedi, which waa fint
tanken by Miia Steele, who seemed very much diapoaed
fbr converBBtioD, and who now said, rather abruptly, " And
how do you like Deronshire, Miss Daahwood? 1 suppoae
you were very sorry to leave Sussex. "
In some lorprise at the familiarity of thia qoeatum, or
Bt least of the mumcr in which it waa spoken, Elinor re«
plied that she waa.
" Norland ia a prad^ioua bcantifiil place, ia not it? "
•ddbd Mias Steele.
" We have heard & i John admire it exeeMvely, " said
Lacy, whn seemed to think some apology laeccvary for the
ftvedom (rf her aister.
" I think evny one mtitt admire it, " replied Elinor,
" who ettr saw the place ; ibou^ it ia not to be supposed
Aat any one can estimate its beautia as we do. "
" And had you a great many amart bean diere ? I
m{q > oae you have not so many in this part of the worU.
For my part, I think they are a vast additiM) always. "
" But why dwuld you think, " said Lncy, looking;
DoliiHihyGoOgle
106 nsKSB AKO (ENnBILITF.
uhamed of her siUer, " that there are not u many gented
young men in Devonshire as Sussex ? " <
" Naj, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that
dwre an'L I'm snre there's a vast many smart beaux in
Exeter; but you know, how could I tell what smart beaux
there might be about Norland ; and I was only ititid
the Miss DasbwQods might find it dnU at Barton, if they
had not BO many as they used to have. But perhaps yon
young ladies may not care about the beaux, and had aa
lief be without them as with them. For my part, I think
they are vastly agreeable, provided they dress smart and
behave civil. But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty.
Now there's Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young
man, quite a beau, clerk to Mr. SiropHon, you know, and yet
if yon do but meet him of a morning, he is not fit to be
seen. I suppose your brother waa quite a beau. Miss
Dadwood, bdVire be married, as he was so rich i "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " I cannot tell you,
for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word.
But this I can say, that if he ever was a beau before he
married, he is one still, for there is not the smallest alter-
" Oh, dear I one never thinks of married men's bdog
beaux — they have something else to io. "
" Lord ! Anne, " cried her sister, " you can talk of no-
thing but beaux ; you will make Miss Dashwoed believe
you think of notliing else. " And then, to tnm the discourse,
she h^an admiring the house and the furniture.
- Tliis specimen of the Miss Sleelei was enough. Tha
Tu^ar freedom and fcdly of the eldest left her no recom.
mendation ; and as Elinor was not blinded by (he beauty,
or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her want of real
el^ance and artlessness, she left the house without any
wi^ of knowing them better.
Not HO the Miss Steeles. They came from Exeto-
well provided with admiration for the use of Sir John
Middleton, his family, and all his relations ; and no n^-
gudly proportion waa now dealt out to his fair cousin^
whom they declared to he the moat beaati & l, el^ant, ac-
eomplislwd, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and
DoliiHihyGoOgle
own iun > naniBiLnTi 107
irith wboDi they were partienlul}'anxious to be better ac-
qtutinted. And U > be better acquainted, therefore, EliDor
•oon foimd was their inevitable lot ; for as Sir John was
entirely on the (ide of the Misa Steeles, their party would
be too strong for opposition, and that kind of intimacy
most be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour ot
two together in the same room almost every day. Sir
John could do uo more ; but be did not know that any
more was required : to be together was, in his opinion, to
he intimate; and while his continual schemes for their
meeting were efiectual, he had not a doubt of their being
established iriendg.
To do him justice, he did every thing, in his power to
promote their unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles ac
qusinted with whatever he knew or supposed of his couains'
aituatioDS in the most delicate particulars; and Elinor
had not seen them more than twice, before the eldest of
them wished her joy on ber sister's having been so lucky
as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came
to!brton.
"'Twill be a fine thing to have her married bo youngs
to be sure, " said she, " and I hear he is quite a beau, uid
prodigious handsome. And I hope you may have as good
luck yourself soon; but, perhaps, you may have a friend
in the comer already. "
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more
nice in proclaiming his supidons of her regard for Eldward,
than he had been with respect to Marianne ; indeed it was
rather his favourite joke of the two, as being somewhat
newer and more conjectural ; and since Edward's viait, they
had never dined together without his drinking to ber best
•Sections with so much significancy and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. The letter F had been
likewise invariably brought forward, and found productive of
such countless jokes, that ita character, as the wittiest letter
in the alphabet, bad been long established with Elinor.
The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all ihie
boieflt of these jokes ; and in the eldest of them they raised
i curiosity to know the name of the gentleman alluded to^
which, tbongti often inpertineiitly expressed, was perfectly
DoliiHihyGoOgle
in ■Mm J
of a piece with her gmeni inqnirativeness into Ae coneenu
of tbtir familj. But Kr John did not iport long wiA Ae
miioait7 which he dtJighted to ruK, for he had it least a
much fdeasure in telling the name, as Mits Steele had id
bearing it.
" His name is Ferrara, " aaid he, in a very andiHe triiia-
per; " but pray do sot idl it, fin it'i a great secret. "
" Ferrara ! " repeated Miss Steele ; " Mr. Ferrare ia die
happy man, ia he^ What! your rister-in -law's brother,
ttiu Dashwood ^ a very agreeable young man to be nue ;
I know him Tcry weU. "
" How can you aay so, Anne ? " cried Lncy, who gene-
rally made an amendment to aB her siater'i aaaertiDns.
" Though we have seen him once or twice at my uncle's,
it is rather too mudi to pretend to know htm very welL "
EUnor heard all this with attention and surprise. " And
who waa this nnde P Where did he live ? How came they
acquainted? " She wished very nmch to have the suhjeA
contiDued, Aou^ she did not choose to join in it herself}
hntnothibgmoreof it wasaaid, and, for the first time in h»
life, she thought Mra. Jenuings deficient either in cuTiosity
after petty information, or in a disposition to communicate
It. Tbe maimer in which Mias Stede had spoken of Ed.
ward increased her curiosity ; fnr it struck her as being
rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of that tady'a
knowing, or fimcying herself to know, somelhitig to his dis-
adTantage. But her cariosity was unavailing ; for no fir-
Aer notice waa tdien of Mr. Ferrars's name by Miss Steele
irtien dlnded to, or even openly mentioned by Sir John.
CHAPTER XXII.
MAKumn, who had seTer mnch tolcradan Esr any (king
like impatinence, vidguity, inferiority of porta, or ent
diffierence of tMte from beiaetf, wm at this time particnl«^
iLdlapased, from the state of hex ^vitBito bei^enedwitb
HihyGoogle
tbe MisB Stedes, or to •namn^ tbeir advnuetj and to
die invariable coldnew of h«r behaviour toward! Ulem,
wbich checked every endeavour at indmac; on tfaair aida.
Elisor prindpallf aUribiued that preferenm of benelf
vfhich soon became evident in the mannerg of both, but
eqkecially of Lucy, who mined no opportonity of engaging'
her in canveiBation, or of atriving to improve theiT ac-
quaintance by BQ easy and trank communicatkin of her len-
Lucy was naturally clever ; her remuks woe often just
■sd amusiiig ; and as a companion for half an honx Elinor
irequcDtly found her agreeable; but her powers had r» >
oeived no aid from education : she was ignorant and illite-
rate; and her deficiency of all mental improvemeBt, her want
»f information in the moat common partimilaiB, could not
be concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant
endeavour to appear to advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied
her for, the tteg^t of abilities which eduoation might have
rendered so respectable ; but ahe saw, with 1«bi tenilernest
ef feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitude, and
intt^ty of mind, which her attentions, her aidihiities, her
flatteries at tbe Park betrayed ; and she could have no last-
ing, satisfaction in the company of a person who joined
insincerity with ignorance ; whose nant of inslmetion pre*
vented their meetiiig in conversation on terms of equality,
•nd whose conduct towards others made every show of at-
tention and deference towards hefself perfectly valudeas.
" You will think my question an odd odb, I dare say, "
i^ haxy to lier one day, as they were walking together
from the Park to the cottage; " but, pray, are yon person-
ally acquainted with your sister-in-law's mother, Mrsi
Verrars? "
Elinor did think the question a very odd one, and her
sountenanee expressed it, as she answered that she had
never aeeu Mrs. Femn.
" Indeed ! " replied Lucyi " I wonder at that, fbr I
thought you inust have sent ha kt Norland aometinea.
Xben, perhaps, yon eaonot tdl me what sort Of a woman
" No, " returned Elinor, cautious of giving her tai
DoliiHihyGoOgle
110
opinioD of Edward's modier, and not very dei^rous of aatii-
fying, what seemed impertinent curiosity; " I know no-
ttiiDg of her. "
" I am nue yoa think me very atrange, for enquiring
about het in aac^ a way, " aaid Lacy, eyeing Elinor atten-
tively as %be spolie; " but perhaps diere maybe reasons —'
I wieb I might Tentnre ; but, however, 1 hope you will do
me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be im-
pertinent. "
Elinor made ha a civil reply, and they walked on for a few
minutes in silence. It was broken by Lncy, who renewed
the subject ^aiD by saying, with some hesitation, —
" I cannot bear to have yon think me impertinently
curious. I am sure I would rather do any thing in the
world tlian be thought so by a peraon whose good ofunion
is so well worth having as yours. And I am sure I should
not have the smallest fear ot trusting you ,'indeed, I should
be very glad of yonr advice how to manage in such an nn-
comfortable situation aa I am; but, however, there-is no
occasion to trouble you. 1 am sotry yoa do not happen to
know Mn. Feirars. "
" I am Borry I do not " said Elinor, in great aalonish.
raent, " if it could be of any use to you to know my opinion
of her. But really I never understood that you were at
all connected with that family, and Uierefore I am a little
surprised, I confess, at so serious an enquiry into her cha-
" I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not ^t all wonder
at it. But if 1 dared tell you all, you would not be bo mndi
surprised. Mrs. Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at pre*
sent ; but the time may come — how soon it will come
must depend upon hersdf — when we may be very inti-
mately connected. "
She looked down aa she said this, amiably bashful, with
only one side glance at her companion to observe its effbet
on her.
" Good heavens ! " cried Elinor, " what do yon mean^
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrara f Can yoa
be P " And she did not feel much ddighted with die ide*
of and) a liater-iii-law.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
lU
, " No, " replied Lney, " not to Mr. Sebert Femn — I
never saw him in my life ; Inil, " fixing her eyea upon
Elinor, " to hii elder brother, "
Whst felt £li)ior at that moment? A«loniahment, that
would have been u painful t« it waa alrong, had not an
immediate disbelief of the aiBerti < m attended it. She
tnmed towards Lucy in dlent amazement, unable to divina
die reason or object of auch a declaration ; and though her
complexion varied, she Btood Ann in incredulity, and fdt
in DO danger of an hysterical fit, or a awoon.
" Yon may well he surprised, " continued Lacy ; " for
to be sure you could have bad no idea of it before; for I
dare say he never dropped the smallest hint of it to you oi
any of your family; because it was always meant to be a
great secret, and I am aure has been faidifuUy kept so by
me to this hour. Not a soul of all my relations know of it
hut Atme, and I never should have mentioned it to you, if
I had not felt the greatest dependence in the world upon
your secrecy ; and I really thought my behaviour in asking
80 many qnesiions about Mrs. Ferrara must seem so
odd, that it ought to be explained. And I do not think
Mr. Ferrara can be diapleaaed, when he knows I have
trusted you, because I know he has the highest opinion in
the world of all your family, and looka upon youradf and
the other Miss Dashwoods quite as hia own sisters. " Bhe
paused.
Elinor for a few momenls remained silent. Her as-
tonishment at what she heard was at first too great for
words ; but at length forcing herself to speak, and to speak
cautiously, she said, with a calmness of manner which
tolerably welt concealed her surprise and solicitude, —
" May 1 ask if your engagement is of long standing ? "
" We have been engaged these four years. "
" Four years ! "
. " Yes. "
EUnor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to he-
" I did not know, " said she, " that you were even ae-
qnainted till the other day. "
" Our acquaintance, howerer, ia of many years'date,
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
He wai Wider my nnck's care, jva. know, a condderaUe
irtiile. "
" Your uncle! "
" Yea ; Mr. PralL Did yon nerer bear him talk of
Mr. Pratt? "
" I tbink I hare, " replied Elinor, with an esertion of
■jririts, wbidt increased with her innease of emotion.
" He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longa
Itaple, neir Plymouth. It waa there our acquaintance
begun, for my eiater and me was often staying with mj
uncle, and it was there oar engagement was formed, thou^
Kot till a year after he had quitted aa a papil ; but be was
almost alwaya wiA us afterwards. I was very unwilUng
Id enter into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge
and approbation of his moAer ; but I waa too young, tmd
loved him too well, to be so prudent aa I ought to hare
been. Though yon do not Inow him so welt as me. Miss
Dashwood, you must have seen enongh of him to be sen-
iible he is very capable of making a woman aincerely at-
tached to him. "
" Certainly, " answered Elinor, without knowing what
•he said ; but, after a moment's reflection, she added, with
ravived security of Edward'a honour and love, and her
companion's fiUsdtood, — " Engaged to Mr. Edward Fer <
Ban ! — I confess myself so totally surprised at what you
tell me, that really — I beg your pardon ; but surely there
Bnat be seme mistake of person or name. We camot
mean the same Mr. Ferrari. "
" We can mean no other, " cried Lucy, smiling. " Mr.
£dward Ferrars, the ddest son of Mrs. Ferran of Failc
fib'eet, and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dad)~
wood, it die person I mean ; you moflt allow that I uH
not likely to be deceived » to the name of the nian OQ
whom all my happiness depends. "
" It is sb'snge, " repUed Elinor, in a most painAd pcT-
jlKity, " diat I should never have heard him even meiriion
" Hv; considering our situation, it was not strange.
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret Vam
knew nothing rf nc, or my tixulj, aad, tfafiefMc, there
r. .HinyGoOnlc
113
ctoild be no oectuion for ever meadoning my name to you ;
and, as fae wai always particularly airud of hia sister's ms-
pecdng any thing, that waa reason enough for hia not men-
tioning it. "
She waa silent. Elinor's accotity auik ; but her adf-
command did not sink with iL
" Four years you ha?e been engaged, " aaid she, with a
firm TiHce.
" Yes ; and heaven knows how much longer we may
have to waii. Poor Edward ! It puts him quite out
of heart " Then taking a small miniature from her pocket,
she added, " To prevent the possibility of raiaiake, be so
good aa to look at this face. It does not do him justice, to
be sure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the
person it was drew for. I bave had it above these three
She put it into her baods sa she spoke; andwhoi Elinor
saw the painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too
Juaty decision, or her wish of detecting falsdiood, might
Bufier to linger in her mind, she could have none of ita-
being Edward's facet She returned it almost inaCantly, ac-
knowledging the likeneaa.
" I have never been able, " continued Lucy, " to give
him my picture in return, which I am very much vexed at,
for he has been always so anxious to get it .'But I am
determined to sit for it the very first opportunity. "
" You aie quite in the right, " replied Elinor, calmly.
They then proceeded a few paces in silence. Lacy s^ioke
first.
" I am sure, " said she, " I have no doubt in the world
of your faithfully keeping this secret, because you must
know of what importance it is to us, not to have it reach
tuB mother; for ahe would never approve of it, I dare say.
I duU have no fortune, and I foncy she is an exceediog
proud woman. "
. " I certainly did not seek your confidence, " said Elinor ;
" bat you do me no more than justice in imagining that I
may be depended on. , Your secret is safe with me ; but
pardon me if I ezpresa some aurpriic at so unneceaaary &
HihyGoonlc
114 nprac Airs nmiuuaTT.
coBamimiwtion. Yon iniut at kaat Iutb ttit tbu mf
bcii^ icqiiainted viih it could not add to in ttSetj. "
Aa she Bud tlui, she lookad earnertly st Lucy, hoping
to discover something in ber comttentnce; perhaps tbe
falsehood of the greatest pvit of what she had been sajing ;
but IiUcj's countCDBDce niSered no change.
" I was afraid joa wo«ld think I was taking a great
liberty with jou, " said she, " in telling you all this. I.
have not known jou long, to be sure, personally at least,
bat I have known yon and all yonr funily by deMripdm a
great while ; and as soon as I saw yon, I fdt almost aa if -
you was an old acqoaintance. Berides, in the presoit case,
I really thought some explanation was due to yon, after my
making such particular enqniriea about Edward's mother ;
and I am so anfortnnate, that I have not a creatare whose
advice I can ask. Anne is the only person that knows ot
H, and ibe has no judgment at all ; indeed, she does me a
great deal more harm than good, for I am in conatant fesr
of her betraying me. She docs not know how to hold her
tongue, as you must percave ; and I am sore 1 was in the
greatest fright in the world t'other day, when Edward's
name was mentioned by Sir John, kst she should oat with
it aU. Yon can't think how much I ga tbrongh in my
mind fn»n it alt(^;etber. I only wond» that I am alive,
after what I have suSbred for Edward's sake these last four
years. Every thing in snch suspense and uncertainty ;
and seeing him so seldom — we can hardly meet above
twice a year. I am sore 1 wonder ^y heart is not quite
Here the took ont her handkereliief ; but EUnor did
not feel very compasaionate.
" Bometimea, " continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes,
" I think, whether it would not be better for us both t*
break off the. matter entirely. " Aa she said this, she looked
direcdy at her companion. " But then, at other times, I
have not resolution enoi^h toi it. 1 cannot bear the
tbonghts of making him so miserable, aa I knew the varf
mention of such a thing would do. And on my own k-
oonnt too — ao deat aa hp is to m« — I don't tkink 1 could
DoliiHihyGoOgle
be equal t» it, Wlwt wooU jon adviM roe to do in ntob
a CMe, Mill Duhwood i What woald jou do jounelf ? "
" Pardon me, " replied JGlinor, startled bj tbe qneetioB ;
" bat I can give yon no advice under such circnmstanoea.'
YoUr own jodpnent moat direct jtta. "
" To be sore, " condnnad Lvef, after a few minute*'
Htnce m both udea, " hia mother must provide for taim
some time or other ; but poor Edward is so east down about)'
it I Did not jou driak bin drtadAil low-spirited wheii he
wasM Barton^ He was so miaerable when he left us at
Lengataple, to go to yoo, that I was afraid yaa would
tbink him quite iU. "
" Did. be coma firus jan widens, then, wbra be fisited
us? "
" Oh, jes ; he had been staying a forCni^t with us.
Did you think be came diracdy from town ? "
" No, " replied EUnor, most feelingly sennUe of every
ffeih circamstance in favour of lAey's veiaoity ; " I l-e-
nwmber he told ns, that he had been stayitig a fortaigfat
with some friends near Plymouth. " She remembered, loo,
her own surprise at the time, at his mendiming nothing
farther of ibase frieoda, at his total silence with respect
even to their names.
" Did not you think him aadly out of ^irite ? " repeated
liocy.
" We did, indeed, pardcnlarly bo when.he first arrived. "
** " I bt^ed him to exert himself for fear you should
suspect what was the matter; but it made him ho me-
lancholy, not being able to stay more than a fortnight
with us, and SQeing me so mniji affected. Poor fellow !
I am a & aid it is just the same with hint now ; for he
writes in wretched apirita. I heard from him juat before
I left Exeter ; " taking a letter from her pocket, and care-
lessly showing the direction to E^nor. " You know his
hand, 1 dare say, — a charming one it is; but that is not
writien to well as usual. He was tired, I dare say, for
he had juBt filled the sheet to me as full as possible. "
Elinor saw that it mu bis band, and ^e could doubt no
longer. The picture, she had allowed herself to believe,
might have been accidentaUy obtained j it mi^t not har^
DoliiHihyGoOgle
1I6 aaim abd bbriibilitv.
been Edward's gift ; but a corregpondeDce betveoi tbem bjt
letter could Bubsist only under a posittve engagement,
oould be authorised by nothing else : for a few roomenta
she was almost overcome —■ h^ heait lunk within her,
and she could hardly atand ; but exertion was indispensaUy
Aecessary ; and she Btru^led so resolutely against the op-
pieiBion of her feelings, that her success was speedy, and'
ibr the time complete.
" Writing to each odier, " said Lucy, returning the
letter into her pocket, " is the only comfort we have in
such long separation?. Yei, / have one other comfort in
his picture; but poor Edward haii > nateTen that. If be
had but my picture, be says be should be easy. I gave
him a lock of my hair aet in a ring when he was at Long-
staple last, and that was some comfort to him, he said, but
not equal t & a picture. Perhaps you might nodce the ring
when you aaw him ? "
''I did, " sffid Elinor, with a composure of voice, un-
der which was concealed an emotion and distress beyond
any thing she had ever felt before. She was mortified,
shocked, confounded.
Fortunately for her, they bad now reached the cottage,
and the conversation could be continued no farther. After
idttjng with them a few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned
to the Park, and Elinor was then at liberty to think and.
be wretched.
i OP THE FHUT
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
CHAPTER I.
HowfyKB tmall Elinor'a gemral dependence on Lncj's
▼eracitir might . be, it was impoasible for her, on Mtiou*
lefleeCioii, to miBpect it in the present case, where no tempt-
ation canld be Rnawerable to the folly of inventing a falae-
hood of auch a description. What Lucy had asserted to
be trae, therefore, Elinor could not, dared ndt, longer
doubt ; supported as it was, too, on every ride by such pro-
babili^ea and proofs, and contradicted by nothing but her
own wishes. Their opportunity of acquuntance in Uie
hoase of Mr. Pratt was a foundation for the tceI, at
once indisputable and alarming ; and ESdward's visit near
Plymouth, his melancholy state of mind, his dissatil-
faction at hia own prospects, his uncertain bdiaviour to-
wards herself, the intimate knowledge of the Miss Sceeles
as to Norland and their family connections, which.had often
Mirpriaed her, the picture, the letter, the ring, formed alto-
gether such a body of evidence as overcame every fear of
condemning him unfairly, and establisbed as a fact, which
, no partiality could set aside, his ill-treatment of herself.
Her resentment of suoh behaviour, her indignation at
having been its dupe, for a short time made her feel only
fi > r herself ; but other ideas, other consideratiDBB soon arose.
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her ? Had he
feigned a regard for her which he did not feel P Was his
engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart ? No ;
wfaa^ver it mi^t once have been, she could not believe it
such at presenL Hb affection was all her own. She
CDvld not lie deceived in that. Her motheTj liiten,
I 3
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
116
Finny, bU had been conidona of his regard for her at
Norland; it was not an illiuion of her own vinitj. He
cert & inlf loved her. What a Boflener of the heart waa Oii*
perEuaiion ! How much could it not tempt her to foi^Te 1
He had been blamable, highly blamable, in renuining at
Norland after he Srst felt her influence over him to be more
than it ought to be. In that, he could not be defended;
but if he had injured her, how much more had ho injured
himaelf ; if her case were pitiable, hig wa» hopeleu. Hia
imprudence had made ber miaenble for a while ; but it
■eemed to have deprived himself of all chance of erer
being otherwise. She might in time r^ain tranquillity;
but ht, what had be to look forward to ? Could be eret
be tolerably happy wiih Lucy Steele ; eould he, were his
afiedian for herself out of the queetixni, with his integrity,
hii delicacy, and wril-infonned mind, be satiifled wiA s
wife like her — iOileiate, artful, and lelfiih ?
The yotithfiil infatuatMMi of nineteen would natnraBy
Uind him to every thing but her beauty and good nature ;
but the four succeeding years — years whidi, if ntimully
■pont, give such improrement to the underatanding— mnat
have opened hit eyes to her defects of education, while the
•sine period of time, spent on her side in infoior society
and more frivolous pormils, bad perhaps robbed Imt of
that aimplicity which mi^t once have given an jnteieatii^
character to her beauty.
If fn the supposition of Us seeking to mairy hendf,
lufl difficnldei from his mother had seemed great, how
inueh greala were they now hkely to be when the cdtjeot of
hii engagement was undoubtedly inferior in oonneotioiH,
and probably inferior in fortune to herself. These diflU
eulties, indeed, with a heart so alionatad from Lucy^
might not press very hard upon his patienca ; hot mdan.
choly was the state of the person by whom tbe expeetatioa
of family opposition and unldndneas could be Mt aa m
idiefl
As these conrideradona occorred to her in painful foca
ceaaion, she wept for him more than for hersdf. SoppoiMd
by the ooDviction of having done mithing to mint bar fia-
■eot imlmppinaBSj and consoled by the beliaf Hun Edwwd'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■BI^ AlfD BimiBIUTT. IIB
lad dcBi€ mthing to fiwfeit her etifleni, m^* Utou^t ■l > y
oould erea now, nixlw the flnt smut of the hettr; blovr,
fiOnmuid henetf enough to guud e-nry aiupidon of the
toith fioBi her mother and rist«n. And so well wu ihe
•Ue to ancwer her own expeotatton*, that when she joined
dtHn Bt dinner, onl^ two honn after ahe had fint n^rad
the tsaiitctioa of all her deareat hopee, no one wonld hare
I, from the appearance of the liaten, that Elinw
a mooming in aeeiei over obalaclet whidt miiat divide
her for ever ftam the oltject of her bfe, and that Marianne
Mu intemallj dwelling on the perfections of a man, of
whose whtde heart she feJt thoroughly poBwned, and
whom she expected to aee in every carriage which drove
Bear their home.
The naeenity of concoling from her mother and Mail-
aane what had been intmated in confidence to henclf,
diongh it obbged her to imoe«ung exertion, vai no aggn-
«Ui(u of Eliaor'a djalwaa. On the contrary, it waa &
(elief to her, to be spared the communicatioD of what would
f^n wcfa affliction to dtcm, and to be aaved likewise from
'faeaiing that ramdemnalion of Edward, which wonld pio-
baUy flow from the exceas of their partial afiectitai for her-
m^, and which waa more than she felt equal to uipporL
f^om dwir eoonael, or their conversation, she Imew she
amid receive na auiatance ; their tendemeaa and tamow
inuit add lo her diatresa, while her self-command would
neither ncdve eneonngemoit from their example nor from
ih«ir praiae. She was stronger alone ; and her own good
fleaue ao wdl tl^perled her, that her flrmneaa waa aa un-
jhaken, her i^pearance of cheerfuineaa aa invariable, aa,
vith r^jrelB so poignant and ao fresh, it was possible fat
them to be.
Mudi as she had mifoed from her first conversatioB
wiifa Lacy on the sutgeet, she soon, felt an earnest wish of
xenewing it ; and this for more reasons than one. She
wanted to bear many partienlars of their engsgcment z^
peated apin ; she wanted more dearly to nuderatand what
Lucy really fdt for Edward, whether there were any siii-
oerity in liar declaration id tender regard for him ; and
•be particnladr ^ " ^tei to convince Lncy, by her readincM
I 1
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
120 raiiBE J
to enter on tbc matter again, and her calmnesfi in cchu
Tereing on it, that ahe was no otherwise interetted in it
'thui as a friend, which ahe very much feared her invo-
Inntary agitation, in their mwning diaeoune, must have
left at least doubtful. That Lucy was dispoied to be
jealous of her appeared vely probaUe : it was plain that
fUward had always spoken highly in her praise, not merely
from Lucy's assertion, but from her veoturing to tniat her
on BO short a personal acquaintance with a lecret so cod-
feaaedly and evidently important. And even Sir John's
joking intelligence must have had some weight. But, in-
deed, while Elinor remained eo well assured within herself
of being really beloved by Edward, it required no other
consideration of probabilides to make it natural that Lucy
should be jealous ; and that she was so, her very confidence
was a proof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
a & ir could there be, hut that Elinor might be informed
by it of Lucy's niperior claims on Edward, and be taught
to avoid him in future ? She bad little difficulty in un-
derstanding thus much of her rival's intentions ; and while
she was firmly resolved to act by her as every principle of
honour and honesty directed, to combat her own afiection
for Edward, and to see him as little as possible, she could
not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince
Lucy that her heart was unwounded. And as ahe could
now have nothing more painful to hear on the subject thaa
bad already been tidd, she did not mistrust her own aUlitj
of going through a repetition of particulars with composure.
But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing
so could be commanded, though Lucy was as w^ disposeA
as herself to take advantage of any that occurred; for the
weather was not often fine enough to allow of their joining
in a walk, where they might most easily separate thran-
selvea from the others ; and though they met at least every
other evening either at the Park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they could not be supposed to meet for the
sake of conversatioD. Such a tbou^t would never enter
dther Sir J(^ or Lady Middlcton's head ; and therefore
very little leisure was ever given for general chat, and
Bone at all ibr particular discourse. They met for the
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
niTBB IND SSNBIBILITY. 121'
sake of eadog, drinldng, and laughing together, playing at
cards, or consequences, or an; other game that was sufB-
dcntly noisy.
One or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without
affording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in priTste,
when Sir John called at the cottage one morning, to htg,
in the name of charity, that they nonld all dine with Lady
Middleton that day, as he was obliged to attend the dub
at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone.'except
her mother and the two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who fore-
saw a fairer opening for the point she had in view, in and)
a party as this was likely to be, more at liberty among
diemselves under the tranquil and well-bred direction of
Lady Middleton than when her husband united them to-
gether in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted the
invitation ; Mai^aret, wi^ her mother's permiaaion, waa
equally compUant ; and Marianne, though always unwilling
to join any of their parties, was persuaded by her mother,
who could not bear to have her sednde hersdf from any
diance of amoBement, to go Ukewise.
The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily
preserved from the frightful solitude which had threatened
her. The insipidity of the meedi^ was exactly luch as
Elinor bad expected ; it produced not one novelty of thoi^ht
or expression ; and nothing could be less interesting than
die whole of dieir discourse both in the dining parlour and
drawing room : to the latter, the children accompanied
Aem ; and while they remained there, she was too well
convinced of the impossihility of engaging Lucy's attention
to attempt it. They quitted it only with the removal of
the tea-things. The card-uUe was then placed; and Elinor
began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a
hope of finding time for conversation at the Park.'They _
iH rose up in preparation for a round game.
" I am glad, " said Lady Middleton to Lucy, " you are
not going to finiah poor little Anna-maria'e badiet this even-
log ; for I am sure it must hurt your eyea to work filigree
by Candlelight And we will make the dear little love
aome amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and tb(D
I hope she will not much mind it. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
199 Msw AKS wpKtiBmmf.
Tliis hintwu enou^ Lucy tea^iatted beiMlf ioaUud;,
•nd replied, " Indeed you are very mucb miiukeo, haAj
Middleton ; I am only wudng to kooir wbetha you coi
ualte yooi party widwut me, or 1 shoaid have been at my
flli{?«e already. I would not diuppoiat the little angd
for all the world ; and if ytni vant me at the CMd-tablp
now, I am reuilred to finith the backet after supper. "
" You are lery good, — 1 hope it woo't hurt your eyet:
■ — will you ring the bell for lome working candlei t Mjt
poor httie girl would be Mtdly disappoanted, I know, if the
ba^t was not finished to-morrow ; for though I told bar
it certainly would not, 1 am nire ihe depend* upon having
ft done. "
Lucy directly drew ber work-table near her, and re*
•eatcd heradf with an alau^y and cheerfiilneN, whidi
aeemed to infer, that ahe could taste no greater ddight
than in making a filigree basket for a epoilt child.
Lady Hiddlelon proposed a mUier of Casdno to dM
othen. No one made any olgectjoo but Marianne, wbo^
with her usual inattention to the forms of general civility,
exclaimed, " four Ladyship will have the gaodne«s to ex-
onae me — you know I detest cards. 1 aball go to the
iriano-forte; 1 hare not touched it lince it was tuned. "
And, without & rdieT ceremony, she turned away and walked
to the iootrament.
Lady Middleton looked aa if die dtanked Heann that
sft* had never made so nide a speecli.
*'Marianne can never keep limg Irom tbat i
yoo know, ma'sm, " said £linor, endeavonring to s
*w*y the ofibnce ; " and I do not much wonder at it; ter
it is the very heat totied piano-forte I ever heard. "
The remaining five were now to draw their cards.
" Perhaps, " continued Elinor, " if I should happen to
cut out, I may he of some uk to Hiss Lucy Stede, ia
railing her papen for her ; and there is so much stitt to
be done to the basket, that it muit be irapossiUe, I thin^
for her labour, singly, to finish it this evening. I shooU
Uke the woik exceedingly. If she would allow me a share
in it "
" Indeed I sbaU be very mnch oUigfd Co jron for jvm
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
hdp, " cried hacj, " fw I fad there i* mora to be ioM to
it aita I dUMtgkt there wm ; tad it would be a aboddiig
Jbing to diwppoint deu Anna-nurU lAer all. "
" Oh, that wodd be teiritde, i & deed, " mid iSm Steda.
'" Detr little bdu), hoiT I do lore her ! "
" You ftM laj kind, " uid Lady Middleton to Elinori
" and M ]rou Te^7 like Ute voik, peibape you will be w
wcU pleued not to cat ia till uiatheT lubber, oi will yon
take your ehtnoe now? "
£linor joyfiiUy pnSted by the ilrtt of thMe propoaali,
Md thiu, by a little (tf that oddFete, which Maiianne could
Ktmx condMcend to praetiae, gained b & own coil, utA
pleawd Ladj HJddlMwi at die hidb time. Lucy made
room fbr her infk ready attentioD ; and the two fJiir riTala
were ttnu seated, aid* by aide, tt the tame talde, and wUh
the utmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same worifc
The pi«BD-fort«, at -whick Marianne, imqiped up in her
«wn miuBc and bar own tboughti, had by ti^a time forgob <
IBD that any body was in the room beaides herself, waa
Indnly ao near iJiem, that Hisa Daahweod now judged she
night aafdy, undnr the ahelter of its ntnae, introduce the
iateresting suhjeet, without any risk of being beaid at the
CHAFTIR n.
Is a firm, ihongh cautioni tone, Hioor thoi began : — t >
" I should be undeserving of the cosfidapee you hate
bonouied me wltbi if I Cdt no deaiie for iu oontinuwH^
or no farther curiosity on its subject 1 will ntrt apol^giatt
ihefeforc, for tringing it forward again- "
" Thank you, " oried Lucy, warmly, " for breaking the
ice ; yoo have set my heart at ease by it ,- for I wu,
ePKMhow or other, afraid I had offended you by what I
tadd'you that Mowtky. "
" OSbnded me! HowoooM you mffote m? Bdien
DoliiHihyGoOgle
me, " uid E3moT ipoke it with the truest lincerity, " no-
thing CDold be futher from my intention than to give yov
such ID idea. Could 70U have a motive for the tnut,
that v > u not honoorabie and flattering to me? "
" And yet, I do atsure yon, " teplied Lucy, her HtlJe
aharp eyei full of meaning, " there teemed to me to be a
ooldneu and displeamre in yonr manner, that made me
^te uncomfortable. 1 felt sure that you was angry with
me ; and have been quurelling with mysdf ever aiuce, for
having look such a liberty as to trouble yon irith my afiirs.
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy, and
that you do not realiy blame me. If you knew what a
eonaolation it wai to me to relieve my heart, by spealdng to
yon of what I am always thinking of every moment of my
'life, your compsadon would midce you overlook every thing
" Indeed, I can eamly believe that it was ■ very great
-relief to you, to acknowledge your mtuation to me, andbe
wmired that you ahall never have reason to repent it.
Your case is a very unfortunate one; yon seem to me to
be surrounded with dilBculdes ; and you will have need of
^ yonr mutual afibcdon to support you under them.
Mr. Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother. "
" He has only two thousand pounds of his own: it would
be madness to marry upon that ; though, for nty own part,
I could give Up every prospect of more without a sig^. I
hare been always used to a very am^ income, and could
struggle with any poverty for him ; but 1 love him too
well to be the wlfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all
that his mother might give him, if he married to please
her. We must wait, it may be for many years. With
almost every other man in the world, it would be an alarm-
ing prospect; but Bd ward's affection and constancy dq-
tidng can deprive me of, I know. "
" That conviction must be every thing to'you ; and he
is, undoubtedly, supported by die same trust in yours.
If the strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed, aa'
between many people, and under many drcumsunces, it
naturally would, during a four years'engagement, your
ainiatton would have baen pliable indeed. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
135
Lucy here looked up ; but EUuor waa cirefui in gnard-
ing.ber countenance from ever; expreasion that could give
her words a Buapidous tendency.
" Edward's lore for me, " s«id Lucy, " has been pretty-
well put to the test, by our long, very long absence, since
we wne first engaged, and it has stood the trial so well,
that 1 should be unpardonable to doubt it now. 1 can
safely say that he has never gave me one nunuent's alarm
on that account from the first. "
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or ngh at this as-'
Lucy went on. " I am rather of a jealous tranper, too,
bj nature; and from our different sitoations in Ufe, frotn
his being so much mwe in the world than me, and our
condnual separation, 1 was enough inclined for suspicion,.
to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had been
the fihghtest aitemtion in his behaviour to me when we met,
or any lowne«s of spirits that I could not account for, or if
be had talked. more of one lady than another, or seemed in
any respect less happy at Longetapie than he used to be. I
do not mean to say that 1 am particularly . observant or
. qoick-sighted in general, but in such a ease 1 am Bure I
could not be deceived. "
" All this, " thought Ehnor, " is very pietty ; hnt it can
impose upon neither of us. "
" Bnt what, " said she, after a short Mlence, - " are your
views? or have you none but that of waiting for Mrs.'
Forars's death, which is a melancholy and shocking ex-
tremity ? Is her son determined to submit to this, and to >
all the tediousness of the many years of sntpense in which
it may inv(4ve you, rather than run the risk of her dia--
pleasnre for a while by owning the truth ? "
■ " If we could be certain that it would be only for- a
while !. But Mrs. Fcrrars is a very headstrong proud w».
man, and .in her firat fit of anger upon hearing it would
very likely secure every tiling to Robert;, and the idea of
that, for Edward's sake, frightens away all my inclination
ibr hasty measures. "
" And for your own sake too, or you ate carrying yotir'
diNDl^reatedness beyond reawn. "
i.. < i " ,G(Hinlc
Lucy looked it EUnor tgsfn, and wm (imt.
" Do you know Hr. Robert Femn ? " adud Slinor.
" Not at aU — I never uw him ; biu I ttaej he i« ytrf-
m^lce his brother — nlly, and a. great aueomb. "
" A great eozeomb I " repeated Miai Steele, wboee MP
had caught diOK words by a sodden puue in Mariannes
mnait^i " Oh, titej *ze talking of their favourite beniz,
" No, siater, " cried Lucy, " you are mistakca tfaen,— -
oar favourite beanx are not great coxcombs. "
" I can answer for it that Misa Daahwood'a is not, " aiid-
Un- Jennitiga, laughing heartily ; " ftfr he ia ok of ihe
TDodesteat, prettied behaved yoang men I ever aav ; but
aa for Lucy, die is aach a dy little erettnre, there ia no
finding out wha tie likea. "
" Gb, " raied Mita Steele, looking Bignificantly nmnd
at them, " 1 dare Mj Lucy's beau is quite ai modest and.
piet^ bdiaved a* Miss Daabwood's. "
ElinOT Uushed in spite of heiaidf. Lucy tat inx lip, and'
iMdced angrily at her Hister. A mutual ailenea to < ^ place-
for aome time. Lucy first put an end to it foy aaying, in ■
Uwer tana, ihough Marianne waa then giving thcro tbe ■
powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto, —
" I will honestly tell you of one acheme which has lately
come into my head for bringing matters to bear ; indeed I-
•m'botnd to let you into the secret, for you are a party
COBcemed. I dare say yon have seen enough ot Edward to
knmv that he wonld pre & r the claucb t« every other profes-^
aton ; now my plan is, that he ahoiild t^e orders aa waoa
aa he can ; and then, thmu^ your interest, which I «ut
awe you would be kind encn^'to nae out of frindshqi for
him, and I hope out of some regard to me, your brotfacTi
ni^t be persuaded to give hnn Norfauid living, ifhich I
understand is a very good one, and the present i & cuiobcBV
noeUkelyto live a ^«at vriule. That would beenooghte
ns to mvry upon, and we mi^t tmat to time and ebmeai
fpr tberert. "
" I should be slways happy, " replied Elinor, " to show
any mu-k of toy eatacm and frieBdahip for Mr. Forara ;
bat do not yon perceive that my inMrast on aach maooa^
DoiiihUv Google
I«7
litm would be perfectly unDeeeiury ? He is brotber ta
Hra. John DMhwood — that must be reeentmendrtion
enough to her hnitand. "
" But Mrs. John Dashwood wontd not much approve of
Edward's going into orden. "
" Then I nths soapect that tnj intei'eat wosid do very
little. "
They were again silent fot many minatei. At length
Lacy exdumed, with a deep sigh, —
" I beliere it would be ttie wisest way to put an eod to
tfoe bunness at once by disscdving the engagement. We
*eem so beset with difficulties on every aide, that though it
would make na miaeraUe for a time, we ahould be happier
petii^B in the end. But you will not give me your advice,
MiwDasbwood? "
" No, " answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed
vrary agitated feeLngs; " on snch a subject 1 certainly wilt
not. You know very wdl that my ofnnion would bave no
weight with yon, unless it were on the side irf yonr wishes. "
" Indeed yon wrong me, " replied Lucy, with great solem-
nity ; " I know nobody of whose judgment 1 think so
hi^y as I do of youra ; and I do really believe, that if
you was to say to me,'I advise you by all means to put
m end to ycwT eng^enient with Edward Ferrari, it will be
mwe for the happiness of both of you,'X ^cnld residve
npon dfnng it immediately. "
Elinor bhisbed for Ae insincerity of Edward's future
wife. Hid replied, " This compliment would efeetudly
frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject, had I
firmed one. It raises my inSuence much too high ; the
power or dividing two people so tenderiy attached is too
noch for an indifitrent perMHi. "
" ■ Tis because you are an indiSferwit peraon, " smd Lucy,
with some piqne, and laying a particular stress on thme
wards, " that your Judgment might justly bave such weight
wkh me. If you codd be supposed to be biassed in any
respect by your own feelings, your opinien would not be
vrarth having. "
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest
ibey mig^t [vovobe eadi otbn to an unsttltal^ inetettse of
198 BBiru Atn > estnoBihrrr,
eaw ud unreserve ; and. was even pullj determitied D^ver
to mentioii the subject again. Another pauie, therefoie, of
many minutea'duratioo, aucceeded tliia speech, and Lucj
wu still the firat to end it.
" Shall you be in town tbia winta', Mias Daahwood ^ "
aaid she, with all her accuatomary complacency.
'* Certainly not. "
" I am BOrry for that, " returned the Other, while her
eyea brightened at the information ; " it would have gave
me Buch pleasure to meet you there I But I dare say you
will go for all that. To be sure, your brother and aister
will ask you to come to them. "
" It win not be in my powo'to accept their invitation
if they do. "
" How unlucky that ia ! I had quite depended upon
meeting yon there. Anne and me are to go the latter end
of January K > some rdationa who have been wandng us to
visit them these aeveral years. But I only go for the salce
of aedng Edward. He will be there in February, otber-
ynae London would have no charms for mej 1 have not
spirits for it. "
Elinor wsa soon called to the card-table by the coodu.
sion of the first rubber, and the confidential discourse of
the two ladies was therefore at an end ; to which both of
them submitted without any reluctance, for nothing had
been aaid on either side to make them dislike each other
less Aan they had done before ; and Elinor sat down to
the card-table with the melanchdj persuasion that Bdward
was not only without afiection for the person who.waa to
be his wife, hut that he had not even the chance of being
ti^rably happy in marriage, which sincere afiection on her
aide would have given ; for sdf.interest alone could indUM
a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which ajte
seemed so thoroughly aware that he was weary.
From thu time the subject was never revived by £lin(»;
and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an
opportunity of introducing it, and was particularly cai^ul
to inform her confidant of her happiness whenever she
nedvtd a letter from Edward, it was treated by the former
with calmneu and caution, and diimiated aa loon as dvility
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
woold illow; for the fidt anch conTeiMtioni to be an
indulgence which Lucy did not deseire, tnd which were
The virit of the Miss Steelei at Barton Pfvk wh
lengthened far beyond what the first inTittttion implied.
Their favour inereased ; they could not be spared ; Kr John
would not hear of their going ; and in apile of their numer-
«UB and long arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of
the absolute necessity of their returning to fulfil them
immediately, which was in full force at the end of erery
week, they were prevailed on to stay nearly two months at
the Park, and to asoiBt in the due celebration of that fes-
tiral whid) requires a more than ordinary share of private
baUa and large dinners to proclaim its importance.
CHAPTER III.
Thocsh Mrs. Jennings was in the halut of spending a
large portion of the year at the houses of her childm
■nd friends, she was not without a settled ha\ritation of her
own. Since the death of her husband, who had traded
with success in a lets el^ant part of die town,'she had
resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near
Fortman Square. Towards this home she began, on the
^proach of January, to turn her thoughts; and thither she
one day abruptly, and very unexpectedly hy them, asked
the elder Miss Uashwoods to accompany her. Elinor,
without observing the varying complexion of her dster, and
the animated look which gpoke no indiSbrence to the plan,
immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial for both, in
which she believed herself to be speaking their united
inclinations. The reason alleged was their determined
reaidution of not leaving their mother at that time of ihe
year. Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with aonie anr-
priae, and repeated her invitation immediately,
" Ob, JUn^ ! I am ante your modrn tua ipare you
DoliiHihyGoOgle
180 WHBS AMD IKfnBtLRT.
Teiy Well, and I do heg yon wiD ftvonr ma with jam
G0Hi[ > (ai7, for I've quite Kt my heart upon it. Don't
ftncy that you will be luiy incoDvenience to roe, fbr I
dtan't put myself at ill out of my way for you. It will
only he abiding Betty by the coich, and I hope I can
affi > rd that. We three ihall he aUe to go Tcry well in my
chaise ; and when we are in town, if you do not like to- go
wherever I do, -well and good, you may always go with
one of ray dai^hten. I am sure your mother will not ob-
ject to it ; for I have had nidi good luck in getting ray
own children off my hands that tjie will think me a very
fit person t« have the charge of you ; and if 1 don't get iH > e
of you at least well married before I hare done with yon ll
shall not be my fault. I shall speak a gtxid word for you
to all the young men, you may depend upon it. "
" I have s notion, " said Sir John, " & at Miss Marianne
would not object to such a scheme if her elder siBter would
eome Into it It is very hard, indeed, that she should not
have a little pleasure, because Miss Dashwood does not
wish it. So I would advise yon two to set off for town,
when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to
Miss Dashwood about it. "
" Nay, " cried Mrs. Jennings, " I am sure I shall be
monatrona glad of Misa Marianne's company, whether Mias
Dashwood will go or not, only the more the merrier say I,
and I thought it would he more comfortAbte for them to be
together; because if they got tired of me they might talk to
one another, and laugh at my odd ways behind my back.
iBttt one or the other, if not both of them, I must have.
Lord bless me ! how do you think I can five poking fay
myself, I who have been always used, till this winter, to
have Charlotte, with roe. Come, Miis Marianne, let u
strike hands upon the baigain, and if Miss Dashwood will
change her mind by and by, why, so much the better. "
" I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you, " said H» >
rianne, with wwmth : " your invitation has insured my
gratitude for ever ; and it would give me such happiness,
yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of , to be
able to accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest
roolhtr — I feel the justice of what EUnor has urged, Uid
DoliiHihyGoOglc
13t
if Ae wira« to be made 1 < M Inppy, leu comfoiUUe by mu
abwnce — ob, no, nothing sbould tempt me to leftve her.
it should not, mnat not be a struggle. "
Mrs. Jenniaga repealed her ugurance that Mrs. Dub-
wood CDidd spue ^em perfectly well ; and Elinor, who
now understood her sister, and saw to what indifference
to almost eveiy tiling else she was carried by her eagemM
be with Willonghby again, made no farther direct oppo-
sition to (he plan, and merely referred it to her mother's
decision, from whom, however, she scarcely expected to ro-
o^ve any support in her endeavour to prereat a visit
which she could not approve of for Marianne, and which,
bn her own account, she had particular leasons to avoid.
Whatever Marianne was desirous of, her mother would be
eager to promote : — she could not expect to influence the
Utter to cautiousnesa of conduce in an affair retpecdng
which she had never been able to inspire her with distrust ;
and she dared not explain the motive of her own disinclin-
ation for going to London. -That Marianne, fastidious as
abe was, thoroa^Iy acquainted with Mrs. Jennings's
manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should over-
look every inconvenience of that khid, should disregard
'whatever must be most wounding to her irritable feelings,
in her pursuit of one ol^ect, was such a proof, so alrong, sa
full, of the importance of that object la her, as Elini^, jit
spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to witness.'
On bdng informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood,
persuaded that such an excuruon would be productive of
much amusement to both her daughters, and perceiving,
through all her affectionate attenljon to herself, how much
the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear of their
declining the offer upon her account; insisted on their both
accepting it directly; and then. began to foresee, with ber
usual cheerfulneaa, a variety of advantages that would ac-
crue to them all from this separadon.
- " I am dehghted with the plan, " she cried; " it is ex-
actly what 1 could wish. Margaret and I shall be as mndi
benefited by it as yourselves. When you and the Middle--
tons I are ^ > ne, we shall go on so quietly end happily toge-
ther with our booKs and our mu^ ! You will find
.i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
132 SBNUi AND SaNSIBIUTr.
'Mu^aret'so improved when yon come back again ! And I
have a little plan of alteration for your bedrooms too, which
may now be performed without inconTenience to uiy one.
It is very right that you should go to town ; I would have
every young woman of your condition in life acquainted
with the manners and amusements of London. You will
be under the caie of a motherly good sort of woman, of
nhoee kindness to you 1 can have no doubt. And in all
probability you will see your brother ; and whatever may be
his faults, or the faults of his wife, when 1 conuder whose
aon'he is, I cannot bear to have you to wholly estranged
from each other. "
" Though with yonr usual aniiety for our happinesi, "
uud Elinor, " you have been obviating every impediment
to the present scheme which occurred to you, there is still
one Direction which, in my opinion, cannot be bo easily
removed. "
Marianne's countenance sunk.
" And what, " said Mrs, Dashwood, " is my dear, pru-
dent Elinor going to suggest? What formidable obstacle
it she now to bring forward ? Do not let me bear a word
about the expense of it. "
" My objection is this : though I think very well of
Mrs. Jennings's heart, she is not a woman whose society
can afford us pleasure, or whose protection will give u«
oonsequence. "
. " That ia very true, " replied her mother ; " but of her
society, separattjy from that of other people, yon will
■carcely have any thing at all, and you will almost always ■
appear in pubhc with Lady Middleton. "'" "
" If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mn.
Jennings, " said Marianne, " at least it need not prevent
my accepting her invitation. 1 have no such scruples ; and
I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of
that kind with very little effort "
■ Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indiffi^-
eoce towards the manners of a person, to whom she had
often had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave widi
tolerable politeness ; and resolved within herself, that if
Iter sister persisted in going, she would go likewise, as ihe
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SBND AND SENSraiUTT.'ISS
did not think it proper thmt MBrisnne Hhonld be left to the
Mle guidance of her own judgment, or that Mra. Jenninga
should be abandoned to the mere; of Marianne, for all the
comfort of her domestic hours. To this detetmination she
waa the more catlly reconciled, by recollecting, that Edward
Ferrars, by Lucy's account, was not to be in lown before
February; and that their visit, without any unreasonable
abridgement, might be previoualy finished.
" I will have you bolh go, " said Mra. Dashwood ;
" these objections are nonsensical. You will have much
}deasure in being in London, and especially in beii^; ti^e-
ther ; and if Elinor would ever condescend to anticipate
enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety of
■ourcea ; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving
her acquaintance with ber sister-in-Ia,w'B family. "
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempt-
ing to weaken her mother's dependence on the attachment
of Edward and herself, that ^e shock might be the less
when the whole truth were revealed ; and now, on this at-
tack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself
to b^n her design, by saying, as calmly aa she could, " I
. like Edward Ferrars very mud), and shall always be g^
to see him ; but aa to the rest of the family, it is a matter
of perfect indifference to me, whether I am ever known to
Mrs. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing. Marianne
lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor conjectured
that she might as well have held her tongue.
After very little /arther discourse, it was finally settled
that the invitation ahould be fully accepted. Mra. Jennings
received the information with a great deal of joy, and many
assurances of kindness and care ; nor was it a matter of
pleasure merely to her. Sir John was delighted ; for to a
jnan, whose prevailing aniuety waa the dread of bdng
alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants
in London, was something. Even Lady Middleton tot'lc
the trouble of bdng delighted, which nag putting herself
rather out of her way ; and as for the Miss Steeles, espe-
cially Lucy, they had never been so happy in their lives M
this intelligence made Aem.
K 3'
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
154 gsKo J
EHnot Bubmitted to the urangemeDt whidi anutertded
her wishes wilh less relucttnce than the had expected to
fed. Wilh i^srd to herself, it was now a matter of nn <
ooncern whether she went to town or not ; and when the
saw hif mother so thoroughly pleased with the jitm, and
her ueter exhilarated b; it in look, voice, and nannerj
restored to all her usual animation, and elerated to more
than her usual gaiety, she could not be dissatiBfled with the
eatue, and woald hatdly allow herself to diitiust the con-
Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness,
wo great waa the pertDibation of her spiriu, and ha impb
tience to be gone. Her imwillingneia to quit her ittotheT
was her only restoratiTe to cslnmesa ; and at the moment
of parting her grief on that score waa excessive. Her
BK^ier't affliction was hardly less; and Elinor was the only
sne ot the three who seemed to consider the sepaiatioti al
loy thing short of eternal.
Their depntnre tocdc place in the first wed in JumaTy.
The Middletons were to follow in abont a week. The Miss
Steele! kept didr station at the Park, and were to qnit it
only with tlie rest of the family.
CHAPTER IV.
ELiNMt eotild not find herself in Ae carriage with Mrs.
Jennings, and beginning a journey to London nnder her
protection, and as her guest, without wondering at her own
•itaation, so Aon had thtnr acquaintance with that lady
iKen, BO wholly unsuited were they in age and dispostion,
and so many had been h«'olijections gainst such a mea-
Kire only a few days before I But these objections had bQ,
with Aat happy ardonr of youth ftbich Marianne and h^
nother equally shared, been OTercotne or overlooked ; and
Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt of WiUoughby'x
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
CMMuwjr, could not irittmB tfae nphti« of dttightTnl ex-
INCtetion which filled the whole soul and beamed in the
eyes of Marianne, without feeling how blank waa her own
prospect, how dieerlen her own stale of mind in die com~
pariEon, and how gladly she would engage in die s(£citude
of Marianne's situation to have the laine animating oltiect
ia view, tile same possibiUty of hope. A short, a very
ihort time, however, must now decide what Wiilot^bj'a
intentions were ; in all prohability he was already in town,
Hamnne's eagerness to be gone declared faer dependence
«a findf ng him there ; and Elinor was resolved not only
upon ^ning every new light aa to his character which her
own observation, or the intdligence of othexa conld giva
her, but likewise upon watching his behavioiu'to her sister
with such zealous attention, as to ascertain what he w > ^
■ad what he ni^mt, before many meetings bad t«ken place.
Should the result of her observations be unfavouraUe, she
waa determined, at all events, to open the eyes of her siEter ;
■fcould it beodierwise, her exertioiu would be of a differenC
■Mture;— die most then learn to avoid every sdfish com^
patisoa, and banish every r^ret which might ksBcn ba
BMiafaelion in the happiness of Marianne.
Thay were three days on their jouiney, and MaiiHine'a
bc^vionr, «s they travelled, was a happy specimen of what
her future complaisance and componionaUensss to Mrs.
Jennings might be expected to be. She sat in silence al-
■UMt all the way, wrapt in her own iBeditadona, and scarcely
< ver voluntarily speaking, except when any oligect of pie-
tutesque beanty within their view drew from her an exda-
Miation of delight exclusively addressed to her sister. To
atone for this conduct, therefore, Elinor todc imniediate'
posstssiim of the post of civility which she bad astigned
kerself, behaved with the greatest attentian to Mrs. Jen-
Dings, talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to
her whenever she could ; and Mrs. Jennings, on her side,'
treated them both with all possible kindness, was solicitous
on e:very occasion for their ease and eqjoyment, and only
disturbed that she could not make them choose their own
diimeri at the inn, nor »tort a confession of their prefer'
ting salmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets Th^
K 4,
DoliiHihyGoOgle
130 UtnB AND ■SmtBILITT'.
reached town by three o'clock the third dft^, glad to be re*
leased, after Rich a journey, from the confinement of ■ car-
riage, and ready to enjoy hU the luxury of a good fire.
The house was handsonie and handsoinely fitted up; and
the young ladies were immediately put in poseesuon of ■
very comfortable apartment. It had formerly b£en Char-
lotte's ; and over the mantel.piece sdll hung a landscape in
coloured sillis of her performance, in proof of her haTing
■pent seven years at a great school in tonn to seme effect.
Ab dinner was not to be ready in lees than two houn
from their arrival, £iinar determined to employ the intervld
in writing to her mother, and sat down for that purpose*
In a few moments Marianne did the same. " / am writ'
ing home, Marianne, " said Klinor; " had not you better
defer your letter for a day or two f "
" I am not going to write to ray mother, " replied Mari-
anne, hastily, and as if wishing to atoid any farther enquiry.
Elinor said no more : it immediately struck her that she
must then be writing to Willoughby; and the conclusion'
which as instantly followed was, that, however mysteriously
they might wish to conduct the a & ir, they must be en-
gaged. This conviction, though not entirely satiafactory,'
gave her pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater
alacrity. Marianne's was finished in a very (ew minutes;
in length it could be no more than a note ; it was then folded
up, s^led, and directed with eager rapidity. Elinor thought
■he could distinguish a large W in the direction ; and no-
sooner waa it complete than Marianne, ringing the bell, re-
quested the footman who answered it to get that letter con-
veyed for her to the two-penny post This decided the-
Her spirits still continued very high; bat there was a
flutter in them which prevented their giving much pleasure
to her sister, and this agitation increased as the evening
drew on. Bhe could scarcely eat any dinner; and when
they aflertiards returned to the drawing-room, seemed anxi-
ously listening to the sound of every carriage.
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jenningt,F
by being much engaged in her own room, could see hUle <
of what was passing. The tea things were brought in, (|nd
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SEHSB AND SBIWBIUTr. 137
■Iretdf had Mftrianne been diaappointed more than once bj
a np at a neighbouring door, when s loud one was sud-
denly heard which could not be miataken for one at any
Other bouK. Elinor felt secure of its announcing Wit-
kmgfaby'g approach, and Marianne, starting up, moved to-
wards the door. Every thing was silent : this could not
be borne many seconds ; Ae opened the door, advanced a
few steps towards the stairs; and after listening half a mi-
nute, returned into the room in all the agitation which a
conviction of having heard him would naturally produce:
in the ecstasy of her feelings at that instant ehe could not
help exclaiming,''Oh, £linor, it is Willoughby, indeed
it ia 1 " and seemed almost ready to throw herself into bis
araiB, when Colonel Brandon appeared.
It was too great a shock to be home with calmness ; and
she immediately left the room. Elinor was disappointed
too ; but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon
MUmred his welcome with her; and she felt particularly
bort that a man so partial to her aister should perceive
that she experienced nothing iHit grief and disappointment
in seeing him. She instantly saw that it was not un-
noticed by him ; that he even observed Marianne, as she
quitted the room, with such astonishment and concern, aa
hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded
towards herself.
" Is your sister ill ? " said he.
EUinor answered in some distress that she was ; and
then talked of headachs, low spirits, and over fatiguei ;
Kid of every thing to which she could decently attribute
her slater's behaviour.
He heard ber with the most earnest attention ; but
leeming to recollect himself, said no more on the subject,
and b^an directly to apeak of his pleasure at seeing them
in London, making the usual enquiries about their journey,
and the frienda tbey had left behind.
In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on
either side, they continued to talk ; both of them out of
■pints, and ibe ibougbta of both engaged elsewhere. Ehnor
wi^ed very much to ask whether Wllloughby were then
in town, but she was afraid ot giving him pain by any
DoliiHihyGoOgle
139 nwsB ANo mmBiUTT.
enqntTy itfter bii rival ; and U lengdi, b; w > r of Mjing
Boraething, the asked if he had beea in Londoit ever utice
she had Been him luL " Yes, " he rq^ed, wiih some
embarraumeDt, " almoct ever aince; 1 have been tmee n
twice at Delaford for a few daya, but it haa iK*«t been in
1117 power to retuni to Biflon. "
Tliis, and the manner io which it was aaid, immediately
brought back to her remembrance all ^e drcumetances of
his quitting that place, with the uneaaineat and auspidona
they had caused to Mrs. Jenniiigi ; and she was fesrfiil
that her queatiou had implied much more cuiioaity on the
aulyect than she had ever fell.
Mrs. JeaningB soon came in. " Oh, Colond,* aaid
ihe, with her usual noisy cheerfiilncsa, " 1 am monatiana
glad to see ymi — sorry I could not come before — b^
your pardon,— ^but I have been forced to look about me ft
Utde, .and settle my matters; for it is a hmg while anc« X
have been at home, and you know we has alwaya a worid
of little odd things to do after one baa been away toi any
time; and then I have had CaKwright to settle with.
Lord, I have been aa busy as a bee ever since duiner J
Bnt pray, Colond, how came ;ou to eonjart out that I
abould be in town to-day ? "
" I bad the plessore of hearing it at Mr. Ftdmer'a, when
I have been dining. "
" Oh, you did ; well, and how do diey all do at thar
house? How does Charlotte dof I warrant you she ia
a fine sice by this time. "
" Mra. Palmer appeared quite well ; and I am emu
missioned to tell you, that you will certainly see her tO >
Joorrow. "
" Ay, to be sure, I thought aa much. Well, Colond,
I have brought two young ladies with me, you see, — that
is, you see but one of them now, but there ia anolhn
aomewhere. Your friend Jifias Marianne, too — which you
will not be sorry to hear. I do not know what yon and
Mr. Willoughby will do between you about her. Ay, it
b a fine thing to be young and handsoac Well — I wu
young once, bnt I never was very handsome — worse luck
tpi ate. However, 1 got a very good hufband, and I don't
DoliiHihyGoOgle
URBR ju(D iRiraiBiunr.'199
know what the gieitnt beunj can do more. Ah, poor
niftn ! he has been dead these eight years and better. But,
Colond, wbene hare jcm been to ranee we parted i And
how does y«u bDnnesa go on? Coate, come, let'a have-
no seoeta aiuMig frieada. "
He replied widi hia accnttomary mildneaa to ail her
enqnmea, hut without aatiffynig her in any. Elinor bow
b^an to make Ae tea, and Marianne was obliged lo ap-
pear again.
< After her eBtrance.CobxielBnuidtmbeeameinorethought-
All and ailent than be had been before, and Mrs. Jennings
coi^d not prevail on him to stay long. No other viuter
appeared that evening, -md the ladies were nnanimoaa in
agreeing to go eariy to bed.
Marianne roae the next manring wilh reeovered apiiita
and hap'pj leoka. The diaappmntment of the evening be-
fore seemed forgotten in the expectation of what waa ts
happen that day. They had not kmg finided their break-
out before Hra. Palmei^a barouche stopped at the door, and
in a few rainntea she came langhing into the room: ao
delighted to eae Aon ^, that it waR hard to say whether
she received mott pbaaurefnun meeting her rootbei or that
Iffiss Da^wooda ^ain. So mrprised at their coming to
town, thoi^h it waa what she had rather expected all
along ; so angry at th^ «cceptii^ her mother's invitatioK
after having declined ha own, though at the same time
she would never have forgiven them if fliey had not come I
" Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see yod, " aaid she: —
''what do you Aiok he aaid when he heard of your coming
with mamma ? I forget what it waa now, bnt it was some'
thing BO droll! "
After an hour or two spent in what her mother called
comfortaUe chat, or in other words, in every variety of
enquiry concerning all their acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's
side, and in laughter without cause on Mrs. Palmer's, it
ivBS proposed by the latter that they ehouM all accompany
faer to some shops where she had business that morning, to
which Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as
having likewise some purchatea to make themselves ; and
DoliiHihyGoOgle
IVX annu juot ceireiBiLiTr.
Uuimne, thotigti declining it at flnt, wu iodnced to go'
likewise.
Wherever they went, she wm evidently «lw»ye on the
wUdi. In Bond Street especially, where much of their
buuness lay, her eyea were in constant enquiry ; and in
whatever shop the party were engagedj her mind wax
equally abstracted from every thiag actaally before them,
from all that interested and occupied the others. Beatless
and disBBtiafled every where, her sister could never ohtain
her opinion of any article of purchase, however it might
equally concern them both : she received no pleasure from
any thing; was only impatient to.be at'home again, and
could with difficulty govern her vexation at the lediousnew
of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was cai^ht by every thing
pretty, ezpensive, or new ; who was wild to buy all, could
determine mi ttooe, and dawdled away her time in rapture
and indecision.
It wai late in the morning before they returned home ,'
and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne
flew eagerly up itairs; and when Elinor followed, she found
her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance,
which declared that no Willoughby had been there.
" Has no letter been left here for me aince we went out f "
tud she to the footman, who then entered with the parcels.
She was answered in the negative. " Are yon quite sure of
it ? " she replied. " Are you certvn that no servant, no
porter has left any letter or note f "
The man replied that none had.
" How very odd .'" said she, in a law and disappointed
voice, as she turned away to the window.
" How odd, indeed! " repeated Elinor within hersdf,
regarding her niter with uneasiness. " If she had not
known him to be in town she would not have writt^
to hini, as she did ; she would have written to Combe
Magna ; and if he is in town, how odd that he should nei-
ther come nor write ! Oh, my dear mother, you must be
wrong in permitting an engagement between a dau^ter s6
young, a man so little known, to be carried on in so doubt'
fill, so mysterious a manner ! / long to enquire ; but boW
will tny interftreoce be borne ? "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
•B^ Am mnmuTT. 141
She detennioed, after some conrideration, that if q»pear >
snceB continaed manj diji kmger ta unpleutnt m tbey
.now were, she would rqiTeaeiit in the fltraigeat ntDDer tD
her mocher the necessity of lome aerioiu enquiry into the
affiur.
Mr«. Palmer and two elderly Udiea of Mn. Jenningi^
intimRte acquuntance, whom she had met and invited in
the morning, dined with them. The former left them goon
after tea to fuMl her evening eng^ementa ; and Elinor waa
obliged to aisiat in making a whitt taUe far the othera.
Uarianne waa of no use on theie oceaaiona, aa she would
never leara the game ; but though hef lime waa therefore st
her own diapoaal, the evening was by no meana more'pro-
ductive of pleaanre to her than to Elinor, for it was apent
in all the anuety of expectation and the pain of dlaappolnt-
■nent. She aometimea endeavonred for a few minutea to
read ; bat the book was soon thrown aside ; and she retnmed
to the more interesting employment of walking backwarda
and forwards hctobb the room, pausing for a moment when-
ever she came to the window, in hopes of distingniihiBg the
long-expected rap.
CHAPTER V.
" If, this open weather holds macb lo^er, " aaid Mra.
Jenningg, when they met at breakfast the following morn-
ing, " Sir John wiU not like leaving Barton next week ;
'da a sad thing for sportamen to loae a day's pkaauic
Poor aonla ! I alwaya pity them when they do ; they seem
to take it ao mudi to heut. "
" That is tme, " cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and
walking to the window as she spoke, to examine the day,
" l had not thought of that. Tbia weather will keep
many sportsmen in the country. "
It waa a lucky reo^ection; all her good qiiriU were r*.
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
1^ lEHn AMU aaaaaixn.
Iteeed l^ iL " It is dianaing weUfaer for tAam indead, "
«he coDiinued, u she sat dowa to the breakfut table with
* happy countenance. " How much tixej must enjoy it !
Alt " (with « little return of ansiet;) " it aannot be ex-
pected to last long. At this time of the year, and after
■uch a series of rain, we shall certainly have very little more
ef it. Frosts will soon set in^ md in all probability with
severity. In another day or two, perhaps ; this extreme
IBildneBS can hardly last longei — nay, petjiapi it may
& eeze to.nigtit ! "
" At any rate, " said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs.
Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts as dearly as she
did, " 1 dare say we slu^ have Sic Jdin and Lady Alid-
tUeton in town by the end of next week. "
" Ay, my dear, I'll wairant you we do. Mary always
has her own way. "
" And now, " silently coifjectured Elinw, " she will
vrite to Combe by this day's poet. "
But if she did, the letter was written and sent away with
a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the
fact. Whatever the truth of it might be, and far as Elinor
was from feeling thorough contentment about it, yet while
she saw Marianne in spirits, she could not be very uncom-
fortable herself. And Marianne was in spirits ; happy in
the mildness of the weather, and still happier in hec expect-
adon of a frost.
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the
houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance, to inform them of
her being in town ; and Marianne iwas all the time busy in
(^Merving the direction of the wind, watching the variations
of the sky, and imagining an alteration in. the air.
" Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning,
Elinor ? There seems to me a very, decided difibrence. I
oan hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff. It was
not so yesterday, 1 think. The clouds seem, parting too;
the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear
Afternoon. "
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained ; hut Mari-
anne persevered, and saw every night in the brighteess t£
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BMU AMS tamtBiLm. 143
ibt flre, and erery momiiig in the appearuice of the atnio-
■phere, the ceruin lymptonM of i^proaching frost.
The Mua Duhwooda hui no greater reaaon to be dls-
Mtwfied with Mn. JnuiingB'* style of liviBg, and «et of ae-
qntiotance, than with h«r behaviour to themaelvea, wbi(^
ma innoiably kind. Every thing in her houBchoId Bmnge-
menlB wu conducted on the moat liberal plan, and except-
ing a few old dty friendi, whom, to Lady Middleton's
T^ret, she had never dropped, ahe visited no one to whom
an introduction could at all discompose the feelings of her
young companions. Pleased to find hersdf mote comfort^
d > ly edtuated in that particolar than she hod expected,
Elinor was v^ willing to compound for the want of mudi
real enjoyment from any of their evening parties, which,
iriiether at home or abioad, fonned only for cardi, could
have little to amuse her.
Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the
house, was with them almost every day : he came to look
at Marianne, and talk to Elinor, who often derived more
•atis & eiion trnn conversing with him than from any other
daily occurrence, but who saw, at the same time, with
much concern hia eontimied regard for her sister. She
fbaied It was a strengtheniog regard. It grieved her to
aee the eameatneaa wich which heoften wattled Marianne;
and his spirita were certainly worse than when at Barton.
About a week after their arrival, it became certain that
WiHonghby waa also arrived. His card was on the table
when they came in from the morning's drive.
" Good God! " cried M»ianne, " he has been here
while we were out. " Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of hia
being in London, now ventured to say, " Depend upon it,
he will call ^ain to-monow. " But Marianne seemed
hardly to hear her, and, on Mrs. Jennings's entrance, escaped
with the precious card.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored
to those of her sister all, and more than all, their former
agitation. From this moment her mind waa never quiet ;
the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day made
ker unfit for any thing. She insisted on being left behind,
the next morning, when the othet* went out.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
EUnor's thouglitB were full of what mi^ be pMkhig
in Berlceley Street during their abtence ; hut > momcnt'i
glance at ber deter, when they returned, yiaa enough to in-
form ber that Willougbb]'had paid do second viait tbere^
A note was juat then brought in, and laid on the table.
" For me 1 " cried Marianne, stepping hastily fonfard^
" No, ma'am, for my miBtress. "
But Marianne, not convinced, toolc it initaotly up.
" It ia, indeed, for Mrs. Jenninga; how provoking! "
" You are expecting a letter, then ? " said Elinor, nnaUc
to be longer silent.
•'Yes, a little — not much. "
After a abort paute, " You luve no confidence in me,
Mariuine. "
" Nay, Elinor, this reproach from j/ou • — you who have
confidence in no one ! "
" Me! " relumed Ehnor, in some confiuion ; " indeed,
Marianne, I have nothing to tell. "
" Nor T, " answered Marianne, with energy ; " oar nttu
ationa then are alike. We have neither of ua any thing to
tell ; you, because you communicate, and 1, because I con-
ceal nothing. "
Elinor, distreseed by this diarge of reserve in henelf,
which abe was not at liberty to do away, knew not how,
under such drcunulances, to press for greater openness In
Marianne.
Mrs. Jerminga soon appeared, and the note being pnai
ber, she read it aloud. It was from Lady Middkton, aiw
nouncing their arrival in Conduit Street the night befwe,
and requesting the company of her mother and conainH the
following evening. Business on Sir John's part, and a
violent cold on her own, prevented their calling in Berke-
ley Street. The invitation was accepted ; but when the
hour of appointment drew near, necessary as it was, in
common civility, to Mrs. Jennings that tbey should both
attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty in
persuading ber sister to go, for still she had seen nothing
of Willoughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for
amusement abroad than unwilling to nin the risk of bit
atlling again in ber absence.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■nn AMD aiMBBiurri 145
'EliDOT fbnod, vfaen the evening «u over, that dispoti-
titm i« not nialeriilly iltered by a change of abode ; tar,
although scarcely settled iu town, Sir John had contriTcd
to odlect anrand him neai^; twenty jonng people, and to
amine tbem with a ball. This was an afiir, bowenr, of
which lAdy Middlelon did not i^prore. In the conntry,
an unptemeditated dance waa vety allowable ; but in London,
where the repntatioa of elegance waa more important, and
leM easily obtained, it waa risking too mneh for the gratifl-
oadon of a few girls, to hsTe it known, that Lady Middle-
ton bad given a small dsQoe, of eight or nine couple, with
two TiidinB, and a mere sideboard collation.
- Ur. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party ; from the
fimner, whom they had not nen before since their arrival
in town, as he waa careful to avoid the appearance of any
attendon to his mother-in-law, and therefore never came
near her, tfaey recdved no mark of recognition on their en-
trance. He looked at them slightly, without seeming to
know who tfaey were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings
fiom the-otber side of the room. Marianne gave one
glance ronnd the apartment as the entered ; it ws > enongh,
he WW not there — and she sat down, eqnally ill-disposed
to Mceire or communicate pleasure. After dwy had been
sas ambled abont-an hour, Mr, Palmer sauntered towarda
the Miss Dasbwoods to espreis his aurpriae on aeeing
them in town, though Colond Brandon bad been first in-
Armed of th^ artiral at his house, and he had himself
mid something very droll on bearing that they were to
oome. .
" J tboo^t yon were both in Devonihire, " said he.
. " Did you ? " replied Elinor.
- " When do you go back again ? "
'" I do not Imow. " And thus ended their discourse.
Never had Marianne been to unwilling to dance in her
life as she waa ifast evening, and never so much fatigued
by the exercise. She complained of it as they returned to
Berkeley Street.
" Ay, ay, " said Mrs. Jennings, " we know the reason
of all that very well : if a certain person, who shall bt
namdess, .had been there, you woold not have been a bit
h
DoliiHihyGoOgle
I4fi
tired ; and, to iay the trDth, it wm not yery pretty of Idm
not tf > give yon the meeting when he wu invited. "
" Inrited ! " cried MAiiaone.
" So my daughter Middleton told me ; ibr it MeBii Sir
J < Aa met him somewheic in the itreet thii BMRiiiiig. "
Marianne said no moie, but looked exceedmgly hurt im-
patient in this litnation to be doing lomething that mi^t
lead to her uster's relief, Elinor resolved to write the next
morning to her mother, and htqied, by awakening het fears
for the health of Marianne, to procure those enqniriea
which had beoi wo long delayed ; and ahe wai alall mote
eagerly bent on thii measure, by perceiving, after breakfatt
on the morrow, that Marianne was again writing to Wil-
longhby, for ahe could not auppoae it to be to any othd
About the middle of the day Mra. Jenningt went out by
berself on buBiaess, and Elinor b^an her tetlei dinctly,
while Marianne, too restlem for employment, toe anxiona
tor converaatioa, walked from one window to the other, er
■at down by tbe fire in melancholy meditation. Elinor
was very earnest in her application to her mothei, relating
all that bad ptased, her nupieionH of Willoo^by'i inceiw
Btancy, n^i^ her, by every plea of duty and auction, to
demand from Marianne an account of her real aitnatiiia
with respect to him.
Her letter waa acarcely finished, when a i^ fanttM & :
visiter, and Cokmil Brandon was annoimced. Hariaane,
who h»d seen him from the window, and who hated com.
pany of any kind, left the room before he entered it He
looked more than nsaally grave; and thongh eigireMing
satisfaction at finding Miss Daahwood done, as if be had
somewhat in ^rticnlar to tell her, sal'for some time with-
out saying a word. Elinor, persuaded ihart he had aone
communication to make in which her sister waa ccmcamed,
impatiently expected its opening. It waa not the flnt
time of her feeling the same kind of oonvictim ; fur mace
than once before, banning with the obaervmtion of, " Your
sister looks imwdl to-day, " or, " Your sister seAns out of
spirits, " he had qipesred on the point, rither of diseloaiiig,
or ot enquiriiig, somatbing partkular absnt her. Attet m
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
147
• dicdr siknce wm Imkn, bj bia
uking her, in ■ race of wtM agibrtioD, when he wu to
ooi^ntaUte her on the Mqukiiioti of a Invther? £linor
wnnot prepared for luch'k queation; and haTingnoaBiwcr
readr, was obliged M tidapt die aimide and common expe-
dient of aaking what he meant f He tried to smile, u he
npliad, " Your liaier'i eng^iement to Mr. Willonghb; ii
Toy gancnUgr kMtwn. "
" It cannot be generally known, " nttuned Elinor, " tot
bar oKNi fteaily do not know it. "
He kwked euipriaed, and aaid, " I beg your paidon, I
■nafiwdmyettqauyhMbem impotineBt; bailhadnot
BiqipiMed way aeoeey intended, aa they openly correspead,
and their naaniage ia nuvMaally talked of. "
" How can Hut be? By wbran cao yoa have heard it
Bientioned? "
- " By many— by aema of whom you know nothing, by
•Aera with whom you are moat intimate. Mis. Jennings,
Hi*. Pafaner, and the Middletona. Btit sdU I might not
bwre beUered it, fbr where the mind ia, perbapa, rather
vnwilling to be convinced. It will alwaya find lomething to
aopport ita doubta, if I bad not, when the aervant let me in
to-day, BccidoitBlly aeen a lett^ in hia hand, directed to
Mr. Willonghby, in youi uater's writing. I came to en-
quire, but I was convinced before I could ask tha question.
Is erery tbii^ Anally settled? Is it imponiUe to P
Bat I have no righ^ and I could have no chance of sac-
GOeding. Excuse me, Hiaa Daahwood. I believe I have
been wrong in aaying io much, but I hardly know what to
do, and on yonr pmdenee I have the strongeat dependence.
Tell me that h ia all abachitety reac^Ted an, that any at-
tntpt, that in sbett enKe^ment, if concealment be poaaible,
ivalitbamnains.''
Thaae words, which conveyed to EUnM a direct avowal
of his love fttr her nsler, afllKted her very rnncb. She waa
mt immediMdy able to say any thing; and even when her
i^ta wen reeovered, iihe debated for a short time on the
iBwifet it would be meat proper to give. The real state of
diini^ between WiUoughby and hu dater was so litde
known to bendf, diat, in endeavoori^ to ex^o it, tb»
t. »
DoliiHihyGoOgle
148 B^HBB AjID BENBIBILITS.
might be u liable to laj too mucli u too lilde. Tet,uah«
vta convinced that Muianoe's affec & m for WiUoughby
could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon'a auccesi, wbaUvet
the event of that afiecdon might be, and at the laiiie time
wi^ed to iihleld her conduct from cenmire, she thought it
most prudent and kind, after Bome connderation, to sajr-
more tilian she really knew or believed. She admowledged,
therefore, that though she had netei been informed'hj.
themselves of the terms on whitih they stood with each
other, of their mutual affection she had no doubt, and of
their correspondence she was not astoniahed to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention; and on her ceaa^
ing to speak, rose directly from his seat, and after saying,
in a voice of emotion, " To your sister 1 wish all imagin.
able happiness j to Willonghby that be may endeavour to
deserve her, " — took leave, and went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable fedingi from this cooven.
Btion to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points;
she was left, on the contrary, with a melanchtdy impiesaiim
of Colonel Brandon's -unbappiness, and was prevented even
from wishing it removed, b; her anxiety for the very event
that must confirm it.
CHAPTER Vr.
NoTHtNS occurred during the next three iw four days to
make Elinor regret what she had done, in ^plying to her
mother ; for Willoughby neither came nor wrote. They
were engaged about the end of that time to attend La^.
Middleton to a party, from which iSn. .lenninga was kqit
away by the indisposition of her youngest dao^ter; and
for this party Marianne, wholly dispirited, careleas at hec
appearance, and seeming equally indifferent whether sIk
went or stayed, prepared, without one look of hope, or one
expression of pleasure. She sat by the drawing-room fire
)fter tea till the moment of Lady Middleton's arrivalj
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
149
wIAout once Bdrriiig ftam her mU, or altering her attitude,
lost in her own thoughts, and iniendble of her lister's pre^
■ence; and when at last thej were told that Lady Middle-
tcm waited for them at the door, she started as if she had
fc^otten that any one waa expected.
They arrived in due time at the place of destinstioii ;
■nd as soon as the string of carriages before them would
idh > w, alighted, ascended the stain, heard their names an-
Donneed from one landing-place to another in an audible
T < Hce, and entered a room splendidly lit tip, quite full of
company, and insufierably hoL When they btul paid their
tribute of ^Uteoess by eourtesying to the lady of the house,
diey were permitted to mingle in the crowd, and take their
■hare of the heat and inconvenience to which th^ arrival
must necessarily add. After some time spent in saying little
«nd doing less. Lady Middleten sat down to Cassino ; and
A Marianne was not in spirits for moving about, she and
Eliaor luckily succeeding to chairs placed themselves at no
great distance from the table.
Tbey had not remained In this manner long, before Eli-
nor percdved WiUoughby, standing within a few yards of
tibem, in earnest eonvenation with a very fashionable look-
ing young woman. She soon caught his eye, and he imme-
diately bowed, but without attempting to speak to her, or
to approach Marianne, though he could not but see her ;
and then continued his discnurse with the same lady. Elinor
tnmed invohint & rily to Marianne, to see whether it could
be unobserved by her. At that moment she first perceived
him; and her whole countenance glowing with sudden de-
Hght, she would have moved towards him instantly,, had
not her sister cn^ht hold of her.
" Good heaTensI " she exclaimed, " he is there — he is
tftere ! — Oh, why does he not look at me f Why cannot
I speak to him J "
" Pray, pray be composed, " cried Elinor, " uid do not
betray what yon feel to every body present. Perhaps he
has not observed yon yet. "
This, however, was more than she could believe herself;
■nd to be composed at such a moment was not only beyond
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ISO Kna AHD SEmtBlLFIT.
the reach of Mwiaone, it wu beyond ber with. Me aM
in an agony of impatdence whidi aStctecl every fottme.
At las^he turned round again, and regarded timn both ;
the started up, and pnmooncing hia name in a tinie of af-
fection, held out her hand to him. He approached ; and
addreising himself ratber to Elinor than Marianne, M it
wiahing to avoid har eye, and determined not to obaerye bcc
attitude, enquired, in a hurried manna, after Mn. D«dl >
wood/and asked how long they had been in town. EUner waa
robbed of all presence ctf ,mind by auch an addrest, and waa
tmaUe to aay a word. But the fedings of her sister wa«
inatandy ex^eaaed. Her face was crimacmed over, and she
exclaimed, in a VMoe of the greatest emotion, " Good God I
Willoughby, what is the meming of this ? Have yon not
recrived my tetters f Will yon. not ah & ke hands with me? "
He could not then avoid it; but her touch seemed painAil
to him, and he held her hand only for a mcnnent. During
all this time he was evidently struggling for compamre.
Elinor watched his countenance and saw its expreoion be-
coming more tranquil. Aiter a i & oinent's pause, he spoke
with calnuiesB. ,
" I did myself the honour of calling in Bctkdey Street
laat Tuesday, and very much rcgTet*ed that I waa not ton.
tunate enough to find youiselvea and Mxa. Jaminga at
home. My card was not lost, I hope.''
" But hare you not recdved my note* t " cried MaTJanne'
in the wildest anxiety. " Here is some mistake, I am nne
— some dreadful mistake. What can be the meaning of
it ? Tdl me, Willoughby ; fw Heaven's sake tell me; w:hat
it the matter ? "
He made no reply : his complexion changed, and all fa!a
embarrassment returned ; but as if, on catching the eye of
the young lady with whom he had been previously talkiD^
he felt the necessity of instant exertion, he recovned him.
self again, and aito'saying, " Yes, 1 had the pleaanre of
receiving the information of your arrival in town, whirit
you were eo good as to send me, " tamed lustily away with
a alight bow, and Joined his tHend.
Marianne, now looking dreadfully while, and anaUe to
atand, sunk into her chair; and Elinor, expecting every mo-
DoiiiHihv Google
UKIH AKD SXNIIBILITT. 151
iBHit to Me her fUnt, tiled to screen her from the t/iMttr.
■turn of others, while reriring her with Uvender water.
" Go to him, Eliiiiff, " «he cried, u mxu w *he could
^eak, " and force him to come to me. Tdl him I mmt
■ee him igain — must ipesk to him initantly. I camuit
rest — I dull not have a moment's peace till this is ex-
plained — Kune dreadful raisapprdienBion or other. Oh,
go to him this moment. "
" How can that be done t No, mj dearest Marisnae,
fou mutt wait. This ii not a place for explanatiODS. Wait
onlj till lo-morrow. "
With difficulty, howe*«r, coold she present her frma foU
lowing him herself; and to persuade her to check her agL
tttJOD, to wait, at least, with the sppearanee of eompoauie,
till die mig^t speak to him with more privacy and more
'«fi^, waa impouible, for Marianne continued incessantlj
'to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings, l^
exdamations of wretchedness. In a short time Blinitr taw
Willonghby quit the room by the door towards the stair >
case; and tdtlng Marianne that he was gone, urged the im-
poMilality of speaking to htm ^ain that evening, as a fredi
argument for her to be calm. She Instantly begged her
sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home,
as she was too miserable to stay a minute longer.
Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on
bong informed that Marianne waa unwell, was too polito
to olgect for a mranent to ha wish of gmng away, and
making over ber cards to a friend, they de^rted as soon aa
die carriage could be found. Scarcely s word was spoken
during their return to Berkeley Street Marianne was in a
nlent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but aa
Mrs. Jennings was luckily not come home, they could go di-
rectly to their own room, where hartshorn restored her a
little to herself. 6be was soon undressed and in bed ; and
as she seemed deurons of being alone, her sister then left
ber, and while she wailed the return of Mrs. Jennings, had
leiaire enough for thinting over the past,
That some kind of engagonent had subnsted between
WiUoughby and Mariaiyie she could not doubt, and that
Willoughby was weary of it, seemed equally clear ; for l}ow >
I. i
I'l. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
152 raNBE AMD'BiNuaiurY-
trtjtr Mariuine miglit atin fted ber Dim wishof, •ie couU Diit~
Utiibute such behAiiour to mistake or imwpprehetiuoii of
4Dy kind. Nothing but ■ thorou^ duuige of aenliment
could account fbr it. Her indignttioD would have been stiU
■lionger than it was, had ihe not witnessed that embanu*.
-inent which seemed to speak a conicioiuneu of his own
.mifcouduct, and prevented her from believing him so un-
principled aa to have been sporting with the afiections of
her sister irom the fint, without an; deagn that would bear
investigation. Absence might have weakened hia regard,
and convenience might have determined him to overcome
It ; but that such a regard had fotmeriy existed she could
not bring hersdf to doubt.
As for Marianne, on the pang* which to unhappy a
meeting must already have given her, and on those still
more severe which might await her in its probable conse-
quence, she could not reflect without the deepest coDcetn.
Her own situation gained in the comparison ; for while
.ahe could ette»m Edward aa much as ever, however thef
.might be divided in future, her mind might be always sup*
iported. But every circumstance that could embitter miA
■aa evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne
.in a flnal separation from Willou^by — in an immediate
and irreconcilable rupture with him.
CHAPTER. VIL
£bfom the housemaid bad Ut their fire the next day, oi
'the sun gained any power over a cold, gloom; momi:^ in
January, Marianne, only half dreiwd, was kneeling agunst
one of the window.seats for the sake of all the little h^t
she could command from it, and writing as fut as a conti >
Dual flow of tears would permit h«. In this situation,
Elinor, ronaed from sleep by her agitation and lobi, Arat
^ceived her ; and after obeerving ber for a few mtnaoiU
I .i-. < i " ,'C(H1nlc
widi dloit Hiliety, Mid, in k tona of tlw moat contidertw
gentlmen, —
" Mamnne, msj I ik ■ ? "
" No, EUnbr, " iha repUsd, " aak nothing; jvn will
NOD knew alL "
The aoTt of dc^ante ealmnwa with which dua waa
■aid Inted no Imgsr than while die apoke, ud was immfc
diately followed b; a retiuii of the isme exceadve afflictioti.
It waa aome minntca hefere ihe could go on widi her
letter; and the frequent bunts of grief which still oUiged
her, U intcrrals, to withhidd her fat, were proofi enoagb
o£ her feeling bow more than pn^iaUe it was that she wat
wriiiDg for the Isat time to Willoogfab;.
£liuor paid her emj quiet ud unobtnuiye attention in
her power ; and she would have tried to soothe and ttan.
qailUae her still mtaejliad not Marianne entreated her, with
all the eagemeas of the moat nemna irritaUitj, not M
■peak to her for the world. In such dmunataneea it waa
batter for both that they should not be long together ; and
dte radesa state of Marianne's mind not only prevented
her from remaining in the room a montent & fter she wa*
dreaied, but requiring at on.ce solitude and continual change
of place, made her wander about the booae till brcak & at <
time, aroiding the li^t of ererj body.
At breakfsat she neither ate nor attempted to eat any
thing ; and Elinor'a attention was Uien aU employed, not
in uiging her, not in pitying her, nor in appearing to re-
gard bcr, but in endeavouring to ei^age Mrs. Jsinings's
notice entiidy to herself.
As this waa a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings
it lasted a considerable time ; and they wne jnat setting
thenudves after it round the common working taUe, vdien
a letter was delivered to Marianne, which she eagerly
ean^t frMu the aervant, and, turning at a death-like pal^
neaa, inslandy ran out of Ihe room. Elinor, who saw aa
plainly by this as if she had seen the ditecdon diat it
mtut come from Willoughby, felt immediately inch a
rickncsB at heart as made her hardly able to hold up her
bead, and sat in such a geno'al tremour as made her fearit
impoadUe to esci^ Mrs. tTenningB's notiee. That good
DoliiHihyGoOgle
iM sKmp J
■hdj, faowetB, MW vAj thkt Mnanbe hid i«cd*ed k
letter front Witloug^by, which ■ppeared to her a vcxf
good joke, and which ■iu- treated accordingly, b; hoping,
-Kith a iaa^, that ahe wodU And it to her lUung. Ot
Elinor's distreaa ihe was too bualy em^ored in nm-
aaring lengtha of wanted for her ing to wte anjr diing at
jiU ; and cdaily contimiBg her tdk u soon aa Mariame
.diappeared, ihe aaid, —
" Upon my word, I never mw a yoaag woman wt deapeik
•tdy in lofe in my life ! 3fy girli were nothii^ to ber,
and yet they vted to be fboliah enooj^ ; bnt u f or Miaa
Muiuine i^ ii quite an altered ereatnre. I hope, froa
the bottom of my heart, he won't keep her waidi^ modi
longer, for it ia quite griertnu to lee her look so ill tad
fbflom. Pray, when are tfa^ to be married ? "
Elinm, th < n^ never less dispoted to apeak than at diM
moment, obl^ed herself to answer sach an attai^ aa thi^
and, ther^ore, trying to sniile, replied, " And have ymi
really, ma'am, talked yourself into a pennaaion of my fia.
tor's being engaged to Mr. Willonghby ? 1 thought it had
been only a Joke, bat to aeriout a qneadon seems to imidj
more ; and I must heg, theselore, diat yon will not deedn
yonndf any kmgei. I do lasnre yon that nothing would
Borprise me more than to hear of dieir being going to be
married. "
" For dtame, fbt shame, Miss Dashwood I bow can yoa
talk 10 f Don't we all know that it must be a'matdi, — that
ihey were ores bea4 end ears in love with each other fran
the first moment they met ? Did not I see them together
in Deycmahire every day, and all day long ; and did ttot I
know that ytmr sister came to town with me on purpose te
buy wedding clothes f Come, come, this won't do. Bet
c*nse you are to ely abotit it yoursdf, yon think nobody
else hai any senses ; bat it is no snch thing, I can tell yoa,
Ibr it haa be«i known all over town this ever so long. I
tell every body of it, and so does Charlotte. "
" Indeed, ma'am, " said Elinor very seriously, " yon ai*
nuitskeo. Indeed, yon are doing a very unkind diing ia
apreadii^ the r^oM ; and . you will find that you hav^
ItuH^ yon will not bdieve me now. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mm AXB ntmrntuTT. 1A0
Mn. Jenniagi l«iglied < 4 > ii > , tat Staer had not tftiUM
to u]t more; and eager, at all eranti, to knoir what WiL
km^by had initten, boiried aiAj tg tkeir looni, wlun,
on opening tbe dow, ihe nw Marianiw ftntched on the
bod, almost dwked by grief, one letter ia her hind, and
two or three otben lying by ber. Elinor drew near, but
without Myii^ a nori ; ind aeating betmit on die bed,
todk her band, kiseed her afibctionatdy Hveral timet, and
then gave way to a burst of tean, which at £nt waa
•earedy Icm Tioknt than Mariamw'e. Hie latter, thoo^
unfile to ^etk, Memed lo fed all tbe tMderMM of thia
bebaiioar ; and, after DMiieliiBe tbu vent !■ JoiBt affliclion,
«be put all Ae letm inlo laiDor'a lunda, and dtea oota.
ing her face with ber handkenUrf, alnoat MrMmed with
agony. Elinor, who knew that lacb grief, dioekiag as It .
was to witneM it, molt Wve its oonne, watched by ber till
this excesa of anffbing had Mmewhat tfoit itadf, and tbea
tunuog eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read a* ftjlowa : —
■■ Bond Stncti jMinaiy.
" My deer Madam,
*'I have jut had the honour at recrfviBg your letter,
for which I beg to return my rineeie acknowledgmenta. I
em much conoemed to And Acre waa any tiling in taj
behaTionr last night that did not meet yonr approbation ;
vd though I am qnile at a loas to diaoorer in what point
I oonld be ao nnfbrtanate aa tD.oKnd you, I entreat yoni
fbrgiTeneM ol what I can assnre yon to hare been pnAedy
BttntentionaL I shall nerer v^ect on my fimner an.
qoaintanoe witii your family in DeYonahire without the
most gratefU jdeunre, and flatter myidf it will not he
broken by any mistake or misi^ipnbenslon of my actiona.
My eateoo for your whole family is very sincBe ; but if I
hxn been ao nnfortnnate ae to give rise to a bdief of more
than I Mt, or meant to express, I shall raproaeh mysdf
for not having been more guarded in my piofesalons of
that esteem. That I should evra haTe meant more, yoa
win allow to be impossible, when you nndentand that my
aflbetion* have been long engaged elsewhere, and it wiQ
Mt be many we^, I beUere, before tins engagement 1 >
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
ISG
It is with great r^ret Au I cbej yonr eotn-
mands of rMoniiiig the letters widi which I have bml
honoured froin joa, ud the lock of hair whidi you m
obligingly beatoired on me.
" I am, deal Madam,
" Your moat obedient
" humble (errant,
" John WiiMmaasy. " ■
With what mdignation meh a letter u this must be
read bj Miss Daahwood may be imagiDed. Thou^ aware,
before she bq;a]i it, that it must bring a confession of his
inconitancy, and cmiflna their aeparation for erer, she was
Dot aware dut audi language could he sufiered to uinounM
it ; nor could ahe have supposed Willou{^by capable of
(l^»arting bo tax from the appearance of every honourable
Bnd delicate feding — so far frmn the ccHnmon deeonun
of agentlemaa — as to send a letter so impudently erad; t
letter which, instead of bringing with his detiie of a release
■ny profeaiions. of regret, acknowledged no breach of faith,
denied all peculiar affection whatever ; — a letter of whidi
erery Une- waa an Inmlt, and which proclaimed ita writer
to be deep in hardened villany.
She paused over it for some time widi indignant aston*
iahment ; then read it again and again ; bat every perusal
only served to incMaae her abborrence of die man; and ao
hitter were her fedinga againat him, that the dared not
tmst faeradf to apeak, leat die might wound Maiianne iliQ
deeper, by treating their diaengagemoit, not as a lose to her
of any poaalble good, but as an escape from the worst and
most iiremediaUe of all evils, — a connection fbr life widt
an uuprindpled man, as a ddiverance the most real, a
biCMing the moat important.
In her eaniest meditations on the contenta of the letter,
on tl» depravity of diat mind whidi could dictate it, > adf
probably, on the very different mind of a very different
petaon who had no other connection whatever with dte
a & ir than what her heart gave him with every diii^ that
passed, Elinor forgot the inunediate distress of hei sistefr
Angot that abe bad three letters oo lur li^ yet, unread, and
DoliiHihyGoOgle
J57
sp estiKly fwgot how long the luul been in the room, that
irhen, on hearing a carriage drive up to the door, ihe went
to the window to see who could be coming n > nnrcManahlj
eulj, she was all aitoniahment to petceiTe Mn, Jenoings'i
diuiot, which she knew had not been ordered till one.
Detennined not to quit Marianne, thoi^ hopeless of con-
tributing, at present, to her eu«, ihe hurried away to ex-
cuse herself from attending Mn. Jenningi, on account of
her rister being indisposed. Mta. JemiiDg*, with a tho-
roughly good-humoured concern for its cause, admitted the
excuse raost readily ; and Eliuor, after seeing her cafe off,
retnined to Marianne, whom she found attemptiBg to risa
from the bed, tuid whom ihe reached just in time to prevent
her from falling on the floor, faint and giddy from a loi^'
ifant of proper rest and food ; for it was many days since
^e had any appetite, and many nights since she bad really
dept; and now, when her mind wsa no longer supported
1^ the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this was felt
in an aching head, a weakened slraiadi, and a general ner-
Tooa faintnesB. A glass of, wine, which Elinor procured for
her diractly, ^ade her more comfortable, and she was at
last aUe to exprees some sense of her kindnesa, by saying,.
" Poor Elinor I how unhappy I make you 1 "
., " I , < aily wish, " replied her uster, " there were any
thing I amid do, which might be of comfort to you. "
This, as every thing else would have been, was too much
for Mprianne, who could only exclaim, in the anguish of
her heart, " Oh, Elinor, I am miserable indeed, " beibr*'
her voice was entirely lost in sobt.
_ Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted
grief in silence.
" Exert yourself, dear Marianne, " she cried, " if you
wwld not kill yourself and all who love you. Think. of
your mother; think of her misery while you sufier ; for her
sake you must exert yourself. " •
" I cannot, I cannot, " cried Marianne j " leave me, leavs
me, if I distress you ; lesve me, hate me, forget me 1 but
do not torture me so. Oh, how easy for those who have
no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion 1 Happy, happy
Elinw, you cannot have an ide« of what 1 sufler. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
MB RNBB Amy uiraiBiCnT.
'*'Do yoQ call nte hippy, MarUnne t Ah, if yon ImMrl
And csD you bdkre me to be m > , whila I tee yon tO'
wretched? "
" Forgive me, foi^ < re me, " throwiiq; ber arm* round
her sister'a Deck; " I know you feel for me ; I know what
a heart yon hsTS ; bat yet yon are — you most be happy ;
Edward loves yon— what, oh what, can do away auch
happiness as that 7 "
" Many, many dreumstancea, " said !Kinor, solemnly.
" No, no, no,''cried M & rianne, wildly : " he loTec yon,
and only you. You ean have no grief. "
" I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state. "
" And you will aerta; see me otherwise. Mine is a
misery which nothing can do away. "
" You must not Uik eo, Marianne. Have yon no ana.
flnla ? no friends ? Is your loss such as leavei no openii^
for consolatiwi ? Much as you suffer now, think of what
yon would have suffimd, if the discovery of his chsracta
had been ddayed to a later period; — if yonr engagement
had been carried on fbr months and months, as it mi(^t
have been, before he chose to put an. end to iu Every ad-
ditional day of unhappy confldence, on your side, wouM-
have made the blow more dreadful. "
" Engagement I " cried HsrisDne, " there haa been no
" No engagMnent! "
" No, he ia not BO noworAy a* you believe trim. He
has hroken no tvA with me. "
" But he UM yon that he loved you. "
" Yes — ho — never absolutely. It was every day im-
plied, bnt never professedly declared. Sometime* I thought
it had been, but it never was. "
■ " Yet you wrote to him ? "
" Yes : conld that be wrong, aAer aU ftat had pasaedf
But I cannot talk. "
Elinor uud no more, and turning agaJn to the three
iMIers which'now ruted a much stronger cntioaity than
before, directly ran over the contents of all. The int,
which was what her sitter had smt him on their arriral in
town, was to this eSect : —
DoliiHihyGoOgle
•• Bnkdej SUttt, Antwrr.
" How snrpriicd you wiH be, Willoughby, on Kcdviiig
ibis ; u)d I think yon will feel sometb^g more than
snrpriie, when yon know dut I am in town. An opportu-
nity of coming hither, though with Mrs. Jennings, nu a
tempbition we conld not rerisf. I wish you may receire
this in time to come here to-night, but I wiU not depend
on it. At any rate I ehall expect you to-morrow. For'
the present, adiea.
" M-D. "
Her tecond note, which had been written on the morn-
ing after the dance at theMiddletons', wiu in these words: —
" I cannot expresE my disappointment in having misted
yon the day before yesterday, nor my aatonidunent at not
having received any answer to a note which I sent you
above a week ago. I have been expecting to hear from
yon, and still more to see you, every hour of the day.
Fray call again as soon as posiible, and explain the reason
of my having expected thia in vain. You had better come
earlier another time, because we are generally oat by one.
We were last night at Lady Middleton'a, where there waa
a lUnce. I have been told'that you were aaked to be of the
party. But could it be so? You must be very much
altered, indeed, since we parted, if that could be ihe case,
and you not there. But I will not suppose this possible,
■nd I hope very soon to recdve your personal assurance of
its being otherwise.
" M. D. "
The ctmleatB of her last note to hint were these : —
" What am I to imagine, Willoughby, l^ your be-
haviour laat uig^t i Again I demand an explanation of it.
I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure which our
B^ > aration nahirally produced, — vrith the famUiarity which
our intimacy at Baiton appeared to me to justify. I was
repulaed indeed 1 1 have passed a wretched night in ^-
dcavouriog to ezcnae a conduct which can acaicely be
called lesB than insulting j bat though I have not yet been
ahl« to fimn any reasonalde apology ibr yofir b^vioor, I
DoliiHihyGoOgle
am perfectly reftdj to heu your Jiutifiution of it. Too
i^M,■n perlu^ be«i misiiiformed, or purposely deceiTed > in
Bomething concerning me, which may have lowered roe in
yoQT opinion. Tell me what it is ; explain the gronndi
cm whii^ you kcted, and I Bhill be laUsfled, in being able
to B & tisfy yon. It would giieve me, indeed, to be oUiged
to think ill of you ; but if I am to do it, if I am to leant
diat you are not what we have hitherto believed yon, that
your r^anl for ui all was inaincere, that your behaviour
to me waa intended only to deceive, let it be told as soon
at poaailde. My feeling! are at presrat in a atate of dread-
ful indeciaioDj I wish to acquit you, but certainty on
dther dde wiU be ease to what I now Buffer. /If yonr-
Kudments are no longer what they were, yon will Tetnm
my notes, and the lock of my hair which ia in yonr poa.
" M. D. "
That such letten, so full of aSbction and confidence,
could have been so answered, EUnor, for Willooghby'a
■die, would have been unwilling to believe. But her eoD-
demnation of him did not blind her to the impropriety of
their having been written at all ; and she was ulently
gneving over the imprudenoe which bad hazarded su(^
unsolldted proofs of tenderness, not warranted by any
thing preceding, and most severely condemned by the event,
when Marianne, perceiving that she had flnished the letten^
observed to her diat they contained nothing bnt what auj
one would hare written in the same situation.
" I felt myaelf, " she added, " to be as solemnly engaged
to him aa if the -atricteat l^al covenant had bound na
to each otho. "
" 1 can believe it, " said Elinor ; " but nnfintunat^ he
did not feel the same. "
" He did feel the same, Elincn — for weeh and weeks
he mt it. I know he did. Whatever may have dtanged-
him now (and nothing hut the blackest art employed
gainst me can have dtme it), I vras onoe aa dear to him
M my own soul could wish. This lock of hair, which now
he can so readily give up, was begged of me with the moat'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
aum AND mraiBiLtTT. 161
nraest mpplicMion. Had joa aeen fail look, hit nuumcr,
had you h^id his voice at tlut moment 1 Have jou fiir <
got the last ereniag of oui being tc^ether at Barton ? The
norniiig that we parted too ! When he told me that it .
loight be man; weeks before we met again - > hia distreaa
; — can I ever forget his disticaa f "
For a moment or two she could say no more ; but when
this emotion had paued away, she added, in a firmer tone, —
" £lmor, I have been cruelly used ; but not by Wil-
loughby. "
" Dearest Marianne, who but himself ? By whom can
he have been instigated? "
" By all the world, rather than by bis own heart. . I
could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance
leagued t(^ether to ruin me in his opinion, than behere -
hia nature capable of Buch crudty. Thia woman of whom
he writeH — whoever she be — or any one, in short, but
your own dear self, mamma, and Edward, may have been bo
bsrbarouE to belie me. Beyond you three, is there a crea-
ture in the world whom 1 would not rather suspect of evil
than Willoughhy, whose heart I know so well ? "
Elinor would not contend, and only repUed, " Whoever
jnay have been so detestably your enemy, let them be
cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sister, by
seeing how nobly the conidonsnesa of your own innocence
and good intentions supports your spirits. It is a reason-
able Mid laudable pride'which resists such malevolence. "
" No, no, " cried Marianne, " misery such as mine has
no pride. I care uot who knows that I am wretched. The
^tunph of leeing me so may be open to all the world.
.^t^or, Ehnor, they who aufibr Uttle may be proud and
independent as they like — may resist insult, or return
xoOTtificatioB — but I cannot. I must feel — I must be
wretched — and they are welcome to ei^oy the couscioua-
^lessof it that can. "
" But for my mother's sake-andmine "
" I would do more than for my own. But to appear
Jiappy when I am so miserable — oh, who can requiie
it? "
. Again they wei? both silent. £linor was employed ia
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
miking tbonghtruUj from the fire to the window, from
the window to the fire, without knowing that she received
wumth from one, or discerning objecia through the other ;
and Marianne, seated at the foot of the hed, with her
head leaning against one of its poata, again took up Wil-
loughbj's letter, and, after ahuddering orer every sentence,
exclaimed, —
" It is too much ! Oh, Wiilongfabj, Willoughby, conld
thii be yours ? Cruel, cruel — nothing can acquit yon.
EhnoT, nothing can, Whatever he might have heard againit
me, ought he not to have suspended his belief f ought
he not to have told me of it, to have given me the power
«f clearing myself ?'The lock of hair (repeating it from
the letter) which you so obUgin^y bestowed on me —
that it unpardonable. Willoughby, where was your heart
when you ¥frote thdse words ? Oh, harbanhisly insolent I
— Elinor, can he be justified f "
" No, Marianne, in no possible way. "
" And yet this woman — who knows what her art may
have been ? — how long it may have been premeditated, and
how deeply contrived by her ! — Who is she? — Who can
^e be ? — Whom did I ever hear him talk of as yonng
and attractive among hia female acquaintance? — Ob, no
one, no one : — he talked to me only of myaelf. "
Another pause ensued ; Marianne was greatly agitated,
and it ended thus : —
" Elinor, I must go home. I must go'and comfort
mamma. Cannot we be gone to > monow f "
" To-morrow, Marianne ! "
" Yea ; why should I stay here P I oame only for WS-
loughby's sake — ■ and now who cares for me f Who
i^jards me ? "
" " It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe
Mrs. Jennings much more than civility ; and dvility of die
commonest kind must prevent snch a bMty removal as
that. "
" Well then, another day or two, perhaps ; but I can >
Bot stay here long; I cannot stay to endure the questions
and remarks of all these people. The Middletons and
Falmera— how am I to bear their pity i The jdty of rach
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
a womin u Ltd; Middleton ! Oh, what woald he nj n
that? "
Elinar advised her to lie down again, and for a inoiDetit
■be did so ; Init no attitude Oonid give her ea«e ; and in
mtlem pain of mind and body she moTcd from one posture
to another, till, growing more and more hysterical, her sister
could with difficulty keep hei on the bed at all, and for
some time waa feajful of being constrained to call for
ainstance. Some lavender drops, however, which she wt >
at length persuaded to take, were of use ; and from that
time till Mn. Jennings returned she continued on the bed
quiet and motionless.
CHAPTER VIII.
Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room iHi her
return, and widiout waiting to have her request of ad-
mittance answered, opened the door and walked in with «
hxdc of real concern.
" How do you do, my dear ? " said she, in a voice of
great compassion to Marianne, who turned away her fact
without attempting to answer.
" How is she. Hiss Dashwood } Poor thing ! she
looks very bad. No wonder. Ay, it is but too true.
He is to be married very soon — a good-for-nothing fellowl
I have no patience with him. Mrs. Taylor told me of it
b^ an hour ago, and she was told it by a particular friend
of Miss Grey herself, else I am rare I should not hava
baheved it ; and 1 wu almost ready to sink u it was.
Well, said 1, all 1 can say U, that if it is true, he hss
used a young lady of my acquaintance abominably ill, and
I wish with all my soul his wife may plague hia heait out.
And so I shall always aay, my dear, you may depend on it.
I have no notion of men's going on in this way ; and if
ever I meet him again, I will give him such a dressing aa
he has .not bid thia many a day. But there ia one con»q
M S
DoliiHihyGoOgle
J64 iBNSB Aim uMBiBiLrrr.
Airt, my dear Miu Marianne — he m not die only young
man in the world north having ; and with your pretty
face you will never want admirerd. Well, poor thing ! 1
won't disturb her any longer, for she had better have her
try out at once and have done with it. The Farrys and
SanderBona luckily are coming to-night, yon know, and
that will amuse her, "
She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the
room, tm if she supposed her young friend's affliction could
t > e increaBed by noise.
1 Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determioed on
dining with tbeni. Elinor even advised her against it.
But " no, she would go down ; she could bear it very
well, and the bustle about her would be less. " Elinor,
pleased to have her governed for a moment hy such a
motive, though believing it hardly possible that she could
sit out the dinner, said no more ; and adjusting her dress
for her as well as she could, while Marianne still remained
on the hed, was ready to assist her into the dining room as
soon as they were summoned to it.
Wbea thwe, though looking most wrelchedly, she ate
more, and was calmer than her sister had expected. Bad
she tried to speak, or had she been conscious of half Mrs.
Jennings's well meant but ill-judged attentions to her, this
calmness could not have been maintained ; but not a
ayllable escaped her lips ; and the abstraction of her thonghts
preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing
before her.
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's khidness,
though its efihsions were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridicidous, made her those acknowledgments, and
returned her dioee civilities, which her sister could not
make or return for hersdf. Their good friend saw that
Marianne was unhappy, and f«dt that every thing was due
to her which might make her at all less so. She treated
her, therefore, with all the indulgent fondness of a parent
towards a favourite child on the .last day of its holidays.
Marianne was to have the heat place by the fire, was to be
tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, ami to be
■J & uied by the rdatioB of all the ne^a of the day. Had
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
i6S'
not Elinor, in die cad countenance of hei aiater, seen a
check to all mirth, she could have been entotained by'
Mrs. Jenninga'e endeavoura to cure a duappcnntnient in
love, by a variety of eweetmeaia andolivea, andsgood fire.'
Ar soon, bowerer, as the coDsdoagnen of all thia waa
forced by continnal repetition on Marianne, she could atay
no longer. With a haaty exclamation of misery, and a
aign to her sister not to follow her, she directly got up and
hurried out of the room.
" Poor Bool I " cried Mn. Jenninga, aa aoon aa she waa
gone, " how it grieves me to see her! And I declare if
the is not gone away without finishing her wine ! And the
dried cherries too .'Lord ! nothing seems to do her any
good. I am sure if I knew of any diing she would like, f
would send all over the town for it. Well, It ia the oddest
diing to me, that a man should nae aadi a pretty girl ao'
ill ! But when there ia plenty of money on one ^e, and-
next to none on die other. Lord bless you ! they care no'
more abovt such things ! "
" The lady, then, — Miss Grey, I think yon called ber,
—is very riebf "
" Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever aee-
her } a smart, stylish girl, they say, bat not tumdaome. I
remember her aunt very wdl, Biddy Henshawe ; she
married a very wealthy man. Bat the family are all ridi
together. Fifty thousand pounds ! and by all accomats it-
won't come before it'a wuited; for they say he ia all to
pieces. No wonder I daahing about with hia curricle and'
hunters ! Well, it don't dgnify talking; but when a young "
man, be he who he will, comes and msJces love to a pretty >
girl, and promises marriage, he has no business to fly off
from his word, only because he grows poor, and a richer'
girl ia ready to have him. Why don't he, in auch a case,
sell his horses, let hia house, torn off his servants, and-
make a thorough reform at once i I warrant you, Misa'
Marianne would have been ready to wait till matters earner
round. But that won't do now-a-days ; nothing in thee
way of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men «E
diia age. "
a 8 ■
DoliiHihyGoOgle
" I neves heird any hum of her ; indeed I hirdly ever
beanl hei mentioned ; except that Mrs. Taylor did say this
moming, that one day Misa Walker hinted to her, that Bhe
believed Mr. and Hn. Ellison would not be aony to have
Min Grey married, for the and Hra > Ellison conld never
■eree, "
" And who are ihe Ellisons ?
" Her gnaTdiani, my dear. But now she is of age, and
may choose for herself; and a pretty choice she haa
made 1 — What now, " after psnaing a moment, " your
poor sister is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by
berself. Is there nothing one can get to comfort her?
Poor dear, it seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well,
by-tnd-by we shall have a few friends, and that will
NDnise her a little. What shall we [day at ? She hates
whist, I know ; but u there no round game she cares
for? "
" Dear ma'am, this Idndoess is quite nnneeenary.
Marianne, I dare say, will not leave her room again this
erening. I shall persuade hei, if I can, to go early to
bed, for I un sure she wants resL "
" Ay, I believe Ihst will be best for her. Let her
name her own .jupper, and go to bed. Lord ! no wonder
die has been looking so had and so cast down this last
week or two, fw this matter I suppose haa been hanging
over her head as kng as that. And so the letter that csme
to-day flnisbed it I Poor soul I I am sure if I had had ft
Dotioa of it, I would not have joked her about it ftir all my-
tnoney. But then, yon know, how should I guess such ft
ddng i I made sure of its being nothing but a common
love letter, aad you know yonng people like to be laughed
at about them. Lord ! how concerned Sir John and my
danghteis will be when they hear it I If I had had mj
senses about me I might have called in Conduit Street in
mj way home, and told than of it. Bnt I shall see than
" It would be unneceasary, I am sure, for yon to cantion
Mra. Palmer and Sir John against ever naming Mr. Wil-
UHBB AND RBHSIBILITT. it^
loagbbj, or raabiDg the slightest alliuion to what has paswd,'
before raj «iBter. Their own good-nkture must poiot oat
to tbem the real ctuelt; of spearing to know an; thing <
about it when «he ii preseot ; aad the lesa that may ever
be Hid to mytelf on the subject, the more mj feelings will
be spared, m you, my dear madam, will easily belieTe. "
" Oh, hord ! yes, that I do indeed. It must be ceni >
Ue for you to hesi it talked of; and as for your sister, I
am sure I would not menttoii a word about it to her for
the world. You saw I did not all dinner lime. No mora
would Sir John nor my daughters, for they are all rery
thoughtful and considerate ; especially if I give them a hint,
as I certainly will. For my part, 1 think the less Uiat is
•aid about such things the better, the sooner'til blown
over and forgoL And what good doea talking ever do, you
" In this R^r it can only do haixQ ; more so, perhaps,
duninmany casesof a similar kind; for it has been attended
by drcamstances, which, for the sake of every one con-
cerned in it, make it unfit to become the public conversation.
I must do thU justice to Mr. Willoughby — he has broken
no positive engagement with my sister. "
" Law, my dear ! Don't pretend to defend hira. N»
positive eitgagement indeed ! after taking her all over AUen-
ham House, and fixing on the very rooms they were to live ,
in hereafter I "
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject
Darther, and she hoped it was not required of her for Wil-
lougbby's ; since, though Marianne might lose much, ha
could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
After a short ^ence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings, with all
ber natural hilarity, burst forth again.
" Well, niy dear,'tis a true saying about an ill wind,
ibr it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He will
have her at hut ; ay, that he will. Mind me, now, if ih^
an't muried by Midsunmier. Lord 1 how he'll chuckleovev
this news ! I hope he will come to-night. It will be all
to one a better match for your sister. Two thousand »
year without debt or drawback — except the little lavft <
«hild, indeed; ay, I had foi^ot her ; but ahe may be'pren-
X 4,
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
ticed out Rt motO cost, and then wh«t doea it aignify?
Itelaford ii a nice place, I can tell you ; exactly what I
call ■ nice old faahioned place, foil of comforta and conTe-
niences; quite shut in with great garden walk that aie
covered with the beat fruit-trees in the counO^ ; and mdi
a mulberrj tree in one comer I Lord ! how Charlotte and
I did Btuff the only time we were there ! Then, there is
a dovecote, some delightful atewponda, and a Tery pretty
canal; and everything, in short, that one could wiah for;
and, moreovo', it ia close to the ditirch, and only a quarter
of a mile Irom the turnpike-road, so'tis never dull, for if
you only go and dt up in an old yew arbour behind tbe
house, you may see all the carriages that pass along. Oh,
*tia a nice place ! A butcher hard by in the village, and the
paraonage-house within a stone's throw. To my fancy, a
thouaand times pretder than Barton Park, where they are
farced U > send three miles for their meat, and have not a
neighbour nearer than your mother. Well, I shall spirit
^ the Cotond as soon as I can. One shoulder of mutton,
you know, drives another down. If we can but put WTl-
bnighby out of her head ! "
" Ay, if we can but do that, ma'am, " sAid Elinor, " we
ahall do very well with or without CiJonel Brandon. " And
then rising, she went away to join Marianne, whom she
found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning, in ailoit
misery, over the amall remains of a fire, which, till Elinor'a
entrance, had been her only light.
" You had better leave me, " was all the notice that her
Bster received from her.
" I will leave you, " said Elinor, " if you will go to
bed. " But this, from the momentary pervetaeness of im-
patient suffering, she at first refused to do. Her sister's
earnest, though gentle persuasion, however, soon softoied
her to compliance ; and Elinor saw her lay her aching head
on the pillow, and saw ber, as she hoped, in a way to get
■ome quiet rest befbre she lefl her.
In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was
■pon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine glass, fvSl of
amnediing, in her hand.
- " My dear, " aaid she, enterii^ " I have juat recftUeeled'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
nma and mniBiLnnr. 169
that I bxie arane of tlie finert old CoDslsniiK vine in the
bouK that ever was taited, m I have broi^ht a glaas of it
Sot jour (tater. My poor husband ! how fond he wu of it i
Whenever he had a touch of hii old colicky goat, ha lud
it did him more good than any thing elie in the woHd.
Do lake it to yonr siiter. "
" Dear ma'am, " replied Elinor, smiling at the difitrence
of Uie complaints fbr which it waa recommended, " how
good you are ! But I have jnit left Marianne in bed, and,
I hope, almost asleep ; and as I think nothing will be of so
much service to her as rest, if you will give me leave, I will
drink the wine myself. "
Mrs. JenniDgs, though r^retting that die had not been
five minutes earlier, waa satisfied with the compronuBe ;
and Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of it, reflected, that
tbongh its good effects on a eoUclcy gout were, at present,
of little importance to her, its healing powers, on a disap-
pointed heart, might be as reasonably tried on herself U on
her sister.
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea;
and by his msnner of looking round the room fbr Marianne,
Elinor immediately fancied that he ndther expected nor
wished to see her there, and, in short, that he was already
aware of what occasioned her sbienee. Mrs. Jennings was
not struck by the same thonght ; for, soon after his en-
trance, she walked acroasjthe room to the tea-taUe where
JElinor presided, and whkpered, " The Colonel looks as
grave as ever, you see : be knows oothing of it : do tell him,
my dear. "
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to heis, and,
wilh a look which perfectly assured her of his good inform-
ation, enquired after her lister.
" Marianne is not well, " said she. " She has been in*
disposed all day, and we have persuaded her to go to bed. "
" Perhaps, then, " he hesitatingly replied, " what I heard
this morning may be — there may be more trath in it than
I could iKlieve possible at first. "
" What did you hear P "
" That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think — in
ibat, that a man, whom I ftnaw to be engaged— but bow
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■hall I tell jon ? If you know it idreadyi m nrdy 701P
must, I m^; be Bpored. "
" You mean, " answered £liDor, with forced calmnefl^
" Mr. Wi]loughb;*B muriage with Miss Grey. Yea, we
do know it all. This aeems to have been « day of genaal
eincidatioo, for this very morning first unfolded it to ut.
Mr. WiUoughby ia unfalhtKnable ! Wliere did you bear it ? "
" laaBtatioiier'iBhopin Pall Mall, where Ihadbuuoesi.
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage, and one of
Uiem was giving the other an account of the intended
matcb,ina voice BO Uttle attempting concealment, that it was
impossible for me not to hear alL The name of WiUooghby,
John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
attention ; and what fallowed was a positive assertion th^
every thing was now finally settled respecting bis marriage
with Miss Grey — it was no longer to be a secret — it would
take place even within a few weeks, with many particulata
of preparations and other mattera. One thing, espedallj,
I remember, becauseitserved to identify the man still more:
— as soon as the cerem < my was ovw, they were to go to
Combe Magna, bis seat in SoroerBetsbire. My aatonisli-
ment 1 — but it would be imposuble to describe wbat I felt.
The communicative lady I learnt, on enquiry, — for I stayed
in the shop till they were gone, — was a Mrs. KUison, and
that, as I have been since informed, ia the name of Miae
Grey's guardiau. "
" It is. But have you likewise beard diat Miss Givj
has fifty thousand pounds? In that, if in any thing, we
may And an explanation. "
" It may be so ; but WiUoughby is capable — at least I
think " He stopped a moment ; then added, in a voite
which seemed to distrust itself, " And your aister, — how
did she ■■
" Her Bufierings have been very severe. I have onl^r
to hope that they may be proportionably ^Mnrt. It ho*
been, it is a most cruel affliction. Till yesterday, I be.
lieve, she never doubted bis regard ; and even now, p < r-
haps — but /am almost convinced that he never was really
attached to her. He has been very decntful ! and, in
•nne punts, dure wKSoa ■ hatdnew of heart about him. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
X7l
" Ah I " Mid Colonel Bnndoiij " there is, indeed I But
yma sister does not — I think you wid to — she does not
MOnder it quite m yoa do ? "
" You know her disposition, uid may beUere how eagerly
die would still Justify him if she could. "
He made no answer ; and soon afterwuds, by the re-
moval of the tea-things, and the sTTangemeiit of the card
. parties, the sutgect was necessarily dropped. Mra. Jennings,
who had watdied them with pleawire while they woe
taUdng, and who expected to see the efibct of Miss Daah-
wood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety m
Colonel Brandon's side, •■ might have become a man in
lite bloom of youth, of hope, and happiness, saw him, with
■maMment, remain the whole evening more aerioaa and
dwughtftil IbannMul.
CHAPTER IX.
From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Ma-
rianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of
misery in which she had closed her eyes.
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of
what she felt; and before breakfast was ready they had
gone through the subject agun and again ; wiUi the same
steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side,
the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on
Uariaune'sj aa before. Sometimes she could believe Wil-
lougbby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself,
and at otliers lost every consolation in the imposaihility of
acquitting him. At one moment she was absolutely in-
different to the obaervation of all the world; at another,
she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a third,
could resist it with energy. In one thing, however, she
was unifonn, when it came to the point, in avoiding,
where it was posdble, the presence of Mrs. Jennings, and
in a determined mloice when oUiged to endure it. Her
DoliiHihyGoOgle
l72 mm tun uNnSiuTT.
liewt wu hardened tgunBt the belief of Mn. JenniDgs's
entering into her hoitowh with enj compisBion.
" No, no, no, it cannot be, " she cried ; " die cannot
ted. Ha IdndneM is not sympathy ; her good-nature !■
not tendernesB. All that she wants is gossip ; and she only
Ukes me now because I supply it. "
Elinor had not needed diis to be assured of the iixjnstice
to which her sister was often led in her opinion of others,
by the irritable reflneinent of her own mind, and the too
great importance placed by her on the delicacies of a strong
sensibility, and the graces of a polished manner. Like
half the rest of the world, if more than half there be that
are clever and good, Marianne, with ezcellent abilities and an
excellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid.
She expected from other people the same opinions and feel-
ings SB hw own, and she judged of their motives by the
immediate efi^t of their actions on herself. Thus a dr-
cumatance occurred, while the dsters were tc^ether in their
own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mrs.
Jennings atill lower in her esdmstion ; because, through
her own weaknesi, it chanced to prove a source of fresh
pain to herself, though Mrs. Jennings w^b governed in it
by an impulae of the utmost good-will.
With a letter in her out-stretched hand, and countenance
gaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she
entered their room, saying, —
" Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure
will do you good. "
Marianne heard enough. In one moment her imagination
placed before her a tetter from Willoughhy, full of ten-
derness and contrition, explanatory of all that had passed,
satisfactory, convincing ; and instantly followed by Wil-
longhby himself, rushing eagerly into the room to enfbrcej
ftt her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurancea
of his letter. The work of one moment was destroyed by
the next. The hand. writing of her mother, nera till then
unwelcome, wss before her ; and, in the acuteness of die
disappointment which followed such an ecstasy of more
than hope, the felt as if, till that instant, she had nevci
wotknA.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
171
The cruelty of Mn. Jeoninga no luigxuige, withia her
Teach in her roomentB of bappieit eloqoeiice, could have
expressed ; ind now she could leproach her otdj by the
te*is which BtTeamed from her eyei with pudonate ridenoe;
— a reproach, however, so entirely lost on its o^ect, that,
after raany expresuons of pity, she withdrew, itiU referring
her to the letter for comfort. But the letter, when «he wta
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort. Willoughbj
filled every page. Her mother, atill confident of their en-
gagement, and relying as warmly as ever on his constancy,
had only been roiued by Elinor's applicatioD, to entreat
from Marianne greater openness towards them both ; and
this, witb such teademess towards her, such afibction for
Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future hai > -
pinesB in deb other, that she wept with agony through the
whole of it.
All her impatience to be at home again now returned;
her mother was dearer to her than ever ; dearer through
the very excess of her mistaken confidence in WiUoughby,
and she was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor, unaUe her-
self to determine whether it were better for Marianne to b«
in Iiondon or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own, ex-
cept of patience till their mother's wishes could be known ;
and at length ihe obtained her sister's consent to wait for
that knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings left them earUer than usual ; for she could
not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were Me to
grieve as much as herself; and positively refusing Elinor'a
oSered attenduice, went out alone for the rest of the room-
ing. Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the pain
she was going to communicate, and perceiving, by Marianne'a >
letter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation
for it, then sat down to write her mother an account of what
had passed, and entreat her directions for the futnre ; while
Marianne, who came into the drawing-room on Mrs. Jen-
nings's going away, remained fixed at the table where Elinor
wrote, watching the advancement of her penj grieving over
her for the hardship of such a task, and griering itUl more
fbndly over its effect on ba mother.
In tliis mannet they bad continued about a quartet of an
DoliiHihyGoOgle
1T4 mm un >
honr, when Hariuine, whoie Dorei could not then heu
any eudden noite, was sUrtled bj s rap at the door.
" Who tan this be ? " cried Elinor. " SoeariytooII
thought we had been safe. "
Matianne mored to the window.
" It ig Colonel BrandoD ! " aaid she, with vexation. " W«
■M never aafe from Mm. "
" He will not come in aa Hra. Jenninga is from home. "
• " I will not tniat to that, " reUeating to her own room.
" A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no
conacienee in his intmsion on that of others. "
The event proved her coDjectore rig^t, though it was
founded on injustice and error ; for Colonel Brandon J4d
eome in ; and Elinor, who was convinced that wlidtude for
Marianne brought him thither, and who saw Aat solidtnde
in his disturbed and roelancholj look, and in hia anxioui
though brief enquiry after her, could not forgive her slater
for esteeming him so lightly.
" I met Mrs. Jennings iu Bond Street, " aaid he, after
ifae 6rKt salutatiDn, " and she encouraged me to come on }
and I was the more easily enconraged, because I thongfatit
probable that I might find you alone, which I was very
desirous of doing. My abject — my wish — my sole widi
in desiring it — 1 hope, I bdieve it is — is to be a meana
of giving comfort ; — no, I must not say comfort — not
present comfort — but conviction, lasting conviction to your
■iater'a mind. My regard for her, for yourself, for yoor.
mother — will yon allow me to prove it, by relating Bome
drcumatances which nothing bat a very dncere r^ard —
notbii^ but an earnest desire of being useful — I think
I am justified — though where so many hours have bem
spent in convincing myself that I am right, is there not
•ome reason to fear I may be wrong? " He stopped.
" I understand ymi, " said Eliiior. " You have some-
thing to tell me of Mr. Willooghby, that will open his cha-
Eacter futher. Your telling it will be the greatest act of
friendship that can be shown Marianne. Mg giatitade will
'be ensured immediately by any information tending to that
end, and Aer < must be gained by it in time. Pray, pnf
let me hear it. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
178
" You slmll ; wd, to be brief, when I quitl*d Barton
lut October, — but this will gire you do ides — I miut go
fartlMr back. You will find me a verj awkward narrator,
Uiis Daabwood ; I hardly know where to begin. A ebert
account of myself, I bdieve, will be necenary, and it tkatt
be a abort one: On sudi a Bubject, " dghiug heavily, " I
can have little lemptation to be diffuse. "
Hettopt a moment for recollection, and tb«i, with another
i^h, went on.
" Von have probably entirely forgotten a conversation —
(i[ is not to be supposed diat it could make any impression
OB yon) — a conversation between us one evening at Barton
Park — it was the evening of a dance — Jn which I alluded
to a lady I bad once known, as resembling, in some mea-
mre, your sister Marianne. "
" Indeed, " answered Elinor, " I have not fo^otlen it. "
He looked pleased by this remembrance, and added, —
" If I am not decsived by the uncertainty, the partiality
of tender recollection, there is a very strong resemblance
between them, as wdl in mind as person. The same
warmth of heart, the same eagerness of fancy and spirits.
This lady was one of my nearest relations, an orphan from
her infancy, and under the guardianship of ray father. Our
agea were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we
were playfellows and friends. J cannot remember the time
when I did not love Eliza ; and my afi«ctian for her, as we
grew up, was such, as, perhaps, judging from] my present
fiR'lorD and dieerless gravity, you might think me incapable
«f having ever felt. Hers, for me, was, I believe, fervent
•a the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willau);hby, and it
was, though from s different cause, no less unfortunate. At
seventeen she was lost to me for ever. She teas married-
married against her inclination to my brodicr. Her fortune
was large, and our family estate much encumbered. And'
this, I fear, is all that can be said for the conduct of one,
who was at once her uncle and guardian. My brother did
not deserve her; he did not even love her. I bad hoped
tkat her regard for me would suj^rart her under any diffi <
flulty, and for some time it did; hut at last the misery of her
■itaatian, for die experienced great unkmdnesa, overcaina
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
176 BBMBB J
all ber resolution, and thongfa she had pivmUed me diat
pothing — but how bliodly I relate! I have never ^told
you how thiB was brought on. We were within a few
hours of eloping tt^.tber for Scotland. The trefchery, or
the folly, of my cousin'i maid betrayed ua. I waa banished
to the houBe of a relation far distant, and she was allowed
no liberty, no Bociety, no amusement, till my father's point
waa gained. I had depended on her fortitude too far, and
the blow was a severe one ; — but had her marriage beeik
happy, BO young as I then was, a few monthi must have
reconciled me to it, or at least 1 should not have now to
lament it. Thu, however, waa not die case. My brother
had no regard for ber ; his jJeasures were not what they
ought to have been, and from the first he treated her ua_
kindly. The consequence of this, upon a mind so young,
ao lively, bo inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too
natural. She resigned herself at first to all the misery of
her situation ; and happy had it been if she had not lived
to overcome those regrets which the remembruice of ine
occasioned. But can we wonder that, with such a husband
to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to advise or
restrain her, (for my father Jived only a few months after
their marriage, and 1 was with my regiment in the East
Indies,] Bhe should fall f Had 1 remained in England, per-
haps, — but I meant to promote ,the happiness of both by
removing from her for years, and for that purpose bad pro-
cured my exchange. The shock which her marriage had
given me, " he continued, in a voice of great agitation, " was
of trifling weight — was nothing to what I felt when I
heard, about two years afterwards, of her divorce. It waa
iAot which threw this gloom, — even now the recollection
of what I Bufered "
He could aay no more, and, rising hastily, walked for a
few minutes about the room. Elinor, affected by his re-
lation, and Biill more by his distress, could not speak. Ha
saw ber concern, and coming to her, took her hand, pressed
it, and kissed it with gratefid respect. A few minutes more
of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composunv
" It was nearly three years after thie unhappy perio^
Ixfore I letumed to Eogknd. My first cat^ when I did
DoliiHihyGoOJ^Ic
MDIBE AND fEintBn.nT. 177
urive, «u of course to seek for her ; but the sear^ wu
ta fraitlees u it was melancholy. I could not trace her
beyond her firit seducer, «nd there was every reason to fear
that she had removed from him only to sink lieeper in k
life of ain. Her Ic^al allowance was not adequate to her
fortune, nor sufficient for her comfortable maintenance;
and I learnt from my brother that the power of receiving
it had been made over some montha before to another per-
son. He imagined, and calmly could he im^ne it, that
her estravagance, and conseijnent distress, had obliged her
to dispose of it tor some immediate relief. At last, how-
ever, and after I had been six months in England, I did
find her. Regard for a former servant of my own, who
had since fallen into misfortune, carried me to visit him in
t spunging-house, ytbere he waa confined for debt ; and
there. In the same house, under a similar confinement, was
my unfortunate sister. So altered — so faded — worn
down by acute suffering of every kind ! hardly could I
believe the melancholy and sickly ffgure before me, to be
the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on whom
I had once doted. What I endured in so beholding hel
— but I have no right to wound your feelings hy attempt-
ing to describe it — I have pained you too much already.
That she was, to all appearance, in the last stage of a con-
sumption, was — yes, in such a situation, it was my greatest
comfort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving
time for a better preparation for death ; and that was given.
I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and onder proper
attendants ; I visited her every day during the rest of her
short life: I was with her in her last moments. "
Again he atopped to recover himself; and Elinor apoke
her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern at the fate
of his unfortunate friend.
" Your sister, I hope, cannot be oSbnded, " said he,
■ " by the resemblance I have fancied between her and my
poor disgraced relation. Their fates, their fortunes, cannot
he the same j and had the natural sweet disposition of the
one been guarded hy a firmer mind, or a happier marriage,
isbe might have been all that you will hve to see the othec
be. But to what does all this lead ? I *enn to have bees
HihyGoogle
yt9 MMHtm A
diitreuing jva for nothing. Ah \ HiM Duhwood — ft
subject such SB this — untouched for fomtecn years — it u
dangerouB to handle it at all ! I wiU be more collected — ■
more concise. She left to my care her only child, a little
girl, tlie oKpring of her firat guilty connectionj who was
dmk about three yean (dd. She loved the child, and had
always kept it with her. It was a valued, ■ precious trust
to me ; and glftdly would I have dischu^ed it in the striet-
«8t sense, by watching over her education myaelf, bad ^
nature of our lituationi allowed it ; but I had no family,
no home; and my little Eliia wai, therefore, placed at
■chool. I saw her there whenever I could ; and after the
death of my brother (which happened about five yeais sgi^
and which left to me the possession of the family property,)
■he frequently visited me at Delaford. I called her a dis-
tant relation ; but J am well aware that I have in general
been snipected of a much nearer ctmnection with her. It
ia now three yean ago (ahe had juat reached her foniieratb
year) that I removed her from school, to place her under
the care of a very respectable woman, residing in Doraet.
shire, who had the charge of four or five other girls of
about the same time of Ufe ; and for two yean I had every
reason to be pleased with her situatioB. Bat lost Fehniary,
almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared. I
had allowed her, (imprudently, as it has aince turned out,)
at her eamert desire, to go to Bath with one of her young
& iends, who was attending her fstha there for hii bealtlk
I knew him to be a very good sort of man, and I thoi^^
well of his daughter — better tiian she des^ved ; iot, with
a most obatinate and itl-judged secrecy, ahe would tell
nothing, would give tio clue, though she certainly knew aU.
He, her father, a well.4neaning, but not a quidbsighted
man, could really, I beUeve, give ni > information ; for he
had been gmetallj confined to the house, while the girts
were ranging otn the town, and makii^ what acqiuintanea
ihey chose ; and be tried la ecnvince me, aa tberou^y as
he was convinced himself, i£ hia daughter's bcHig enliTdy
unconcerned in the bu & neHs. In shw^ I eould learn nok
thii« but that she WBi gjone; all the rest, iat eight long
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mm Am bbhubiutt.'179
-HHtnths, WM left to conjectore. Whit I tbought, nhat I
feared, may be imagined ; and what I goStred too. "
" Good hesTsna I " cried Elinor, " conld it be — catH
Wmaa$bhjl " —
" The flnt newa that reached me of her, " he contlnned,
" ewne in a letter from herielf, last October. It was for-
wtrded to rae from Delaford, and I received it on the very
morning of our intended party to Whitwell ; and this was
the reason of my leaving Barton so soddenly, which I am
anre nmst at the time have appeared itrange to every body,
■nd which I believe gave oKnce to aome. Little did
Mr. Willonghby imagine, I auppoae, when hia look* een-
Bored me far incivility in breaking np the party, that I
waa called away to the relief of one whom he had made
poor and miaeraUe ; but had he known it, what would it
bave availed f Would he have been len gay or leas happy
in the smiles of your aister ? No, he had already done dial,
which no man who con feel t < « another wonld do. He
bad left the giil whoie youth Md innocence he had ad-
duced in a dtua^on of Uie utmost distress, with no ote^
^itaUe home, no help, no friends. Ignorant of his address !
He had left her, promiring to return ; he neither retnmed,
oar wrote, nor relieved her. "
" This is beyond every thing ! " esclaimed EHnor.
" His character is now before you, — expensive, dissi-
pated, and worse than both. Knowing all iMa, as I bavfc
now known it many weeks, gBeea what I must have felt ah
•Ming your sister as fond of him as ever, and on beln^
asaored that she waa to marry Um : guess what I rnnat
have felt for alt your sakes. When I came to y(M kat
week and found yoQ alone, I came determined to know the
• truth ; though irresolute what to do when it wot known.
My behaviour nmst bave seemed strange to you then ; but
now you will comprehend it. To suffer you all to be so
deceived ; to see your dster — but what could I do? I had
no hope of interferii^ with Bu«%sa ; and sometimes I
thoogfat your sister's inflnence might yet reclaim him. But
BOW, after Bieb. dishonmirable usage, who can tell what
were his deaigns oD her ? Whatever they may have been,
however, she may mm, and hereafter doDhtless «Mff, turn
» S
HihyGoogle
'180 misH J
Willi gratitude'toward* her own condition, when she coid-
pares it with that of mj poor Bliza ; when she conaiden
'the wretched and hopdesa aituation of this poor girl, and
pictures her to herself, with au affection for him as sirong,
.Btill M itrong aa her own, and with a mind tormented by
■elf-reproach, whidi inuat attend her throu(^ life. Snrdf
thia compariaon must have its use with her. She will fed
Iter own Bufferings to be nothing : they proceed from no
miscouduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the contrary,
.every friend must be made atill more her friend by them.
Concern for her unhappinesa, and respect for her fortitude
■indei it, must strengthen every attachment. Uae your
own discretion, however, in communicating to her what I
have told you. You muat know best what will be itaeS^t;
but had I not seriously, and from my heart believed it
might be of service, might lessen her regrets, 1 would not
have suffered myself to trouble yon with this account of
my family afflictions, — with a redtal which may seem
to have been intended to raise myself at the expeuae of
others. "
'Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful ear-
jKstoeBB ; attended, too, with the asaurance of her expecCiDg
material advantage to Marianne from the communicatioii
of what had passed.
" I have been more pained, " said she, " by her endea-
^Tours to acquit him than by all the reat ; for it iiritales her
mind more than the moat perfect conviction of bia un-
worthiness can do. Now, though at first ^e will suff^
touch, I am sure she will soon become easio'. Have you, "
■he continued, after a short silence, " ever seen Mr. Wil-
loughby since you left him at Barton ? "
" Yes, " he relied gravely, " once I have. One meeting,
was unavoidable. "
. EEnor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,
■aying,—
" What ! have you met him to ■ "
" I could meet him in no other way. Eliza had con < >
fened to me, diough most rduclantly, the name of her
lover ; and when be returned to town, which Was within a
(ortuigbt after myself, we met by appointment; he to de-
D,™i,;f < ihvG0*)^lc
OEMBB AND nNUBIUTT- 161.
fend, I to punish his condnet. We returned unwoanded,
•nd the meeting, therefore, never got ahrocd. "
Elinor sighed over the fuided necerait; of this ; bnt to
■ man and a soldier she premimed not to cenmre it
" Such, " said Colonel Brandon, after a pauee, " hu
been the unhappy resemhlance between the fate of mother,
and daughter; and so imperfectly have I diichai^ed taj
tmst. "
" Is she still in town ? "
" No ; as soon as she recoTered from her lying-in, for I
feond her near her delivery, I removed her and her child
Into the country, and there she remains. "
BecoUecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably di-
viding Elinw from her sister, he put an end to hia viMt,
Jvceiving from her again the same grateM aclcnowle^-
ments, and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for
CHAPTER X.
Wbbk the particular! of this conversation were r^ealed
by Miss Dashwood to her aister, •■ they very soon were,
the effect on her was not entirely such as the former bad
boped to see. Not that Marianne appeared to distruBt the
truth of any part of it, for she listened to it all with the
moat steady and submissive attention, made neither ol(jec-
tion nor remark, attempted no vindication of WiUoughby,
and seemed to show by her tears that she felt it to be im-
possible. But though Ais behaviour assured Elinor diat
tbe conviction of this guilt wa# carried home to her mind,
though she saw with satisfaction the effect of it, in her no
longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called, in her
speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind ci
compasaiooate respect, and thoagh ahe saw her spirits leM
violently irritated than before, ahe did not see her k**
wretched. Her mind did bfctwne settled, but it was settled
K S
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
1B2'semB urn
ID a. gloomy d^eetion. Sbe felt the lou of WiOou^hbyV
character yet more hearily th«a she bad felt the loM of hia,
heart ; his seduction and deEertion of Miss WiUlama, the
jnisery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what bia deugns^
mi^t once have been on herself, preyed tltogetber bo
much on her Epirite, tbM ebe could not bring herself to'
speak of wbat she felt even to EUnor; and, brooding otct.
her Borrowa in silence, gave more pain to her sister thwL
could have been communicated by the most open and most
£fequeiit confession of them.
To give the feelings or the langu^e of Mrs. Daahwood'
OR receiving and answering Elinor's letter would be only
to give a repetition of what her daughters had already felt
and said; of a disappointment hardly less painful than'
Marianne's, and an indignation even greater than Elinor'a.
Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,
arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought ; to express
her anxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would
bear up with fortitude under this misfortune. Bad,
indeed, must the nature of Marianne's affliction he, when
her mother could talk of fortitude ! mortifying and humili-
ating must be the origin of those regrets, which «Ae could
wish her not to indulge I
Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs.
^ashwood had determined that it would be better for
Marianne to be any where, at that time, than at Barton,
-where every thing within her view would be bringing back
the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by
constantly placing Willoughby before her, such as she had
■Iffays seen bim there. She recommended it to her
daughters, therefore, by all means not to shorten their visit
to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which, though never
exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise at least
five or six weeks. A variety of occupations, of objects,
and of company, which could not be procured at Barton,
would be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped, cheat
Harituine, at times, into some interest beyond herself, and
even into some eniisement, much as the idea of both
might now be spurned by her.
^ From all danger of seeing mDovg^by agahij her mo*
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
Uier ebOBideied her to be at leut equally safe in town u in
the country, since hia acquaintance must now be dropped
by all who called themselvM her friends. Design could
tiQTer king them in each other's way : negligence could
never leave them exposed to a surprise ; and chance had
less in its favour in the crowd of London than even in the
retirement of Barton, where it might force him before her
wliile paying that visit at Allenhsm on his marriage, which
Mra. Dashwood, from foreseeing at first as a probable
event, had brought herself to expect as a certain one.
She had yet another reason for wishing her children to
remain where tbey were ; a letter from her son-in-law had
tokl her that he and his wife were lo be in town before the
middle of February, and she judged it right that they
should sometimes see their brother.
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's
opinion, and she submitted to it, therefore, without oppo-
Mtion, though it proved perfectly different from what she
.wished and expected, though she felt it to be entirely
wrong, formed on mistaken grounds ; and that, by requiring
her longer continuance in London, it deprived her of the
only possible alleviation of her wretchedness, the person^
sympathy of her mother, and doomed her to such society
and such scenes as mutt prevent her eve| knowii^ a mo-'
ment's rest. i
But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that
what brought evil to herself would bring good to her siater ;
tad Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that it would
not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely, comforted
herself by thinking, that though their longer stay would
therefore militate against her own happinesa, it would ba
better for Marianne than an immediate return into De-
vonshire.
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever bearing
Willoughby's name raentioneil was not thrown away.
Marianne, though without knowing it herself, reaped all
its advantage ; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor Sir John,
nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before
her. Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have
extended towards benelf, but that was imposuble, and aha
N i
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
ins obliged to listen, d & y after daj, to the iDdign»tion di
themslL
Sir John could not have thooght it poimble. " A man
of whom be hul always had such reasou to think nell 1
Such a good-natured fellow ! He did not bdieve there
was a bolder rider in England ! It was an unaccountable
fausinen. He wished him at the devil with alt hie heart.
He would not ipealc another wcsd to him, meet him where
he might, for'all the world I No, not if it were to be by tbe
aide of Barton covert, and they were kept waiting for two
Iioura together. Such a scoundrel of a fellow ! such k
deceitfiil dog ! It was only the lait time they met that
he bad oSfered him one of Folly's puppies ! and this was
tiie end of it ! "
Mn. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. " Sb*
was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately, and
■he was very thankful that she had never been acquainted
with him at all. She wished with all her heart Combe
Magna wai not so near Cleveland ; but It did not signify,
for it was a great deal too far off to virit ; she hated hhn
■o much that she waa resolved nero'to mention his name
again, and she should tell every body she saw, how good-
fbr.nothing he was. "
The rest of ^rs. Palmer's sympathy was shown in pro-
caring all the partJculars in her power of the approaching
marriage, and communicating them to Elinor. She could
■oon tell at what coachmaker's the new carriage was build-
ing, by what painter Mr. Willougbby's portrait was drawn,
and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be seen.
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the
occasion was a happy relief to E^nor's spirits, oppressed as
they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others.
It was a gTBBt comfort to her to be sure of exciting so in-
terest in one person at least among their circle of friends;
a great comfort to know that there was one who would meet
her without feeUng any curiosity after particulars, or anjr
anxiety for her sister's health.
Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstance!
of the moment, to rrore than its real value; and she was
•ometimei worried down by offidoua condolence to r^
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
gtwd-breeding m more indispeiiBaUe to comfort duui good
Lad; Middleton expressed her Bense of the a^r about
fluce every day, or twice, if the subject occurred very ofteOj
bysaying, " Itis very Bhocking, indeed I " uidbythemeuu
erf'thk continual, though gentle, vent, was able not only to
■ee the Miss Dashwoods, from ^e first, without the smallest
^notion, but very iood to see them without recollecting s
word of the matter ; and having thus supported the dignity
of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend
to the interest of her own asserablies, and therefore deter,
mined (though rather againat the opinion of Sir John) that
as Mra. Willoughby would at once be a womsn of elegance
and fortune, to leave her cord with her as soon as she
married.
Colonel Brandon's deKcate, unobtrusive enquiries were
never unwelcome to Mias Dashwood. He had abundantly
earned the privilege of indinate diicuadon of her sister's
disappiHntment, by the friendly xeal with which he had
endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed with
confidence. His chief reward for the painful exertion of
disclosing past sorrows and present humiliations was given
in (be pitying eye with which Marianne sometimes ob-
served him, and the gentleness of her voice, whenever
(though it did not often happen) she was obliged, or could
oblige hetself to speak to him. Ztew assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards
himself, and these gave IShnor hopes of its being farther
augmented hereafter ; but Mrs. J«iningB, who knew nothing
of all this, who knew only that the Colonel continued a«
grave as ever, and that she could neither prev^ on him to
make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it for
bim, b^an, at the end of two days, to think that, instead of
Midsummer, they would not be married till Michaelmas,
and by the end of a week that it would not be a match at
aU. The good understanding between the Colonel and
Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the honouni
of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would
DoliiHihyGoOgle
186 BEtrgfa J
ill be made over to her; and Mrs. Jenningi b»d, tor Ktam
tine, ceased to thiok at all of Mr. Ferrars.
Early in February, within a fortnight from the recdpt of
Willoughby'i letter, EUdot had the painful office of infbnu < f
ing her Bister that he nas married. She had taken care to
have the intelligence conveyed to herself, as soon as it va»
known that the ceremony was over, as she was desirous that
Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from the
public papers, which she saw her eagerly exunining every
morning.
She received the news with resolnte eompomre ; mado
no observation on it, and at first abed no tears ; but after a
short time they would burst out, and for the rest of the
day she was in a state hardly less pitiable than when she
first learnt to expect the event.
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were mar- >
ried ; and Elinor now hoped, as there could be no danger
of her seeing either of them, to prevail on her sister, who
had never yet left the house since the blow first fell, to go
out again, by degrees, as she had done before.
About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at
their cousin's bouse in fiartleCt's Buildings, Holbom, pre-
sented themselves again hefore their more grand -relations
in Conduit and Berkeley Street ; and were welcomed by
them all with great cordiality.
Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence al-
ways gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to malce a
very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy iir
flnding her »tiil in town.
" I should have been quite disappointed if I bad not
found you here Hill, " said she repeatedly, with a stimtg
emphasis on the word. " But I always thought 1 tbouid..
I was almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile;
though you Md nie, you know, at Barton, that you should
not stay above a month. But I thought, at the time, that
you would most likely change your mind when it came to
the point. It would have been such a great pity to have
went away before your brother and usler came. And now,
to be sure, yon wUl be in no hvrry to be gtme. I an*
amaxiogly glad you did not keep to your mtrd. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BwraB AKv ■BftrsBBiuTT. 18T
Elinor perfectly understood her, and wtB forced to nw
all her eelf-command to make it appear that she did Ttot.
. " Well, my dear, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did
you travel? "
'" Not in the stage, I aisure you, " replied Miss Steele,
with quick exultation ; " we came post all the nay, and
had a very smart beau to attend us. Dr. Daytes was c(Hn-
ing to town, and so we thoi^ht we'd join him in a post-
chaise ; and he behaved very genteelly, and pud ten or
twelve shillings more than we did. "
" Oh, oh ! " cried Mrs. Jennings ; " very pretty, indeed)
and the Doctor is a single man, I warrant you. "
" There now, " said Miss Steele, affectedly Eimperii^y
" every body laughs at me so about the Doctor, and I can-
Dot think why. My cousins say they are sure I have made
a conquest ; but for my part 1 declare 1 never think about
him from one hour's end to another.'Lord 1 here comes
your beau, Nancy,'my cousin said t'other day, when she saw
him cruBsing the street to the house. My beau, indeed !
said I — I cannot think who you mean.'The Doctor is no
beau of mine. "
" Ay, ay, that is very pretty talking — bat it won't do
— the Doctor is the man, I see. "
" No, indeed ! " replied her condn, with affected earnest-
ness, " and I beg you will contradict it, if you ever hear it
talked of. "
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying aaanrance
that she certainly would not, and Miss Steele was made
completely happy.
" I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and
nster. Miss Dashwood, when they come to town,'said
Lucy, retoming, after a cessation of hostile hints, to the
" No, I do not think we shall. "
" Oh, yes, I dare say you will, "
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.
" What a charming thing it is ^at Mrs. Dashwood can
■pare you both for so long a time together I "
" Long a time, indeed ! " interposed Mrs. Jennings.
•* Why, their visit is but just begun ! "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
188 BENSE AND BmSIBILITT.
Lucy was aUenced.
sud Hisg Steele. " I
rianne had left the room od their arriyal.
" You are very good. My eister wiU be equally sorry
to miss the pleasure of seeing you ; but she has been very
much plagiwd lately with nerrouE headachs, which make
her unfit for company or conversation. "
" Oh, dear, that is a great pity ! but Buch old friends aa
Lucy and me ! — 1 think she might see u« y and I am sore
ve would not speak ■ word. "
Elinor, with great civihty, dedined the pTopowL Her
Bister was, perhaps, laid down upon the bed, or in her
g gown, and therefore not able to come to them. | 9
" Oh, if that's all, " cried Miss Steele, " we can just ■■
well go and see her. "
Elinor began to tind this impertinence too much for
her temper ; but she was saved the trouble of checking it,
by Lucy's sharp reprimand, which now, as on many
occasions, though it did not give much sweetness to the
manners of one sialer, was of advantage in governing thooe
of the other.
CHAPTER XI.
ArTEK some opponiion, Marianne yielded to her sister's
entreaties, and consented to go out with her and Mrs. Jra-
nings one morning for half an hour. She expressly con-
ditioned, however, tor paying no visits, and would do no
more than accompany them to Gray's in Sackville Stre^
where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the ex-
change of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollect-
ed that there was a lady at the other end of the street mi
whom she ought to c^ ; and aa she had no businesi at
Gray's, it was resolved, that while her young friends
DoliiHihyGoOgle
BBNHB AND SKraiBlUTT.
traiiMCted th^n, ahe iboiild pay her vidt, tnd
On ascending the stun, the Mies Dashwoa
many people before them in the room, that there wu not >
person at Uberty to attend to thar orders ; and ihejr were
obliged to wait. All that could be done was, to lit down
at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the
quickest mccesaion ; one gentleman only was standing
there, and it is probable that Elinor was not without hope
of exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch. But the
correctness, of his eye, and the delicacy of hie taste, proved
to be beyond his politeness. He was giving orders for a
toothpick-case for himself; and till its size, shape, and
tffDaments were determined, all of which, after esamining
and debating for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-
case in the shop, were flnally arranged by his own inven-
tive fancy, he had no leisure to bestow any other attention
on the two ladies than what was comprised in three or four
very bioad stares ; a kind of notice which served to im-
print on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face of
strong, natural, sterling insignificance, ^ough adorned in
the first style of fashion.
Marianne was spared from the trouldesome feelings of
contempt and resentment, on this impertinent examination
of their features, and on the puppyism of his manner in
deciding on all the different honors of the different tooth-
pick^cases presented to his inspection, by lemainit^ uncon-
scious of it all; for she was as well able to collect hei
thoughts within herself, and be as ^nwant of what was
passing around her, in Mi. Gray's shop, aa in her own
bed-room.
At hut the aSUr was decided. The ivory, the gold,
«nd the pearls, all received their appointment; and the
gentleman having named the last day on which his exist-
ence could be continued without the possesdon of the
toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care, and
bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but
each a one as seemed rather to demand than express ad-
miration, walked off with a happy air of real conceit and
■fibcted iiidiSbenc &
DoliiHihyGoOgle
190 em«m i
'Elinot lost no time in bringing her biudnMB fmnrd,
md wu on the point of concluding it, when another gen-
tkman presented himself st her dde. She turned her eyea
towuds his face, lud found him, with aome snijvise, to be
her brother.
Their afiectiim and pleuure in meeting wm just enough
to make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Graj's shop.
John Daahtrood was really fac from being sorry to aw
his sisters agun ; it rather gsve them satisfaction ; and
his enquiries after their mother were respectful and at-
tentire.
ElitMO'foond diat he and Fanny had been in town tw«
" I wished very mnch to call upon you yesterday, " said .
he, " but it was impossible, for we wei« obbged to take
Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Exchange ; taid we
Bpent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars. Harry waa
Tattly pleased. Tku moming 1 had folly intended to call as
you, if I could possibly find a spare ha^ bonr, hit one hae
always so much to do on first coming to town. I am ctooe
here to bespeak Fanny a seal. But to-morrow I think I
shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street, and be in-
troduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings. I understand she
is a woman of very good fortune. And die Middletone, tot^
you most introduce me to Ibem. As ny motber-in-law'a
relatiDns, I shall be happy to Aow them every lei^eeti
They are exceUent nei^bonn to you in the eomtry, X
KnderBtand. "
" Exoelloit indeed. Their attentitm to o«r cemfbr^
their friendlittess in every pftrdenlir, it more Aan I catt
express. "
" I am extremdy glad to hear it, opoa my wtvd ; ex >
tremely glad indeed. But so it ought to be ; they an
people of large fortune ; they tie related to yom; and ererf
drility and aeeomraodation that can serve to make jftax
BtuatioB pleasant Slight be reasonaUy expected. Aad a*
yon are most cixnfortabty settled in your tittle cottage, and
wint fbr nothing ! Edward broi^t us > inost dimntng
•ecoirat < rf the place : the most complete thing of its kind,
be *«id, that ever was, and you all seemed to e^f it ie.
HihyGoo^lc
191
Tond any Ihiog. It ww a great utufaction to lu to hear
it, I unire jou. "
Elinor did feel a little uhamed ot her brother ; and vu
not BOny to be spared the necesBit; of answering him, bj
the arrival of Mn. JenniDgs'i servant, who came to tell ba
that hia miatreBS waited for them at ^e door.
Ml " . Daihwood attended them down stairg, was introduced
to Mra. Jennings at the door of her carriage, and repeating
bis hope of hdog able to call on them the nest day, UmA
leave.
His viut was dnly paid. He came with a pretence at
Hn apology from their sister-in-law, for not coming too ;
" but she was so much engaged with her mother, that reallj
■be had no leisure for going any where. " Mn. Jenuinga,
boweTer, assured him directly, that she ahonid not stand
upon ceremony, for they were all consios, or something like
it, and she should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood
very Eoon, and bring her sisters to see her. His manners
to them, Uiough calm, were perfectly kind ; to Mrs. Jen-
nings, most attentively civil; and on Colonel Brandon'i
comiog in sow after himself, he eyed him with a curiosity
which seemed lo say, that he only wanted to know him to
be rich, to be equally civil to Attn.
After stayii^ with them half an hour, he asked Elinor
to walk wi^ him to Ctmduit Street, and introduce him to
Sir John and Lady Middlelon. The weatherwM remarkablj
fine, and she readily consented. As soon as they were out
of the house, his ^iqoiriea began.
" Who is Cdonel Brandon ? la he a man of fortune ? "
" Yea ; he haa very good property in Dorsetahire.''
" I am glad of it Heaeemaa moat gentlemanlike man;
and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the proapeet
of a very respectable eataUishment in life. "
" Me, brother I what do you mean ? "
" He likes you. 1 obserred him narrowly, snd am con-
sifflced of it. What is the amount < rf'hia fmtane? "
" I believe about two tfaouaand a year. "
" Two thousand a year I " and thai working hinuelf up
to a pitch of uithusiastic generaaity, he added, " Elinor, I
.irii^^inthaUmy heart it were AriMatnnch for youi nha. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
marrying " > «■
" You are mistaken, £Unor ; you tie very much muu.
taken. A very ]itt!e trouble on your side secures hiin.
Perhaps just at present he may be nndeciiled ; the smaUness
of your fortune may make him hang back ; his friends may
all adviw him against it. But some of those Uttle atten-
tions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give
nill fix him, in spite of himself. And there can be no
teasoD why you should not try for him. It is not to be
supposed that any prior attachment on your side; — in short,
you know, as to an attachment of that kind, it is quite out
of the question, the objectionB are insurmountable^- you
have too much sense not to see all that. Colonel Brandon
must be the man ; and no civility shall be wanting on my
part to make him pleaeed with you and your family. It
is a match that must give universal satisfaction. In short,
it is a kind of thing that, " lowering his voice to an im-
portant whisper, " will be exceedingly welcome to aS
farliet. " Recollecting himself, however, he added, " That
is, I mean to say — your friends are all truly anxious to see
you well settled ; Fanny particularly, for she has yoQT
interest very much at heart, I assure you. And her mother
too, Mrs. Ferrsrs, a very good-natured woman, I am sure
it would give her great pleasure ; she said as much the
other day. "
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
" It would be something remarkable, now, " he continued,
" something droll, if Fanny should have a brother end I
a raster settling at the same time. And yet it is not very
unlikely. "
" Is Mr. Edward Ferrars, " said Elinor, with reacdntion,
" going to be married ? "
" It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in
agitation. He has a most excellent mother. Mrs. Ferrars,
with the utmost liberality, will come forward, and settle on
him a thousand a year, if the match takes place. The
Iwty is the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughter of thelata
'Wd Morton, with thirty thooMod pounds. A very deair..
DoliiHihyGoOgle
19»
ahle cotmecliiHi oa bolh ndea, utd I tmve not « doubt
of its taldog plkce m time. A dioound a year u a great
ded for s motho'to giTe »,fvf, to make otm for ever;
but Mrs. Ftmn hu a noUe spirit. To give jaa anothv
inatance of her liberalitjr : — The other iaf, as soon aa w*
came to town, aware that mooey could not be Tery plentjr
with us juit now, the put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to
tile amount of two hundred pounds. And extremely ac-
ceptable it ia, for we raoit live at a great expense while we
are here. "
He paused for her assent and companion ; and she fMeed
benelf to say, —
" Your expeDBes both in town and eonntry must cer-
tunly be considerable; but yonr income is a large one. "
" Not BO large, I dare ssy, as many people suppose. I
do not mesa to complain, however ; it is ondoubtedly a
comfortable one, and I hope wilt in time be better. The
enclosure of Norland CommoD, now carrying on, is a moat
serioiu dnun. And then I have made a little purchase
within this half year; East Kingham Farm, you must
remember the place, where old Gibson used hi Utc. The
land was so very deurable for me in every respect, so im-
mediately a4ioining my own property, that I fdt It my
duty to buy it. I could not have answered it to my con-
■denoe to iet it fall into any other hands. A man must pay
for his cenvenienoe; and it bat cost me a vsat deal ot
money. "
" More than you think it really and intrinsicaliy worth? "
" Why, I hope not that. 1 might have sold it again,
the next day, far more than 1 gave: but, with regard to
the pUTcbase-mMiey, I might have been very unfortunate
indeed ; for the stocks were, ^ that time, so low, that if I
bad not hki^ned to have the necessary sum in my banker's
bands, I must have sold out to very great loss. "
Elinor could only smile.
" Other great and inevitaUe expenses, too, we have had
oa Srst oomuig to Norluid. Our respected fadier, as you
well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill d^ds thK remained
at Nmland (u)d very valuable they were) to y«Br moAer.
Far be it £reBi mt to le^ne at hii doing so ; ha bad hi «».
DoliiHihyGoOgle
194 SEiraE AND BEKSIBILITr.
doubted right to diapoK of his own property as he chow.
But, in coniequence of it, we hare been obliged lo make
large purchaseB of lioen, china, & c. to supply the place of
vhat waa taken away. You may guess, after all these ex-
penses, how very far we must be from being rich, and how
acceptable Mrs. Ferran'i kindnen is. "
" Certainly, " said Elinor; " and, assisted by her liber-
ality, I hope you may yet Uve to be in easy drcum-
ttances. "
" Another year or two may do much towards it, " he
gravely replied ; " but, however, there is still a great deal
to be done. There is not a stone laid of Fumy's green-
house, and nothing but the plan of the fiower-garden
marked out. "
" Where U the green-house to be ? "
" Upon the knoll behind the house. The old walmit
trees are all come down to make room for it. It will be a very
fine object from many parts of the park ; and the flower,
garden will slope down just before it, and be exceedin^y
pretty. We have cleared away all the old thorns that grew
in patches over the brow. "
EUnor kept her concern and her censure to herself; and
was very thankful that Marianne was not present to ahare
the provocation.
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and
to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for
each of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray's, his thoughts
took a cheerfuller turn, and he began to congratulate Elinor
on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.
" She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her
house, her style of Uving, all bespeak an exceeding good in-
come ; and it is an acquaintance that has not oidy been of
great use to you hitherto, bat in the end may prove mate,
rially advantageoua. Her inviting you to town is certainly
a vaat thing in your favonr ; and indeed it speaks alto,
gethor BO great a regard for yon, that in all probabilitj
when she dies you will not be forgotten. She must have
m great deal to leave. "
" Nothing at all, I shonld ratha suppose ; for she hsa
only her jointare, whidi wiD dcKeod to he > duldrm. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BBKSB AI4D tSNaiBIUTT. 195
" But it ia not to be imagined that the lives up to her
income. Few people of common prudence will do thatj
and whatever she saves she will be able to dispose of. "
" And do you not think it more likely that she shouIA
leave it to her daughters, than to in f "
" Her daughters are both exceedingly well married, and
therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of faer remember-
ing them farther. Whereas, in my opinion, by her taking
so much notice of you, and treating you in this kind of way,
ahe has given you a sort of claim on her future consider-
ation, which a conscientious woman would not disregard-
Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can
hardly do all this, without being aware of the expectation
*'But she ruses none in those most concerned. Indeed,
brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries
" Why, to be sure, " sud he, seeming to recollect himself,
" people have htlle, have very litde in their power. But,
my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne? — she
looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is pown quite
thin. Is idle ill? "
" She is not well, she has had a nervous coo^aint on
ber for several weeks. "
" I am sorry for that. At her time of life, any thing of
an illness destroys the Uoom for ever ! Hers has been a
very short one ! She was as handsome a girl last Sep-
tember as any I ever saw, — and as likely to attract the
men. There was something in her style of beauty to
please diem particularly. I remember Fanny used to say,
that she would marry sooner and better than you did; not
but what she is exceedingly fond of you, but so It happened
to strike her. She will be mistaken, however. I question
whether Marianne, now, vSl marry a man worth niore than
five or six hundred a year at the utmost, and I am very
much deceived if yott do not do better. Dorsetshire ! I
know very little of Dorsetshire; but, my dear Elinor, I
shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it ; and I think
I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the
earliest and best pleased of your visiters. "
oS
I i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
td6
Eliam- ttied Tery Krioiuly to convince bim thu there wu
fto likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon ; but it was
an expectation of too much pleuore to himidf to be rdin-
jniihed, and lie was really lesoiTed on welcing an intimacy
with that gentleman, and promoting the marriage by every
poaaible attention. He had juit compunction enough for
having done nothing for his nuiert hiraself, to be exceed-
ingly anxioiu that every body eUe should do a great deal ;
and an oSbr from Colonel Brandon, or a kgaey from Mrt.
Jenningi, waa the easiest means of atoning for his own
n^ect.
They Were lucky enou{^ to find Lady Mtddleton at
home, and Sir John came in before their visit ended.
Abnndance of dvilities passed on all ddea. Sir John was
ready to hke any body ; and though Mr. Dashnood did not
seem to know much about horses, be soon set him down as
- a very good-natured fellow : while Lady Middleton aaw
enough of fashion in his appearance to think his acquaint-
ance worth having ; and Mr. Dashwood went away de^
lighted with both.
" 1 shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny, "
sud he, as he walked back with his sister. " Lady Mid-
dleton is really a most elegant woman ! Such a woman as,
I am sure, Fanny will be glad to know. And Mrs. Jen.
Bings too, an eseeeding wdt-behaved woman, though not
so elegant as her daughter. Your oster need not have
any scruple, even of tiating her, which, to say the truth,
has be«i a little the case, and very naturaUy ; for we only
knew that Mrs. Jennings waa the tridow of a man who
had got all hia nKmey in a low way ; and Fanny and His.
Fenara were both strongly prepossesaed, that neither abe
Bor her daughtera wen audi kind of women u Fanny
would like to aaaociate with. But now I can carry ber s
moat satiaf Ktory account of both. "
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
CHAPTER XII.
Hbi. JoHtr Daihwoob bkd m muA eonfldence In her hsB >
band's jodgment, that Ae waited the Tery next day both on
Mrs. Jennings and her daughter ; and her eonfldenee vat
rewarded by finding eren the fbnner, eren tfae wonan
widi whom her ristert were staying, by no means nnworthy
of notice ; and as tor Lady Hiddlelon, ihe foond her com
of the most charming vomen in the world 1
Lady Middleton was equally pleated with Mrs. Dath-
wood. There was a kind of eold-heuied tdfishneat on
both rides, whi^ mutually attracted them ;1 and they tym-
paAiaed with each otbw in an insipid propriety of de-
meanour, and a gmertl want of nnderetanding.
The same manners, however, which recommended Hra.
John Dashwood to the good opinion of Lady Middleton
did not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jmninga, and to A«r she
appeued nothing more than a little proud-looking woman,
of nncordlal addreat, who met her husband's sbters without
my afibetion, and dmoit without having any thii^ to «ay
to them ; for of the quarter of hi hour bestowed on Bttke-
ley Ettreet, the sat at least leren minutea and a half in
Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not
dtooae to aak, wbelber Edward was then in town ; but no-
Afng would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention bis
name before her, till able to t^ her, that Us marriage with
Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband's ke-
peetatlons on Colonel Brandon WMe answered ; because she
believed dwm stiD so very much attached to each other,
diat diey could not be too sedulouriy divided in word and
deed on every occasion. The inteUigence, however, which
*he would not give soon flowed from another quarter.
Lucy came very shortly to dalm Elinor's eompasuon on
being unaMe to see Edward, though he had arrived in town
with Hr. and Mra. Dashwood. He darad not come to
IBartlett's Buildings for ieu of detection^ and though didr
OS
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
198 nsnu i
mnnul iropadence to meet nu not to be told, tbej could
do nothing *t present but write.
Edward aasuKd them himself of his being in town,
widiin a very short time, by twice calling in Berkeley
StreeL Twice waa hii card found on the taUe, when they
i«tumed from their raoming's engageroenta. Elinor was
I^eaaed that he had called ; and still nKse ple»ed that ahe
had miased him.
The Daahwooda were n > prodigioualy delighted with die
Middletons, that, though not much in the habit of giving
any thing, they determined to give them — a dinner ; sqd
Boon after theii acquuntance b^;an > invited them to dine in
Harley Street, where they had taken a very good house for
three months. Their daten and Mrs. Jennings were in-
vited likewise ; and John Daahwood waa careful to] secure
Colonel Brandon, who, always glad to be where the Misa
Daahwooda were, received hia eager dvilities widi some
■urptiae, .but much more pleasure. They were to meet
Mrs. Ferrari ; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons
were to be of the party. The expectation of seeing her,
however, was enough to make her interested io the engage-
ment ; fin though she could now meet Edward's mother
without that strong anxiety wluch had once promised Io
atteitd such an introduction, lho;^h she could now see bet
with perfect indifference as Io her opinion of herself, her
deure of bdng in company with Mrs. Ferrars, her curi-
odty to know what she was like, was as lively aa ever.
The interest with which ihe thna anticipated the party
waa soon sftoiraidB increased, more powerfully than plea-
wntly, by her bearing that the Misa Steeles were also to be
at it.
So well h»d they recommended themselves to Lady
Middletoo, so agreeable had their assiduities made them to
her, that though Lucy was certainly not elegant, and btx
uster not even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John to ask
them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street ; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steelea,
as soon as the Dashwoods'invitation was known, that their
visit should begin a few days before the party took place.
Their dums to the notice of Mrs. John Daihwood, u
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SHNBE AND BENSIBUiirr. 199
tbe niecM of the geDtlemui wbo for mtny yean had had
the eve of her brother, might not have done much, haw-
evei, toward! procuring them aeata at hez. table ; but aa
Lady Middleton's guest* they must be welcome ; and Lucy,
who had long wanted to be peraondly known to the family,
to have a uearer view of their characters and her own d^
ficulties, and to have an opportunity of endeavouring to
please them, had seldom been happier in her life than she
was on receiving Mn. John Daahwood'i card-
On Elinor its effect was very different She b^an im-
mediately to determine, that Edward, who lived with hia
mother, must be aslced, as his mother was, to a party given
by big lister ; and to see him, for the first time, ^ter all
that passed, in the company of Lucy ! — she hardly knew
Ikow she could bear it I
These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely
on reason, and certainly not at all on truth. They were
relieved, however, not by her own recollection, but by the
good will of Lucy, who believed herself to be inflicting a
severe disappointment, when she told her, that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and
even hoped to be carrying the pain stjll fsither, by per-
suading her that he was kept away by that extreme affec-
tion for herielf, which he could not conceal when they were
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the
. two young ladies to this formidable moAer-in-law.
" Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood! " said Lucy, as they
walked np the stairs together — for the Middletons arrived
so directly after Mrs. Jennings, that they all followed the
servant at the same time: — " there is nobody here bat
you tliat csn fed for me. I declare I can hardly stand.
Good gracious ! In a moment I shall see the person that
■II my happiness depends on — that is to be my mother 1 "
Elinor could have given her immediate relief, by sug-
gesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton's mothra*,
rather than her own, whom they were about to behold;
but instead of doing that, she sssured her, and with great
sincerity, that she did pity hei, — to the utter amaxeraent
DoliiHihyGoOgle
900 aaitn t
of Laej, idKT, tboB|^ retlly nDComfortable hendf, hoped
mt leut to be an ottject ot invpresHEble aivy to Elinor.
Mn. FemtB was a little, thin woman, apngbt, eren to
finnnalitj. In her figure, and aeriont, e*en to Muniefla, hi
her aspect. Hei complexion waa sallow ; and her fealnrea
■mall, without beanty, and naturaUy without exprearion ;
bat a lucky contraction of the, brow had reaeued her coun-
tenance from the diagraee of insipidity, by giving it the
atrong characterB of pride and ill-nature. She was not a
woman of many words ; for, nnlike people in general, ahe
proportioned them to the number of her ideaa ; and of the
few ayllabka that did eacape her, not one Ml to the share
of MisB Dashwood, whom she eyed with the spirited de-
tamination of disliking her at all events.
Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this be-
baviour. A few months ago it would hare hurt her ex-
cttdin^j; but it was not in Mrs. Ferrars's power to distresi
iut by it now ; and the difiference of her manners to the
Hiss Sleeles, a difference whidi ■eemed purpcsdy made to
humble her more, only amused her. She could not but
■mile to see the gradousness of both mother and daughter
towards the wry pawn — for Lucy was particularly dis-
tinguished — whom of «1) others, had they known as much
aa ahe did, they would have been most anxiona to mortify ;
while ahe herself, who had comparatiTely no power to
wound them, sat pointedly sUghted by both. Bnt while
she sroiUd at a gradonsness so misapplied, she could not
reflect on the mean-spirited fblly from which it sprung,
HOT obserre the studied attentions with which the Mis«
St«eles courted its conCiniuuice, wltbont thoroughly it~
flpising them all four.
Lucy was aB exultation on being so honourably dla-
tinguidted; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teaied
about Dr. Davis to be perfectly happy.
The dinner was a grand one, Oie servants were nn-
moYius, and every thing bespoke the mistress's indinatioii
for show, and the master's ability to support it. In B[nle
of the improvements and additioDB which were making to
th < r Norland eslato, and in spite of its owner having once
been within aome thousand pounds of being obliged to aeU
DolAihyGoOHlc
SOI
out at a loM, nothing gave uij symptom of dutt Indigence
which he had tried to infa tfvm it ; no porerty of any
Und, except of oonveriattoii, ippearad ; but there the de-
fidency was considerabk. Jolui Daahwood had not mneli
to say for Mmself that was worth hearing, and hia wifle
had still len. But there was no peculiar diagrace in dus ;
tat it was rery much the caae willi the chief of their Tiriten,
who almost t^ laboored under one or other of these dis-
qiuMcadons for being agreeable — want of sense, either
natural or improved — want of elq;ance — want of spirits
— ~ or want of temper.
Wh«i the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after
dinner, this poverty wea particularly evident, for the gen.
donen had supplied the diBCOune with some variety — the
variety of politics, enclodng land, and breaking horses —
bat then it was all over ; and one Bnttject only engaged
libe ladies till eofibe came in, which was die comparative
heights of Harry Daahwood, and Lady Middleton's second
sen William, who wore nearly of the same age.
Had both dw children been diere, the affidr might have
been determined too easily by measoring them at once;
bat as Harry only was present, it was all conjectural as*
lection on both sides ; and every body had a right to be
equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and
over again as often as they liked.
The parties stood thus : — -
The two mothers, though each really convinced that her
mm son was the tallest, politely decided in Aivonr of the
The two grandmothers, with not leas partiality, but more
rincerity, were equally earnest in sapport of their own de-
scendant.
Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent
dian the odier, thought the boys were both remarkaUy tall
Ibr their age, and could not eoncdve that there could be
die smallest dififcrence in the worid between them ; and
Hiai Steele, with yet greater address, gave It, as fktt as she
could, in favour of eaeh.
Elinor, having onoe delivered her opinion on William's
Me, by which die o^nded Mrs. Pnrajs and Fanny stiQ
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SOS IKNU ASB
more, did not lee the neeenity of enfiorciiig it hj aay
futhtr UKTtion ; and MBiiuine, when ctlled on for hen,
offended them all, by decluiag that she had no opinion to
^ve, u she had never thought about iL
Before her renaoving from Norland, EUnor had pointed
a very pretty pair of aereena for her aiater-inJaw, whidi
being now ju*t mounted and brooght home, omamented.
her present drawing-room ; and theae icreenf, catching
the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gen-
tlemen info the room, were offidoualy banded by him to
Colonel Brandon for his admiration.
" These are done by my eldeat sister, " said he ; " and
you, as a man of taste, will, 1 dare say, be pleased with
them. I do not know whether you ever h^pened to see
tuif of her performances before, but she ia in goteral
reckoned to dnm extremely well. "
The Colond, though disclaiming all preleniiona to con-
noiueurship, warmly admired the screens, aa he would bam
done any thing painted by Miss Dashwood ; and the cn-
riodty of the others being of course excited, they were
handed round for general inspecdon. Mrs. Ferrus, not
aware of their being Elinor's work, particularly requested
to look at them j and after they had received the grati-
fying testimony of Lady Middleton's approbation, Fanny
presented them to her mother, considerately informing her >
at the same time, that they were done by Miss Dashwood.
" Hum " — said Mrs. Ferrara — " very pretty, " — and,
without n^arding them at all, returned them to btx
daughter.
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother
had been quite rude enough ; for, colouring a little, she
immediately said, —
" They are very pretty, ma'am — an't they? " Bat
then ^ain Hit dread of having been too civil, too encour-
aging herself, probably came over her, for she prefently
added,—
" Do you not think they are somethiog in Miss Morton's
style of painting, ma'am ? — She doet paint most delight <
fiUly I — How beautifully her last landM^pe is done ! "
" Beautifully iudced 1 But (Ae doea every thing wdL "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SOS
Mariuine could Dot bear this. She wu already greaHj
displeued with Mra. Ferran ; and such ill-tiroed praise a£
another, at Elinoi'a expense, dtough & he had not any notion
of what nas principally meant by it, provoked her inime.
diately to lay, with warmth, —
" This is admiration of a very particular kind ! what il
Miss Morton to ua P who knows, or who caiei, for her ? —
it i* Elinor of whom ve think and apeak. "
■ And 10 saying, she took the acreena out of her aister-in-
law's hands to admire them herself ■■ they onght to be
admired.
Mra. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing
heraelf up more stiffly than ever, pronouncied, in retort, thia
bitter phUippic, " Miss Morton is Lord Morton's daughter. "
Fanny looked very angry too, and her buaband was all
in a fright at his sister'a audacity. Elinor was much more
burt by Maiianne'i warmth than she had been by what
produced it ; bat Colonel Brandon's eyea, as they were
fixed on Marianne, declared Ihat he nqticed only what
was amiaUe in it, tbe afibctionate heart which could not
bear to see a sister alighted in the smallest point.
Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold inso-
lence of Mrs. Ferrara's general behaviour to her aister,
seemed to her to foretell such difficulties and distresses to
Elinorasherownwoundedheart taught her to think of with
horror ; and, urged by a strong impulse of affectionate aen-
aibility, she moved, after a moment, to her sister's chair,
and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek doae
to hers, said in a low, but eager, voice, —
'■ Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let them
make you unh^ipy. "
She could aay no more : her spiritawere quite overcome;
and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into
Uars. Ever; body's attention was called, and almost every
body was concerned. Colonel Brandon rose up and went
to diem without knowing what he did. Mrs. Jenningi^
with a very intelligent " All ! poor dear, " immediately
gave her her lalta ; and Sir John felt ao desperately en-
raged against the author of tfaia nervous distress, that he
Instantly changed hit seal to one close by Lucy Steele, and
DoliiHihyGoOgle
204 BBtrn j
gave her, in > whlBper, a brief aeeonnt of th« wh < ^ block-
ing a Ait.
In a few minntM, howerer, Marianne waa recovered
enmgh to put an end to the bnstle, and ait down among'
tlie reat; though her spirits retsinml the impreadon of
iriiat had pawed the whole erening.
" Poor Marianne ! " said her brother to Colonel Brandon,
in a low voice, aa soon as he could secure his attention:
" she has not such good health as her sister, — she is very
nervous, — she has not Elinor's oonstitutioii ; — and one
must albw that there is something very trpng to a young
woman who has been a beauty in the loss of her personal
attractions. You would not think it, perhaps, hut Marianne
teoi remarkably handsome a few months ago ; quite at
handaoine as Elinor. Now you see it is all gone. "
CHAPTER XIII.
Elinoh's cnrionty to see Mra. Ferrars was satisfied. She
had found in her every thing that could tend to make «
farther connection between the families undesirable. She
had seen enongh of her pride, her meanness, and her de-
termined prejudice agtunst herself, to comprehend all the
^fficolties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage of Edward and herself, had he been
otherwise free ; and she had aeen almost enongh to be
thankful, for her (nan sake, that one greater obatacle preserved
her from suSMng onder any other of Mrs. Ferrara's crea-
tion, preserved her fVom all dependence upon her caprice,
or any solicitude for ha good opinion. Or at least, if ahe
did not bring hersdf quite to r^oice in Edward's being
fMtered to Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been
more amiable, she ought to have njoieed-
8he wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very muck
elevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferrars ; that her intereM
and her vanity shookt so very mndi Uind her as to make
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■KNU AKD BENnBIUTS'. 80$
the Httendon nhicti seemed onljr paid ber because the wm
not Elinor, appear a complimeiit to heradf, — or to allow
her to derive encouragement from a preference only given
her, becauBe her real aitiiatioii wai unknown. But that it
waa ao, had not only been declared bj Lucj's eyes at the
time, but waa declued over again the next morning more
openly ; for at her particular desire Lady Middleton set ber
down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing Elinor
alone, to tell her buw happy she was.
The chance proved a lucky one ; for a raeraage from Mrs,
Palmer soon after ihe arrived carried Mrs. Jennings away.
" My dear friend, " cried Lucy, as soon as they were by
Ihemielves, " I come to talk to you of my happiness.
Could any thing be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's way of
treating me yesterday ? So exceeding affable as she was .'
You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her ; but
the very moment I was introduced, there was such an affa-
bility in her b^aviour as really shmild seem to say, she
bad quite took a fancy to me. Now was not it so ? You
■aw it all; and waa not you quite struclc with it? "
" She wai certainly very civil to yon.
" Civil ! — Did you see nothing but only ctvihty? — I
■aw a vast deal more. Buch kindness as fell to the shore of
nobody but me ! — No pride, no hauteur, tuid your aister just
the same — all sweeteess and a & bility! "
£linoT wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still
prened her to own that she had reason for ber happhiess j
and Elinor waa obliged to go on.
" Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement, "
laid she, " nothing could be more flattering than their
treatment of you ; — but aa that was not the case- - "
" I guessed you would nay BO, " replied Lucy, quickly; —
'" but there wat no reason in die world why Mrs. Ferrara
■bomld seem to hlte me, if she did not, and her liking me if
every thing. You shan't talk me out of my Badsfaction. I
■m Hure it will all end well, and there will be no diffieultiea
at all, to what I uaed to think. Mrs. Ferrara is a charm-
ing woman, and so ia your sister. They are both deli^U
All women indeed! — I wonder I shoidd never hear you
■ay how tpettUa iln. Daahwood waa I "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
206 fERVB Aim BENSmiilTT.
To thU Elinor had no answer to mske, and did not M-
lempt any.
" Are yoo ill. Miss Daahwood? — you aeem low — yon
don't speak ; — sure you an't well. "
" I never wm in better health. "
" I am glad of it with all my heart ; but really you did
not look it. I should he so sorry to have you ill ; you, that
have been the greatest comfort to me in die world !~
Heaven knows what I should have done without your
friendship. "
Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her
own success. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she di-
rectly replied, —
" Indeed I am perfectly convinced of yonr r^ard fbr
me, and, next to Edward's love, it is the greatest comfort I
have. Poor Edward ! But now there is one good thing,
we shall be able to meet, and meet pretty often, for Lady
Middleton'a delighted with Mrs. Dashwood; so we shall be
a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends
h^ his time with his sister — beudes. Lady Middleton and
Mrs, Ferrars will visit now ; — and Mrs. Ferrars and your
sister were both so good to say, more than once, |they
should always be glad to see me. They are such charming
women ! — I am sure if ever yon tell your lister what I
think of her, you cannot speak too high. "
But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to
hope that ahe thouU tell her uster. Lucy continued, —
" I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs.
Ferrars had took a diUike to me. If she had only made
me a formal courtesy, for instance, without saying a word,
and never after bad took any notice of me, and never looked
at me in a pleasant way — you know what I mean — if I
had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I ^onld
have gare it all up in despair. I could not bave stood it.
For where she doei dislike, I know it is most violent. "
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this
civil triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the servant's
announcing Mr. Ferrars, and Edward's immediately walk-
ing in.
It was a very awkward moment; and the conntenince
I .i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
aor
of each showed that it was bo. The; all looked exceed-
ingly foolish ; and Edward seemed to have aa great an in-
clination to walk out of the room again ae to advance isrther
into it. The very circumstance, in its unplesBanteat fonn,
which they would each have been most anxious to avdd,
hod fallen on them. They were not only all three together,
but were together without the relief of any other penon.
The ladies recovered themselves fint. It was not Lucy's
bnainegs to put herself forward, and the appearance of ae-
crecy must still be Icept up. She could therefore only look
her tenderness, and after slightly addressing him, said no
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious waa she, for
hia sake and her own, to do it wdl, that she forced herself,
after a moment's recollection, to welcome him, with a look
and manner that were almost easy, and almost open ; and
another struggle, another effort still improved them. She
would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor ihe conscious-
ness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from
Baying that she was happy to aee him, and that she had
very much regretted being from home, when he celled be-
fore in Berkeley Street. She would not be frightened from
paying him those attentions which, as a friend and almost
a relation, were his due, by the observant eyes of Lucy,
though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching
her.
Her manners gave some re-aasuranee to Edward, and he
bad courage enough to sit down ; but hii embarrassment
■till exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion which the
case rendered reasonable, though his sex might make it
rare ; for his heart had not the indiSbrenee of Lucy's, nor
oould hia conscience have quite the ease of EUnor's.
Lucy, with a demure and settied air, seemed determined
to make no contribution to the comfort of'the others, and
would not say a word; and almost every thing that wot
■aid proceeded from Elinor, who was obliged to volunteer
■11 the information about her mother's health, their coming
to town, & c. which Edward ought to have enquired about,
bat never did.
Her exertions did not atop here; for ifae soon afterward!
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SOS BKum AND imoiBiLiTy.
fiiU bttself to heroically diiposed u to detenuine, oader
pretence of fetchiog Muiuine, to leave the others by th^u-
eelves ; and she really did it, and that in the handaomeat
manner, for she loitered away leveral minutes on the laDd >
ing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude, bef(»« tbt
went to her sister. Wlien that was once done, however, it
was time for the raptures of Edward to cease ; for Mari-
aone's joy hunied her into the drawing-room immediatdy.
Her pleasure in seeing him waa like every other of her feel*
logs, strong in itself, and strongly spoken. She met him
with a hand that would be taken, and a voice that ex-
pressed the afi^tioD of a sister.
" Dear Edward! " she cried, " this is a moment of great
happiness ! This would almost make amends for every
Edward tried to return her kindnees as it deserved, but
before such witnesses he dared not say half what he really
felt. Again they all sst down, and for a moment or two
all were silent ; while Marianne was looking with the most
speaking tendemesa, sometimes at Edward and sometimes
at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each othn'
should be checked hy Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edwud
was the first to speak, and it was to notice Marianne's al-
tered look*^ and expresa his fear of her not finding London
agree with her.
" Oh, don't think of me ! " she replied with spirted
eameatness, thoi:^;h her eyes were filled with l^ara as sh«
spoke, " don't think of my health. Elinor is well, you Me.
That must be enough for us both. "
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or
Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the gaod will ot Lue^,
who looked iqi at Marianne with no very b«u^ant < ■•
preasioo.
" Do yon like London ? " aaid Edward, willing ta say
aoy thing tiiat might introduce another suttject.
" Not at alL I expected raudi pleasnte in it, bttl I
have found ntuie. The sight of you, Edward, is the only
comfort it haa afforded; and, tfai^ Heaven! yon we wh^
you always were ! "
Shejpuued — no one apt^
DoliiHihyGoOgle
uam Ajm wKnaiaidTt. 909
" I dunk, EliiKV, " Bhe preseolly tdded, " we mtut
employ Edwanl to take cue «f iw in our return to Barton.
Id a week or two, I nippoae, we ihall be going ; and, I
buM, Edward will not be Ytrj unwiUiog to acc^t tlw
Poor EdwRid mattered H»netliiDg, bat what it waa
nobody knew, not even himself. But Marianne, who aaw
bii agitation, and could easily trace it to whatever caiue
best pleaeed herself, was perfectly satisfied, and aoon talked
of aomething dte.
" We BpeDt luch a day, Edward, in Harley Street
yeaterday ! So dull, so wretchedly duU ! But I have
tnoch to My to yon on that head, whieh cannot be laid
And with thit adajiraUe diicretion did abe defer the
asauraace of her finding their mutual relativca rooi« dis-
agreeable than ever, and of her being paiticidarly disgusted
with hii mothv, till ihey ware mere in private.
" But why were you not there, Edward ? Why did
you not coote f "
" I was eng^ed ebewhene. "
" Engaged 1 But what was that, when such iriendf
" Perbqw, Mist Marianne, " cried Lucy, eager to tak«
iome revenge en her, " you think young men never stand
upo) engageEoenU, if they have no mind to keqi them,
Utde «s weU as great. "
Elisor was very angry, but MariaBBe seemed entirely
inwnaUe of the ating ; for ihe calmly rephed, —
" Not BO, ntdeod ; iai, aerioualy spealdng, I am very
aore that conacaniM aidy kept Edward from Hariey Street.
AaA I really believe he Aim the noat delicate conseience \a
the world ; the moit setupuLona in performing every en-
gagement, however minute, and however it may make
■gainst lut interett or [^aiure. He is the moit fearM wE
giving pain, of wounding expectation, and the moat iD; <
capable of being selfish, of any body 1 ever saw. Edward,
it ia 10, and I will say it What I are you never to hear
youraelf praised? — Then you must be no friend of mine;
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SIO BKMtE J
for thoM who wilt accept of my love and etteem mutt
rabmit to m; open commeadation. "
The ntture of her commendation, in the present cttae,
however, happened to be particularly ill suited to the feeL
ingB of two thirds of her auditora, and was so very nn-
exhilarating to £dw & rd, that he very soon got up to go
away.
" Going BO soon ! " said Hariuine; " my dear Edward,
ibis must not be. "
And drawing him a little aside, sbe whispered her per-
suasion that Lucy could not stay much longer. But even
this encouragement failed, for he would go ; and Lucy,
who would faave outstayed him had his visit lasted two
hoars, soon afterwards went away.
" What can bring her here so often ? " said Marianne,
on her leaving them. " Could she not see that we wanted
her gone .'— how teazii^ to Edward ! "
" Why BO i we were all his friends, and Lncy has
been ihe longest known to him of any. It is but natural
that he should hke to see her as well as ourselves. "
Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, " You know,
fUinor, that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear.
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted, as I
mnst suppose to be the case, you ought to recollect that I
am the last person in the world to do iL I cannot descend
to be tricked out of assurances that ere not really wanted. "
She then left the room ; and Elinor dared not follow her
to say more, for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy
to Lucy, she could give no information that would convineo
Marianne ; and painful aa the consequences of her ^ill
conUnuing in an error might be, she was obliged to nibmit
to it All that she could hope was, that Edward would
not oAea expose her or himself to the distress of bearing
Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetidon of anj
Other part of the pain that had attended their recent meets
ing — and this she had every reason to expect
DoliiHihyGoOgle
CHAPTER XIV.
WiraiN a few days aftei thU meeting, the newepspen
aonouDced to the world, that the lady of Thoraas Palnier,
Esq. VIM lafely delivered of a son and heir ; a very in.
terestiDg and satiifactory paragraph, at least to all those
iatiinate connectioDS who knew it before.
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's hap-
pinefW, produced a temporary aileratioD in the disposal of
her time, and inflnenced, in a like degree, the engage-,
ments of her young friends ; for as she wished to be aa
much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither every <
morning as soon as she was dressed, and did not retuni tiU
late in the evening ; and the Miss Uaabwoods, at the par > .
ticular request of 4he Middletona, spent the whole of every-
day in Conduit Street For their own comfort, they wonld
much rather have remained, at least all the morning, in
Mrs. Jennings's house ; bul, it was not a thing to be urged
against the wishes of every body. Their hours were there--
fbre made over to Lady Middleton and the two Misa
Steeles, hy whom their company was, in fact, as little
rained as it was professedly soughL
They had too much sense to be desirable companions to
d > e former ; and by the latter they were considered with ft
jealous eye, aa intruding on their ground, and sharing tha:
Uodness which they wanted to monopolise. Though no >
thing conld be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour
to Slinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither Oxtered herself nor her children, aba.
oould not bdieve them good natured ; and because they
were fond of reading, she fancied them satirical : peihapSL'
-without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical ; Imt
that did not signify. It was censure in common use, and
easily given.
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy,
It checked the idleness of one, and the husineas of the other.
Lady Middleton was Hhimed of doing nothing before thsm,
r %
DoliiHihyGoOgle
313 wranm ^m ■Etnttiurr.
wd the flatteiT whidi Lncy wu pioud to think of and ad-
minister at other timea she feared they would deipiae
her for oSMng. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of
the three by their pFesence ; and Jt was in their power to
Kcondle her to it entirely. Would either of them only
bave given her a full and minute account of die whole aSUr
between Marianne and Mr. Willoughby she wonld have
dioaght herself amply rewarded for the aaeriflce of die beat
place by the fire after dinner, which their aitival oecaaloBed.
But this condliadoB was not granted ; fbr thnq^ ibe tiftcn
threw out espreaaionB of pity fin her tiner to Elinor, and
more than once dropt a reflection on tile hicoaMaiMy of
beaux before Marianne ; no efllhct was produced, but a look
of indiff^ence tram the former, or of diign«t in the httter.
Anefibrt even yetlighter might have made her their friend:
— would they only have langbed at her abont the Doctor !
But go little were they, any more tJiafi the others, inclined
to oblige her, that if Sir Jt^n dined from home she might'
q > end a whole day without hearing any other raillery on the
subject than what she was kind enough to b < *tow on, hereelf.
All these jealouties and discontents, however, were so
totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that sh« thought it k
deh^tfiil thing for die girls to be together; and generally
congratulated her young friends every night on having e*-
caped the company of a stupid old woman to long. She Joined
tbem sometimes at Sir John's, and sometini» it her own
bome ; but wherever it Was, she'atwaya came in excelleiA
ifiirits, tvH of delight and importance, attributing Ctnrlotte'a
well doing to her own care, and ready to gtve ao exact, ao mi.
nnteadetailof herdtnation, asonlyHiasStecJehadeufioatr
enough to desire. One thing did dtRtarb her ; and of that
die made her daily complaint. Mr. Palmer maintained tfac
oommmijbnt unfatherlyopfnion among hiswx, of allinbnta
bang alike ; and though she could plainly perceiTe, at dif-
ferent times, the most striking reiemUance between Ihla
baby and every one of his rektions on both rides, there waa
no convincing his father of it ; no persuading him to ba-
lieve that it was not exactly Hke every oAer baby of the
•ame age; nor -oonld he evm be bnmght to aekiiowledge
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
219
the nmple prapoadon of its bring the & iMt child in Qm
I come sow to the relatian of ■ mkfortune which about
this ttme be & U tin. John Dt^wood. It wt happened that
while k«r two wtfen with Mn. Jenoiiigi were first calling on,
her in Haiiejr Street, another of her acquaintance had dropt
in — a drconiBtance ia itielf not app«fently likelj to pro-
duQt evil to hei. But while the imaginations of other peou
{de will carry theio away to fisin wrong judgments of out
oooduct, and to decide on it by alight appearancei, one's
happiness miut in lome measure be always at the mercy of
dunoe. In the present instance, this last-arrived lady al.
lowed kei fancy no far to outrun trudi and probability, that
on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods, and
understanding them to he Mr. Diahwood's sisters, she im-
mediately concluded them to be staying in Hsrley Street;
and this misconstruetioD produced, within a day or two
sfterwards, cards of invitation for them, as well as for their
brother and sister, to a small musical party at her bouse;
die consequence ot which was, that Mrs. John Disbwood
was obliged to submit not only to. the exceedingly great in-
convenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dub-
woods, but, what waa still worse, must be subject to all
tlieunpleaaantneBBof appearing to .treat them with atientdon;
and who could tell that they might not expect to go out
vitb her a second time ? The power of disapp < nnting diem,
it was true, must always be hera.- But that was not enough ;
for when people are determined on a mode of conduct which
they know to be wrong, they feel ipjured by the expectation
of any thing bett» from them.
Marianne bad now been tnougbt, by d^reee, so much
into the habit of going out every day, that it was become a
matter of indifference to her whether she went or not ;
and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every evtm-'
ing's engagement, though wilhout expecting the smallest
amusement from any, and. very often without knowing, till
die last moment, where it was to take her.
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly
indifferent as not to bestow half the consideration on it,
during the whide of hei toilet, whidi it received from
DoliiHihyGoOgle
kHn Steele in dw fint five minatet of tbdr bdng together,'
when it wta finisbed. Nothing e«(»ped her minate ofaaervd
atJOD and general cnrionty ; abe aaw ereiy thing, and asked.
erery thing ; w« never e»Mj till ahe knew the price of every
part of Marianne'i dress ; could have gneated the nninba'
of her gowni altogether widi better jiidgin«it than Marianne
herself; and was not without hopes of finding ont,befaie
thej parted, how much her wa^iii^ cost pCT week, and
bow mncfa (lie had every year to spend npcni hendf. The
impdrtinence of tbeae kind of scmtiaics, moreorer, wai
^erally condnded with a compBment, whidi, dio < ^
meant as its doaeenr, was eonitdaed by Marianne as the
greatest impertinence of all; for after undeigoing an ex-
amination into the valne and make of her gown, die colour
of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hsir, she wai
almost sure of being told, that npon " her word abe looked
vatdy smart, and she dared to say would make a gmt
With anch enconragement as this wm she dismissed, va
the present occasion, to her brothcr'a carriage,'which they
were ready to enter five minutes after it stopped at the
door, a puncniality not very agreeable to their sister-m-
law, who had preceded them to the boose of her acquaint-
Mice, and was there hoping for some delay mi their part,
that might ioconvenioice either hendf or ha- coachman.
The events of the evening were not very remsrksble:.
The party, like other musical parties, comprehended a great
many people who bad real taste for the performance, and a
great many tatae who had none at all ; and the peribrmers
themselves were, u unul, in their own estimation, aod
that of tbeir immediate friends, the fint private performen
in England.
As Elinor was nather musicsl, nor affecting to be ao^
she made no scruple of turning away her eyes from the
grand piano-forte whenever it suited her, and unrestrained
even by the presence of a harp, and a violoncello, would
fix them at pleasure on any other olgect in the room. In
one of these excursive glances she percdved, among a group
of young men, the very be who had given them s lecture
on toothpick-cases at Gray'i. She perceived him aooa
D,™i,3. < ihvGoogle
US
afterwards looklDg at henelf, and speaking ftmillarlj to her
brother ; and had just determined to find out bis name
from the latter, when they both came towarda ber, and
Mr. Daehwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert
Ferrara,
He addresaed her with easy dvlKty, and twisted hit
bead into a bow, which asBDred her, aa plainly aa worda
eonid have done, that he was exacdy the coxcomb abe bad
beard him described to be by Lucy. Happy had it been
for her, if her regard for Edward had depended leea on hia
own merit than on the merit of his nearest relations ! For
then his brother's bow must have given the finishing'stroke
to what the ill-bumoar of his mother and sister would have
fa^un. But while she wondered at the diSbrence of the
two young men, she did not find that the emptiness and
conceit of the one put her at all out of charity with the
modesty and worth of the other. Why they were difierenC,
Robert explained to her himself, in the course of a quarter
of an hour'a conTersation ; for, talldng of hia brother, and
lamenting the extreme gaudterie which be really believed
kept him from mixing in proper society, he candidly and
generoualy attributed it mudi less to any natural deflciency
than to the misfortune of a private education ; while be
himself, though probably without any particular, any ma-
terial superiority by nature, merely from the advantage of
a public school, was aa well fitted to mix in the world as
any other man.
" Upon < my soul, " he added, " I beUeve it is nothing
more ; and so I often tell my mother, when she is grieving
about it. * My dear madam,'I always say to her,'yon
must make yourself easy. The evil is now irremediable,
and it baa been entirely your own doing. Why would
you be p«auaded by my uncle. Sir Robert, gainst your
own judgment, to'place Edward under private tuition,
at the most critical time of his life ? If you had only sent
him to Westminster as well as myself, instead of sending
him to Mr. Pratt's, all thii would have been prevented.'
This ia the way in whidi I always conuder the mattra,
and my mother is perfectly convinced of ber error. "
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever
r 4
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
816 mim j
miglit be ber general Mtunation of the adrniUge of •
public ichool, she ceuld bM think of Edwud'a abode Sa
Mr. Prstt'a family witli aty Mtii & clion.
" Vou reside in Devooaiiire, I tluok, " wta kb next ok
terradon, " in a cottage near Danlisb. "
EUncH* Kt him right aa tolls titnatien ; aitd it Boenied
Tathec MtrpriiiDg lo him that any body eoidd Hvf in Devan-
Aire without living near Dawliah. He bestowed hit
beartj ^iprohation, however, on Aeir apedea of house.
" For my own part, " said he, " 1 am exeetaively food
■ of a collage ; there is always so much comfort, *• mvA
degance about them. And I protest, if I bad my money
to spare, I should boy a little land and build one myaelf,
within a abort dietance of London, where 1 might drive
myself down at any time, and collect a few Menda about
Bte, and be happy. I advise every body who is going to
build, to build s cottage. My friend Lord Courtlaud
eame to. me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and laid before me three different plana of Bonomi's. I was
to decide on the best of ihem.'My dear Conrtlsnd,'laid
I, immediately thiflwing them all into the fire,'do not
adept either of them, but by all means build a cottag &'
And that, I fancy, will be the end of it.
" Some people imagine that there can be no accommo-
dations, no space in a cottage ; but tliis i« all a mistake. I
was last month at my friend Elliott's, near Dartford.
Lady Elliott wished to give a dance.'But how can it be
done P'said she :'iny dear Ferrara, do tell me how it ia
to be managed. There ia not a room in this cottage that
will hold ten couple ; and nheie can the mqaper be?'T
Immediately saw diat there could be no difficulty in it, so
I laid,'My dear Lady Elliott, do not be uneaay. The
dining-pariour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card-
tables may be placed in tbe drawing-room ; the library
may be open for tea and other refreshments ; and let Ae
ni^er be set out in the saloon.'Lady Elliott was de-
listed with the thon^t. We measured the dining-
room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen coiqde, —
and the afiUr was arranged predaely after lUy plan. So
tbat, in fact, you see, if people do but know lunr to act
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
SIT
•boat it, every eooifort nu; be u wdl eiqoycd id a e«tUg«
u in the most ipaciona dwdling. "
Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not tfaink be deurred
die conpiiaait of ratioDal o^ovtioD.
Aa John DubwDod had no more pleanre in mnae tban
bu eldest siater, kii nuDdwaa equaUj at liberty lo fix on
any thing el«e ; and a thought itruck him, during the
evening, which he communicated to fail wife, for har ap-
probation, when they got home. The consideration of
Mr*. Denniaon'i miiuke, in auppodng hit usCera their
gucsu, bad luggnCed die propriety of their being really in-
vited to become such, while Mrs. Jenninga'a engagonenta
kept her from home. The expense would be nothing; th«
inconvenience not more ; and it wat altcfWber an atten-
tion wbidt the delicacy of hia conscience pmntad out to be
retjuiaite to ila compkEe enfranchisement from his promise
to hii father. Fanny waa startled ^t the proposal.
" I do not see how it can be done, " said she, " without
affitmting Lady Middleton, for they spend every, day with
her ; otherwise I (honld be exceedingly ^ad to do it You
know I am alwayt ready to pay them any attention in my
powa-, as my taking them out this evening abowB. But
they ore Lady Middleton's visiters. How can I ask them
away from her ? "
Her hntband, but with great humility, did not see the
force of her objection. " They bad already spent a week
in tbia manner in Conduit Street, and Lady Middleton
could not be displeased at their giving the same number ctf
days to such near relations. "
Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigouTj
said, —
" My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it
W*a in my power. But I had just settled within mysdf to
•ak the Miss Steelea to spend a few tlays with us. They
are very well bdiaved, good land of girls ; and I think the
mttention is due to them, as their uncle did so very wdl by
Edward. We can ask yoor aiateri some other year, yon
know ; but the Miss Steeles may not be in town any more.
I am sure you will like them ; indeed, you do like tbem.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SIS SBiraE AND 8BNgIBILIT7.-
you know, yery much already, and so does my mothH';
and they are such favourites with Harry ! "
Mr. Dashwood waa convinced. He hw the neceuity of
invidng the Misa Steetea immediately ; and his conscienee
Ktta psMified by the resoludon of inviting his sisten another
year ; at the same time, however, slily nispecdng that an*
other year would make the invitation needless, by bringing
Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne ac
Fanny, rqoicing in her escape, and prond of the ready
wit that bad procured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy,
to request her company and her sister'a, for some days, in
Harley Street, as soon as Lady Middleton could spue
them. This was enough to make Lucy really and reason-
ably happy. Mrs. Da^wood seemed actually working for
her herself; cherishing all her hopea, and promoting all her
views ! Such an opportunity of being with Edward and
hia family was, above all things, the most material to her
intereat, and sueh an invitation the most gratifying to her
feelings ! It was an advantage that could not be too grate-
fully acknowledged, nor too speedily made uae of; and the
visit to Lady Middleton, which had, not before had any
precise limits, waa instantly discovered to have been always
meant to end in two days'time.
When the note was ahown to Elinor, as it was within
ten minutes after " its arrival, it gave her, for the first time,
■ome share in the expectations of Lucy ; for audi a maik
of uncommon kindness, Touchsafed on so short an acquaint-
ance, seemed to declare that die good will towards her
arose from something more than merely malice against
herself; and might be brought, by time and address, to da
every ihing that Lucy wished. Her flattery had already
subdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entry
into the close heart of Mrs. John Daahwood ; and these
were effects that laid open the probability of greater.
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street ; and all that
reached Elinor of their influence there strengthened her
expectation of the event Sir John, who called on them
more than once, brought home silch accounta of the favour
they were in as must be tiniversally striking. Mrs. Daih*
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ii9
wood bad never been m much pletsed with any joong
women in her life u she was iritli them ; bad given each
of tbem a needle.book made ij some emigrant ; called
Lnc;r bj her Chriatian Dame ; and did not know whether
■he ihoold ever be able to part widi tbem.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
VOLUME THE THIRD.
CHAPTER I.
Mrs. FaiiMeb wm bo nell U the end of • fortnight that
her mother felt it no longer Decenary to give up the wbde
of her ^me to her ; and, con tenting herself with viutiog her
once or twice a day, returned from that period to her own .
home, and her own habits, in which she found the Miis
Dtahwoods very ready to re-aiaume their former ehare.
Abont the third or fourth rooming after their being thus
resettled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning
from her ordinary vidt to Mrs. Palmer, entered the draw-
ing-room, where Elinor was sitting by herself, with an air
of such hurrying importance as prepared her to hear lome-
thing wonderful; and giving her time only to form that
idea, began directly to justify it by saying, —
" Lord ! my dear Miss Dashwood ! have you heard the
news? "
" No, ma'am. What is it? "
" Something so strange 1 But you shall bear it all.
When I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite in a
fuss about the child. She was sure it was very ill — it
cried, and fretted, and was all over pimplea. So 1 looked
at it directly, and,'Lord ! my dear,* says I,'it is nothing
in the world but the red gum ;'and nurse said just the
same. But Charlotte, she would not be satufled, so Mr.
Donavan was sent for ; and luckily he happened to be just
come in from Harley Street, so he stepped over directly,
and as soon as ever lie saw the child he said just as we did,
that it was notfaii^ in the world but the red gum, and then
Charlotte waa easy. And so, just as be was g < »iig away
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SSI
agidn, it came into my head, J am ntre I do not know how
I happened to think of it, b«t it otme ioto my bead to uk
him if there was any mwi. So npon diat he imirked, and
aimpered, and looked grave, and Memed to know lom**
thing or other, and at last he laid in a vhitpm,'For fear
any nnpleaaant report ibould reach the youi^ ladtei ondv
your care as to their liater'i indiipotition, I think it ad-
visahle to «ay, that t beliere there ii no gre«t reaaon for
alarm ; I hope Mn. Daahwood will do very welL "
" What! 11 Fanny iU? "
" That ii exactly what I aaid, my dear.'Lord I'iaya
I,'K Mn. Daahwood ill?'So then it all came out;
and the long and the short of the matter, by alll can l«sro,
aeemi to be tbia. Mr. Edward Ferrari, the very yoODg
man I uiod to joke with you about, (but, however, aa it
tuma oat, I am monatroUB glad there never waa any diing
in it,) Mr. Edward Ferran, it leemi, baa been engaged
above thia twelvemonih to my oouun Lucy J There's for
you, my dear E And not a ereature knowing a lyllable of
the matter eioept Nancy I Could yon have beUeved luch
a thing poaaiUe f There li no great wonder in their liking
one another ; but that nattera diould be bronght to for-
ward between tbem, and nobody suspect it ! That ia
atrange I I never happened to aee them tc^etber, or I am
aiire I should have found it out directly. Weil, and n
diia waa kept a great secret, fer fear of Mra. Ferrari, and
neithn abe nor your brother or alatei mapected a word of
the matter ; till thia very morning, pMr Nancy, who, yon
know, is a well-meaning creature, but no coitjurer, popt it
all out.'liOrd!'thinks ahe to herself,'they are all to fond
of Lucy, to be nire they will make no dlfllculty about it;'
and se away she went to your sister, who waa sitting iH
alone at her carpet-work, litde suspecting n^iat was to come
. —for she had just been aaying to your brother, only Ave
minutes before, that ahe thought to make a match between
Edward and some Lord's dav^ter or other, I forget who.
So yon may thhik what a blow it waa to all h^ vanity and
pride. %e fell into violent hysterics immediately, with
muii icreams aa readied yoni Inotber'a ears, aa he waa Bt-
tiag in hia vim dicMng-room dowu-itain, thinking abmu
DoliiHihyGoOgle
m BEKSB AND mmiBIUTr.
writing a letter to lus steward in the country. So up lie
flew directly, and a terrible aeeae took place, for Lney was
come to them bj that time, little dreaming what wae going
on. Poor soul ! 1 pitj her. And 1 muBt say, I think she
vas used very hardly ; for your sister scolded like any fury,
and soon drove her into a fainting fit. Nancy, she fell
upon her knees, and cried hitterly; and your hrother, he
walked about the room, and said he did not know what to
do. Mrs. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute
longer in the house; and your brother was forced to go down
upon Aw knees, too, to persuade her to let them stay till they
bad packed up their clothes. Then she fell into hysterics
again, and he was so frightened that he would send for
Mr. Donavan, and Mr. Donavan found the house in ail this
Uproar. The carriage was at the door ready to take my
poor cousins away, and they were just stepping in as he
came < ^; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says, she
could hardly walk; and Nancy, she was almost as bad. I
declare, I have no patience with your sister ; and 1 hop^
with all my heart, it will be a niat«h in spite of her. Lord!
what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when he hean
of it 1 To have his love used so scornfully I for they say
he is monstrous fond of her, as well he may. 1 should
not wonder, if he was to be in the giealest of a passion .'—
and Mr. Donavan thinks just the aame.^ He and I had a
great deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that he ia
gone back again to Hatley Street, that he may be within
call when Mrs. Ferrars is told of it; for she was lent for tm
•oon as ev«r my cousins left the house, for your sister waa
Blue the would be in hysterica too ; and so she may, for
what I care. I have no pity for either of them. I have
no notion of people's making such a to^o about money and
greatness. Th^ ia no reason on earUi why Mr. Edward
and Lucy should not marry ; for I am sure Mrs. Ferrars
may afibrd to do very well by her ton; and though Lucy
haa neU to nothii^ herself, she knows better than any body
how to make the most of every thing ; and I dare say, if
Mrs. Ferrars would only'allow him five hundred a year,
ahe would make a« good an appearance with it as any body
^■e would with eight Xoid ] how rang they nigiit live
DoliiHihyGoOJ^Ic
mmi AND MMnBiuiT, $i3
in such another cottage as yours — or a little bigger — with
two maids and two meD ; and 1 believe I could help them
to a housemaid, for my Betty has a taeta out of plac«, that
would fit them exactly. "
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased; and as EUinor had had time
enough to collect her thoughts, she was able to give such
an answer, and make such observations, as the subject might
naturally be supposed to produce. Happy to find that she
was Dot suspected of any extraordinary interest in it ; that
Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be the
case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward;
and happy above all the rest, in the absence of Marianne,
she felt very well able to speaL of the affair without embar-
rassment, and to give her judgment, as she beUeved, with
impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it.
She couU hardly determine what her own expectation of
its event really was ; though she esrnestly tried to drive
away the notion of its being possible to end otherwise at
last, than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy. What
Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be
a doubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear ; and atiU
more anxiouB to know how E^iward would conduct himself.
Por hitn sbe felt much compassion ; — for Lucy very little
• — and it coat her some pains to procure that little;— for
tbe rest of the party none at all.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor
soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its dis-
cttfision. No time was to be lost in undeceiving her, in
making her acquainted with the real truth, and in endea-
vouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others, without
betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any
resentment against Edward.
Elinor's office was a painfiil one. She was going to re-
move what she really believed to be her sister's chief con-
solation, — to give such particulars of Edward as she feared
would ruin him for ever in her good opinion, — and to make
Marianne, by a resemblance in their sitoations, which to her
fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointment
over again. But unwelcWe as such a task must be, it wu
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
Hi
Mccntfy l|o be done, ud EUhot Aerefore hwtened to per^
She WW very far trom wishing to dwell on her own feeL
ings, or to represent herself as suffering mudi, any other-
wise than ts the adf-eomtnand she had practised since ha
first tnowledge of Edward's engagement might suggest ■
hint of what wu practicable to Marianne. Her narratifm
was dear and simple ; and though it could not be given
without emotion, it was not aceompamed by violent agi-
tation, nor impetuous grief. That belonged rariier to the
hearer, for Marianne listened wfth horror, and cried exces-
■ively. Elinor was to be the comforter of Others in her
own distresses, no less than in theire; and all the comfort
that could be given by assurances of her own composure of
mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward fimn every
< jiai^ but of imprudence, was readily offered.
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither.
Edward seemed a second WiUou^by; and acknowledging
as EKnor did, that she had loved him most sincerely, conid
■he feel less than hersdf ! As for Lucy Steele, she con.
tidered her so totally nnamiable, so absolutely incapable of
attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded
at first to beheve, and afterwards to pardon, any former af-
feetion of Edward for her. She vronld not even admh it
to have been natural ; and Elinor left her to be convinced
that it was BO, by Aat which only could convince her, a
better knowle^e of mankind.
Her first commnnication had reached no farther than to
atate the fact of the engf^ement, and iJie length of time it
had existed. Marianne's feelings had then broken in, and
ptit an end to all regularity of detail ; and for seme thne
all that could be done was to soothe her distress, kaaen her
alarms, and combat her resentment. The first qnettioD m
ber aide, which led to ftrdier particulars, was, —
" How long has this been known to yon, Elinor ? bat he
written to you? "
" I have known it dieee four months. When Lney fint
nme to Barton Park last November, she toM me in eon-
fldence of her engagement. "
At tbeae words, Marianne's eyes expressed the aatonUw
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mtnt which ber lipi could not utter. After ■ puue of
wander, ibe excliimed, —
" Four months ! HBTeyouknownof thiifanrmontht? "
EUdot conflnned it.
" WhU ! while attending me in all taj mitery, has ihii
been on jaat heart f and 1 have reproached you fbr itiag-
h^py! "
" It wai not fit that you ahould then know bow much I
was the reverte. "
" Four months ! " cried Marianne ag^n. " So calm !
ao (^eerfiil ! How have you been supported ? "
" By feeling that I wu doing my duty. My promiae
to Lucy oUiged me to be secret. I owed it to her, there,
fbre, to avoid giving any hint of the truth ; and I owed it
to my family and fiieuda, not to create in them a solicitude
about me, whidi it could not be in my power to satisfy. " ,
Marianne waned much stm^
" I have very often wished to undeceive yomsdf and
my mother, " added Elinor ; " and once or twice I haT»
attempted it; but without betraying my ttuat, I never
could liave convinced you. "
" Four mondiB I and yet you loved him ! "
" Yea. But I did not love only him ; and wbSt A*
comfort of others was dear to me, I was glad to spare them
tKtm knowing how much I felt. Now, 1 can thinlt and
speak of it with little emotion. I would not have you
■nffer on ray account ; for I assure you I no longer sufib
materially myself. I have many things to support me. I
am not conicioua of having provoked the disappointment
by any imprudence of my own, and I have borne it as mudl
as possible without spreading it farther. I acquit Edward
of dl essential misconduct. I wish him very happy ; and
I am so sure'of his always doing his duty, that thou^
now he may harbour some regret, in the end he must b^
come so. Lucy does not wuit sense; and Aat is dw
foundation on wtiich every Uring good may be bnilL And
afitr all, Marianne, after all that is tiewitching in die ides
of a single and constant attachment, and all that can be
said of one's happineas depending entirely on any par. -
tienlar pera«),4t is not meant— it i* not fit — it is-not
DoliiHihyGoOglc
926 raoraB i
powlbiB that it ahoul^ lie «o. £dw«rd wiU inanT Lnej ;■
he will marry a woman superior in person and understand-
i[^ to half her wx ; and time and halnt will teach him to
fbrget that he ever thought another Euperior to her "
" If such ia your way of thinking, " said Marianne, " if
die }0Hs of what is moat valued is bo easily to be made up
by something else, your resolutioD, your self-coniinand,
aie, perhaps, a little less to be wondered at. They are
brought more within my comprehension, "
" J understand you. You do not snppose that I hare
ever felt much. For foar months, Marianne, I have had
■1] this hanging on my mind, without bdng at liberty to
speak of it to a sii^^ creature; knowing that it would
make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were
e^Eplained (o you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the
leMt. It was told me, — it was in a manner forced on me
by the very person herself, whose prior engagement rained
aU my prospect! ; and told me, as I ihou^t, with triumph.
This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to oppose, -
by endeavouring to qipear indifferent where I have been
most deeply interested ; and it has not berai only once ; I ,
have had her hopes and exultatitni to listen to again and
again. I have known myself to be divided from £dward
for ever, without hearii^ one circumstance that could make .
me leas desire the connection. Nothing has proved him
unworthy ; nor has any thing declared him indifferent to
me. I have had to contend against the unkiDdneas of his
sitter, and the insolence of his mother; and have coff^ed
the puniBhment of an attachment, without enjoying ite
advantages. And all this has been going on at a time,
when, a > you too well know, it has not been my only ua-
hi^piness. If you can think me capable of ever feeling,
surely you may suppose that I have suffra^d note. The
composure trf mind with which 1 have brought myself at
present to conuder the matter, the consolation that I
have been willing to admit, have been the et & ct of constaat
and painful exertion ; they did not spring up of thent-
selves ; they did not occur to relieve my apirita at fint.
No, Marianne. Tien, if I tiad not been bound to sileno^
perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely —not evea
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
txsBB AND BEmnHiirrr.'S97
what I owed to my dearest friends — fiom openly showing
thftt I was wry unhappy. "
'Marianne was quite sabdued.
" Oh, EKnor, " she cried, " yon IwYe in«de me hate
myself for ever. How barbarous have I been to you ! —
you, who have been my only comfort, who have borne
with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be only
Euffiring for me! la this my gratitude? Is this the
only return I can make you ? Because yonr merit cries
out upon myself, I have been trying to do it away. "
The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In such
a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor had no diffi-'
cnlty in obtaining from her whatever promise she reqaired ;
and, at her reqnest, Marianne engaged never to speak of
the aflair to any one with the least appearance of bitter-
nesB ; to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest in-
crease of dislike to her ; and even to see Edward himself,
if chance should bring them together, without any dimi.
nution of her usual cordiality. These were great con-
cessions ; but where Marianne felt that she had injured,
DO reparation could be too much for her to make.
She performed her promise of bdng discreet, to admir-
ation. She attended to all that Mrs. Jennings had to say
upon the subject, vrith an anchanging complexion, dissented
from her in nothing, and was heard three times to say,
" Yes, ma'am. " She listened to her praise of Lucy with
only moving from one chair to another ; and when Mrs.
Jennings talked of Edward's afFection, it cost her only a
Bpasm in her throat. Such advances towards heroism in
her sister, made Elinor feel equal to any thing herself.
The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a vitit
from their brother, who came with a most serious aspect
to talk over the dreadful affiiir, and bring them news of
his wife.
" You have heard, I suppose, " said he, with great
solemnity, as soon as he was seated, " of the very shocking'
diMovery that took place nnder onr roof yesterday. "
They all looked their assent ; it seemed too awflil a
moment for speech.
" Your dster, " be continued, " ha > sabred dreadfiilly ;
«2
DoliiHihyGoOgle
MS aam amd nnnBiurr.
Hn. FerrUB too — in ihort it ban been a Koie of nich
complicated distren — but I will hope that the BtonD may ^
Ik iiesthered without our being any of us quite oveicoue.
Poor Fanny ! she wu in hyateiin all yeaterday. Bnt I
wouU not alarm yon too much. Douavan aays there ig
nothing materially to be apprehended ; hei consiitaUoD ia
a good one, and her resolution equal to any thing. She
ha« borne it all vith the fortitude of an angel ! She aaya
■he never shall think well of any body again ; and one
cannot wonder at it, after being to deceived ! — meeting
with euch ingratitude, where bo much kindnew had been
ahowD, so much confidence had been placed 1 It was quite
out of the benevolence of her heart, that she had asked
these young women to hei house ; merely because she
thought they deserved aome attendon, were harroleaa, well-
behaved girls, and would be pleasant companions; for
Otherwise we both wished very much to have invited you
and Marianne to be with us, while your kind friend there
was attending her daughter. And now to be so rewarded I
'I wish, with all my heart,'says poor Fanny, in her
afibctionate way,'that we had asked your sisters instead of
Here he stopped to be thanked ; which being done, be
wait on.
" What poor Mrs. Ferrars sufiered, when fiist Fanny
broke it to her, is not to be described. While she with th«
truest afitction had been planning a most ehgible con-
nection for him, was it to be supposed that be could be all
the time secredy engaged to another person i — such a
suspicion could never have entered her head! If ahe
su^ected any prepoasesuon elsewhere, it could not be in
that quarter.'3%ere, to be sure,'said she,'I might have
thought myxBlf safe.'She was quite in an agony. We
consulted together, however, as to what should be done,
uid at last she determined to send for Edward. He came.
Sut I am sorry to relate what ensued. All that Mrs.Fenara
could say to make him put an end to the engagement, as-
■isted too, u jo» may well suppose, by my arguments, and
Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail. Duty, afiection, every
thing was disregarded. I never thought Edward so atub-
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
■Eim iKtt sEKnatLirt. S39
bora, » unfeefing before. Hi* mother explained to him
her Uberd designs, In cue of Ui murying Min Morton ;
told him she would lettle on him the Norfolk estate,
which, clear of land-tax, bringa in a good dionMnd a year ;
oHbred even, when matters grew desperate, to make It
twelve hundred ; and in opposition to thia, if he still
perdsted in this low connection, represented to hira the
cotain penary that must attend the matdi. His own two
dionsand pounds she protested should be his all ; ahe
would never see Um again ; and so tat would she be fttim
■fibrding him the smdlest assistance, that if he were to
«nter into any profession with a vjew of better support,
«he would do all in her power to prevent his advancing
Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped
lier hands together, and cried, " Gracious God 1 can this be
possible ? "
" Well may you wonder, Marianne, " replied her brother,
" at the criMtinacy iriiich coiild redst sudt argunients aa
these. Your exclamation ia very natural. "
Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her
■a urged In Tain.
Edward said very little ; but what he did say was in die
most determined manner. Nothing shotdd prevail on him
to give up his engagement. He would stand to it, cost him
what it might, "
" Thim, " cried Mrs. Jennings with Unnt sincerity, no
longer able to be lUent, " he has acted like an honest man !
■I beg your pardon, Mr. Dashwood, but if he had done
otherwise, I should have thought Um a rascal. I have
some little concern in the busineaa, as well as yourself, fbr
Lucy Steele is my cousin ; and I believe there is not a better
Idnd of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband. "
John Daahwood was greatly astonished ; but his nature
was calm, not opm to provocation ; and he never wished to
oSted any body, especially any body of good fortune. H«
therefore replied without any resentment, —
" I woidd by no tncani ipttk. dinespectfiillj of tny fftj
«S
DoliiHihyGoOgle
iation of yoim, nudani. Miss Lucy. Stede is, I dare uy,
a very degerring young woman; but in tbe present case,
you know, the connection must be impossible. And to have
entered into a secret engagement with a young man under
her uncle's care, the eon of a woman especially of cudl
very large fortune as Mrs. Ferrars, is, perhaps, altogether a
little extraordinary. In short, I do not mean to reflect
upon tbe b^aviour of any person whom you have a regard
for, Mrs. Jennings. We all wish her extremely ^happy;
and Mrs. Ferrsrs'a conduct throughout the whole has
been such as every conscientious, good mother, in Uke dr-
mmstances, would adopt. It has been dignified and liberaL
Ifdward has drawn his own lot, and I fear it will be a had
■ Marianne dghed out her dmtlar appiehendon ; and
Elinor'a heart wrung for the feelings of Edward, while
braving his mother's threats, for a woman who could not
reward him.
" Well, sir, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did it
end? "
" I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture :
— Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's notice.
He left her house yesterday, but where he u gone, or
whether he is still in town, I do not know ; for u« of
course can make no enquiry. "
" Poor young man j and what is to become of him ? "
" What, indeed, ma'am ! It is a melancholy con-
sideration. Bom- to the prospect of such affluence ! 1
cannot conceive a situation more deplorable. The intereet
of two thousand pounds — how can a man live on it !
And when to that is added the recollection that he migh^
but for his own foUj, within three months, have been in
the receipt of two thousand five hundred a year (foe
Miss Morton has thirty thousand pounds), 1 cannot picture
to myself a mare wretched condition. We mnst all fed
fix him ;'and the more so, because it is totally out of our
power to assist him. "
" Poor young man ! " cried Mrs. Jennings, "'1 am *nre
he should be very welcome to bed and board Bt my house ;
fud w I wotthl tell him if I could see him. It i* not fit
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
MHU AND BMNRIBtUrr. ^Sl
that lie should be liTing about at his own charge now, at
lodgings and tavenu. "
Elinor's heart thanked her for inch kindnesi towarda
Edwud, though ahe could not forbear smiling at the fona
of it.
" If he would only have done as well bj himself, " said
John Daihwood, " as all hia friende were dispoged to do bj
him, he might now have been in hia proper situation, and
would have wanted for nothing ; but aa it is, it must be out
of mj body's power to assist him. And there is one diing
more preparing against him, which must be worse than all,
— Mb mother has determined, with a very natural kind of
■pirit, to settle UuU estate upon Robert immediately, which
might have been Edward's, on proper conditions, I left
her thia morning with her lawyer, talking over the buainese. "
" Well ! " said Mra. Jennings, " that is her revenge;
Every body has a way of their own. But I don't think
mine woidd be, to make one aon independent becauae
another hod plagued me. "
Marianne got up and walked about the room.
" Can any thing be more galling to the spirit of a man,
continued John, " than to see his younger brother in pos.
session of an estate which might have been his own ? Poor
Edward ! I feel for him sincerely. "
A few minutes more, spent in Ae same kind of eflbsioD,
concluded hSs visit ; and with repeated assurances to his
sisters that he really believed there was no material danger
m Fanny's indisposidon, and that they need not therefore
be very uneasy about it, he went away, leaving the three
ladies unanimous in their sentiments on diepresent occasion,-
aa far at least as it r^arded Mrs. FeTrara'a conduct, the
Daahwoods', and Edward's.
31arianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted
the room ; and aa her vehemence made reserve impossible
in JGUnor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jenninga, they all joined
in a very spirited critique upcm the party.
,G(Hinlc
CHAPTER 11.
Has- Jknkinm wu tetj wami is hei praJK of Edwaid's
conduct, but only Elinor and Marianne nndentood its true
meriL Th«s only knew how little he had had to tempt him
to be disobedient, and how email wu the ctHiacdation, beyond
the ranadouinen of doing right, that could remain to him
in the Iom of friends and fortune. Elinor glimed in his in-
t«^ty ; and Muianne forgave all his ofiences in compasuim
for his pnniahment. But though eonfldence between them
was, bf this public diseoTeiy, reatored to ita [ntiper state, it
was not a subject on whii^ either of diem were fond of
dwelling wb«i alone. Elinor avoided it upon principle, m
tending to fix still more upon her ihoughta, by the too
warm, too podtive aunrancea of Marianne, that belief of
Edward'i continued afiection for heraelf which she rathet
wished to do awaj^ ; and Marianne's courage soon failed tut.
In trying to cmvene upon a topic which alwayi left her man
diwatiBfied with herself than evei^ by tiie comparison it ne-
oeaaarily produced between Elinw'i conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison ; bst not aa htr
sister bad hoped, to urge her to exerdon now ; she felt it
with all the pain of continual self-reproach, regretted most
Utterly, that ahe had never exerted herself before ; hat it
brought only the torture of penitence, without the hope of
amendment Her mind was so much weakened, that ahe
still fancied preeent exerdon impoiaible, and therefore it
only dispirited her more.
Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two after-
wards, of affitirs in Harley Street or Bartlett's Buildings.
But though 10 much of the matter was known to them al-
leady, that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in
spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking aftet
more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of com-
fort and enquiry to her coumnB aa soon as die could ; and
nothing but the htnderanee of more viuten than usual had
prevented her going to them witliin that time.
.i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
''The third diy niceeeding thtir knowledge of die pir-
tienlan irw to fine, w > beautiftil ■ aunday, u to draw many
to Keniington GardenR, diongh it wa* onl; the second
week in March. Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the
number ; hut Marianne, who knew that the Willonghbya
were again in town, and had a conatant dread of meeting
them, dioee rather to stay at home, dian lentnic into n
public a place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mra. Jenninga joined them
MOD after they entered the Gardens ; and Elinor was not
■orry Uiat by her continuing with them, and engaging aS
Mrs. Jenninga'a conversation, she was herEcIf left to qoiet
rdlection. She saw nothing of the W^illoughbys, nothing
of Edward, and for Bome time nothing of any body who
cenld by an; ^ance, whether gnve or gay, be interesting to
her. Bat at last uhe fonnd^heraelf, with some sarprise, ac-
costed by Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy, ex-
pfeased great satisfaction in meeting them; and on receiving
encouragement from the particular Undneas of Mrs. Jen-
nings, left her own party for a short time, to jwii th«Eint.
Mra. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor, —
" Get it all out of her, my dear. Sbt will tdl yon any
thii^, if yoQ uk. Yon tee I oannot kave Mrs. Clarke. "
It waa Incky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity and
Elinor's loo, that she wonM tell any thing mOout bdng
asked; for nothing wonld otherwise have been leamt.
" I am so f^ad to meet you, " said Miss Sicde, tsking
her familiarly by the arm — " for I wanted to kc you of
all thinga in the world. " And then lowering her voice, " 1
nqipose Mrs. Jmninga has heard all about it. Issheangryf "
" Not at all, I bdieve, with you. "
" That is a good thing. And Lady Middkton, is st«
tagrjt "
" I cannot suppose it possible that she ibauld. "
" I am monstrous glad of it. Good gradoui ! I hava
had mdi a time of it ! 1 nev«r saw Lucy in such a rage
hi my life. She vowed at first she would never trim me vp
m new bonnet, nor do any thing else for me ^ain, so long aa
■he lived ; but now she is quite come to, and w« are as good
ftieoda ■■ ever. lM)k, ahe made me thla bow to my hatt
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
934 lamz and smtixiidTT.
■nd put in the feather Uit ni^t. Tb & tt now^'you ire go-
ing to laugh at me toq. But why should not I wear pink
ribands ? I do not care if it i* the Doctor's favouiite
ctdoni. 1 am rare, [tot mj part, I should nerer have
known be did like it better than any other colour, if be \aA
not haj^iened to say bo. My cousins have bera so pUgmng
me ! I declare, lonwtiDies I do not know which way to
look befwe ihem. "
She had wandered away to a lulgect on whidi Elinor had
nothing to say, and therefore soon judged it expedient to
find her way back again to the first.
" Well, bnt Miss Daahwood, " speaking triumphantly,
" people may say what they choose about Mr. Perrars's de-
claring he would not have Lucy, for it's no such thing, I
can tell you ; and it's quite a shame for such iU-natured re-
pcffta to be spread aboad. Whatever Lucy mi^f think
about il hendf, you know, it was no btuinesa of other peo-
ple to set it down for c^tain. "
" I never heaid any thii^ ot the Idnd hinted at befine^
I assure you, " said SSiiux.
" Oh, did not you ? But it va* aid, 1 Icnow, very
wdl, and by more than one ; for Miss Godby told Miss
Sps^, that nobody in their sense* could expect Mr. Fer.
raia to give up a woman like Miaa Morton, with thirty
thousand pounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele, that had
nothing at all ; and I had it from Mit« Sparks mysdif.
And besides that, my cousin Ridiard and himself, that when
it came to the point, he was afraid Mr. Ferrars would be off;
and when Edward did not come near ub for three days, I
conld not tell what to think myself; and I bdieve in my
heart Lucy gave it up all for lost ; for we came away firau
your'brother's Wednesday, and we saw nothing of him not
all Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, and did not know what _
was become with him. Once Luty thought to write to
him, but thai her spirit rose against that. However, diia
morning he came just as we came home from church ; and
then it all came out, how he had been sent for Wedneaday.
to Harley Street, and been talked to by hia mother and all
of them, and how he had dedared before thetn all that
he loved nobody but Looy, and nobody but Lncy would he
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
S35
lure. And how. he hod been so worriad bj nhat paueti,
th & t u Boon u he had went awsj from his mother's houw,
he had got upon his hone, and rid into the countr;, lome
where or other ; ind how he had eUyed about at an inn all
Tbundaj and Friday, on purpoBe lo get the better of it.
And after thinldng it all over and over again, he said, it
■eemed to bini -as if, now he had oo fortune, and no nothing
at all, it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the en-
gagement, -because it muat be for her loss, for he had no-
thing but two thousand pounds, and no hope of any thing
else ; and if he was to go into orders, aa he bad some
thougbte, he could get nothing but a curacy; and haw waa
they to live upon that ? He could not bear to think, of her
doing no better, and so he begged, if she had the leaat
mind for it, to put an end to the matter directly, and leave
him to shift for himself. I heard him say all this aa plain
aa could possibly be. And it was entirety for her sake,
and upon her account, that he said a word about being off,
and not upon hia own. I will take my oath he never
dnipt a syllable of being dred of her, or of wishing la
.many Mias Morton, or any thing like it. But, to be sure,
Lucy would not gjve ear to sudi kind of talking ; so she
told him directly (with a great deal about sweet and lore,
you know, and all that — Oh, la! one can't repeat such
Idnd of things you know) — she told him directly, she bad
not the least mind in the world to be off, for she could live
with him upon a trifle, and how Uttle soever he might have,
■he should be very glad to have it all, you know, or some-
thing of the kind. - So then be was monstrous happy, and
.talked on some time about what they should do, and they
agreed he should take orders directly, and they must wait
to be married till he got a living. And just then I could
not hear any more, for my cousin caUed from below to tell
me Mrs. Richardson was come in her coach, and would take
one of us to Kensington Gardens; so I was forced to
^ into the room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if she
would Uke to go, but she did not care to leave Edward ; so
X juat run up stairs and put on a pair of ailk stockings, and
came off with the Richardsona. "
" I do not understand what you mean by intemiptii^
D,™i,;f < ih.,.Google
336 - sENn i
them, " uud Minor ; " yon were all in the mme room ble-
ther, were not you ? "
" No, indeed, not tu. L & ! MiiB Duhwood, do yoti
think people make love when any body elae it by ? Oh flit
aharae ! To be sure yon must know better than that.
(Laughing affectedly.) No, Do ; they vere shut up in the
dnwing-room t^^eAer, and all I heard was only by listen-
ing at the door. "
" How ! " cried Elinor ; " have you been repeating to
me what you only learnt yoniBelf by listening at the door?
I am sorry I did not know it before ; for 1 certainly woold
not have suffered you to give me particulars of a convers-
Btion which you ought not to have known yourself. How
eould you bdiave so unfairly by your sister ? "
" .Oh, la \ there is nothing in tluit. I only stood at Ae
door, and heard what I could. And I am sure Lucy would
have done just the same by me ; for a year or two back,
when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets tf^ther,
*he never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or behind
a cfaimney.board, on purpose to hear what we said. "
Elinor tried to talk of something else ; but Miss Ste^
could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes, from wh«t
was uppermost in her mind.
" Edward talks of going to Oxford soon, " said she; " tmt
now he is lodging at No. — , Pall Mall. What an ill-na-
tuted woman hiB rao^er is, an't she ? And your brother
and sister were not very kind ! However, I shan't «iy any
thing against them to jwu,- and to be sure they did send
us home in their own chariot, which was more than I
looked for. And for my part, I was all in a fright for ttar
your sister should ask us for the bUswIfea she had gave Ub
K day or two before ; but, however, nothing was said about
them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight. Edward
have got some business at Oxford, he says ; so he must gt >
there for a time ; and after that, as soon as he can light
upon a bishop, he will he ordained. I wonder what curacy
he will get ! Good gracious ! (giggling as she spoke) I'd
lay my life I know what my cousins will say, when tbey
bear of it. They will tell me f should write to tfie Doctor,
la get Edward the cutaey of bis new Uvit^. I know they
DoliiHihyGoOgle
win ; but I uu mn I would Dot do inch a thing for all
the world.'La !'I HuM w; directly,'I wonder-how
yoa could think of such a thing. / write to the Doctor,
indeed!'"
" Well, " Kud Elinor, " it is * comfort to be prepiied
igainst the wont. You have got your aiKwer ready. "
Miaa Steele wu going to reply on the uune iubject, bat
the approach of hei own party made anodier more neces-
" Oh, lal here come the Richaidsons. I had a vast deal
more to %aj to you, but I must not stay away from them
not any looger. I atnire you they are very genteel people.
He makei a monatroui de^ of money, and they keep their
own coach. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings
about it myielf, but pray tell hei 1 am quite happy to hear
■he is not in anger againat hb, and Lady Middleton the
same ; and if any thing should happen to take you and
your uster away, and Mrs. Jennings should want company,
I am sure we diould be very glad to come and stay with
her for as long a time as she likes. I suppose Lady Middle-
ton won't ask us any more this bout. Good-by; I am
sorry Misa Marianne was not here. Remember me kindly
to her. La ! if you have not got your spotted mnsliu ttt 1-
I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn. "
Such waa her parting concern ; for after this she had
time only to pay her farewell complimenta to Mrs. Jen-
siugs, before her company was claimed by Mrs. Kiehard-
■pn ; and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge whidi
mig^t feed her powers of reflection some time, though she
bad learnt very little more than what had been already
foreseen and foreplanned in her own mind. Edward's mar-
riage with Lucy waa aa firm^ determined on, and the time
of Its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain, as she
badconcludeditwovldbe: — every thing depended, exactly
after her eipectation, on his getting that pieiennent, of
irhich, at prcseoi, there seenwd not the smallest chance.
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs, Jenningi
fn eager for Infomiation ; but aa Elinoi wished to ipjread
a* little aa posuble. intelUgenGe that had in the first place <
been so unfairly obtained, she confined herself to the brief
DoliiHihyGoOgle
8SS wMKfB um
repetitioa of Rich riinple ptrdnilin, m ilie Mt usnied
that Lacj, for the Mike of her own conKquence, would
chome to have known. The condDnance of tbeir engage
ment, and the tnana that were to be taken for prcmoting
ill end, w«i all her coniniimication ; and Ihii ptodnced from
Mn. Jenningt the foDowing natnral remaric : —
" Wait for hii having a living ! — ajr, we all know how
Aat will end : — they will wait a twelTononth, and finding;
no good comei of it, will act down upon a cniacy of fiftjr
pound* a year, with the interest of hia two thousand pounds,
and what little matter Mr. Stede and Mr. Pratt can give
her. Then they will have a diUd every year J and. Lord
help'em ! bow poor they will be ! I mnat tee what I can
give diem toward! fbmiBhing their houae. Two maidi and
two men, indeed ! as I talked of t'other day. No, no, they
muat get a itout girl of all works. Betty'i liater woidd
never do for them fune. "
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-
penny poat from Lucy heraelf. It waa as follow* : —
" Bartlett'i Baildiogi, Hmdt.
" I hope ray dear Miis Dashwood will excnie the liberty
] take of writing to her; hot I know yonr friendship finr
tne will make you pleased to hear lueh a good aeconnt of
inytelf and my dear Edward, after all die troubles we
have went through lately, therefore will m^ no more
apologies, but proceed to tay ibat, thank God! thongh we
have suffered dreadAilly, we are both quite well now, and
as happy as we must always be in one another's love. We
have had great trials, and great peraecntions, but, however,
at the same droe, grateMly acknowle < ^ many friends,
yourself not the least among them, whose great Idndness I
shall always thankfnlly remember, as will Edward too,
who I have told of it. I am sure yon will be glad to
hear, as likewise dear Hra. Jennings, I apent two happy
hours with him yesterday afternoon: he wmdd not hear nf
our pardng, though eameady did I, as I thought my duty
reqnired, urge him to it for prudence sake, and wonld
have parted for ever on die spot, would he consent to it;
hit he aaid it should never be, be did nM r^ard his mo >
DoliiHihyGoOgle
anna akd ienhbiutt. iSS
tber'a anger, wbile he could have my afifections ; oni'pnw-
pects are not yoj bright, to be sure, but we must wait,
and hope for the be«t ; he will be ordained shortl]'; and
diould it e«er be in your power to recomniend him to any
body that has a living to bestow, am very rare you will
not forget us; and dear Mth. JeniuDgs too, trust ihe will
speak a good word for as to Sir John, or Mr. Palmer, or
any friend that may be aUe to aiaiBt us.— Poor Anne wa«
much to blame for what she did, but ahe did it for the
best, 10 I say nothing ; hope Mrs. Jennings won't think
it too much trouble to give ua a call, should she come this
way any morning,'t would be a great Idndneas, and my
cousins woidd be proud to know her. — My paper reminda
me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully and re-
qiectfully remehibered to her, and to Sir Jobn, and Lady
Middlfiton, and the dear children, when you cfaance to see
them, and love to Miss Mariannej
" I am, & c. & 0. "
As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what
she concluded to be its writer's real design, by placing it
in the hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read it aloud with
many comrooitt of satisfaction and praise.
" Very well, indeed! — how prettily she writes! — ay,
that was quite proper to let him be off* if he would. That
was just like Lucy. Poor soul I 1 wish I eOuld get him
a living, with all my heart She calls me dear Mrs. Jen-
nings, yon tee. She is a gaodJiearted girl as ever lived.
Very wdl, upon my word. That sentence is Tery prettily
turned. Ves, yes, I will go and see her, sure enough,
H«w attentive she is, to think of every body! — Thank
you, my dear, for thowbg it me. It is as pretty a letter
as ever I saw, and does Lucy's head and heart great
ctedit. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
CHAPTER III.
Thb Mui DadiwoodB had now been rather more thin two
monthB in town, and Mariaone't impalieDce to be gone
inereued erery day. She dghed for the lir, the liberty,
the quiet of the amotr; ; and faniaed, that if tatj phwe
Muld give her ease. Barton mutt do it. Elinor was hardlf
lets anxious than herself for their removal, and only m
much leas bait on its bdng efiiMited immediately, ai that
she was conadoui of the difSculties of so long a jonmey,
which Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge. She-
b^;an, however, cerioualy to turn her thoughts towarda ita
accomplishment ; and had already mentioned their wiahes
to tbeir kind hostess, who resisted them with all the al» >
quence of her good-will, when a plan wu suggested,
which, though detaining them from home yet-a few wedu
longer, applied to Elinor altogether much mote el^iUe
than any other. The Palmers were to remove to Clevi^
land, about the end of March, for the Easter hohdaya;
and Mrs. Jennings, with both her friends, received a very
warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them. Thia
would not, in itself, have been sufficient fm the delicacy
of Mias Daahwood; but it was enforced with so mudt
real politeneas by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to (he
very great aroendinent of his manners towatds them sinoe
her aiater had been known to be unhappy, induced her to
accept it with pleasnie.
When she told Marianne what she had done, howeva,
her first reply was not very anspidotis.
" Cleveland ! " she cried, with great agitation. " No,
I cannot go to Cleveland. "
" Yon forget, " sud Elinor, gently, " diat it* titnMiMi
is not — that it is not in the neighbourhood of'■■ "
" But it is in Somersetahiie. 1 cannot go into Somer—
■etihire. Thei^ where I looked forward to gtnng ; — no^
Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there. "
Elinor would not *zgae upon the propriety of over-
'DoliiHihyGoOgle
SXNBE AHS 8ENSIBIL1TT. S41
coming such teetingi ; she only endeavoured to coun-
leract them by voildng on others ; and represented it,
therefore, as a measure which trould fix the time of het
returning to that dear mother, whom she bo much wished
to see, in a more eligible, mofe comfotlftble manner, than
any other plan could do, and perhaps without any greater
delay. From Cleveland, which was within a few miles of
Bristol, the distance to Barton wai not beyond one day,
though a long day's journey ; and thdr mother's servant
night eadly cmne there to attend them down ; and as
there could be no occasion for their staying above a week
at Cleveland, they might now be at home in little more
than three weeks'time. As Marianne's aiftction for her
mother was sincere, it must triumph, with litde difficulty,
orer the imBginary evils ^e bad started.
Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her
guests, that she pressed them very earnestly to return with
her again from Cleveland. Elinor was grateful for the
attention, hut it could not alter their design; and their,
mother's concurrence being readily gained, every thing
relative to their return was arranged as far as it couU
be; and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a
statement of the hours that were yet to divide her from
" Ah ! Colonel, 1 do not know what you and I shall
do widiout the Miss Dashwoods, " was Mrs. Jennings's
address to him when he first called on her, after their
leaving her was settled ; " for they are quite resolved
upon going home irom the Palmers; and how forlorn
we shall be when I come back ! Lord 1 we shall sit and
gape at one another as dull as two cats. "
Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by diis vigorous
sketch of their future ennui, to provoke him to make that
ofi^r, which might give himself an escape from it; and
if so, she had soon afterwards good reason to think her
object gained ; for, on Elinor's moving to the window to
take more expeditioualy the dimensions of a print, which
she was going to copy for her friend, he fallowed her to it
with a look of particular meaning, and conversed with her
then for several minntea. The effect of hia discourse on
B
r,. i., < i-,G00J^lc
S48 KtSBE AND UCNnBILITT.
the lady, too, conld not escape her obaerTRtioii ; for dum^
■he wu too hottoarable to listen, and hid eren changed
her seat, on purpose that die might rtot hear, to one close
by the piano-forte on which Marianne was playing, the
could not keep henelf from seeing that Elinor changed
colour, attended nith agitation, and was too intent on
what he Baid to pursne her employment. Still farther
in confirmation of h^ hopes, in the interval of Murianne'a
turning from one lesion to another, some words of the
Colonel's inevitably reached her ear, in which he seemed
to be apologising for the badness of his house. This set
the matter beyond a doubt. She wondered, indeed, at his
blinking it necessary to do so ; but supposed it to be the
proper etiquette. What Elinor ssjd in reply she conld not
distinguish, hut judged, from the motion of her lips, that
she did not think that any material objection ; and Mrs.
Jennings commended her in her heart for being so ho-
nest. They then talked on for a few miuutea longer with-
out her catching a syllable, when another lucky stop in
Marianne's performance brought her these words in the
Colonel's calm roice, —
" I am afraid it cannot take place Tery soon. "
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-Uke a speech,
she was almost ready to cry out, " Lord ! what should
hinder it? " but checking her desire, confin^ henelf to
this silent tgaculation, —
" This is very strange ! — sure he need not wiitto be
This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem
to o%nd or mortify his fair companion in die least ; for
on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards, and
moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings very plainly heard
Elinor say, and with a voice which showed her to feel
what she said, —
" I shall always think myself very much obliged to
you. "
Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and
only wondered, that, after hearing such a sentence, the
Colonel should be able to take leave of them, as he imme-
diately did, with the utmost tang-freid, and go away with-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
RBMgB AND aSNaiBIIJTY. S43
out maldi^ her 1117 reply ! 6he bad not thought her old
friend could have made ao indifierent a suitor.
What had really paued between them wu to this efiect.
" 1 have heard, " aaid he, with great compassiou, " of
the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from
hia family ; for, if I undentand the matter right, he haa
beeD entirely cast off by them for pereevering in his en.
gagement with a very deserving young woman. Have I
, been rightly informed t Is it «o ? "
Elinor told him that it was.
" The cruelty, the impohtic cruelty, " he replied, with
great feeling, " of dividing, or attempting to divide, two
young people long attached to each other, ia terrible. Mrs.
Ferrars does not know what she may he doing — what she
may drive her eon to. I have aeen Mr. Ferrats two or
three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased with
him. He is not a young man with whom one can be
indmately acquainted in a short time, but 1 have seen
enough of hirn to wish him well for his own sake, and as
a friend of yours, 1 wish it still more. I understand that
he intends to take orders. Will you be so good aa to tell
him that the hving of Delaford, now just racont, as I
am infbnned by thia day'a post, is his, if he think it worth
his acceptance; hut that, perhaps, so unfortunately dt-
cnmstanced as he is now, it may be nons^ise to appear to
doubt ; I only wish it were more valuable. It ia a rectory,
but a small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did not
make more than SOW. per annum ; and though it ia cer-
tainly capable of improvement, I fear not to such an
amount as to atfhrd him a very comfortable income. Sudk
as it is, however, my pleasure in presenting him to it
will be very great. Pray assure him of it. "
Elinor's astonishment at this commisaion could hardly
have been gteater had the Colonel been really making
bei an offer of his hand. The preferment, which only
two days before she had considered as hopeless for Edward,
was already provided to enable him to marry ; and the,
of all people in the world, was fixed on to heatow itl
Her emotion waa such as Mrs. Jenninga had attributed to
a very difiennt cause ; but whatever minor feelings leas
B S
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S44 SBMIE AND SBiraiBlUTT.
pure, Ut» pleating, mif^t have a share in that emotion,'
her esteem for the general benevolence, and her gratitude
for the particular friendship, which together prompted
Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and wannlj
expressed. She thanked him for it with all her heart,
spoke of Edward's principles and disposition with that
praise which she knew them to deserre; and promised
to undertake the comiaission with pleasure, if it were
really his wish to put off so agreeable en office to another.
But at the same time she could not help thinking that no
one could so well perform it as himself.'It was an office,
in short, from which, unwilling to give Edward the pain
of leceiTing en obligation from htr, she woald have been
very glad to be spared herself; but Colonel Brandon, on
motives of equal deUcacy, declining it likewiee, still seemed
so deBirotiB of its being given through her means, that she
would not, on any account, make farther opposition. Ed-
ward, she beheved, was still in town, and foitunatelj she
had heard his addresB from Miss Steele. She could un-
dertake therefore to inform him of it, in the course of the
day. After this had been settled. Colonel Brandon b^an
to talk of his own advantage in securing so reapectaUe
and agreeable a neighbour, and then it was that he men-
tioned, with r^et, that the houEC was small and indiffto-
ent ; an evil which Ehnor, as Mrs. Jennings had supposed
her to do, made very bght of, at least as far as r^srded
its size.
" The smsllness of the house, " said she, " 1 cannot
imagine any inconvenience to them ; for it'will be in pro-
portion to their family and income. " i
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that«Ae was
considering Mr. Ferrars's mairisge as the certain conse-
quence of the presentation ; for he did not suppose it pos-
sible that Delaford living could supply such an income ss
any body in his style of Ufe would venture to settle on, and
he said so.
" This little rectory can do no more than make Mr. Perrars
comfortsble as a bachelor ; it cannot enable him to marry.
I am sorry to say that my patronage endB with this ; and
my interest is hardly more extensive. If, however, by au
DoliiHihyGoOgle
onfitreseen. chance it ihoold be in my power to serve him
(u\ber, I muit think very difierently of him from what I
now do, if I ftm not aa leady to be useful to him then aa I
aineerely wish I could be at praent. What I am now
doing, indeed, leemi nothing at all, aiuce it can advance
him 10 little towards what must be his principal, bia only
object of happiness. His marriage muat adU be a distant
good; at leaat, I am afraid it cannot take place very
Such was the sentence which, wben misunderstood, so
justly ofFended the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings ; but,
after this nuration of what really passed between Coload
Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the window, the
gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting raay per-
haps appear, in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded, tl»n if it had ariaen from an oSbr of
marriage. ^'
CHAPTER IV.
" WaUi, Miss Dashwood, " aaid Mrs. Jennings, sagBCiously
smiling, as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn, " I do
not ask yon what the Cobnel has been saying to you ; for ,
though, upon my honour, I tried to keep out of hearing, I
could not help catchii^ enough to Boderstand bis business ;
and I assore you I never was better pleased in my life, and
I wish you joy of it with all my heart. "
" Thank yon, ina'am, " said Elinor. " It i« a matter < d
great joy to me, and I feet the goodness of Colonel Bran-
don most sendMy. There are not many men who would
act as he has done. Few people who have so compassionate
a heart ! I never was more aalonished in my life. "
" Lord j my dear, you are very modest. I an't the
least astonished at it in the world; for I have often
thought, of late, there was nothing more likely to
happm. "
■..^ •^
DoliiHihyGoOglc
346 BENBV .IND SKNRBIUTV.
" You judged from your knowledge of the Cdonel's
genenl benevoleDce ; but & t least you could not foresee t}iat
the opportunity would bo very soon occur. "
" (^portunity J " repejtted Mtb. Jennings. " Oh, as to
ihst, when a man has onc« made up his mind to such
a thing, somehow or other he will soon find an opportu-
nity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again and
■gain ; and if ever there was a happy couple in the
world, I think I shall soon know where to look for them. "
" You mean to go to Delaford after them, I suppose, "
mad Elinor, with a funt smile.
" Ay, my dear, that I do, indeed; and as to the honse
bdng a bad one, I do not know what the Colonel would be
M, fiv it is as good a one as erer I saw. "
" He spoke of its being out of repair. "
" Well, and whose fault is that 7 Why don't he repair
it? Who should do it but himself? "
They were interrupted by the servant's coming in to an*
nounce the carriage bdng at the door ; and Mrs. Jennings,
immediately preparing to go, said, —
" Well, my dear, I must be gone before 1 have had half
my talk out. But, howerer, we may have it all over in the
ereuing ; for we shall he quite slone. 1 do not ask yon to
go with me, for I dare say your mind is too iiill of the mat-
ter to care for company ; and, besidea, you must long to tell
your raster all about it. "
Marianne bad left the room before the conTcrsation
began.
" Certainly, ma'am, I ehall tell Marianne of it ; bat I
shall not mention it at present to any body else. " i
'^Oh, Tery well, " said Mrs. Jennings, rather disap-
pranted. " Then you would not have me tell it Lucy ; (br
I think of going as far as Holbom to-day. "
. " No, ma'am, not even Lucy, tf yon please. One day's
delay will not be very material ; and, till I have written to
Mr. Ferrars, 1 think it ought not to be mentioned to any
body else. 1 shall do that directly. It is of importance
that no time should be lost with him ; for he will of course
have much to do relatiTe to his ordination. "
This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedii^y.
nRM AHD ecNBiBiLrnr. £47
Why Mr. Peirara wu to be written to ttbont it in such a
hurry the could not immediately comprehend. A fen mO'
menla'reflection, however, produced a very happy idea;
and she exdainied, —
" Oh, ho ! I understand you. Mr. FerrarB is to be the
man. Wdl, lo much the better for him. Ay, to be
OUK, he must be ordained in resdineas ; and I am very
glad to find things are so forwud between you. But, my
dear, is not this rather out of character? Should not the
Cdonel write himself? Sure, he it the proper person. "
EUnor did not quite understand the banning of Mrs.
Jenninga'a speech, neither did she think it worth enquiring
into ; and therefore only replied to it« conclnsioa.
" C < donel Brandon is m delicate a man, that he rather
wished any one to auiounee his intoitionB to Mr. Ferrars
than himself.''
" And so yott are forced to do it. Well, that is an odd
kind of deUcacy !'However, I will not disturb you (se^g
her preparing to write). Vou know your own concerns
besL So good-by, my dear. I have not heard of any
thing to please roe to well since Charlotte waa broi^ht
to bed. "
And away she went ; but returning again in a mO'
" I have JQBt been thinking of Betty's siBter, my dear.
I should be very glad to get her bo good a miatress. But
whether she would do for a bdy's maid, I am sure I can't
telL She i* an excellent housemaid, and works very wdl
at her needle. However, you will think of sM that at your
" Certainly, ma'am, " replied Elinor, not hearing much of
what she said, and more anxious to be alone than to be aaa-
tress of the sul^ect.
How she should begin, — how she should express herself
in her note to Kdwud, — was now all her concern. The
particular circumstance* between them made a difficulty of
diat which to any other person would have been the easiest
Aing in die world ; but she equally feared to say too ranch
or too little, and tat deUberating over her paper, with die
B 4
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
2i8 aauK i
pen in her bind, till broken in on by tbe entrance of
Edward hinuelf.
He had met Mrs. JenningB at the floor, in her way to
the carriage, as he came to leave hia farewell card ; and eIk,
after apoli^ging for not retnming henelf, had oUiged him
to enter, by saying that Misa Dashwood was above, and
■wanted to speak with him on very particular business.
, i^linur had just been congratulating herself, in the midst
of liur perplexity, that however difficult it might be to ex-
press herself properly by letter, it was at least preferable to
giving the information by word of mouth, when her visiter
entered, to force her upon this greatest exertion of all. Ho-
astonishment and confusion were very great on his, so sad-
den appearance. She had not seen him before since his
engaganent became pubhc, and ther^ore not since hia
knowing her to be acquainted with it; which, with the
consciousness of what she had been thinking of, and what
she had to t«jl him, made her fed. partjcularly uncomfort-
able for some minutes. He, too, was much distressed; and
they sat down together in a moat promising state of embar-
rassment. ^Vhether he had ssked her pardMi for his intru-
sion on first coming into the room, he could not recollect;
but, detamining to be on the safe side, hemadebis^Ktlc^
in form, as soon as he could say any thing, after taldng k
" Mrs. Jennings told me, " said he, " that yoa wished
to speak with me, at least 1 understood her so, — or I cer-
tainly should not have intruded on yon " in such a msnner;
though, at the same time, I should have been extrem^
jorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;
espedally as it will most likely be some time — it is not
probable that 1 should soon have the pleasure of meelii^
you again. 1 go to Oxford to-morrow. "
" You would not have gone, however, " said Elinor, re-
covering hraaelf, and determined to get over what she m)
much dreaded as soon as possible, <'without receiving our
good wishes, even if we had not been able to give them in
pNson. Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she said.
I have something of consequence to inform you of, whi < ^
I was on the point of communicating by paper. I am
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
BKHSB AND SKNglBUilXT. 349
charged with a moBt agreeable office (breathing rather
faster than uausi at gbe spoke). ColonJel Brandon, who
was hae only ten minutes ago, has deiired me to say, that,
understanding you mean to take orders, he hai great pleasure
in offering you the living of Delaford, now just vacant, and
only wishes it were more valuable. Allow me to congratulate
yon on having so respectable and well-judging a friend,
and to join iu his wish that the living — it is about two
hundred a year — were much more considerable, and such
as might better enable you to — as might be more than a
Iraaporary accommodation to yourself — such, in short, as
might establish all your views of happinesa. "
What Edward felt, as be could not say it himsdf, it
cannot be expected that any one else should say for him.
He loeAed aU the utonishment which such unexpected,
such unlhoDgfat of information could not fail of exciting ;
but he said only these two words, —
" Colonel Brandon I "
" Yes, " continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as
some of the worst was over; " Colonel Brandon means it
as a testimony of his concern for what has lately passed, —
for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of
your & mily has placed you, — a concern, which I am sure
Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share ; and,
likewise, as a proof of his high esteem for your general
character, and his particular appiobatiou of your behaviour
on the present occasion. "
" Colonel Brandon give me a living ! Can it be poa.
»ble? "
" The nnkindnera of your own relation* has made you
astonished to find friendship any where. "
" No, " replied he, with sudden conscioasnest, " not to
find it in ]fou; for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to
your goodness, I owe it alL I feel it— 1 would express
it if I could — but, as you well know, I am no orator. "
" You are very mudi mistaken. I do assure you that
you owe it entirely, at least almost entirely, to your own
merit, and Colonel Brandon's discernment of it. I have
had no hand in it. I did not even know, till I understood
his design, that the living was Tacant j nor had it ever
DoliiHihyGoOgle
860 SKtH Ann SKHnBIUTT.
occurred to me that he might hmre had saA a living in hia
gift Aa a friend of mine, of mj funily, he ma^, perfaapa,
indeed I know he Atu, sdil greater pleasure in beatoning It ;
bat, npon my word, yoa owe Dothiog to mj solicitation. "
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in
the action ; but she was at the same time so unwilling to
appear as tlie benefaclrew of Edward, that she acknow-
ledged it with hesitation ; which probably contributed to
fix that SQspidon in his mind which had recently entered
it. For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor
bad ceased to speak ; at last, and as if it were rather an
eSbrt, lie aaid, —
" Colonel^randon se«ns a man of great worth and
respectatnli^. I have always beard him spoken of as sach,
and your brother 1 know esteems him highly. He is nn-
dottbledly a soiaible man, and in his manners perfectly the
gentleman. "
" Indeed, " replied Elinor, " I believe that yon will find
him, on farther acquaintance, all that yon have heard him
to be ; and as you will be such very near neighboun (fi > r
I underaiand the parsonage is almost dose to Uie mandon-
house) it is particularly important that he should be all
this. "
Edward made no answer; but when she had tamed
away her head, gave her a look eo serious, so earnest, so
nncheerfiil, as seemed to say, that he might hereafter widi
the distance between the parsonage and the mannon-bouae
mach greater.
" Cdioad Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James's Street, "
■aid he, soon afterwards, ridng from hia chair.
Elinor tdd him the number of the house.
" I must hurry away, then, to give him those thanks
which you will not allow me to give youj to assure him
that he has made me a very — an exceedingly happy man. "
Elinor did not ofi'er to detain him'; and they parted,
with a very earnest assurance on Iter side of her unceasing
good wishes for his happiness in every change of dtufttion
that might befall him; on hit, with rather an attempt to
return the same good will, than the power of expressing it.
" When 1 see him again, " said EUoor to heradf, as dte
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SENBI AMD SSmtBILRT. 251
door shut him out, " I ihall see him the husband of
Lucy. "
And wilh this pletsing snlicipation she ut down to r^
consider the past, recall tlie words, and endesvonr to
comprehend all the feelings of Edward ; and, of course, to
reflect on her own with discontent.
When Mrs. Jennings came home, thongh she retnroed
from seeing people whom she bad never seen before, snd of
whom, therefore, die must have i great deal to say, her
mind was so much more occupied by the important secret
in her possesion, than by any thing else, that the rerertcd
to it again as soon as Elinor appeared.
" Wdl, my dear, " she cried, " I sent yon up the young
man. Did not I do right f And I suppose yon had no
great difficulty — you did not find him very uowilling to
accept your proposal ? "
" No, ma'am ; that was not very likely. "
" WeU, and how soon wiU he he ready? For it seems
■11 to depend upon that. "
" Really, " said Elinor, " I know so litde of these kind
of forms, that I can hardly eren conjecture as to Ae time,
or the preparation ueceasary ; but I suppose two or three
months will complete his ordination. "
" Two or three months I " cried Mrs. Jennings : " Lord I
my dear, bow calmly you talk of it ; and can the Colonel
wait two or three months 1 Lord bless me ! I am sure it
would put me quite out of patience I And though one
would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrara,
I do think it is not worth while to wait two or three
months for him. Sure, somebody dse might be found that
would do as weU ; somebody that is in orders already. "
" My dear ma'am, " tdd Elinor, " what can you be
thinking of t Why, Colonel Brandon's only olqect is to
be of use to Mr. Ferrara. "
" Lord bless you, my dear .'Sure yon do not mean
to persuade me that the Colonel only marries yon for the
sake of giving ten guineas to Mr. Ferrars ! "
The deception could not continue after tJiis; und an
explanation immediately took place, by which both gained
atmaidenhle amusement for the motnent, without anr
DoliiHihyGoOgle
raaterulloaiof hippineM to either; for Mra. Jenningi only
exchanged one form of delight for another, and still with-
out forfeiting her expectation of the fint.
" Ay, ay, the parsonage ia but a amell one, " Eud she,
after the firat ebullition of aurpiiie and satiatiaclioa iraa
over, " and very likely may be out of repair ; but to bear
a man apolc^jiung, aa I thought, for a house that to my
knowledge has five dtting roonu on the ground-fioor, and
1 think the bouiekeeper told ine could make up fifteen
beds [ and to you, too, that bad been used to live la
Barton Cottage ! It leetned quite ridiculous. But, my
dear, we must touch up the Colonel to do aomelbing to
the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them, before
Lucy goes to it. "
" But Colonel Brandon does not seem to bave any idea
of the living's being enough to allow them to marry. "
" The Colonel is a ninny, my dear ; because he has
two thousand a year himself, he thinks that nobody else
£an marry on less. Take my word for it, that, if I am
alive, I shall be paying a vint at Delaford Parsonage befbre
Michaelmaa ; and I am sure I ahan't go if Lucy an't
there. "
Elinor was quite of her opinion as to the probability of
their not waiting fta any thhig more.
CHAPTER V.
SinwAitD, having carried hia thanks to Colonel Brandon,
proceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and such was tile
excess of it by the time he reached BartleU's Buildings,
that she was able to assure Mrs. Jennings, who called on
her again the next day with her congratnlalionB, that she
had never seen him in auch spirits before in her life.
Her own bappinesa, and her own spirits, were at least
very certain ; and she joined Mrs. Jennings most heartily
in her expectation of thdr being bQ comfortably blether
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BKHSE ADD SHNglBlUTT. 353
in DeUford ParsonBge before Micluelmu. So far was
she, at the M & me time, from any backwardnesB to give
Elinor that credit which Edward would give her, that she
spoke of hec friendship for them both nith the most grate-
ful warmth, was ready to own all their obligation to her,
and openly declared that no exertion for their good on
Mies Dashwood's part, either present or fulore, would ever
. aorprise her, for ^ebeUeved her CBpBl)Ie of doing any thing
in the world for those she resUy valued. As for Colond
Brandon, she was not only ready to wor^p him as a
saint, but was, moreover, truly ansious that he should be
beated as one in all worldly coDcems ; anxious that his
tithes should be raised to the utmost; and secretly resolved
to avail herself, at Delafbrd, as far as she possibly could,
of bis servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.
It was now above a week since John Dashwood had
o^led in Berkeley Street, and aa since ^at time no notice
had been taken by ihem of his wife's indispodtion, beyond
(me vethal enqoiry, Elinor tx^an to feel it necessary to pay
ha a visit. This was an obUgation, however, which not
only opposed her own inclination, but which had not the
assistance of any encouragement from her companions.
Marianne, not contented with absolutely refusing to go
herself, was very u^;ent to prevent her sister's going at all ;
■ad Mrs. Jennings, though her carriage was always at
Elinor's service, so very much disUked Mrs. John Dash-
wood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked
after the late discoverjr, nor her stroi^ desire lo affront
her by taking Edward's part, could overcame her unwil-
lingness to be in her company again. The consequence
was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit, for .
which no one could rrallf have less inchnation, and to
mn the risk of a tete-il-tete with a woman whom neitlier
of the others had so much reason U > dislike.
Mra. Dashwood was denied ; hut before the carriage
could turn from the house, her husband accidentally came
out. He expressed great pleasure in meeting EUnor, told
her that he had been just going to call in Berkeley Street,
•od assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to see
her, invited her to corae in.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S54
Tbey wilked np ■tain iaia the dnwing-KMHn. No-
body wu there.
" Fanny is in her own room, I nippoae, " said he :
" I wiU go to her preiently, for I am sure she will not
have the leaat objectioo in the world to seeing you. Very
far from it, indeed. iVou especially there cannot he — hat,
however, yon and Marianne were alwayt great faTooritaa.
MTiy woold not Marianne come ? "
Elinor made what excuse ahe could for her.
" I am not aorry to see you alone, " he lepUed, " for I
have a good deal to say to you. Thia living of Colonel
Brandon's — can it be true i has he really given it to
Edward f I heard it yesterday by chance, and waa com-
ing to you on purpose to enquire farther about it. "
" It is perfectly trne. Colonel Brandon has given the
lirmg of DeUford to Edward. "
" Really I Well, this is very astonishing I — do re.
lationship ! — no connection between them!— -and now
that livings fetch such a price 1 — what was the value of
this? "
" About two hundred a year. "
" Very well — and for the next presentation to a living
of tbat^ value — supposing the late incumbent to have been
M and uckly, and likely to vacate it soon — he might
have got, I dare say — fourteen hundred pounds. And
how carae he not to have settled that rnatt^ before this
person's death f Now, indeed, it would be too late to sell ,
it, but a man of Gc^nel Brandon's sense I 1 wonder he
diould be so improvident in a point of such common, sudi
natural, concern ! Well, I am convinced that there is a
vast deid of inconsistency in almost every human character.
I suppose, however — on recollection — that the case may
probftbly be thtt. Edward is only to hold the Uving liU
the person to whom the Colonel has teally sold the present-
ation is old enough to talce it. Ay, ay, that is the fact,
depend upon it. "
Elinor contradicted it, however, very pouiively ; and 1^
relating that she had herself been employed in conveying
the offer from Coltnel Brandon to Edward, and Xhenttae
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SBHBE AVD RnmBtUTT. i55
miut undentond the terma on nhich it wta givea, obliged
him to mbgut to her luthority.
" It is truly utom«hing ! " he cried, after hearing what
■be Raid : " what could be the Colonel'g motive. "
" A Tery simple one, — to be of use to Mr. Petrm. "
" Well, well ; wbatever Colonel Brandon may be, Ed-
ward ie a very lucky man. You will not mendon dw
matter to Fanny, however ; for thongh I have broke it to
her, and she bears it vastly well, she will not like to hear
it much talked of. "
Elinor had some difficulty here to reAvin from observing,
diat she thought Fanny might have Iwme vrith composore
an acquisition of wealth to her brother, by wluch neither
'die nor her child could be possibly impoverished.
" Mra. Ferrars, " added he, lowering his voice to the
tone becoming so important a subject, " knows nothing
abont it at present ; and 1 believe it will be best to keep it
entirely concealed from her aa long as may be. When the
murine takes place, I fear, she must hear of it all. "
" But why should such precaution be used f Though it
ia not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have the
smallest satisfaction in knowitig that her son has money
enough to live upon, for that moat be quite out of the
question ; yet why, after her late behaviour, ia she supposed
to feel at all ? She has done with her son, — she has cast
him off for ever, and has made all those over whom she had
any influence cast him off likewise. Surely, after doing so,
she cannot be imagined Uable to any impression of sorrow
or of joy on his account : she cannot be interested in any
thing that befalls him. She would not be so weak as to
throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the
anxiety of a parent ! "
" Ah ! Elinor, " said John, " your reasoning is very
good ; but it is founded on ignorance of human nature.
When Edward's unhappy match takes place, depend upon
it, his mother will feel as much as if she had never dis-
carded him ; and therefore every circumstance that may
accelerate that dreadful event must be concealed from her as
much as posaiUe. Mrs. Ferrais can never forget that Ed-
ward is her son.'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
856 lENlB Ata > SEffBIBILITT.
" You gurpriw me ; I ihould think it must nearly hare
escaped her memory by this time. "
*'You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs. Perran ii one of
the most affectionate mothers in the woild. "
Elinor was silent.
" We think now, " said Mr. Daehwood, after a short
pause, " of Robert's manyii^ Miss Morton. "
Elinor, Bmiling at the grave and decisive importance of
her brother'a lone, calmly replied, —
"'The lady, 1 suppose, has no choice in the a^r. "
" Choice ! how do you mean ? "
" I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of
apeakini;, it must be the same to Miss Morton whether she
marry Edward or Robert. "
" Certainly, there can be no difference ; for Robert will
now, to all intents and purposes, be considered sa the eldest
■on; and, as to any thing else, they are both very agree.
aUe young men ; I do not know that one is superior to the
Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time
silent His reflections ended thus ; —
" Of one thing, my dear aiater, " kindly taking her hand, ~
and speaking in an awful whisper, " J may assure you ; tind
I will do it, because I know it must grati^ you. I have
good reason to think — indeed I have it from the best au-
thority, or I should not repeat it ; for otherwise it would be
very wrong to say any thing about it, — but I have it from
the very best authority, — not that J ever precisely heard
Mrs. Ferrws say it herself, but her daughter did, and I
have it from her, — that, in short, whatever objections there
might be against a certain — a certain connection, you un_
< lersCand me, — it would have been far preferable to her, —
it would not have given ber half the vexation that this
does. I was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. Ferrars
considered it in that light ; a very gratifying circumstance,
you know, to us all.'It would have been beyond compa-
rison,'she said,'the least evil of the two ; and she would
be glad to compound noio for nothing worse.'But, how-
ever, all thai is quite out of the question, — not to be
thought of, or mentioned. As to any attachment, you
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ntKBK AND HENKBILITT. S57
know, it never could be : all that ie gone by. But I
thought I would just tell 70a of this, because 1 knew how
much it must please jou. Not that you have any reason
to r^ret, my dear Elinor : there is no doubt of your doing
exceedingly well, — quite as well, or better, perhaps^ all
thioga considered. Hu Colonel Brandon been with you
lately? "
Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify het vanity
and raise hei aelf-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill
her mind ; and she was therefore glad to be spared from
the necessity of saying much in reply herself, and from
the danger of hearing any thing more from her brother, by
the entrance of Mr. Robert Ferrars. After a few mo-
ments* chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny waa
yet uninformed of his sister's being there, quitted the room
in quest of her; and Elinor was left to improve her
acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay unconcern, the
happy self-complacency of his manner, while enjoying so
unfair a division of his mother's love and liberahty, to the
prejudice of his banished brother, earned only by his own
dissipated course of life and that brother's integrity, was
confirming her most unfavourable opinion of liis head and
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, be-
fore he began to speak of Edward ; for he, too, bad heard of
the living, and was very inquisitive on the subject. Elinor
repeated the particulars of it, as she had given them to
John; anil their effect on Robert, though very different,
was not less striking than it had been on him. He
laughed most immoderately. The idea of Edward's being
a clergyman, and living in a small parsonage-house, di.
verted him beyond measure; and when to that was added
& e fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a while
surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between
John Smith and Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing
more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovable gra >
Tity the conclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eyes
from being fixed on him with a look that spoke all the con-
tempt it excited. It was a look, however, very well be-
r,. i., < i-,G00J^lc
Btowed ; for it rdiered her own fedinga, and gmve HO
intelligence to him. He was recalled froid wit to wisdom,
sot bj vij reproof of hen, but by Us own B«uibility.
" We mvf treat it u a joke, " aud he, at fast, recovering
from the aSbcted lau(^ which had consideraUy la^tbened
oat the genuine gaiety of t]ie moment ; " bat, opon mf
■onl, it is a most serious buiinesa. Poor Edward ! he is
mined for ever. I am extremdy sorry for it; for I know
him to be a terj good-hearted creature, — ai well-meiuiing
■ fellow, peihaps, as any in the world. You must not
jndige of him. Mist Dashwood, from your dlght acquaint-
ance. Poor Edward ! His manners are certunly not the
happiest in nature. But we are not aU bom, yon know,
with the same powa«, — the same address. Poor feUow !
to aee him in a drde of strainers ! To be sore it was
pitiable enough ; but, upon my soul, I believe he baa aa
good a heart M any in ibe Idogdom ; and I dedare and
protest to you, I never was so shocked in my life as when
it all burst forth. I could not believe it. My mother waa
the tint person who told lue of it; and I, feeling myadf
called on to act with resolution. Immediately said to her,—
'My dear madam, I do not know what you may intend to
do on the occasion ; but as for myself, I must say, that if
Edward does marry this young woman, / never will see
him again.'That was what I said immediately. I was
most uncommonly shocked, indeed. Poor Edward ! he has
done for himself completely, — shut himsdf out for ever
from aU decent society t But, as I directly said to my mo-
ther, I am not in the least surprised at it : from his style of
education, it was always to be espected. Uy poor mother
was half frantic. "
" Have you ever seen the lady ? "
" Yes; once, while she was staying in this house, I
h^pened to dn^ in for ten minutes; and I saw quite
enough of her : the merest awkward country girl, with-
out style, or elegance, and almost without beauty. I
remember her perfectly. Just the kind of girl I ^ould
suppose likely to captivate poor Edward. I offered imme-
diately, as soon as my mother related the afikir to me, to
talk to him myself, and dissuade him from the tntteh ; but
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
HBNgB AND startararr. S59
It wu too lite then, I found, to do any thing ; for, un-
luckily, r wu not in the wsy at flret, and knew nothing of
it rill after the breach had taken place, wben it waa not for
me, yon know, to interf^. But, had I been informed of
it a few hours earlier, 1 think it is most probable that
Mtnething migjit have been hit on. I certainly ihould have
represented it to Edward in a very strong Ught.'My
dew fellow,'I shonld bare said,'conridR what you are
doing. Yon are making a moat dtagraceful connection,
and Buch a one aa yonr family are nnanjmoiu in disap-
proving.'I cannot help thinking, in abort, that means
might have been found ; but now it is all too late. He
must be starved, you know, that is certain ; absolutely
He had just settled this pcnnt with great composure,
when the entrance of Mrs. John Duhwood put an end to
the snlgect. But though Ae never spoke of it out of her
own family, Elinor could see its influence on het mind in
die something like contusion of countenance with which she
entered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to
herself. She even proceeded so far aa to be concerned to 6nd
Hat Elinor and her uster woe so soon to leave town, as she
bad hoped to see more of them ; an exotion in which het
husband, who attended her into the room, end hung en-
amoured over her accents, seemed to disdnguish every thing
that was most aStedooate and graceful.
CHAFTER VI.
One other short call in Harley Street, in whidi Elinor
received her brother's congratulations on their travelling so
far towards Barton without any expense, and on Colonel
Brandon's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or
two, completed the intercourse of the brother and sisters
In town ; and a fdnt invitation from Fanny, to come to
Koriand whenever it should happen to be in their way.
HihyGoogle
26o sams and BsmxaaJTY.
which of all tbiiigs was the most unlikely to occur, with
ft more wirm, though less public, asnirauce, fiom John to
Ehnor, of the promptitude with which he should come to
see her at Del & ford, was all th > t foretold any meeting in
the country.
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed
determined to Bend her to Delaford ; a place, in which,
of all others, she would now least choose to visEt, or wish
to reside; for not only was it considered as her futnte
home by her brother and Mrs. Jenninga, but eren LuCf,
when they parted, gave her a pressing invitation to Tiiit
her there.
Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the
two parties from Hanover Sqnsre and Berkeley Street set
out from thor respective homes, to meet, by appointment,
on the road. For the convenience of ChailoCte and her
child, they were to be more than two days on their journey ;
and Mr. Pahner, travelling more expeditiously with Colonel
Brandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after thdr
Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in
London, and eager as she had long been to quit it, conld
not, when it came to the point, bid adieu to the house in
which she had for the last time esjoyed those hopes, and
that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now extin.
guished for ever, without great pain. Nor could she le«Te
the place in which Willoughby remained, busy in new
engagements, and new schemes, in which «A« could have
no share, without shedding many tears.
Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was
more positive. She had no snch olyect for her lingafng
thoughts to fix on ; she left no creature bdiind, from whom
it would give her s moment's r^ret to be divided for
ever ; she was pleased to be free herself from the peneca-
tion of Lucy's friendship ; she was grateful for bringing
her sistK away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage;
and she looked forward with hope to what a few months
of tranquillity at Barton might do towards restoring Ma-
rianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.
Their journey was safely performed. The second daj
aEsm AMD BBtraiBiuiT. 26l
tnvught them'into the cherithed, or the prohibited, county
of Soraenet ; for as such ww it dwelt on hj turns in Meu
risnne'a imiginktioii ; and in the forenoon of the third
they drove up to Cleveland.
CLereland was s Kpsdous, modern-built house, situated
OD a. sloping Uvm. It had no park, but the pleasure-
grounds were tolembly extensiTC ; and, like every other
place of the Bune degree of importance, it had its open
ahnibbery, and closer wood walk ; a road of amooth gravel,
winding round a plantation, led to the front ; the lawn waa
dotted over with timber ; the house itself was under the
guerdianahip of the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia,
•nd a thick screen of them altogether, interspersed with
tall Lombardy poplars, abut out the ofBces.
Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with
onotion from the conadouaness of being only eighty miles
from Barton, and not thirty from Combe Magna; and
before ahe had been five minutes within its walla, while the
others were busily helping Charlotte to show her child to
the housekeeper, she quitted it again, atealing away through
the windii^ shruhberies, now just banning to be in
beauty, to gain a distant eminence ; where, from its Gre-
dan temple, her eye, wandering over a wide tract of coun-
try to the south-east, could fondly rest on the farthest ridge
of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from theii Bummila
Combe Magna might be seen.
In such momenta of predous, of invaluable misery, .she
rgoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ; and as she
returned by a difierent circuit to the houae, feding all the
happy privil^e of country liberty, of wandering from
place to place in free and luxurious solitude, she resolved
to BpHid almost every hour of every day, while she remained
with the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary
nmblea.
She returned just in time to join the others, as they
quitted the house, on an excursion through its more im-.
mediate premises ; and the rest of the morning was easily
whikd away in lounging round the kitchen garden, ex-
amining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to the
gardoier'alamentationa upon blights, — in dawdling through
i*-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
the greenhiMue, where ifae Ion of her fftToniite plants, «ni >
wuily exposed, and nipped by the lingering froat, raised
die Iiiii^t«r of Charlotte, — ^and in Tinting her poultry-
yard, where, in the diaappointed hopes of her doiry.maid,
by hens forsaking their nests, or being stolen by a fox, or
in the rapid decease of a prDmising young brood, she
£iMUid fresh loorces of merriment.
The morning was fine and dry, and Mariume, in her
plan of employment abroad, had not calculated for any
diai^ of weaAer during their stay at Ckveland. Widi
great am^rise, therefore, did she fiad hoself prevented, by
a settled rain, f rton going out again after dinner. She
bad depended on a twilight iralk to the Grecian temple,
and perhaps all over the grouidB, and an ereniog merety
cold or damp would not have deterred her from it ; bat a
heavy and settled rain even the could not fancy dry or
pleasant weather for walking.
Theit party was small, and the honrs passed quiedy
away. Mrs. Palmer had her child, and Mrs. Jenoinga
her carpet-work : they talked of the friends they had left
behind ; arranged Lady Middleton's engagementa, and
wondered whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would
get farther than Reading that night Elinor, however
Uttk concerned in It, joined in thett diseourae; and Ma >
rianne, who had the knack of finding her way in every
house to the library, however it might be avoided by the
family in general, soon procured herself a book.
Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's aide that con-
stant and friendly good.humour could So, to make than
feel thonselves welcome. The i^nness and heartineea
of her manner more than atoned for that want of recede
lection and el^ance which made her often deficient in
the forms of politeneaB ; her kindness, recommended by m
pretty a face, was engaging ; her folly, though evident,
was not disgusting, because it was not conceited ; and
£Iinor could hare forgiven every thing but her laugh.
The two gentlemen arrived & e next day to a very late
dinner, afibrding a pleasant eolargement of the party, and
a very welcome variety to th«r conversation, which a loi^
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mMning of the tame contiDiicd rain had Tednced very
low.
£linor bsd seen so littk of Mr. Palmer, and in that
littk had seen so much variety in his address to her mttt
and herself, thai she knew not what to expect to find him
in his ow« famitf. She found him, however, perfectly
the gentlemui in faia behaviour to all hii viaitm, and Mdy
occaaionally mde to his wife and her mother i she found
him very capable of being a pleasant eompauion, and only
prevented from being so always, by too great an aptitnde
to fancy himself as much superior to pet^le in general,
aa he must feel himself to be to Mrs. Jennings and Char-
lotte. For the rest of his character and habits, they were
marked, aa far aa EUnor conld -perceive, with no tzaics at
tH unuBU^ in his sex and time of life. He was nice in
bis eating, uncertain in hia hours ; fond of his child, though
affecting to slight it ; and idled away the rowninga at
UlUards, whieb ought to have been devoted to huakieiB.
She liked him, however, upon the whole, much better than
■he had expected, and in ber heart was not sorr; that she
ei > uld like him no more ; not aorry to be driven by the
observation of his epicurism, his aelfisbness, and his con-
ceit, to rest with complacency on the remembrance of
Edward's generaua temper, aimple taste, and diffident
fedings.
Of Gdward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now
recdved intell^ence from Colonel Brandon, who bad been
into Dorsetshire lately ; and who, treating her at once as
the disinterested friend of Mr. Ferrars, and the kind con-
fidant of himself, talked to her a great deal of the parson-
ic at Delaford, described its dcficiendes, and told her
what he meant to do himself towards, removing them.
His behaviour to her fn this, as well aa in every other
pardcnlar, bis open pleasure in meeting her after an absence
of only l«i days, his readiness to convene with her, and
bis dderence for her opinion, might very w^ justify
Mrs. Jennings's peranaaiou of hie attachment, and would
have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor alill, as from
the first, beUeved Marianne his real favourite, to make her
•nspect it herself. But as it was, luch a notion had
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
S64 aztrsE J
Bcarcely evet entered her head, except by Mrs. JeoningB's
Bu^eBtion ; and she could not help believing herself the
nicest observer of the two ; she watched his eyes, while
Mrs. Jennings thoi^ht only of his behaTionc; ind while
his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in
her head and throat, the beginning of a heavy cold, be-
cause unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the latter
lady's observation, — tA« could discover in them the quick
feehngs, and needless alarm of a lover.
Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth
evenings of her ijeing ^ere, not merely on the dry gravd
of the shrubbery, but all over the grounds, and espedallj
in the most distant parts of them, where there was some-i
thing more of wildness than in the rest, where the trees
were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,
had — assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting
in her wet shoes and stockings — given Marianne a cold so
violent, as, though for a day or two trifled with or denied,
'Would force itself by increasing ailments on the concern of
every body, and the notice of herself. Prescriptiona
'poured in from all quarters, and, as usual, were all declined.
Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, a
cough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest was lo cure
her entirely ; and it was with difficulty that Elinor pre-
vailed on her, when she went to bed, to try one < x two of
the simplest of the remedies.
CHAPTER VII.
MARiAtniE got up the next morning at her usual time ; to
every enquiry replied that she was better, and tried to prore
herself so, by enaging in her accuatomary employments. But
a day spent in sitting shivering over the fire with a book in
her hand, which she waa unable to read, or in lying, weaT7
and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour of h»
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■mendment ; atid when, at lut, die went early to bed,
more and more indispoud. Colonel Brandon was only tts-
tODiabed at her siBtfr's composure, who, though attending
and Durring her the whole day, againit Marianne's inclin-
ation, and forcingpropermedicineson heratnight, tnuied,
like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of aleep, and
fdt no real atarm.
A very restless and feverish n^t, however, disappointed
tbe expectation of both ; and when Marianne, after per-
silting in rising, confessed herself unable to sit op, and
returned voluntarily to her bed, Elinor was very ready to
adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice, of sending for the Palmers'
apothecary.
He came, examined his patient, and though encouraging
Miss Dastawood to expect that a very few days would re-
store her sinter to health, yet, by pronouncing her disorder
to have a putrid tendency, and allowing the word " infeo-
tion " to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palroer,
on her baby's account. Mrs. Jennings, who had beta
inclined from the first to think Marianne's complaint mote
serious than Ehnor, now looked very grave on Mr; Harris's
report, and confirming Charlotte's fears and caution, urged
the necessity of her Immediate removal with her infant ;
and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions as
idle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too
great to be withstood. Her departure, therefore, was fixed
m ; and, within an hour after Mr. Harris's arrival, she set
off, with her little boy and his nurse, for the house of a
near relation of Mr, Palmer's, who lived a few miles on the
other side of Bath; whither her husband promised, at her
earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two ; and whither
she was almost equaUyurgentwith her mother to accompany
her. Mrs. Jennings, however, with a kindness of heartwhieh
made Elinor really love her, declared her reaolntian of not
stirring from Cleveland as hmg aa Marianne remained ill,
and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care, to supply
to ber the place of the mother she had taken her from ;
and Elinor found her, on every occasion, a most willing and
active helpmate, desirous to share in all ber fatigues, and
itften, by her bett^ experience in nursing, of material uta >
DoliiHihyGoOgle
t66 ■£»« i
Fota Maritime, languid and low from the nature of her
maladjr, and feeling henelf univ enally ill, could no longn
hope that to-morrow would find her recovered ; and tb«
idea of what to-monow wotlld have produced, but for thit
nnlnckp illitea, made every ulment more Krere ; for on
that daj they weie to have begun their Journey home ; at > ^
attend^ ihe whole way by a serrant of Mrs. Jenoing^
were to have taken their mother by aurpriae on the foUow-
ii^ tateaoon. The little that ahe laid wa < all in lamrait-
ation of thia inevitable delay ; though Elinor tried to raiM
her apirita, and make her beliere, as she M«n really b^
Heved heraelf, that it would be a very abort one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in the rtatt
of d > e patioit; ahe certainly was not better, and, except
■hat there wa* no amendment, did not appear worse. Thdi
party wai now farther reduced ; for Mr. Palmer, thon^
very unwilling to go, as well from real humanity and good*
nature aa from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away
by hi* wife, waa pennaded at last, by C < ^nel Brandon, to
perform hia promise of following her ; and while he waa
preparii^ to go. Colonel Brandon himself, with a miA
greater exertion, began to talk of going likewiae. Here,
however, the kindness of Mrs. Jennings interpoaed moat
ScceptaUy ; for to send tjie Colonel sway while his love
was in ao much uueariness on her aiater's account would
be to deprive them both, she thought, of every comfort ;
and, therefore, telling him at once that bia stay at Cleveland
was necesMry to henelf ; that she should want him ta > play
at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dasbwood vras above
with her aiater, & c she urged him ao strongly to remaJB,
that he, who waa gratifying the first wish of hia own heart
by a compliance, eould not long even aSbct to demur ;
especially as Mrs. Jenninga'a entreaty was warmly, seconded
by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himaelf in
leaving behind him a person ao wdl able to aasist or adviaa
Mias Dashwood in any emogence.
Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all theaa
arrangements. She knew not that she had been the meana
of sending the ovrnen of Cleveland away, la about aeveii
daya from the lime of tbeir srrivaL It gaveher no aur-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
nNBB Aim flsmiBiuTY. S6T
piiae that (he saw Dolbing of Mn. Palms ; and as it
gaye her likewiie no concern, she never mentioned btt
Two dajB passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's
departoie; and her situation continued, with little vsii.
ation, the same. Mr. Harris, who attended her every day,
still talked boldly of a speedy recorery ; and Misa Dash-
wood waa equally aangnine ; tmt the expectation of the
odiers was by no means so cheerful, Mrs. Jennings had
determined, very'early in the seizure, that Marianne would
never get over it ; and Colonel Brandon, who was chiefly
of use in listening to Mn. Jenninga'a forebodings, was not
in * Btale of mind to resist their influence. He tried to
leaaon himself out of fears, which the diS'erent judgment
of the apothecary seemed to render absurd ; but the many
hours of each day in w)uch he was left entirely alone were
but too favourable for the admission of every ntelancholj
idea; and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion
that he should see Marianne no more.
On the moining of the third day, however, the gloomy
•Dticipationa of both were almost done away ; for irbea
Mr. Harris arrived, be declared his patient malmally
better. Her pnlse was much stronger, and every symptom
more favourable than on the preceding visit, hllinor, con-
firmed in every [deasant hope, was all cheerfulness ; re-
joicing that, in her lettera to her mother, she had punned,
her own judgment rather than her friend's, in making very
li^t of die indispoddon which ddayed them at Cleveland ;
and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would ha
abb to travel.
But the day did not dose so auspicionsly as it began.
Towards the evening Marianne became ill again, growing
more heavy, restless, and uncomfDrtable than before. Her
nater, however, atiU sanguine, was willing to attribute the
diange to nothing more than the fatigue of having aat up
to have her bed made ; and carefUly administering the
Mrdials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction,'sink at last
into. a slumber, from which she expected the most bene-
ficial eSbcts. Her sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor
wished to see it, lasted a considerable time; and aniioui
DoliiHihyGoOgle
ass nNii i
to otxwrTe the result of it heraeif, she reioiTed to lit wiA
ber during the whole of it. Mrs. Jenninga, Imowing n»-
thing of any chmnge in the patient, irent untuually early t0
bed ; her miid, who waa ooe of the principal nunn, wu
Rcreadng hendf in the houaekeeper's room, and Elinor
ronained alone with Marianne.
The repoae of the latter became more and more di»-
torbed ; and her nater, who watched, with nnremittiDg at-
tention, her continual change of poatore, and heard the
frequent but inarticulate aounda of complaint which pMaed
ber lipi, wm almost wishing to rouse her from bo painfU a
slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some acci-
dental noise in the house, Etwted hastily np, and, widi
feverish wildoess, cried out, —
" la mamma coming? "
" Not yet, " replied the other, concealing her Uemr, and
■ansting Marianne to lie down again ; " bat she will be
here, I hope, before it is long. It is a great way, yon
know, from hence to Barton. "
" But she must not go round by London, " cried Ma >
rianne, in the same hurried manner. " 1 shall never see
ber, if she goes by London. "
Elinor pO'Ceired, with alarm, that she waa not quite her-
adf, and, while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her
pulse. It was lower and quicker than ever. And Ma-
rianne, still talking wildly of mamma, her alarm increased
ao rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantly for Mr.
Harris, and despatchii^ a mesaenger to Barton for her
moiber. To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best
means of effbcting the latter was a thought which imme-
diately followed the resolution of its performance ; and as
■oon she had rung up the maid to take her place by her
sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she
knew he was generally to be found at a much later hour
(ban the present.
It was no time for besitaCion. Her feara and ber diffi-
culties were immediately before him. Her feara, he had
no courage, no confidence, to attempt the remoTal of: ha
listened to them in silent deapondence; but her diiDcultiea
were instantly obviated ; for, with a readiness that seemed
DolL-HihyGoOgle
UNga AND SESStBlIATV. Sd9
td qieak the oceauon, and the lerTice pre-ananged in bis
mind, he offered himself as the mesBenger i*ho should
fetch Mrs. Dashwood. Elinor made no resistance thatwM
not easily oTercome. ^e thonkd him with hrief, though
fervent gratitude ; and while be went to hurry off his
servant with a meBsage to Mr. Harris, and an order for
post-horses directly, she wrote a few Unes to her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel
Brandon, — of such s companion for her mother, — > how
gratefully was it felt ! a companion whose judgment would
guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whose friendship
mi^t soothe her ! As far as the shock of such a
ODuU be lessened to her, hii presence, his n
assistance, would lessen iL
ffe, meanwhile, whaterer he might feel, acted with all
die firmness of s collected mind, made every necessary ar-
rangement with the utmost despatch, and calculated with
exactness the time in which she might look for his return.
Not a moment was lost ip delay of any kind. The horses
arrived, even before they were expected ; and Colonel
Brandon only piesaing her hand with a look of solemnity,
and a few words spoken too Ion to resch her ear, hurried
into the carriage. It was then about twelve o'clock, and
■he returned to her - aster's apartment to wait for the
arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by h«'the rest of
the nigfaL It was a ni^t of almost equal suffering to
both. Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and
delfrittm on Marianne's side, and in the most cruel anxiety
OD Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared. Her apprehen-
aions once raised paid by their excess far all her former
security ; and the servant who sat up with her, for she
would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured
her more, by hints of what her mistress had always thought.
Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoha-
rently on her mother; and whenever she mentioned her
name it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor, who, re-
proaching- herself for having trified with so many Axja of
illness, and wretched for some immediate relief, fancied
'that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing bad
been delayed too long, and pictured to herself her sufibr-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
t70 SBKU J
ing mother uriTiDg too Ute to see this darling child, or to
•ee her rational.
She irai on the pdnt of sending agun for Hr. Harria,
0r if he could not come, for mme otha adTice, when tbe
former — but not till after five o'clock — arrived. Hla
opinion, howerer, made aome little amends for his delay;
for though acknowledging a lerj unexpected and iuiplea- <
(uit alteration in his patient, he would not allow the
danger to be material, and talkai of the relief which a freah
mode of treatment most procure, with a confidence whidii,
in a lesser iegfee, waa conununicated to Elinor. He pnn
■nised to call agun in the course of three or four honra;
and left both the patient and her anxious attendant mOR
composed than he had found them.
With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not
bung called to their aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in tbo
tnoming of what had passed. Her fenner apprehensioni,
now with greater reason restored, left her no doubt of the
event ; and though trying to apeak comfort to XUinor, her
conviction of her dster's danger would not allow her to
fAfet the comfort of hope. Hex heart waa really grieved.
The rapid decay, the early death of a girl so young, aa
lovely as Marianne, must have struck a less interested per-
son with concern. On Mrs. Jennings's compasnon she bad
other daima. %e had been for three months her compa-
nion, was stiD under her care, and she ms known to have
been greatly injured, and long unhappy. The distress of
her nster, too, particularly a ftvourite, waa before her ;
asd as for their mother, when Mrs. Jennings conndeVed
that Marianne mi^t probaUy be to her what Charlotte
was to herself, htx sympathy in Iter suKiingi was very
Mr. Harris waa punctual in his second visit ; bat be
came to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would
produce. His medieines bad failed; tlie fever was un-
abated ; and Marianne only more quiet — not more herself
— remained in a heavy atupor. Elinor, catching all, and
mo'e than all, his fen in a moment, proposed to call in
farther advice. But he judged it unnecessary ; he bad
aiiU something more to'try, some fresh appUcstiact, of
DoliiHihyGoOgle
smffiB Aim SKHBiBiuTT. S71
whose auccass he vaa almost as confident u the lait ; and
his Tidt conclnded with encouraging assurances which
(Cached the ear but could not enter the heart of Mias
Daehwood. She was cahn, except when she thought of
her mother ; but she was ahnost hopeless ; aud in this state
•he continued tiU noon, acarcelj stirring from her sister's
bed, her thm^ta wandering from one image of grief, one
m & ering friend to another ; and her spirits oppressed to the
Utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings, who scrupled
not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to
die many weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne's
disappointment had bou^t on. Elinor felt all the reK-
aonsbieoesB of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to ba
reflections.
About noon, however, she b^an — but with a cautira
'— a dread of disappointment which for some time kept
ber silent even to her friend — to fancy, to hope she could
perceive a slight amendment in her sister's pulse : dte
waited, watched, and examined it again and again ; and at
last, with an agitation more difficult to bury under estenoT
calmness than all her foregoing distress, Tentnred to com-
mnnicate her hopes. Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on
examination, to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to
keep her young friend from indulging a thought of it»
continuance ; and Elinor, conning over every injunction of
distrust, told herself likewise not to hope. But it was too
late. Hope had alrettdy entered; and feeUng all ilB
anxious flutter, she bent over her sister to watch — she
hardly knew for what Half an bour passed away, and
die favonrahle symptom yet Uessed her. Others even aroae
to confirm it. Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered
EUnor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed fas'
eyes on ber with a rational, though languid, gaze. Anxiety
end hope now oppressed her in equal degrees, and left her
no moment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr. Harris at
four o'clock; when his assurances, his felidtations on a
recovery in her sister even surpassing his expecUtion, gave
her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.
Marianne was in every respect materially better ; and he
declared her entirely out of danger. Mrs. Jenni:^, per-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S7S SEN8B AMD HBNaiBii.rnr.
hapi Bdtiafied with the psitial justification of her forebod-
inga which hul been found in their late aUnn, allowed
herself to tnut in hie judgment, and admitted, with un-
feigned joy, and Boon with uneqiuTocal cheerfulneu, the
probability of an entire recovery,
£liDor could not be cheerfuL Her joy was of a different
kind, and led to any thing rather thsn t < t gaiety. Marianne,
restored to life, health, friends, and to her doting mother,
was an idea to fill her heart with BenaationB of exquisite
comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude; but it led
to no outward deraonstrationB of joy, no words, no smiles.
All within EUnor'B breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.
'She continued by the side of her sister, with little in-
termisaion, the whole afternoon ; calming every fear, satis-
fying every enquiry of her enfeebled spirits, Bupplying
every succour, and watching almost every h > o)c and every
breath. The possibility of a relapse would, of course, in
some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was;
but when she saw, on her frequent end minute examin-
ation, that every symptom of recovery continued, and saw
Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet, steady, and to
all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced every doubt.
The time was now drawing on when Colonel Brandon
might he expected back. At ten o'clock, she trusted, or at
least not much later, her mother would be relieved from
the dreadful suspenae in -which she must now be traveiling
towards them. The Colonel, too 1 — perhaps scarcely less
an object of pity ! Oh, how slow was the progress of dme
which yet kept them in ignorance !
At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep,
die joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea. Of
breakfast she bad been kept by her fears, and of dinner by
tlieir sudden reverse, from eating much ; and the present
refreshment, therefore, with such feelings of content a*
^e brought to it, was particularly welcome. Mrs. Jennings
would have persuaded ber, at its conclusion, to take some
rest before her mother's arrival, and allow her to take ber
place by Marianne ; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue,
no capability of sleep at that moment about her, and she
was not to be kept away from her sister an unnecessary
DoliiHihyGoOgle
«7S
instant. Mn. Je & ningH, therefore, attending lier np Btain
iota the sick chamber, to satisfy faeraelf that all continued'
right, left hn there again to her charge and her thoughtaj
and retired to her onn room (o write letters and sleep.
The night wai cold and storniy. The wind roared round
Ae house, and the rain beat'gainst the windows ; but
Elinor, all happineaa within, regarded it not Marianne
il«pt through every blait ; and the trsTellers, they had &
rich reward in store, tor vrtrj present inconfenienoe.
Tile clock ttTnck fo^i- Had it been ten, Elinor would
have been convinced that at that moment she heard a car-
riage driving up to the house ; and ao strong was the per-
suasion that she did, in apite of the almott impossibility of
their lieing already come, that she moved into the adjoining
dreadng-etoaet and opened a window shutter, to be satiaficd of
the trath. She instantly aaw that her ears had not deceived
her. The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in
view. By thdr nnco'lKin li^t ^e thought she could
discern it to be drawn by four hones ; and Uiis, while it
told the oxeeaa of her poor mother's alarm, gave some
explanation to such unexpected rapidity.
Never in her life had Minor found it so difficult to be
calm as at dial moment. The knowledge of what bar
mother must be feeling aa the carriage stopped at the door,
— of her doubt — her dread, — perhaps her deapair I —
and of what aAe had to tell ! with such knowledge it waa
imposmUe to be calm. All that rcmaJDed to be done wu
to be speedy ; and, therefore, staying only till she could
leave Mr*. Jennings'* maid with ber aiatev, she hurried
down atairs.
The Imsde in the vestibule, aa she paiaed along an inner
loliliy, assured hex that they were dready in the house.
She rushed forwards towards the drawing-room : she ou
tered it, — and saw only WiUoughby.
HihyGoogle
CHAPTER VIII.
EuNon, Btsrtiiig b*ck with ■ look of boiroT Kt the sight of
him, obeyed (he first impulse of her heart in tuminf; in.
■tantly to quit the room ; and her hand wu aheady m
the lock, when its action wu lugpended by his hastily
•drandng, and saying, in a voice rather of command than
■application, —
" Mias Daahwood, for half an hour — for ten minutei
— I entreat you to stay. "'
" No, sir, " she repUed with firmness, " I shall m > t stay.
Your business cannot be with me. The servants, I sup.
pose, forgot to tell yon that Mr. Palmer was not in the
bouse. "
" Had they told me, " he cried with vehemence, " that
Hr. Palmer and all his relations were at the devil, it would
iM > t have turned me frooi the door. My bumnesi ia witk
you, and only you. "
" With me ! " — in the utmost amazement : — " well,
air — be quick — and if you can — less violent. "
" Sit down, and I will he both. "
She hedtited ; she knew not what to do. The poaai-
bility of Colond Brandon's, arriving and finding him these
came across her. But she had promised to hear him ; and
her curiosity no less than her honour was engaged. After
a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding that prudence
lequired despatch, and that her acquiescence would beat
promote it, she walked silently towards the table, and lat
down. He took the opposite chair ; and for half a minute
nat a word was said by either.
" Pray be quick, sir, " aaid Elinor, impatiently; " I hare
no time to spare. "
He was sitting in an attitude of deep n
seemed not Co hear her.
" Your dster, " said be, with abmptness,
afterwards, " is out of danger. I heard it from the serrailt.
God be praised! Bat is it true? is it really tnief "
■KMBB ADD BENetBUittT. S7S
ElioDT would not speak. He repeated the enquiry with
jet greater eagemeu.
" For God'a sake tdl me, ia ahe out of danger, or is she
not ? "
" We hope she is, "
He roie up, and walked across the room.
" Had I known aa much half an hour ago; — but Bince I
am here, " speaking with a forced vivacity as he returned to
his seat, — " what doea it signify ? For once. Miss Daah.
wood — it will be the last time, perhaps — let us be cheer-
fol together. 1 aro in a fine mood for gaiety. Tell- me
honestly, " a deeper glow OTerapreading his cheeks, " d6 you
think me mo«t a knave or a fool f "
Elinor looked at him with greater aitonishmeut than
ever. She b^an to think that he must be in liquor ; —
the atrangenesB of such a visit, and of such nuuiners,
seemed no otfaerwiae intelligible ; and with this impression
abe immediately rose, saying, —
" Mr. Willonghby, I advise you, at present, to return to
Cotnbe. I am not at leisure to remain with you longer.
Whatever your business msy be with me, it will be better
recollected and explained to-moirow. "
" I undentand you, " he replied, with an expressive smile,
ud a voice perf^y calm; " yes, I am very drunlc. A
pint of porter with my cold beef at Mai^lborough was
enough to ovenet me. "
" At Marlborough I " cried Elinor, more and more at a
loss to understand what he would be aL
" Yes — 1 left London this morning at eight o'clock,
. and the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise
■ince that time procured me a nuncliion at Marlliorough. "
. The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his
eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other un-
pardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland, he was not
brought there by intoxicatjon, she said, after a moment's
recolleetion, —
" Mr. Willonghby, you ought to feel, and 1 certdnly do,
that after what has paased, your coming here in this man-
ner, and forcing yourself upon my notice, requires a Tery
particular excuse. What is it that you mean by it ? " .
X 3
DoliiHihyGoOgle
«7»
" I mean, " t^A he, with leriMu eatrgj, " if I on, to
make you hate me one dq^ree leu than jaa do mmo. \
BMUi to ofibr aome kind of explanation, some kind of
apoI(^]r, for the past ; to open my whole heart to you, and
l^ convincing you, that though I have been always a,
Uockhead, I have not been always ■ TRScal, to oBtain soDe-
thing like forgiveneaa ft^m Ma——- from ycmr listat'. "
" Is thia the real reaian of your ooming ? "
" Upon my aoul it ia, " waa hia answer, with a wuintfa
whidi bronght all the former WUlon^l^ to hsr remem-
branee, and, in spite of hersdf, -made her think him sin-
c^e.
" If that is all, yon may be iBtisfled already ; for Maii-
anne ttMt, ihe has long forgivsn yon- "
" Hat ihe ? " he oried, in the same eaffsr lone. " Then
Ax hat forgiven me before she ought to have done it.
But she shall forgive me agftia, and oa mMe reaiosable
gnmnds. JVou will you listen to me ^ "
Elinor bowed her assent.
" I do not know, " said he, aftar ■ pawe of axpeelalion
on her side, and thoughtfolneas on his «wn, " how yett
may have accoonted for my behaviour to y < »r siller, wr
vdiat diabolical motive yon may ha«e imputed to me.
Eerhaps you will hardly think the hotter af ne, — it ia
worth the trial, however, — and you sbsll hear every thing.
When I first became intimate in your family, I had ao
other ntention, no othn- view In the acquaiatanoe, than to
pass my time pleasantly while I waa «Uiged to remain in
Oevooihire, more pleasantly than I had ever dene before.
Vottr sister's lovsjy perion, aad interetting manners, could
not bat please me; andh^bobaiviour tome almost from the
first waaof a kind — it isastoniihiDg, whenl refleoton what
it was, andwhsC < A« was, that my i > «artabo(ildha < e'beeni«
inaendble ! But st first, I must cMifeM, my vanity onljr
was devatcd by it. Careless of her happiness, thii^ing
only of my own amusement, giving way to -feelings whidi
I had always been uw much in the ^abit of indulging, lea-
daavouted, by tfvery means in iny power, to make mysdf
pleasing to her, without any deugn af r^mii^ boTAAe-
tion. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■ENSB AFti si!NS(Bi] & rpr. 377
Miss Ihshwood, at this p < nnt, turning her tsjn on him'
mi & the moBt angry contenipt, stopped hira, by eaying, —
" It is hardly worth while, Mr, Willoughby, ftir you to
teUte, or for me to listen any longer. Such a banning
as this cannot be ft^owed by any thing. Do not let roe
be pained by hearing any thing more on the subject "
" I insist on your hearing the whole of it, " he replied.
" My fortune w & i never lu^, and I had always been ex-
pensive, always in the habit of associating with people of
better income than myself. Every year wnce my coming
of age, or even before, I beGeve, had added tomy debts ;
and though the death of iny old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to
set me free, yet fliat event being uncertain, and possibly far
diat«it,it had been for Bome time myintentiou to re-establish
my circumstances by marrying a womAi of fortune. To
attach myself to your sister, therefore, was not a thing to be
dionght of; and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty,
which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of youia,'
Miss Dashwood, can ever reprobate too much, — I was act-
hig in this manner, trying to engage her regard, without a
thought of returning it But one thing may be said fbr
tne : even in that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I did
sot then know what it was to love. But have I ever known
it ? Well may it be doubted ; for, had I really loved,
could 1 have sacrificed my feelings to vanity, to avarice ?
or, what is more, could I have sacrificed hers ? But
I have done it To avoid a comparative poverty, which
fier aftction and her society would have deprived of all its
horrors, I have, by rairing myself to affluence, loft every
thing that could make it a blessing. "
" You did, then, " said Elinor, a liilie softened, " be-
lieve yourself at one time attached to her ? "
" To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood
mch tenderness ! Is there a man on earth who could
have done it ? Yes, I found myself, by insensible de-
grees, sincerely fond of her ; and the happiest hours of
iny life were what I spent wiA her when I felt my inten-
tions were strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless.
Even thm, however, whea fiilly determined on pqring m;
T 3
DoliiHihyGoOgle
nddieaaea to her, I t]]»wed iojaelt most improperly to pnt
off, from da; to Aaj, the moment of dtdng it, from an un-
willingness to enter into an eng^ement while laj drcam-
stanceB were ao greatly embarraaeed. I will not reason
here — nor will I stop for you to expatiate on the ab-
surdiCy, and the worse than absurdity, of scrupling to en-
gage my faith where my honour was already hound. The
event has proved that I was a cunning fool, providing with
great circumspection tta a posaihle opportunity of making
myself contemptiUe and wretched for ever. At last, bow-
ever, my resolution was taken ; and 1 had deterniined, as
soon u I could engage her alone, to justify the attenti < »iB
I had so invariably paid her, and openly assure her of an
affection which I had already taken such pains to display.
But in the interim — in the interim of the very few honra
that were to pass before I could have an opportunity of
speaking with her in private — a circumitance occurred —
an unlucky circumstance — to ruin all my resolution, and
with it all my comfort. A discovery took place, " — here
he hesitated and looked down. " Mrs. Smith had some-
how or other been informed, I imagine hy some distant
relation, whose interest it was to deprive me of her favour,
of an a & ir, a connection — but I need not explain myself
farther, " he added, looking at her witbj a heigbiened co-
lour and an enquiring eye, • — " your particular intimacy —
you have probably heard the whole story long ago. "
" I have, " returned Ehnor, colouring likewise, and
hardoiing her heart anew against any compassion for him,
" I have heard it all ; and how you will explain away
any part of your guilt in that dreadful huaineaB I confess
is beyond my comprehension. "
" Hemember, " cried WiUougbby, " from whom yon re-
ceived the account. Could it be an impartial one^ I
acknowledge that her situation and her character ought to
have been respected by me. I do not mean to justify my-
self, but at the same time cannot leave yon to suppose that
1 have nothing to urge — that hecanae she was injured she
was irreproachable, end because /was a libertine, Me muat
be a saint. If the violence of her passions, the weakness
of her underatanding — I do itot mean, however, to defend
mmi AMD eamtBiLim 379
tnjaelf. Hn k & cdon for me deserved better trefttment ;
and I often, with great «elf-iepn > ach, lecall the tendemeu
which, for a veiy ahort time, had the power of creating
•ny return. I wish — I heartily wish it had never been.
But I have ii^nred more than herself; and I have injured
one, whose afibclion for me (may I say itp) waa scarcely
less warm than bera ; and whose mind — oh, how In-
finitdy superior ! "
" Your indifierence, however, towards that unfortunate
^1 — I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discuMdon of
such a subject may well be — your indifierence ia no
■polc^ for your cruel neglect of her. Do not think your-
self excused by any weakness, any natural defect of un-
derstanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty bo evident
on yours. You must have known, that while you were
enjoying yourself in Devonshire, pursuing fresh Hchemes,
always gay, always happy, she was reduced to the ex-
tremeat indigence. "
" But, upon my soul, I did not Icnow it, " he warmly
replied : " I did not recollect that I bad omitted to give
ber my direction ; and common sense might have told her
bow to find it out. "
" Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith ?'*
" She taxed me with the offence at once, and my con-
fusion may be guessed. The purity of her life, the for-
mality of her notioni, her ignorance of the world, — every
thing was against me. The matter itaelf I could not deny,
and Tun was every endeavour to soften iL She was pre-
viously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my
conduct in general, and was, moreover, discontented with
die very little attention, the very little portion of my time
Aat 1 had bestowed on her in my present visit. In short,
it ended in a total breach. By one measure I might have
saved inysdf. In the height of her morality, good woman !
die ofi'ued to foi^ve the past, if I would marry Eliza.
That could not be ; and I was formally dismissed from her
favour and her bouse. The night following this tWaii — I
was to go the next morning — was spent by me in deliber-
ating on what my future conduct should be. The struggle
wwa great, but it ended too soon. My afi^tion for Marianne,
T 4
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
880 gmnm i
m7 thoroagh convictim of b«r sUasfameitt to me — it woa
■11 iasuffident to outwdgh that dread of poverty, or gtt tha
betto'of those false ideas of the neceanty of ridies, which
I was natunll; inclined to fed, and expensive aociety had
loaeued. I had teaam to beliere myadf aeeuie of mjr
present wii«, if I choie to addi«« her, < uid I pennaded
mysdf to think that notliing dse in coipmon prodencA
remained for me to do. A heavy scene, howevo', awaited
me before I could leave Dovonshire : I iras engaged to
dine with you on that very day ; some apdogy waa there-
fi»e neceaaaiy for my brealuDg the engmement. Bat
iritetber I ghonldwriie Ihia apology, ordeliver it in peraoD,
waa a pnat of hti^ debate. To aee Marianne I ic^ would
be dreadiul ; and I even doubted whether 1 could see bei
^ain and keep to my retolntjos. In that point,. ho wev»,
I undervalued ray own magnanimity, as the event de-
clared ; for I went, I saw her,, and saw her miaoable, and
left her miaeraUe ; — and left her hoping never to aee ha
^tt. "
" Why did you call, Mr. WiUoughby ? " said Elinor, re-
pioacbflilly ; " a note would have cncwered evoj puipoae.
Why was it necessary to call ? "
" It was necessary to my own pride. 1 could not bear
to leare the country in a manner that might lead you, or
the reat of the neighbourhood, to BUspeot any part of what
hsd really paased between Mn. Smith and myself, aoA. I
restdved, thertfbre, on calling at the cottage, va. my way to
Honiton. The sight of your dear iiater, however, was
le^y dreadftil ; and, to hei^ten the matter, I found her
alone. You were .all gone 1. do not know where. Ilud
kii her only the evening before, bo ftiUy, so firmly resolved
within myudf mi doing right ! A few hwn were to have
Wigaged hco'to me for ever; and I remember how happy,
how gay were my spirita, as I walked from the cottage la
AUenham, satisfied with myself, delif^ted with every body 1
Bnt in this, our last interview of Moidship, 1 a^ioacbed
her with a sense of guilt that almost took from me tb«
power of dissembling. Her sorrow, bar disiqipointmeB^
her deqi regret, when I told her diat 1 waa obliged ta
leave DeTODdiire so immediately — I never shall forget it—
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
naited, too, wiA inch reliMee, lucli confld«ice in me!
Oh, God ! what a bard-hearted rascal I naa I "
They were both nknt foT a few momenU. Elinor first
spoke.
" Did yon tell ber that you should soon retiira? "
" I do not know what I told herj " he replied, impa-
tisntly ; " lets than was due to tlie past, beyond a doubt,
and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the
Aituxe. I cannot think of it. It won't do. Then came
your dear mother to torture me farther, with all her kind-
Bess and confidence. Thank Heavea ! it did torture me.
I was miierabls. Mlsg Dadwood, you cannot have an idea
of the comfort it gives me to look back on my own misery.
I owe such a grudge to myself for the stupid, rascally folly
of iny own heart, that all my past sufi^ngi under it aie
only triumph and exultation to me now. Well, I went, left
all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I wsa
only indiffbr^t My journey to town — travelhug with my
own hones, and therefore so tediouriy — no creature to
^eak to — my own reflectionB so cheerful — when I looked
forward every thing so inviting ! — when 1 looked back at
Barton, the picture so soothing! — oh, it was a blessed
joumay ! "
He stopped.
" Well, MT, " said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew
impatient for his departure, " Uid this is all p "
" All! — no: — have you ito^ot what passed in town?
That infunons letter ? Did she show it you i "
" Ves, I saw every note that passed. "
" When the fiiW of hers reached me, (a* it immediately
did, for 1 was in town the whole time,) what I felt is, in
the commtm phrase, not to be expressed ; in a more dmple
one, perhaps too simple to wiae any emotion, my feelings
were very, very pdnful. Every line, every word, was — in
the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she
here, would forbid — a dagger to my heart. To know that
Maiianoe was in town was, in the same language, a thun-
derbolt. Thunderbolts and da^ers ! what a reproof would
aha h*ve given me! Her taste, her opinions — I believe
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SSS gKNBB Aim snreiBiuTT.
they are better known to me tLsa ray 6'wa, and I am twet
they are dearer. "
'EOidof'b heart, which had undergone many ehangra in
the course of this extraordinary convertation, was now gafti
eaed again ; yet she fdt it her duty to check such ideas
in her companion as the last.
" This ii not right, Mr. Willoaghby. Remember that
you are married. Relate only what in your conscience yon
think necessary for me to hear. "
" Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was sdU as
dear to her as in {ormer days, — that in spite of the many,
many weeks we had been separated, she was as constant in
her own feelings, and as fiill of faith in the constancy of
mine as ever, — awakened all my remorse. 1 say awakened,
because time and London, boBiness and diaaipation, had in
some measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine
hardened villain, fancying myself indifibrent to her, and
choosing to fancy that she too must have become indifibreirt
to me ; tslMng to myself of our past attachment as a mere
idle, trifling, business; shragging up my shoulders in proof
of its being so, and silencing every reproach, overcoming
every scru]^, by secretly, saying now and then, ■ I shall
be heardly glad to hear she is wdl married.'But this note
made me know mys^ better. I felt that she was infi-
nitely dearer to me than any other woman in the world,
and that I was using her infamously. But every thing was
then just settled between Miss Grey and me. To retreat
was impossible. All that I had to do was to avoid you
both. J sent no answer to Marianne, intending by that
means to preserve myself from her farther notice ; and for
some time J was even determined not to call in Berkeley
Street; but at last, judging it wiser to a%ct the air of ■
cool, common acquaintance than any thing else, J watched
you all safely out of the house one morning, and left my
" Watched ns out of the house ! "
" Even so. You would be sniprised to hear how often
I watched yon, how often I was on the point of fallii^ in
with yon. I have entered many a shop to avind your
sight as the carriage drove by. Lodging u I did in Bond
DoliiHihyGoOgle
sKtne ASB snniBiutr. 2SS
Street, there nu hardlj ■ day in which I did not catch a
glimpse of one or other of you ; sod nothing but the moit
oonatant watcbfulneBS on mj side, a moat invariably pre-
Tiiling desire to keep out of your sight, could have separ-
ated ns BO bng. I avoided the Middletons as much as
possible, as well ss every body else who was likely to
prove an acquaintance in common. Not aware of their
being in town, however, I blundered on Sir John, I
believe, the first day of his coming, and the day aft» I
had called at Mra. Jennings's. He asked me to a party, a
dance at his house in the evening. Had he not told me as
an inducement that you and your sister were to be there, I
■hould have felt it too certain a thing to trust myself near
him. The next morning brought another abort note fmm
Marianne — adll affectionate, open, artless, confiding — .
every thing that could make mg conduct moat hateful. I
could not answer it. I tried — but could not frame a
seoteuce. Bnt I thought of her, J believe, every moment
of the day. If yon- can pity me. Miss Dashwood, pity my
situation as it was Men. With my head and beut full of
your sister, I wss forced to play the happy lover to an-
other woman ! Those three or four weeks were worse
than all. Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were
forced on me ; and what a sweet figure I cut ! what an
evening of agony it was ! Marianne, beautiful as an
angel on one side, calling me Willoughby in such a tone !
Oh, God J holding out her hand to me, asking me for an
explanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such
speaking stdicitnde on my face ! and Sophia, jealous as the
devil on the other hand, looking all that was — Well, it
does not signify ; it is over now. Such an evening 1 I
ran away from you all as soon as I could ; but not before
I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white as death. That
was the last, last look I ever had of her ; the last manner
in which she appeared to me. It was a horrid sight J Yet
when I thought of her to-day aa really dying, it was a kind
of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly how she
would appear to those who saw her last in this world. She
was before me, constantly before me, as 1 travelled, in the
nme look and fane. "
DinfedhyGoOgle
S81 nun: a
A iliort piow of mutual thonghtfulneffi succeeded.
WUlonghbj fiiM rousing himself, brol^e it thas : —
" WeH, let IDS tnftke haite and be gone. Your rimrr ia
eertainl; better, oertunly out of dugcr ^ "
''We utt Msured of it "
" Your poor mother too ! doling on Marianne. "
" Bat the letter, Mr < Willoughby, your own letter : have
you any thing to say about that P "
" Yes, yes, tiial in partjculai'. Your sister wrote to
ne again, yon know, the very next morning. Yoo saw
what she sud. I wai fareakfasdng at the Ellisons,
—Mid her letter, with some othets, was brou^t to me
Aere from my lodgings. It happened to catch Sophia's
eye before it caught mine; —and its siie, the el^auce of
the paper, the handwriting altogether, immediately gave her
a suspicion. Some vagae report had reached her before'of
iny attachment to some young lady in Devonshire, and
what had passed within her observation die preceding eres "
ing had marked who the young lady wag, and made her
more jealous than ever. AStcting that air of playfiihieas,
Iberefore, which is deli^tful in a woman one loves, she
opened the letter direc^y, and read its contents. She was
well paid for her impudence. She read what made her
wretched. Ka wretchedness I could have borne, but her
pasaiou — her malice — at all events it must be appeased.
And, in short, what do you think of my wii^'s style of
letter-writing ? — ddioate — tender — truly feminine —
was it not? "
" Your vrife I The letter was in your own hand-
" Yea, but I had only the credit of servilely copying
BUch sentences at I was adiamed t« put my name to. The
original was all her own — her own happy thoughta and
gentle diction. But what could I do p We were engaged,
every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed — but I
am taking like a fool. Preparation ! Day ! In honest
words, her money was neDeasary to me, and in a situation
like mine any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture.
And after tXl, what did it signify to my character, in tlie
opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what laogu^my
H,.;lo
axNH *jn > ABcnesiirT. £85
Minrer wm couched ? It rotnt have been onlj'to one end.
My budneBB irsa to declve myielf a Bcmmdrel ; ind
whether I did it with a bow oi a bluiter wae of littk
iniporUnce.'I am mined for ever in their opiniim/
■aid I to myself;'I em Bhnt out for ever from their ao-
dety; they already think me an nnprindpled fellow; tbia
letter will only mike them think me a blackguard one.'
8udi were my reasoningi aa, in a sort of deaperate cardeaa-
neas, I copied my wife's words, aod parted widi the Jut
relics ef Marianne. Her three notea, — unluckily they
WMe all in my pocket-book, or I ahoold have denied their
exietenee, and hoarded thtm for ever, — 1 waa forced to
put them np, and could Dot even kiaa them. And the
lock of hair — that, too, I had always carried about me in
the tame pockeNbook, which was now aeardted by madtun
with the most ingratiatiDg vimlence, — the dear lock, —
all, every memento was torn ^m me. "
" You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby ; very hlaia-
able, " said Elinor ; while bar Toice, in ijAU of herself,
betrayed her compaaaionate emotion ; " you ought not to
■peak in tbia way, either of tin. Willongfaby or my siakr.
You have made your own choke. It was not forced < m
yon. Your wife has a claim to your politeneis, to yoor
reapeet, at least Ske mast be attached to yon, or afae
would not have married yon. To treat her with unldnd-
neas, to speak of her slightingly, is no atonement -to
Marianne; nor can I suppose it a rdief to your own
" Do not uHk to me of my wife, " aaid he with a heavy
■igh ; " she does not deserve yoor eompasdon. She knew
I had DO regard for her when we married. Well, married
we were, and eame dawn to Combe M^ " ^ ^ ^ h^i^^,
and afCerwarda retarned to town to be gay. And now do
yon pity me, MinDaahwood? Or have I said all tlua
to no purpose ? Am I, — be it only one degree, — am I leas
guilty in your i^nion tiiaii 1 was before ? My intentiona
w«e not always wrong. Have I ex^ained away any part
of my guib ? "
" Yea, yeu have certainly removed somatliing — a lit^
Tea have proved yeuntlf, en die irtioie, less faulty titan J
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
htd believed yon. You hive proved your betrt lew wicked;
iBudi less wicked. But I taordijr know — the misery that
you have inflicted — I hatdJy know what could bave made
it worse. "
" Will you repeat to your siBter, when she is lecorered,
what I have been telling you ? Let me be a little lightened,
too, in her opinion as well as in youni. You tell me that
she has fo^Ten me already. Let me be able to fancy that
a better knowledge of my heart, and of my present feeUngs,
will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural,
more gentle, less dignified, forglTeness. Tell her of my
misery and my penitence ; — tell her that my heart waa
sever inconstant to her; and, if yon will, that at thia
moment she is dearer to me than ever. "
" I will tdl her all that la necessary to what may com-
paratively be called your justification. But you have not
explained to me the particular reason of your coming now,
nor how you heard of her illness. "
" Last night, in Dmry Lane lobby, I ran against Sir
John Middleton ; and when he saw who I was, for the first
time these two months, he spoke to me. That he had cut
me ever since my marriage, I had seen without surprise or
resHitment. No < v, howerer, his good-natured, honest,
etupid soul, full of indignation against me, and concern for
your sister, could not resist the temptation of telling me
what he knew ought to, though probably he did not think
it tBoiM, vex me horridly. Aa blundy as he could apeak
it, therefore, he told me that Marianne Dasbwood was dying
of a putrid fever at Cleveland — a letter that moniing re-
ceived from Mrs. Jennings declared her danger most im-
minent — the Pahnera all gone off in a fright, & c I was
too much shotted to be able to pass myadf off as insensitde
even, to the undisceming Sir John. His heart was softened
in seeing mine suffer ; and so much of his ill-will was done
away, that when we parted, he almost shook me by the
hand while he reminded me of an old promise about a
pointer puppy. What 1 felt on hearing that your sister
was dying, and dying, too, beheving me the gresteat riilain
upon earth, scorsing, hating me in her latest moments —
for how coiild I tell what bottld pniyeots mig^t not have
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■HU AKD BHHCtUUTT. S87
been imputed ? On« pereoD 1 was ime would repreaeat
me as capable of any thing. What I felt wu dreadful !
My reioWon was BOgn made, and at eight o'clock thia
morning I was in my carriage. Now you know aU. "
Elinor made no answer. Her thoughts were ailently
fised on the irreparable injury which too early an inde-
pendence, and its consequent habits of idlenesa, diwpation,
and luxory, had made in the mind, the character, the hap-
piness, of a man who, to every advantage of person and
talents, uniced a dispoution naturally open andhouest, and
a feeling, affectionate temper. The world had made him
extravagant and vain — extravagance and vanity had made
him cold-hearted and selfish. Vanity, while seeking ita
own guilty triumph at the expense of another, had involved
him in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at least
its oSipring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed. Each
faulty propensity in leading him to evU, had led him like-
wise to punishment. The attachment, from which againat
honour, against feeling, against every better interest he had
outwardly torn himself, now, when no longer allowable,
governed every thought ; and the connection, for the sake
of which tie had, with little scruple, left her sbter to
misery, was likely to prove a source of nnhappinesa to
himself of a far more incurable nature. From a reverie of
duB kind she was recalled at the end of some minutes by
Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a remie at least
equally painful, started up in preparation for going, and
«aid,—
" There is no use in staying here ; I mutt be off. "
" Are you going back to town ? "
" No — to Combe Magna. I have busiiiess there ; from
dieace to town in a day or two. Gpod-hy. "
He held out his band. She could not refuse to give him
bera : he pressed it with affection.
" And yon do think something better of me than you
did? " said he, letting it fall, and leaning agaiiist the
mantel-piece, as if forgetting he was to go.
Elinor assured him that she did ; — that she foi^ve,
pitied, wished him well — was even interested in his hap-
pXMS — and added some gentle counsel as to the hehaviovt
DoliiHihyGoOgle
3SS ICMU JLirO BEHnBIUTT.
mcMt Hkely to promote it. Hi* aniirer wu not very
enconn^ng.
" As to thtt, " uid he, " I miut nib through the world
u well M I can. Dom« > tic happineu is out of the qaet & aa^
If, however, I un lUowed to dunk that jon and joun fed
an intereit in laj fate and actions, it may be the meaoi — <
it nutTpnt me on mygnard — at leaat it will be aoniethiiqc
to live for. Marianne, to be sure, it loat to me foi ever.
Were 1 even by any bloued ebance at liberty again — — "
Elinor itopped him with a reproof.
" Well, " he replied, " once more good-by. I ihall now
go away and live in dread of one eveot. "
" What do you mean ? "
" Your aiiler's marriage. "
" You are very wrong. She can new be more lost to
yon than ibe ii now. "
" But she will be gained by some one die. And if that
•ome one thould be Uie very he whom, of all others, I
could leait bear — but I will not Btay to rob myaelf of all
jour compaationate good-will, by dMwing that where I
have moat injured I can least forgive. Good-by, — God
And with tbeae wixda he abnoat ran oat ot the remn.
CHAPTER IX.
Eltkoh, for some time after he left her, for icHBe time even
after the sound of his carriage had died away,'remained
too macfa oppreaaed by a crowd of ideaa, widely differing
in themselvea, but of whi^ sadMaa was ike general reanlt,
to think evm of btx Hister.
WUlanghby, — he whom wly half an bmiT ago she had
abhorred as the moat worthleaa of men, — Wllloughby, in
spite of afl his fanht, excited a d^rce of conmiieraiiMi
fyr the snSal^B pntdseed by tbera, irtueh made her d^ft
of him aa mw aqiaralad tor •vra'boD her family, with %
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
289
tendernew, s Kgret, rather in proportion, u she soon ac-
knowledged within benelf, to hia wiihes tlian to his merits.
She felt thftt hia influence otct her mind was heightened
by circumBtviefA «4iich tmght not in reaion to have weight :
l^ that person of tinccnnmoii attraction, that open, affec-
tionate, and liTely manner, wUch it was no merit to pos-
sess'; and by that itijl ardent love for Marianne, whidti it
was not even innocent to indulge. But ahe felt that it wu
ao, long, long before she could feel his influence less.
WhNi at last ^e returned to the nnconsdouB Marianne,
the fbund her just awaking, refreshed by bo long and sweet
a ileqi to the extent of her hopes. Elinor's heart was fulL
The past, the preswit, the fiiture, Willoughby's viait,
Marianne's safety, and her mother's espected arrival, threw
her altogether Into an agitation of spirits which kept off
every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful of
betraying henelf to her auter. Short was the time, how-
erer, in which that fear could afibct her ; for within half
an hour after Willoughby's leaving the house, ebe waa
aguD called down stairs by the sound of another carriage.
Sager to save her mothw from every unnecessary mo-
ment's horrible suspoiBe, she ran immediately into the
hall, and reached the outward door just in time to receive
and support her as the entered it.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the
house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne's
being do more, had no " voice to enquire after her, no voice
even for Elinor : but the, waiting neither tof salutatios nor
oiquiry, inattntly gave the joyful relief; and her mother,
eatctaing it -with all her usual warmth,'was in a moment as
much orercOme by her happiness as she had been before by
her fears. She was supported into the drawing-room be-
tween her daughter and her friend ; and there, shedding
taan of joy, though still unable to sp^k, embraced Elinor
again and again, tiuming from her at intervals to preia
Cidonel Brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at once
her gratitude, and her conviclioii of his sharing with her-
sdf in the bliss of the moment. He shared it, howerer, in
a rilence even greater than her own.
As soon as Mr*. Dashwood had recova^ herself, to see
V
DoliiHihyGoOgle
£90 lENSB AND sensibiutt;
Maritime was her first desire ; and in tiro minutes she mt
with ber beloved child, rendered deueF to her thttn erer
by absence, unhappiness, and danger. Elinor's delight, aa
ahe aayf what each felt in the meeting, was only diecked by
an apprdendoQ of it* robbing Marianne of brther sleep :
but Mre. Dashwood could be calm, could be etco prudent,
when the life of a child was at stake ; and Marianne, satis.
fied in knowing her mother was near her, and conscious ot
being too weak for conversation, Babmitted readily to the
silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her.
Mrs. Dashwood wmld ait up with her all night; and £11-
nor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to bed.
But the rest, which one night entirely slee^^eBs, and many
hours pf the most wearing anxiety seemed to make requi-
site, was kept off by irritation of spirits. Willeughby,
" poor Willoughby, " as she now allowed herself to call
Jtim, was constantly in her thoughts : she would not but
have heard his vindication for the world, and now blamed,
now acquitted herself for having judged him ao harshly
before. But her promise of relating it to her aiatei WW
invariably painful. She dreaded the performance of it,
dreaded what its eSbct on Marianne might be; doubted
whether, after such an explanation, she could ever be happy
with another ; and for a moment wished Willoughby ■
fridower. Then, remembering Colonel Brandon , rqiroved
herself, felt that to his sufferings and hit ctaiatancy, far
more than to bis rival's, the reward of her uster was due,
and wished any thing rather than Mrs. WiUoughby's death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had
been much soitened to Mr^ Dashwood by her own preriiMB
alarm ; for so great was her, uneasiness about Marianne,
that she bad already determined to set out for CleveiaBd
on that very day, ^thout waiting for, any farther i»tdlL
gence, and had so far settled her journey befb > « bis ar-.
^val, that the Careys were then expected every moment t»
fetch Margaret away, as her mother waa unwiUii^ to take
ber where there might be infection.
Marianne continued to mend every day ; and the btiUiaBt
cheerfiilness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved
ber to be, as she repeatedly declared herself, one of Ihc
■KNOB un > SEiraiBUJTV. S9I
ktp]neit women in tbe world, Elinor could not hear the
declaration, nor witnen its proofs, without Boroedmea won.
dering whedier ha mother ever recollected Edward. But
Hn. Dashwood, IrUBting to tbe temperate account of bet
tma dieappokitmcnt, which Elinor had aent her, was led
away by the exub««iice of her joy to think only of what
would jnereaae it. Marianne was restored to her, ftoza a
darker in which, aa she now began to fed, bm own mia-
talen judgment in encouragii^ theunfortiniBte sttochmeni
to Willonghby had contiitmted to {dace her ; and in her
leeoTery the had yet another source of joy, nnthonght of
1^ EUinor. It was thus imparted to b^, aa soon as any
i^ipartnnity of private conference between them occnrred.
" At hut we are alone. My £linor, you do not yet know
■11 my happincn. Colonel Brandon loves Marianne. He
has told me w himself. "
Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained,
■apprised and nof surprised, was all silent attention.
" Yon are never like me, dear Elinor, or I ahonld won-
ia M your composure .now. Had I sat down to wish fyr
any poauble good to my family, 1 should have fixed on
Cdonel Brandon's marrying one of yon, as the ol^ect moat
denraUe ; and I believe Marianne will be the miost happy
with him of the two. "
Elinor was half inclined to asic her reason for thinking
■0, because satisfled that none, founded on an impartial con-
lUerttioii of their age, cbaraeters, or feelings, could be
givoi: but her mother most alwaya be carried away by
twr imagination, on any interesting sul^ect; and, thetdbre,
inatead of an enquiry, she passed it off with a smile.
" He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we
Invelled. It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.
I, you may well believe, conld talk of nothing but my
< biU: — he could not conceal his distress; I saw that it
•quailed my own ; and he, perhaps thinking that mere
ftiendahip, as the world now goes, would not justify so
warm a sympathy > 01 rather, not thinking at all, 1 suppose,
firing wdf to irreastible feelings, made me acquainted
with bis eaincBt, tender, constant, afiection for Marianne.
V 2
DoliiHihyGoOgle
He hM loved her, my Elinor, ever d & ee the flnt moment of
■edng her. "
Here, however, Elinor perceived, not the Icngtuge,
not the profeadons of Colond Brandon, but the nahmil
embelliabmenli offaer mover's active tmaej, vrhidii fiubioD-
ed every thing delightful to her aa it choK.
" Bis regard for her, inflnitely lurpaaaiDg any thing thM
Willonghbjt ever felt or fidgned, u much nare warm, ae
more sincere or constant, wbkhevor we ue to call it, hai
suhaisted through all the knowledge of dear Mirianne'a
unhappy pr^Kwaeasion for that wonhlew yonng man ! and
without lelflehneas, without encouraging a hope! conld
he have seen her happy with another. Such a ruMe mind t
tnch openneaa, nich sincerity! No one can be deceived in
" Colonel Brandon's character, " aaid Blill«r, " « an
excellent man, is well established. "
" I know it ia, " replied her mother, serionslf, " or, itut
such a warning, / should be the last to encourage nii^ af-
fection, or even to'be pleased by iL But hi* anoing tar
me, as be did, with such active, inch ready fisiendshipj is
enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men. "
" Hia character, however,''answered Elinor,, ■ " doea not
rest on one act of kindness, to which his'aSbcdon for Ma.
rianne, were humanity out of the case, would have prcmipted
faim. To'Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he has been
long and intimately known : they equally love and reapect
him ; and even my own knowledge of him, thoogh l^ely
acquiiied, ia very considerabte ; and so highly do / value
and esteem him, that if Marianne can be happy with him,
I shall be as ready as yootadf to think our connection the
greatest blessing tousin the world. Whataitswer did yea
give him 7 Did yon allow him to hope ? "
" Ob, my love! I could not them talk of hope to him or
to myself. Marianne mi^t, at dut moment, be dyii^. Bat
he did not aak fm* hope, or encouragenwnL His was m >
involuntary confidence, an irrepressible efiWon to a sooth.
Ing friend, not an appHcation to a parent. Yet, after a
time, 1 did say, for, at Brat, I was quite overcome, that if
d» lived, as I trosted she might, my greatest ha^rinew
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BKNIE AND BBXraiBIUIT. 298
would lie in promotiiig their murine ; and MDce our ar-
riTal, since onr delightful Becuritir, I h*ve repeated it to
him more fully, have f^ven him every encouragement in
my power. Time, a very little time, I tell him, will do
every thing ; Marianne's heart is not to be waited for ever
on such a man aa Willoughby. His own merits must loon
■eonre it "
" To judge fiom the Colonel's spirits, however, yon
have not yet made him equally sanguine. "
" No. * Ue thinks Marianne's afiection too deeply
rooted for any change in it under- a great length of time;
and even supposing her heart again free, is too diffident of
himself to believe, that with such a difference of age and
dispocition be could ever attach her. There, . however, he
is quite mistaken. Bis age is only so much beyond hers
■• to be ao advantage, as to make his character and prin-
ciples fixed J and his diapoation, I am well convinced,
ia exactly the very one to make your sister happy. And
'Us person, his minners, too, are all in his favour. My
partiaUty does not blind me : he certainly is not lo hand-
•ome as Willoughby; but, at the same time, there is
something much more pleasing in bis countenance. There
WIS always a something, if yon remember, in WiUooghby's
eyes at dmea, which I did not like. "
Elinor could not remonber it ; but her mother, wilh-
oat waiting for her assent, continued, —
. " And his manners, the Ccdonel's mannos are not only
more pleasing to me than Willougfaby's ever were, but
(bey are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attach-
mg to Marianne. Their gentleness, their genuine atten-
tion to other people, and thdr msnly unstudied simplicity,
is much more accordant with her real disposition than the
- liveliness, often artificial, and often ill.timed, of the other.
I am very sure mysdf, that had Willou^hy turned out
aa really amiable, as he has proved himself the contrary,
Marianne would yet never have been so hsfipy with Aim
a« the will be widi Colonel Brandon. "
Bhe paused. Her daughter could not quite agree with
her ; but her dissent was not beard, and therefbre gave no
dffiKwe.
u S
DoliiHihyGoOgle
394 BENBB AND BBNUBlUrV.
" At Delaftntl, Bhe will be within ao easy disUnee df
me, " added Mrs. Daihwood, " even if I remain at Barttn ;
tad in all probability, — for I hear it is a la^e tUIs^, ^-
indeed there certainly ttnut be unne small taouge or cottag«
close by, that would mit ue quite u wcJl as onr [ " VWiA
Poor Elinoi ! — here waa a new scheme for getliiig hs
to Delaford I — but her spirit was stubborn.
" His fortnae too ! — for at my time of life, tou knoW)
every body cares about that ; — and though I nenher know,
Dor desire to know, what it really is, I am sure it must tie
a good one. "
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a diird
person ; and EUtior withdrew to think it all over in private,
to wish snccesi to her frieud, and yet, in wishing it, to fed
a pang for Willoughby.
CHAPTER X.
MAHtAmrE'a illness, though weakening in its kind, had not
been long enough to make -her recovery alow ; and widi
youth, natural strength, and her mother's prcMUce in idd,
it proceeded so smoothly u to enable her to remove, widliB
four days after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs. Palmer's
dresdug.room. When there, at her own particular re.
quest, for she vras impatient to pour forth her thanki to
him for fetching her modier. Colonel Brandon was invited
to visit her.
His emotion in entering the room, in seeing her altoed
looks, and in recdving the pale hand which she immediately
held out to him, was such as, in Elinor's coqjectore, moat
arise from something more than his affection for Marimnnei
or the consdonsness of its bang known to others ; and ahe
won discovered, in his melancholy eye and varying oon-
plexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recnncnoe
oogk
vt mmy put BCene« of miseiy to hia mind, broaght back
b; that resmnbUnce betneen Marianne and Eliza already
adcnowl edged, and now strengthened bjr the hollow eje,
the Bickly skin, the poature of reclining weakneas, and thiB
warm ai^nowledgment of peculiar oblation.
Mrsi I > ashwoad, not Icsa watchful of what paued than
her daughter, but with a mind very difibrently influenced)
and therefore watching to very diffb'ent eS^t, aaw nothing
in the Colond's behaviour but what arose from the most
^raple and self-evident sensatiana, while in the actions and
wordi of Marianne she persuaded henelf to think that
tomething more than gratitude ali;eady dawned.
At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing
Tisibly stronger every twelve honra, Mrs. Dashwood, urged
equally by her own and her daughter's wiaheaj iM^an to
t^ of removing to Barton. On her measures depended
diose of her two friends : Mrs. Jenninga could not quit
Cleveland during the Dashwoods'stay ; and Colonel Bran-
don was soon brought, by their nnited request, to consider
hia own abode ibere as equally determinate, if not equally
Indispensable. At bis and Mrs. Jennings's united reqneU
in return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevail^ on to accept th£ __
nie of hia carriage on her journey back, for the betto'ac <
cmnmodadon of her idck child ; and the Colonel, at the
Joint invitation of Mii. Dashwood and Mrs. Jennings,
whose active good-nature made her friendly and hospitaU^
for other people aa well as herself, ei^aged widi pleasure
to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in Uie course of m
tew weeks.
The day of separation and departure arrived ; and
Marianne, after taking so particular and lengthened a
kave of Mrs. Jennings, one ao earnestly grateful, so fiill
of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own
heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and
bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with the cordiality of a
friend, was carefuUy assisted by him into the canine,
of which he seemed anxious that she should engross at
leaat half. Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor then followed, and
the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travel-
lers, and feel their own dulnesa, till Mrs. Jennings wu
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
Btunnioned to her dutbe to talce comfort in the gonip of
her maid for the lose of her two young compauions;. ftitd
Colonel Brandon immediately afterwuda took his aolitaiy
-way to Ddaford.
The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Mari-
anne bore her journey on both withont ewential fatigue.
Every thing that the moat zealous aSecticin, the moat
lolicitous care, could do to render her comfortable,'Vnui
the office of each watchful companion, and each found
their reward in her bodily ease, and her cdmueu of
spirits. To Elinor, the observation of the latter waa
particularly gralefiil. She, who had a^n ber week after
neek ao constantly suKring, oppreaaed by anguish of heart
which she had neither courage to apeak of, nw fordtnde
to concealj now saw with a joy, which no other could
equally ahare, an t^parent composure of mind, which, in
being the result, as she trusted, of serious reflection^ mut
eventually lead her to contentment and cbeerEuhiew.
. As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on
aceoes, of which every field and ev^ See brought aonte
peculiar, some painful Recollection, die grew sileDt and
thoughtful, and turning away her & ce ftom their notice,
sat earneatly gazing thiougb the window. But hen,
Elinor could neither wonder nor blame; and when atw
saw, as she assisted Marianne from the cairiage, that ihe
had been crying, she aaw only an emotion too natural in
itsdf Ui raise any thing leas tender than pity, and in ila
unohtrusiveness entitled to praise. In the whole of ber
subseqijent manner, she traced the direction of a mind
awakened to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner had they
entered their common sitting-room, than Harianne turned
her eyes around it with a look of resoluto flrmjiess, M
if determined at once to accustom hersdf to the sight ti
every object with which the remembrance of W^illooghby
could be connected. She said little, hot every sentence
aimed at cheerfulness j and though a sigh sometimea
escaped her, it never passed away without the atonement
of a smile. After dinner she would try her piano > f(pte.
She went to it j but the music on which her eye firat rested
was an opera, procured for her fay WHlou^by, coolaiidng
DKiliiHinvGoOHlc
297
Mme of their faTonrite duels, and bearing on iti outward
leaf her own name in his hand- writing. That would not
dg. She ihook her head, put the music aside, and,
after running orer the keys for ■ minute, complained of
f«ei)lenesa in her flngen, and closed the instrument again ;
dedttii^ bowera, wi^ firmness, as she did so, that she
ahould in ftitnre practiRe much.
The next momit^ produced no abstement in these happy
symptoms. On the contrary, with a mind and body idike
strengthened by rest, she looked and spoke with more
genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of Maigaret's
tetoni, and talking of the dear family party which woold
that be restored, of their mutual purauita and cheefhil
society, u the only happiness worth a wish.
" Wbm the weather is setded, and 1 have recovered
my atrei^ith, " Mid she, " we will take tong walks to-
grther erery day. We will walk to the farm at the
edge of the down, and aec how the children go on ; we
will walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross,
aod the Abbeyland ; and ne will often go to the old ruins
ot the Priory, and try to trace its foundations as far as we
ate tdd they once reached. I know we shall be happy. I
know the snmnMr will paas hqtptly away. I mean never
to be later in rising than rix, and from that time till dinner
I shall divide every moment between music and reading.
I have formed my plan, and am detennined to enter on «
eoorse of serioua study. Our own library is too wdl
known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyond mere
amusement. But there ate many works well worth read-
ing at the Park ; and there are others of more modem
production, which 1 know I can borrow of Colonel Bran-
don. By reading only six hours a day, I shall gain in the
oouise of a twelvemonth a great, dsal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want. "
£tinor honoured her for a plan whidi originated so nobly
as this ; Aough smiling to see the same eager & ncy which
had been leading her to the extreme of languid indolence
and selfish repining now at work in introducing exceas
iata a scheme of such rational employment and nrtuona
■el & oonttoL Her smile, however, changed to a sigh when
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S98 mm* anh BsnnBnjTT.
■he remembered that btx pTomise to WiDoaghby wta yet
nniiilfilled, and feared the had that to commnnicate whidh
might again unsettle the mind of Marianne, and niia, at
least for a time, this fair prospect of busy tranqiiillity.
Willing llierefbre to delay the evil hour, she rescdved to
wait till ber dster'i healdi were more secure, before ahc
appointed it. But the resolution was made only to be
Marianne had been two or three daya at home befim
the weather was fine enough for an invalid like henelf Mt
venture oat. But at last a soft, genial morning appeared,
nich as might tempt the daughter's wishes and the mo-
thft'a confidence ; and Marianne, leaning «n Elinor's arm,
was authorised to walk as long as she could without
fatigue, in the lane before the house.
The sisters set out at a pMe, slow as the feeUeness of
Marianne in sn exercise hitherto untried since'her illne*
required ; and they had advanced only so far beyond the
house as to admit a fuU view of the hill, the important hill
behind, when panting with her «yes tonied towards it,
Marianne calmly said, —
" There, exactly there, " pointiDg with one hand, " on
that projecliDg monnd, there I fell j and there I first saw
Willoughby. "
Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving,
she added,—
" I am thankful to find that I can look widi so litde
pain on the spot I Shall we ever talk on that sulgect, Bli-
aoii " heutatin^y it was said. " Or will it be wrong?
1 can talk of it now, 1 hope, as I ought to do. "
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.
" As fw regret, " said Marianne, " I have done wilh
that, as far as ^ is concerned. I do not mean to Uik to
you of what tny feehngs have been for him, but what tbej
are now. At present, if I could be satisfied on one point,
if I could be allowed to think that he was not alwajfe act-
ing a part, not alwayg deceiving me ; but above all, if I
could be asaured that he never wsa so very wicked as tny,
fears have aometimea fancied him, since the stny of that
agurl ■'
DoliiHihyGoOgle
BiNn AMD BKiiuBiunr. S99
8be stopped, fainoi Joyfully tKunred ber voi^ u di <
tuwered, —
" If you conid be uanred of thit, you think ^m sfaoold
bcMty. "
" Yes. My peace of mind ii doubly inTolved in it ;
Vir Dot oaly ia it hwrihle to nupect a perKin, who hw been
whU he hai bem to ni«, of inch deaigna, but what mutt
it make me appeal to royielf ? Wbat, in a aitaation like
mine, bat a moat ihamefiilly UDguarded affection could ex-
poaemeto "
" How, then, aaked her liiter, " would you aecoant for
his behaTionrf "
" I would suppose him — oh, bow gladly would I tap.
poae him I — only fickle, rery, very fickle. "
Elinor aaid no more. She was debating within herself
on the eligitnlity of banning her story directly, or postpon-
ing it till Marianne were in etronger health; and they crept
on for a fow minulea in dlence.
" i am not wiahing him too much good, " aaid'Mari-
anna at last, with a ngh, " when I wish hia secret reflec
tionfi may be no more unpleasant than my own. He will
iwer enough in them*
. " Do you compare your conduet with his t "
" No. I compare it with what it ought to haTe been ;
I -compare it with yonra. "
" Our ntuatiani have borne little leaemblance. "
" They have borne more than our conduct. Do not,
ny dearett Elinor, let your kindneu defend what I know
yonr judgment must censure. My illnesa has made me
think. It has ^ven me leisure and calmneas for seri-
ous recollection. Long before I was enough recovered to
talk, I wa* perfectly able to refiect. I considered the past;
I siw in my own bebsTiour, nnce the bc^oning of out aiu
4]nsintance with him last autumn, nodiing but a series of
imprudence towards myself, and want of kindness to others.
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufieringe,
Uid that my want of fortitude under them had almost led
me to the grsTe. My illness, 1 well knew, had been en.
tiiely bron^t on by myself by soch negligence of my own
health, as 1 had felt, viea at the time, to be wrong.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SOO BBMSB AMD BSNUBIUrT.
Had I died, it would have been Mlf-destruction. I did not
know my danger till the danger wu remoyed ; Int with
■uch feelingB aa these reflection! gave me, 1 wcoider at myre-
oorery, — wondn that the very eagerness ofroydeaire to livc^
to have time for atonemeDt to my God, and to you bH, did
not Idll me at once. Had I died, in what peenliar miserj'
dionld J have left you, my nurse, my friend, my gist^I
Yon, who had seen all the fretful selfidiiKSi of my latter
days; who had known all the murmuringa of myheaftl
How should I have lived in your remembrance ! My mo-
ther, too I How conM you have consoled her 1 I cannot
express my own abhorrence of myself. Whenever I looked
towards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some fail-
ing indulged. Every body seemed irtjored by me. The
kindness, the unceasing kindness, of Mis. Jennii^, I had
repaid with ungiateful contempt. To the Middletons, the
Palmers, the fiteelea, to evesy commcm acquaintance Bvea,
I had been insolent and ui^ust ; with a heart hardened
against their meritB, and a temper irritated by their verf
■tteDdon. To John, to Fanny, yes, erra to than, UtUe
as they deserre, I had given less tJwn their due. But yoa,
you aboTe all, above my mother, bad been wronged by
me. I, and only I, knew your heart and its sonows;
yet, to what did it influence me? — not to any compassion
that could benefit you or myself. Your example was be-
fore me ; but to what avail ? Was I mote considerate of
you and yonr OHnfort f Did I imitate yoor forbearance,
ot lessen yonr restrsinia, by taking any put in those offices
at general oomphusance or particular gratitude which 70a
had hitherto been left to discharge alone ? No j not kaa
when I knew you to be unhappy, than when 1 had bdieved
you at ease, did I turn away from every exeitiac of duty
or fiiendahip ; scarcdy allowing sorrow to eiiit but with
me, regretting only Aat heart which had deaoted and
wronged me, and leaving you, for s4iom I profi wa ed an
unbounded affection, to be miseraUe for my sake. "
Here cea^ the rapid flow of her self-repKmng ^irit;
and Elinor, impatient to soothe, thoi^ tbo honest to flatter,
gave bar instandy that praise and support which her frsok-
DoliiHihyGoOgle
mum un > skkmbiutt. SOI
Ben and her contritioa go wdl deserved. Marianne presaed
hei hand and replied, — >
" Yon ue very good. The Aitare miut be my proof. I
have laid dovm my plan, and if I am capable of adhering to
it, my fedinga ahUl be gavemed and my temper improved.
They shall no longer worry others, nor torture myself. I
shall now live solely for my family. Yon, my mother, and
Margaret, mnat henceforth be all the world to tne; yo«
will share my afieettons entirely between you. Prom you,
from my boine, I shall never again have the smalleBt in-
citement to move; and if I do mix in other society, it
will be only to show that my spirit is humbled, my heart
■mmded, and that I can practise the dvilitiea, the lesser
duties of life, with gentlenera and forbearance. As for
VUlonghby, to say that 1 shall soon, or that I shall ever
finget him, would be idle. His remembrance can be ovn-
OMne by no change of circumstances or opinions. But it
■hall be related, it shall be checked by reUgion, by reason,
l^ constant employment. "
She paused — and added, in a lower voice, " If I could
bat know hu heart, every thing would become easy. "
Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on
file propriety or impropriety of speedily haurding her nar-
ration, without fteUng at all nearer decision dian at first,
beard this ; and perceiving that as reflection did nothing
resolution must do all, soon found herself leading to the
Uet.
She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address ;
prepared her anxious listener with caution ; related simply
and honestly the chief points on which Willonghby grounded
his apoli^ ; did justice to his repentance, and softened
only his protestations of present r^ard. Marianne said
not a word. She trembled : her eyes were fixed on the
ground; and her lips became whiter than even uckneas had
left ibem. A thousand enquiries sprung np from her heart,
bat she dared not urge one. Bhs caught every syUable
with panting eagerness : her hsnd, unknowingly to herself,
dosely pressed her aster's, and tears covered her cheeks.
Elinor, dreading her bdng tired, led her towards home ;
and tilt they readied the door of the cottage, eaaily con.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
802 amm j
jecUiring what her amimtj taaat be, tbougfa no qneMltm
was mfibred to Bpesli it, talked of nothing but Willoaghby,
Vtd their converMtioa together ; and w«s oarefuJiy nuMite
m every particnlar of speedi and look, where mimitaMM
could be safely indulged. At soon u they entered the
houBe, Marianne, nith a Um of gratitude, and these two
wordi juBt articulate throng her tean, " Tell mamma, "
withdrew from her sister, and walked slowly up stairt.
EUnor would not attempt to distm-b a solitude ao reasonable
as what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously pre-
arranging its result, and a resolution of reviTing the Mibject
again, should Marianne fail to do it, she turned into thf
parlour to fulfil her parting injunction.
CHAPTER XI.
Mrs. Dasbwood did not bear, unmoved, the vindication of
her former favourite. & be r^dced in bis being cleared
from some part of his imputed guilt ; she was sorry fix
him; she wished him happy. But the fedii^ i^ the
past could not be recalled. Nothing could r^itore him
with « faith unbroken, a character unblemished, to Man-
Mine. Nodiing could do away the knowledge of what the
latter had suKred through his means, nor remove the guilt
of his conduct towards Eliza. Nothing could replace him,
therefore, in her former esteem, dot injure the interests rf
Colonel Brandon.
Had Mn. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Wfl-,
loughby'e story from bimsdf, — had she witnessed his dis-
tress, and been under the influence of his countenance and
his manner, —it is probable that her compassioD would
bave been greater. But it was neither in Elinor's power,
Bor in her wish, to rouse such leelings in another, by h»
retailed explanatitm, aa had at first been called forth ia
'herself. Reflection had given calmness to her judgmant,
and sobered h^ own opinion of Willougbby's deserts v
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
she wished, therefore, to declare only the simple truth, and
l*y open nich facts as were really due to his charactCT,
without sny embelliBhiaeiit of tendemesi to lead the fancy
pstrsy.
In the evening, when they were all three tt^ther,
Murianne b^an volimtarily to epeak of him again ; but
th«t it was not without en effort, the restless, unquiet
thought & lneiB in which she had been for BOme time pre-
viously dtdng, her rising c«^ur, aa she spoke, and her
unsteady voice, plainly showed.
^'I wish to assure you both, " said she, " that I see
every thing as you can dewe me to do. "
Mis. Dashwood wonld have interrupted her instantly
with soothing tendemeas, had not Elinor, who re^y Viished
to hear her sister's unbiassed opinion, by an eager sign,
engaged her silence. Marianne slowly continued, —
" It is a great relief to me, what Elinor told me this
nMHTiipg; I have now heard exactly what I wished to hear. "
For some moments her voice was lost; but recovering
herself, she added, and with greater calmness than before,
— " 1 am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change.
I never could have been happy with him, after knowing, as
■ooner or later I must have known, all diis. I should have
had no confidence, no esteem. Nothing conld have done it
»«ay to my feelii^. "
" 1 know it, I know it, " cried her mother. " Happy
with a man of libertine practices 1 With one who had so
ii^nred the peace of the dearest of our friends, and the best
«C men I Ko — my Mariaime has not a heart to be made
happy with such a man ! Her conscience, her sensitive
conscience, would have felt all that the conscience of her
husband ought to have felt. "
Marianne sighed, and repeated, " I wish for no change. "
. " Yon consider the matter, " said Elinor, " exactly as a
good mind and a sound understanding must consider it ;
tnd I dare say you peroeive, as well as myself, not only in
this, hut in many other ciicmnstances, reason enough to be
fionvinced that your marriage must have involved you in
many cwtain troubtes and disai^Kuntments, in whidi yon
wmld have been pooily nipported by aa affection, on his
DoliiHihyGoOgle
S04 BBiraa ahd sximBiuTir.
■ide, much less eert^n. Had jaa tDanied, you nmst hxn
been alwaTs poor. His expeiiDTeneM is acknowledged
even by hinuelf ; and his whole conduct dedares, that «!£.
denial U a word hardly understood by him. His demand*,
and your inexperience b^^er, on a small, rery small in-
come, must hare broi^t on distresses which wonld not be
the lets grievous to you, from having been enlirdy nnknown
and unthoagfat of before. Your sense of honour and hones^
would have led you, I know, when aware of your dtu-
BtioD, to attempt all the economy that would mppear to yos
possible ; and, perhaps, as long as yoor frugality retrenched
only on yoni own comfort, yon might have been sufitred to
jnractise it, but beyond that— and how little could the
Btmost of your single mwiagemuit do to stop the ruin
which had begun before your marriage? beyond that,
had you endeavoured, however reasonably, to abridge hU
H^oyments, is it not to be feared, that instead of { > re~
vdling on feelings so selfish to consent to it, you wonld have
lessoied your own influence on his heart, and made him
regret the cotmection which had involved him in such
difficulties? "
Mfrianne'a lips quivered, and she repeated the wtrd
" Selfish ? " in a tone that implied, " Do you really think
him selfish? "
" The whole of hia behavionr, " replied Elinor, " fimn
the beginning to the end of the aflUr, has been grounded
on selfishness. It was selfishness which first made him
■port with your afifections; irttich afterwards, when his
own were engaged, msde him dday the confession of it,
and which finally carried him from Barton. His own
eigoyment, or his own ease, was, in every particnlar, his
ruling principle. "
" It a very true. My happiness nevff was hii object. "
" At present, " continued ^inor, " he rq^reta wfabt be
has done. And why does he r^ret it ? Because he finds
it has not answered towards himself. It has not mad«
bira happy. His circumstances are now nnembairassed
— he suffrav from no evil of that kind; and be thinks
only that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper
than yourself. But docs it thence follow that had fa*
DoliiHihyGoOgle
■BmB JU4D nutmLiTt. 505
muried you, be would have been happy ? The iaeon-
veniences would have been different. He would then -.
have Buffered under the pecuniary diBtreMes which, because'
they are removed, he now reckons as nothing. He would
have had a wife of who«e temper he could make no com-*
l^aint, but he wonld have been always necessitous — alwayi
poor ; and probably would soon have learned to rank tiie
innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income
as of far more importance, even to domestic happinen,
than the mere temper of a wife. "
" I have not a doubt of it, " said Marianne; " and I
have nothing to regret — nothing but my own folly. "
" Rather say your mother's imprudence, ray child, " said
Mrs. Dashwood : " she must be answerable. "
Marianne would not let her proceed ; and Elinor, satis-
fied that each felt their own error, wished to avoid any
survey of the past that might weaken her sister's spirits;
she, therefore, pursuing the first subject, immediately con-
" Om observation may, I think, be UiAj drawn from
the whole of the story — that aSi Willou^by's difficn^ie*
have arisen from the first o & ence against virtue, is his
behaviour to £Uzb Williams. That crime has been the
or^n of every lesser one, and of all his present dia-
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and
her mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel
Brandon's injuries and merits, warm as friendship and
deNgn could unitedly dictate. Her daughter did not look " ,
however, as if much of it were heard tiy her.
Elinor, according to her espectatifHi, saw, on the two ot
three following days, that Marianne did not condnue 10
gain strength as she had done; but while her resolution
was unaulMloed, and she stiU tried to appear cheerful and
easy, her slater could safety trust to the efibct of time upon
her health.
Margaret retmmed, and the family were again all Te-
stored to each other, again quiedy settled at the cottage J
and if not pursuing their usual studies with quite so mudi
DoliiHihyGoOgle
'9P6 iEHBI AMD BKHSTBlLnT.
■Tigour aa when they first came to Barton, at least plannii^
a vigorous proBecntioii of them in future.
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving London,
nothing new of his plana, nothing certain even of his
present abode. Some letters had passed between her and
her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness ; and in
the first of John's there had been this sentence ; — " We
know nothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make
no enquiries on so prohibited a sul^ct, but conclude him
to be still at Oxford ; " which was all the intelligence of
Edward afforded her by the correspondence, for his name
yna not even m«itioned in any of the succeeding letters.
She was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of
his measures.
Th^T man-servant had been sent one moming*to Exeter
on business ; and when, as he waited at table, he had
satisfied the enquiries of his mistreHs as to the event of his
'rarand, diia was his voluntary communication, —
" I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrais is
numied. "
Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon
minor, saw her turning pale, and fell back in her chair in
hysterics. Mrs. Dasbwood, nhose eyes, as she snswered
the servant's enquiry, had intuitively taken the same direo-
tioo, was shocked to perceive, by Elinor's countenance, how
much she really suffered ; and, in a moment afterwards,
alike distressed by Marianne's situation, knew not on
which child to bestow her principal attention.
The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne wa*
taken ill, had sense enough to call one of the maids, who,
with Mrs. Doahwood's assistance, supported her into the
Other room. By that time Marianne was rather better;
jwd her mother, leaving her to the care of Mai^ret and
the maid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much dis-
ordered, had so far recovered the use of her reason and
roice as to be just beginning an enquiry of Thomas, as to
the source of his intelligence. Mrs. Dashwood iinmedi-
Slely took all that boutde on herself; and Elinor had dw
DoliiHihyGoOJ^Ic
Iifneflt of the inftmnatioti withcrat the exertion of Mek'
" Who t < dd you that Mr. Femn wm married, Thomas? "
" I Bee Mr. FerrarB myself, ma'am, tius morning in
Exeter, and his lady too, MUs Steele as waa. They was
stopping in a chaise at tbe door of the New London tnn,
as I went there with a message from Sally at the Park to
ber brother, who is one of the poat-boys. I happened
to look up as I went by the chaise, and ao I see directly
it wqa the yonngeat Miss Steele; ao I took off my bat,
and she knew me and called to me, and enquired after you,
ma'am, and the young ladies, especially Miss Marianne,
and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. Fer.
rars's, their beat complimenta and service, and how sorry
they was they had not time to come on and see you; bnt'
they wag in a great huny to go forwards, for they was
going further down for a little while, but howsever, when;
they come back, diey'i make sure to come and see you. "
" But did she tell you she waa married, Thomas? "
" Yea, ma'am, ^e smiled, and said how she had
changed her name since ebe was in these parts. She wsa'
always a very affaUe and free-spoken young lady, and.
Tery civil bdiaved. So, I made free to wish her joy. "
" Was Mr. Fm«ra in the carriage with her ? "
" Yet, ma'am, I jmt see him leaning back in it, hot he
did not look up: he never was a gentleman much ftnr
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting
himself forward; and Mrs. Daahwood probably found the'
■ame explanation.
" Was there no one else in the carriage ? "
" No, ma'am, only th^ two. "'
" Do you know where they came from f "
" They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy — M».
f erran told me. "
" And ^Ie going fiirther westward?'
" Yes, ma'am — but not to bide long. They will soon
be back again, and then they'd be sure and call here. "
Mrs. Daahwood now lodced at her dau^ter ; bat Elinor
knew better than to expect them.'S^ recognised dtt
z S
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SOB asHia aitd lEinniLm.
wliole of hacj in the menage, and wbb very confident
that Edward would never come near them. She observed,
in a low voice, to her mother, that they were profaablj
going down to Mr.Pntt's, near Plymouth.
; Thomaa's intdligence seemed over. Elinor looked u if
ahe wished to bear more.
" Did yon tee them off, before yon cune away ? "
" No, ma'am — the borses was just coming out, but I
could not bide any longer ; I was afraid of being late. "
" Did Mrs. Ferrars look well ? "
" Yea, ma'am, the eaid how she was very well ; and
to my mind she was always a very bandwme young lady
^and she seemed vastly contented. "
Mrs. Dashwood conld think of no other queacion ; and
Tbomaa aod the table-doth, now alike needless, were soon
afterwards dismissed. Marianne had already senf to say,
that she should eat nothing more. Mrs. Dashwood's and
Elinor's appetites were equally lost ; and Mai^aret might
think herself very well off that, with so much uneasiness aa
both her sisters had lately experieuced, so much reason as
they had often had to be careless of their meals, she had
never been obliged to go without her dinner before.
When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and
Mra. Dashwood and Ebnor were left by ihemaelres, they
ismained long together in a similarity of though tfnin ess
and silence. Mrs. Dashwood feared to hazard any remark,
and ventured not to ofier consolation. She now foimd that
rite had erred in relying on Elinor's'representation of her-
Bdf ; and justly concluded that every thing h«d been ex-*
pressly softened at the time, to spare her from an increase
of unhappiness, sufiMng as she then had sufiered for
Marianne. She found that she had been riusled by the
careful, the considerate attention of her daughter, to think
the attachment, which once she had so well understood,
much slighter in reality than she had been wont to believe,
or than it was now proved to be. She feared that under
tfiis persnasion she had been unjust, inattentive, nay, almost
unkind, to her Elinor; that Marianne's affliction, becauae
more acknowledged, more immediately before her, had too
touch engwmtd her tendaness, and )eA ber away to torget
DoliiHihyGoOgle
sMsm AND amaaiiatr. SOQ
tlut in Elinor she might have ■ dni^ter luSMng ilmost
w much, certainly with leu Belf-proTOMtion and greatv
fortitude.
CHAPTER Xll.
Elinor ^ow found the difference between the expectation
of an impleaBint event, however certain the mind may be
told to consider it, and certainty itself. She now found
that, in spite of her«elf, ahe had always admitted a hop«,
while Edward remained single, that Boroething would occur
to prevent his marrying Lucy ; that smne resolution of bis
own, sorae mediation of friends, or some more eli^ble op-
portunity of establishment for the lady, would arise to aaajat
the happiness of alL But he was now married ; and she
condemned her heart for the lurldn|i; flattery which so much'
heightened the pain of the intelligence.
That he should be married so soon, before (as she
imagined) he could be in orders, and consequently befora
he could be in possession of the living, surprised her a litlja
at first; but she soon saw how likely it wss that liucy, in
her < c)f-pmvident care, in her haste to secure hira, should
overlook every thing but the risk of delay. They were mar-
ried, — married in town, — and now hastening down to her
uncle's. What had Edward felt on being within four
miles of Barton, — on seeing her mother's servant, — on
hearing Lucy's message !
They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Delafoid: —
Delaford, — that place in which so much conspired to give
her an interest; which she wished to be acquainted with,
and yet desired to avoid. She saw them in lui instant in
their paraon age-house : saw in Lucy the active, contriving
manager; uniting at once a desire of smart appearance
with the utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of
half her economical practices; pursuing her own interest in
DoliiHihyGoOgle
810 smraB and tamiBiLreY.
■tmrj thongbt ; courting the faronr of Colonel Brandon, of
Mn. Jennings, and of every wealthy friend. In Edward;
■be knew not what she saw, nor what she wished to see.
Happy or unhappy, nodung fdeaaed her : she turned away
her head from every sketch of him.
Elinar fiattered hosdf that aome one of their connec-
tions in London would write to them to announce the .
event, and give farther particulars • but day after day
passed off, and bronghl no letter, no tidinge. Tbongb
uncertain that any one were to blame, she found fault
with every absent friend. They were all thoughtless or
ind < rfent.
" When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am ? "
was an enquiry wbicb sprung from the impatience of her
mind to have something going on.
" 1 wrote to bim, my love, last week, and rather enpect
io see than to bear from him again. I earnestly pressed his
coming to us, and should not be surprised to see him walk
in to-day, or to-morrow, or any day. "
'This was gaining something, — something to look for-
ward to. Colonel Brandon mu«t have some information to
give.
Scarcely had ^e bo determined it, when the figure of a
man on horseback drew her'eyes to the window. He stop-
ped at thdr gate. It was a gentleman, — it was Colonel
Brandon himself. Now she should hear more, and she
trembled in expectation of it. But it was not Colonel Bran-
don ; neither his air, nor his height. Were it possible, she
should say it must be Edward. She looked again. He had
just dismounted : she could not be mistaken, — it mu Ed-
ward. She moved away, and sat down. " He comes from
Mr. Pratt's purposely to see us. I teill be calm, — I aill be
mistress of myself. "
In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise
aware of the mistake. She saw her molho'and Marianne
(diange colour, — saw them look at herself, and whisper a
fbw sentences to each other. ESie would have given the
world to be able to speak, and to make them understand
that she hoped no coolness, no slight, would qipear in iheit
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SENSE AND SEHBIBIUFT. 811
behsTiour to him ; liuC she had no DttcraDce, uid was
obliged to leave all to their own discTetion.
Not a syllable puaed aloud. They all waited in silence:
for the appearance of tiieir vinter. His footsteps were
heard along the gravel path : in a moment he waa in the'-
puK^, and in anotber he was before them.
His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too
bappy, even for Elinor. His complexion was white with
agitation ; and he looked as if fearful of his reception, and
ccmsciouB that he merited no kind one. Mrs. Dashwood,
faoweier, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes of that
dai^;hter, by yibota ahe then meant, in the warmth of her
heart, to be guided in every thing, met him with a look of
forced complacency, gave him her hand, and wished him
joy.
He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.
Elinor's lips had moved with her mother's ; and, when the
moment of action was over, she wished that she had shaken
hands with him too. But it waa then too late ; and, with
a countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again, and
talked of the weather.
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, ■
to conceal her distress ; and Margaret, understanding some
part, bat not the whole of the case, thought it incombent
on her to be dignified, and therefore took a seat as far from'
him as she could, and maintained a strict silence.
When Elinor had ceased to r^oice in the dryness of the
season, a very awfiil pause took place. It waa put an end
to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope that be had
left Mrs. Ferrars very well. In a hurried manner, he -
Teplied in the affirmative.
Another pause.
Elinor, resolving to exert herself, thoi^h fearing the
Bound of her own voice, now said,—
" Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple? "
" At Longstaple ! " he replied, with an air of surprise.
" No ; my mother is in tovm. "
" I meant, " said Elinor, taking np tome work from the .
UiAe, " to enquire after Mrs. EAieard Ferran. "
She dared not look up ; but her mother and Marianne
z4
HihyGoogle
ait mni UD nrntaiinrv.
both tuined their ejei on him. He coloured, seemed
perplexed, looked douhdogly, and, after Knne hentUum,
" Perb^n you mean mj hrother: yon mean Mr*.—
Ura. itoftert Ferr*™. "
" Mn. Robert Femn ! " wu repeated by Marianne and
her mother in an aecMit of die utmost unaieinent ; and
ihoogh Elinor could not ^eak, even Iter eye* were fixed on
him with the same impatient wonder. He roae from hi*
■eat, and walked to the window, apparently from not know-
ing what to do ; took up a pair of adsaora diat lay there ;
and, while apoiUog both them and their abeath by catting
the latter to piecea as he spoke, aaid, in a hurried roice, —
" Perhaps yon do not know : you may not have beard
that my brother is lately married to — to the youngest— to
Miaa Lucy Steele. "
Hia words were echoed with unapeakable astoniahmrait
by all but Elinor, who sat, with iua head leaning over her
work, in a state of such fetation as made her hardly know
where she waa.
" Yes, " said he : " they were muried last week, and an
now at Dawlieh. "
£linor could sit it no longer. She slmoit ran out of Ae
room ; and, as soon as the door was closed, burst into tears
of joy, which at first the thought would never ceaac. Ed-
ward, who had till then looked any where, rather than at
Lot, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw, or even heard,
ber emotion ; for immiediately afterwards he fell into a
lererie, which no remarks, no enquiries, no B%cdonat«
address of Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate ; and at last,
without Baying a word, quitted the room, and walked out
towards tbe village, leaving the others in the gieateat
UMnisbment and perplexity on a change in hia situation eo
wonderful and so sudden, — a perplexity which they had
no means of lessening bat by their own coigeetur«a >
DoliiHihyGoOgle
CHAPTER XIII.
Unaodountablb, howerer, u the cinnini«anc«s of hU re-
lease might appear to the wbole family, it was certain lliat
fidvard waa free; and to what pOtpose that freedom would
be employed wai eaaily pre-determined by all; — for after
experiencing the bleaainga of one imprudent engagement,
contracted without hia mother's consent, aa he had already
done for more than four years, nothing lesa could be ex.
peeted of him in the failure of Aat, than the immediate
omitraction of another.
His errand at Barton, in fact, was a nmple one. It
ma only to ask Elinor to marry him ; and considering that
bo was not altogether inesperienced in mch a question, it
might be strange that he should iieel so nnconofortable in
the present case u he really did, to much in need of en-
couragemoit and fresh air.
How Booo he had walked himsdf into the proper reao >
lutioD, however, how soon an opportunity of exercising it
occurred, in what manner he expressed himself, and how
be was received, need not be particularly told. This only
need he said; — that when they all sat down to table at
finir o'clock, abaat three hours after his arrival, he had
secured his lady, engaged her mother's consent, and waa
not only in the rapturous profession of the lover, but, in the
reality of reason and truth, one of the happiest of men.
IDs sieuation indeed was more thsn commonly joyful. He
had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to
mtH hia boart, and raiae his apirita. He was released,
without any reproach to himself, from an entanglement
whidi had long formed hia miaery, from a woman whom
he had long ceased to love ; and elevated at once to that
Hecnrity with another, which he must have thought of
■Imoat with deqiair, as soon aa he had learned to conaider
it Willi desire. He was brought, not from doubt or sus-
pense, but trvm misery to iupfineui and the change
DoliiHihyGoOgle
91*
wu openly Bpoken in gaA a geonine, flowing, gntefol
cbeerfnlneM, u hi* friends hmd never witnened in him
His heart wu now open to Elinor ; all iti weaknesses,
■n it* errors confesaed, and his fiiat boyish attachment to
Lncy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty*
& ar.
" It was a fboKBh, idle indinatitHi on my ride, " sud be,
" the consequence of ignorance of the world, and want
of employment. Had my mother given me stme aedve
professian when 1 was removed at eighteen & om the care -
of Mr. Pratt, I think, pay, J am inre, it woold never
have happened ; for ihoogh I left Longstaple wilb what I
tboug^t, at the time, a most unconquerable preference for
his niece, yet, had I dten had any poisiiit, any ot^ect ta >
o^age my time and keep me at a distance from hv for a
few months, I should very soon have outgrown the fancied'
attaduneot, especially by mixing more with the woiM, as
in such a case I mutt have done. But instead of having
any dling to do, instead of having any profession cbosen
for me, or being allowed to choose any myself, I Ktumed
home to be completely idle ; and fbr die first twelvemonth
afterwards I had not even the nominal employmait,'
which beloi^ng to the nniverrity would have given me,
for J was not entered at Oxford till I was nineteen. I had
therefore nothing in the world to do, but to fancy myself
in love ; and as my mother did not make my home in
every respect comfortable, as I had no ftiend, no companion^
in my brother, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not
unnatural for me to he very often at Longstaple, where I
always felt myself at home, and was always sure of a wel-
come ; and accordingly I spent the greatest part of my
time there from eighteen to nineteen : Lucy appeared evoy -
thing that was amiable and obliging. Bhe was pretty too'
— at least I thought so then ; and 1 had seen so little of
ottta women, that 1 could make no comparisons, and see
no defects. Considering every thing, therefore, I hope,
fodish as our engagement was, fooludi as it has since in
every way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural'
or an inoccuMhle piece of fUly. "
DoliiHihyGoOgle
315
The change which a few hoan had wronglit in the minda
and the happineu of the Dashwoods, wai luch— bo great— ^
aa promised them all the satisfaction of a sleepleBS night.
Mis. Dashnood, too happy to be comfortahle, knew not how
to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enou^, how to be
enough thankful for his release without wounding his d & >
licacy, nor how at once to give them leisure for unreatraineit
conversation l < ^ther, and yet enjoy, aa ahe wished, the'
Ught and society of both.
Marianne could speak her happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur — regrets would arise; and her*
joy, though sincere as her love for her sister, was of a kind
to gire her neither spirits nor language.
But Elinor — how are her feelings to be described f
From the moment of learning that Lucy was married
to another, that Edward was free, to the moment of hia
jnatifying the hopea which had so instantly followed, she
was every thing by turns but tranquil. But when the second
moment had pa^ed, when she found every doubt, every
■olicitude removed, compared her situation with what so
lately it had been, — saw him honourably released from his
former engagement, — saw him instantly profiting by the re-i
tease, to address herself and declare an affbction aa tender,
as constant aa she had ever suppoaed it to be, — she was
Oppressed, she was overcome by her own feUcity ; and
happily disposed as is the human mind to be easily fami-
liarised with any change for the better, it required several
hours to give sedateness to her spirits, or any degree of
tranquillity to her heart.
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for
a week; for whatever other claims might be made on
him, it was impossible that leaa than a week should be
given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, or suffice
to say half that vas to be said of the past, the piesent, and
the future ; for though a very tev hours spent in die
hard labour of incessant talking wiU despatch more subjects
than can really be in common between any two rational
•reatures, yet with lovers it is difitrent. Between them no
■ulgect is JiniBhed, no comnuanication is even made, dll it
has been made. at leaat twenty times orsr.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
316 *Eim AMD BENiiBiurr.
Iiucy'i marriage, the nneeaaing and reaaonaUe woniler
among tbein all, fivmed of course one of the e*r]iest diecut-
BionB of the kiven ; and Elinor's particular knowledge of
each p & Tty made it appear to her, in eTer; view, aa one of the
moat extraordinarj and unaccountable circumttances sha
bad era- heard. How tbej conld be thrown together, and hj
Vhat attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry ■ girl,
of wfaoae beauty she had hendf heard him speak without
any Admiration, — a ^rl, too, already ei^aged to his bro-
ther, and on whose account that brother had been thrown
off by hia family, — it was beyond ber comprehennon to
make oul To her own heart it was a delightful affair, to
ber imagination it was even ji ridiculous one, but to her
reason, her judgment, it was completely a puizle-
Edwud could only attempt an explanation by suppoung,
that, perhaps, at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of
the one bad been so worked on by the flattery of the other,
as to lead by degreex to all the rest. Elinor retneniber«d
what Robert had told her in Hailey Street, of hia opinitHi
of what hia own mediation in his brother's aAira might
have done, if applied to in lime, ^le repealed it to
Edward.
" That was exactly like Robert, " was bis immedists
observation. " And that, " be presently added, " might
perhaps be in hu bead when the acquaintance between
them first began. And Lucy, perhaps, at first roi^t think
only of procuring his good offices in my favour. Other
dengns might afterwards arise. "
How long it had been carrying on betweai them, how-
ever, he was equally at a loss with herself to make out ;
fw at Oxford, wbere lie bad remained by choice ever since
bis quitting London, be had had no means of hearing of
her but from herself, and her letters to die very last woto
neither less frequent nor less affbctionate than usual. Not
the smallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to pre-
pare him for what fdlowed ; and when at last it burst
on him in a letter from Lucy herself, he bad been for some
time, he believed, half stupified betwe«i the wonder, the
horror, and the joy of such a ddiverance. He put the
letter into Elinor's hands.
DoliiHihyGoO^lc
817
" Dear Sir,
" Being Teiy sure I have long loit y onr albctioDB, I hsva
thought iDTself at liberty to beihiw my own on another,
and have no doubt of being as happy with him as I once
used to think I might be with you ; but I scom to accept
a hand while the heart was another's. Sincerely wiih you
happy is your choice, and it shall not be my fault if wa
aie not always good friends, as our near relatjonship now
makes proper. 1 can safely say 1 owe you no ilUwiU,
and am sure you will be too generous to do us any ill
offices. Your brother has gained my affections entirely ;
and as we could not Uve wi^out one another, we are juat
letumed from the altar, and are now on our way to Dawliih
for a few weeks ; which place your dear brother has great
curiosity to see, but thought 1 would first trouble you with
these few lines, and shall always remain,
" Youi uncere wellwisher, friend, and sister,
" LucT Fbbbasw.
" I have burnt all your letters, and will return your
picture the first opportunity. Please to destroy my scrawls
— but the riilg with my hair you are very welcome to
keep. "
Elinor read and returned it without any emnment.
" I will not ask your opinion of it as a composiliMi, "
said Edward. " For worlds would not I have had a
ktter of hera seen by you in former days. In a sister it
is bad enough, but in a wife ! how I have blushed over
the pages of her writing ! and 1 believe 1 may say that
nnce the first half year of our foolish busiDess this is the
only letter 1 ever received from her, of which the suIk
■tance made me any amends for the defect of the style. "
" However it may have come about, " said Elinor, after
a pause, " they are certainly married ; and your mo-
ther has brought on herself a most appropriate punish-
ment The independence she settled on Robert, throi^
resentment against you, has put it in his power to make
his own choice ; and she has actually been britang cme ion
with a thousand a year to do the very deed which she
diunherited the other fiu intendlag to do. She will hard^
HihyGoogle
S18
be leas hurt, I Boppose, by Robert's marrying Lucy, tbaa
die nould have been by yow marrying her. "
" She will be more hurt by it, for Robert alwayi iraa
ber favourite. She will be more hurt by it, end on the
■■me principle will forgive him much aooner. "
In what state the a & ir lUMd at present between them'
Edward knew not, for no communication with any of Us
family had yet been attempted by him. He had quitted
Oxford within four- and -twenty hours after Lucy's letter
arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearest-
road to Barton, had had no teiaure to form any scheme of
conduct, with which that road did not hold the most inti-
mate connection. He could do nothing till be were asstued
of his fate with Miai Daibwood ; and by his rapidity in
seeking & at fate, it ia to be auppoaed, in iplte of the
jealouiy with whidi be had once thought of Colonel Bran-
don, in spile of the modisty with which he rated his own
deserts, and the politeness vrith which he talked of his
doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect a very cruel
reception. It waa his buainesi, however, to say that he
dirf,'and he said it very prettily. What he might say on
die subject a twelvemonth after must be referred to the
imagination of husbands and wirea.
That Lacy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off
with a flourish of malice against him in her message bj
Thomas, waa perfectly clear to Elinor ; and Kdward him-
■df, now thoroughly enUghtened on her character, bad no
•cruple in believing her capable of the utmost meanness of
wanton ill-liature. Thou^ his eyes had been longopmed,
even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her
ignorance and a want of liberality in some of ber opinions,
tfiey had been equally imputed, by him, to her want of
education ; and till her laat letter reacbed bim, he had
always heheved her to be a well-disposed, good-hearted'
girl, and thoroughly attached to himself. Nothing bat
such a pemiaaion could have prevented his putting an eod
to an engagement, which, long befbre the discovery of it
laid him open to his mother's anger, had been a cmtinnal
source of disquiet and regret to him.
. " I thoo^t it my duty, " said he, " independent of my
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SENSB AMD EBNSIB1LIT7. 919
feelings, to give her the optiaa of continuing the engage-
ment or not, when I was renounced by mj mother, and
stood to all appearance vrjthout a friend in the world to
aaaist me. In such a situation as that, where there seemed
iiothing to tempt the avarice m the vanity of any living
CKSture, how could I suppose, when she bo earnestly, so
warmly insisted on sharing my fate, whatever it might be,
that any thing but the most disinterested afiection was her
inducement } And even now, I cannot comprehend on
what motive she acted, or what fancied advantage it could
be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not
the smallest regard, and who bad only two thousand
pounds in the world. She could not foresee tbat Colonel
'Brandon would give me a living. "
" No ; but she might suppose that something would occur
in your favour ; that your own family might in time relent.
And at any rate, she lost nothing by continuing the engage-
ment, for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclin-
Mion nor her actions. The connection was certainly a
respectable one, and probably gained bee consideratioa
among her friends ; and, if nothing more advantageous
occurred, it would be better for her to marry you than be
'£dward was, of course, immediately convinced that
nothing could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct,
nor more self-evident than the motive of it.
I^nor Molded him, harshly aa ladies alwap scold the
imprudence which compliments themselves, for having
■pent so mudi time with them at Norland, when he must
Lave felt his own inconstancy.
" Your behaviour wm certainly very wrong, " said she;
" .because, to say nothing of my own conviction, our rela-
'tions were all led away by it to fancy and expect wW, aa
'you were then situated, could never be. "
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and
a tnittaken confidence in the force of his engagement.
" I was simple enough to think, that because my JkiA
'was plighted to another, there could be no danger in my
being with you; and that the consdonmesa of my engage-
ment was to keep my heart aa safe and sacred as taj honoor
DoliiHihyGoOgle
SSO IBiraE AMD SKNBIHLITX.
1 felt Hut I idmiNd you, but I told mjadf it mi only
friendihip ; and till 1 began to nuke comparieoDB between
jonrself and Lucy, I did not know bow far 1 wu got.
After that, I luppow, 1 wai wrong in remaining ao much
in Sussex ; and the aipimenta with which I reconciled
myielf to the expediency of it were no better than Ibeae ;
— The duigei- ia my own ; I am doing no irgury to any
body but myadf. "
Elinor amiled, and shook her head.
Edward heard with pleasure of Cobniel Brandon's being
expected at the cottage, as be really wished, not only to be
belter acquainted with bim, but to have an opportunity of
convincing him, that he no longer resented bis giving him
the living of Delaford. " Which, at present, " said be, " after
thinks so ongraciously delivered as mine were on the oeca^
aion, he must think 1 have never foi^ven him for ofiering, "
Now he felt asloniiihed himself that he had never yet
been to the place. But so little interest had he taken in
the matter, that he owed all his knowledge of the houao,
garden, and glebe, extent of the parish, condition of the
land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herself, who bad
heard so much of it & om Colonel Brandon, and heard it
with BO much attention, a* la be entirely miBtreis of the
■nttject.
One question after thia only remained undecided betvreen
them ; one difficulty only waa to be overcome. They were
brought tt^tber by mutual auction, with the warmest
approbation of tbar real friends ; their intimate knowledge
of each other leemcd to make their h^pinesa certain, and
they only wanted something to live upon. Edward had
two thousand pounds, tad Ehnor one, which, with Dela-
ford living, was all that they could call their onn ; for it
waa impossible that Mis. Dashwood should advance any
thing ; and they were neither of them quite enough in lorf
to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a year would
supply them with the comforts of life.
Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favour-^
able change in his mother towards him ; and on that he
rested for the residue of their income. But Elinor had no
luch deiteudence ; for^ since Edward would still he unabk
DoliiHihyGoOglc
SSI
U many Miaa Morton, and his choocing herself had been
spoken of in Mrs. Ferrors's fluttering langoage as only a
ksaer evil than his choosins Lucy Steele, ihe feared that
Robert's oflbnce would serve no other purpose than to
enrich Fanny.
'About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon
appeared, to complete Mrs. Daahwood's satisfaction, and to
give her the dignity of having, for the first time since her
living at Barton, more company with her than hei house
would hold. Edward waa allowed to retain the privilege
of first comer, and Colond Brandon, therefore, walked
every n^t to his old quarters at the Park ; from whflice
he usually returned in the morning, early enough to inter-
rupt the hirers'first tete-ih-tete before breakfast.
A three weeks'residence at Delaford, where, in his
evaiing hours at least, he had little to do but to calculate
the disproportion between thirty-six and seventeen, brought
him to Barton in a temper of mind which needed all the
improvement in Marianne's looks, all the kindness of ba
welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's lan-
guage, to make it cheeriul. Among such friends, however,
and such flattery, he did revive. No rumour of Lucy's
marriage had yet reached him : he knew nothing of what
had passed; and the first hours of his visit were conse-
quently ^nt in faearitig and in wondering. Every thing
waa explained to him by Mrs. Dashwood ; and he found
fresh reason to r^oice in what he had done for Mr. Ferrari,
since eventually it promoted the interest of Elinor.
It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced
in the good opinion of each other, as they advanced is each
olher't acquaintance, for it could not be otherwise. Their
resemblance io good ^nciples and good sense, in dispo-
dtion and manner of tfainkiiig, would probably have been
sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any other
attraction ; bat their being in love with two sisters, and
two sisters fond of each other, made that mutual regard
inevitable and immediate, which might otherwise have
waited the effect of time and judgment.
The letters from town, which a ffaw days before would
have made every nerve in EUoor'a body thrill with traiu-
T
" DoliiHihyGoOgle
port, now arrived to lie read with less emotion than mirth.
Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale, to vent hear
honest indign & tion against the jilting girl, u)d pour forth
her coinpaMion towuda poor Mr. Edward, who, she was
sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was
now, by all accounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.
" I do think, " ahe continDed, " nothing was ever car-
ried on 80 sly ; fM it waa bat two d & ys before Lucy edkd
and sat a con|de of hours with me. Not a soul auapeeted
any diii^ of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor bouI !
came cryii^ to me the day after, in a great fright for feaf
of Mrs. Ferrars, as well as not knowing how to get to
Plymouth i for Lucy, it seems, borrowed all her money
before she went off to be married, on purpose, we suppose^
to make a diow widi, and poor Nancy hiiF not seven Ail-
lings in the world ; so I was very g^ to give her ftve
guineas to l«ke ner down to £xeter, where die thinka of
staying three or four weeks with Mrs. Bargess, in hopes,
as I tell hcT, to fall in with the Doctor again. And ]
must say that Lucy's crossness not to take her along with
them in the d^aise is worse than sU. Poor Mr. Bdward !
I cannot get him out of my head, bat you must sendfin-
him to Barton, and Miss Marianne must try to comfort
Mr. DashwDod's strains were more solemn. Mrs. Fer.
rars waa the most unfortunate of women — poor Fanny
had Bufitred agonies of sensitnlity — and he considered
the existence of each, under such a blow, with grateAil
wonder. Robert's offence was unpardonable, but Lucy's
was infinitely worse. Neither of them was ever again to
be mentioned to Mrs. Ferrars ; and even, if she might
hereafter be induced to fo^ve her son, his wife should
never be acknowledged as her daughter, nor be permitted
to appear in her presence. The secrecy with which -every
thing had been carried on between them was rationally
treated as encnrmously he^hlening the crime, because, had
any sua^ndon of it occurred to the othra^, proper mea-
sures would have been taken to prereut the marriage;
and he called on Elinor to join with him in regret-
ting that Lucy'a engagement with Edward had not rather
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
BBNSH AND BEnSIBIEITT. 533
been fulfilled, tlun thu the should thui be the meaiM
gf spreading misery farther in the family. He thus con-
timied: —
" Hre. Ferrara has neva yet mentioDed Eklward's name,
iihich does not surprise us ; but, to our great astomshment,
not a line has been rec^ved from him on the occasiou.
Perhaps, however, he is kept silent by his fear of ofl^diag ;
and 1 shall, therefore, give him a hint, by a Una to Oxford,
that his sister and I both think a letter of proper submia*
Bon from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her
shown to her mother, niight not be taken amiss ; for we
all know the tenderness of Mrs. Perran's heart, and that
die wishes for nothing so much as to be on good terms
with her children. "
This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects
and conduct of Edward. It determined him to attempt a
reconciliatioD, though not exactly in the maimer pointed
out by their brother and uster.
" A letter of proper submission ! " repealed he; " would
they have me beg ray raother's pardon for Robert's ingra-
titude to Aer, and breach of honour to tnef I can make
no submission. I am grown neither humble nor penitent
by what has passed. I am grown very happy; lut that
would not interest. 1 know of no aubmisaion that it pro
per for me to make. "
" You may certainly ask to be fo^ven, " said Elinor,
" because you have offended ; and I should think you mi^t
(MHO venture so far as to profess some concern for having
erer formed the engagemoit which drew < Hi you your mo-
ther's anger. "
He agreed that he mig^t.
" And when she haa forgivm you, perhaps a little hiu
mility may be convenient while acknowledging a second
engagement, almoat as imprudent in her eyes as the first. "
He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the
idea of a letter of proper submission ; and, therefore, to
make it easier to him, as he declared a much greater wil-
lingness to make meui conoesaions by word of mouth than
on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writing to Fanny^
ha should go to London, and penonaUy enDeat her good
DoliiHihyGoOgle
offiMB in hii fsToiiT. " And if thsy really dv intemt
tbemaelTet, " said Marianne, in her neir character of can-
dour, " in bringing about a reconciliation, I shall think that
ercn John and Fanny are not entirel; without merit "
After a vimton Colond Brandon's side of only three or
four days, the two gentlemen quitted Barton together.
They were to go immedialdy to Delaford, that Edwsrd
might have sonie pemnal knowledge of hia future home,
and lasiBt hia patron and friend in deciding on what im-
{tfovementt were needed to it ; and from thence, after
■laying there a conple of nights, he was to proceed on hia
journey to town.
CHAPTER XIV.
AriEn a proper renatance on the part of Mra. Vemn,
just BO riolent and ao steady ta to preserve ha {torn that
reproach which ahe always seemed fearful of incurring, the
reproach of heing too amiable, £dward was admitted to her
presence, and pronounced to be again her son.
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating.
For many years of her life ahe had Iiad two sons ; bnt the
crime and annihilation of Edward, a few weeks ago, had
robbed her of one ; the nmilar annihilation of Robert had
ieft her for a fortnight without any ; and now, by the re-
Buadtatian of Edward, she had one again.
In apite of his being allowed once more to live, however,
he did not fed the continuance Jif bis existence seeme tiS
he had revealed his pres«it engagement ; for the pnUi-
cation of dial circumatancej he feared, might give a sudden
turn to hia constitution, and carry him off asnqndly as be-
fi > re. With apprdtensive caution, therefore, {t was revealed;
and he was listened to vrith unexpected calmness. Mn.
Fwran at first resaiMiably endeavomed to dissuade liim
fiom nurryiug MIm Daahwood, by evwy argunent In her
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
power ; told him, that in Mira Morton he woold have a
woman of higher rank and latter fortnne ; and enforced
the assertion, by observing that Mibb Morton wu the
dangfater of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds,
while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a priTate
gentleman with no more than three ; but when she found
that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her represent-
ation, he waa by no means inclined to be guided by it, she
judged it wisest, from the experience of the past, to sub-
mit; and, therefore, after such an ungracioas delay as ebe
owed to her own dignity, and aa serred to_^ prevent every
suspicion of good'will, she iiaued her decree of consent to
tile marriage of Edward and Elinor.
What she would engage to do towards augni«iling their
income was next to be considered ; and here it plainly ap-
peared, that though Edward was now her only son, he was
by no means her eldest ; for while Bobert was inei^tably
oidowed with a thousand pounds a year, not the smallest
objection waa made against Edward's taking orders for the
lake of two hnndced and fifty at the utmost ; nor was any
tting promised either for the present or in ftiture, beyond
the ten thotuand pounds, which had been given with
It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than
waa expected, by Edward and EUnor ; and Mrs. Feiran
faeiaelf, by her shufSing excuses, seemed the only person
surprised at her not giving more.
With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus
secured to them, they had nothing to wait for after Edward
was in poasesaion of the living, but the readiness of the
honse, to which Colonel Brandon, with an eager desire for
the accommodation of Elinor, waa making considerable
improvements ; and after waiting some time for their com-
motion, — after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disap-
pointments and delays, from the unaccountable dilaCoriness
of the workmen, — Elinor, as usnal, broke through the first
positive resolution, of not marrying till every tiling was
ready ; and the ceremony took place in Barton church early
in the autumn.
The first month after their marriage was spent with their
T S
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
fnead at the manEion-hmue ; from whence they conhl att-
periDtoid the progreei of the parsonage, and direct erety
thing SB they liked on the spot ; could choose papers, pro-
ject shmUieries, aDd invent a sweep. Mrs. Jennings's
prophecies, " though rather jumhled tc^iether, were chiefly
inlfiUed ; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in
their parsonage by Michaelmas ; and she found in EUnor
and her husband, as she really believed, one of the happiest
couple in the world. They had, in fact, nothing to wish
for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne,
and rather better pasturage for thdr cotra.
They were visiled on their first settling by almoit bU
their relations and friends. Mra. Ferrars came to inspect
the happiness which she was almost ashamed of having
anthorised ; and even the Dashwoods were at the expetue
of a journey from Sussex to do them honour.
" I vrill not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister, "
said John, as the; were walking together one morning
before the gates of Delaford House, " & at would be saying
too much ; for cerlunly you have been one of the moat for-
tunate young women in the world, as it ia. But, T confess,
it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandcm
brother. His property here, his place, his house, — every
thing in such respectable and excellent condition ! And his
woods, " - 1 have not seen such timber any where in Dorset-
shire as there ia now standing in IMaford Hanger I And
though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactly the person
to attract him, yet I think it would altogether be advisable
for you to hare them now frequently staying widi you ; fbr,
as Colonel Brandon seaus a great deal at hMne, nobody can
tell what may happen ; for, when people are much duown
together, and see little of any body else, — and it will
always be in your power to set her off to advantage, and so
forth. In short, you may as well give her a chance : you
tmderatand me. "
But thou^ Mrs. Ferrars 4id come to see them, and
always treated'diem with the make-believe of decent iffbe-
tion, they wc^e never inBDlt«d by her real fovour aiid.pie >
ference. TTtaf waa due to the folly of Robert, and tba
auming of his wift ; and it waa earned by tttem beftn
BBMBB AKD SBHSIBILITV. S27
nuny nuuidii had pawed away. The selflah sagadty of th«
latter^ which had at first drawn Robert into the Bcrape, waf
the piincipal instnunent of hit delirerance froni it ; for her
leipectful humility, assiduous attentions, and endless flat-
teries, as soon as the smallest opening was given for their
^Eerciae, reconciled Mrs. FeirarB to his choice, end re*
eatabliahed him completely in her favour.
The whole of Lucy'e behaviour in the afikir, and the
prosperity which crowned it, therefore, may be held forth
as a roost encouraging instance of what an earnest, an
unceasing atlention to self-intercBt, howerer its prioress
may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing every
wivantage of fortune, with no other sacriAce than that
of time and conscience. When Robert first sought her
acquaintance, and privately visited her in Bartlett's Build.
ings,. it was only with the view imputed to him by his
brother. He merely tQesnt to persuade her to give up the
engagement ; and as there could be nodiing to overcome
but the aSectiou of both, he naturally expected that one
or two interviews would settle the matter. In that point,
'however, and that only, be erred ; for though Lucy soon
'gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in
time, another visit, another conversation, was slways wanted
to produce this conviction. Some doubts always lingered
in her mind when they parted, which could only be re-
moved by another half hour's discourse with himself.
His attendance was by this means secured, and the rest
followed in course. Instead of talldng of Edward, they
came gradually to talk only of Robot, — a sulgect on
which he had always more to say than on any other, and
in which she soon betrayed an interest even equal to his
own ; and, in short, it became speedily evident to both,
that he had entirely supplanted bis brother. He was
proud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, snd very^
proud of marrying privately without his mother's consent.
What immediately followed is known. They passed some
months in great happiness at Dawlisb ; for she had many
lelations and old acquaintance to cut — and he drew several
^ans for magnificent cottages ; and iVom thence returning
^ town procured the foigivenesa of Mrs. Ferrari, by the
T i
. I i-. < i " ,G(H1^lc
■iniple expedient of uking it, which, at Lucy's iniligslion,
was Adopted. The forgiveness, at first, indeed, ai wu
reasonable, comprehended only Bobert; and Lacy, who
had owed hie mother no duty, and therefore conld hate
transgresBed none, still remained some weeks longer un-
paidoned. But perseverance in humility of conduct and
mesBftgei, in self-condemnation for Robert's offence, and
gratitude for the unldndnesa she was -treated with, pro-
cured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her
by its graciousneea, and led soon afterwards, by rapid
degrees, to the highest state of affection and inflnenee.
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars as either
Robert or Fanny ; and while Edward was never cordiaQj
forgiven for having once intended to marry her, and Eli-
nor, though si^erior to her in fortune and birth, wM
ipoken of as an intruder, she was in every thing con-
sidered, and always openly acknowledged, to be a favourite
child. They settled in town, received very liberal assist-
ance from Mrs. Ferrars, were on the best terms imaginsUe
with the Dashwoods ; and, setting aside the jealousies and
ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy,
in which their husbands of course took a part, as well as
the frequent domestic disagreements between Robert and
Lucy ^emseives, nothing could exceed the harmony in
which they all lived together.
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of ddeat
son might have puzzled many people to find ont ; and
what Robert had done lo succeed to it might have puzzled
them still more. It was an arrangement, however, joa.
tified in its effects, if not in its cause ; for nothing ever
appeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to gire a
suspicion of his r^retting the extent of hii income, as
either leaving his brother too httie, or bringing hiintdf
too much ;,aud if Edward might be judged from the ready
discharge of his duties in every particular, from an in-
creasing attachment to bis wife and his home, and from
the regular cheerfulness of hi» spirits, he might be siq)-,
posed no less coatented with hit lot, no less free thm
every wiah of an exchange.
Elinor's marriage divided her h little from her ftmil;
I,. i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
ana akb bbhubilitti SSg
M eonld wen be contriTed, without tendering the cottige
■t Buton eatinlj uielesi, for her mother and OBten
•pent nincb more than halt their time with her. Mn.
Duhwood wu actiDg on motiveB of poUcy u well u
plsMure in die frequency of her Tialte at Ddtfbrd; for
iMt wish (rf bringing Mariuine and Colonel Brandtm lo >
gslhor wu hardly lees eernest, though Tsther more liheral
duo what Jidm had exprened. It wm now her darling
otgect. Precimu as was the company of her daughter
to her, ahe desired nothing so much as to give up its
eonstant enjoyment to her Tahied friend; and to see Ma-
rianne settled at the mannon-honae was equally the wish
pf Edward and Elinor. They each felt his sorrowe, and
their own obligsdonB, and Abrianne, hy general oonient,
was to be the reward of all.
With such a confederacy against her — with a know-
ledge M intimate of his goodness — with a conviction of hia
fond attachment to herself, which at lut, though long
after it was obserrable to every body else — bunt on her —
what could die do i
Marianne Dashwood was bom to an extraordinary fUe.
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opi-
nion*, and to counteract, by her conduct, hermost favourite
maxims. She was bom to overcame an sfibction formed
■o late in life aa at seventeen, and with no sentiment bu-
peiior to atrong ecteem and lively friendship, voluntarily
to give her hand to another ! — and that other, a mui who
had BuSbred no lesB than herself under the event of ■
former attachment, irtiom, two years before, she had con-
■idered too old to be married, — and who still sou^t the
owstltational nf^anl of a flannel waistcoat !
Bat so it waa. Instead of falling a aacriflce to an ir.
reeistible passion, aa once she had fondly flattered heraelf
with expecting, instead of remaining even tor ever with
ber molher, and finding her only pleasures in retirement
and Btndy, as afterwards in her more calm and sober
judgment she had determined on, — she found henelf at
nineteen sabmitdng to new attadiments, entering on new
dntiea, placed in a new home, a wife, the r'
family, and the patroness of a village.
i-. < i " ,G(Hinlc
Cctlonel Bnddon wu now u happy u all thoae who
bett loved him beliend he dewrred to be : in Muiuine
he was conKiled & )t every put affliction : her regird and
her todety reMored his mind to animstion, and hia iiniita
to cheerftdnesa ; and that Harianne found her own h^^
pineal in forming hii, waa equally the pemiaaion and
delight of each obeerving friend. Marianne conld never
love by halves ; and her whole heart became, in time, as
mnch devoted to her hnsband as it had once been to Wil-
longfaby.
Willou^t^ could not hear of her murine without a
pang ; and hia pnniahment was soon afterwards complete,
in die vdnntary tor^TeatBt of Mrs. Smith, who, by stating
his mairiage with a woman of character as the sonroe of
her clemency, gave him reason for believing tbat had he
behaved with honour towards Marianne he might at once
bare been happy and rich. That his repentance of mis-
conduct, which thni bnmght its own ponishment, was sin-
cere, need not be doubted; nor that he long ifaonght of
Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret.
Bat that he was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from
society, or contracted an habitaal gloom of temper, or died
of a brolccn heart, mnst not be depended on — for he did
neither. He lived to exert, and -frequently to enjoy him-
■df. His wife was not always out of humour, nor hia
home always uncomfortable; and in bis breed of horses and
dogs, and in porting of every kind, he fotmd no inconsi-
dcrable degree of domestic felicity.
For Marianne, however, in spite of his indVility in «ar-
viving her loaa, he always retained that decided regant
which interested him in every thing that befdl her, and
made her his secret standard of periection in woman;
and many a rising beauty would be dighted by him io
after-daya as bearing no comparison with Mn. Brandon.
Mra. Daahwood was prudent enough to remsin at the
cottage widiaat attempting a removal to Ddaford ; and,
forttinatdy for Sir Jdtin and Mts. Jennings, when Ma-
rianne waa taken from diem, Margaret had reached an age
hi^y snitable for dancing, and not very ineligiUe for
bdng Buppoaed to have a lover.
DoliiHihyGoOHlc
SSI
Between ButOD and DeUford there wu tfa & t conMsnt
coiniDunication which strong family tfiecdon would Da-
tunUj dictate ; and among the mmts and ihe happineu of
Kinor and Marianne, let it not he ranked as the least con-
siderable, that, thoi^ dsters, and living almost within
fli^t of each other, thej could live without disagreentent
between tbemselTes, or producing coolneu hetween their
husbands.
DoliiHihyGoOgle
PrtnUd by A. s R Spattlivoadr,
D,™i,;f < ihvG0Cl'{lc
,G(Hinlc
hv Google
