

at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/

600068951 Z
f
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
SENSE
N S I B I L I T Y.
rv .'.• < ? >
A NOVEL. /

> .
JANE AUSTEN,
)RES8 OF " PRIDE AND PREJUDICE., " ETC., ETC.
VOL. I.
LONDON:
LARKE AND CO., 66, OLD BAILEY.
18*4.
^4$. 9*~, / J+ & .

■I
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
CHAPTER I.
The family of Dashwood had been long settled in
Sussex. Their estate was large, and their residence
was at Norland Park, in the centre of their property,
where, for many generations, lliey bad lived in ao
respectable a manner,, ia to engage th(J^ general good
opinion of their su/frHtfidftlfg -acquaintance. The
late owner of thia i ;afate n vs u itugLc man, who lived
to a very advanced IgeV a*d'who for many years of
bis life had a K.iitjtuJii lioinp^ni^n iiul huuttrkt-vpur
In his sister. But lie*-*ft*atf*rltfhjuh Imp pen ml ten
years before his own, gSBljB jjAcat alteration in
his home j for tu supply her loss, he invited and re^
ceived into hia bOQM the family of his nephew, Mr.
Henry Dashwood, the legal inheritor of the Norland
estate, and the person to whom he intended to be-
queath it. In the society of his nephew and niece,
and their children, the old gentleman's days were
comfortably spent. His attachment to them all in-
creased. The constant attention of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not
merely from interest, but from goodness of heart,
6 3EN8B AND SENSIBILITY.
gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age
could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the children
added a relish to his existence.
By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had
one son ; by his present lady, three daughters. The
son, a steady respectable young man, was amply pro-
vided for by the fortune of his mother, which had
been large, and half of which devolved on him on
his coming of age. By his own marriage, likewise,
which happened soon afterwards, he added to his
wealth. To him, therefore, the succession to the
Norland estate was not so really important as to his
sisters ; for their fortune, independent of what might
arise to them from their father's inheriting that pro-
perty, could be but small. Their mother had nothing,
and their father only seven thousand pounds in hi*
own disposal ; for the remaining moiety of his first
wife's fortune was also secured to her child, and ha
had only a life-interest in it.
The old gentleman died; his will was read, and, lift*
almost every other will, gave as much disappointment
as pleasure. He was neither so unjust, nor so un-
grateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew } but
he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the
value of the bequest. Mr. Dashwood had wished
for it more for the sake of his wife and daughters
than for himself or his son : but to his son, and his
son's son, a child of four years old, it was secured,
in such a way, as to leave to himself no power of
providing for those who were most dear to him, and
who most needed a provision, by any charge on the
estate, or by any sale of its valuable woods. The
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 7
whole ww tied up for the benefit of this child, who,
in occasional visits with hit father and mother at
Norland, had so far gained on the affections of his
uncle, by such attractions as are by no means un-
usual in children of two or three years old j an im-
perfect articulation, an earnest desire of having his
own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of
noise j as to outweigh all the value of all the attention
which, for years, he had received from his niece and
her daughters. He meant not to be unkind how-
ever, and, as a mark of affection for the three girls,
he left them a thousand pounds a-piece.
Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first,
severe ; but his temper was cheerful and sanguine,
and he might reasonably hope to live many years,
and by living economically, lay by a considerable
sum from the produce of an estate already large, and
capable of almost immediate improvement. But the
fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was his
only one twelvemonth. He survived his uncle no
longer j and ten thousand pounds, including the late
legacies, was all that remained for his widow and
daughters.
His son was sent for, as soon as his danger was
known, and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended,
with all the strength and urgency which illness could
command, the interest of his mother-in-law and
sisters.
Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings
of the rest of the family ; but he was affected by
a recommendation of such a nature at such a time,
and he proinisod to do everything in his power to
B SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
make them comfortable. His father was rendered
easy by such an assurance, and Mr. John Dashwood
had then leisure to consider how much there might
prudently be in his power to do for them.
He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to
be rather cold-hearted, and rather selfish, is to be
ill-disposed : but he was, in general, well respected ;
for he conducted himself with propriety in the dis-
charge of his ordinary duties. Had he married a
more amiable woman, he might have been made
still more respectable than he was : he might even
have been made amiable himself; for he was very
young when he married, and very fond of his wife.
But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricature of
himself; more narrow-minded and selfish.
When he gave his promise to his father, he medi-
tated within himself to increase the fortunes of his
sisters by the present of a thousand pounds a-piece.
He then really thought himself equal to it. The
prospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his
present income, besides the remaining half of his own
mother's fortune, warmed his heart and made him
feel capable of generosity. " Yes, he would give
them three thousand pounds : it would be liberal and
handsome ! It would be enough to make them com-
pletely easy. Three thousand pounds! he could spare
so considerable a sum with little inconvenience. "
He thought of it all day long, and for many days
successively, and he did not repent.
No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs*
John Dashwood, without sending any notice of her
intention to her mother-in-law, arrived with her child
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 9
and their attendants. No one could dispute her right
to come ; the house was her husband's from the mo-
ment of his father's decease; but the indelicacy of
her conduct was so much the greater, and to a wo-
man in Mrs, Dashwood's situation, with only common
feelings, must have been highly unpleasing ; but in
her mind there was a sense of honour so keen, a
generosity so romantic, that any offence of the kind,
by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source
of immoveable disgust Mrs. John Dashwood had
never been a favourite with any of her husband's
family; but she had had no opportunity, till the pre-
sent, of showing them with how little attention to
the comfort of other people she could act when occa-
sion required it.
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious
behaviour, and so earnestly did she despise her daugh-
ter-in-law for it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she
would have quitted the house for ever, had not the
entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect
on the propriety of going, and her own tender love
for all her three children determined her afterwards
to stay, and for their takes avoid a breach with their
brother.
Elinor, this eldest daughter whose advice was so
effectual, possessed a strength of understanding, and
coolness of judgment, which qualified her, though
only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother,
and enabled her frequently to counteract, to the ad-
vantage of them all, that eagerness of mind in Mrs.
Dashwood which must generally have led to impru-
dence. She had an excellent heart ; her disposition
10 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
wm affectionate, and her feelings were strong; but
she knew how to govern them : it was a knowledge
which her mother had yet to learn, and which one of
her sisters had resolved never to be taught.
Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite
equal to Elinor's. She was sensible and clever, but
eager in everything; her sorrows, her joys, could
have no moderation. She was generous, amiable,
interesting: she was everything but prudent. The
resemblance; between her and her mother was strik-
ingly great.
Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's
sensibility; but by Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and
cherished. They encouraged each other now in the
violence of their affliction. The agony of grief
which overpowered them at first, was voluntarily re-
newed, was. sought for, was created again and again.
They gave themselves up wholly to their sorrow,
seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection
that eoukl affoj^. it, and resolved against ever admit-
ting consolation in future. Elinor, too, was deeply
afflieted; but still she could struggle, she could exert
hetsettt She could consult with her brother, could
receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her
with proper attention} and could strive to rouse her
mother to similar exertion, and encourage her to
similar forbearance,
Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humoured,
well-disposed girl; but she had already imbibed a
good deal of Marianne's romance, without having
much of her sense; she did not, at thirteen, bid fair
to equal her sister* at a more advanced period of life.
11
CHUPTBB IL
Mm. Jqu D*J«wo©n worn Installed benatf mie»
tree* af Norland § and ha* motto wad efciers4n4aw
unt degraded to the condition 0/ visitonu Aseuohf
howcrov they win treated bgr her with, quiet oiTiiityj
and by bar husband with aa much kindness aa ha
eould foal toward* anybody beyond himself; hit wife,
and their child. He really pressed them, with tome
earnestness, to consider Norland aa their home j and,
as no plan appeared ao eligible to Mrs, Daehwood aa
remaining there till aha could accommodate herself
with a. house in the neighbourhood, bie invitation was
accepted*
A eontmuemee In. a, place where everything re-
minded her of former delight, was exactly what suited
her mind* In season* of cheerfulness, no temper
eould be more cheerful than hers, or poetess* in a
greater degree 9 that sanguine expectation of happi-
ness which is happiness iteel£ But in sorrow she
mutt be equally carried away by her fancy, and as
far beyond consolation aa in pleasure she waa beyond
alloy.
Mrs, John Daehwood did not at all approve of what
her husband intended to do for his sisters. To take
three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear
12 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
little boy, would be impoverishing him to the most
dreadful degree. She begged him to think again on
the subject. How could he answer it to himself to
rob his child, and his only child too, of so large a
sum? And what possible claim could the Miss
Dashwoods, who were related to him only by half
blood, which she considered as no relationship at all,
have on his generosity to so large an amount? It was
very well known that no affection was ever supposed
to exist between the children of any man by different
marriages ; and why was he to ruin himself, and their
poor little Harry, by giving away all his money to his
half-sisters ?
" It was my father's last request to me, " replied
her husband, " that I should assist his widow and
daughters. "
" He did not know what he was talking of, I dare
say; ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.
Had he been in his right senses, he could not hare
thought of such a thing as begging you to give away
half your fortune from your own child. "
" He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my
dear Fanny; he only requested me, in general terms,
to assist them, and make their situation more com-
fortable than it was in his power to do. Perhaps it
would hare been as well if he had left it wholly to
myself. He could hardly suppose I should neglect
them. But as he required the promise, I could not do
less than give it : at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be per-
formed. Something must be done for them whenever
they leave Norland and settle in a new home. "
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 13
" Well, then, let something be done for them ; but
that something need not be three thousand pounds.
Consider, " she added, " that when the money is once
parted with, it never can return. Tour sisters will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it
could eyer be restored to our poor little boy . . . "
" Why, to be sure, " said her husband, yery gravely,
" that would make a great difference. The time may
come when Harry will regret that so large a sum was
parted with. If he should have a numerous family,
for instance, it would be a very convenient addition. "
M To be sure it would. "
" Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties
if the sum were diminished one halt Five hundred
pounds would be a prodigious increase to their
fortunes! "
44 Oh ! beyond anything great ! What brother on
earth would do half so much for his sisters, even if
really his sisters! And as it is... only half blood!
But you have such a generous spirit! "
" I would not wish to do anything mean, " he re-
plied. " One had rather, on such occasions, do too
much than too little. No one, at least, can think I
have not done enough for them : even themselves,
they can hardly expect more. "
44 There is no knowing what they may expect, "
said the lady, " but we are not to think of their ex-
pectations : the question is, what you can afford to
do. "
" Certainly, and I think I may afford to give them
five hundred pounds a-piece. As it is, without any
addition of mine, they will each have above three
14 SfeNSE AND 8EN8IB1LITY.
thousand pounds on their mother's death : a Tery
comfortable fortune for any young woman. "
" To be sure it is : and, indeed, it strikes me that
they can want no addition at all They will have
ten thousand pounds divided amongst them. If they
marry, they will be sure of doing well; and if they do
not, they may all live very comfortably together on
the interest of ten thousand pounds. "
" That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know
whether, upon the whole, it would not be more ad-
visable to do something for their mother while the
lives rather than for them ; something of the annuity
kind I mean. My sisters would feel the good effects
of it as well as herseif. A hundred a year would
make them all perfectly comfortable. "
His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her
consent to this plan.
" To be sure, said she, " it is better than parting
with fifteen hundred pounds at once. But then if
Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen years, we shall be
completely taken in. "
" Fifteen years ! my dear Fanny; her life cannot
be worth half that purchase* "
" Certainly not ; but if you observe, people always
live for ever when there is any annuity to be paid
them i and she is very stout and healthy, and hardly
forty. An annuity is a very serious business; it
comes over and over every year, and there is no get*
ting rid of it. Tou are not aware of what you are
doing. I have known a great deal of the trouble of
annuities ; for my mother was clogged with the pay-
ment of three to old superannuated servants by my
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 15
father's will, and it it amaaing how dlsagroeabls aba
found it. Twice every year these annuities wen Id
be paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it
to them ; and then one of them wee amid to hare
died, and afterwards it tamed out no such thing.
My mother was quite tick of it. Her income was
not her own, she said, with such perpetual claims on
it ; and it was the more unkind in my father, be-
cause, otherwise, the money would have been entirely
at my mother's disposal, without any restriction what-
ever. It has given me such an abhorrence of annui-
ties, that I am sure I would not pin myself down to
the payment of one for all the world. 19
" It is certainly an unpleasant thing, " replied Mr.
Dashwood, " to have those kind of yearly drains on
one's income. One's fortune, as your mother Justly
says, is not one's own. To be tied down to the regu-
lar payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by
no means desirable t it takes away one's independ-
ence. "
" Undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks
lor it. They think themselves secure, you do no
more than what is expected, and it raises no grati-
tude at alL If I were you, whatever I did should be
done at my own discretion entirely. I would not
bind myself to allow them anything yearly. It may
be very inconvenient some years to spare a hundred,
or even fifty pounds, from our own expenses. 19
" I believe you are right, my love ; it will be better
that there should be no annuity in the case ; what-
ever I may give them occasionally will be of far
greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because
16 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
they would only enlarge their style of living if they
felt sure of a larger income, and would not be six-
pence the richer for it at the end of the year. It
will certainly be much the best way. A present of
fifty pounds, now and then, will prevent their ever
being distressed for money, and will, I think, be am-
ply discharging my promise to my father. "
" To be sure it will. Indeed, to say the truth, I
am convinced within myself that your father had no
idea of your giving them any money at all. The
assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such
as might be reasonably expected of you ; for instance,
such as looking out for a comfortable small house for
them, helping them to move their things, and sending
them presents of fish and game, and so forth, when-
ever they are in season. I'll lay my life that he meant
nothing farther; indeed, it would be very strange and
unreasonable if he did. Do but consider, my dear
Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your
mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the
interest of seven thousand pounds, besides the thou-
sand pounds belonging to each of the girls, which
brings them in fifty pounds a-year a-piece, and, of
course, they will pay their mother for their board out
of it. Altogether, they will have five hundred a-year
amongst them, and what on earth can four women
want for more than that ? They will live so cheap !
Their housekeeping will be nothing at all. They
will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly any ser-
vants ; they will keep no company, and can have no
expenses of any kind ! Only conceive how com-
fortable they will be ! Five hundred a-year ! I am
IENIB AND SENSIBILITY. 17
lot imagine how they will spend half of it ;
our giving them more, it is quite absurd to
. They will be much more able to give
iing. w
tny word, " said Mr. Dash wood, " I believo
jrfectly right. My father certainly could
ing more by his request to me than what
I clearly understand it now, and I will
il my engagement by such acts of assistance
> ss to them as you have described. When
• removes into another house, my services
■adily given to accommodate her as far as
me little present of furniture too may be
then. "
ily, w returned Mrs. John Dashwood. " But,
ne thing must be considered. When your
mother moved to Norland, though the fur-
Jtanhill was sold, all the china, plate, and
saved, and is now left to your mother,
will therefore be almost completely fitted
as she takes it.**
is a material consideration undoubtedly.
; legacy indeed ! And yet some of the
Id have been a very pleasant addition to
ock here. "
and the set of breakfast china in twice as
as what belongs to this house. A great
tndsome, in my opinion, for any place they
flbrd to live in. But, however, ho it is.
r thought only of them. And 1 must say
you owe no particular gratitude to him,
ion to his wishes, for we very well know
vol.. I.
18 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
that if he could, he would have left almost every-
thing in the world to them. "
This argument was irresistible. It gave to his in-
tentions whatever of decision was wanting before ;
and he finally resolved, that it would be absolutely
unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more
for the widow and children of his father, than such
kind of neighbourly acts as his own wife pointed
out.
CHAPTER m.
Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several
months ; not from any disinclination to move when
the sight of every well-known spot ceased to raise
the violent emotion which it produced for a while ;
for when her spirits began to revive, and her mind
became capable of some other exertion than that of
heightening its affliction by melancholy remembran-
ces, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable
in her inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neigh-
bourhood of Norland ; for to remove far from that
beloved spot was impossible. But she could hear of
no situation that at once answered her notions of
comfort and ease, and suited the prudence of her
eldest daughter, whose steadier judgment rejected
am •umiuiY, 10
several houses as too latg* for their Income, which
her mother would have approved*
Xn. Dashwood had been informed by her husband
of the solemn promise on the pert of hit ten in their
favour, which fare comfort to hii last earthly reflec-
tions. She doubted the sincerity of this assurance
no more than be bed doubted it himself; and she
thought of it for her daughters'sake with satisfaction,
though as for herself she wis persuaded that a much
smaller provision than seren thousand pounds would
support her In affluence. For their brother's sake
too, for the sake of his own heart, she rejoiced j and
the reproached herself for being unjust to his merit
before, in believing him incapable of generosity.
His attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters con-
vinced her that their welfare was dear to him, and,
for a long time, she firmly relied on the liberality of
his intentions.
The contempt which she had, very early in their
acquaintance, felt for her daughter-in-law, was very
much increased by the farther knowledge of her
character, which half a year's residence in her family
afforded ; and perhaps In spite of every consideration
of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the
former, the two ladies might have found it impossible
to have lived together so long, had not a particular
circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility,
according to the opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her
daughters'continuance at Norland.
This circumstance was a growing attachment be-
tween her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John
Dashwood, a gentlemanlike and pleasing young man,
20 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after
his sister's establishment at Norland, and who had
since spent the greatest part of his time there.
Some mothers might have encouraged the inti-
macy from motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars
was the eldest son of a man who had died very rich ;
and some might have repressed it from motives of
prudence, for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his
fortune depended on the will of his mother. But
Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either con-
sideration. It was enough for her that he appeared
to be amiable, that he loved her daughter, and that
Elinor returned the partiality. It was contrary to
every doctrine of hers, that difference of fortune
should keep any couple asunder who were attracted
by resemblance of disposition ; and that Elinor's
merit should not be acknowledged by every one who
knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their
good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or
address. He was not handsome, and his manners
required intimacy to make them pleasing. He was
too diffident to do justice to himself; but when his
natural shyness was overcome, his behaviour gave
every indication of an open, affectionate heart. His
understanding was good, and his education had given
it solid improvement. But he was neither fitted by
abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his
mother and sister, who longed to see him distin-
guished as, they hardly knew what. They wanted
him to make a fine figure in the world in some
manner or other. His mother wished to interest
SBHSI AND SBNS1B1LITT. 21
him in political oonoerns, to gat him Into parliament,
or to ate him conne ct ed with tome of the gnat men
of the day. Xn. John Deshwood wished it like-
wise | but in the mean while, tUl one of these su-
perior blessings eonld be obtained, it would hare
quieted her ambition to. see him driving a barouche.
But Edward had no turn for great men or barouche*.
All bis wiahea centred in domettie comfort and the
quiet of private lift. Fortunately he had a younger
brother who wat more promising*
Edward had been staying several weeks in the
house before he engaged much of Mrs, Dashwood's
attention j for she was, at that time, in such afflic-
tion as rendered her careless of surrounding objects.
She saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and
she liked him for it He did not disturb the wretch-
edness of her mind by ill-timed conversation. She
was first called to observe and approve him farther,
by a reflection which Elinor chanced one day to
make on the difference between him and his sister.
It was a contrast which recommended him most
forcibly to her mother.
" It is enough,* »** d •he j M to say that he is un-
like Fanny is enough. It implies everything amiable.
I love him already. "
« I think you will like him, " said Elinor, « when
you know more of him. "
M Like him P replied her mother, with a smile.
M I can feci no sentiment of approbation inferior to
love. "
M Tou may esteem him. "
24 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
I know of the world, the more am I convinced that
I shall never see a man whom I can really love. I
require so much ! He must have all Edward's vir-
tues, and his person and manners must ornament his
goodness with every possible charm. "
" Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.
It is yet too early in life to despair of such a happi-
ness. Why should you be less fortunate than your
mother? In one circumstance only, my Marianne,
may your destiny be different from hers ! n
CHAPTER IV.
" What a pity it is, Elinor, " said Marianne, " that
Edward should have no taste for drawing. "
" No taste for drawing, " replied Elinor; " why
should you think so ? He does not draw himself,
indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing the per-
formances of other people, and I assure you he is by
no means deficient in natural taste, though he has
not had opportunities of improving it. Had he ever
been in the way of learning, I think he would have
drawn very well. He distrusts his own judgment in
such matters so much, that he is always unwilling to
give his opinion on any picture ; but he has an innate
■MM AMD SENSIBILITY. 25
propriety and simplicity of taste, which in general
direct him perfectly right. "
Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no
more on the subject j but the kind of approbation
which Elinor described as excited in him by the
drawings of other people, was very far from that
rapturous delight, which, in hor opinion, could alone
be called taste. Yet, though smiling within herself
at tho mistake, she honoured her sister for that blind
partiality to Edward which produced it.
11 1 hope, Marianne, " continued Elinor, " you do
not consider him as deficient in general taste. In-
deed, I think I may say that you cannot, for your
behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if that were
your opinion, I am sure you could never be civil to
him. "
Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would
not wound the feelings of her sister on any account
and yet to say what she did not believe was impos-
sible. At length she replied :
" Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him
is not in everything equal to your sense of his merits.
I have not had so many opportunities of estimating
the minuter propensities of his mind, his inclinations
and tastes, as you have ; but I have tho highest
opinion in tho world of his goodness and sense. I
think him everything that is worthy and amiable. "
u I am sure, " replied Elinor with a smile, " that
hia dearest friends could not be dissatisfied with such
commendation as that. I do not perceive how you
could express yourself more warmly. "
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily,
pleased.
26 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" Of his sense and his goodness, " continued Elinor,
" no one can, I think, he in doubt, who has seen him
often enough to engage him in unreserved conver-
sation. The excellence of his understanding and
his principles can he concealed only by that shyness
which too often keeps him silent. You know
enough of him to do justice to his solid worth. But
of his minuter propensities, as you call them, you
have from peculiar circumstances heen kept more
ignorant than myself. He and I have heen at times
thrown a good deal together, while you have heen
wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle
by my mother. I have seen a great deal of him,
have studied his sentiments and heard bis opinion
on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the
whole, I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-
informed, his enjoyment of books exceedingly great,
his imagination lively, his observation just and cor-
rect, and his taste delicate and pure. His abilities
in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance
as his manners and person. At first sight, his address
is certainly not striking ; and his person can hardly
be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes,
which are uncommonly good, and the general sweet-
ness of his countenance, is perceived. At present, I
know him so well, that I think him really handsome;
or, at least, almost so. What say you, Marianne? "
" I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor,
if I do not now. When you tell me to love him as
ft brother, I shall no more see imperfection in his
i'ucc, than I now do in his heart. "
Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry
27
h * t * .Itfh tH« m » *juA to exp 1 * 11 * t .
28 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
doubt of his preference. But there are other points
to be considered besides his inclination. He is very
far from oeing independent. What his mother really
is we cannot know; but, from Fanny's occasional
mention of her conduct and opinions, we have never
been disposed to think her amiable ; and I am very
much mistaken if Edward is not himself aware that
there would be many difficulties in his way, if he
were to wish to marry a woman who had not either
a great fortune or high rank.''
Marianne was astonished to find how much the
imagination of her mother and herself had out-
stripped the truth.
" And you really are not engaged to him P* said
she. " Yet it certainly soon will happen. But two
advantages will proceed from this delay. I shall not
lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater
opportunity of improving that natural taste for your
favourite pursuit which must be so indispensably ne-
cessary to your future felicity. Oh! if he should be
so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw
himself, how delightful it would be ! n
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.
She could not consider her partiality for Edward in
so prosperous a state as Marianne had believed it.
There was, at times, a want of spirits about him
which, if it did not denote indifference, spoke a some-
thing almost as unpromising. A doubt of her re-
gard, supposing him to feel it, need not give him
more than inquietude. It would not be likely to
produce that dejection of mind which frequently at-
tended him. A more reasonable cause might be
fENIE AND SENSIBILITY. 29
d In the dependent situation which forbad the
Igence of his affection. She knew that his
her neither behaved to him so as to moke his
le comfortable at present, nor to give him any as-
ance that he might form a home for himself, with-
; strictly attending to her views for his aggran-
•ement. With such a knowledge as this it was
iposaible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject,
ae was far from depending on that result of hi«
reference of her, which her mother and sister still
onsidered as certain. Nay, the longer they were to-
gether, the more doubtful seemed the nature of his
regard ; and sometimes, for a few painful minutes,
she believed it to be no more than friendship.
But, whatever might really be its limitH, it wns
enough, when perceived by his sister, to make her
uneasy j and at the same time, (which was still more
common,) to make her uncivil. 8he took the first
opportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the
occasion, talking to her so expressively of her brother'**
great expectations, of Mrs. Ferrer's resolution that
both her sons should marry well, and of the danger
attending any young woman who attempted to draw
him in, that Mrs. Dashwood could neither pretend
to be unconscious, nor endeavour to be calm. She
gave her an answer which marked her contempt, and
instantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might
be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a re-
moval, her beloved Elinor should not be exposed an-
other week to such insinuations.
In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to
her from the post, which contained a proposal parti-
30 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
cularly well-timed. It was the offer of a small house,
on very easy terms, belonging to a relation of her
own, a gentleman of consequence and property in
Devonshire. The letter was from this gentleman
himself, and written in the true spirit of friendly
accommodation. He understood that she was in
need of a dwelling, and though the house he now
offered her was merely a cottage, he assured her that
everything should be done to it which she might
think necessary, if the situation pleased her. He
earnestly pressed her, after giving the particulars of
the house and garden, to come with her daughters to
Barton Park, the place of his own residence, from
whence she might judge, herself, whether Barton
Cottage, for the houses were in the same parish,
could, by any alteration, be made comfortable to her.
He seemed really anxious to accommodate them, and
the whole of his letter was written in so friendly a
style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ;
more especially at a moment when she was suffering
under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer
connexions. She needed no time for deliberation or
inquiry. Her resolution was formed as she read.
The situation of Barton, in a county so far distant
from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hours
before, would have been a sufficient objection to out-
weigh every possible advantage belonging to the
} lace, was now its first recommendation. To quit the
neighbourhood of Norland was no longer an evil ; it
was an object of desire ; it was a blessing, in compari-
son of the misery of continuing her daughter-in-law's
guest : and to remove for ever from that beloved place
■EN1B AND SENSIBILITY. 31
would be lew painful than to inhabit or visit it while
•nch a woman waa iti ndatnaa. She instantly wrote
Sir John Hiddleton her acknowledgment of his kind-
ness, and her acceptance of his proposal j and then
hastened to ahow both letters to her daughters, that
she might be secure of their approbation before her
answec were sent*
Elinor had always thought it would be more pru-
dent lor them to settle at some distance from Norland
than immediately amongst their present acquaintance.
On that head, therefore, it was not for her to oppose
her mother's Intention of removing Into Devonshire.
The house, too, as described by Sir John, was on so
simple a scale, and the rent so uncommonly moderate,
as to leave her no right of objection on either point j
and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought
any charm to her fancy, though it was a removal
from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she
made no attempt to dissuade her mother from send-
ing her letter of acquiescence.
CHAPTER V.
No sooner was hor answer despatched, than Mrs.
Dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of an-
nouncing to her son-in-law and his wife that she
waa provided with a house, and should incommode
32
SENSE AND 8EN8IBILITY.
them no longer than till everything were ready
her inhabiting it. They heard her with surpr
Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing ; hut her h
hand civilly hoped that she would not he settled
from Norland. She had great satisfaction in rep
ing that she was going into Devonshire. Edw
turned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and,
a voice of surprise and concern, which required
explanation to her, repeated, " Devonshire ! 1
you, indeed, going there ? So far from hence ! A
to what part of it ? " She explained the situati
It was within four miles northward of Exeter.
" It is hut a cottage, " she continued, " hut I h <
to see many of my friends in it A room or t
can easily he added ; and if my friends find
difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sur
will find none in accommodating them. "
She concluded with a very kind invitation to 1
and Mrs. John Dashwood to visit her at Bartc
and to Edward she gave one with still greater aff
tion. Though her late conversation with her dauj
ter-in-law had made her resolve on remaining
Norwood no longer than was unavoidahle, it 1
not produced the smallest effect on her in that pc
to which it principally tended. To separate Edw
and Elinor was as far from heing her object as ev <
and she wished to show Mrs. John Dashwood
this pointed invitation to her brother, how tota
she disregarded her disapprobation of the match.
Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again n
again how exceedingly sorry he was that she 1
taken a house at such a distance from Norland
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 3.'$
to prevent his being of any service to her in remount;
her furniture. He really felt conscientiously vexed
on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he
had limited the performance of his promise to his
father was hy this arrangement rendered impractica-
ble. — The furniture was all sent round by water. It
chiefly consisted of household linen, plate, china, and
books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.
Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with
a sigh: she could not help feeling it hard that as
Mrs. Dashwood's income would be so trifling in com-
parison with their own, she should have any hand-
some article of furniture. ♦
Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth ;
it was ready-furnished, and she might have immediate
possession. No difficulty arose on either side in
the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal
of her effects at Norland, and to determine her future
household, before she set off for the west ; and this,
as she was exceedingly rapid in the performance of
everything that interested her, was soon done.— The
horses which were left her by her husband, had been
void soon after his death', and an opportunity now
offering of disposing of her carriage, she agreed to
sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldest
daughter. For the comfort of her children, had she
consulted only her own wishes, she would have kept
it; but the discretion of Elinor prevailed. Her
wisdom too limited the number of their servants to
three — two maids and a man, with whom they were
speedily provided from amongst those who had formed
their establishment at Norland.
D. vol. I.
34 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
The man and one of the maids were sent off im-
mediately into Devonshire, to prepare the house for
their mistress's arrival ; for as Lady Middleton was
entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred
going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Bar-
ton Park ; and she relied so undoubtingly on Sir
John's description of the house, as to feel no curiosity
to examine it herself till she entered it as her own.
Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was pre-
served from diminution by the evident satisfaction of
her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her removal ;
a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be
concealed under a cold invitation to her to defer her
departure. Now was the time when her son-in-law's
promise to his father might with particular propriety
be fulfilled. Since lie had neglected to do it on first
coming to the estate, their quitting his house might
be looked on as the most suitable period for its accom-
plishment. But Mrs. Dashwood began shortly to give
over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced,
from the general drift of his discourse, that his assist-
ance extended no farther than their maintenance for
six months at Norland. He so frequently talked of
the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of the
perpetual demands upon his purse which a man of
any consequence in the world was beyond calculation
exposed to, that he seemed rather to stand in need of
more money himself than to have any design of giv-
ing money away.
In a very few weeks from the day which brought
Sir John Middleton's first letter to Norland, every-
thing was so far settled in their future abode as to
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 35
tble Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin
i\r journey.
Many were the tears shed by them in their last
lieus to a place so much beloved. " Dear, dear Nor-
tnd ! " said Marianne, as she wandered alone before
he house, on the last evening of their being there ;
•when s?iall I cease to regret you ! — when learn to
feel a home elsewhere! — Oh! happy houso, could
you know what I suffer in now viewing you from this
spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more !
— And you, ye well-known trees ! — but you will con-
tinue the same. — No leaf will decay because we are
removed, nor any branch become motionless although
we can observe you no longer ! — No ; you will con-
tinue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the
regret you occasion, and insensible of any change in
those who walk under your shade ! — But who will
remain to enjoy you ? w
CHAPTER VI.
The first part of their journey was performed in
too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than
tedious and unpleasant. But as they drew towards
the end of it, their interest in the appearance of a
country which they were to inhabit overcame their
dejection, and a view of Barton Valley as Vhe^f «».\\-
36 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
tered it gave them cheerfulness. It was a pleasant,
fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture. After
winding along it for more than a mile, they reached
their own house. A small green court was the whole
of its demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate ad-
mitted them into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was
comfortable and compact ; but as a cottage it was
defective, for the building was regular, the roof was
tiled, the window-shutters were not painted green,
nor were the walls covered with honeysuckles. A
narrow passage led directly through the house into
the garden behind. On each side of the entrance
was a sitting-room, about sixteen feet square ; and
beyond them were the offices and the stairs. Four
bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the
house. It had not been built many years, and was
in good repair. In comparison of Norland, it was
poor and small indeed ! — but the tears which recol-
lection called forth as they entered the house were
soon dried away. They were cheered by the joy of
the servants on their arrival, and each for the sake
of the others resolved to appear happy. It was very
early in September ; the season was fine, and from
first seeing the place under the advantage of good
weather, they received an impression in its favour
which was of material service in recommending it to
their lasting approbation.
The situation of the house was good. High hills
rose immediately behind, and at no great distance on
each side ; some of which were open downs, the
others cultivated and woody. The village of Barton
was chiefly on one of these hills, and formed a
•MM AND MMSIBILITY. 37
pleasant tIow from the cottage window The pro-
spect in front was more extensive} it commanded
the whole of the valley, and reached into the country
beyond. The hills w~ich surrounded the cottage
terminated the valley in that direction j under an-
other name, and in another course, it branched out
again between two of the ateepeat of them*
With the aiie and furniture of the home Bin.
Daahwood waa upon the whole well eatiefied ; for
though her former atyle of life rendered many ad-
ditions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and
improve was a delight to her j and she had at this
time ready money enough to supply all that was
wanted of greater elegance to the apartments. " As
for the house itself, to be sure, " said she, " it is too
small for our family j but we will make ourselves
tolerably comfortable for the present, as it is too late
in the year for improvements. Perhaps in the spring,
if I have plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we
may think about building. These parlours are both
too small for such parties of our friends as I hope to
see often collected here } and I have some thoughts
of throwing the passage into one of them, with per-
haps a part of the other, and so leave the remainder
of that other for an entrance : this, with a new draw-
ing-room which may be easily added, and a bed-
chamber and garret above, will make it a very snug
little c ttage. I could wish the stairs were hand-
some. But one must not expect everything; though
I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen
them. I shall see how much I am beforehand with
38 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
the world in the spring, and we will plan our i
provement8 accordingly. "
In the mean time, till all these alterations could
made from the sayings of an income of five hundi
a-year by a woman who never saved in her life, th
were wise enough to be contented with the house
it was; and each of them was busy in arrangi
their particular concerns, and endeavouring, by p
clng around them their books and other possession
to form themselves a home. Marianne's pianofo:
was unpacked and properly disposed of; and Elino
drawings were affixed to the walls of their sittin
room.
In such employments as these they were int <
rupted soon after breakfast the next day by the e
trance of their landlord, who called to welcome the
to Barton, and to offer them every accommodate
from his own house and garden in which the
might at present be deficient. Sir John Middlet
was a good-looking man about forty. He had fc
merly visited at Stanhiil, but it was too long ago i
his young cousins to remember him. His count
nance was thoroughly good-humoured j and his ma
ners were as friendly as the style of his letter. Tin
arrival seemed to afford him real satisfaction, ai
their comfort to be an object of real solicitude to hii
He said much of his earnest desire of their living <
the most sociable terms with his family, and press
them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every d
till they were better settled at home, that, though r.
entreaties were carried to a point of perseverance b
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 3f)
ontl civility, they could not give offence. His kind-
icm was not confined to words ; for within an hour
sftcr he left them, a large basket full of panic n ntuiT
and fruit arrived from the park, which was followed
before the end of the day by a present of prune. He
intiiHtod moreover on conveying all their letter* to and
from the post for them, and would not be denied the
satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day.
Lady Middle ton had sent a very civil message by
him, denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs.
Dashwood as soon as she could be assured that her
\isit would be no inconvenience; and oh thiR message
wuh answered by an invitation equally polite, her lady-
ship was introduced to them the next day. -
They were of course very anxious to see a person
on whom so much of their comfort at Iinrton must
depend ; and the elegance of her appearance was
favourable to their wishcR. Lady Middleton whs
not more than six or seven and twenty; her face
was handsome, her figure tull and striking, mid her
address graceful. Her manners had all the elegance
-which her husband's wanted. But they would have
been improved by some share of his frankness and
VMinnth ; and her visit was long enough to del r:u t
Ki.iucthing from their first admiration, l.y showing
that though perfectly well-bred, she wa:* rc*-ei\cd,
cold, and had nothing to say for herself be\oud the
most common-place inquiry or remark.
Conversation, however, was not wanted, for Sir
John was very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken
the wise precaution of bringing with herjheir eldest
child, a line little boy about six \cars old, by which
40 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
means there was one subject always to be recurred
to by the ladies in case ct extremity ; for they had to
inquire his name and age, admire his beauty, and
ask him questions which his mother answered for
him, while he hung about her and held down his
head, to the great surprise of her ladyship, who won-
dered at his being so shy before company, as he could
make noise enough at home. On every formal visit
a child ought to be of the party, by way of provision
for discourse. In the present case it took up ten
minutes to determire whether the boy were most like
his fat!:cr or mother, and in what particular he re-
sembled either ; for of course everybody differed, and
(very body was astonished at the opinion of the
others.
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dash-
woods of debating on the rest of the children, as Sir
John would not leave the house without securing
their promise of dining at the park the next day.
CHAPTER VII.
Barton Park was about half a mile from the cot-
tage. The ladies had passed near it in their way
along the valley, but it was screened from their view
at home by the projection of a hill. The house was
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 41
large and handsome j and the Middletont lived in a
style of equal hospitality and elegance. The former
was for Sir John's gratification, the latter for that of
his lady. They were scarcely ever without so mo
friends staying with them in the house, and they kept
more company of every kind than any other family
in the neighbourhood. It was necessary to the hap-
piness of both ; for however dissimilar in temper and
outward behaviour, they strongly resembled each
other in that total want of talent and taste which
confined their employments, unconnected with such
as society produced; within a very narrow compass.
Sir John was a sportsman, Lady Middle ton a mother,
lie hunted and shot, and she humoured her children ;
and those were their only resources. Lady Middle-
ton had the advantage of being able to spoil her
children all the year round, while Sir John's inde-
pendent employments were in existence only half
the time. Continual engagements at home and
abroad, however, supplied all the deficiencies of na-
ture and education, — supported the good spirits of
Sir John, and gave exercise to the good-breeding of
his wife.
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance
of her table, and of all her domestic arrangements ;
and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoy-
ment in any of their parties. Hut Sir John's satis-
faction in society was much more real ; he delighted
in collecting about him more young people than his
house would hold, and the noisier they were the
better was he pleased. He was a blessing to all the
juvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer
42 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
he was for ever forming parties to eat cold ham and
chicken out of doors, and in winter his private balls
were numerous enough for any young lady who was
not suffering under the insatiable appetite of fif-
teen.
The arrival of a new family in the country was
always a matter of joy to him, and in every point of
view he was charmed with the inhabitants he had
now procured for his cottage at Barton. The Miss
Dashwoods were young, pretty, and unaffected. It
was enough to secure his good opinion ; for to be
unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to
make her mind as captivating as her person. The
friendliness of his disposition made him happy in
accommodating those whose situation might be con-
sidered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.
In showing kindness to his cousins, therefore, he
had the real satisfaction of a good heart j and in
settling a family of females only in his cottage, he
had all the satisfaction of a spoilsman ; for a sports-
man, though he esteems only those of his sex who
are sportsmen likewise, is not often desirous of en-
couraging their taste by admitting them to a residence
within his own manor.
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the
door of the house by Sir John, who welcomed them
to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity ; and as he
attended them to the drawing-room, repeated to the
young ladies the concern which the same subject had
drawn from him the day before, at being unable to
get any smart young men to meet them. They
would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides
AND SIXSIBIUTT 43
■elf; a particular friend who was staying at the
;, but who wm neither very young nor very gay.
hoped they would all excuse the smsllness of the
y f and could assure them it should never happen
igain. He had been to several families that
oing, in hopes of procuring some addition to
r number \ but it was moonlight, and everybody
fall of engagements. Luckily Lady Middleton s
bar had arrived at Barton within the last hour,
as she was a very cheerful, agreeable woman, he
kI the young ladies would not find it so very
aa they might imagine. The young ladies, as
as their mother, were perfectly satisfied with
ng two entire strangers of the party, and wished
10 more.
[ra > Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a
L-humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who
id a great deal, seemed very happy, and rather
ar. She was full of jokes and laughter, and be-
dinner was oyer had said many witty things on
subject of lovers and husbands ; hoped they had
left their hearts behind them in Sussex, and p ro-
od to see them blush whether they did or not,
ianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and
ed her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore
6 attacks, with an earnestness which gave Elinor
uore pain than could arise from such common-
i raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.
Lionel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed
lore adapted by resemblance of manner to be his
d, than Lady Middleton was to be his wife, or
Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother. Ho
41 SENSE AND 8ENSIBIL1TY.
was silent and grave. His appearance however was
not unpleasing, in spite of his being in the opinion
of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor,
for he was on the wrong side of five-and-tjiirty; but
though his face was not handsome, his countenance
was sensible, and his address was particularly gen-
tlemanlike.
There was nothing in any of the party which could
recommend them as companions to the Dash woods;
but the cold insipidity of Lady Middlcton was so
particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the
gravity of Colonel Brandon, and even the boisterous
mirth of Sir John and his mother-in-law, was inter-
esting. Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy
children after dinner, who pulled her about, tore her
clothes and put an end to every kind of discourse
except what related to themselves.
In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be
musical, she was invited to play. The instrument
was unlocked, everybody prepared to be charmed
and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request
went through the chief of the songs which Ladj
Middleton had brought into the family on her mar
riage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in th
6ame position on the pianoforte ; for her ladyship ha
celebrated that event by giving up music, althouf
by her mother's account she had played extreme
well, and by her own was very fond of it.
Marianne's performance was highly applaud
Sir John was loud in his admiration at the end
every song, and as loud in his conversation with
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 45
others while every song lasted. Lady Middlcton fre-
quently called him to order, wondered how any one's
attention could be diverted from music for a moment,
and asked Marianne to sing a particular song which
Marianne had just finished. Colonel Brandon alone,
of all the party, heard her without being in raptures.
He paid her only the compliment o{ attention ; and
she felt a respect for him on the occasion, which the
others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless
want of taste. His pleasure in music, though it
amounted not to that ecstatic delight which alone
could sympathise with her own, was estimable when
contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that
a man of fivc-aud-thirty might well have outlived all
acutcness of feeling and every exquisite power of en-
joyment. She was perfectly disposed to make every
allowance for the colonel's advanced state of life
which humanity required.
CHAPTER VIII.
Mrs. Jennings was a widow, with an ample join-
ture. She had only two daughters, both of whom
bhe had lived to see respectably married, and she had
46 SENSE AND 8ENSIBIL1TY.
now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest
of the world. In the promotion of this object she
was zealously active, as far as her ability reached, and
missed no opportunity of projecting weddings among
all the young people of her acquaintance. She was
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments,
and had enjoyed the advantage of raising the blushes
and the vanity of many a young lady by insinuations
of her power over such a young man ; and this kind
of discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at
Barton decisively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon
was very much in love with Marianne Dashwood.
She rather suspected it to be so, on the very first even-
ing of their being together, from his listening so
attentively while she sang to them ; and when the
visit was returned by the Middletons* dining at the
cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to
her again. It must be so. She was perfectly con-
vinced of it. It would be an excellent match, for he
was rich and she was handsome. Mrs. Jennings had
been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married,
ever since her connexion with Sir John first brought
him to her knowledge ; and she was always anxious
to get a good husband for every pretty girl.
The immediate advantage to herself was by no
means inconsiderable, for it supplied her with endless
jokes against them both. At the park she laughed
at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne. To
the former her raillery was probably, as far as it re-
garded only himself, perfectly indifferent; but to
the latter it was at first incomprehensible ; and when
its object was understood, she hardly knew whether
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 47
io«t to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its imper-
nence, for she considered it as an unfeeling rcflec-
on on the colonel's advanced years, and on his for-
> rn condition as an old bachelor.
Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man Ave
cars younger than herself so exceedingly ancient
s he appeared to the youthful fancy of her daughter,
cntured to clear Mrs. Jennings from the probability
f wishing to throw ridicule on his age.
" But at leant, mamma, you cannot deny the ab-
urdity of the accusation, though you may not think
b intentionally ill-natured. Colonel Brandon is
ertainly younger than Mrs. Jennings, but he is old
nough to be my father ; and if he were ever ani-
lated enough to be in love, must have long outlived
very Herniation of the kind. It is too ridiculous !
Vhen is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and
niirmity will not protect liimP "
" Infirmity! " tmid Elinor; " do you call Colonel
Irandon iniirm P I can cosily suppose that his age
iay appear much greater to you than to my mother;
•ut you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having
he use of his limbs ! "
44 Did not you hear him complain of the rhcuma-
isni? and iw not that the commonest infirmity of dc-
•lining lifer 1 "
44 My dearest child, " said her mother laughing,
'at this rate you muHt be in continual terror of my
Way ; and it must seem to you a miracle that my
life 1i:ih been extended to the advanced age of forty. "
" Maininu, you are not doing nic justice. I know
very well that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to
48 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
make his friends yet apprehensive of losing him ii
the course of nature. He may live twenty year
longer. But thirty-five has nothing to do witl
matrimony. "
" Perhaps, " said Elinor, " thirty-five and seventeen
had better not have anything to do with matrimonj
together. But if there should by any chance happen
to be a woman who is single at seven-and-twenty, I
should not think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five
any objection to his marrying her. "
" A woman of seven-and-twenty, " said Marianne,
after pausing a moment, " can never hope to feel or
inspire affection again; and if her home be uncom-
fortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she
might bring herself to submit to the offices of a
nurse, for the sake of the provision and security of a
wife. In his marrying such a woman therefore there
would be nothing unsuitable. It would be a com-
pact of convenience, and the world would be satisfied
In my eyes it would be no marriage at all, but tha
would be nothing. To me it would seem only
commercial exchange, in which each wished to 1
benefited at the expense of the other. "
" It would be impossible, I know, " replied Eiinc
" to convince you that a woman of seven-and-twer
could feel for a man of thirty-five anything n <
enough to love, to make him a desirable compan
to her. But I must object to your dooming Cole
Brandon and his wife to the constant confinemer
a sick chamber, merely because he chanced to c
plain yesterday (a very cold, damp day) of a s
rheumatic feel in one of his shoulders. "
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 19
" But he talked of flannel waistcoats, " said Mari-
ne ; " and with me a flannel waistcoat is invariably
nnectcd with aches, cramps, rheumatisms, and
ery species of ailment that can afllict the old and
e feeble. "
M Had he been only in a violent fever, you would
t have despised him half so much. Confess, Mari-
ne, is not there something interesting to you in
b flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a
rer? "
Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room,
Mamma, " said Marianne, " I have an alarm on the
hject of illness, which I cannot conceal from you.
im sure Kdward Ferrars is not well. We have
w been here almost a fortnight, and yet he does
t come. Nothing but real indisposition could
maion this extraordinary delay. What else can
tain him at Norland? "
" ll;id you any idea of his coming so soon P " said
•s. Dash wood. " I had none. On the contrary,
I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject, it has
n\ in recollecting that he sometimes showed a
nt of pleasure and readiness in accepting my ill-
ation, when I talked of his coming to Hartou.
►oh Elinor expect him already P "
u I have never mentioned it to her but of course
j must. "
M I rather think yon are mistaken, for when I was
king to her yesterday of getting a new grale for
1 spare bedchamber, she observed that there was
immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that
3 room would be wanted for some time. "
K. vor. I.
50 HENfiE AN [j flEXSIBtLITY.
w How strange this is ! what can be the raear
of it! But the whole of their behaviour to t
other has been unaccountable ! How cold, ]
composed were their last adieus [ How lanj
their conversation the last eve fling of their bi
together ! In Efiwnrd's farewell there was no
t mil- t ion between Elinor and me % it was the g
wishes of an affectionate brother to both, Ti
did I leave them purposely together in the cour*
the last morning, and each time did he most u
count ably fallow me out of the room. And Eli
in q iiiting Norland and Edward, cried not as I
Even now her a elf-command is invariable. *W
is she dejected or melancholy ? When does she
to avoid society, or appear restless and dissatii
in it? "
CHAPTER IX.
The Dash woods were now settled at Barton n
tolerable enmfort to the receives. The bouse and
garden, with all the objects surroumling them, i
now become familiar; and tbe ordinary pursuits w
liinl given to Norland balf its charms, were engt
in again with far greater enjoyment than Nor
had been able to afford at ee the loss of their fat
Sir John Middleton, who called on them erery
•MSB AND SENSIBILITY. 51
for the first fortnight, and who was not in the habit
of seeing much occupation at home, could not con-
ceal his amasement on finding thorn always em-
ployed.
Their visitors, except those from Barton Park,
were not many ; for, in spite of Sir John's urgent
entreaties that they would mix more in the neigh-
bourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage
being always at their service, the independence of
Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame the wish of society
for her children ; and she was resolute in declining
to visit any family beyond the distance of a walk.
There were but few who could be so classed ; and it
was not all of them that were attainable. About a
mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow
winding valley of Allenham, which issued from that
of Barton, as formerly described, the girU had, in one
of their earliest walks, discovered an ancient re-
spectable-looking mansion, which, by reminding
them a little of Norland, interested their imagination,
and made them wish to be better acquainted with it.
But they learnt, on inquiry, that its possessor, an
elderly lady of very good character, was unfortunately
too infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred
from home.
The whole country about them abounded in beau-
tiful walks. The high downs which invited them
from almost every window of the cottage to seek the
exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a
happy alternative when the dirt of the valleys be-
ncath shut up their superior beauties ; and towards
one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one
52 8ENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by
the partial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable
longer to bear the confinement which the settled rain
of the two preceding days had occasioned. The wea-
ther was not tempting enough to draw the two others
from their pencil and their book, in spite of Mari-
anne's declaration that the day would be lastingly
fair, and that eTery threatening cloud would be
drawn off from their hills ; and the two girls set off
together.
They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their
own penetration at every glimpse of blue sky ; and
when they caught in their faces the animating gales
of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fears
which had prevented their mother and Elinor from
sharing such delightful sensations.
" Is there a felicity in the world, " said Marianne,
" superior to this ? — Margaret, we will walk here at
least two hours. "
Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way
against the wind, resisting it with laughing delight
for about twenty minutes longer, when suddenly the
clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain set
full in their face. Chagrined and surprised, they
were obliged, though unwillingly, to turn back, for
no shelter was nearer than their own house. One
consolation however remained for them, to which the
exigence of the moment gave more than usual pro-
priety ; it was that of running with all possible speed
down the steep side of the hill which led imme-
diately to their garden gate.
They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage,
SEME AMD SENSIBILITY. 53
a false step brought her suddenly to the ground,
. Margaret, unable to stop herself to assist her,
i involuntarily hurried along, and reached the
torn in safety.
I gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers
{ring round him, wan passing up the hill and
Sin a few yards of Marianne, when her accident
•pened. He put down his gun and ran to her
stance. She had raised herself from the ground,
her foot had been twisted in the fall, and she was
rccly able to stand. The gentleman offered his
rices, and perceiving that her modesty declined
at her situation rendered necessary, took her up
[lis arms without further delay, and carried her
vn the hill. Then passing through the garden,
gate of which had been left open by Margaret, he
e her directly into the house, whither Margaret
i just arrived, and quitted not his hold till he had
ted her in a chair in the parlour.
Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at
ir entrance, and while the eyes of both were fixed
him with an evident wonder and a secret admi-
on which equally sprang from his appearance, lie
logiscd for his intrusion by relating its cause, in
nanner so frank and so graceful, that his person,
ich was uncommonly handsome, received addi-
lal charms from his voice and expression. Had
been even old, ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and
dness of Mrs. Dashwood would have been se-
ed by any act of attention to her child ; but the
uencc of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an in-
?8t to the action which came home to her feelings
54 SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
She thanked him again and again, and, with I
sweetness of address which always attended her, in
vited him to he seated. But this he declined, as h <
was dirty and wet. Mrs. Dashwood then begged t <
know to whom she was obliged. His name, he re
plied, was Willoughby, and his present home was a
Allenham, from whence he hoped she would alio*
him the honour of calling to-morrow to inquire aftei
Miss Dashwood. The honour was readily granted,
and he then departed, to make himself still more in-
teresting, in the midst of a heavy rain.
His manly beauty and more than common grace-
fulness were instantly the theme of general admira-
tion, and the laugh which his gallantry raised against
Marianne received particular spirit from his exterioi
attractions. Marianne herself had seen less of hi
person than the rest, for the confusion which crim
soned oyer her face, on his lifting her up, had robbe
her of the power of regarding him after their ente
ing the house. But she had seen enough of him
join in all the admiration of the others, and with
energy which always adorned her praise. His p
son and air were equal to what her fancy had e
drawn for the hero of a favourite story ; and in
carrying her into the house with so little prev:
formality, there was a rapidity of thought which
ticularly recommended the action to her. £
circumstance belonging to him was interesting,
name was good, his residence was in their favc
Tillage, and she soon found out that of all i
dresses a shooting-jacket was the most beco
Her imagination was busy, her reflections
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 55
pleasant, and the pain of a sprained am le was dis-
regarded.
Sir John called on them as soon as the next in*
tcrval of f« ir weather that morning allowed him to
get out of doors ; and Marianne's accident being re-
lated to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew
any gentleman of the name of Willoughby at Al-
lenham.
" Willoughby f cried Sir John } " what, is he in
the country P That is good news however ; I will
ride over to-morrow, and ask him to dinner on
Thursday. "
" You know him then, " said Mrs. Dash wood.
" Know him ! to be sure I do. Why, he is down
here every year. "
" And what sort of a young man is he P "
" As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure
you. A very decent shot, and there is not a bolder
rider in England. "
" And is that all you can say for him? " cried
Marianne, indignantly. " But what are his manners
on more intimate acquaintance P what his pursuits,
his talents and genius ? n
Sir John was rather puzzled.
" Upon my soul, " said he, " I do not know much
about him as to all that. But he is a pleasant, good-
humoured fellow, and has got the nicest little black
bitch of a pointer I ever saw. Was she out with
him to-day ?
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the
colour of Mr. Willoughby's pointer, than he could
describe to her the shades of his mind.
56 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
* But who is he ? " said Elinor. " Where does he
come from ? Has he a house at Allenham ? "
On this point Sir John could give more certain
intelligence ; and he told them that Mr. Willoughby
had no property of his own in the country; that he
resided there only while he was visiting the old lady
at Allenham Court, to whom he was related, and
whose possessions he was to inherit; adding, " Yes,
yes, he is very well worth catching, I can tell you,
Miss Dashwood ; he has a pretty little estate of his
own in Somersetshire besides ; and if I were you, I
would not give him up to my younger sister in spite
of all this tumbling down hills. Miss Marianne
roust not expect to have all the men to herself.
Brandon will be jealous, if she does not take care. "
" I do not believe, " said Mrs. Dashwood, with a
good-humoured smile, " that Mr. Willoughby will be
incommoded by the attempts of either of my daugh-
ters towards what you call catching him. It is not
an employment to which they have been brought up.
Men are very safe with us, let them be ever so rich.
I am glad to find, however, from what you say, that
he is a respectable young man, and one whose ac-
quaintance will not be ineligible. "
" He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever
lived, " repeated Sir John. " I remember last Christ-
mas, at a little hop at the park, he danced from eight
o'clock till four, without once sitting down. "
" Did he indeed ? " cried Marianne, with sparkling
eyes, " and with elegance, with spirit ? "
" Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to
covert. "
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. . p > 7
" That is what I like ; thnt is what a young man
night to be. Whatever bo his pursuits, his enger-
iess in them should know no moderation, and leave
dm no sense of fatigue. "
" Ay, ay, I see how it will bo, " said Sir John,
1 1 see how it will be. You will be Betting your c:ip
t him now, and never think of poor Brandon. "
" That i* an expression, Sir John, " said Marianne,
rarmly, " which I particularly dislike. I abhor every
ommon-plnce phrase by which wit is intended ; and
setting one's cap at a man,'and ( making a conquest,'
re the most odiouR of all. Their tendency is grows
nd illiberal; and if their construction could ever be
eemed clever, time has long ago destroyed all its
tigenuity. "
Sir John did not much understand this reproof;
ut he laughed as heartily as if he did, and then re-
lied,
•'Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say
ne way or other. Poor Brandon! he is quite sniit-
•n already, and he is very well worth setting your
ip at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumbling
bout and spraining of ancles. "
HI
*
CHAPTER X.
Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more ele
gance than precision, styled Wiiloughby, called at th
cottage early the next morning to make his persona
inquiries. He was received by Mrs. Dashwood wit!
more than politeness — with a kindness which Si
John's account of him and her own gratitude prompt
ed; and everything that passed during the visit
tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutua
affection, and domestic comfort of the family to whon
accident had now introduced him. Of their persona
charms he had not required a second interview to h
convinced.
Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regula
features, and a remarkably pretty figure. Mariann
was still handsomer. Her form, though not so coi
rect as her sister's, in having the advantage of heighl
was more striking ; and her face was so lovely, tha
when in the common cant of praise she was called :
beautiful girl, truth was less violently outraged thai
usually happens. Her skin was very brown, but
from its transparency, her complexion was uncom
monly brilliant ; her features were all good ; he
smile was sweet and attractive ; and in her eyes
which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, ai
eagerness, which could hardly be seen without de
light. From Wiiloughby their expression was a
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 59
first held back, by the embarrassment which the re-
membrance of his assistance created. But when this
passed away, when her spirits became collected — when
she saw that to the perfect good-breeding of the gen-
tleman, he united frankness and vivacity, and, above
all, when she heard him declare that of music and
dancing he was passionately fond, she gave him such
a look of approbation as secured the largest share
of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay.
It was only necessary to mention any favourite
amusement to engage her to talk. She could not
be silent when such points were introduced, and she
had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion.
They speedily discovered that their enjoyment of
dancing and music was mutual, and that it arose
from a general conformity of judgment in all that re-
lated to eith > r. Encouraged by this to a farther ex-
amination of his opinions, she proceeded to question
h m on the subject of books ; her favourite authors
were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rap-
turous a delight, that any young man of fivc-aiid-
twenty must have been insensible indeed, not to be-
come an immediate convert to the excellence of such
works, however disregarded before. Their taste was
strikingly alike. The same books, the same pas-
sages were idolised by each — or, if any diiFerenco
appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no longer
than till the force of her arguments and the bright-
ness of her eyes could be displayed. He acquieHeed
in all her decisions, caught all her enthusiasm, and,
long before his visit concluded, they conversed with
the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance.
30 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" Well, Marianne, " said Elinor, as soon as he
left them, " for one morning I think you have t
pretty well. You have already ascertained
Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter of
portance. You know what he thinks of Co^
and Scott ; you are certain of his estimating i
beauties as he ought, and you have received e
assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is
per. But how is your acquaintance to be long
ported, under such extraordinary despatch of e
subject for discourse P You will soon have exhau
each favourite topic. Another meeting will su
to explain his sentiments on picturesque beauty
second marriages, and thin you can have not
farther to ask. " —
" Elinor, " cried Marianne, " is this fair P is
just ? are my ideas so scanty ? But I see what
mean. I have been too much at my ease, too ha
too frank. I have erred against every common-p
notion of decorum ; I have been open and sin
where I ought to have been reserved, spiritless, c
and deceitful : — had I talked only of the weather
the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten
nutes, this reproach would have been spared . "
" My love, " said her mother, " you must no
offended with Elinor — she was only in jest. I she
scold her myself, if she were capable of wishiii]
check the delight of your conversation with our i
friend. " Marianne was softened in a moment.
Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of
pleasure in their acquaintance which an evident v
of improving it could offer. He came to them e^s
8EN8B AND SENSIBILITY. 01
day. To inquire after Marianne war at first bin ex-
cuse ; but the encouragement of his reception, to
Which every day gave greater kind newt, made hucIi
rn excuse unnecessary beforo it had ceased to ho
aossiMe, by Marianne's perfect recovery. She was
ponfincd for some days to the house ; but never had
any confinement been less irksome. Willoughby
was a young man of good abilities, quick imagina-
tion, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners.
He was exactly formed to eng ige Marianne's heart ;
for with all thin, he joined not only a captivating
person, but a natural ardour of mind which was now
roused and increased by the cxamp'e of her own, and
which recommended him to her affection beyond
everything else.
His society became gradually her most exquisite
enjoyment. They read, they talked, they sang toge-
ther; hit* musical talents were considerable ; and he
read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward
had unfortunately wanted.
In Mra. Dashwood's estimation, he was as faultless
an in Marianne's; and Elinor saw nothing to cen-
•ure in him but a propensity, in which he strongly
VMembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of say-
Jig too much what he thought on every occasion,
without attention to persons or circumstances. In
tastily forming and giving his opinion of other peo-
ple, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment
of undivided attention where his heart was engaged,
snd in slighting too easily the forms of worldly pro-
priety, he displayed a want of caution which Elinor
62 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
could not approve, in spite of all that he and Mari-
anne could say in its support.
Marianne began now to perceive that the despera-
tion which had seized her at sixteen and a half, of
ever seeing a man who could satisfy her ideas of per-
fection, had been rash and unjustifiable. Wiiioughby
was all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy
hour, and in every brighter period, as capable of at-
taching her; and his behaviour declared his wishes to
be in that respect as earnest, as his abilities were
strong.
Her mother too, in whose mind not one specula-
tive thought of their marriage had been raised by bis
prospect of riches, was led before the end of a week
to hope and expect it, and secretly to congratulate
herself on having gained two such sons-in-law as
Edward and Wiiioughby.
Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which
had so early been discovered by his friends, now first
became perceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be
noticed by them. Their attention and wit were
drawn off to his more fortunate rival ; and the raillery
which the other had incurred before any partiality
arose, was removed when his feelings began really to
call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe
that the sentiments which Mrs. Jennings had as-
signed him for her own satisfaction, were now ac-
tually excited by her sister; and that however a gene-
ral resemblance of disposition between the parties
might forward the affection of Mr. Wiiioughby, an
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 63
equally striking opposition of character wan no hin-
drance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. She naw
it with concern; for what could a silent man of five-
and-thirty hope, when opposed by a very lively one
of fi ve-and-twenty P and as she could not even wish
him succesHful, she heartily wished him indifferent.
She liked him — in spite of his gravity and reserve,
she beheld in him an object of interest. His man-
ners, though serious, were mild; and his reserve
appeared rather the result of some oppression of spi-
rits, than of any natural gloominess of temper. Sir
John had dropped hints of pant injuries and disappoint-
ments, which justified her belief of his being an
unfortunate man, and she regarded him with respect
and compassion.
Perhaps hIic pitied nnd esteemed him the more
because he was slighted by Willoughby and Mari-
anne, who, prejudiced against him for being neither
lively nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his
merits.
" Brandon is just the kind of man, " said Wil-
loughby one day, when they were talking of him to-
gether, " whom everybody speoks well of, and nobody
cores about ; whom all are delighted to see, and no-
body remcmbcrH to talk to. "
" That is exactly what I think of him, " cried
Marianne.
u Do not bonHt of it, however, " said Elinor, " for
it ia injustice in both of }ou. He iH highly CHtcciucd
by all the family at the park, and I never Bee him
ti\ < ; <'lf without taking pains to converse with him. "
" That he is patronised by you, " replied \S\\-
6i SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
loughby, " is certainly in his favour ; but as fc
esteem of the others, it is a reproach in itself,
would submit to the indignity of being appro v
such women as Lady Middlcton and Mrs. Jem
that could command the indifference of an-
else? "
" But perhaps the abuse of such people as
self and Marianne will make amends for the r
©f Lady Middleton and her mother. If their ]
is censure, your censure may be praise ; for the
not more undiscerning, than you are prejudice
unjust. "
" In defence of your proteg€, you can en
saucy. "
" My protege^ as you call him, is a sensible
and sense will always have attractions for me.
Marianne, even in a man between thirty and
He has seen a great deal of the world ; has
abroad ; has read, and has a thinking mind. I
found him capable of giving me much inforn
on various subjects, and he has always answer*
inquiries with the readiness of good-breeding
good-nature. "
" That is to say, " cried Marianne, contempt™
" he has told you that in the East Indies the cl
is hot, and the mosquitoes are troublesome. "
" He would have told me so, I doubt not,
made any such inquiries ; but they happened
points on which I had been previously informec
" Perhaps, " said Willoughby, " his observi
may have extended to the existence of nabobs
inohrs, and palanquins. "
8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 05
" I may venture to say that his observations have
stretched much farther than your candour. But why
should you dislike him P**
" I do not dislike him. I consider him, on tho
contrary, as a very respectable man, who hns every-
body's good word and nobody's notice ; who bus
more money than he can spend, more time than
he knows how to employ, and two new coats every
year. "
" Add to which, " cried Marianne, " that he has
neither genius, taste, nor spirit. That his under-
standing has no brilliancy, his feelings no ardour,
and his voice no expression. "
" You decide on his imperfections so much in the
mass, " replied Elinor, " and so much on the strength
of your own imagination, that the commendation I
am able to give of him is comparatively cold and
insipid. I can only pronounce him to he a sensible
man, well-bred, well-informed, of gentle address, and
I believe possessing an amiable heart. "
" Miss Dashwood, " cried Willoughby, " you are
now using me unkindly. You are endoavourng to
disarm me by reason, and to convince me against my
will. But it will not do. You shall find me as
stubborn as you can be artful. I have three unan-
swerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon : ho
has threatened me with rain when I wanted it to he
fine ; he lias found fault with the hanging of my
curricle, and I cannot persuade him to buy my
brown mare. If it will bo any satisfaction to you,
however, to be told, that I believe his character to
be in other respects irreproachable, I am .r»ady to
F VOL. 1.
66 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
confess it. And in return for an acknowledgment
which must give me some pain, you cannot deny ma
the privilege of disliking him as much as ever.*
CHAPTER XT.
Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters ima-
gined, when they first came into Devonshire, that
so many engagements would arise to occupy their
time as shortly presented themselves, or that they
should have such frequent invitations and such con-
stant visitors as to leave them little leisure for seri-
ous employment. Yet such was the case. When
Marianne was recovered, the schemes of amusement
at home and abroad which Sir John had been pre-
viously forming were put in execution. The private
balls at the park then began ; and parties on the
water were made and accomplished as often as a
showery October would allow. In every meeting of
the kind, Willoughby was included ; and the ease
and familiarity which naturally attended these parties
were exactly calculated to give increasing intimacy
to his acquaintance with the Dashwoods, to afford
him an opportunity of witnessing the excellences of
Marianne, of marking his animated admiration of
her, and of receiving, in her behaviour to himself, the
most pointed assurance of her affection.
•EMM AND SENSIBILITY. 07
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.
the only wished Oat It were leet openly shown,
tnd once or twice did -venture to suggeet the pro*
trier/ of tome self-command to Marianne. But
V arianne abhorred all concealment where no real
Jisgrace ponld attend nnreaerre j and to aim at the
jestraint of sentiments which were not in themselves
flaudible, appeared to her not merely an unneces-
sary effort, bat a disgraceful anbjeetion of reason to
common-place and mistaken notions.'Willoughby
thought the same ; and their behaviour, at all times,
was an illustration of their opinions.
When he was present, she had no eyes for any one
else. Everything he did wis right Everything he
said wn clever. If their evenings at the park were
concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the
rest of the party to get her a good hand. If dancing
formed the amusement of the night, they were part-
ners for half the time ; and when obliged to separate
for a couple of dances, were careful to stand together,
tnd scarcely spoke a word to anybody else. Such
eonduct made them of course most exceedingly
laughed at; but ridicule could not shame, and
seemed hardly to provoke them.
Mrs. Dashwood entered Into all their feelings with
a warmth which left her no inclination for checking
mis excessive display of them. To her it was but
the natural consequence of a strong affection in a
prang and ardent mind.
This was the season of happiness to Marianne.
Her heart was deroted to Willoughby, and the fond
attachment to Norland which she brought with her
1
68 8EN8B AND SENSIBILITY.
from Sussex, wai more likely to be softened thin the
1 1 iuI thought it possible before, by the charms which
IiIh society bestowed on her present home.
Minor's happiness was not so great. Her heart
whn not ho much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their
amusements so pure. They afforded her no com-
panion that could make amends for what'she had
lift behind, nor that could teach her to think of Nor-
land with less regret than ever. Neither Lady Hid-
(ll n to n nor Mrs. Jennings could supply to her the
conversation she missed j although the latter was an
everlasting talker, and from the first had regarded her
with a kindness which insured her a large share of
her discount. She had already repeated her own
history to Elinor three or four times ; and had Eli-
nor's memory boon equal to her means of improve-
ment, she might have known very early in her ac-
quaintance all the particulars of Mr. Jennings's last
illness, and what he said to his wife a few minutes
before lie died. Lady Middleton was more agree-
able than her mother, only in being more silent
Elinor needed little observation to perceive that her
reserve was a mere calmness of manner with which
sense had nothing to do. Towards her husband and
mother she was the same as to them ; and intimacy
was therefore neither to be looked for nor desired.
She had nothing to say one day that she had not said
the day before. Her insipidity was invariable, for
even her spirits were always the same ; and though
she did not oppose the parties arranged by her hus-
band, provided everything were conducted in style
and her two eldest children attended her, she never
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. CO
appeared to receive more enjoyment from them,
than she might have experienced in sitting at home ;
— and so little did her presence add to the pleasure
of the others, by any share in their conversation, that
they were sometimes only reminded of her being
amongst them by her solicitude about her troublesome
boys.
In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaint-
ance, did Elinor find a person who could in any
degree claim the respect of abilities, excite the in-
terest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion.
Willoughby was out of the question. Her admira-
tion and regsrd, even her sisterly regard, was all his
own : but he was a lover ; his attentions were wholly
Marianne's, and a far less agreeable man might have
been more generally pleasing. Colonel Brandon,
unfortunately for himself, had no such encourage-
ment to think only of Marianne, and in conversing
with Elinor he found the greatest consolation for the
total indifference of her sister.
Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had
reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love
had already been known by him. This suspicion
was given by some words which accidentally dropt
from him one evening at the park, when they were
sitting down together by mutual consent, while the
others were dancing. His eyes were fixed on Mari-
anne, and, after a silence of some minutes, he said
with a faint smile, " Your sister, I understand, does
not approve of second attachments. "
" No, " replied Elinor j " her opinions are all ro-
mantic. "
70 8EN8B AMD SENSIBILITY.
" Or rather, as I believe, she considers t'.em in
possible to exist. "
" I believe she does. But how she contrives
without reflecting on the character of her own fathe
who had himself two wives, I know not. A fe 1
years however will settle her opinions on the reasoi
able basis of common sense and observation; an
then they may be more easy to define and to justif
than they now are, by anybody but herself. "
" This will probably be the case, " he replied
" and yet there is something so amiable in the pre
judices of a young mind, that one is sorry to se
them give way to the reception of more genera
opinions. "
" I cannot agree with you there, " said Elinoi
" There are inconveniences attending such feeling
as Marianne's, which all the charms of enthusiav
and ignorance of the world cannot atone for. H
systems have all the unfortunate tendency of setti'
propriety at nought ; and a better acquaintance w
the world is what I look forward to as her grea'
possible advantage. "
After a short pause he resumed the converts
by saying —
" Does your sister make no distinction in
objections against a second attachment ? or
equally criminal in everybody ? Are those
have been disappointed in their first choice, w
from the inconstancy of its object, or the pe
ness of circumstances, to be equally indiffere
ing the rest of their lives P "
l •* Upon my word, I am not acquainted *
SENS! AMD SMSIBILITT. 71
minutto of her principles. I only know that I never
yet heard her adroit any instance of a aecond attach-
ment's being pardonable *
" This, " said he, M cannot hold \ bnt a change, a
total change of sentiments — No, no, do not desire it,
-—for when the romantic refinements of a young
mind are obliged to giro way, how frequently are
they succeeded by such opinions as are but too com-
mon, and too dangerous f I speak from experience.
I once knew a lady who in temper and mind greatly
resembled your sister, who thought and Judged like
her, but who from an inforced change— from a series
of unfortunate circumstances " Here he stopped
suddenly; appeared to think that he had said too
much, and by his countenance gave rise to conjec-
tures which might not otherwise hare entered
Elinor's head. The lady would probably have pass-
ed without suspicion, had he not convinced Miss
Dathwood that what concerned her ought not to es-
cape his lips. As it was, it required but a slight
effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender
recollection of past regard. Elinor attempted no
more. But Marianne, in her place, would not have
done so little. The whole story would have been
•pecdily formed under her active imagination, and
everything established in the most melancholy order
of disastrous love.
^■mk
72
CHAPTER XII.
As Elinor and Marianne were walking together
the next morning, the latter communicated a piece of
news to her sister, which, in spite of ail that she knew
before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,
surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both.
Marianne told her, with the greatest delight, that
" Willoughby had given her a horse, one that he had
bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which
was exactly calculated to carry a woman. Without
considering that it was not in her mother's plan to
keep any horse — that if she were to alter her resolu-
tion in favour of this gift, she must buy another for
the servant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after
all, build a stable to receive them — she had accepted
the present without hesitation, and told her sister of
it in raptures.
" He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire
immediately for it, " she added, " and when it arrives,
we will ride every day. You shall share its use with
me. Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight
of a gallop on some of these downs. "
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a
dream of felicity, to comprehend all the unhappy
truths which attended the affair, and for some time
she refused to submit to them. As to an additional
servant, the expense would be a trifle ; mamma, she
r as sure, would never object to it ; and any horse
MWn AM •■NUBILITY. 13
do for him j ha might always get one at the
as to a stable, the mmat abed would bo sunV
Elinor then Tentured to doubt the propriety
reeeiYing such a present from a man ao little,
least ao lately known to her. This was too
m are mistaken, Elinor, " said aha warmly, " in
tag I know very little of Wllloughby. I have
own him long indeed, but I am much better
ntod with him than I am with any other cree-
i the world, except yourself and mamma. It
time or opportunity that la to determine in-
I — it Is disposition alone. Seren years would
lAcient to make some people acquainted with
(her, and seren days are more than enough for
I should hold myself guilty of greater un-
ity in accepting a horse from my brother .than
Wlloughby. Of John I know very little,
we have lived together for years) but of
ghby my judgment has long been formed/ 9
or thought it wisest to touch that point no
She knew her sister's temper. Opposition
tender a subject would only attach her the
o her own opinion. But by an appeal to her
n for her mother, by representing the inconye-
i which that indulgent mother must draw on
if (as would probably be the case) she con-
to this increase of establishment, Marianne
> rtly subdued ; and she promised not to tempt
ther to such imprudent kindness by mention-
s offer, and to tell Willoughby when she saw
xt, that it must be declined.
74
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
She was faithful to her word; and when Wil-
loughby called at the cottage, the same day, Elinor
heard her express her disappointment to him in a
low voice, on being obliged to forego the acceptance
of his present. The reasons for this alteration were
at the same time related, and they were such as to
make farther entreaty on his side impossible. His
concern, however, was very apparent; and after ex-
pressing it with earnestness, he added in the same
low voice — " But, Marianne, the horse is still yours,
though you cannot use it now. I shall keep it only
till you can claim it. When you leave Barton to
form your own establishment in a more lasting home,
Queen Mab shall receive you. w
This was all overheard by Miss Dash wood; and in
the whole of the sentence, in his manner of pro-
nouncing it, and in his addressing her sister by her
Christian name alone, she instantly saw an intimacy
so decided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect
agreement between them. From that moment she
doubted not of their being engaged to each other;
and the belief of it created no other surprise, than
that she, or any of *~ieir friends, should be left by
tempers so frank to discover it by accident.
Margaret related something to her the next day
which placed this matter in a still clearer light.
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with
them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the
parlour with only him and Marianne, had had oppor-
tunity for observations, which, with a most important
face, she communicated to her eldest sister, when
they were next by themselves.
! Ettaor, " she cried, M I hare such a Mcrtt
pom about Marianne. I am rare she will be
to Mr. WiUoughby Tory soon/ 1
1 have said so, " replied Elinor, " almost trery
• they first met on High-church Down j and
ft not known each other a week, I believe,
•em ware certain that Marianne wore hie pie*
and her neck | but It tamed oat to be only
Jataro of our e^eat-ancW 9
t Indeed this le quite another thing. I am
ry will be married yery toon, for he hae got a
her hair. "
ae care, Margaret It may he only the hair
> great-uncle of his. "
t indeed, Elinor, it la Marianne's. I am
rare it ie 9 for I saw him out it oft Lett
iter tea, when you and mamma went out of
m, they were whispering and talking together
ae could be, and he eeemed to he begging
ing of her, and presently he took up her sds*
1 cut off a long lock of her hair, for it wai all
1 down her back ; and he kitted, it, and fold-
> in a piece of white paper, and put it into his
book/
i such particulars, stated on such authority,
could not withhold her credit : nor was she
i to it, for the circumstance was in perfect
with what she had heard and seen herself.
;aret's sagacity was not always displayed in a
satisfactory to her sister. " When Mrs. Jen-
ttacked her one evening at the park, to give
le of the young man who was Elinor's parti-
76 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
cular favourite, which had been long a matter of ]
curiosity to her, Margaret answered by lookin
her sister, and saying, " I must not tell, ms
Elinor ?*
This of course made everybody laugh ; and £
tried to laugh too. But the effort was painful,
was convinced that Margaret had fixed on a pc
whose name she could not bear with composui
become a standing joke with Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne felt for her most sincerely j but sh <
more harm than good to the cause, by turning
red, and saying in an angry manner to Margare
41 Remember that whatever your conjectures
be, you have no right to repeat them.*
" I never had any conjectures about it,* re]
Margaret ; " it was you who told me of it yours*
This increased the mirth of the company, and ]
garet was eagerly pressed to say something more
" Oh ! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all a
it, " said Mrs. Jennings. " What is the gentles
name? "
" I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very
what it is ; and I know where he is too. "
" Tes, yes, we can guess where he is ; at his
house at Norland, to be sure. He is the curat
the parish, I dare say. "
" No, that he is not. He is of no professic
alL "
" Margaret, " said Marianne with great war
u you know that all this is an invention of your <
and that there is no such person in existence. 1 *
" Well then he is lately dead, Marianne, for ]
AMD MMftlBlLITT, 77
sure there wu such a man anon, and his name begins
with aa F. "
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton
for observing at this moment, M that it rained very
hard, " though she believed the interruption to pro-
ceed lata from any attention to her, than from her
ladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects
of raillery as delighted her husband and mother.
The idea, however, started by'her, was immediately
pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every oc-
casion mindful of the feelings of others j and much
was said on the subject of rain by both of them.
Willonghby opened the pianoforte, and asked Mari-
anne to sit down to it j and thus, amidst the various
endeavours of different people to quit the topic, it
fell to the ground. But not so easily did Elinor
recover from the alarm into which it had thrown
her.
A party was formed this evening for going on the
following day to see a very fine place about twelve
miles from Barton, belonging to a brother-in-law of
Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could
not be seen, as the proprietor, who was .then abroad,
had left strict orders on that head. The grounds
were declared to be highly beautiful, and Sir John,
who was particularly warm in their praise, might be
allowed to be a tolerable judge, for he had formed
parties to visit them, at least, twice every summer
for the last ten years. They contained a noble piece
of water \ a sail on which was to form a great part
of the morning's amusement; cold provisions were
to be taken, open carriages only to be employed, and
78 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.'
everything conducted in the usual style of a com*
plete party of pleasure.
To some few of the company, it appeared rather
a bold undertaking, considering the time of year,
and that it had rained every day for the last fort-
night; — and Mrs. Dashwood, who had already a cold,
was persuaded by Elinor to stay at home*
i
CHAPTER XIII.
Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out
very differently from what Elinor had expected. She
was prepared to be wet through, fatigued, and fright-
ened j but the event was still more unfortunate, for
they did not go at alL
By ten o'clock the whole party were assembled at
the park, where they were to breakfast. The morn-
ing was rather favourable, though it had rained all
night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the
sky, and the sun frequently appeared. They were
all in high spirits and good humour, eager to be
happy, and determined to submit to the greatest
inconveniences and hardships rather than be other-
wise.
While they were at breakfast, the letters were
brought in. Among the rest there was one foi
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY, 79
Colonel Brandon ; — he took it, looked at the direc-
tion, changed colour, and immediately left the room.
" What is the matter with Brandon P " said Sir
John.
Nobody could tell.
" I hope he has had no bad news, " said Lady
Middleton. " It must be something extraordinary
that could make Colonel Brandon leave my break-
fast-table so suddenly. "
In about five minutes he returned.
" No bad news, Colonel, I hope P " said Mrs. Jen-
nings, as soon as he entered the room.
" None at all, ma'am, I thank you. "
" Was it from Avignon P I hope it is not to say
that your sister is worse P "
" No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely
a letter of business. "
" But how came the hand to discompose you so
much, if it was only a letter of business ? Come,
come, this won't do, Colonel ; so let us hear the
truth of it. "
" My dear madam, " said Lady Middleton, " recol-
lect what you are saying. "
" Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny
is married P " said Mrs. Jennings, without attending
to her daughter's reproof.
" No, indeed, it is not. "
" Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel.
And I hope she is well. "
" Whom do you mean P " said he, colouring a
little.
" Oh ! you know who I mean. "

flEHfiE AXT > SF.NSIEIUTY.
" I am particularly sorry , ma*am, rt said be, ft <
ing Lady Middleton, * that I should receft
letter to-day, for It is on business which reqnii
immediate attendance in town "
" In town! " cried Mrs, Jennings. « Whi
you hare to do in town at this time of year? "
My own loss is great, " he continued, u in
obliged to leaTe so agreeable a party ; but I t
more concerned, as I fear my pre & ence is necesi
gain your admittance at Whitwell, "
What a blow upon them all was this !
" But if you write a note to the housekeepe
Brandon/ 1 said Marianne eagerly, " will it i
sufficient P "
He shook his head.
" We must go/ 1 said Sir John. « It shall i
put off when we are so near it* Tou cannot
town till to-morrow, Brandon, that is all, "
" I wish it could be so easily settled. Bu
not in my power to delay my journey fo
day!*
II If you would but let ub know what youi
ness is " said Mrs, Jennings, " we might see w
it could be put off or not, "
" You would not be six bours later, " sale
lough by, u if you were to defer your journey t
return. "
II I cannot afford to lose one hour. " —
Elinor then heard Willoughby say in a low
to Marianne, H There are some people who i
bear a party of pleasure, Brandon is one of
He WO flfraid of catching cold, I dare say, a
nm amd ■uniMLirr. 81
Oik trick for getting out of it I would lay
dueas the letter wae of hie own writing, "
we no doubt of it, " replied Marianne,
ire it no penuading you to change your mind,
a, I know of old " said Sir John, " when once
i determined on anything. But, however, I
u will think better of it Consider, here are
» Mies Careys come over from Newton, the
Jet Daahwooda walked up from the cottage,
% Willougfaby got up two hours before hie
me, on purpose to go to WhitwelL "
lei Brandon again repeated his sorrow at
tie cause of disappointing the party, but at
e time declared it to be unavoidable.
11 then, when will you come back again P "
ope we shall see you at Barton, " added her
i, M as soon as you can conveniently leave
Ad we must put off the party to Whitwell
return. "
i are very obliging. But it is so uncertain
may have it in my power to return, that I
; engage for it at alL "
t he must and shall come back, " cried Sir
M If he is not here by the end of the week,
X) after him. "
so do, Sir John, " cried Mrs. Jennings, " and
haps you may find out what his business is. "
> not wish to pry into other men's concerns.
ie it is something he is ashamed of. "
el Brandon's horses were announced,
i do not go to town on horseback do you P "
j John,
o vol. ].
82 SENSE AND SEN8IBIL1TT.
" No — only to Honiton. I shall then go post. "
" Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish yon a
good journey. But you had better change your
mind. "
" I assure you it is not in my power. "
He then took leave of the whole party.
" Is there no chance of my seeing you and your
sisters in town this winter, Miss Dashwood P "
" I am afraid, none at all. "
" Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time
than I should wish to do. "
To Marianne he merely bowed and said nothing.
" Come, Colonel, " said Mrs. Jennings, " before
you go, do let us know what you are going about. "
He wished her a good morning, and, attended by
Sir John, left the room.
The complaints and lamentations which politeness
had hitherto restrained, now burst forth universally;
and they all agreed again and again how provoking
it was to be so disappointed.
" 1 can guess what his business is, however,''said
Mrs. Jennings exultingly.
" Can you, ma'am P " said almost everybody.
" Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure. "
" And who is Miss Williams ? " asked Marianne.
" What! do not you know who Miss Williams is?
I am sure you must have heard of her before. She is
a relation of the Colonel's, my desjp — a very near
relation. We will not say how near, for fear of
shocking the young ladies. " Then lowering her
voice a little, she said to Elinor, " She is his natural
daughter. "
IENIB AND SENSIBILITY. 83
« Indeed P
" Oh ! yes; and m like him M the can stare. I
dare amy the Colonel will leave her all hit for-
tune. "
When Sir John returned, he joined moat heartily
in the general regret on to unfortunate an event ;
concluding, however, by observing, that af they were
all got together, they must do something by way of
being happy) and after tome consultation it was
agreed, that although happiness could only be en-
Joyed at Whitwell, they might procure a tolerable
composure of mind by driving about the country.
The carriages were then ordered ; Willoughby's was
first, and Marianne never looked happier than when
she got into it. He drove through the park very
fast, and they were soon out of sight j and nothing
more was seen of them till their return, which did
not happen till after the return of all the rest. They
both seemed delighted with their drive, but said only
in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while
the others went on the downs.
It was settled that there should be a dance in the
evening, and that everybody should be extremely
merry all day long. Some more of the Careys came
to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down
nearly twenty to table, which Sir John observed with
great contentment. Willoughby took his usual place
between the two elder Miss Dashwoods. Mrs. Jen-
nings sat on Elinor's right hand ; and they had not
been long seated, before she leant behind her and
Willoughby, and said to Marianne, loud enough for
them both to hear, " I have found you out in spite
84 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of all your tricks. I know where you spent the
morning. "
Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily,
" Where, pray ? " —
" Did not you know, " said Willoughby, " that we
had been out in my curricle P "
" Yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well,
and I was determined to find out where you had
been to. I hope you like your house, Miss Mari-
anne. It is a yery large one, I know, and when I
come to see you, I hope you will have new-furnished
it, for it wanted it Yery much, when I was there six
years ago. "
Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mrs.
Jennings laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in
her resolution to know where they had been, she had
actually made her own woman inquire of Mr. Wil-
loughby's groom, and that she had by that method
been informed that they had gone to Allenham, and
spent a considerable time there in walking about the
garden and going all oyer the house.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it
seemed very unlikely that Willoughby should pro-
pose, or Marianne consent, to enter the house while
Mrs. Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not
the smallest acquaintance.
As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor in-
quired of her about it ; and great was her surprise
when she found that every circumstance related by
Mrs. Jennings was perfectly true. Marianne was
quite angry with her for doubting it.
" Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 85
not go there, or that we did not see the house ? Is
not it what you have often wished to do yourself? "
" Yes, Marianne, but 1 would not go while Mrs.
Smith was there, and with no other companion than
Mr. Willoughby. "
" Mr. Willoughby however is the only person who
can have a right to show that house ; and as lie went
in an open carriage, it was impossible to have any
other companion. I never spent a pleasanter morn-
ing in my life. "
" I am afraid, " replied Elinor, " that the pleasant-
ness of an employment does not always evince its
propriety. "
" On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof
of it, Elinor ; for if there had been any real impro-
priety in what I did, I should have been sensible of
it at the time, for we always know when we are
acting wrong, and with such a conviction I could
have had no pleasure. "
" But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed
you to some very impertinent remarks, do you not
now begin to doubt the discretion of your own con-
duct? "
11 If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are
to be the proof of impropriety in conduct, we are all
offending every moment of all our lives. I value not
her censure any more than I should do her commend-
ation. I am not sensible of having done anything
wrong in walking over Mrs. Smith's grounds, or in
seeing her house. They will one day be Mr. Wil-
loughby's, and "
44 If they were one day to be your own, Mari-
86 8EN8E AMD SENSIBILITY.
anne, you would not be justified in what you have
done. "
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly
gratifying to her ; and after a ten minutes'interval of
earnest thought, she came to her sister again, and
said with great good humour, " Perhaps, Elinor, it
was rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham ; but
Mr. Willoughby wanted particularly to show me the
place; and it is a charming house, I assure yon.
There is one remarkably pretty sitting-room upstairs,
of a nice comfortable size for constant use, and with
modern furniture it would be delightful. It is a
corner room, and has windows on two sides. On
one side you look across the bowling-green, behind
the house, to a beautiful hanging wood; and on the
other you have a view of the church and village, and,
beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we have so
often admired. I did not see it to advantage, for
nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture, —
but if it were newly fitted up a couple of hun-
dred pounds, Willoughby says, would make it one of
the pleasantest summer-rooms in England. "
Could Elinor have listened to her without inter-
ruption from the others, she would have described
every room in the house with equal delight.
CHAPTER XIV.
The sodden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit
at the park, with hia ateadineia In concealing ita
came, Ailed the mind and railed the wonder of Mrs.
Jennlnge for two or three days : the waa a great won-
< , erer 9 aa every one moat be who takes a very lirely
intereat In all the comings and goings of all their
acquaintance. She wondered with little intermission
what oonkl be the reason of it j waa sure there must
be aome bad news, and thought over every kind of
dletreat that could have befallen him, with a fixed
determination that he should not escape them all.
* Something very melancholy must be the matter,
I am euxe.* said she. M I could see it in his face.
Poor man f I am afraid his circumstances may be bad.
The estate at DeUford waa never reckoned more than
two thousand a year, and his brother left'everything
sadly involved. I do think he must have been sent
for about money matters, for what else can it be P
I wonder whether it is so. I would give anything to
know the truth of it Perhaps it is about Miss Wil-
Hsms and, by the bye, I dare say it is, because he
looked so conscious when I mentioned her. Maybe
she is ill in town j nothing in the world more likely,
for I have a notion she is always rather sickly. I
would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams. It
is not so very likely he should be distressed in his
88 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
circumstances now, for he is a very prudent man,
and to be sure must have cleared the estate by this
time. I wonder what it can be ! Maybe his sister
is worse at Avignon, and has sent for him over. His
setting off in such a hurry seems very like it. " Well,
I wish him out of all his trouble with all my heart,
and a good wife into the bargain. "
So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings ; her
opinion varying with every fresh conjecture, and all
seeming equally probable as they arose. Elinor,
though she felt really interested in the welfare of
Colonel Brandon, could not bestow all the wonder
on his going so suddenly away which Mrs. Jennings
was desirous of her feeling j for besides that the cir-
cumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting
amazement or variety of speculation, her wonder was
otherwise disposed of. It was engrossed by the ex-
traordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on
the subject, which they must know to be peculiarly
interesting to them all. As this silence continued,
every day made it appear more strange and more in-
compatible with the disposition of both. Why they
should not openly ackowledge to her mother and
herself, what their constant behaviour to each other
declared to have taken place, Elinor could not
imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might not
be immediately in their power ; for though Wil-
loughby was independent, there was no reason to
believe him rich. His estate had been rated by Sir
John at about six or seven hundred a year ; but be
lived at an expense to which that income could
siuru axd ■■iniBtLiTr. 89
f be equal, and he had himself often corn-
ed of bit poverty. But for thii strange kind of
cy maintained by them relathre to their engage*
t, irhleh in met concealed nothing at all, ehe
d not account j and It was to wholly contradic-
• to their general opinion! and practice, that a
ht sometimes entered her mind of their being
fly engaged, and this doubt was enough to pre-
it her making any inquiry of Marianne.
Nothing could be more expressiTe of attachment
them all than Willoughby's behaviour. - To Marl-
ine it had all the distinguishing tenderness which
lover's heart could give, and to the rest of the
unily it was the affectionate attention of a son and
t brother. The cottage seemed to be considered and
loved by him as his home j many more of his hours
rere spent there than at Alienism j and if no gene-
ral engagement collected them at the park, the exer-
rise which called him out in the morning was almost
sertain of ending there, where the rest of the day
a/as spent by himself at the side of Marianne, and
by his favourite pointer at her feet.
One evening in particular, about a week after Co-
lonel Brandon had left the country, his heart seemed
more than usually open to every feeling of attach-
ment to the objects around him; aud on Mrs. Dash-
wood's happening to mention her design of improving
the cottage in the spring, he warmly opposed every
iteration of a place which affection had established
is perfect with him.
44 What P he exclaimed— " Improve this dear cot-
tage! No-— that I will never consent to. Not a
90 SENSE AMD SEN8IBILITT.
•tone mutt be added to its walls, not an inch to its
size, if my feelings are regarded. "
" Do not be alarmed, " said Miss Dashwood, " no-
thing of the kind will be done; for my mother will
never hare money enough to attempt it. "
" lam heartily glad of it, " he cried. " May the
always be poor, if she can employ her riches no
better. "
" Thank you, " Willoughby.* But you may be
assured that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of
local attachment of yours, or of any one whom I
loved, for all the improvements in the world. De-
pend upon it, that whatever unemployed sum may
remain when I make up my accounts in the spring,
I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose
of it in a manner so painful to you. But are you
really so attached to this place as to see no defect
in it? "
" I am, " said he. " To me it is faultless. Nay,
more, I consider it as the only form of building ir
which happiness is attainable; and were I rieJ
enough, I would instantly pull Combe down, as
build it up again in the exact plan of this cottage.'
" With dark narrow stairs, and a kitchen tl
smokes, I suppose, " said Elinor.
" Yes, " cried he in the same eager tone, " with
and everything belonging to it ; — in no one co-
nience or inconvenience about it, should the
variation be perceptible. Then, and then only, i
such a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at C
as I have been at Barton. "
" I flatter myself, " replied Elinor, " that ev
mm AMD milUlITT. 91
dor tbm diirfvllf of better mum and a broader
a, yon wffl h st e edlo r fineVyonrown house —
iMyounowdothfa*
m certainly are olmuiis*simss,» said Wit
loughby, M which might gratify endear it to me |
but this place will always have ana data on my
ejection which no other eaa possibly share. "
Mrs. Daahwood looked with pleasure at Marianne,
wnooo fine eyes wen fixed ao expressively on Wil-
loughby, as plainly denoted how watt ehe under*
• «HowoftendUIwiil^*aJdedhe, " wn«nIwas
at AUenham this time twelvemonth, that Barton cot-
tag* wave inhabited t I never passed within view
tfttwtfinutadittiringits situation, and grieving that
^ one should brain it. How little did I then think
that the very Ant news I should hear from Mrs.
Smith, when I next came into the country, would be
that Barton cottage was taken I and I felt an imme-
diate satisfaction and interest in the erent, which
nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness
I should experience from it can account for. Must it
not hare been so. Marianne? " speaking to her in a
lowered voice. Then continuing his former tone,
he said, " And yet this house you would spoil, Mrs.
Daahwood! Tou would rob it of its simplicity by
Imaginary improvement! and this dear parlour, in
which our acquaintance first began, and in which so
many happy hours have been since spent by us to-
gether, you would degrade to the condition of a
common entrance, and everybody would be eager to
pass through the room which has hitherto contained
92 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
within itself more real accommodation and comfort
than any other apartment of the handsomest dimen-
sions in the world could possibly afford. "
Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no altera-
tion of the kind should be attempted.
" You are a good woman, " he warmly replied.
" Your promise makes'me easy. Extend it a little
farther, and it will make me happy. Tell me that
not only your house will remain the same, but that
I shall ever find you and yours as unchanged as your
dwelling ; and that you will always consider me with
the kindness which has made everything belonging
to you so dear to me. "
The promise was readily given, and " Willoughby's
behaviour during the whole of the evening declared
at once his affection and happiness.
" Shall we see you to-morrow to dinner P n said
Mrs. Dashwood when he was leaving them. " I do
not ask you to come in the morning, for we must
walk to the park, to call on Lady Middleton. "
He engaged to be with them by four o'clock*
CHAPTER XV.
Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took
place the next day, and two of her daughters went
■urn and sevhbimtt. 93
with her | but Marianne excused herself from being
of the party under some trifling pretext of employ*
ment| eiid her motiier 9 wlioeondoded that e promise
had been made by Wflloughby the night before of
calling on her while they were absent, wia perfectly
satisfied with her remaining at home.
On their return from the park they found Wil-
loughby'a curricle and •errant in waiting at the cot-
tage, end Mm. Daahwood waa eonTineed that her
conjecture had been just. 80 far it waa all as she
had foreseen j but on entering the house she beheld
what no foresight had taught her to expect. They
were no sooner in the passage than Marianne came
hastily out of the parlour, apparently in violent afflic-
tion, with her handkerchief at her eyes, and without
noticing them ran up stairs. Surprised and alarmed,
they proceeded directly Into the room she had just
quitted, where they found only Willoughby, who was
leaning against the mantel-piece with his back to-
wards them. He turn round on their coming in, and
bis countenance showed that he strongly partook of
the emotion which OTerpowered Marianne.
" Is anything the matter with her? " cried Mrs.
Dashwood as she entered — u is she ill? "
" I hope not, " he replied, trying to look cheerful ;
and with a forced smile presently added, " It is I
who may rather expect to be ill — for 1 am now suf-
fering under a Tery heary disappointment ! "
" Disappointment! "
w Yea, for I am unable to keep my engagement
with you. Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised
the privilege of riches upon a poor dependant cousin,
)
94 SENSE AND 8EKSIBU.ITT.
by sending me on business to London. I have just
received my despatches, and taken my farewell of
Allenham ; and by way of exhilaration I am bow
come to take my farewell of you, "
" To London ! — and are you going this morning? *
" Almost this moment. "
" This is very unfortunate. But Mrs. Smith must
be obliged ; — and her business will not detain you
from us long, I hope. "
He coloured as he replied, « Tou are very kind,
but I have no idea of returning into Devonshire
immediately. My visits to Mrs. Smith are never
repeated within the twelvemonth. "
" And is Mrs. 8mith your only friend P Is Allen-
ham the only house in the neighbourhood to which
you will be welcome P For shame, Willoughby.
Can you wait for an invitation here ? "
His colour increased ; and with his eyes fixed cm
the ground he only replied, " Tou are too good. "
Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise.
Elinor felt equal amazement. For a few moments
every one was silent. Mrs. Dashwood first spoke.
" I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at
Barton cottage you will always be welcome ; for I
will not press you to return here immediately, be-
cause you only can judge how far that might be
pleasing to Mrs. Smith ; and on this head I shall be
no more disposed to question your judgment than to
doubt your inclination. "
" My engagements at present, " replied Willoughy ;
confusedly, " are of such a nature — that — I dare not
flatter myself " —
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 95
He stopped. Mrs, Dashwood was too much as-
tonished to speak, and another pause succeeded. This
was broken by Willoughby, who said with a faint
smile, " It is folly to linger in this manner. I will
not torment myself any longer by remaining among
friends whose society it is impossible for me now to
enjoy.*
He then hastily took leave of them all and left the
room. They saw him step into his carriage, and in
a minute it was out of sight.
Mrs. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and in*
stantly quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to
the concern and alarm which this sudden departure
occasioned*
Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mo-
ther's. She thought of what had just passed with
anxiety and distrust. Willoughby's behaviour in
taking leave of them, his embarrassment, and affecta-
tion of cheerfulness, and, above all, his unwillingness
to accept her mother's invitation, a backwardness so
unlike a lover — so unlike himself, greatly disturbed
her. One moment she feared that no serious design
had ever been formed on his side ; and the next, that
some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between
him and her sister; — the distress in which Marianne
had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel
could most reasonably account for ; though when she
considered what Marianne's love for him was, a quar-
rel seemed almost impossible.
But whatever might be the particulars of their
separation, her sister's affliction was indubitable ; and
she thought with the tenderest compassion of that
4f SETS *» SESSIBIIJTT.
"'■•ir scrrrw wijri Marsanne vac in mil probability
~ < *c r«*r»v > rrvis^ wit tt* > a* a relief, but feeding and
*aj-:cn«r-2j ** * r=sy.
!z. t:.:cr: btif ax bc«r bcr mother returned, and
•Li.:.-^ri **r eyes were red, bcr countenance was not
- - > rr s*ar *»:Zocxh*y is now some miles from
SUrt-rc T^sae* sail she, as she sat down to work,
- ar > i w.ti baw beavy a heart does he travel ! "
- I: 2* iZ **t% scrarje. So suddenly to be gone !
I: ***•*=» > c: the week of a moment. And last night
b; wis with :» so haypy. so cheerful, so affectionate !
An I i-:t aA»r cere ten minutes* notice — Gone too
witi-:-* int^n-Iinx to retcm! — Something more than
wha: h* ewned :o os most have happened. He did
n:$ sreax. be did not behave like himself. Yon
n:^« hare seen tfee difference as well as I. What
car it Ve ? Can they hare quarrelled ? Why else
sh?:ild he hare shown such unwillingness to accept
ycur invitation here ? " —
- It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor ! I
could plainly see that. He had not the power of
accepting it. I hare thought it all over, I assure you,
and I can perfectly account for everything that at
first seemed strange to me as well as to you. w
" Can you indeed ?**
u Ye*. I have explained it to myself in the mo*
satisfactory way; — but you, Elinor, who love t
doubt where you can It will not satisfy you,
know ; but you shall not talk me out of my trust i
it. I am persuaded that Mrs. Smith suspects his r
gard for Marianne, disapproves of it, (perhaps becau
SSJWSB AMD 8KWSIIILITT. 07
i hat other views far him,) and on that account ii
ger to get him away | — and that the business which
b aenda him off to transact, is invented at an excuse
dismiss him. This is what I believe to have hap-
aed. He is moreover aware that she does disap-
)re the connexion, he dsres not therefore at present
afcss to her his engagement with Marianne, and
feels himself obliged, from his dependent situation,
giro into her schemes, and absent himself from
ironshire for a while. Too will tell me, I know,
it this may or may not have happened j but I will
ten to no cavil, unless you can point out any other
tthod of understanding the affair as satisfactory an
a. And now, Elinor, what have you to say P w
" Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer. "
" Then you would hare told me, that it might or
ght not have happened. Oh t Elinor, how incom-
thensible are your feelings! You had rather take
1 upon credit than good. You had rather look
t for misery for Marianne and guilt for poor Wil-
ighby, than an apology for the latter. You are
ohred to think him blamable, because he took
re of us with less affection than his usual behavi-
r has shown. And is no allowance to be made
Inadvertence, or for spirits depressed by recent
appointment P Are no probabilities to be accepted,
rely because they are not certainties P Is nothing
i to the man whom we have all so much reason to
e, and no reason in the world to think ill of P to
possibility of motives unanswerable in them-
res, though unavoidably secret for a while P And,
er all, what is it you suspect him of P "
F. VOL. I.
95 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" I can hardly tell you myself. But suspicion of
something unpleasant is the ineritable consequence
of such an alteration as we have just witnessed in
him. There is great truth, however, in what you
have now urged of the allowances which ought to be
made for him, and it is my wish to be candid in my
judgment of everybody. Willoughby may undoubt-
edly have very sufficient reasons for his conduct, and
I will hope that he lias. But it would have beeu
more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at once.
Secrecy may be advisable ; but still I cannot help
wondering at its being practised by him. "
" Do not blame him, however, for departing from
his character, where the deviation is necessary. But
you really do admit the justice of what I have said
in his defence ? — I am happy — and he is acquitted. "
" Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their
engagement (if they are engaged) from Mrs. Smith: —
and if that is the case, it must be highly expedient
for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at pre-
sent. But this is no excuse for their concealing it
from 118. "
" Concealing it from us ! my dear child, do you
accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment?
This is strange indeed, when your eyes have been
reproaching them every day for incautiousness. "
" I want no proof of their affection, " said Elinor ;
" but of their engagement I do. w
" I am perfectly satisfied of both. "
" Tet not a syllable has been said to you on the
subject, by either of them. w
" I have not wanted syllables where actions have
•■Ml *W» MMtUILITT. 99
spoken to plainly. Hm not hit behaviour to Mari-
anne and to all of us, for at Vault the hat fortnight,
declaimed that ha loved and considered her aa hia
future wile, and that ha fch for ue tha attachment of
the nearest relation P Hare we not perfectly under*
stood each other P Haa not my oaneent been daily
aaked by hla looks, hia manner, his attentive and
aflbctionate reapeetP My XUnnr, la tt poeaible to
doubt their engagement P How eould sock a thought
eeeurtoyouP How Is it to be supposed that WiU
kmghby, persuaded aa ha must be of your slater's
lore, should leave her, and leave her perhaps for
months, without telling, her of hia aflfeetlonj — that
they shoukk part without a mutual exchange of con-
fldeneeP "
u I confess, " replied Elinor, " that every circum-
stance except one is in fivrour of their engagement ;
but that one is the total silence of both on the sub-
ject, and with me it almost outweighs erery other. "
u How strange this is ! You must think wretch-
edly indeed of Willoughby, if, after all that has
openly passed between them, you can doubt the
nature of the terms on which they are together. Has
he been acting a part in his behaviour to your sister
all this time P Do you suppose him really indifferent
to her P*
" No, I cannot think that. He must and docs
lore her, I am sure. "
u But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can
leave her with such indifference, such carelessness
of the future, aa you attribute to him. "
" You must remember, my dear mother, that I
100 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
have never considered this matter as certain. I have
had my doubts, I confess; but they are fainter than
they were, and they may soon be entirely done away.
If we find they correspond, every fear of mine will
be removed. "
" A mighty concession indeed ! If you were to
see them at the altar, you would suppose they were
going to be married. Ungracious girl! But / re-
quire no such proof. Nothing, in my opinion, has
ever passed to justify doubt ; no secrecy has been
attempted j all has been uniformly open and unre-
served. You cannot doubt your sister's wishes. It
must be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect.
But why ? Is he not a man of honour and feeling?
Has there been any inconsistency on his side to cre-
ate alarm ? can he be deceitful ? n
" I hope not, I believe not, " cried Elinor. M I love
Willoughby, sincerely love him; and suspicion of
his integrity cannot be more painful to yourself than
to me. It has been involuntary, and I will not
encourage it. I was startled, I confess, by the al-
teration in his manners this morning ; — he did not
speak like himself, and did not return your kindness
with any cordiality. But all this may be explained
by such a situation of his affairs as you have sup-
posed. He had just parted from my sister, had seen
her leave him in the greatest affliction; and if he
felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs. Smith, to
resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet
aware that by declining your invitation, by saying
that he was going away for some time, he should
seem to act an ungenerous — a suspicious part by
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 101
family, he might well be embarrassed and dis-
hed. In such a case, a plain and open avowal of
i difficulties would hare been more to his honour,
think, as well as more consistent with his general
laracter ; — but I will not raise objections against
ny one's conduct on so illiberal a foundation, as a
liffcrence in judgment from myself, or a deviation
from what I may think right and consistent. "
" You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly
does not deserve to be suspected. Though we have
not known him long, he is no stranger in this part
of the world; and who has ever spoken to his disad-
vantage? Had he been in a situation to act inde-
pendently and marry immediately, it might hn^e
been odd that he should leave us without acknow-
ledging everything to me at once : but this is not
the case. It is an engagement in some respects not
pnwperously begun, for their marriage must be at a
very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as
it can be observed, may now be very advisable. "
They were interrupted by the entrance of Marga-
ret; and Elinor was then at liberty to think over the
representations of her mother, to acknowledge the
probability of many, and hope for the justice of all.
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner-time,
when she entered the room and took her place at
the table without saying a word. Her eyes w«re
red and swollen ; and it seemed as if her tears were
even then rest mined with difficulty. She avoided
the looks of them all, could neither eat nor speak,
and after some time, on her mother's silently pressing
her hand with tender compassion, her small degree
102 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of fortitude was quite overcome — she burst into
and left the room.
This violent oppression of spirits continued
whole evening. She was without any power
cause she was without any desire of command
herself. The slightest mention of anything rel
to Willoughby overpowered her in an instant;
though her family were most anxiously attenti
her comfort, it was impossible for them, if they s
at all, to keep clear of every subject which her
ings connected with him.
CHAPTER XVI.
Marianne would have thought herself very
cusable had she been able to sleep at all the
night after parting from Willoughby. She v,
have been ashamed to look her family in the fac <
next morning, had she not risen from her bed in j
need of repose than when she lay down in it.
the feelings which made such composure a disg
left her in no danger of incurring it. She was a^
the whole night, and she wept the greatest part
She got up with a headache, was unable to talk,
unw lling to take any nourishment ; giving
every moment to her mother and sisters, and fo
SEME AND SENSIBILITY. 103
,g all attempt at consolation from either. Hit
isibility was potent enough !
When breakfast was over, she walked out by hcr-
lf, and wandered about the village of Allenham,
idulging the recollection of past enjoyment and cry-
ng over the present reverse for the chief of the
morning.
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence
of feeling. 8he played over every favourite song
that she had been used to play to Wiiloughhy, every
air in which their voices had been oftunest joined,
and Hat at the instrument guzing on every line of
music that he had written out for her, till her heart
wan ho heavy that no farther sadness could be gained ;
and thitt nourishment of grief was every day applied.
She spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately
hinging and crying, her voice often totally suspended
by her tears. In book* too, as well as in miiHie, she
courted the misery which a contrast between the past
and preBent was certain of giving. She read nothing
but what they had been used to read together.
Such violence of aiHiction indeed could not be sup-
ported for ever; it sunk within a few days into a
calmer melancholy ; but these employments, to which
she daily recurred, her solitary walks ami silent me-
ditation*, still produced occasional effusions of sor-
row as lively at ever.
No letter from Wiiloughhy came, and none seemed
expected by Marianne. Her mother was surprised,
and Klinor ugaiu became uneasy. Hut Mrs. Dash-
wood could ilud explanations whenever she wanted
litem, which at least Hatisiied herself.
)
104 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" Remember, Elinor, " said she, " how very often
Sir John fetches our letters himself from the post,
and carries them to it. We have already agreed that
secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge
that it could not be maintained if their correspond-
ence were to pass through Sir John's hands. "
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she
tried to find in it a motive sufficient for their silence.
But there was one method so direct, so simple, and
in her opinion so eligible, of knowing the real state
of the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery,
that she could not help suggesting it to her mother.
" Why do you not ask Marianne at once, " said she,
" whether she is or is not engaged to Willoughby ?
From you, her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a
mother, the question could not give offence. It would
be the natural result of your affection for her. She
used to be all unreserve, and to you more especially. "
" I would not ask such a question for the world.
Supposing it possible that they are not engaged, > vhat
distress would such an inquiry inflict ! At any rate,
it would be most ungenerous. I should never de-
serve her confidence again, after forcing from her a
confession of what is meant at present to be unac-
kmrwledged to any one. I know Marianne's heart:
1 ktiuw that she dearly loves me, and that I shall not
be the btht to whom the affair is made known, when
circumstances make the revealment of it eligible. I
would not attempt to force the confidence of any one,
of a child much less, because a sense of duty would
prevent the denial which her wishes might direct. "
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, con-
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 105
sidering her sister's youth, and urgc4 the mutter
farther, but in Tain ; common sense, common care,
common prudence, were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's
romantic delicacy.
It was several days before Willoughby's name was
mentioned before Marianne by any of her family :
Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, indeed, were not bo nice;
their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour ;
— but one evening, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentally ta-
king up a volume of Shakespeare, exclaimed,
" We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne ; our
dear Willoughby went away before we could get
through it. We will put it by, that when he comes
again But it may be months, perhaps be-
fore that happens. "
" Months ! " cried Marianne, with strong surprise.
" No — nor many weeks. "
Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had Raid ;
but it gave Elinor pleasure, as it produced a reply
from Marianne so expressive of confidence in Wil-
loughby and knowledge of his intentions.
One morning, about a week after his leaving the
country, Marianne was prevailed on to join her Bis-
ters in their usual walk, instead of wandering away
by herself. Hitherto she had carefully avoided every
companion in her rambles. If her sisters intended
to walk on the downs, she directly stole away towards
the lanes ; if they talked of the valley, she wuh ;ih
speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be found
when the others set off. But at length she was se-
cured by the exertions of Elinor, who greatly disap-
proved such continual seclusion. They walked along
106 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,
for Marianne's mind could not he controlled, and
Elinor, satisfied with gaining one point, would not
then attempt more. Beyond the entrance of the
valley, where the country, though still rich, was less
wild and more open, a long stretch of the road which
they had travelled on first coming to Barton lay be-
fore them ; and on reaching that point, they stopped
to look around them, and examine a prospect which
formed the distance of their view from the cottage,
from a spot which they had never happened to reach
in any of their walks before.
Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon dis-
covered an animated one ; it was a man on horseback
riding towards them. In a few minutes they could
distinguish him to be a gentleman ; and in a moment
afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed,
" It is he; it is indeed; — I know it is! " — and
was hastening to meet him, when Elinor cried out,
" Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken
It is not Willoughby. The person is not tall enoug)
for him, and has not his air. "
" He has, he has, " cried Marianne, " lam sure 1
has ! — his air, his coat, his horse. I knew how so <
he would come. "
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elir
to screen Marianne from particularity, as she
almost certain of its not being Willoughby, quicke
her pace and kept up with her. They were •
within thirty yards of the gentleman. Mari
looked again ; her heart sunk within her ; an <
ruptly turning round, she was hurrying back,'
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 107
he voices of both her sisters were rained to detain
: f a third, almost as well known as Willoughby's,
ned them in begging her to stop, and she turned
und with surprise to sec and welcome Edward
errars.
He was the only person in the world who could
,t that moment be forgiven for not being Willoughhy ;
he only one who could have gained a smile from her;
but she dispersed her tears to smile on him, nnd in
her sister's happiness forgot for a time her own dis-
appointment.
He demounted, and giving his horse to his servant,
walked back with them to Barton, whither he was
purposely coming to visit them.
He was welcomed by " them all with great cor-
diulity, but especially by Marianne, who showed more
warmth of regard in her reception of him than even
Elinor herself. To Marianne, indeed, the meeting
between Edward and her sinter was but a continua-
tion of that unaccountable coldness which she hud
often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour.
On Edward's Hide, more particularly, there wuh a
deficiency of all that a lover ought to look und Hay
on Kiieh an occasion. He was confused, Hccmed
Kcnrccly sensible of pleasure in seeing them, looked
neither rapturous nor gay, said little but what wuh
forced from him by questions, and distinguished Elinor
by no murk of affection. Marianne saw and listened
with increasing surprise. She began ulmoM to feel
a dislike of Edward ; and it ended, as evry feeling
n.iiht end with her by carrying back her thoughts to
108 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
Willoughby, whose manners formed a contrast suffi-
ciently striking to those of his brother elect.
After a short silence which succeeded the first sur-
prise and inquiries of meeting, Marianne asked Ed-
ward if he came directly from London. No, he had
been in Devonshire a fortnight.
" A fortnight ! " she repeated, surprised at his
being so long in the same county with Elinor without
seeing her before.
He looked rather distressed as he added, that he
had been staying with some friends near Plymouth.
" Have you been lately in Sussex ? " said Elinor.
" I was at Norland about a month ago. "
" And how does dear, dear Norland look ? w cried
Marianne. *
" Dear, dear Norland, " said Elinor, " probably
looks much as it always does at this time of year
— the woods and walks thickly covered with dead
leaves. "
" Oh ! w cried Marianne, " with what transporting
sensations have I formerly seen them fall ! How
have I delighted, as I walked, to see them driven in
showers about me by the wind ! What feelings have
they, the season, the air altogether inspired ! Now
there is no one to regard them. They are seen only
as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven as much
as possible from the sight. "
" It is not every one, " said Elinor, " who has your
passion for dead leaves. "
" No ; my feelings are not often shared, not often
understood. But sometimes they are. " — As she said
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 109
A, she sunk into a reverie fur a few moments ;- -
it rousing herself again, " Now, Edward, " Maid she,
illing his attention to the prospect, " here is Barton
alley. Look up it, and be tranquil if you can.
-ook at those hills ! Did you ever see their equals p
To the left is Barton park, amongst those woods and
plantations. You may see one end of the house.
And there, beneath that farthest hill which rises with
such grandeur, is our cottage. "
" It is a beautiful country, " he replied ; " but these
bottoms must be dirty in winter. "
44 How can you think of dirt, with such such ob-
jects before you ? "
" Because, " replied he, smiling, " among the rest
of the objects before me, I see a very dirty lane. "
44 How 8 1 range ! " said Marianne to herself as she.
walked on.
" Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here ?
Are the Middletons pleasant people ? "
" No, not all, " answered Marianne j " we could
not be more unfortunately situated. "
" Marianne, " cried her sister, •'how can you say
so ? How can you be so unjust ? They are a very
respectable family, Mr. Ferrars, and towards us have
behaved in the friendliest manner. Have you forgot,
Marianne, how many pleasant days we have owed to
them? "
**J > io, " said Marianne in a low voice, " nor how
many painful moments. "
Elinor took no notice of this, and directing her
attention to their visitor, endeavoured to support
bomcthiug like discourse with him by talking of their
110 SENSE AHD SENSIBILITY.
present residence, its conveniences, & c. extorting
from him occasional questions and remarks. His
coldness and reserve mortified her severely ; she was
vexed and half angry ; but resolving to regulate her
behaviour to him by the past rather than the present,
she avoided every appearance of resentment or dis-
pleasure, and treated him as she thought he oiiffht to
be treated from the family connexion.
" >
CHAPTER XVII.
Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment
at seeing him ; for his coming to Barton was, in her
opinion, of all things the most naturaL Her joy and
expressions of regard long outlived her wonder. He
received the kindest welcome from her ; and shyness,
coldness, reserve could not stand against such a re-
ception. They had begun to fail him before he en-
tered the house, and they were quite overcome by
the captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood. Indeed
a man could not very well be in love with either of
her daughters, without extending the passion to her ;
and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon
become more like himself. His affections seemed to
reanimate towards them all, and his interest in their
welfare again became perceptible. He was not in
spirits however ; he praised their house, admired its
SBNSB AND SENSIBILITY. Ill
prospect, was attentive and kind} but still he wis
not in spirits. The whole family perceived it, and
Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want of libe-
rality in his mother, sat down to table indignant
against all selfish parents.
" What are Mrs. Ferrars'i views for you at present,
Edward P " said she, when dinner was over, and they
had drawn round the fire } M are you still to be a great
orator in spite of yourself P "
" No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I
have no more talents than inclination for a public life ! "
" But how is your fame to be established P for fa-
mous you must be to satisfy all your family; and
with no inclination for expense, no affection fur
strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may
find it a difficult matter. 9'
" I shall not attempt it. I hare no wish to be dis-
tinguished j and I hare every reason to hope I never
shall. Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced into
genius and eloquence. "
" You have no ambition, I well know. Your
wishes are all moderate.''
" As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I
believe. I wish, as well as everybody else, to be per-
fectly happy ; but, like everybody else, it must be in
my own way. Greatness will not make me so. "
" Strange if it would ! " cried Marianne. " What
has wealth or grandeur to do with happiness P "
" Grandeur has but little/* said Elinor, " bat
wealth has much to do with it. "
" Elinor, for shame! " said Marianne; " money
112 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
can only give happiness where there is nothing else
to give it, Beyond a competence, it can afford no
real satisfaction, as far as mere self is concerned.*
" Perhaps, " said Elinor, smiling, " we may come
to the same point. Your competence and my wealth
are very much alike, I dare say; and without them,
as the world goes now, we shall both agree that every
kind of external comfort must be wanting. Your
ideas are only more noble than mine. Come, what
ic your competence ? "
" About eighteen hundred or two thousand a-year;
not more than that. "
Elinor laughed. " Two thousand a-year! One
is my wealth ! I guessed how it would ewV
" And yet two thousand a-year is a very iuw J«r_te
income, " said Marianne. " A family cannot well be
maintained on a smaller. I am sure I am not ex-
travagant in my demands. A proper establishment
of servants, a carriage, perhaps two, and hunters,
cannot be supported on less. "
Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing
so accurately their future expenses at Combe Magn?
" Hunters ! " repeated Edward — " But why mu
you have hunters ? Everybody does not hunt. "
Marianne coloured as she replied, " But most pf
pie do. "
" I wish, " said Margaret, striking out a nc
thought, " that somebody would give us all a 1
fortune apiece ! "
" O that they would! " cried Marianne, her
sparkling with animation, and her cheeks gle
with the delight of such imaginary happiness.
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 113
• *.Vp are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose, "
(1 " Elinor, " in spite of the insufficiency of wealth.
" Oh dear! " cried Margaret, " how happy I should
! I wonder what I should do with it! "
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that
oint.
" I should be puzzled to spend a large fortune my-
»clf, " said Mrs. Dashwood, " if my children were all
to be rich without my help. "
" You must begin your improvements on this
house, " observed Elinor, " and your difficulties will
soon vanish.*
" What magnificent orders would travel from this
family to London, said Edward, " in such an event!
What a happy day for booksellers, music-sellers, and
print-shops ! You, Miss Dashwood, would give a
general commission for ever)'new print of merit to
be sent jou — and as for Marianne, I know her great-
ness of soul, there would not be music enough in
I.'iudoii to content her. And books! — Thomson,
( jwper, Scott — she would buy them all over and
o^er again; she would buy up every copy, I hclicAc,
tc prevent their falling into unworthy hands; and she
v.?uld have every book that tells her how to admire
an old twisted tree. Should not you, Marianne?
Forgive me, if I am very saucy. But 1 v*as w " lling
to show jou that I had not forgot our old disputes.''
" I love to be reminded of the past, Edward —
vvhether it be melancholy or gay, I love to recall it —
an.l you will never offend me by talking of former
times. You are u*ry right in Mipposing ho v.- my
money would be spent — some or it, at len*»t my
I VOL. I
114
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
loose cash would certainly be employed in imp:
my collection of music and books. "
•• And the bulk of your fortune would be la
in annuities on the authors or their heirs. "
44 No, Edward, I should have something else
with it. "
Perhaps then you would bestow it as a i
on that person who wrote the ablest defence o:
favourite maxim, that no one can ever be i]
more than once in their life — for your opini
that point is unchanged, I presume ? "
" Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinio
tolerably fixed. It is not likely that I should
see or hear anything to change them. "
" Marianne is as stedfast as ever, you see
Elinor j she is not at all altered. "
" She is only grown a little more grave th
was.
4 Nay, Edward, " said Marianne, ** you nei
reproach me. Tou are not very gay yourself.'
44 Why should you think so ! " replied he'
sigh. 44 But gaiety never was a part of my char
44 Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's, " sa
nor. 4 * I should hardly call her a lively girl ;
very earnest, very eager in all she does — som
talks a great deal, and always with animatioi
she is not often really merry. "
" I believe you are right, " he replied, " a
I have always set her down as a lively girl. "
44 1 have frequently detected myself in sue
itakes, " said Elinor, " in a total misapj
of character in some point or other — fi
RVSB AND ■ENIIBILITT. 115
ople to much more gay or grave, or ingenious or
upiri than they really are, and I can hardly tell
hy, or in what the deception originated. Somc-
imes one is guided by what they lay of themselves,
ind very frequently by what other people lay of
.hem, without giving oneself time to deliberate and
Judge. "
" But I thought it wai right, Elinor, " said Mari-
anne, " to be guided wholly by the opinion of other
people. I thought our judgments were given us
merely to be subservient to those of our neighbours.
Thin has always been your doctrine, I am sure/'
" No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never
aimed at the subjection of the understanding. All
1 have ever attempted to influence has been the be-
haviour. You must not confound my meaning. I am
guilty, I confess, of having often wished you to treat
our acquaintance in general with greater attention ;
but when have I advised you to adopt their seuti-
nients or conform to their judgment in serious mat-
ters ? "
" You have not been able then to bring your sister
over to your plan of general civility, " said Edward to
Elinor. u Do you gain no ground P "
" Quite the contrary, " replied Elinor, looking ex-
pressively at Marianne.
" My judgment, " he returned, " is all on your Hide
of the question; but I am afraid my practice is much
more on your sister's. I never wish to offend, but I
uin ho foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when
I nut only kept back by my natural awkwardness.
1 ha\e frequently thought that I must ha\c been
116 8EN8E AMD SENSIBILITY.
intended by nature to be fond of low company, I am
so little at my ease among strangers of gentility ! "
" Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inatten-
tion of hers, " said Elinor.
" She knows her own worth too well for false
shame, " replied Edward. " Shyness is only the ef-
fect of a sense of inferiority in some way or other.
If I could persuade myself that my manners were
perfectly easy and graceful, I should not be shy. "
" But you would still be reserved/'said Marianne,
" and that is worse. "
Edward stared — " Reserved! Am I reserved,
Marianne ? "
" Yes, very. "
" I do not understand you, " replied he, colouring.
" Reserved ! — how, in what manner ? What am I
to tell you ? What can you suppose ? "
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion, but trying
to laugh off the subject, she said to him, " Do not
you know my sister well enough to understand what
she means ? Do not you know she calls every onf
reserved who does not talk as fast, and admire whs
she admires as rapturously as herself ? "
Edward made no answer. His gravity and though
fulness returned on him in their fullest extent, a
he sat for some time silent and dull.
117
CHAPTER XYUI.
Elinor saw with great uneasiness the low spirits
of her friend. Hli visit afforded her but a very
partial satisfaction, while his own enjoyment in it
appeared to imperfect. It was evident that he wat
unhappy; the wished it were equally evident that he
•till distinguished her by the same affection which
once she had felt no doubt of inspiring ; but hitherto
the continuance of his preference seemed very uncer-
tain, and the reservedness of his manner towards
her contradicted one moment what a more animated
look had intimated the preceding one.
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room
the next morning before the others were down; and
Marianne, who was always eager to promote their,
happiness as far as she could, soon left them to them-
selves. But before she was halfway up stairs she
heard the parlour door open, and, turning round, wat
astonished to see Edward himself come out.
M I am going into the village to see my horses, "
said he, M as you are not yet ready for breakfast ; I
•hall be back again presently. "
Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of
the surrounding country ; in his walk to the village,
he had seen many parts of the valley to advantage ;
118 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
and the village itself, in a much higher situation than
the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole,
which had exceedingly pleased him. This was a
subject which insured Marianne's attention, and she
was beginning to describe her own admiration of
these scenes, and to question him more minutely on
the subjects that had particularly struck him, when
Edward interrupted hor by saying, " You must not
inquire too far, Marianne — remember I have no
knowledge in the picturesque, and I shall offend you
by my ignorance and want of taste if we come to
particulars. I shall call hills steep, which ought to
be bold ; surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought
to be irregular and rugged ; and distant objects out
of sight, which ought only to be indistinct through
the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere. Tou must
be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly
give. I call it a very fine country — the hills are steep,
the woods seem full of fine timber, and the valley
looks comfortable and snug — with rich meadows and
several neat farm-houses scattered here and there. It
exactly answers my idea of a fine country, because it
unites beauty with utility — and I dare say it is a
picturesque one too, because you admire it; I car
easily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories
grey moss and brushwood, but these are all lost o
me. I know nothing of the picturesque. "
" I am afraid it is but too true, " said Mariano
" but why should you boast of it ? "
" I suspect, " said Elinor, " that to avoid one k
of affectation, Edward here falls into another,
cause he believes many people pretend to mon
•BWSK AND SENSIBILITY. 1J'.)
miration of the boau t iea of nature than they really
feel, and la disgusted with rach pretensions, he affects
greater indifference and lm discrimination in viewing
them himself than he poetesses. He it fastidious
and will hare an affectation of hit own. "
" It is very true,* laid Marianne, M that admira-
tion of landscape scenery is beeome a mere jargon.
Everybody pretends to foil and tries to describe with
the taste and elegance of him who first denned what
picturesque beauty was. I detest jargon of every
kind, and sometines I have kept my feelings to my-
self because I could find no language to describe
them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all
" I am convinced,* said Edward, " that you really
feel all the delight in a fine prospect which you pro-
fess to feeL But, In return, your sister must allow
me to feel no more than I profess. I like a fine
prospect, but not on picturesque principles. I do
not like crooked, twisted, blasted trees. I admire
them much more if they are tall, straight, and flou-
rishing. I do not like ruined, tattered cottages. I
am not fond of nettles, or thistles, or heath blossoms.
I have more pleasure in a snug farm-house than a
watch-tower — and a troop of tidy, happy villagers
please me better than the finest banditti in the world. "
Marianne looked with amasement at Edward, with
compassion at her sister. Elinor only laughed.
The subject was continued no farther ; and Mari-
anne remained thoughtfully silent, till a new object
suddenly engaged her attention. She was sitting by
Edward, and in taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood
120 SENSE AND 8ENSIBILITY.
his hand passed so directly before her, as to make a
ring, with a plait of hair in the centre, very conspi-
cuous on one of his fingers.
" I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward/'
she cried. " Is that Fanny's hair ? I remember her
promising to give you some. But I should have
thought her hair had been darker. "
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really
felt — but when she saw how much she had pained
Edward, her own vexation at her want of thought
could not be surpassed by his. He coloured very
deeply, and giving a momentary glance at Elinor,
replied, " Yes, it is my sister's hair. The setting
always casts a different shade on it, you know. "
Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious like-
wise. That the hair was her own, she instantane-
ously felt as well satisfied as Marianne ; the only dif-
ference in their conclusions was, that what Marianne
considered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was
conscious must have been procured by some theft or
contrivance unknown to herself. She was not in a
humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and affect-
ing to take no notice of what passed, by instantly
talking of something else, she internally resolved
henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeing
the hair and of satisfying herself, beyond all doubt,
that it was exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it
ended in an absence of mind still more settled. He
was particularly grave the whole morning. Marianne
severely censured herself for what she had said ; but
her own forgiveness might have been more speedy,
SMSB AMD SEMfclBILITY. 121
had the known bow little oflenoe it had given her
titter.
Before the middle of the day, they were visited by
Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, who, having heard of
the arrival of ft gentleman at the cottage, came to
take a surrey of the guest with the astiatance of
his mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in disco-
vering that the name of Ferrate began with an F,
and this prepared a future mine of raillery against
the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness
of their acquaintance with Edward could have pre-
vented from being immediately sprung. But, as it
was, she only learned from some very significant
looks, how far their penetration, founded on Marga-
rets instructions, ext e nde d.
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without
either Inviting them to dine at the park the next day,
or to drink tea with them that evening. On the
present occasion, for the better entertainment of their
visitor, towards whose amusement he felt him«elf
bound to contribute, he wished to engage them for
both.
" Tou must drink tea with us to-night, " taid he,
" for we shall be quite alone — and to-morrow you
mutt absolutely dine with us, for we shall be a largo
party.*
Mrs. Jennings enforced the neceatity. " And who
knows but you may raise a dance P " taid the. " And
that will tempt you, Miss Marianne. "
M A dance! " cried Marianne. " ImpoMible! Who
is to dance P "
•• Who ! why yourselvet, and the Careys, and

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
Whi takers, to be sure. — What ! you thought nobody
could dance because a certain person that shall be
nameless is gone ! "
" I wish with all my soul, " cried Sir John, " that
Willoughby were among us again. "
This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspi-
cions to Edward. " And who is Willoughby ? " said
he, in a low voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom be
was sitting.
She gave him a brief reply. Marianne's counte-
nance was more communicative. Edward saw enough
to comprehend, not only the meaning of others, but
such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled him
before ; and when their visitors left them, he went
immediately round her and said, in a whisper, " I
have been guessing. Shall I tell you my guess P "
" What do you mean? "
" Shall I tell you? "
" Certainly. "
" Well then, I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts. "
Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she
could not help smiling at the quiet archness of his
manner, and, after a moment's silence, said,
" Oh ! Edward ! How can you ? — But the time
will come, I hope .... I am sure you will like him. "
" I do not doubt it, " replied he, rather astonished
at her earnestness and warmth; for had he not ima-
gined it to be a joke for the good of her acquaintance
in general, founded only on a something or a no-
thing between Mr. Willoughby and herself he would
not have ventured to mention it.
123
CHAPTER XIX
Edward remained a week at the cottage; he wan
earnestly p r e teed by Mm. Daabwood to ttay longer ;
bnt as if he wave bent only on seltaorilnoation, ho
seamed nsolved to be gone when his enjoyment
among his Mends was at the height His •pint*,
last two or Hues days, though still Tory
f wero greatly improved'- he grew more and
more partial to the house and snrirons— nerer spoke
of going away w i thout a sigh— declared his time to
be wholly disengage d e ren doubted to what place
hs should go when he left them— but still go he mutt.
Nerer had any week passed so quickly— he could
hardly beliere it to be gone. He said so repeatedly;
other things he said too, which marked the turn of
his feelings and gare the lie to his actions. He had
no pleasure at Norland ; he detested being in town;
bnt either to Norland or London he must go. He
rained their kindness beyond anything, and hit great-
est happiness was in being with them. Yet he mutt
leare them at the end of a week, in spite of their
wishes and his own, and without any restraint on his
time.
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way
of acting to his mother's account ; and it was happy
for her that he had a mother whose character was so
imperfectly known to her, as to be the general excuso
124 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
for everything strange on the part of her son. Dis-
appointed, however, and vexed as she was, and some-
times displeased with his uncertain behaviour to her-
self, she was very well disposed on the whole to re-
gard his actions with all the candid allowances and
generous qualifications, which had been rather more
painfully extorted from her, for Willoughby's service,
by her mother. His want of spirits, of openness,
and of consistency, was most usually attributed to
his want of independence, and his better knowledge
of Mrs. Ferrars's dispositions and designs. The
shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose
in leaving them, originated in the same fettered in-
clination, the same inevitable necessity of temporising
with his mother. The old well-established grievance
of duty against will, parent against child, was the
cause of all. She would have been glad to know
when these difficulties were to cease, this opposition
was to yield, — when Mrs. Ferrars would be reformed,
and her son be at liberty to be happy. But from
such vain wishes, she was forced to turn for comfort
to the renewal of her confidence in Edward's affec-
tion, to the remembrance of every mark of regard in
look or word which fell from him while at Barton,
and above all to that flattering proof of it which he
constantly wore round his finger.
" I think, Edward, " said Mrs. Dash wood, as they
were at breakfast the last morning, " you would be a
happier man if you had any profession to engage your
time and give an interest to your plans and actions.
Some inconvenience to your friends, indeed, might
result from it — you would not be able to give them
■rati AMD ■EWIBILITY. 125
•o much of your time. Bat (with a smile) you would
be materially b en e fit e d in oat particular at least—
you would know where to go whoa you left them. "
" I do assure you, " he replied, " that I hare long
thought on this point as you think now. It has been,
and is, and probably will always ho a heavy misfor-
tune to me, that I hare had no necessary business to
engage me, no profession to give me employment or
afford me anything like independence. But unfor-
tunately my own nicety, and the nicety of my friends,
have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being. We
never could agree In our choice of a profession. I
always prefer red the church, as I still do. But that
was not smart enough for my family. They recom-
mended the army. That was a great deal too smart
for me. The law was allowed to be genteel enough;
many young men, who had chambers in the Temple,
made a Yery good appearance in the first circles, and
drore about town in yery knowing gigs. But I had
no inclination for the law, even in this less abstruse
study of it, which my family approved. As for the
navy, it had fashion on its side, but I was too old
when the subject was first started to enter it — and, at
length, as there was no necessity for my having any
profession at all, as I might be as dashing and ex-
pensive without a red coat on my back as with one,
idleness was pronounced on the whole to be the most
advantageous and honourable, and a young man of
eighteen If not in general so earnestly bent on being
busy as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do
nothing. I was therefore entered at Oxford, and
have been properly idle ever since. "
120 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" The consequence of which, I suppose, w
said Mrs. Dashwood, " since leisure has not pre
your own happiness, that your sons will he b
up to as many pursuits, employments, profe
and trades as Columella's. "
" They will be brought up, " said he, in a i
accent, " to be as unlike myself as is possibl
feeling, in action, in condition, in everything.'
" Come, come ; this is all an effusion of imn
want of spirits, Edward. Tou are in a mela
humour, and fancy that any one unlike yoursel
be happy. But remember that the pain of j
from friends will be felt by everybody at times,
ever be their eduction or state. Know you
happiness. You want nothing but patience — <
it a more fascinating name, call it hope,
mother will secure to you, in time, that indepeo
you are so anxious for ; it is her duty, and it i
must ere long become her happiness to prevent
whole youth from being wasted in discontent,
much may not a few months do ! "
" I think, " replied Edward, " that I maj
many months to produce any good to me. "
This desponding turn of mind, though it coul
be communicated to Mrs. Dashwood, gave addi
pain to them all in the parting, which shortly took
and left an uncomfortable impression on El
feelings especially, which required some troubl
time to subdue. But as it was her determinati
subdue it, and to prevent herself from appeari
suffer more than what all her family suffered c
going away, she did not adopt the method so j <
127
oualy employed by Marianne, on a similar occasion,
to augment and flx her sorrow, by ssaHng alienee,
solitude, and idleness. Their means were ae different
ae tlmir objects, and equally tufted to the advance-
ment of eaek
Elinor eat down to her drawins^table ae toon as
he waa out of the hones, boatty employed henelf the
whole day, neither sought nor avoided the mention
of hie name, appeared to interest henelf almost as
much ae ever in the general conc er ns of the family,
and H by this conduct, she did not les sen her own
grief; it was at least prerented from unnecessary in-
crease, and her mother and sisters were spared much
solieitnde on her account.
Such behaviour ae this, so exactly the reverse of
her own, appeared no more meritorious to Marianne,
than her own had seemed faulty to her. The busi-
ness of setfK»mmand she settled yery easily ; — with
strong affections it was impossible, with calm ones it
could hare no merit That her sister's affections
were calm, she dared not deny, though she blushed
to acknowledge it ; and of the strength of her own,
she gave a very striking proof, by still loving and re-
specting that sister, in spite of this mortifying con-
viction*
Without shutting herself up from her family, or
leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid
them, or lying awake the whole night to indulge
meditation, Elinor found every day afforded her lei-
sure enough to think of Edward, and of Edward's
behaviour, in every possible variety which the differ-
ent state of her spirits at different times could pro-
128 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
duce ; — with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure,
and doubt. There were moments in abundance,
when, if not by the absence of her mother and sisters,
at least by the nature of their employments, conver-
sation was forbidden among them, and every effect of
solitude was produced. Her mind was inevitably at
liberty; her thoughts could not be chained elsewhere;
and the past and the future, on a subject so interest-
ing, must be before her, must force her attention, and
engross her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.
From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her draw-
ing-table, she was roused one morning, soon after
Edward's leaving them, by the arrival of company
She happened to be quite alone. The closing of the
little gate, at the entrance of the green court in front
of the house, drew her eyes to the window, and she
saw a large party walking up to the door. Amongst
them were Sir John and Lady Middleton, and Mrs.
Jennings; but there were two others, a gentleman
and lady, who were quite unknown to her. She was
sitting near the window, and as soon as Sir John
perceived her, he left the rest of the party to the
ceremony of knocking at the door, and stepping
across t > e turf, obliged her to open the casement to
speak to him, though the space was so short between
the door and the window as to make it hardly possible
to speak at one without being heard at the other.
" Well, " said he, " we have brought you some
strangers. How do you like them ? n
" Hush ! they will hear you. "
" Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmers.
Charlotte is very pretty, I can tell you. You may
see her if you look this way. "
•Urn AMD IMSIBIL1TT. 129
'Ai BUnorwas oertain of teeing her in a couple of
tunutse, without taking that liberty, the begged to
* excused.
u Where is Marianne P Hae she run away be-
%use we -are oome P I eee her instrument is open. "
« She ii walking, 1 baUere. "
They were now Joined by Mrs. Jennings, who had
& > t patience enough to wait till the door was opened
before the told ktr story. She came hallooing to
the window, " How do yon do, my dearP How does
Mrs. Dashwood doP And where are your sisters?
What! all alone t you will be glad of a little com-
pany to alt with yon. I hare brought my other son
and daughter to eee you. Only think of their coming
so suddenly 1 I thought I heard a carriage last night,
while we ware drinking our tea, but it nerer entered
my head that it could be them. I thought of nothing
but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come
back again; so I said to Sir John,'I do think I hear
a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come back
again 9 »—
Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle
of her story, to receive the rest of the party; Lady
Middleton introduced the two strangers; Mrs. Dash-
wood and Margaret came down stairs at the jame
time, and they all sat down to look at one another,
while Mrs. Jennings continued her story as she
walked through the passage into the parlour, At-
tended by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than Lady
Middleton, and totally unlike her in every respect.
Jhe was short and plump, had a very pretty face, and
x vol. I.
130 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
the finest expression of good humour in it thai
possibly be. Her manners were by no me
elegant as her sister's, but they were much mo
possessing. She came in with a smile — smiled
time of her visit, except when she laughed, and
when she went away. Her husband was a
looking young man of five or six and twenty, \*
air of more fashion and sense than his wife,
less willingness to please or be pleased. He e
the room with a look of self-consequence, s
bowed to the ladies without speaking a word
after briefly surveying them and their apart
took up a newspaper from the table and contin
read it as long as he staid.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was st
endowed by nature with a turn for being uni
civil and happy, was hardly seated before her ai
tion of the parlour and everything in it burst f
" Well ! what a delightful room this is ! I
saw anything so charming! Only think, mamini
it is improved since I was here last ! I always tt
it such a sweet place, ma'am ! (turning to Mrs.
wood,) but you have made it so charming! Onl;
sister, how delightful everything is ! How I i
like such a house for myself ! Should not you
Palmer? "
Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did no
raise his eyes from the newspaper.
" Mr. Palmer does not hear me, " said she, lauj
" He never does, sometimes. It is so ridiculoi
This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwoo
had never been used to find wit in the inatti
IU1TT. 131
of any on, and ©onld not htfe looking with surprise
at them both.
Kit, Jennmge, in the mean time, talked on m loud
at she could, and continued h«r account of their sur-
prise, At evening before, on ■ewlng their friends,
withcntoeasingtffleTerythmg was told. Mrs. Palmer
laughed heartily at tin recollection of their astonish-
ment, and everybody agreed, two or three timet over,
that It had been quite an agreea bl e surprise.
" Yon may believe how glad we all were to aee
them,* added Mrs. Jennings, leaning forwards to-
wards Elinor, and speaking in a low Toloe as if she
meant to be heard by no one else, though they were
s ea ted on different aides of the room t " but, however,
I can't help wishing they bad not travelled quite so
fast, nor made such a long Journey of it, for they
came all round by London upon account of some
business, for yon know (nodding significantly and
pointing to her daughter) it was wrong in her situa-
tion* I wanted her to stay at home and rest this
morning, but she would come with us j she longed
ao much to aee yon sill*
Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her
any harm.
M She expects to be confined in February, " con-
tinued Mrs, Jennings.
Lady Middleton eould no longer endure such a
conversation, and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr.
Palmer if there was any news in the paper.
M No, none at all, " he replied, and read on.
M Here comes Marianne, cried Sir John. " Now,
Palmer, yon shall see a monstrous pretty girl. "
132 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
He immediately went into the passage, opened the
front door, and ushered her in himself. Mrs. Jen-
nings asked her, as soon as she appeared, if she had
not been to Allenham; and Mrs. Palmer laughed so
heartily at the question, as to show she understood it.
Mr. Palmer looked up on her entering the room,
stared at her some minutes, and then returned to his
newspaper. Mrs. Palmer's eye was now caught by
the drawings which hung round the room. She got
up to examine them.
" Oh! dear, how beautiful these are! Well, how
delightful ! Do but look, mamma, how sweet ! I
declare they are quite charming ; I could look at
them for ever. And then sitting down again, she
very soon forgot that there were any such things in
the room.
When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Pal-
mer rose also, laid down the newspaper, stretched
himself, and looked at them all round.
" My love, have you been asleep P " said his wife,
laughing.
He made her no answer, and only observed, after
again examining the room, that it was very low-
pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked. He then
made his bow and departed with the rest.
Sir John had been very urgent with them all to
spend the next day at the park. Mrs. Dashwood,
who did not choose to dine with them oftener than
they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her
own account; her daughters might do as they pleased.
But they had no curiosity to see how Mr. and Mrs.
Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation of plea-
mm a«d snrswuTY. 134
rate from them in any other way. They attempted,
therefore, liktwte to excuse themselves; the weather
wee uncertain end not likely to he good. But Sir
John would not he satisfied the carriage should he
eent for them, end they must come. Lady Middleton
too, though she did not press their mother, pressed
mem. Mrs. Jennings and Mrs. Palmer Joined their
entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid a
Jamily party, and the young ladies were obliged to
yield.
••Why should they ask us P* said Marianne, as
soon as they were gone. •• The rent of this cottage
Is said to he low) hut we have it on very hard terms,
if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is
staying either with them or with us. "
«• They mean no less to he civil and kind to us
now, " said Elinor, •'by these frequent invitations
than by those which we received from them a few
weeks ago. The alteration is not in them, if their
parties are grown tedious and dull. We must look
for the change elsewhere. "
CHAPTER XX.
As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room
of the park the next day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer
134 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
came running in at the other, looking as good-hu-
moured and merry as before. She took them al
most affectionately by the hand, and expressed great
delight in seeing them again.
" I am so glad to see you ! " said she, seating her-
self between Elinor and Marianne, " for it is so bad
a day I was afraid you might not come, which would
be a shocking thing, as we go away again to-morrow.
We must go, for the Westons come to us next week,
you know. It was quite a sudden thing our coming
at all, and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was
coming to the door, and then Mr. Palmer asked me
if I would go with him to Barton, He is so droll !
He never tells me anything ! I am so sorry we can-
not stay longer; however, we shall meet again in town
very soon, I hope. "
They were obliged to put an end to such an ex-
pectation.
" Not go to town!* cried Mrs. Palmer, with a
laugh ; " I shall be quite disappointed if you do not
I could get the nicest house in the world for you,
next door to ours, in Hanover-square. Tou must
come, indeed. I am sure I shall be very happy to
chaperon you at any time till I am confined, if Mrs.
Dashwood should not like to go into public. "
They thanked her, but were obliged to resist aU
her entreaties.
" Oh ! my love, " cried Mrs. Palmer to her. husband,
who just then entered the room — " You must help
me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town
this winter. n
Her love made no answer; and after slightly
m
AVI SBMU1LITT. 136
bowing to the ladles, btgin complaining of the
weather*
" How horrid all this 1st* Mid he. " Sucn wea-
ther makes everything and everybody disgusting.
Dulness it as much produced within doon at without,
by rein* It makes one detest all one's acquaintance.
What the devil does Sir John mean by not having a
billiard-room in }fo house P How few people know
what comfort Is I Sir John Is as stupid as the wea-
ther*
The rest of the company soon dropt in.
« I am afraid, Miss Marianne,* said Sir John, " you
hate not been able to take your usual walk to Allen-
ham to-day. "
Marianne looked very grave and said nothing.
" Oh I don't be so sly before us, " said Mrs. Palmer;
" for we know all about it, I assure you ; and I ad-
mire your taste very much, for I think he is extremely
handsome. We do not live a great way from him in
the country, you know,— not above ten miles, I dare
say.*
u Much nearer thirty, " said her husband.
M Ah t well ! there is not much difference I never
was at his house j but they say It is a sweet pretty
place. "
" As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life, " said Mr.
Palmer.
Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her
countenance betrayed her interest in what was said.
" Is it very ugly P " continued Mrs. Palmer— " then it
must be some other place that is so pretty, I suppose. "
When they were seated in the dining-room, Sir
£36 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
J-jhii observed with regret that they were only eigl*
all together.
" My dear, " said he to his lady, " it is very pro
yoking that we should be so few. Why did not yof.
ask the Gilberts to come to us to-day ? "
" Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke ta
me about it before, that it could not be done P The)
dined with us last. n
" You and I, Sir John, " said Mrs. Jennings, " should
not stand upon such ceremony. "
" Then you would be very ill-bred, " cried Mr.
Palmer.
" My lore, you contradict everybody, " said his
wife with her usual laugh. " Do you know that you
are quite rude ? "
u I did not know I contradicted anybody in calling
your mother ill-bred. "
" Ay, you may abuse me as you please, " said the
good-natured old lady. " You have taken Charlotte
off ray hands, and cannot give her back again. So
there I have the whip hand of you. "
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her hus-
band could not get rid of her, and exultingly sai^
she did not care how cross he was to her, as they
must live together. It was impossible for any one
to be more thoroughly good-natured or more deter-
mined to be happy than Mrs. Palmer. The studied
indifference, insolence, and discontent of her hus-
band gave her no pain ; and when he scolded or
abused her, she was highly diverted.
" Mr. Palmer is so droll ! " said she, in a whisper,
to Elinor. " He is always out of humour. "
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 137
Elinor was not inclined, alter a little observation,
to give him credit for being so genuinely and unaf-
fectedly ill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to appear.
His temper might perhaps be a little soured by find-
ing, like many others of his sex, that through some
unaccountable bias in favour of beauty, he was the
husband of a very silly woman, — but she knew that
this kind of blunder was too common for any sen-
sible man to be lastingly hurt by it It was rather
a wish of distinction, she believed, which produced
his contemptuous treatment of everybody, and his
general abuse of everything before him. It was the
desire of appearing superior to other people. The
motive was too common to be wondered at ; but the
means, however they might succeed by establishing
his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to
attach any one to him except his wife.
" Oh ! my dear Miss Dashwood, " said Mrs. Palmer
soon afterwards, " I have got such a favour to ask of
jou and your sister. " Will you come and spend some
time at Cleveland this Christmas P Now, pray do, —
and come while the " Westons are with us. You
cannot think how happy I shall be ! It will be quite
delightful ! My love, " applying to her husband,
" don't you long to have the Miss Dashwoods con*
to Cleveland P "
" Certainly, " he replied with a sneer — " I cam}
into Devonshire with no other view. "
" There now " — said his ludy, " you sec Mr. Palmet
expects )ou; so you cannot refuse to come. "
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her
imitation.
138 8 EH SB AND SENSIBILITY.
" But indeed you must and shall come. I am sore
you will like it of all things. The Westons will be
with us, and it will be quite delightful. You cannot
think what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are
so gay now, for Mr. Palmer is always going about
the country canvassing against the election; and so
many people come to dine with us that I never saw
before, it is quite charming! But, poor fellow! it is
very fatiguing to him! for he is forced to make
everybody like him.*
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she
assented to the hardship of such an obligation.
" How charming it will be, " said Charlotte, " when
he is in Parliament ! — won't it P How I shall laugh !
It will be so ridiculous to see all his letters directed
to him with an M. P. But do you know, he says he
will never frank for me. He declares he won't.
Don't you, Mr. Palmer ? "
Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.
" He cannot bear writing, you know, " she con-
tinued — " he says it is quite shocking. "
" No, " said he, u I never said anything so irra-
tional. Don't palm all your abuses of language upon
me. "
" There now ; you see how droll he is. This is
always the way with him ! Sometimes he wou't speak
to me for half a day together, and then he comes out
with something so droll — all about anything in the
world. "
She surprised Elinor very much as they returned
into the drawing-room by asking her whether she did
not like Mr. Palmer excessively.
1
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 130
" Certainly,''ssid Elinor, " he seems very agree-
able. "
" Well— I am so glad yon do. I thought you
would, he is so pleasant; and Mr. Palmer is exces-
sively pleased with you and your sisters, I can tell
you, and you can't think how disappointed he will
be if you don't come to Cleveland. I can't imagine
why you should object to it. "
Elinor was again obliged to decline her invita-
tion ; and by changing the subject, put a stop to her
entreaties. She thought it probable that as they
lived in the same county, Mrs. Palmer might be able
to give some more particular account of Willoughby's
general character than could be gathered from the
Mid die tons'partial acquaintance with him, and she
was eager to gain from any one such a confirmation
of his merits as might remove the possibility of fear
for Marianne. She began by inquiring if they saw
much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether
they were intimately acquainted with him.
" Oh ! dear, yes ; I know him extremely well/'
replied Mrs. Palmer — " Not that I ever spoke to him
indeed ; but I have seen him for ever in town.
Somehow or other, I never happened to be staying
at Barton while he was at Allenham. Mamma saw
him here once before; — but I was with my undo
at Weymouth. However, I dare say we should have
seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire, if it had
not happened very unluckily that we should never
have been in the country together. He is very little
at Combe, I believe ; but if he were ever so much
there, I do not think Mr. Palmer would visit him,
140 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
for he is in the opposition, you know, and besides il
is such a way off. I know why you inquire about
him, very well j your sister is to marry him. I am
monstrous glad of it, for then I shall have her for a
neighbour, you know. "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " you know
much more of the matter than I do, if you have any
reason to expect such a match. "
" Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it
is what everybody talks of. I assure you I heard
of it in my way through town, "
" My dear Mrs. Palmer ! M
" Upon my honour I did. — I met Colonel Brandon
Monday morning in Bond-street, just before we left
town, and he told me of it directly. "
" You surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon
tell you of it ! Surely you must be mistaken. To
give such intelligence to a person who could not be
interested in it, even if it were true, is not what I
should expect Colonel Brandon to do. "
" But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and
I will tell you how it happened. When we met him,
he turned back and walked with us ; and so we began
talking of my brother and sister, and one thing and
another, and I said to him,'So, Colonel, there is a
new family come to Barton cottage, I hear, and
mamma sends me word they are very pretty, and that
one of them is going to be married to Mr. Willoughby
of Combe Magna. Is it true, pray ? for of course
you must know, as you have been in Devonshire so
lately/ n
" And what did the Colonel say ? n
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 1 11
" Oh ! — he did not say much ; but he looked as if
he knew it to be true, so from that moment I set it
down as certain. It will be quite delightful, I
declare ! When is it to take place P "
" Mr. Brandon was very well, I hope P "
u Oh ! yes, quite well ; and so full of your praises,
he did nothing but say fine things of you. "
" I am flattered by his commendation. He seems
an excellent man ; and I think him uncommonly
pleasing. "
" So do I. — He is such a charming man, that it is
quite a pity he should be so grave and so dull.
Mamma says he was in love with your sister too.
I assure you it was a great compliment if he was,
for he hardly ever falls in love with anybody. "
" Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of
Somersetshire P " said Elinor.
" Oh ! yes, extremely well ; — that is, I do not be-
lieve many people are acquainted with him, because
Combe Magna is so far off; but they all think him
extremely agreeable, I assure you. Nobody is more
liked than Mr. Willoughby wherever he goes, and
so you may tell your sister. She is a monstrous
lucky girl to get him, upon my honour ; not but that
he is much more lucky in getting her, because she is
so very handsome and agreeable that nothing can be
good enough for her. However, I don't think her
hardly at all handsomer than yoa, I assure you ; for
I think you both excessively pretty, and so does Mr.
Palmer too, I am sure, though we could not get him
to own it last night. "
Mrs. Palmer's information respecting Willoughby
142 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
was not very material; but any testimony in his fa-
vour, however small, was pleasing to her.
" I am so glad we are got acquainted at last, " con-
tinued Charlotte. " And now I hope we shall al-
ways be great friends. Tou can't think how much
I longed to see you ! It is so delightful that you
should live at the cottage ! Nothing can be like it,
to be sure ! And I am so glad your sister is going
to be well married ! I hope you will be a great deal
at Combe Magna. It is a sweet place, by all ac-
counts. "
" You have been long acquainted with Colonel
Brandon, have not you P "
" Yes, a great while ; ever since my sister married.
He was a particular friend of Sir John's. I believe, "
she added in a low voice, " he would have been very
glad to have had me, if he could. Sir John and Lady
Middleton wished it very much. But mamma did
hot think the match good enough for me, otherwise
& ir John would have mentioned it to the Colonel,
and we should have been married immediately.
" Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's
proposal to your mother before it was made P Had he
never owned his affection to yourself P "
" Oh I no ; but if mamma had not objected to it,
I dare say he would have liked it of all things. He
had not seen me then above twice, for it was before
I left school. However, I am much happier as I am*
Mr. Palmer is just ihe kind of man I like. "
143
CHAPTER XXI.
./
The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day,
nd the two families at Barton were again left to
ntertain each other. But this did not last long;
Slinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her
lead — had hardly done wondering at Charlotte's being
o happy without a cause, at Mr. Palmer's acting no
imply with good abilities, and at the strange un-
uitableness which often existed between husband
nd wife, before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings's active
eal in the cause of society procured her some other
lew acquaintance to see and observe. **.
In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met
rith two young ladies whom Mrs. Jennings had the
atisfaction of discovering to be her relations, and this
ras enough for Sir John to invite them directly to
he park, as soon as their present engagements at
Sxeter were over. Their engagements at Exeter in-
tantly gave way before such an invitation, and Lady
kliddlcton was thrown into no little alarm on the
eturn of Sir John, by hearing that she was very soon
o receive a visit from two girls whom she had never
een in her life, and of whose elegance — wIiohc tolcr-
ble gentility even, she could have no proof; for the
ssurances of her husband and mother on that sub-
ect went for nothing at all. They being her nla-
ionB, too, made it so much the worse; and Mrs. Jen-
144 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
nings's- attempts at consolation were therefore unfor-
tunately founded, when she advised her daughter not
to care about their being so fashionable, because
they were all cousins and must put up with one
another.
As it was impossible however now to prevent their
coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea
of it with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman,
contenting herself with merely giving her husband a
gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times
every day.
The young ladies arrived, their appearance was by
no means un genteel or unfashionable. Their dress
was very smart, their manners very civil, they were
delighted with the house and in raptures with the
furniture, and they happened to be so doatingly fond
of children that Lady Middleton's good opinion was
engaged in their favour before they had been an hour
at the park. She declared them to be very agreeable
girls indeed, which for her ladyship was enthusiastic
admiration. Sir John's confidence in his own judg-
ment rose with this animated praise, and he set of
directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwood
of the Miss Steeles'arrival, and to assure them <
their being the sweetest girls in the world. Fro
such commendation as this, however, there was i
much to be learned ; Elinor well knew that the swe
est girls in the world were to be met with in e\
part of England, under ever}'possible variatioi
form, face, temper, and understanding. Sir •
wanted the whole family to walk to the park dir
and look at his guests. Benevolent, philanth
nan a» sbvsiiilitt, 14ft
; was painful to him even to keep a third
mm now* ttld he — " pray come— you mutt
declare you shall conic.— You can't think
will like them* Lucy is monstrous pretty,
ad-humoured and agreeable! The children
Aging about her already, as If she was an
dntanee. And they both long to see you
ogs, for they hate heard at Exeter that you
uost beautiful creatures in the world \ and
Id them it is all very true, and a great deal
Ton will be delighted with them, I am sure,
e brought the whole coach full of playthings
hildren. How can you be so cross as not
! Why, they are your cousins, you know,
anion. You are my cousins, and they are
i, so you must be related. "
ir John could not prevail. He could only
promise of their calling at the park within
two, and then left them in amasement at
lArenoe, to walk home and boast anew of
actions to the Miss Steeles, as he had been
toasting of the Miss Steeles to them,
their promised visit to the park and conse-
troduction to these young ladies took place,
id in the appearance of the eldest, who was
Irty, with a very plain and not a sensible
hing to admire ; but in the other, who was
than two or three and twenty, they acknow-
msiderable beauty ; her features were pretty,
had a sharp, quick eye, and a smartness of
h, though it did not give actual elegance or
:. vol. r.


146 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
grace, gave distinction to her person. Their :
were particularly civil, and Elinor soon allow
credit for some kind of sense, when she s
what constant and judicious attentions th
making themselves agreeable to Lady Mi
With her children they were in continual 1
extolling their beauty, courting their notice,
mouring all their whims ; and such of their
could be spared from the importunate demanc
this politeness made on it, was spent in ad]
of whatever her ladyship was doing, if she h
to be doing anything, or in taking patterns
elegant new dress, in which her appearance
before had thrown them into unceasing deligl
tunately for those who pay their court throu
foibles, a fond mother, though, in pursuit c
for her children, the most rapacious of humai
is likewise the most credulous; her demands
orbitant ; but she will swallow anything ;
excessive affection and endurance of the Mia
towards her offspring, were viewed therefore
Middleton without the smallest surprise or
She saw with maternal complacency all the
nent encroachments and mischievous tricks 1
her cousins submitted. She saw their sashef
their hair pulled about their ears, their w <
searched, and their knives and scissors stole
and felt no doubt of its being a reciprocal enj
It suggested no other surprise than that EL
Marianne should sit so composedly by,withoi
ing a share in what was passing.
" John is in such spirits to-day! " said sh <
lEJfSE AND SENSIBILITY, 14f
taking Mill Steele's pocket handkerchief, and throw-
ing it out of window — " He is full of monkey tricks. "
And soon afterwards, on the second bo\'» violently
pinching one of the same lady's fingers, she fundly
observed, " How playful William is \ n
" And hero is my sweet little Anna-Maria, " hIig
added, tenderly caressing a little girl of three years
old, who had not made a noise for the last two mi-
nutes; " And she is always so gentle and quiet —
Never was there such a quiet little thing 1 "
But unfortunately, in bestowing these, embraces, a
pin in her ladyship's head-dress Hlightly scratching
the child's neck, produced from this pattern of gentle-
ness such violent screams as could hardly be outdone
by any creature professedly noisy. The mother's
consternation was excessive ; but it could not surpass
the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and everything was
done by all three, in so critical an emergency, which
affection could suggest as likely to assuage the ago-
nies of the little sufferer. She was seated in her
mother's lap, covered witli kisses, her wound bathed
with lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who
was on her knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed
with sugar-plums by the other. With such a reward
for her tears, the child was too wine to cease crying.
She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two
brothers for offering to touch her, and all their united
toothings were ineffectual till Lady Middletou luckily
remembering that in a scene of similar (Uh tress, last
week, some apricot marmalade had been successfully
applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was
eagerly proposed for this unfortunate scratch, and
II




148 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
a slight intermission of screams in the young 1
hearing it, gave them reason to hope that it
not be rejected. She was carried out of the
therefore in her mother's arms, in quest of thii
cine, and as the two boys chose to follow,
earnestly entreated by their mother to stay 1
the four young ladies were left in a quietness
the room had not known for many hours.
" Poor little creature P said Miss Steele, 9
as they were gone. " It might have been
sad accident. "
" Yet I hardly know how, " cried Marianne
less it had been under totally different circunu
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm
there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality. "
" What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is
Lucy Steele.
Marianne was silent; it was impossible foi
say what she did not feel, however trivial th
sion j and upon Elinor, therefore, the whole
telling lies when politeness required it alwt
She did her best when thus called on, by spea
Lady Middleton with more warmth than s
though with far less than Miss Lucy.
" And Sir John too, " cried the elder sister,
a charming man he is ! "
Here too, Miss Dashwood's commendation
only simple and just, came in without any eel
merely observed that he was perfectly good-hu
and friendly.
" And what a charming little family they 1
nejer saw such fine children in my life. I
SBMSI AND SENSIBILITY. 140
quite doat upon them already, and indeed I am
Iways distractedly fond of children. "
" I should guess so, " said Elinor with a smile,
from what I have witnessed this morning. "
11 I have a notion, " said Lucy, " you think the
ttle Middletons rather too much indulged ; perhaps
ley may be the outside of enough ; but it is so
atural in Lady Middleton ; and for my part, I love
3 see children full of life and spirits; I cannot bear
hem if they are tame and quiet. "
" I confess, 11 replied Elinor, " that while I am at
larton Park, I never think of tame and quiet chil-
ren with any abhorrence. "
A short pause succeeded this speech, which was
irst broken by Miss Steele, who seemed very much
lisposed for conversation, and who now said rather
ibruptly, " And how do you like Devonshire, M iss
> ashwood P I suppose you were very sorry to leave
Jussex. "
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question,
•r at least of the manner in which it was spoken,
ilinor replied that she was.
u Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not
tP w added Miss Steele.
" We have heard Sir John admire it excessively, "
laid Lucy, who seemed to think some apology neccs-
lary for the freedom of her sister.
" I think every one must admire it, " replied Eli-
lor, " who ever saw the place j though it is not to
> e supposed that any one can estimate its beauties
is we do. "
41 And had you a great many smart beaux there P
150 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
I suppose you have not so many in this part of the
world ; for my part, I think they axe a vast addition
always. "
" But why should you think, " said Lucy, looking
ashamed of her sister, " that there are not as many
genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex ? "
" Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say
fliat there an't. I'm sure there's a vast many smart
beaux in Exeter ; hut you know, how could I tell
what smart beaux there might be about Norland? and
I was only afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it
dull at Barton, if they had not so many as they used
to have. But perhaps you young ladies may not care
about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as
with them. For my part, I think they are vastly
agreeable, provided they dress smart and behave civil.
But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty. Now
there's Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young
man, quite a beau, clerk to Mr. Simpson you know,
and yet if you do but meet him of a morning, he is
not fit to be seen. I suppose your brother was quite
a beau, Miss Dashwood, before he married, as he was
so rich? "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " I cannot tell
you, for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning
of the word. But this I can say, that if he ever was
a beau before he married, he is one still, for there is •
not the smallest alteration in him. "
" Oh ! dear ! one never thinks of married men b
being beaux — they have something else to do. "
" Lord ! Anne, " cried her sister, " you can talk of
nothing but beaux ; — you will make Miss Dashwood
nini AWD MNtUILITY. 151
you think of nothing alee. " And then, to
• dtnowM, the began admiring the house and
specimen of the MIm Steele* wu enough,
dgar freedom and folly of the eldeet left her
xnmendatlon, and aa Elinor wu not blinded
beauty or the shrewd look of the youngest,
want of real elegance and artlestness, ahe
i house without any with of knowing them
to the MIm Steele*, They came from Exeter,
orided with admiration for the uae of Sir John
ton, hii family, and all hit relations, and no
Qy proportion was now dealt out to his fair
^ whom they declared to be the most beautiful,
, accomplished and agreeable girls they had
meld, and with whom they were particularly
I to be better acquainted. And t " be better
ited therefore, Elinor soon found was their in-
f lot; for as Sir John was entirely on the side
Miss Steeles, their party would be too strong
Kwition, and that kind of intimacy must be
ted to, which consists of sitting an hour or two
tr in the same room almost every day. Sir
ould do no more ; but he did not know that
ire was required ; to be together was, in his
i, to be intimate, and while his continual
s for their meeting were effectual, he had not
t of their being established friends,
lo him justice, he did everything in his power
note their unreserve, by making the Miss
acquainted with whatever he knew or sup-
152 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
posed of his cousins'situations in the most delicate
particulars, — and Elinor had not seen them more
than twice, before the eldest of them wished her joy
on her sister's having been so lucky as to make a
conquest of a very smart beau since she came to
Barton.
"'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so
young, to be sure, " said she, " and I hear he is quite
a beau, and prodigious handsome. And I hope you
may have as good luck yourself soon, — but perhaps
you may have a friend in the corner already. "
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be
more nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard
for Edward, than he had been with respect to Mari-
anne ; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of the
two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural;
and since Edward's visit, they had never dined to-
gether, without his drinking to her best affections
with so much significancy, and so many nods and
winks, as to excite general attention. The letter
F — had been likewise invariably brought forward,
and found productive of such countless jokes, that
its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet
had been long established with Elinor.
The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the
benefit of these jokes, and in the eldest of them they
raised a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman
alluded to, which, though often impertinently ex-
pressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general in-
quisitiveness into the concerns of their family. But
Sir John did not sport long with the curiosity which
he delighted to raise, for he had at least as much
mm awp •cutiBiLit r. 153
In tatting the name, as Miee Steele had la
ft.
name is Ferrars, " said he, in a very audible
" but pray do not tell it, for It's a great
an r repeated Mine Steele j " Mr. Ferrara
ppyman,iaheP What! yonr sister-in-law's
Kiss Dash wood P a very agreeable young
» tore | I know him Tery well. "
'ean yon aay so, AnneP " cried Lucy, who
made an amendment to all her titter's at*
" Though we have teen him once or twice
icle's, it it rather too much to pretend to
n Tery well. "
heard all this with attention and surprite.
ao was thlt uncle P where did he liveP how
7 acquainted P* She wished very much to
subject continued, though the did not choose
. it herself ; but nothing more of it was said,
the first time in her life, the thought Mrs.
deficient either in curiosity after petty in-
i, or in a ditpotition to communicate it.
iner in which Miss Steele had spoken of
increased her curiosity ; for it struck her as
her ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion
kdy*s knowing, or fancying herself to know,
g to his disadvantage. But her curiosity
miling, for no farther notice was taken of
UN's name by Miss Steele when alluded to,
penly mentioned by Sir John.
154
CHAPTER XXII.
Marianne, who had never much toleration for any-
thing like impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts,
or even difference of taste from herself, was at this
time particularly ill-disposed, from the state of her
spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or to en-
courage their advances 5 and to the invariable cold-
ness of her behaviour towards them, which checked
every endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor
principally attributed that preference of herself which
soon became evident in the manners of both, but
especially of Lucy, who missed no opportunity of
engaging her in conversation, or of striving to im-
prove their acquaintance by an easy and frank com-
munication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever ; her remarks were often
just and amusing; and as a companion for half an
hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable ; but her
powers had received no aid from education, she was
ignorant and illiterate, and her deficiency of all men-
tal improvement, her want of information in the most
common particulars, could not be concealed from
Miss Dash wood, in spite of her constant endeavour
to appear to advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied her
for, the neglect of abilities which education might
have rendered so respectable ; but she saw, with less
tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy,
■ asm muiMftin. tftV
integrity of mk*d, which herattem-
ber latteries at the park he-
end aha could hay* no lasting satisfaction In
pony of & person who Joined insincerity with
as, whose want of Instruction prev ent o d thetr
> hi conversation on tenet of equality, and
ondnet towaida others made every show of
m and deference towards henelf perfectly va-
a win think my question an odd one, I data
Id Lney to her one day aa they were walking
t from tha park to the cottage— " hut, pray,
. personally acquainted with your sister-in-
other, Mrs. Ferrari ? n
m aW think the question a very odd one, and
Btananoa expressed it, as she answered that
merer seen Mrs. Femurs.
lead 1 " replied Lucy; " I wonder at that, for
ht you must hare seen her at Norland some*
Then perhaps you cannot tell me what sort
■man she is P*
S w returned Elinor, cautious of giving her
nion of Edward'e mother, and not very desir-
satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity
now nothing of her. "
ea sure you think me very strange, for inquir-
»«t her in such a way, said Lucy, eyeing
attentively as she spoke ; " but perhaps there
reasons — I wish I might venture ; but how-
lope you will do me the justice of believing
lo not mean to be impertinent "
> r made her a civil reply, and they walked on
156 8ENSB AND SENSIBILITY.
for a few minutes in silence* It was broken by
Lucy, who renewed the subject again by saying with
some hesitation,
" I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently
curious ; I am sure I would rather do anything in the
world than be thought so by a person whose good
opinion is so well worth haying as yours. And I
am sure I should not have the smallest fear of trust "
ing you ; indeed I should be very glad of your advice
how to manage in such an uncomfortable situation
as I am $ but however there is no occasion to trouble
you. I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs.
Ferrars. w
" I am sorry I do not, " said Elinor in great asto-
nishment, " if it could be of any use to you to know
my opinion of her. But really, I never understood
that you were at all connected with that family, and
therefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so
serious an inquiry into her character. "
" I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all
wonder at it. But if I dared tell you all, you would
not be so much surprised. Mrs. Ferrars is certainly
nothing to me at present, — but the time may come
— how soon it will come must depend upon herself—
when we may be very intimately connected. "
She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful,
with only one side glance at her companion to ob-
serve its effect on her.
" Good heavens! " cried Elinor, " what do you
mean ? Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Fer-
rars? Can you be? " And she did not feel much
delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law.
SKKSI AND SENSIBILITY. 157
41 No, " replied Lucy, " not to Mr. Robert Ferrara
—I never taw him in my life ; but, " fixing her eyes
upon Elinor, " to his elder brother. "
" What felt Elinor at that moment P Astonish-
ment, that would have been as painful as it was strong,
iad not an immediate disbelief of the assertion at-
tended it. She turned towards Lucy in silent amaze-
ment, unable to divine the reason or object of such
i declaration, and though her complexion varied, ahe
itood firm in incredulity, and felt in no danger of an
irytterical fit or a swoon.
" You may well be surprised, " continued Lucy ;
" for, to be sure, you could have had no idea of it
before ; for I dare say he never dropped the smallest
hint of it to you or any of your family; because it
was always meant to be a great secret, and I am sure
has been faithfully kept by me to this hour. Not a
ioul of all my relations knows of it but Anne, and I
never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not
felt the greatest dependance in the world upon your
lecrecy ; and I really thought my behaviour in asking
k > many questions about Mrs. Fcrrars, must seem so
xld, that it ought to be explained. And I do not
think Mr. Fcrrars can be displeased, when he knows
I have trusted you, because I know he has the highest
opinion in the world of all your family, and looks
upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite
is his own sisters. " — She paused.
Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Her
istonishment at what she heard was at first too great
: or words ; but at length forcing herself to speak, and
:o speak cautiously, she said with a calmness of man-
158
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
ner, which tolerably well concealed her surp
solicitude — " May I ask if your engageme]
long standing ? "
" We have been engaged these four years.'
" Four years ! "
" Yes. "
Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt u:
believe it.
" I did not know, " said she, " that you wc
acquainted till the other day. "
" Our acquaintance, however, is of man;
date. He was under my uncle's care, you I
considerable while. "
" Your uncle ! "
" Yes ; Mr. Pratt. Did you never hear h
of Mr. Pratt? "
" I think I have, " replied Elinor, with an exc
spirits, which increased with her increase of e
" He was four years with my uncle, who'.
Longstaple, near Plymouth. It was there
quaintance begun, for my sister and me wa
staying with my uncle, and it was there our (
ment was formed, though not till a year after
quitted as a pupil; but he was almost alwa
us afterwards. I was very unwilling to enter
as you may imagine, without the knowled
approbation of his mother} but I was too you
loved him too well to be so prudent as Ioi
have been. — Though you do not know him
as me, Miss l)ashwood, you must have seen
of him to be sensible he is very capable of i
a woman sincerely attached to him. "
SENSE AND 8EN8IBIL1TY. 150
" Certainly, " answered Elinor, without knowing
what she said ; bat after a moment's reflection, she
added with reriyed security of Edward's honour and
love, and her companion's falsehood— w Engaged to
Mr. Edward Ferrars! — I confess myself so totally
surprised at what you tell me, that really — I beg
your pardon ; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name. We cannot mean the same Mr.
Ferrars. "
" We can mean no other, " cried Lucy smiling.
u Mr. Edward Ferrars, the eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars
of Park-street, and brother of your sister-in-law,
Mrs. John Dashwood, is the person I mean ; you
must allow that / am not likely to be deceived as to
the name of the man on whom all my happiness
depends. "
" It is strange, " replied Elinor in a most painful
perplexity, " that I should never have heard him
even mention your name. "
" No ; considering our situation, it was not strange.
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret. —
You knew nothing of me or my family, and therefore
there could be no occasion for ever mentioning my
name to you ; and as he was always particularly
afraid of his sister's suspecting anything, that was
reason enough for his not mentioning it. "
She was silent. — Elinor's security sunk ; but her
self-command did not sink with it.
u Four years you have been engaged, " said she
with a firm voire.
" Yes ; and Heaven knows how much longer we
may have to wait. Toor Edward ! it puts him quite
160 SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
out of heart. " Then taking a small miniature from
her pocket, she added, " To prevent the possibility of
mistake, be so good as to look at this face. It does
not do him justice, to be sure, but yet I think you
cannot be deceived as to the person it was drew for.
I have had it above these three years. "
She put it into her hands as she spoke, and when
Elinor saw the painting, whatever other doubts her
fear of a too hasty decision or her wish of detecting
falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind, she
could have none of its being Edward's face. She
returned it almost instantly, acknowledging the like-
ness.
" I have never been able, " continued Lucy, u to
give him my picture in return, which I am very
much vex^d at, for he has been always so anxious to
get it ! But I am determined to sit for it the very
first opportunity . "
" You are quite in the right, " replied Elinor
calmly. They then proceeded a few paces in silence.
Lucy spoke first.
" I am sure, " said she, " I have no doubt in the
world of your faithfully keeping this secret, because
you must know of what importance it is to us, not
to have it reach his mother ; for she would never ap-
prove of it, I dare say. I shall have no fortune, and
I fancy she is an exceeding proud woman. "
" I certainly did not seek your confidence, " said
Elinor ; " but you do me no more than justice in
imagining that I may be depended on. Your secret
is safe with me ; but pardon me if I express some
surprise at so unnecessary a communication. You
SENSE AND SEMftlBILITI. 161
mutt at least haye felt that my being acquainted with
t could not add to its safety. "
As she suid this, she looked earnestly at Lucy,
toping to discover something in her countenance ;
> erhaps the falsehood of the greatest part of what nlie
lad been saying; but Lucy's countenance suffered
10 change.
" I was afraid you would think I was taking a great
iberty with you, " said she, " in telling you all this.
[ have not known you long to be sure, personally at
east, but I have known you and all your family by
lescription a great while ; and as booh as I saw you,
I felt almost as if you was an old acquaintance. Bo-
lides in the present case, I really thought some ex-
planation was due to you after my making such par-
icular inquiries about Edward's mother ; and I am
k > unfortunate, that I have not a creature whose ad-
rice I can ask. Anne is the only person that knows
> f it, and she has no judgment at all; indeed she dors
me a great deal more harm than good, for I am in
:onstant fear of her betraying me. She does not
know how to hold her tongue, as you must perceive,
ind I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world
t'other day, when Edward's name was mentioned by
Sir John, lest she should out with it all. You en n't
think how much I go through in my mind from it
altogether. I only wonder that 1 am alive after what
I have suffered for Edward's sake these last four
years. Everything in such suspense and uncertainty;
and seeing him so seldom — we can hardly meet abovo
twice a-year. I am sure I wonder my heart is not
quite broke. "
M. VOL. I-
1G2
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
D'

Here she took out her handkerchief ; but
did not feel very compassionate.
" Sometimes, " continued Lucy, after wip
eyes, " I think whether it would not be bett€
both, to break off the matter entirely. " As i
this, she looked directly at her companion,
then at other times I have nojt resolution enc
it. I cannot bear the thoughts of making
miserable, as I know the very mention of
thing would do. And on my own account
dear as he is to me — I don't think I could I
to it. What would you advise me to do in
case, Miss Dashwood ? What would you d
self? "
" Pardon me, " replied Elinor, startled by tl
tion ; " but I can give you no advice under si
cumstances. Tour own judgment must dire <
" To be sure, " continued Lucy, after a few n
silence on both sides, " his mother must prpi
him some time or other ; but poor Edward if
down about it ! Did not you think him dreadi
spirited when he was at Barton ? He was so
ble when he left us at Longstaple, to go to yo
I was afraid you would think him quite ill. "
" Did he come from your uncle's then, w
visited us? "
" Oh ! yes ; he had been staying a fortnig
us. Did you think he came directly from to-
" No, " replied Elinor, most feelingly sent
every fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy's v <
" I remember he told us, that he had been sts
fortnight with some friends near Plymouth.
SEWSE AVD SENSIBILITY. 163
remembered, too, her own surprise at the time, at his
mentioning nothing farther of those friends, at his
total silence with respect even to their names.
" Did not you think him sadly out of spirits ? " re-
peated Lucy.
" We did indeed, particularly so when he first
arriYed. w
" I begged him to exert himself for fear you should
suspect what was the matter ; but it made him so
melancholy, not being able to stay more than a fort-
night with us, and seeing me so much affected. —
Poor fellow ! — I am afraid it is just the same with
him now ; for he writes in wretched spirits. I heard
from him just before I left Exeter ; " taking a letter
from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction
to Elinor. " You know his hand, I dare say, a
charming one it is ; but that is not written so well
as usual. He was tired, I dare say, for he had just
filled the sheet to me as full as possible. "
Elinor saw that it was his hand, and she could
doubt no longer. The picture, she had allowed her-
self to believe, might have been accidentally ob-
tained; it might not have been Edward's gift; but a
correspondence between them by letter, could subsist
only under a positive engagement, could bo author-
ised by nothing else ; for a few moments, she was
almost overcome — her heart sunk within her, and
she could hardly stand; but exertion was indispen-
sably necessary , and she struggled so resolutely against
the oppression of her feelings, that her success was
speedy, and for the time complete.
" Writing to each other, " said Lucy, returning the
164 SENSE AND 8EN SIBIL IT Y.
letter into her pocket, " is the only comfort we hare
in such long separations. Yes, / have one other
comfort in his picture ; but poor Edward has not
even that. If he had but my picture, he says he
should be easy. I gave him a lock of my hair set in
a ring when he was at Longataple last, and that was
some comfort to him, he said, but not equal to a
picture. Perhaps you might notice the ring when
you 8a w him? "
" I did/'said Elinor, with a composure of voice,
under which was concealed an emotion and distress
beyond anything she had ever felt before. She was
mortified, shocked, confounded.
Fortunately for her, they had now reached the
cottage, and the conversation could be continued no
farther. After sitting with them a few minutes, the
Miss Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was
then at liberty to think and be wretched.
CHAPTER XXIII.
However small her general dependance on Lucy's
ve- acity might be, it was impossible for her on serious
reflection to suspect it in the present case, where no
temptation could be answerable to the folly of in-
venting a falsehood of such a description. What
160
L to be tro*,th«fefora, Elinor aoold
toad not longer doubt; eupported m itwae too
my aide by mob probabilitice and proots, and
mdleted by nothing but om own wishee, Their
rtanity of aoqnainfanne In tha. houtc of Mr*
: wu a foundation for the net, at once inditput-
ejad alarming) and Kdward'e visit near Ply-
lb bia melancholy atata of mind, bia diesetiake-
at hla own proepecta, bia uncertain behaviour
Ida bereelf, tha intimate knowledge of the Hiaa
aa aa to Norland and their family connexion*,
h had oftan anrpriaed her — the picture, the letter,
ing, formed altogether such a body of evidence,
mama every fear of condemning him unfairly,
Mtabliahed aa a fact which no partiality could aet
• bit ill-treatment of hereeft Her reaentment
Mh behaviour, her indignation at having been ita
• for a abort time made her feel only for herself;
ither ideas, other considerations toon arose. Had
ard been intentionally deceiving her P Had he
* & a regard for her which he did not feel P Wat
agagement to Lucy, an engagement of the heart P
whatever it might once have been, she could
Mlieve it such at present. Hit affection wat all
•wn. She could not be deceived in that. Her
ter, sisters, Fanny, all had been conscious of hit
d for her at Norland ; it waa not an illusion of
iwn vanity. He certainly loved her. What a
ner of the heart wat this persuasion! How
i could it not tempt her to forgive t He had
blameable, highly blameable in remaining at
and after be first felt her influence over Jiim to
166 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
be more than it ought to be. In that, he could not
be defended ; but if he had injured her, how much
more had he injured himself! if her case were pitia-
ble, his was hopeless. His imprudence had made her
miserable for a while ; but it seemed to have deprived
himself of all chance of ever being otherwise. She
might in time regain tranquillity ; but he, what had
he to look forward to P Could he ever be tolerably
happy with Lucy Steele P could he, were his affection
for herself out of the question, with his integrity, his
delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with a
wife like her — illiterate, artful, and selfish ?
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would na-
turally blind him to everything but her beauty and
good nature ; but the four succeeding years — years,
which, if rationally spent, give such improvement to
the understanding, must have opened his eyes to her
defects of education, while the same period of time,
spent on her side in inferior society and more frivol-
ous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of that sim-
plicity, which might once have given an interesting
character to her beauty.
If in the supposition of his seeking to marry her-
self, his difficulties from his mother had seemed great,
how mush greater were they now likely to be, when
the object of his engagement was undoubtedly in-
ferior in connexions, and probably inferior in for-
tune to herself! These difficulties indeed, with a
heart so alienated from Lucy, might not press very
hard upon his patience ; but melancholy was the state
of the person, by whom the expectation of family
opposition and unkindness could be felt as a relief!
SENSX AVD SENSIBILITY. 107
At th6M conslderationa occurred to h?r in painful
succession, the wept for him, more than for herself.
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing
to merit her present unhappiness, and condoled by
the belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit
her esteem, she thought the could even now, under
the first smart of the heavy blow, command herself
enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her
mother and sisters. And so well was she able to
answer her own expectations, that when she joined
them at dinner only two hours after she had lirHt suf-
fered the extinction of all her dearest hopes, no one
would have supposed from the appearance of the sis-
ters, that Elinor was mourning in secret over obsta-
cles which must divide her for ever from the object
of her love, and that Marianne was internally dwell-
ing on the perfections of a man, of whose whole
heart she felt thoroughly possessed and whom she ex-
pected to see in every carriage whicli drove neur their
house.
The necessity of concealing from her mother and
Marianne what had been entrusted in confidence to
herself, though it obliged her to uneeasing exertion,
was no aggravation of Elinor's distress. On the
contrary, it was a relief to her to be spared the com-
munication of what would give such ailliehou to
them, and to be saved likewise from hearing that
condemnation of Edward, which would probably ll«»w
from the excess of their partial affection for herself,
and which was more than she felt equal to support.
From their counsel or their conversation she knew
•he could receive no assistance; their tenderness ami
168 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
sorrow must add to her distress, while her self-com-
mand would neither receive encouragement from
their example nor from their praise. She wst
stronger alone, and her own good sense so well
supported her, that her firmness was as unshaken,
her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as, with
regrets so poignant and so fresh, it was possible for
them to be.
Much as she had suffered from her first conversa-
tion with Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an ear-
nest wish of renewing it, and this for more reasons
than one. She wanted to hear many particulars of
their engagement repeated again — she wanted more
clearly to understand what Lucy really felt for Ed-
ward, whether there were any sincerity in her decla-
ration of tender regard for him, and she particularly
wanted to convince Lucy, by her readiness to enter
on the matter again, and her calmness in conversing
on it, that she was no otherwise interested in it than
as a friend, which she very much feared her involun-
tary agitation, in their morning discourse, must have
left at least doubtful. That Lucy was disposed to
be jealous of her, appeared very probable ; it was
plain that Edward had always spoken highly in her
praise, not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from
her venturing to trust her, on so short a personal
acquaintance, with a secret so confessedly and evi-
dently important. And even Sir John's jok*ng intel-
ligence must have had some weight. But indeed,
while Elinor remained so well assured within herself
of being really beloved by Edward, it required no
other consideration of probabilities to make it natural
nam amd •■mmbilitt. 109
tint Lacy ehoald t* JeeJaatj tad that the was so,
lssrvury eoanttssseewMaptnot What other reason
fbr the) disclosure of tha eflUr oould there be, but
that Elinor might be informed by it of Lucy's supe-
rior etalme on Edward, and be taught to avoid him
In future P Bhe had little diflculty in understanding
that much of her rival's intentions, and while she
was firmly molted to act by her as every principle
of honour and honesty directed, to combat her own
aflbetion fbr Edward and to tea him at little as pos-
sible { the oould not deny herself the comfort of en-
deavouring to convince Lucy that her heart was
uuwounded. And m aha oould now have nothing
more painful to hear on the subject than had already
been told, she did not mistrust her own ability of
going through a repetition of particulars with corn-
But tt was not Immediately that an opportunity of
doing to could be commanded, though Lucy was as
well disposed ae herself to take advantage of any
that occurred j for the weather was not often fine
enough to allow of their Joining in a walk, where
they might most easily separate themselves from the
others 1 and though they met at least every other
evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly at
the former, they could not be supposed to meet for
the take of conversation. 8uch a thought would
never enter either Sir John or Lady Middleton's
head, and therefore very little leisure was ever given
fbr general chat, and none at all for particular dis-
course. They met for the sake of eating, drinking,
and laughing together-— playing at cards, or conse-


.y
■~)
170 SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY,
quences, or any other game that was si
noisy.
One or two meetings of this kind had tai
without affording Elinor any chance of
Lucy in private, when Sir John called at th
one morning, to heg in the name of charity,
would all dine with Lady Middleton that d
was obliged to attend the club at Exeter,
would otherwise be quite alone, except he:
and the two Miss Steele*. Elinor, who f
fairer opening for the point she had in view
a party as this was likely to be, more a
among themselves under the tranquil and i
direction of Lady Middleton than when her
united them together in one noisy purpoa
diately accepted the invitation ; Margaret,
mother's permission, was equally compliant,
rianne, though always unwilling to join sjt
parties, was persuaded by her mother, who c
bear to have her seclude herself from any c
amusement, to go likewise.
The young ladies went, and Lady Middl
happily preserved from the frightful solitui
had threatened her. The insipidity of the
was exactly such as Elinor had expected ; it ]
not one novelty of thought or expression, and
could be less interesting than the whole of 1
course both in the dining parlour and drawir
to the latter, the children accompanied th
while they remained there, she was too ^
vinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucj
tion to attempt it. They quitted it only'
AVD IBlltlBILlTY. 171
femoral of the teeHttmfi. The card-table was then
PUoed, and Ulnar began to wonder it herself for
Wring artr onttrtehied ft hop* of finding time for
«oaT«rtntion at the perk. They til roee up in pre-
peratlon for a ronnd game.
«Iun glad, " eaid Lady Middleton to Lucy, " you
are not going to finish poor little Anna-Maria's basket
this evening ; for I em sure it must hurt your eyes to
work flUagree by candlelight And we will make
Dm dear little lor* tome amends for her disappoint-
ment to atmruw, tad then I hope the will not much
ttrind it«
This hint ww enough j Lucy recollected herself in-
etnntly arid replied, M Indeed yon are rery much mis-
taken, Lady Middleton j I em only waiting to know
w h e th e r yon can make your party without me, or I
should hire bean at my fillagree already. I would
not disappoint the little angel for all the world, and
if you want me at the card-table now, I am resolved
to finish the basket after supper. "
M Ton are rery good, I hope it won't hurt your
ey es w ill you ring the bell for some working can-
dles P My poor little girl would be sadly disap-
pointed, I know, if the basket was not finished to-
morrow, for though I told her it certainly would not,
I am sura she depends upon having it done. "
Lucy directly drew her work-table near her and
reseated herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness
which seemed to infer that she could taste no greater
delight than in making a fillagree basket for a spoilt
ehild.
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of cassino to
172
8E*SE AKD SEVSIBILITT.
the other*. No one made any objection bi
anne, who, with her usual inattention to tl
of general civility, exclaimed, " Tour ladya
have the goodness to ezcuae me — you know
cards. I shall go to the pianoforte ; I hi
touched it since it was tuned. " And withoul
ceremony, she turned away and walked to
strument.
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked
that she had never made so rude a speech.
M Marianne can never keep long from that
ment, you know, ma'am, " said Elinor, endea
to smooth away the offence ; u and I do no
wonder at it, for it is the very best-toned pii
I ever heard. "
The remaining five were now to draw thei
" Perhaps, " continued Elinor, " if I should
to cut out, I may be of some use to Miss Lucj
in rolling her papers for her ; and there is s
still to be done to the basket, that it must be i
ble, I think, for her labour singly, to finis!
evening. I should like the work exceedingl;
would allow me a share in it. "
" Indeed I shall be very much obliged to
your help, " cried Lucy, " for I find there is
be done to it than I thought there was; and i
be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Ann:
after alL "
" Oh ! that would be terrible indeed, " sa
Steele — " Dear little soul, how I do love her
" You are very kind, " said Lady Middl
Elinor : " and as you really like the work,
AM» SBMSIBILITT. 173
you will be as wefl pinna 1 ftot to cut in till another
rubber, or will you take yew shames nowP
Elinor Joyfully profiled by the fir* of these pro-
posals, sad thus, by a little of that addresi which
\ eould never condescend to practise, gained
own end, and pleased Lady Middketon at the
time. Lucy made room for her with ready
attention, and the two fair rivals were thus seated
tide by aide at the same table, and with the utmost
harmony engaged in forwarding the same work. The
pianoforte, at which Marianne, wrapt up in her own
musk) and her own thoughts, had by this time forgot-
ten that anybody was in the room besides herself,
was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now
judged she might eafely, under the shelter of its noise,
introdues the interesting subject, without any risk of
being hoard at the card-table.
CHAPTER XXIV.
In a Ann, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began :
** I should be undeserving of the confidence you
have honoured me with, if I felt no desire for its
continuance, or no farther cariosity on its subject. I
will not apologise therefore for bringing it forward
again. "
u Thank you, " cried Lucy warmly, u for breaking
the ice ; you have set my heart at ease by it ; for I
174 SENSE ANDSENSIBILITY.
was somehow or other afraid I had offended yoa by
what I told you that Monday. "
" Offended me ! How could you suppose so ? Be-
lieve me, " and Elinor spoke it with the truest sin-
cerity, " nothing could be farther from my intention
than to give you such an idea. Could you have a
motive for the trust, that was not honourable and
flattering to me P "
" And yet I do assure you, " replied Lucy, her little
sharp eyes full of meaning, " there seemed to me to
be a coldness and displeasure in your manner, that
made me quite uncomfortable. I felt sure that you
was angry with me ; and have been quarrelling with
myself ever since, for having took such a liberty as to
trouble you with my affairs. But I am very glad to
find it was only my own fancy, and that you do not
really blame me. If you knew what a consolation it
was to me to relieve my heart by speaking to you of
what I am always thinking of every moment of my
life, your compassion would make you overlook
everything else, I am sure. "
" Indeed I can easily believe that it was a very
great relief to you to acknowledge your situation to
me, and be assured that you shall never have reason
to repent it. Tour case is a very unfortunate one ;
you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties,
and you will have need of all your mutual affection
to support you under them. Mr. Ferrars, I believe,
is entirely dependant on his mother. "
" He has only two thousand pounds of his own j
it would be madness to marry upon that, though foi
my own part I could give up every prospect of more
8EN8E AMD SBNIIB1LITY. 175
without a sigh. I have been always used to a very
•mall income, and could struggle with any poverty
for him ; but I love him too well to be the selfish
means of robbing him, perhaps, of all that his mother
might give him if he married to please her. We
must wait, it may be for many years. With almost
every other man in the world, it would be an alarm-
ing prospect; but Edward's affection and constancy
nothing can deprive me of, I know. "
" That conviction must be everything to you ; and
he is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in
yours. If the strength of your reciprocal attachment
had failed, as between many people and under many
circumstances it naturally would during a four years'
engagement, your situation would have been pitiable
indeed. "
Lucy here looked up ; but Elinor was careful in
guarding her countenance from every expression that
could give to her words a suspicious tendency.
" Edward's love for me, " said Lucy, " has been
pretty well put to the test, by our long, very long
absence since we were first engaged, and it has stood
the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to
doubt it now. I can safely say that he has never
gave me one moment's alarm on that account from
the first. "
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at
this assertion.
Lucy went on. " I am rather of a jealous temper
too by nature, and from our different situations in
life, from his being so much more in the world than
me, and our continual separation, I was enough in-
176 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
clined for suspicion, to have found out the truth in an
instant, if there had been the slightest alteration ii
his behaviour to me when we met, or any lowness of
spirits that I could not account for, or if he had
talked more of one lady than another, or seemed in
any respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to
be. I do not mean to say that I am particularly ob-
servant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a
case I am sure I could not be deceived. "
" All this, " thought Elinor, " is very pretty; but it
can impose upon neither of us. "
" But what, " said she after a short silence, " are
your views ? or have you none but that of waiting
for Mrs. Ferrars'death, which is a melancholy and
shocking extremity P Is her son determined to sub-
mit to this, and to all the tediousness of the many
years of suspense in which it may involve you, rather
than run the risk of her displeasure for a while by
owning the truth P "
" If we could be certain that it would be only for
a while! But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrong,
proud woman, and in her first fit of anger upon hear-
ing it, would very likely secure everything to Robert ;
and the idea of that, for Edward's sake, frightens
away all my inclination for hasty measures. "
" And for your own sake too, or you are carrying
your disinterestedness beyond reason. "
Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.
" Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars P " asked
Elinor.
" Not at all — I never saw him ; but I fancy he it
very unlike his brother — silly and a great coxcomb.
•Ms* AMD tMJUIBILITY. 177
1 1 " repents* Miss Steele, whom
weeds hy ft sudden panes in
Marianne's rseaU. »Ohl they ere talking of their
favourite teens, I dire ^agr* 19
• No, ettar** cried Lnoy, * you are mistaken then
our sVrourite beans are n«4 gnat ooxeoarte. "
« I can answer for U that Mies Daahwood'i it not,*
•aid Mm. Jctnissis, laughing heartily; " for he is
one of the most modest, p re ttiest b e hav ed young men
I ever aaw. Be* aa for Lucy, the la aueh a sly little
creature, there la no lading out who she likes. "
•Ohl " cried Miss Steele, looking significantly
round at them, M I dare say Lucy's beau is quite as
modest and fKoUy-bebaved as Miss Dashwood's. "
Elinor blushed in spite of herself! Lucy bit her
Up, and looked angrily at her sister. . A mutual si-
lence took place for some time. Lucy first put an
end to it by saying in a lower tone, though Marianne
was then giving them the powerful protection of a
very magnificent concerto—
u I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has
lately come into my head, for bringing matters to
bear f indeed I am bound to let you into the secret,
for yon are a party concerned. I dare say you have
seen enough of Edward to know that he would pre-
fer the church to every other profession j now my
plan is, that, he should take orders as soon as he
can, and then through your interest, which I am sure
yon would be kind enough to use out of friendship
for him, and I hope out of some regard to me, your
brother might be persuaded to give him Norland
living} which I understand is a very good one, and
n, vol. i.
178 SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
the present incumbent not likely to live a great
while. That would be enough for us to marry upon,
and we might trust to time and chance for the rest. "
*'I should be always happy, " replied Elinor, " to
show any mark of my esteem and friendship for Mr.
Ferrars; but do not you perceive that my interest on
such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary?
He is brother to Mrs. John Dashwood — that must
be recommendation enough to her husband. "
" But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much ap-
prove of Edward's going into order8. ,,
" Then I rather suspect that my interest would do
very little. "
They were again silent for many minutes. At
length Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh,
" I believe it would be the wisest way to put an
end to the business at once by dissolving the engage-
ment. We seem so beset with difficulties on every
side, that though it would make us miserable for a
time, we should be happier perhaps in the end. But
you will not give me your advice, Miss Dashwood P "
" No, " answered Elinor, with a smile, which con-
cealed very agitated feelings, " on such a subject 1
certainly will not. You know very well that my
opinion would have no weight with you, unless it
were on the side of your wishes. "
" Indeed you wrong me, " replied Lucy with great
solemnity ; " I know nobody of whose judgment I
think so highly as I do of yours ; and I do really be-
lieve, that if you was to say to me, * I advise you by
all means to put an end to your engagement with
Edward Ferrars, it will be more for the happiness of
•MU AM MirtlBILITT. 179
both of vow/ I should r— o lvo upon doing it imme-
diately.*
Elinor blushed for the ineinoerlty of Edward's fu-
ton wife, and replied, M Thii compliment would effec-
tually frighten me from giving any opinion on the
subject, had I formed one. It raises my influence
much too high | the power of dividing two people to
tenderly attached is too much for an indifferent person. "
M > Tia Decant* yon are an indifferent person, " said
Lucy, with some pique, and laying a ]Kutieuiar stress
on those words, M that your judgment might justly
have such weight with me* If yon could be sup-
posed to be biassed in any respect by your own feel-
ings, your opinion would not be worth having. "
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this,
lest they might provoke each other to an unsuitable
increase of ease and unreserve, and was even partly
determined never to mention the subject again. An-
other pause therefore of many minutes'duration suc-
ceeded this speech, and Lucy was still the first to
end it.
« Shall yon be in town this winter, Miss Dash-
wood P w said the, with all her accustomed com-
placency.
" Certainly not. "
" I am sorry for that, " returned the other, while
her eyee brightened at the information $ " it would
have given me such pleasure to meet you there ! But
I dare amy yon will go for all that. To be sure, your
brother and sister wUl ask you to come to them. "
* It will not be in my power to accept their invi-
Uuoniftheydo. "
UO
SBffSE AMD SENSIBILITY,
M How unlucky that is ! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there. Anne and me are to go the lat-
ter end of January to some relations who hare been
wanting us to visit them these several years! But I
only go for the sake of seeing Edward. He will be
there in February, otherwise London would have no
charms for me ; I have not spirits for it. "
Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the
conclusion of the first rubber, and the confidential
discourse of tne two ladies was therefore at an end,
to which both of them Submitted without any reluct-
ance, for nothing had been said on either aide to
make them dislike each other less than they had done
before ; and Elinor sat down to the card- table with
the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only
without affection for the person who was to be his
wife, but that he had not even the chance of being
tolerably happy in marriage, which sincere affection
on her side would have given, for self-interest alone
could induce a woman to keep a man to an engage-
ment of which she seemed so thoroughly aware that
t e was weary.
From this time the subject was never revived by
Elinor ; and when entered on by Lucy, who aeldom
missed an opportunity of introducing it, and was par-
ticularly careful to inform her confidante of her hap*
piness whenever she received a letter from Edward,
it was treated by the former with calmness and cau-
tion, and dismissed as soon as civility would allow ;
for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence
which Lucy did not deserve, and which were dan-
gerous to herself.
SENSB AMD SRNSIB1LITT. 181
Tho visit of the Mjm Steele* at Barton Park wu
lengthened ftr beyond what the lint invitation im-
plied. Their favour Increased, they could not be
•pared; Sir John would not hear of their going ; and
in spite of their numerous and long-arranged engage-
ments in Exeter, in spite of the absolute necessity of
their returning to fulfil them immediately, which was
in full force at the end of every week, they were pre-
vailed on to stay nearly two months at the park, and
to assist in the due celebration of that festival which
requires a more than ordinary share of private balls
and large dinners to proclaim its importance.
CHAPTER XXV.
Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spend-
ing a large portion of the year at the houses of her
ebildren and friends, she was not without a settled
habitation of her own. Since the death of her hus-
band, who had traded with success in a less elegant
part of the town, she had resided every winter in a
house in one of the streets near Portman-square.
Towards this home, she began on the approach of
January to turn her thoughts, and thither she one
day abruptly, and very unexpectedly by them, asked
the elder Miss Dashwooda to accompany her. Elinor,
182 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
without observing the varying complexion of her
sister, and the animated look which spoke no indif-
ference to the plan, immediately gave a grateful but
absolute denial for both, in -which she believed her-
self to be speaking their united inclinations. The
reason alleged, was their determined resolution of
not leaving their mother at that time of year. Mrs.
Jennings received the refusal with some surprise, and
repeated her invitation immediately.
" Oh ! Lord, I am sure your mother can spare you
very well, and I do beg you will favour me with
your company, for I've quite set my heart upon it
Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to
me, for I shan't put myself at all out of my way for
you. It will only be sending Betty by the coach, and
I hope I can afford that. We three shall be able to
go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town,
if you do not like to go wherever I do, well and
good, you may always go with one of my daughters.
I am sure your mother will not object to it; for I have
had such good luck in getting my own children off
my hands, that she will think me a very fit person to
have the charge of you ; and if I don't get one of
you at least well married before I have done with you,
it shall not be my fault. I shall speak a good word
for you, to all the young men, you may depend ou
it. "
" I have a notion, " said Sir John, " that Miss Ma-
rianne would not object to such a scheme, if her elder
sister would come into it. It is very hard indeed
that she should not have a little pleasure, because
Miss Dashwood does not wish it. So I would advise
Mm A*V SIWSIIILITT. 183
i two, to Mi off Ibr town, when 70a are tired of
rton, without saying a word to Miia Daahwood
wtit. "
1 Kay " cried Mra. Jennings, u I am eure I shall be
natrous glad of Miss Marianne's company, whether
M Daahwood will go or not, only the more the
trier aay I, and I thought it would he more coin-
table for them to he together; because If they got
id of me, they might talk to one another, and laugh
my odd ways behind my back. Bat one or the
or, If not both of them, I must haTe. Lord bless
I how do you think I can lWe poking by myself,
rfao hare been always used till this winter to have
urlotte with me. Come, Miss Marianne, let us
ke hands upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood
1 change her mind by and bye, why so much the
tar.''
• I thenk you, ma'am, sincerely thank you, " said
jrlanne, with warmth ; " your invitation has in-
ed my gratitude for erer, and it would give me
h happiness — yet, almost the greatest happiness I
capable of, to be able to accept it. But my mo-
r, my dearest, kindest mother, I feel the justice of
at Elinor has urged, and if she were to be made
1 happy, less comfortable by our absence — Oh ! no,
:hing should tempt me to leave her. It should
, must not be a struggle. "
Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs.
shwood could spare them perfectly well; and
nor, who now understood her sister, and saw to
at indifference to almost everything else she was
ried by her eagerness to be with Willoughby again,
184 SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
made no farther direct opposition to the pleji nd
merely referred it to her mother's decision, from whom
however she scarcely expected to receive any support
in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could
not approve of for Marianne, and which on her own
account she had particular reasons to avoid. What-
ever Marianne was desirous of, her mother would be
eager to promote— she could not expect to influence
the latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair, re-
specting which she had never been able to inspire
her with distrust; and she dared not explain the
motive of her own disinclination for going to London.
That Marianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly ac-
quainted with Mrs. Jennings'manners, and invaria-
bly disgusted by them, should overlook every incon-
venience of that kind, should disregard whatever
must be most wounding to her irritable feelings, in
her pursuit of one object, was such a proof, so strong,
so full, of the importance of that object to her, as
Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not pre-
pared to witness.
On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dash-
wood, persuaded that such an excursion would be
productive of much amusement to both her daughters,
and perceiving through all her affectionate attention
to herself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it,
would not hear of their declining the offer upon her
account ; insisted on their both accepting it directly,
and then began to foresee, with her usual cheerfulness,
a variety of advantages that would accrue to them
all, from this separation.
" I am delighted with the plan, " she cried, " it is
18*
asaetly what I could wish. Margaret and I shall be
jmnchbonontodbyttasyoursolvoa. Whan you and
he Middlatona ar* gone, wa shall go on io quietly
,nd happily together with our books and our music I
Ton wUl find Margaret *eo improved when you come
eakagain! And I ha™ a UttU plan of alteration for
aw bedrooms too, which may now ba performed
rfckovt inconvenience to any one. It la Tory right
bat yon afoul* 7 go to towni I would have every
osjnf woman of your oonditUm in Ufa acquainted
ri£h the manners and amnaamonta of Lond o n. You
rUL ba under the care of a motherly good sort of wo-
ma, of whose kindness to you I can hare no doubt.
ind in all probability you will see your brother, and
rhatoTar may be his (suits, or the faults of bis wife,
rhan I consider whose son he is, 1 cannot bear to
ave you so wholly estranged from each other. "
M Though with your usual anxiety for our happi-
esa, " said Elinor, " you hare been obviating erery
npodlmont to the present scheme which occurred to
on, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,
innot ba so easily remoTcd. "
Marianne's countenance sunk.
" And what, " said Mrs. Dashwood, " is my dear
rodent Elinor going to suggest ? What formidable
betaele is ska now to bring forward ? Do not 1st me
ear a word about the expense of it. "
" My objection is this : though I think very well
f Mra. Jennings'heart, she is not a woman whose
idoty can afford us pleasure, or whose protection
ill give us consequence. "
" That is very true, " replied her mother \ but of
186 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
her society, separately from that of other people, yotl
will scarcely have anything at all, and you will almost
; lways appear in public with Lady Middleton. "
" If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of
Mrs. Jennings, " said Marianne, at least it need not
prevent my accepting her invitation. I hare no such
scruples, and I am sure I could put up with every
unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort. "
Elinor could not help smiling at this display of in-
difference towards the manners of a person to whom
she had often had difficulty in persuading Marianne
to behave with tolerable politeness, and resolved
within herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she
would go likewise, as she did not think it proper that
Marianne should be left to the sole guidance of her
own judgment, or that Mrs. Jennings should be aban-
doned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort
of her domestic hours. To this determination she
was the more easily reconciled, by recollecting, that
Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account, was not to be in
town before February, and that their visit, without
any unreasonable abridgment, might be previously
finished.
" I will have you both go, " said Mrs. Dashwood;
" these objections are slight. You will have much
pleasure in being in London, and especially in being
together; and if Elinor would ever condescend to
anticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from
a variety of sources ; she would perhaps expect some
from improving her acquaintance with her sister-in-
law's family. "
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of al-
flIKtB AND SENSIBILITY. 187
tempting to weaken her mother'* dependence on the
ittachment of Edward and herself, that the shock
night be the leas when the whole truth were revealed,
ind now on this attack, though almost hopeless of
ineeess, she forced herself to begin her design by
laying, as calmly as she could, " I like Edward Fcr-
rars very much, and shall always be glad to see him ;
rat as to the rest of the family, it is a matter of per-
fect indifference to me, whether I am ever known to
iiera or not. "
Mrs. Dashwood smiled and said nothing. Mari-
inne lifted up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor
jonjectured that she might as well have held her
ongue.
After very little farther discourse, it was finally set-
led that the invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs.
Jennings received the information with a great deal
> f joy, and many assurances of kindness and care ;
lor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her. Sir
Tohn was delighted ; for to a man whose prevailing
inxiety was the dread of being alone, the acquisition
)f two, to the number of inhabitants in London, was
tomething. Even Lady Middleton took the trouble
)f being delighted, which was putting herself rather
rat of her way; and as for the Miss Steeles, cspe-
iially Lucy, they had never been so happy in their
ivcs as this intelligence made them.
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which coun-
eracted her wishes, with less reluctance than she had
sxpected to feel. With regard to herself, it was now
i matter of unconcern whether she went to town or
lot, and when she saw her mother so thoroughly
188 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
pleased with the plan, and her sister exhilarated by U
in look, voice, and manner, restored to all her usual
animation, and elevated to more than her usual
gaiety, she could not be dissatisfied with the cause,
and would hardly allow herself to distrust the con-
sequence
Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happi-
ness, so great was the perturbation of her spirits and
her impatience to be gone* Her unwillingness to
quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness;
and at the moment of parting her grief on that score
was excessive. Her mother's affliction was hardly
less, and Elinor was the only one of the three who
seemed to consider the separation as anything short
of eternal.
Their departure took place in the first week ia
January. The Middletons were to follow in about a
week. The Miss Steeles kept their station at the
park, and were to quit it only with the rest of the
family.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with
Mrs. Jennings, and beginning a journey to London
under her protection, and as her guest, without won-
dering at her own situation, so short had their ac-
flSlfBB AND SBNSIBILITY. U9
qualntance with that lady been, to wholly unsuited
were they in age and disposition, and to many had
been her objection* against such a measure only a
few daya before I Bat these objections had all, with
that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her
mother equally shared, been overcome or overlooked ;
and Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubt of
Willoughby's constancy, could not witness the rap-
tore of delightful expectation which filled the whole
soul and beamed in the eyes of Marianne, without
feeling how blank was her own prospect, how cheer-
less her own state of mind in the comparison, and
how gladly she would engage in the solicitude of
Marianne's situation to have the same animating ob-
ject in view, the same possibility of hope. A short,
a very short time however must now decide what
Willoughby's intentions were; in all probability he
was already in town. Marianne's eagerness to be
gone declared her dependence on finding him there ;
and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every
new light as to his character which her own observa-
tion or the intelligence of others could give her, but
likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sister
with such Ktalous attention, as to ascertain what he
wns, and what he meant, before many meetings had
taken place. Should the result of her observations
be unfavourable, she was determined at all events to
open the eyes of her sister ; should it be otherwise,
her exertions would be of a different nature — she
must then learn to avoid every selfish comparison,
and banish every regret which might lessen her satis-
faction in the happiness of Marianne.
190 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
They were three days on their journey, and Ma-
rianne's behaviour as they travelled was a happy
specimen of what her future complaisance and com-
panionableness to Mrs. Jennings might be expected
to be. She sat in silence almost all the way, wrapt
in her own meditations, and scarcely ever volunta-
rily speaking, except when any object of picturesque
beauty within their view drew from her an exclama-
tion of delight exclusively addressed to her sister.
To atone for this conduct therefore, Elinor took im-
mediate possession of the post of civility which she
had assigned herself, behaved with the greatest atten-
tion to Mrs. Jennings, talked with her, laughed with
her, and listened to her whenever she could ; and Mrs.
Jennings on her side treated them both with all pos-
sible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for
their ease and enjoyment, and only disturbed that she
could not make them choose their own dinners at the
inn, nor extort a confession of their preferring sal-
mon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets. They
reached town by three o'clock the third day, glad to
be released, after such a journey, from the confine-
ment of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire.
The house was handsome and handsomely fitted up,
and the young ladies were immediately put in pos-
session of a very comfortable apartment. It had for-
merly been Charlotte's, and qyer the mantelpiece still
hung a landscape in coloured silks of her perform-
ance, in proof of her having spent seven years at a
great school in town to some effect.
As dinner was not to be ready in less than two
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 191
hours from their arrival, Elinor determined to employ
the interval in writing to her mother, and sat down
for that purpose. In a few moments Marianne did
the same. " / mm writing home, Marianne, " Haiti
Elinor j " had not you better defer your letter for a
day or twoP "
" I am not going to write to my mother, " replied
Marianne hastily, and as if wishing to avoid any fur-
ther inquiry. Elinor said no more; it immediately
struck her that the must then be writing to Wil-
loughby, and the conclusion which as instantly fol-
lowed was, that however mysteriously they might
wish to conduct the affair, they must be engaged.
This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave
her pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater
alacrity. Marianne's was finished in a very few
minutes ; in length it could be no more than a note :
it was then folded up, sealed and directed with eager
rapidity. Elinor thought she could distinguish a
large W. in the direction, and no sooner was it com-
plete than Marianne, ringing the bell, requested the
footman who answered it, to get that letter conveyed
for her to the two-penny post. This decided the mat-
ter at once.
Her spirits still continued very high, but there was
a flutter in them which prevented their giving much
pleasure to her sister, and this agitation increased as
the evening drew on. She could scarcely eat any
dinner, and when they afterwards returned to thn
drawing-room, seemed anxiously listening to the
sound of every carriage.
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jen-
192 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
nings, by being much engaged in her own room, could
see little of what was passing. The tea things were
brought in, and already had Marianne been disap-
pointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring
door, when a loud one was suddenly heard which
could not be mistaken for one at any other house.
Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby'i
approach, and Marianne starting up moved towards
the door. Everything was silent ; this could not be
borne many seconds, she opened the door, advanced
a few steps towards the stairs, and after listening half
a minute, returned into the room in all the agitation
which a conviction of having heard him would na-
turally produce ; in the ecstasy of her feelings at that
instant she could not help exclaiming, " Oh ! Elinor,
it is Willoughby, indeed it is P and seemed almost
ready to throw herself into his arms, when Colonel
Brandon appeared.
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness,
and she immediately left the room. Elinor was dis-
appointed too ; but at the same time her regard for
Colonel Brandon insured his welcome with her, and
she felt particularly hurt that a man so partial to her
sister should perceive that she experienced nothing
but grief and disappointment in seeing him. She
instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him, that
he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room,
with such astonishment and concern, as hardly left
him the recollection of what civility demanded to-
wards herself.
" Is your sister ill P " said he.
Elinor answered in some distress that she was,
tBMUE AMD IIVSIBILITY. 108
ad then talked of head-tehee, low-spirits, and orer-
itlgues j and of everything to which ahe could de-
ently attribute her slater's behaviour.
!He heard her with the moat earneet attention, but
earning to recollect himaelf, aaid no more on the
object, and began directly to apeak of hia pleat ure
i seeing them In London, making the usual inquiries
bout their Journey and the friends they had left
In thia calm kind of way, with very little Interest
a either aide, they continued to talk, both of them
lit of spirits, and the thoughts of both engaged else-
rfaere. Elinor wished yery much to ask whether
f illoughby were then in town, but she was afraid
& giving him pain by any inquiry after his rival ;
nd at length by way of saying something, she asked
f he had been in London erer since she had seen
dm last M Tea, " he replied with some embarrass-
aent, " almost ever since j I have been once or twice
t Delaford for a few days, but it has never been in
ay power to return to Barton. "
This, and the manner in which it was said, imrae-
ilately brought back to her remembrance all the
Ireumstances of his quitting that place, with the
measlnene and suspicions they had caused to Mrs.
tannings, and she was fearful that her question had
mplied much more curiosity on the subject than she
tad erer felt
Mrs. Jennings soon came in. " Oh t Colonel/ 1
aid ahe, with her usual noisy cheerfulness, " I am
aonstrous glad to see you — sorry I could not come
> efore— beg your pardon, but I have been forced to
o. vol. I.
194 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
look about me a little, and settle my matters ; for it
is a long while since I have been at home, and you
know one has always a world of little odd things to
do after one has been away for any time ; and then
I have had Cartwright to settle with — Lord, I have
been as busy as a bee ever since dinner ! But pray,
Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I should
be in town to-day ? "
" I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's,
where I have been dining. "
" Oh ! you did ; well, and how do they all do at
their house ? How does Charlotte do ? I warrant
you she is a fine size by this time. "
" Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am com-
missioned to tell you that you will certainly see her
to-morro.w. "
" Ay, to be sure, I thought as much; Well, Colo-
nel, I have brought two young ladies with me, you
see — that is, you see but one of them new, but there
is another somewhere. Your friend Miss Marianne,
too — which you will not be sorry to hear. I do not
know what you and Mr. Willoughby will do between
you about her. Ay, it is a fine thing to be young
and handsome. Well ! I was young once, but I never
was very handsome — worse luck for me. However,
I got a very good husband, and I don't know what
the greatest beauty can do more. Ah ! poor man !
he has been dead these eight years and better. But,
Colonel, where have you been to since we parted ?
And how does your business go on ? Come, come,
let's have no secrets among friends. "
He replied with his accustomary mildness to all
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 195
her Inquiries, but without satisfying her in any. Eli-
nor now began to make the tea, and Marianne was
obliged to appear again.
After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more
thoughtful and silent than he had been before, and
Mrs. Jennings could not prevail on him to stay long.
No other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies
were unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.
Marianne rose the next morning with recovered
spirits and happy looks. The disappointment of the
evening before seemed forgotten in the expectation of
what was to happen that day. They had not long
finished their breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's baroucho
stopped at the door, and in a few minutes she camo
laughing into the room ; so delighted to sec them all,
that it was hard to say whether she received most
pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss Dash-
woods again. So surprised at their coming to town,
though it was what she had rather expected all along;
so angry at their accepting her mother's invitation
after having declined her own, though at the same
time she would never have forgiven them if they had
not come !
" Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you, 11 said
she ; " what do you think he said when he heard of
your coming with mamma P I forget what it was now,
but it was something so droll ! "
After an hour or two spent in what her mother
called comfortable chat, or in other words, in every
variety of inquiry concerning all their acquaintance
on Mrs. Jennings's side, and in laughter without
cause on Mrs. Palmer's! it was proposed by the latter
196 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
that they should all accompany her to some shops
where she had business that morning, to which Mrs.
Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having
likewise some purchases to make themselves ; and
Marianne, though declining it at first, was induced
to go likewise.
Wherever they went, she was evidently always on
the watch. In Bond-street especially, where much
of their business lay, her eyes were in constant in-
quiry ; and in whatever shop the party were engaged,
her mind was equally abstracted from everything
actually before them, from all that interested and
occupied the others. Restless and dissatisfied every-
where, her sister could never obtain her opinion of
any article of purchase, however it might equally
concern them both ; she received no pleasure from
anything ; was only impatient to be at home again,
and could with difficulty govern her vexation at the
tediousne8s of Mrs. Palmer, whose eye was caught
by everything pretty, expensive, or new ; who was
wild to buy all, could determine on none, and daw-
dled away her time in rapture and indecision.
It was late in the morning before they returned
home ; and no sooner had they entered the house
than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs, and when
Elinor followed, she found her turning from the table
with a sorrowful countenance, which declared that
no Willoughby bad been there.
" Has no letter been left here for me since we went
out ? " said she to the footman who then entered with
the parcels. She was answered in the negative,
11 Are you quite sure of it ? n she replied. u Are you
IIMII AND SENSIBILITY. 197
certain that no servant, no porter hoi left any letter
or note P "
The man replied that none had.
" How very odd ! " said she in a low and dinap-
pointed voice, u the turned away to the window.
u How odd indeed! " repeated Elinor within hor-
self, regarding her sister with uneasiness. " If she
had not known him to be in town, she would not
have written to him, as she did ; she would have
written to Combe Magna ; and if lie is in town, how
odd that he should neither come nor write ! Oh !
my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting
an engagement between a daughter so young, a man
so little known, to be carried on in so doubtful, so
mysterious a manner ! I long to inquire ; but how
will my interference be borne I
She determined, after some consideration, that if
appearances continued many days longer as unplea-
sant as they now were, she would represent in the
strongest manner to her mother the necessity of somo
serious inquiry into the affair.
Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jen-
nings's intimate acquaintance, whom she had met and
invited in the morning, dined with them. The former
left them soon after tea to perform her evening en-
gagements; and Elinor won obliged to assiBt in mak-
ing a whist-table for the others. Marianne wan of
no use on these occasions, as Hhc would never learn
the game j but though her time was therefore at her
own disposal, the evening was by no means more
productive of pleasure to her than to Elinor, for it
was spent in all the anxiety of expectation and the
198 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
pain of disappointment. She sometimes endeavoured
for a few minutes to read ; but the book was soon
thrown aside, and she returned to the more interest-
ing employment of walking backwards and forwards
across the room, pausing for a moment whenever she
came to the window, in hopes of distinguishing the
long-expected rap.
CHAPTER XXVII.
" If this open weather holds much longer, " said
Mrs. Jennings, when they met at breakfast the fol-
lowing morning, " Sir John will not like leaving
Barton next week ;'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to
lose a day's pleasure. Poor souls! I always pity
them when they do — they seem to take it so much
to heart. "
" That is true, " cried Marianne in a cheerful
voice, and walking to the window as she spoke, to
examine the day. " I had not thought of that This
weather will keep many sportsmen in the country. "
It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits
were restored by it. " It is charming weather for
them indeed, " she continued, as she sat down to the
breakfast table with a happy countenance. " How
much they must enjoy it ! But " (with a little return
IIKSE AMD 1KX1IBILITT. 109
of anxiety) " it cannot be expected to last long. At
this time of year, and after inch a series of rain, wo
■hall certainly hare rery little more of it. Frosts will
toon set in, and in all probability with severity. In
another day or two, perhaps ; this extreme mildness
can hardly last longer — nay, perhaps it may freeze
to-night r
" At any rate, " said Elinor, wishing to prevent
Mrs. Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts as
clearly as she did, " I dare say we shall have Sir
John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of
next week. "
44 Ay, my dear, 111 warrant you we do. Mary
always has her own way. "
44 And now, " silently conjectured Elinor, " she
will write to Combe by this day's post. "
But if she did, the letter was written and nont
away with a privacy which eluded all her watchful-
ness to ascertain the fact. Whatever the truth of it
might be, and as far as Elinor was from feeling tho-
rough contentment about it, yet while she saw Mari-
anne in spirits, she could not be very uncomfortable
herself. And Marianne was in spirits, happy in the
mildness of the weather, and still happier in her ex-
pectation of a frost.
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cardR at
the houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to inform
them of her being in town ; and Marianne was all
the time busy in observing the direction of the wind,
watching the variations of the sky, and imagining
an alteration in the air.
Don't you find it colder than it was in the mom-
200 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
ing, Elinor ? There seems to me a rery decided
difference. I can hardly keep my hands warm even
in my muff. It was not so yesterday, I think. The
clouds seem parting too, the sun will he out in a
moment, and we shall have a clear afternoon. "
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained ; bat
Marianne persevered, and saw every night in the
brightness of the fire, and every morning in the ap-
pearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of
approaching frost.
The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be
dissatisfied with Mrs. Jennings's style of living, and
set of acquaintance, than with her behaviour to them-
selves, which was invariably kind. Everything in her
household arrangements was conducted on the most
liberal plan, and excepting a few old city friends,
whom, to Lady Middleton's regret, she had never
dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction
could at all discompose the feelings of her young
companions. Pleased to find herself more comfort-
ably situated in that particular than she had ex-
pected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the
want of much real enjoyment from any of their even-
ing parties, which, whether at home or abroad,
formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.
Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to
the house, was with them almost every day; he came
to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor, who often
derived more satisfaction from conversing with him
than from any other daily occurrence, but who saw
at the same time with much concern his continued
regard for her sister. She feared it was a strength-
inru An sbmsibility. 201
ening regard. * It grieved her to tee the earnestness
with which he often watched Marianne, end his spi-
rits wen certainly worse than when at Barton.
About a week after their arrival, it became certain
that WiUoughby was also arrived. His card was on
the table, when they came in from the morning's
drive*
" Good God P cried Marianne, " he has been here
while we were out. " Elinor, rejoiced to be assured
of his being in London, now ventured to say, " De-
pend upon it, ha will call again to-morrow. " But
Marianne seemed hardly to hear her, and on Mrs.
Jennings's entrance, escaped with the precious card.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor,
restored to those of her sister all, and more than all,
their former agitation. From this moment her mind
was never quiet} the expectation of seeing him every
hour of the day, made her unfit for anything. She
insisted on being left behind, the next morning, when
the others went out
Elinor's thoughts were roll of what might be pass-
ing in Berkeley-street during their absence; but a
moments glance at her sister when they returned
was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid
no second visit there. A note was just then brought
in, and laid on the table.
w For me? " cried Marianne, stepping hastily for-
ward.
" No, ma'am, for my mistress. "
But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.
u It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings ; how provok-
ing! "
202 SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
" You are expecting a letter, then? " said Elinor,
unable to be longer silent.
" Yes ; a little — not much. "
After a short pause, " You have no confidence in
me, Marianne. "
" Nay, Elinor, this reproach from you! — you who
have confidence in no one ! "
" Me! " returned Elinor in some confusion; " in-
deed, Marianne, I have nothing to telL "
" Nor I, " answered Marianne with energy ; " our
situations then are alike. We have neither of us
anything to tell; you, because you communicate,
and I, because I conceal nothing. "
Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in her-
self, which she was not at liberty to do away, knew
not how, under such circumstances, to press for
greater openness in Marianne.
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being
given her, she read it aloud. It was from Lady Mid-
dle ton, announcing their arrival in Conduit-street
the night before, and requesting the company of her
mother and cousins the following evening. Business
on Sir John's part, and a violent cold on her own,
prevented their calling in Berkeley-street. The invi-
tation was accepted; but when the hour of appoint-
ment drew near, necessary as it was in common civi-
lity to Mrs. Jennings that they should both attend
her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficulty in
persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen
nothing of Willoughby, and therefore was not more
indisposed for amusement abroad, than unwilling to
run the risk of his calling again in her absence.
mM am» mraiMLiTT. 203
Elinor frond, what the evening mi over, that
disposition is not materially altered by a change of
abode j for although scarcely settled in town, Sir John
had contrived to collect around him nearly twenty
young people, and to amuse them with a ball. This
was an affair, however, of which Lady Middleton
did not approve. In the country, an unpremedi-
tated dance was very allowable} but in London,
where the. reputation of elegance was more import-
ant and less easily attained, it was risking too much,
for the gratification of a few girls, to have it known
that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of
eight or nine couple, with two violins, and a mere
sideboard collation.
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the
ormer, whom they had not seen before since their
nival in town, as he was camful to avoid the ap-
sarance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and
verefore never came near her, they received no mark
'recognition on their entrance. He looked at them
ghtly, without seeming to know who they were,
d merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings from the other
• of the room. Marianne gave one glance round
apartment as she entered } it was enough, he
\ not there — and she sat down, equally ill-dis-
)d to receive or communicate pleasure. After
'had been assembled about an hour, Mr. Palmer
tered towards the Miss Dashwoods to express his
•ise on seeing them in town, though Colonel
don had been first informed of their arrival at
inse, and he had himself said something very
on hearing that they were to come.
204 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" I thought you were both In Devonshire/'said he.
" Did you P w replied Elinor.
" When do you go back again ? "
" I do not know. " And thus ended their dis-
course.
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance
in her life as she was that evening, and never so
much fatigued by the exercise. She complained of
it as they returned to Berkeley-street.
" Ay, ay, " said Mrs. Jennings, " we know the
reason of all that very well ; if a certain person who
shall be nameless had been there, you would not
have been a bit tired ; and to say the truth it was
not very pretty of him, not to give you the meeting
when he was invited. "
" Invited ! M cried Marianne.
" So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems
Sir John met him somewhere in the street this morn-
ing. " Marianne said no more, but looked exceed-
ingly hurt. Impatient in this situation to be doing
something that might lead to her sister's relief, Eli-
nor resolved to write the next morning to her mother
and hoped by awakening her fears for the health c
Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had bee
so long delayed ; and she was still more eagerly be
on this measure, by perceiving after breakfast on t
morrow, that Marianne was again writing to VT
loughby, for she could not suppose it to be to 1
other person.
About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings t
out by herself on business, and Elinor began hei
ter directly, while Marianne, too restless for era
■MM AMD •IK1IBIL1TY. 205
ment, too aaxtaaa for. eonv er oatlon, walked from one
window to the other, or eat down by the fire iif me-
lancholy meditation. Elinor wai rery earneet'in her
application to her mother, relating alrthat had passed,
her suspiciona of Willoughby'e inconstancy, urging
her by every plea of duty and affection to, demand
from Marianne an account of her real situation with
respect to him.
Her letter wae scarcely finished, when a rap fore-
told a visitor, and Colonel Brandon*waa announced.
Marianne, who'jhed seen him fromjthe window, and
who hated company of any kind, left the room be-
fore he entered it. He looked more than usually
grave,~and though expressing satisfaction in finding
Miss Daahwood alone, aa if he had somewhat in par-
ticular to tell her, eat for aome time without saying
a word. Elinor, persuaded that he had some commu-
nication to make in which her sister was concerned,
impatiently expected its opening. It was not the
first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction;
for more than once before, beginning with the obser-
vation of M Your sister looks unwell to-day, " or " Your
sister seems out of spirits, " he had appeared on the
point,~either fl of disclosing, or of inquiring, something
particular about her. After a pause of several mi-
nutes, their alienee was broken by his asking her, in
a voice* of aome agitation, when he was to congratu-
late her on the acquisition of a brother P Elinor wai
not prepared for, such a question, and having no
answer ready, " waa* obliged to adopt the simple
and common expedient of asking what he meant P
He tried to smile aa he replied, " Your sitter's
206 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
engagement to Mr. Willoughby is very generally
known. "
" It cannot'be generally known, " returned Elinor,
" for her own familyMo not know it. w
He looked surprised and said, " I beg your par-
don, I am afraid^ my inquiry has been impertinent ;
but I had not supposed any secrecy intended, as they
openly correspond, and their marriage is universally
talked of. "
" How can that • be P By whom can you have
heard it mentioned ? w
" By many — by'some of whom you know nothing,
by others with whom you are most intimate — Mrs.
Jennings, Mrs. Palmer, and the Middletons. Bat
still I might not have believed it — for where the mind
is perhaps'; rather unwilling to be convinced, it will
always'find something to support its doubts — if I had
not, when the servant,let me in to-day, accidentally
seen a letter in his hand, directed to Mr/Willoughby
in your sister's writing. I came to inquire, but I
was convinced before I could ask the question. Is
everything finally settled ? Is it impossible to — ?
But I have no right, and I could have no chance of
succeeding. — Excuse me, Miss Dash wood. I believe
I have been wrong in saying so much, but I hardly
know what to do, and on your prudence I have the
strongest dependence. Tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt — that in short conceal-
ment, if concealment be possible, is all that remains.''
These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct
avowal of his love for her sister, affected her very
much. She was not immediately able to say any-
i
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 207
thing, and even when her spirits were recovered,
she debated for a short time on the answer it would
be most proper to give. The real state of things
between Willoughby and her sister was so little
known to herself, that in endeavouring to explain it,
she might be as liable to say too much as too little.
Yet as she was convinced that Marianne's affection
for Willoughby could leave no hope of Colonel Bran-
don's success, whatever the event of that affection
might be, and at the same time wished to shield her
conduct from censure, she thought it most prudent
and kind, after some consideration, to say more than
she really knew or believed. She acknowledged,
therefore, that though she had never been informed
by themselves of the terms on which they stood with
each other, of their mutual affection she had no
doubt, and of their correspondence she was not asto-
nished to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention, and on
her ceasing to speak, rose directly from his scat, and
after saying in a voice of emotion, " To your sister
I wish all imaginable happiness ; to Willoughby, that
he may endeavour to deserve her, w — took leave, and
went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this
conversation to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on
other points : she was left, on the contrary, with a
melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon s unhap-
piness, and was prevented even from wishing it re-
moved, by her anxiety for the very event that must
confirm it.
208
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Nothing occurred during the next three or four
days to make Elinor regret what she had done in
applying to her mother ; for Willoughby neither came
nor wrote. They were engaged about the end of
that time to attend Lady Middleton to a party, from
which Mrs. Jennings was kept away hy the indispo-
sition of her youngest daughter ; and for this party,
Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appear-
ance, and seeming equally indifferent whether she
went or staid, prepared, without one look of hope, or
one expression of pleasure. She sat hy the drawing-
room fire after tea, till the moment of Lady Middle-
ton's arrival, without once stirring from her seat, or
altering her attitude, lost in her own thoughts and
insensible of her sister's presence ; and when at last
they were told that Lady Mi ddleton waited for'them
at the door, she started as if she had forgotten that
any one was expected.
They arrived in due time at the place of destina-
tion, and as soon as the 1 string'Jof carriages before
them would allow, alighted, ascended the stairs,
heard their names announced from one landing-place
to another in an audible voice, and entered a room
splendidly lit up, quite full of company, and insuf-
ferably hot. When they had paid their tribute of
politeness by curtseying to the lady of the house,
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 209
they were permitted to mingle in the crowd, and
take their share of the heat and inconvenience, to
which their arrival must necessarily add. After
some time spent in saying little and doing lesa, Lady
Middleton sat down to cassino, and as Marianne
was not in spirits for moving about, she and Elinor,
luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no
great distance from the table.
They had not remained in this manner long, before
Elinor perceived " Willoughby, standing within a few
yards of them, in earnest conversation, with a very
fashionable-looking young woman. She soon caught
his eye, and he immediately bowed, but without at-
tempting to speak to her, or to approach Marianne,
though he could not hut see her; and then continued
his discourse with the same lady. Elinor turned in-
voluntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could bo
unobserved by her. At that moment she first per-
ceived him, and her whole countenance glowing with
sadden delight, she would have moved towards him
instantly, had not her sister caught hold of her.
** Good heavens ! " she exclaimed, " he in there —
he is there. Oh ! why does he not look at me ? why
cannot I speak to him P "
» " Pray, pray be composed, " cried Elinor, " and do
not betray what you feel to everybody present. Per-
haps he has not observed you yet. "
This however was more than she could believe
herself, and to bo composed at such a moment was
not only beyond the reach of Marianne, it was be-
yond her wish. She sat in an agony of impatience,
which affected every feature,
r. vol. i.
210 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
At last he turned round again, and regarded them
both : she started up, and pronouncing his name in
a tone of affection, held out her hand to him. He
approached, and addressing himself rather to Elinor
than Marianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and
determined not to observe her attitude, inquired in a
hurried manner after Mrs. Dashwood, and asked how
long they had been in town. Elinor was robbed of
all presence of mind by such an address, and was
unable to say a word. But the feelings of her sister
were instantly expressed. Her face was crimsoned
oyer, and she exclaimed in a voice of the greatest
emotion, " Good God ! Willoughby, what is the
meaning of this ? Have you not received my letters?
" Will you not shake hands with me? "
He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed
painful to him, and he held her hand only for a mo-
ment. During all this time he was evidently strug-
gling for composure. Elinor watched his countenance
and saw its expression becoming more tranquil.
After a moment's pause, he spoke with calmness.
" I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley-
street last Tuesday, and very much regretted that I
was not fortunate enough to find yourselves and Mrs.
Jennings at home. My card was not lost, I hope. "
" But have you not received my notes? " cried
Marianne in the wildest anxiety. " Here is some
mistake, I am sure — some dreadful mistake. What
can be the meaning of it ? Tell me, Willoughby —
for heaven's sake tell me, what is the matter P "
He made no reply ; his complexion changed and
all his embarrassment returned ; but as if, on catch-
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 211
ing the eye of the young lady with whom he had
been previously talking, he felt the necessity of in-
stant exertion, he recovered himself again, and after
saying, " Yes, I had the pleasure of receiving the in-
formation of your arrivcl in town, which you were so
good as to send me, " turned hastily away with a slight
bow and joined his friend.
Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and un-
able to stand, sunk into her chair, and Elinor, ex-
pecting every moment to see her faint, tried to screen
her from the observation of others, while reviving
her with lavender water.
" Go to him. Elinor, " she cried, as soon as she
could speak, " and force him to come to me. Tell
him I must see him again — must speak to him in-
stantly. — I cannot rest — 1 shall not have a moment's
peace till this is explained — some dreadful misappre-
hension or other. Oh, £o to him this moment. "
" How can that be done ? No, my dearest Mari-
anne, you must wait. This is not a place for ex-
planations. Wait only till to-morrow. "
With difficulty, however, could she prevent her
from following him herself; and to persuade her to
check her agitation — to wait, at least, with the ap-
pearance of composure — till she might speak to him
with more privacy and more effect, was impossible ;
for Marianne continued incessantly to give way in a
low voice to the misery of her feelings, by exclama-
tions of wretchedness. In a short time Elinor saw
Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the
staircase, and telling Marianne that he was gone,
urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that
212 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY;
evening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm. She
instantly begged her sister would entreat Lady Mid-
dleton to take them home, as she was too miserable
to stay a minute longer.
Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber,
on being informed that Marianne was unwell, was
too polite to object for a moment to her wish of going
away, and making over her cards to a friend, they
departed as soon as the carriage could be found.
Scarcely a word was spoken during their return to
Berkeley-street. Marianne was in a silent agony,
too much oppressed even for tears ; but as Mrs. Jen-
nings was luckily not come home, they could go
directly to their own room, where hartshorn restored
her a little to herself. She was soon undressed and
in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone,
her sister then left her, and while she waited the re-
turn of Mrs. Jennings, had leisure enough for think-
ing oyer the past.
That some kind of engagement had subsisted be-
tween Willoughby and Marianne, she could not doubt;
and that Willoughby was weary of it, seemed equally
clear ; for however Marianne might still feed her own
wishes, she could not attribute such behaviour to mis-
take or misapprehension of any kind. Nothing but
a thorough change of sentiment could account for it.
Her indignation would have been still stronger than
it was, had she not witnessed that embarrassment
which seemed to speak a consciousness of his own
misconduct, and prevented her from believing him so
unprincipled as to have been sporting with the affec-
tions of her sister from the first, without any design
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 2 1 3
that would bear investigation. Absence might have
weakened his regard, and convenience might have
determined him to overcome it, but that such a re-
gard had formerly existed she could not bring herself
to doubt.
As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy
a meeting must already have given her, and on those
still more severe which might await her in its proba-
ble consequence, she could not reflect without the
deepest concern. Her own situation gained in the
comparison ; for while she could etteem Edward as
much as ever, however they might be divided in fu-
ture, her mind might be always supported. But
every circumstance that could embitter such an evil
seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne
in a final separation from Willoughby — in an imme-
diate and irreconcileable rupture with him.
CHAPTER XXIX
Before the house-maid had lit their fire the next
day, or the sun gained any power over a cold, gloomy
morning in January, Marianne, only half dressed,
was kneeling against one of the window-seats for
the sake of all the little light she could command
from it, and writing as fast as a continual flow of
214 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
tears would permit her. In this situation, Elinor,
roused from sleep hy her agitation and sobs, first per-
ceived her } and after observing her for a few mo-
ments with silent anxiety, said, in a tone of the most
considerate gentleness,
" Marianne, may I ask ? " —
" No > Elinor, " she replied, " ask nothing; jen
will soon know all. "
The sort of desperate calmness with which this
was said, lasted no longer than while she spoke, and
was immediately followed hy a return of the same
excessive affliction. It was some minutes before she
could go on with her letter, and the frequent bursts
of grief which still obliged her, at intervals, to with-
hold her pen, were proofs enough of her feeling how
more than probable it was that she was writing for
the last time to Willoughby.
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive atten-
tion in her power; and she would have tried to
soothe and tranquillise her still more, had not Mari-
anne entreated her, with all the eagerness of the
most nervous irritability, not to speak to her for the
world. In such circumstances, it was better for both
that they should not be long together; and the rest-
less state of Marianne's mind not only prevented her
from remaining in the room a moment after she was
dressed, but requiring at once solitude and continual
change of place, made her wander about the house
till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of everybody.
At breakfast she neither ate nor attempted to eat
anything; and Elinor's attention was then all em-
ployed, not in urging her, not in pitying her, nor in
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. i.'l.J
appearing to regard her, but in endeavouring to en-
gage Mrs. Jennings's notice entirely to herself.
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings,
it lasted a considerable time, and they were just set-
ting themselves, after it, round the common working
table, when a letter was delivered to Marianne, which
she eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of
a death-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room.
Elinor, who saw as plainly by this, as if she had seen
the direction, that it must come from Willoughby,
felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her
hardly able to hold up her head, and sat in such a
general tremour as made her fear it impossible to
escape Mrs. Jenning's notice. That good lady, how-
ever, saw only that Marianne had received a letter
from Willoughby, which appeared to her a very good
joke, and which she treated accordingly, by hoping,
with a laugh, that she would find it to her liking. Of
Elinor's distress, she was too busily employed in
measuring lengths of worsted for her rug, to see any-
thing at all ; and calmly continuing her talk, as soon
as Mprianne disappeared, she said,
" Upon my word I never saw a young woman so
desperately in love in my life ! My girls were no-
thing to her, and yet they used to be foolish enough ;
but as for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered
creature. I hope, from the bottom of my heart, he
won't keep her waiting much longer, for it is quite
grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn. Tray,
when are they to be married? "
Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than
at that moment, obliged herself to answer such an
216 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
attack as this, and, therefore, trying to smile, replied,
" And have you really, ma'am, talked yourself into
a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to Mr.
" Willoughby ? I thought it had been only a joke,
but so serious a question seems to imply more ; and
I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive
yourself any longer. I do assure you that nothing
would surprise me more than to hear of their being
going to be married. "
" For shame, for shame, Miss Dash wood! how
can you talk so ! Don't we all know that it must
be a match — that they were over head and ears in
love with each other from the first moment they
met ? Did not I see them together in Devonshire
every day, and all day long ? and did not I know
that your sister came to town with me on purpose to
buy wedding clothes ? Come, come, this won't do.
Because you are so sly about it yourself, you think
nobody else has any senses ; but it is no such thing,
I can tell you, for it has been known all oyer the
town this ever so long. I tell everybody of it, and
so does Charlotte. "
" Indeed, ma'am, " said Elinor very seriously, " you
are mistaken. Indeed, you are doing a very unkind
thing in spreading the report, and you will find that
you have, though you will not believe me now. "
Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had
not spirits to say more, and eager at all events to
know what Wilioughby had written, hurried away
to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw
Marianne stretched on the bed, almost choked by
grief, one letter in her hand, and two or three others
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 217
lying by her. Elinor drew near, but without Haying
a word ; and seating herself on the bed, took her hand,
kissed her affectionately several times, and then gave
way to a burst of tears, which at first was scarcely
less violent than Marianne's. The latter, though un-
able to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness of this
behaviour, and after some time thus spent in joint
affliction, she put all the letters into Elinor's hands ;
and then covering her face with her handkerchief,
almost screamed with agony. Elinor, who knew that
such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must
have its course, watched by her till this excess of suf-
fering had somewhat spent itself, and then turning
eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read as follows :
Bond Street, January.
My Dear Madam,
I have just had the honour of receiving
your letter, for which I beg to return my sincere ac-
knowledgments. I am much concerned to find there
was anything in my behaviour last night which did
not meet your approbation; and though I am quite at
a loss to discover in what point I could be so unfor-
tunate as to offend you, I entreat your forgiveness of
what I can assure you to have been perfectly unin-
tentional. I shall never reflect on my former ac-
quaintance with your family in Devonshire without
the most grateful pleasure, and flatter myself it will
not be broken by any mistake or misapprehension of
my actions. My esteem for your whole family is very
sincere ; but if I have been so unfortunate as to give
218 8EN8B AND SENSIBILITY.
rise to a belief of more than I felt, or meant to ex-
press, I shall reproach myself for not haying been
more guarded in my professions of that esteem. That
I should ever have meant more, you will allow to be
impossible, when you understand that my affections
have been long engaged elsewhere, and it will not be
many weeks, I believe, before this engagement is ful-
filled. It is with great regret that I obey your com-
mands of returning the letters with which I have
been honoured from you, and the lock of hair which
you so obligingly bestowed on me.
I am, dear Madam,
Your most obedient
humble Servant,
John WiLLOuomr.
With what indignation such a letter as this must
be read by Miss Dashwood, may be imagined. Though
aware, before she began it, that it must bring a con-
fession of his inconstancy, and confirm their separa-
tion for ever, she was not aware that such language
could be suffered to announce it ; nor could she have
supposed Willoughby capable of departing so far from
the appearance of every honourable and delicate feel-
ing — so far from the common decorum of a gentle-
man, as to send a letter so impudently cruel : a letter
which, instead of bringing with his desire of a release
any professions of regret, acknowledged no breach
of faith, denied all peculiar affection whatever — a
letter of which every line was an insult, and which
SENW AMD UEMIIILITT. 219
reclaimed Hi writer to be deep in hardened vil-
urjr.
She paused oyer it for some time with indignant
astonishment; then read it again and again; but
every perusal only served to increase her abhorrence
of the man, and so bitter were her feelings againtit
him, that she dared not trust herself to speak, lest
she might wound Marianne still deeper by treating
their disengagement, not as a loss to her of any pos-
sible good, but as an escape from the worst and most
irremediable of evils, a connexion, for life, with an
unprincipled man, as a deliverance the most real, a
blessing the most important.
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the
letter, on the depravity of that mind which could
dictate it, and, probably, on the very different mind
of a very different person, who had no other con-
nexion whatever with the affair than what her heart
gave him with everything that passed, Elinor forgot
the immediate distress of her sister, forgot that she
had three letters on her lap yet unread, and so en-
tirely forgot how long she had been in the room, that
when, on hearing a carriage drive up to the door,
she went to the window to see who could be coining
so unreasonably early, she was all astonishment to
perceive Mrs. Jennings's chariot, which she knew
had not been ordered till one. Determined not to
quit Marianne, though hopeless of contributing, at
present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse her-
self from attending Mrs. Jennings, on account of her
sister being indisposed. Mrs. Jennings, with a tho-
roughly good-humoured concern for its cuuse, ad-
220 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
mitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after
seeing her safe off, returned to Marianne, whom she
found attempting to rise from the bed, and whom
she reached just in time to prevent her from falling
on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of
proper rest and food; for it was many days since
she had any appetite, and many nights since she had
really slept; and now, when her mind was no longer
supported by the fever of suspense, the consequence
of all this was felt in an aching head, a weakened
stomach, and a general nervous faintness. A glass
of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,
made her more comfortable, and she was at last able
to express some sense of her kindness, by saying,
" Poor Elinor ! how unhappy I make you! "
" I only wish, " replied her sister, u there were
anything I could do, which might be of comfort to
you. "
This, as everything else would have been, was too
much for Marianne, who could only exclaim, in the
anguish of her heart, " Oh ! Elinor, I am miser-
able indeed, " before her voice was entirely lost In
sobs.
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of un-
resisted grief in silence.
" Exert yourself, dear Marianne, " she cried, * if
you would not kill yourself and all who love you.
Th.nk of your mother; think of her misery while
you suffer; for her sake you must exert yonrselt "
" I cannot, I cannot, " cried Marianne ; " leave me,
leave me, if I distress you ; leave me, hate me, forget
me ; but do not torture me so. Oh ! how easy for
81N8E AND SENSIBILITY. 221
those who haye no sorrow of their own to talk of
exertion ! Happy, happy Elinor, you cannot have an
idea of what I suffer. "
< « Do you call me happy, Marianne P Ah ! if you
knew! — And can you believe me to he so, while I see
you so wretched ! "
" Forgive me, forgive me, " throwing her arms
round her sister's neck ; " I know you feel for me ;
I know what a heart you have ; but yet you arc —
you must be happy; Edward loves you — what, oh!
what can do away such happiness as that P "
11 Many, many circumstances, " said Elinor, so-
lemnly.
" No, no, no, " cried Marianne wildly j " ho loves
you, and only you. You can have no grief. "
M I can have no pleasure while I see you in this
state. "
" And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is
a misery which nothing can do away. "
" You must not talk so, Marianne. Have you no
comforts P no friends P Is your loss such as leaves no
opening for consolation P Much as you suffer now,
think of what you would have suffered if the discovery
of his character had been delayed to a later period —
if your engagement had been carried on for months
and months, as it might have been, before he chose
to put an end to it. Every additional day of unhappy
confidence, on your side, would have made the blow
more dreadful.
" Engagement! " cried Marianne, " there has been
no engagement. "
" No engagement ! "
222 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" No, he is not so unworthy as you belieTe him.
He has broken no faith with me. "
" But he told you that he loved you ? " —
" Yes — no — never absolutely. It was every day
implied, but never professedly declared. Sometimes
I thought it had been — but it never was. "
" Yet you wrote to him? " —
" Yes — could that be wrong after all that had
passed ? — But I cannot talk. "
Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three
letters which now raised a much stronger curiosity
than before, directly ran over the contents of all. The
first, which was what her sister had sent him on their
arrival in town, was to this effect :
Berkeley Street, January.
How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on re-
ceiving this ! and I think you will feel something
more than surprise, when you know that I am in
town. An opportunity of coming hither, though
with Mrs. Jennings, was a temptation we could not
resist. I wish .you may receive this in time to come
here to-night, but I will not depend on it. At any
rate I shall expect you to-morrow. For the present,
a < lieu - M. D.
Her second note, which had been written on the
morning after the dance at the Middletons', was in
these words : —
" I cannot express my disappointment in having
missed you the day before yesterday, nor my asto-
nishment at not having received any answer to a note
SENS! AHD 1SHIIBILITY. 22: >
which I sent yon above a week ago. I have been
expecting to near from you, and still more to sec you,
erery hour of the day. Pray call again as soon as
possible, and explain the reason of my having ex-
pected this in vain. You had better come earlier ano-
ther time, because we are generally out by one. Wo
were last night at Lady Middleton's, where there was
a dance. I have been told that you were asked to
be of the party. But could it be so ? You must
be very much altered indeed since we parted, if that
could be the case, and you not there. But I will not
suppose this possible, and I hope very soon to receive
your personal assurance of its being otherwise.
" M. I). "
The contents of her lost note to him were these : —
" What am I to imagine, " Willoughby, by your
behaviour last ni^ht P Again I demand an expla-
nation of it. I was prepared to meet you with the
pleasure which our separation naturally produced,
with the familiarity which our intimacy at Barton
appeared to me to justify. I was repulsed indeed !
I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to
excuse a conduct which can scarcely be called less
than insulting ; but though I have not yet been able
to form any reasonable apology for your behaviour,
I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of it.
You have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely
deceived, in something concerning me, which may
have lowered me in your opinion. Tell mo what it
is, explain the grounds on which you acted, and I
shall be satisfied in being able to satisfy you. It
224 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill of
you ; but if I am to do it — if I am to learn that you
are not what we have hitherto believed you, that
your regard for us all was insincere, that your beha-
viour to me was intended only to deceive — let it be
told as soon as possible. My feelings are at present
in a state of dreadful indecision ; I wish to acquit
you, but certainty on either side will be ease to what
I now suffer. If your sentiments are no longer what
they were, you will return my notes, and the lock of
my hair which is in your possession. " M. D. "
That such letters, so full of affection and confi-
dence, could have been so answered, Elinor, for Wil-
loughby's sake, would have been unwilling to believe.
But her condemnation of him did not blind her to
the impropriety of their having been written at all ;
and she was silently grieving over the imprudence
which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs of ten-
derness, not warranted by anything preceding, and
most severely condemned by the event, when Mari-
anne, perceiving that she had finished the letters,
observed to her that they contained nothing but
what any one would have written in the same situ-
ation.
" I felt myself, " she added, " to be as solemnly
engaged to him, as if the strictest legal covenant
had bound us to each other. "
" I can believe it, " said Elinor \ " but unfortunately
he did not feel the same. "
" He did feel the same, Elinor — for weeks and
weeks he felt it. I know he did. Whatever may
SBVII AND SENSIBILITY. 225
inged him now, (and nothing but the black-
smployed against me can have done it,) I
3 as dear to him as my own soul could wish,
k of hair, which now he can so readily give
begged of me with the most earnest suppli-
Had you seen his look, his manner, had
rd his voice at that moment ! Have you
ie last evening of our being together at Bar-
'he morning that we parted too ! When he
that it might be many weeks before we met
lis distress — can I ever forget his distress ! "
moment or two she could say no more ; but
Is emotion had passed away, she added, in a
ne,
ior, I have been cruelly used, but not by
iby. "
rest Marianne, who but himself? By whom
ave been instigated ? "
11 the world, rather than by his own heart.
*ather believe every creature of my acquaint-
ed together to ruin me in his opinion, than
lis nature capable of such cruelty. This wo-
whom he writes — whoever she be — or any
ihort, but your own dear self, mamma, and
may have been so barbarous to bely mo.
you three, is there a creature in the world
would not rather suspect of evil thanWil-
whose heart I know so well ? "
r would not contend, and only replied, " Who-
y have been so detestably your enemy, let
cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear
r seeing how nobly the consciousness of your
vor. i.
226
SEN8E AND SENSn > *~..
own innocence and good intentions supports }
spirits. It is a reasonable and laudable pride wl
resists such malevolence. "
" No, no, " cried Marianne, " misery such as u
has no pride. I care not who knows that I
wretched. The triumph of seeing me so may be c
to all the world. Elinor, Elinor, they who si
little may be proud and independent as they lis
may resist insult, or return mortification — but I <
not. I must feel — I must be wretched — and i
are welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it
can. "
" But for my mother's sake and mine " —
" I would do more than for my own. But to
pear happy when I am so miserable— Oh ! who
require it? "
Again they were both silent. Elinor was
ployed in walking thoughtfully from the fire to
window, from the window to the fire, without ki
ing that she received warmth from one, or discei
objects through the other ; and Marianne, seatc
the foot of the bed, with her head leaning against
of its posts, again took up Willoughby's letter,
after shuddering over every sentence, exclaimed-
" It is too much ! Oh ! Willoughby, Willoug
could this be yours ! Cruel, cruel — nothing can
quit you. Elinor, nothing can. " Whatever he n
have heard against me— ought he not to have
pended his belief ? ought he not to have told n
it, to have given me the power of clearing myi
1 The lock of hair, (repeating it from the let
which you so obligingly bestowed on me'— Thi
•BNSB AMD BBNSIBILITY. 227
unpardonable. Willoughby, where was your heart,
when you wrote those words P Oh ! barbarously in-
solent ! — Elinor, can he be justified P "
" No, Marianne, in no possible way. "
" And yet this woman — who knows what her art
may have been — how long it may have been preme-
ditated, and how deeply contrived by her! — Who is
she P — Who can she be P — Whom did I ever hear
him talk of as young and attractive among his fe-
male acquaintance P — Oh ! no one, no one — he
talked to me only of myself. "
Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agi-
tated, and it ended thus.
" Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort
mamma. Cannot we be gone to-morrow P "
" To-morrow, Marianne ! "
" Yes ; why should I stay here P I came only for
Willoughby's sake — and now who cares for me P
Who regards me P "
" It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We
owe Mrs. Jennings much more than civility ; and
civility of the commonest kind must prevent such
a hasty removal as that. "
" Well then, another day or two, perhaps ; but I
cannot stay here long, I cannot stay to endure the
questions and remarks of all these people. The
Middletons and Palmers — how am I to bear their
pity P The pity of such a woman as Lady Middleton!
—oh! what would he say to that! "
Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a
moment she did so ; but no attitude could give her
oate, and in restless pain of mind and body she moved
228 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
from one posture to another, till growing more and
more hysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep
her on the bed at all, and for some time was fearful
of being constrained to call for assistance. Some
lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use ; and from that time
till Mrs. Jennings returned, she continued on the
bed quiet and motionless.
CHAPTER XXX.
Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room
on her return, and without waiting to have her re-
quest of admittance answered, opened the door and
walked in with a look of real concern.
" How do you do, my dear P w said she in a voice
of great compassion to Marianne, who turned away
her face without attempting to answer.
" How is she, Miss Dashwood ? Poor thing ! she
looks very bad. No wonder. — Ay, it is but too true.
He is to be married very soon — a good-for-nothing
fellow! I have no patience with him. Mrs. Taylor
told me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it
by a particular friend of Miss Grey herself, else I am
sure I should not have believed it; and I was almost
ready to sink as it was. Well, said I, all I can say
AW 4MIIUUTT. 229
It, that If it is trot, he has used a young lady of my
aoquaintanee abominably ill, and I wiah with all my
•ord hit wife may plague hit heart out. And to I
shall alwayt tay, my dear, you may depend on it.
I hare no notion of men't going on in thit way; and
if ever I meet him again, I will giro him tuch a
draating at he hat not had thit many a day. But
there it one comfort, my deal Mitt Marianne : he it
not the only young man in the world worth haying;
and with your pretty face you will never want ad-
mirert. Well, poor thing I I won't ditturb her any
longer, for the had better hare her cry out at once
and hare done with it. The Parryt and Sandersons
luckily are coming to-night, you know, and that will
amute her. " •
She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the
room, at if the tuppoted her young friend's affliction
could be increased by noite.
Marianne, to the t urprite of her titter, determined
on dining with them. Elinor even advised her against
it. But " no, the would go down j the could bear it
very well, and the buttle about her would be less.
Elinor, pleated to have her governed for a moment
by tuch a motive, though believing it hardly possible
that the could tit out the dinner, said no more ; and
adjusting her dress for her at well at the could while
Marianne ttill remained on the bed, wat ready to as-
sist her into the dining-room at toon at they were
tummoned to it.
When there, though looking most wretchedly, she
ate more and wat calmer than her sitter had expected.
Had the tried to speak, or had the been conscious of
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
lalf Mrs. Jennings's well-meant bat ill-judged atten-
fi ■ ma to her, this calmness could not hare been main-
^ained ; but not a syllable escaped her lips, and the
I u i > •■■• < i ,i i l i ■ ..I i of her thoughts preserved her in ignorance
[ of everything that was passing before her.
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kind-
ness, though its effusions were often distressing, and
sometimes almost ridiculous, made her those acknow-
ledgments, and returned her those civilities, which
her ulster could not make or return for herself. Their
good friend saw that Marianne was unhappy, and
felt that everything was due to her which might make
her at all less so. She treated her, therefore, with all
the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a fa-
vourite child on the last day of its holidays. Mari-
anne was to have the best place by the fire, was to be
tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, and to
be amused by the relation of all the news of the day.
Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance of her sister,
teen a dieek to all mirth, she could have been enter-
tained by Mrs. Jennings's endeavours to cure a dis-
appointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and
olives, and a good fire. As soon, however, as the con-
HciQugneaB of all this was forced by continual repe-
tition on Marianne, she could stay no longer. With
a ]i:i!i] y exclamation of misery, and a sign to her sis-
ter not to follow her, she directly got up and hurried
out of the room.
" Poor soul ! " cried Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she
was gone, how it grieves me to see her ! And I de-
clare if she is not gone away without finishing her
wine. 1 And the dried cherries too! Lord! nothing
AM» SBVIIJILITY. 231
teems to do her any good. I am sure If I knew of
anything the would like, I would stud all over the
town for it Well, it ie the oddest thing to me, that
a men should nee such a pretty girl so ill ! But when
there ie plenty of money on one ride, end next to
none on the other, Lord hleee you I they care no more
about eueh things!— "
" The lady then—Hiss Grey I think you called
her — is very rich* "
" Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever
see her r ft smart, stylish girl, they say, but not hand-
some. I remember her aunt very well, Biddy Hen-
shawe; she married a very wealthy man. But the
family are all rich together. Fifty thousand pounds !
end by all accounts it won't come before it's wanted ;
for they say he is all to pieces. No wonder! dashing
about with his curricle and hunters ! Well, it don't
signify talking, but when a young man, be he who he
will, comes and makes lore to a pretty girl, and pro-
mises marriage, he has no business to fly off from his
word only because he grows poor, and a richer girl is
ready to have him. Why don't he, in such a case,
sell his horses, let his house, turn off his servants, and
make a thorough reform at onceP I warrant you,
Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till
matters came round. But that won't do, now-a-days ;
nothing in the way of pleasure can ever be given up
by the young men of this age. "
" Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Orey isP
Is she said to be amiable ? n
M I never heard any harm of her ; indeed I hardlf
ever heard her mentioned \ except that Mrs. Taylor
232 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
did say this morning, that one day Miss Walker
hiated to her, that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison
would not be sorry to have Miss Grey married, for she
and Mrs. Ellison could never agree. " —
" And who are the Ellisons ? "
" Her guardians, my dear. But now she is of age
and may choose for herself; and a pretty choice she
has made ! — What now, " after pausing a moment —
" your poor sister is gone to her own room, I sup-
pose, to moan by herself. Is there nothing one can
get to comfort her? Poor dear, it seems quite cruel
to let her be alone. Well, by-and bye we shall have
a few friends, and that will amuse her a little. What
shall we play at? She hates whist, I know; but is
there no round game she cares for? w
" Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary.
Marianne, I dare say, will not leave her room again
this evening. I shall persuade her, if I can, to go
early to bed, for I am sure she wants rest. "
" Ay, I believe that will be best for her. Let her
name her own supper, and go to bed. Lord ! no
wonder she has been looking so bad and so cast-down
this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has
been hanging over her head as long as that. And
so the letter that came to-day finished it! Poor soul!
I am sure if I had had a notion of it, I would not
have joked her about it for ail my money. But then,
you know, how should I guess such a thing? I made
sure of its being nothing but a common love-letter,
and you know young people like to be laughed at
about them. Lord ! how concerned Sir John and
my daughters will be when they hear it! If I had
SENSE AND SENSIDIL1TY. 233
hail my senses about me, I might hare called in
Conduit-street in my way home, and told them of it.
But 1 shall see them to-morrow. "
" It would be unnecessary, I am sure, for you to
caution Mrs. Palmer and Sir John against ever nam-
ing Mr. Willoughby, or making the slightest allusion
to what has passed, before my sister. Their own
good-nature must point out to them the real cruelty
of appearing to know anything about it when she is
present; and the less that may ever be said to myself
on tho subject, the more my feelings will be spared,
as you, my dear madam, will easily believe.'1
" Oh ! Lord ! yes, that I do indeed. It must be
terrible for you to hear it talked of; and as for your
sister, I am sure I would not mention a word about
it to her for the world. You saw I did not all dinner-
time. No more would Sir John nor my daughter**,
for they are all very thoughtful and considerate —
especially if I give them a hint, as I certainly will.
For my part, I think that the less that is said about
such tilings, the better, the sooner His blown over
and forgot. And what good does talking ever do,
you knowP "
" In this affair it can only do harm — more so per-
haps than in many cases of a similar kind, for it has
been attended by circumstances which, for the sake,
of e\ery one concerned in it, make it unfit to become
the public conversation. 1 must do this justice to
Mr. Willoughby — he lias broken no positive engage-
ment with my sister. "
" Law, my dear! Don't protend to defend him.
Mo positive engagement indeed! after taking her all
234 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
over Allenhara House, and fixing on the very rooms
they were to live in hereafter! "
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the
subject farther, and she hoped it was not required of
her for Willoughby's ; since, though Marianne might
lose much, he could gain very little by the enforce-
ment of the real truth. After a short silence on
both sides, Mrs. Jennings, with all her natural hilarity,
burst forth again.
" Well, my dear,'tis a true saying about an ill
wind, for it will be all the better for Colonel Bran-
don. He will have her at last; ay, that he will.
Mind me, now, if they an't married by Midsummer.
Lord ! how he'll chuckle over this news ! I hope he
will come to-night. It will be all to one a better
match for your sister. Two thousand a-year without
debt or drawback — except the little love-child, in-
deed; ay, I had forgot her; but she may be'pren-
ticed out at small cost, and then what does it signify?
Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you ; exactly whaf
I call a nice old-fashioned place, full of comforts an <
conveniences ; quite shut in with great garden wal'
that are covered with the best fruit-trees in the com
try : and such a mulberry tree in one corner! Lor
how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we w <
there ! Then, there is a dovecote, some delight
stewponds, and a very pretty canal ; and everythf
in short, that one could wish for : and, moreovei
is close to the church, and only a quarter of a
from the turnpike-road, so'tis never dull, for if
only go and sit up in an old yew arbour behim
house, you may see all the carriages that pass t
SBN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 235
Oh !'tis a nice place ! A butcher hard by in the til-
lage, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw.
To my fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton
Park, where they are forced to send three miles for
their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer than
your mother. Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as
toon as I can. One shoulder of mutton, you know,
drives another down. If we can but put Willoughby
out of her head ! "
" Ay, if we can but do that, ma'am/'said Elinor,
" we shall do very well with or without Colonel
Brandon. " And then rising, she went away to join
Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her
own room, leaning, in silent misery, over the small
remains of a fire which, till Elinor's entrance, had
been her only light.
" You had better leave me, " was all the notice that
her sister received from her.
" I will leave you, " said Elinor, " if you will go to
bed. " But this, from the momentary perverseness of
impatient suffering, she at first refused to do. Her
sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion, however,
soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her
lay her aching head on the pillow, and saw her, as
she hoped, in a way to get some quiet rest before she
left her.
In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired,
she was soon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-
glass, full of something, in her hand.
" My dear, " said she, entering, " I have just recol-
lected that I have some of the finest old Constantia
wine, in the house, that ever was tasted — so I have
236 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
brought a glass of it for your sister. My poor hus-
band ! how fond he was of it! Whenever he had a
touch of his old cholicky gout, he said it did him
more good than anything else in the world. Do take
it to your sister. "
" Dear ma'am, 1'replied Elinor, smiling at the dif-
ference of the complaints for which it was recom-
mended, " how good you are ! But I have just left
Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep ; and as
I think nothing will be of so much service to her as
rest, if you will give me leave, I will drink the wine
myself. "
Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not
been five minutes earlier, was satisfied with the com-
promise; and Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of
it, reflected that, though its good effects on a cho-
licky gout were at present of little importance to
her, its healing powers on a disappointed heart
might be as reasonably tried on herself as on ^her
sister.
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at
tea, and by his manner of looking round the room
for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied that he
neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in
short, that he was already aware of what occasioned
her absence. Mrs. Jennings was not struck by the
same thought; for, soon after his entrance, she walked
across the room to the tea-table where Elinor pre-
sided, and whispered — " The Colonel looks as grave
as ever, you see. He knows nothing of it ; do tell
him, my dear. "
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers,
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 237
and, with a look which perfectly assured her of his
good information, inquired after her sister.
" Marianne is not well, " said she. " She has been
indisposed all day; and we have persuaded her to
go to bed. "
" Perhaps, then, " he hesitatingly replied, " what
I heard this morning may be— there may be more
truth in it than I could believe possible at tint. "
" What did you hear? "
" That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think —
in 8hort,that a man, whom I knew to be engaged —
but how shall I tell you P If you know it already, as
surely you must, I may be spared. "
" You mean, " answered Elinor, with forced calm-
ness, " Mr. Willoughby's marriage with Miss Grey.
Yes, we do know it all. This seems to have been a
day of general elucidation, for this very morning first
unfolded it to us. Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable !
Where did you hear it? "
" In a stationer's shop in Pall Mull, where 1 had
business. Two ladies wore waiting for their car-
riage, and one of them was giving the other an ac-
count of the intended match, in a voice so little at-
tempting concealment, that it was impossible for
me not to hear all. The name of Willoughby,
John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught
my attention, and what followed was a positive
assertion that everything was now finally set lied
respecting his marriage with Miss Grey — it was no
louger to be a secret — it would take place even
within a few weeks, with many particulars of pre-
parations and other matters. One thing, especially,
238 SBHSE AKD SENSIBILITY.
I remember, because it Mired to identify the
still more : — as soon as the ceremony was ovei
were to go to Combe Magna, his seat in S
setshire. My astonishment ! Bat it would 1
possible to describe what I felt. The com
cative lady, I learnt on inquiry, for I staid i
shop till they were gone, was a Mrs. Ellison
that, as I have been since informed, is the ns
Miss Grey's guardian. "
" It is. But have you likewise heard thai
Grey has fifty thousand pounds P In that, if ix
thing, we may find an explanation. "
" It may be so ; but Willoughby is capabl
least I think " — he stopped a moment ; then ;
in a voice which seemed to distrust itself'
your sister — how did she — "
" Her sufferings have been very severe. I
only to hope that they may be proportionably
It has been, it is a most cruel affliction. Till y
day, I believe, she never doubted his regard
even now, perhaps — but / am almost convince*
he never was really attached to her. He has
very deceitful! and, in some points, there sec
hardness of heart about him. "
" Ah ! " said Colonel Brandon, " there is, in <
But your sister does not — I think you said so-
does not consider it quite as you do ? "
" You know her disposition, and may believe
eagerly she would still justify him if she could
He made no answer ; and soon afterwards, l
removal of the tea things, and the arrangeme
parties, the subject was necessarily dro
IMU AXD SJMSIBILITY. 239
Mrs. Jennings who had watched them with plea-
sure while they were talking, and who expected to
see the effect of Miss Dashwood's communication,
in such an instantaneous • gaiety on Colonel Bran-
don's tide as might here become a man in the bloom
of youth, of hope and happiness, saw him, with
amasement, remain (he whole evening more serious
und thoughtful thft n usual*
END OF VOL. I.
1

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
*Cf
SENSE
SENSIBILITY.
A NOVEL.
JANE AUSTEN,
AVTHORXW OF " PJIIDE AND F*BJUDXCK., " " C, ETC. 4
VOL. II.
LONDON :
H. G. CLARKE AND CO., 66, OLD BAILEY.
1844.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
CHAPTER I.
From a night of more sleep than she had expected,
Marianne awoke the next morning to the same con-
sciousness of misery in which she had closed her
eyes.
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk
of what she felt ;
had gone through
the same steady 901
Elinor's side, the sitae
opinions on Mariain
could belieye Wtttou^l
innocent as herself, an
tion in the impossHiiJli
moment she was absolui
tion of all the world, at another she would secludo
herself from it for ever, and at a third could resist it
with energy. In one thing, however, she was uni-
form, when it came to the point, in avoiding, where
it was possible, the presence of Mrs. Jennings, and
in a determined uilcncc when obliged to endure it.
Her heart was hardened against tho belief of Mrs.

it was ready, they
and again — with
onate counsel on
,gs and varying
Sometimes she
Fortunate and as
every conaola-
him. At one
liferent to the observa-

•BVU AMD SIVtIBILITT. 7
loughby, full of t end e rn es s and contrition, explana-
tory of all that had patted, satisfactory, convincing;
and instantly followed by Willoughby himself, rush-
ing eagerly into the room to enforce, at her feet, by
the eloquence of hit eyes, the assurances of his let-
ter. The work of one moment was destroyed by
the next The handwriting of her mother, never till
then unwelcome, waa before her; and, in the acute-
neat of the disappointment which followed such an
ecstasy of more than hope, the felt at if, till that
instant, the had never suffered.
The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, withiu
her reach in her momenta of happiest eloquence,
could have expressed; and now the could reproach
her only by the tears which streamed from hor eyes
with passionate violence — a reproach, however, so
entirely lost on its object, that after many expres-
sions of pity, she withdrew, still referring her to the
letter for comfort But the letter, when she was
calm enough to read it, brought little comfort. Wil-
loughby filled every page. Her mother, still confi-
dent of their engagement, and relying at warmly as
ever on hit constancy, had only been roused by Eli-
nor's application, to entreat from Marianne greater
openness towards them both; and this, with such
tenderness towards her, such affection for Willough-
by, and such a conviction of their future bappiuesH
in each other, that she wept with agony through the
whole of it.
All her impatience to be at home again now re-
turned j her mother was dearer to her than ever —
dearer through the very excess of hor mistaken con-
8 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
fidence iii Willoughby, and she was wildly urgent to
be gone. Elinor, unable herself to determine whe-
ther it were better for Marianne to be in London or
at Barton, offered no counsel of her own except of
patience till their mother's wishes could be known;
and at length she obtained her sister's consent to
wait for that knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for
she could not be easy till the Middletons and Pal-
mers were able to grieve as much as herself; and
positively refusing Elinor's offered attendance, went
out alone for the rest of the morning. Elinor, with
a very heavy heart, aware of the pain she was going
to communicate, and perceiving by Marianne's letter
how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation
for it, then sat down to write her mother an account
of what had passed, and entreat her directions for
the future; while Marianne, who came into the
drawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's going away, re-
mained fixed at the table where Elinor wrote, watch-
ing the advancement of her pen, grieving over her
for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still
more fondly over its effect on her mother.
In this manner they had continued about a quar-
ter of an hour, when Marianne, whose nerves could
not then bear any sudden noise, was startled by a rap
at the door.
" Who can this be ? " cried Elinor, " So early too !
1 thought we had been safe. "
Marianne moved to the window. —
" It is Colonel Brandon ! " said she, with vexation.
" We are never safe from him. "
•Mil A*D SBMIBU.KT. 9
M He will not come In, at Mrs. Jennings is from
home. "
" I will not trust to that, " retreating to her own
room. M A man who has nothing to do with hie own
time has no conscience in his intrusion on that of
others. "
The event proved her conjecture right, though it
was founded on injustice and error, for Colonel Bran-
don did come in ; and Elinor, who was convinced
that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither, and
who saw that solicitude in his disturbed and melan-
choly look, and in his anxious though brief inquiry
after her, could not forgive her sister for esteeming
him so lightly.
M I met Mrs, Jennings in Bond-street, 9 said he,
alter the first salutation, " and she encouraged me to
come on ; and I was the more easily encouraged, be-
cause I thought it probable that I might find you
alone, which I was very desirous of doing. My ob-
ject— my wish — my sole wish in desiring it — I hope,
I believe it hi — is to be a means of giving comfort •
—no, I must not say comfort — not present comfort-
but conviction, lasting conviction to your sister 9
mind. My regard for her, for yourself, for your mo-
ther — will you allow me to prove it, by relating some
circumstances, which nothing but a very sincere re-
gard — nothing but an earnest desire of being use-
ful . I think I am justified — though where so
many hours have been spent in convincing myself
that I am right, is there not some reason to fear I
may be wrong P " He stopped.
" I understand you,* said Elinor. " You have
10 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
something to tell me of Mr. Willoughby, that will
open his character farther. Your telling it will be
the greatest act of friendship that can be shown
Marianne. My gratitude will be insured immedi-
ately by any information tending to that end, and
hers must be gained by it in time. Pray, pray let
me hear it. "
" You shall ; and, to be brief, when I quitted
Barton last October,— but this will give you no
idea — I must go farther back. You will find me a
very awkward narrator, Miss Dashwood; I hardly
know where to begin. A short account of myself
I believe, will be necessary, and it shall be a short
one. On such a subject, " sighing heavily, " I can
have little temptation to be diffuse. "
He stopped a moment for recollection, and then,
with another sigh, went on.
" You have probably entirely forgotten a conver-
sation — (it is not to be supposed that it could make
any impression on you) — a conversation between us
one evening at Barton Park — it was the evening of
a dance — in which I alluded to a lady I had once
known, as resembling, in some measure, your sister
Marianne. "
" Indeed, " answered Elinor, " I have not forgotten
it. " He looked pleased by this remembrance, and
added,
" If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the
partiality of tender recollection, there is a very strong
resemblance between them, as well in mind as per-
son — the same warmth of heart, the same eagerness
of fancy and spirits. This lady was one of my
n
neatest tehtiona, mi orphan from her m & ncy, and
nndor the gnardiauofrtp of myfothor. Out ages were
newly the mom, ■*» from oar earnest years we
were pUyfoHows and friend*. I. cannot remember
the .time when I did not lore Bite} end my affec-
tion lor her, as we grew up, wee such, u perhaps,
judging from my present forlorn end cheerleei gra-
vity, you might think me incapable of baring ever
folt. Here, for me, warn, I believe, fervent at the
attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby, and it
we*, though from % dttmrent cause, no less unfortu-
nate. At seventeen she was lost to me for ever. She
wae married— married against her inclination to my
brother. Her fortune was large, and our family
estate much encumbered. And this, I fear, is aU
that can be said for the conduct of one who was at
once her uncle and guardian. My brother did not
deserve her j he did not even love her. I had hoped
that her regard for me would support her under any
difficulty, and for some time it did j— but at last the
misery of her situation, for she experienced great un~
kindness, overcame all her resolution, and though
she had promised me that nothing-*— but how
blindly I relate ! I have never told you how this was
brought on. We were within a few hours of eloping
together for Scotland. The treachery, or the folly, of
my cousin's maid betrayed us. I was banished to
the house of a relation far distant, and she was al-
lowed no liberty, no society, no amusement, till my
father's point was gained. I had depended on her
fortitude too for, and the blow was a severe one—
but bad her marriage been happy, so young as I then
>
12 SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
was, a few months mast have reconciled me to it, or
at least I should not have now to lament it. This,
however, was not the case. My brother had no re-
gard for her ; his pleasures were not what they ought
to have been, and from the first he treated her un-
kindly. The consequence of this, upon a mind so
young, so lively, so inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's,
was but too natural. She resigned herself at first to
all the misery of her situation ; and happy had it
been if she had not lived to overcome those regrets
which the remembrance of me occasioned. But can
we wonder that with such a husband to provoke in-
constancy, and without a friend to advise or restrain
her, (for my father lived only a few months after their
marriage, and I was with my regiment in the East
Indies,) she should fall? Had I remained in England,
perhaps — but I meant to promote the happiness of
both by removing from her for years, and for that pur-
pose had procured my exchange. The shock which
her marriage had given me, " he continued in a voice
of great agitation, " was of trifling weight — was no-
thing — to what I felt when I heard, about two years
afterwards, of her divorce. It was that which threw
this gloom, — even now the recollection of what I
suffered — *
He could say no more, and rising hastily walked
for a few minutes about the room. Elinor, affected
by his relation, and still more by his distress, could
not speak. He saw her concern, and coming to her,
took her hand, pressed it, and kissed it with grateful
respect. A few minutes more of silent exertion ena-
. bled him to proceed with composure.
urn urn MmnniTT. 13
*It was nearly three years after this unhappy
period before I returned to England. My first care,
when I did arrive, m of course to seek for her ; but
the tearch wu at fruitless at it was melancholy. I
could not trace her beyond her first seducer, and there
wae erery reason to fear that ahe had removed from
him only to link deeper In a lift of sin. Her legal
allowance was not adequate to her fortune, nor sufH-
cient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt
from my brother that the power of receiving it had
been made over some months before to another per-
son. He imagined, and calmly could he imagine it,
that her extravagance and consequent distress had
obliged her to dispose of it for some immediate relief.
At last, however, and after I had been six months in
England, I did find her. Regard for a former ser-
vant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune,
carried me to visit him in a spunging-house, where
he was confined for debt j and there, in the same
house, under a similar confinement, was my unfor-
tunate sister. Bo altered— to fadedr~worn down by
acute suffering of erery kind ! hardly could I believe
the melancholy and sickly Ogoxt before me, to be the
remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on
whom I had once dotted. What I endured in so be-
holding her— -but I have no right to wound your
feelings by attempting to describe it — I have pained
you too much already. That she was, to all appear-
ance, in the last stage of a consumption, was — yes,
in such a situation it was my greatest comfort. Life
eould do nothing for her, beyond giving time for a
better preparation for death j and that was given, I
14 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and under
proper attendants ; I visited her every day during the
rest of her short life; I was with her in her last
moments. "
Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor
spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender con-
cern at the fate of his unfortunate Mend.
" Tour sister, I hope, cannot be offended, " said he,
" by the resemblance I have fancied between her and
my poor disgraced relation. Their fates, their for-
tunes cannot be the same ; and had the natural sweet
disposition of the onebeen guarded by a firmer mind,
or a happier marriage, she might have been all that
you will live to see the other be. But to what does
all this lead P I seem to have been distressing you
for nothing. Ah ! Miss Dashwood— e subject such
as this— untouched lor fourteen years— it is dan-
gerous to handle it at all ! I will be more collected
—more concise. She left, to my care her only child,
a little girl, the oflkpring of hex first guilty connec-
tion, who was then about three yean old* She loved
the child, and had always kept it with her- It wa#
a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would
I have discharged it in the strictest sense, by watch-
ing over her education myself had the nature of our
situations allowed it; but I had no family, no home;
and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school.
I saw her there whenever I could, and after the
death of my brother, (which happened about five
years ago, and which left to me the possession of
the family property,) she frequently visited me at
Delaford. I called her a distant relation ; but I am
■Mil AHD M*S1»LIT1 C . IS
well aware that I have in general been inspected of
a much nearer connexion with her. It li now three
years ago, (she had just reached her fourteenth year,)
that I removed her from school, to place her under
the care of a very respectable woman, residing in
Dorsetshire, who had the charge of four or five other
girls of about the same time of lift ; and for two
years I had every reason to be pleased with her
situation. But last February, almost a twelvemonth
back, she suddenly disappeared. I had allowed her,
(Imprudently, as it has since turned out,) at her
earnest desire, to go to Bath with one of her young
friends, who was attending her father there for his
health. I knew him to be a very good sort of man,
and I thought well of his daughter— better than she
deserved, for, with a most obstinate and ill-judged
secrecy, she would tell nothing, would gjlve no clue,
though she certainly knew all. He, her rather, a
well-meaning, but not a quick-sighted man, could
really, I. believe, give no information \ for he had
been generally confined to the house, while tjie girls
were ranging over the town and making what ac-
quaintance they chosej and he tried to convince me,
as thoroughly as he was convinced himself, of his
daughter's being entirely unconcerned in the busi-
ness* In short, I could learn nothing but that she
was gone \ all the rest, for eight long months, was
left to conjecture. What I thought, what I feared,
may be imagined; and what I suffered too.*
« Good heavens! 19 cried Elinor, «* could i\ be!
could WiUoughby! " —
" The first news that reached me of tot " ta ton.*
16 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
tinned, " came in a letter from herself, last October.
It was forwarded to me from Delaford, and I re-
ceived it on the very morning of our intended party
to Whitwell ; and this was the reason of my leaving
Barton so suddenly, which I am sure must at the
time have appeared strange to everybody, and which
I believe gave offence to some. Little did Mr. Wil-
loughby imagine, I suppose, when his looks censured
me for incivility in breaking up the party, that I was
called away to the relief of one whom he had made
poor and miserable ; but had he known it, what
would it have availed P Would behave been less
gay or less happy in the smiles of your sister ? No,
he had already done that which no man who can
feel for another would do. He had left the girl
whose youth and innocence he had seduced, in a
situation of the utmost distress, with no creditable
home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his address !
He had left her, promising to return; he neither
returned, nor wrote, nor relieved her. "
" This is beyond everything P 1 exclaimed Elinor.
" His character is now before you — expensive, dissi-
pated, and worse than both. Knowing all this, as
I have now known it many weeks, guess what I
must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him
as ever, and on being assured that she was to marry
him; guess what I must have felt for all your sakes.
When I came to you last week and found you alone,
I came determined to know the truth, though irre-
solute what to do when it was known. My beha-
viour must have seemed strange to you then ; but
now you will comprehend it. To suffer you all to
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 17
be so deceived j to see your sister — but what could
I do P I had no hope of interfering with success ;
and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might
yet reclaim him. But now, after such dishonourable
usage, who can tell what were his designs on her ?
" Whatever they may have been, however, she may
now, and hereafter she doubtless will, turn with
gratitude towards her own condition, when she com-
pares it with that of my poor Eliza, when she consi-
ders the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor
girl, and pictures her to herself, with an affection for
him as strong, still as strong as her own, and witli
a mind tormented by self-reproach, which must at-
tend her through life. Surely this comparison must
have its use with her. She will feel her own suffer-
ings to be nothing. They proceed from no miscon-
duct, and can bring no disgrace. ■ On the contrary,
every friend must be made still more her friend by
them. Concern for her unhappincBS, and respect tor
her fortitude under it, must strengthen every attach-
ment. Use your own discretion, however, in com-
municating to her what I have told you. You must
know best what will be its effect; but had I not
seriously and from my heart believed it might be of
service, might lessen her regrets, I would not have
suffered myself to trouble you with this account of
my family afflictions, with a recital which may seem
to have been intended to raise myself at the expense
of others. "
Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful
earnestness ; attended too with the insurance of her
D VOL. II.
18 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
expecting material advantage to Marianne, from the
communication of what had passed.
" I hare been more pained, " said she, u by her en-
deavours to acquit him than by afi the rest ; for it
Irritates her mind more than the most perfect convie-
tion of hie unworthiness can do. Now, though at
first she will suffer much, I am sure she will soon be-
come easier. Have you, " she continued, alter a short
silence, " ever seen Mr. Willoughby since you left him
at Barton ? "
" Yes, " he replied gravely, w once I have. One
meeting was unavoidable. "
Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him an-
xiously, saying,
" " What ! have you met him to — *
" I could meet him in no other way. Eliza had
confessed to me, though most reluctantly, the name of
her lover ; and when he returned to town, which was
within a fortnight after myself, we met by appoint-
ment, be to defend, I to punish his conduct. We
returned unwounded, and the meeting, therefore,
never got abroad. "
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this ;
but to a man and a soldier, she presumed not to cen-
sure it
" Such, " said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, " has
been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of
mother and daughter ! and so imperfectly have I dis-
charged my trust ! "
" Is she still in town? "
" No ; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in,
mm AMD •MUBILIYY. 10
for I found her near her delivery, I removed her and
her child into the country, end there the remain*. "
Recollecting, toon afterwards, that he waa proba-
bly dividing Elinor from her sitter, he put an end to
hie visit, receiving from her again the eame grateful
acknowledgment*, and leaving her roll of companion
and esteem lor him.
CHAPTER II.
When the particular* of thia conversation were re*
peated by Mis* Dashwood to her sister, as they very
soon were, their effect on her was not entirely such
as the former had hoped to see. Not that Marianne
appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for
she listened to it all with the most steady and sub-
missive attention, made neither objection nor remark,
attempted no vindication of Willoughby, and seemed
to show by her tears that she felt it to be impossible.
But though this behaviour assured Elinor that the
conviction of his guilt was carried home to her mind ;
though she saw with satisfaction the effect of it, in
her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he
called, in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speak-
ing, with a kind of compassionate respect, and though
she saw her spirits less violently irritated than before ;
20 SCSSE *» SOBKUTT.
site did not see her less wretebed. Her ssxad dad be-
come settled, be* it w» seeded in a gloosmy- dejectim.
She Jek the low of WiDoeghbj'* character yet more
heavily than she had felt the low of Us heart ; his
seduction and d es c ition of MisslHIriasBis, die misery
of that poor girl, and the dooht of what h» <
mrght once hare been on herself preyed
so much on her spirits, that she could not bring her-
self to speak of what she felt eren to Elinor ; and
brooding over her sorrows in silence, gave more pain
to her sister than could hare been communicated by
tSe most open and most frequent confession of them.
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dash-
wood on receiving and answering Elinor's letter,
would be only to gire a repetition of what her daugh-
ters had already felt and said ; of a disappointment
hardly less painful than Marianne's, and an indigna-
tion eren greater than Elinor's. Long letters from
her, quickly succeeding each other, arrived to tell all
that the suffered and thought; to express her anxious
solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear
up with fortitude under this misfortune. Bad indeed
must the nature of Marianne's affliction be, when
her mother could talk of fortitude ! mortifying and
humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, which
•he could wish her not to indulge !
Against the interest of her own individual comfort,
Mrs. Dashwood had determined that it would be bet-
ter for Marianne to be anywhere at that time, than
at Barton, where everything within her view would
t£ing back the past in the strongest and most,
manner, by cotasAmvU^ placing Willoughby
**+m
tBNSS AXD SBXtlBIUTY. 21
before her, such m the had always seen him there.
She recommended it to her daughter*, therefore* by
all means not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings;
the length of which, though never exactly fixed, had
been expected by all to comprise at least five or six
weeks. A variety of occupations, of objects, and of
company, which could not be procured at Burton,
would be inevitable there, and might yet, she hoped,
cheat Marianne, at times, into some interest beyond
herself, and even into some amusement, much as the
idea of both might now be spurned by her.
From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her
mother considered her to be at least equally safe in
town as in the country, since his acquaintance must
now be dropped by all who called themselves her
friends. Design could never bring them in each
other's way ; negligence could never leave them ex-
posed to a surprise; and chance had less in its fuumr
in the crowd of London than even in the retirement
of Barton, where it might force him before her while
paying that visit at Allcnham on his marriage, which
Mrs. Dash wood, from foreseeing at first as a pro-
bable event, had brought herself to expect as a cer-
tain one.
She had yet another reason for wishing her chil-
dren to remain where they were; a letter from her
son-in-law had told her that he and his wife were to
be in town beforo the middle of February, and Mho
judged it right that they should sometimes see their
brother.
Marianne had promised to bo guided by ner mo-
ther's opinion, and she submitted to U. vV\ex«tet%
22 SEXSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
without opposition, though it proved perfectly differ-
ent from what she wished and expected, though she
felt it to he entirely wrong, formed on mistaken
grounds, and that hy requiring her longer continu-
ance in London it deprived her of the only possible
alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sym-
pathy of her mother, and doomed her to such society
and such scenes as must prevent her ever knowing
a moment's rest.
But it was a matter of great consolation to her,
that what brought evil to herself would bring good to
her sister; and Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting
that it would not be in her power to avoid Edward
entirely, comforted herself by thinking, that though
their longer stay would therefore militate against her
own happiness, it would be better for Marianne than
an immediate return into Devonshire.
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever
hearing Willoughby'a name mentioned, was not
thrown away. Marianne, though without knowing
it herself reaped all its advantage; for neither Mrs.
Jennings, nor Sir John, nor even Mrs. Palmer her-
self, ever spoke of him before her. Elinor wished
that the same forbearance could have extended to-
wards herself, but that was impossible, and she was
obliged to listen day after day to the indignation of
them alL
Sir John could not have thought it possible. " A
man of whom he had always had such reason to
think well ! Such a good-natured fellow ! He did
not believe there was a bolder rider in England! It
ma an unaccountable business. He wished him at
SKXSS AMD SENSIBILITY. 23
the devil with all bit heart He would not speak
another word to him, meet him where he might, for
mil the world! No, not if it were to be by the side of
Barton covert, and they were kept waiting for two
hours together. Such a eeoundrel of a fellow! such
a deceitful dog! It wee only the last time they met
that he had offered him one of Folly's puppies! and
this was the end of it! "
Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry.
M She was determined to drop his acquaintance im-
mediately, and she was very thankful that she had
never been acquainted with him at all. She wished
with all her heart Combe Magna was not so near
Cleveland) but it did not signify, for it was a great
deal too far off to visit) she hated him so much that
ehe was resolved never to mention his name again,
and she should tell everybody she saw, how good-
for-nothing he was. "
'The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shown in
procuring all the particulars in her power of the ap-
proaching marriage, and communicating them to Eli-
nor. She could soon tell at what coachmaker's the
new carriage was building, by what painter Mr.
" WUloughby's portrait was drawn, and at what ware-
house l^iss Grey's clothes might be seen.
The cairn and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton
on the occasion was a happy relief to Elinor's spirits,
oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kind-
nets of the others. It was a great comfort to her to
be sure of exciting no interest in one person at least
among their circle of friends; a great comfort to know
that there was one who would meet her without feel-
24 SEXSE AXD SEXSIBILITY.
ling an j curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety for
ber sister's health.
Every qualification is raised at times, by the cir-
cumstances of the moment, to more than its real
ralue ; and she was sometimes worried down by offi-
cious condolence to rate good -breeding as more indis-
pensable to comfort than good-nature.
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the aflair
about once everyday, or twice, if the subject oc-
curred very often, by saying, u It is very shocking
indeed r and by the means of this continual though
gentle vent, was able not only to see the Miss Dash-
woods from the first without the smallest emotion,
but very soon to see them without recollecting a
word of the matter; and having thus supported the
dignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided
censure of what was wrong in the other, she thought
herself at liberty to attend to the interest of her own
assemblies, and therefore determined (though ra-
ther against the opinion of Sir John), as Mrs. Wil-
loughby would at once be a woman of elegance and
fortune, to leave her card with her as soon as she
married.
Colonel Brandon's delicate unobtrusive inquiries
were never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood. He had
abundantly earned the privilege of intimate discus-
sion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly seal
with which he had endeavoured to soften it, and they
always conversed with confidence. His chief reward
for the painful exertion of disclosing past sorrows and
present humiliations, was given in the pitying eye
with which Marianne sometimes observed him, and
•■MSB AMP IKMtlBlMTT. 25
the gentleness of her Tolee whenever (though it did
not often happen) the mi obliged, or could oblige
henelf to speak to him. These assured him that his
exertion had produced an increase of good-will to-
wards himself, and these gave Elinor hopes of its be-
ing farther augmented hereafter ; hut Mrs* Jennings,
who knew nothing of all this— who knew only that
the Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she
could neither prevail on him to make the offer him-
self, nor commission her to make it for him— began at
the end of two days to think that, instead of Mid-
summer, they would not be married till Michaelmas,
and by the end of a week that it would not be a
match at all. The good understanding between the
Colonel and Miss Daahwood seemed rather to declare
that the honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and
the yew arbour, would all be made oyer to her ; and
Mrs. Jennings had for some time ceased to think at
all of Mr. Ferrars.
Early in February, within a fortnight from the re-
ceipt of Willoughby's letter, Elinor had the painful
office of informing her sister that he was married.
She had taken care to hare the intelligence conveyed
to herself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony
was over, as she was desirous that Marianne should
not receire the first notice of it from the public pa-
pers, which she saw her eagerly examining every
morning.
She received the news with resolute composure ;
made no observation on it, and at first shed no tears;
but after a short time they would burst out, and for
the rest of the day she was in a state hardly less
26 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the
event.
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were
married ; and Elinor now hoped, as there could he
no danger of her seeing either of them, to prevail on
her sister, who had never yet left the house since the
blow first fell, to go out again by degrees as she had
done before.
About this time, the two Miss Steeles, lately ar-
rived at their cousin's house in Bartlett's Buildings,
fiolborn, presented themselves again before their
more grand relations in Conduit and Berkley street,
and were welcomed by them all with great cordi-
ality.
Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence
always gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to
make a very gracious return to the overpowering de-
light of Lucy in finding her still in town.
" I should have been quite disappointed if I had
not found you here still, " said she repeatedly, with
a strong emphasis on the word. " But I always
thought I should. I was almost sure you would not
leave London yet awhile; though you told me, you
know, at Barton, that you should not stay above a
month. But I thought, at the time, that you would
most likely change your mind when it came to the
point. It would have been such a great pity to have
went away before your brother and sister came.
And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be
gone. I am amazingly glad you did not keep to
pour word. "
Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced
■MM AMD SIMSIB1L1TY. 27
to nee all her self-command to make it appear that
the did not.
, " Well, my dear,* said Mr*. Jennings, " and how
did yon travel P "
" Not in the stage, I assure yon, " replied Miss
Steele, with quick exultation; " we came pott all
the way, and had a very smart beau to attend us.
Dr. Davies was coming to town, and so we thought
we'd join him in a post-chaise j and he behaved very
genteelly, and paid ten or twelve shillings more than
we did/
" Oh, oh!* cried Mrs. Jennings; " very pretty,
indeed I and the Doctor is a single man, I warrant
yon.* •
" There now,* said Miss Steele, affectedly sim-
pering; " everybody laughs at me so about the Doc-
tor, and I cannot think why. My cousins say they
are sure I have made a conquest ; but for my part
I declare I never think about him from one hour's
end to another. * Lord ! here comes your beau,
Nancy/ my cousin said t'other day, when she saw
him crossing the street to the house.'My beau,
indeed !'said I- —'I cannot think who you mean.
The Doctor is no beau of mine.'*
" Ay, ay, that is very pretty talking — but it won't
do— the Doctor is the man, I see.*
" No, indeed! " replied her cousin, with affected
earnestness, " and I beg you will contradict it, if
you ever hear it talked of. "
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying as-
surance that she certainly would not, and Miss Steele
was made completely happy.
28 SEV5E £S» SESSIBIUTY.
u I suppose you will go mud stay with your brother
j and sister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to tow*,*
said Lacy, returning, after a it wiring of hostile hurts,
j to the charge.
" Xo, I do not think we shaO. "
f M Oh, yes, I dare say yon will. "
1 Elinor would not humour her by farther opposi-
tion.
" What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood
£ can spare you both for so long a time together ! "
} " Long a time, indeed ! " interposed Mrs. Jennings.
i " Why, their yisit is but just begun 1 "
Lucy was silenced.
i " lam sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dash-
i wood, " said Miss Steele. u I am sorry she is not
well ; " for Marianne had left the room on their
i arrival.
: " You are rery good. My sister will be equally
sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you ; but she
has been rery much plagued lately with nerrous
f headaches, which make her unfit for company or
conversation. "
r'" Oh, dear, that is a great pity ! but such old
friends as Lucy and me! — I think she might see
us; and I am sure we would not speak a word. "
Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal.
1 " Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed, or
in her dressing gown, and therefore not able to come
I to them. "
" Oh, if that's all/'cried Miss Steele, " we can
I just as well go and see her?
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much.
nam a*b •■mimlitt. 39
for her temper ; bat the wit tared the trouble of
checking it, by Lucy's sharp reprimand, which now,
m on many occasions, though it did not give much
sweetness to the manners of one titter, wat of advan-
tage in governing those of the other.
CHAPTER III.
After tome opposition, Marianne yielded to her
sister's entreaties, and consented to go out with her
and Mrs. Jennings one morning for half an hour.
She expressly conditioned, however, for paying no
visits, and would not do more than accompany them
to Gray's in Sackville-street, where Elinor was car-
rying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few
old-fashioned jewels of her mother.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings
recollected that there was a lady at the other end of
the street, on whom she ought to call j and as die
had no business at Gray's, it was resolved, that while
her young friends transacted theirs, she should pay
her visit, and return for them.
On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dash woods
found so many people before them in the room, that
there was not a person at liberty to attend to their
orders 1 and they were obliged to wait. All that
30 iENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
could be done ires, to sit down at that end of the
counter which seemed to promise the quickest sue*
cession; one gentleman only was standing there,
and it is probable that Elinor was not without hopes
of exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch. But
the correctness of his eye, and the delicacy of his
taste, proved to be beyond his politeness. He was
giving orders for a toothpick-case for himself, and
till its size, shape, and ornaments were determined,
■ — all of which, after examining and debating for a
quarter of as. hoar ore* every toothpick-case in the
shop, were finally sanraageA by his own inventive
fancy, — he had no leisure- ts > hi i slow any other at-
tention on the two ladies, than what was comprised
in three or four very broad stares; a kind of mcm*
which served to imprint on Elinor the remembrance
of a person and face of strong, natural, sterling in-
significance, though adorned in the first style of
fashion.
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feel-
ings of contempt and resentment, on this imperti-
nent examination of their features, and on the pup-
pyism of his manner in deciding on all the different
horrors of the different toothpick-cases presented to
his inspection, by remaining unconscious of it all ;
for she was as well able to collect her thoughts
within herself, and be as ignorant of what was pass-
ing around her, in Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own
bed-room.
At last the affair was decided. The ivory, the
gold, and the pearls, all received their apr ointment,
and the gentleman having named the last day on
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 81
which hit existence could be continued without the
possession of the toothpick-ease, drew on hit gloves
with leisurely care, and bestowing another glance on
the Mita Daahwoods, but such a one as seemed
rather to demand thaa sxpr— adsokation, walked
off with a happy air of real eeneslt aad aflected
indifference.
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business for-
ward, and was on the point of concluding it, when
another gentleman presented himself at her side.
She turned her eyes towards his face, and found
him with some surprise to be her brother.
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just
enough to make a very creditable appearance in
Mr. Gray's shop. John Dashwood was really far
from being sorry to see his sisters again | it rather
gave them satisfaction ; and his inquiries after their
mother were respectful and attentive.
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town
two days.
" 1 wished very much to call upon you yesterday , "
said he, " but it was impossible, for we were obliged
to take Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Ex-
change: and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs.
Ferrars. Harry was vastly pleased. This morning
I had fully intended to call on you, if I could pos-
sibly find a spare half-hour, but one has always so
much to do on first coming to town! I am come
here to bespeak Fanny a seal. But to-morrow I
. think I shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley-
street, and be introduced to your friend Mrs. Jen-
nings. I understand she is a woman of very good
32 8£N8E AND SENSIBILITY.
fortune. And the Middletons too, you must intro-
duce rae to them. As my mother-in-law's relations,
I shall be happy to show them every respect. They
are excellent neighbours to you in the country, I
understand. " ^
" Excellent indeed. Their attention to our com-
fort, their friendliness in every particular, is more
than I can express. "
" I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word j
extremely glad indeed. But so it ought to be ; they
are people of large fortune, they are related to you,
and every civility and accommodation that can serve
to make your situation pleasant, might be reasonably
expected. And so you are most comfortably settled
in your little cottage, and want for nothing! Edward
brought us a most charming account of the place ;
the most complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever
was, and you all seemed to enjoy it beyond anything.
It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it, I assure
you. "
Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother;
and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of an-
swering him, by the arrival of Mrs. Jennings's ser-
vant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited
for them at the door.
Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was in-
troduced to Mrs. Jennings at the door of her carriage,
and repeating his hope of being able to call on them
the next day, took leave.
His visit was duly paid. He came with a pretenc
at an apology from their sister-in-law, for not comin
too; " but she was so much engaged with her m <
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 33
ther, that really she had no leisure for going any-
where. " Mrs. Jennings, however, assured him di-
rectly, that she should not stand upon ceremony, for
they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very
soon, and bring her sisters to see her. His manners
to them, though calm, were perfectly kind ; to Mrs.
Jennings, most attentively civil ; and on Colonel
Brandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him
with a curiosity which seemed to say, that he only
wanted to know him to be rich, to be equally civil to
him.
After staying with them half an hour, he asked Eli-
nor to walk with him to Conduit-street, and introduce
him to Sir John and Lady Middleton. The weather
was remarkably fine, and she readily consented. As
soon as they were out of the house, his inquiries
began.
" Who is Colonel Brandon P Is he a man of for-
tune P "
" Yes ; he has very good property in Dorsetshire/'
" I am glad of it. He seems a most gentlemanlike
man ; and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate yon on
the prospect of a very respectable establishment in
life. "
" Me, brother — what do you mean P w
" He likes you. I observed him narrowly, and nm
convinced of it What is the amount of his for-
tune P "
" I believe about two thousand a-year. "
" Two thousand a-year ; " and then working him-
self up to a pitcli of enthusiastic generosity, he added,
c VOL. II.
34 . SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" Elinor, I wish with all heart it were twiee as
much, for your sake. "
" Indeed I believe you, w replied Elinor, " but I
am very sure that Colonel Brandon has not the
smallest wish of marrying me. "
" You are mistaken, Elinor ; you are very much
mistaken. A very little trouble on your side secures
him. Perhaps just at present he may be undecided ;
the smallness of your fortune may make him hang
back ; his friends may all advise him against it. But
some of those little attentions and encouragements
which ladies can so easily give, will fix him, in spite
of himself. And there can be no reason why you
should not try for him. It is not to be supposed
that any prior attachment on your side — in short,
you know as to an attachment of that kind, it is
quite out of the question, the objections are insur-
mountable — you have too much sense not to see all
that. Colonel Brandon must be the man ; and no
civility shall be wanting on my part, to make him
pleased with you and your family. It is a match
that must give universal satisfaction. In short, it is
a kind of thing that " — lowering his voice to an
important whisper — " will be exceedingly welcome
to all parties. " Recollecting himself, however, he
added, " That is, I mean to say — your friends are all
truly anxious to see you well settled, Fanny parti-
cularly, for she has your interest very much at heart,
I assure you. And her mother too, Mrs. Femurs, a
" .ery good-natured woman, I am sure it would give
her great pleasure; she said as much the other day. "
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
1BNSB AND SENSIBILITY. 35
" It would be something remarkable now/'ho
continued — " something droll, if Fanny should havo
a brother and I a sister settling at the same time.
And yet it is not rery unlikely. "
" Is Mr. Edward Ferrars, " said Elinor with reso-
lution, " going to be married P w
" It is not actually settled, but there is such a
thing in agitation. He has a most excellent mother.
Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmost liberality, will come
forward, and settle on him a thousand a-year, if the
match takes place. The lady is the Honourable
Miss Morton, only daughter of the late Lord Morton,
with thirty thousand pounds — a very desirable con-
nexion on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its
taking place in time. A thousand a-year is a great
deal for a mother to give away, to make over for
ever ; but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spirit. To give
you another instance of her liberality : — The other
day, as soon as we came to town, aware that money
could not be yery plenty with us just now, she put
bank-notes into Fanny's hands to the amount of two
hundred pounds. And extremely acceptable it is,
for we must live at a great expense while wo are
here. "
He paused for her assent and compassion; and
she forced herself to say,
" Your expenses both in town and country must
certainly be considerable, but your income is a largo
one. "
" Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.
I do not mean to complain, however ; it is undoubt-
edly a comfortable one, and, I hope, will uv txwvi. V»
36 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
better. The enclosure of Norland Common, now
carrying on, is a most serious drain. And then I
have made a little purchase within this half-year —
East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place,
where old Gibson used to lire. The land was so
very desirable for me in every respect, so immedi-
ately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my
duty to buy it I could not have answered it to my
conscience to let it fall into any other hands. A
man must pay for his convenience ; and it has cost
me a vast deal of money. "
" More than you think it really and intrinsically
worth ? w
" " Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it
again, the next day, for more than I gave : but with
regard to the purchase- money, I might have been
very unfortunate indeed ; for the stocks were at that
time so low, that if I had not happened to have the
necessary sum in my banker's hands, I must have
sold out to very great loss. "
Elinor could only smile.
" Other great and inevitable expenses too we have
had on first coming to Norland. Our respected fa-
ther, as you well know, bequeathed all the Stanhill
effects that remained at Norland (and very valuable
they were) to your mother. Far be it from me to
repine at his doing so ; he had an undoubted right
to dispose of his own property as he chose. But, in
consequence of it, we have been obliged to make
large purchases of linen, china, & c. to supply the
place of what was taken away. You may guess,
after all these expenses, Ww Nfet^ far we must be
HMI AND SlirtlBlMTT. 37
from being rich! and How acceptable Mrs* Ferrars's
kindness Li. "
" Certainly, " slid Elinor | " and assisted by her
liberality, I hope you may yet lire to be in easy cir-
cumstances. "
" Another year or two may do much towards it, "
he gravely replied t " but however there is still a
great deal to be done. There it not a stone laid of
Fanny's greenhouse, and nothing but the plan of the
flower-garden marked out. "
" Where it the greenhouse to be P "
" Upon the knoll behind the house. The old
walnut-trees are all come down to make room fur it.
It will be a very fine object from many parts of the
park, and the flower-garden will slope down just
before it, and be exceedingly pretty. We have cleared
away all the old thorns that grew in patches over the
brow. "
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to her-
self, and was very thankful that Marianne was not
presenfto share the provocation.
Haying now said enough to make his poverty
clear, and to do away the necessity of buying a pair
of ear-rings for each of his sisters, in his next visit at
Gray's, his thoughts took a oheerfuller turn, and he
began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend
as Mrs. Jennings.
" She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her
house, her style of living, all bespeak an exceeding
good income ; and it is an acquaintance that has not
only been of great use to you hitherto, but in the
end may prove materially advantageous, ilcr invit-
38 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY,
ing you to town is certainly a vast tiling in your
favour; and, indeed, it speaks altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when she dies
you will not be forgotten. — She must have a great
deal to leave. "
" Nothing at all, I should rather suppose ; for she
has only her furniture, which will descend to her
children. "
" But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to
her income. Few people of common prudence will
do that ; and whatever she saves, she will be able to
dispose of. "
" And do you not think it more likely that she
should leave it to her daughters, than to us ? "
" Her daughters are both exceedingly well mar-
ried, and therefore I cannot perceive the necessity
of her remembering them farther. Whereas, in my
opinion, by her taking so much notice of you, and
treating you in this kind of way, she has given you
a sort of claim on her future consideration, which a
conscientious woman would not disregard. Nothing
can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can
hardly do all this, without being aware of the expec-
tation she raises. "
" But she raises none in those most concerned.
Indeed, brother, your anxiety for our welfare and
prosperity carries you too far. "
" Why to be sure, " said he, seeming to recollect
himself, " people have little, have very little in their
power. But, my dear Elinor, what is the matter
with Marianne ? — she looks very unwell, has lost
her colour, and is grown quite thin. Is she ill? "
BENBB AND SENSIBILITY. .39
" She ii not well, she liai had a nervous complaint
on her for several weeks. "
" I am sorry for that. At her time of life, any-
thing of an illness destroys the bloom for ever! Hers
has been a very short one ! She was as handsome
a girl last September as any I ever saw, and an likely
to attract the men. There was something in her
style of beauty to please them particularly. I remem-
ber Fanny used to say that she would marry sooner
and better than you did ; not but what she is ex-
ceedingly fond of you — but so it happened to Htrike
her. She will bo mistaken, however. I question
whether Marianne now will marry a man worth more
than five or six hundred a-year at the utmost, and I
am very much deceived if you do not do better.
Dorsetshire ! I know very little of Dorsetshire, but,
my dear Elinor, I shall bo exceedingly glad to know
more of it ; and I think I can answer for your hav-
ing Fanny and myself among the earliest and best-
pleased of your visitors. "
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that
there was no likelihood of her marrying Colonel
Brandon ; but it was an expectation of too much
pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was
really resolved on seeking an intimacy with that
gentleman, and promoting the marriage by every
possible attention. He hud just compunction enough
for having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be
exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do
a great deal; and un offer from Colonel lirandmi, or
a legacy from Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest means
of atoning for his own neglect.
40 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
They were lucky enough \o find Lady Middleton
at home, and Sir John came in before their visit
ended. Abundance of civilities passed on ail sides.
Sir John was ready to like anybody, and though
Mr. Dashwood did not seem to know much about
horses, he soon set him down as a very good-natured
fellow; while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion
in his appearance to think his acquaintance worth
having; and Mr. Dashwood went away delighted
with both.
" I shall have a charming account to carry to
Fanny, " said he, as he walked back with his sister.
" Lady Middleton is really a most elegant woman !
such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to
know. And Mrs. Jennings too, an exceeding well-
behaved woman, though not so elegant as her daugh-
ter. Your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little
the case, and very naturally ; for we only knew that
Mrs. Jennings was the widow of a man who had got
all his money in a low way ; and Fanny and Mrs.
Ferrars were both strongly prepossessed that neither
she nor her daughters were such kind of women as
Fanny would like to associate with. But now I
can carry her a most satisfactory account of both. "
41
CHAPTER IT.
Mn. John Dashwood nad fo much confidence in
her husband's judgment, that she waited the very
next day both on Mrs. Jennings and her daughter ;
and her confidence was rewarded by finding even
the former, even the woman with whom her sisters
were staying, by no means unworthy her notice;
and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of the
most charming women in the world!
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs.
Dashwood. There was a kind of cold-hearted self-
ishness on both sides, which mutually attracted them;
and they sympathised with each other in an insipid
propriety of demeanour, and a general want of
understanding.
The same manners, however, which recommended
Mrs. John Dashwood to the good opinion of Lady
Middleton, did not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jennings,
and to her she appeared nothing more than a little
proud-looking woman of uncordial address, who mot
her husband's sisters without any affection, und al-
most without having anything to say to them ; for of
the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley-street,
she sat at least seven minutes and a half in silence.
Elinor wanted very much to know, though nho
did not choose to ask, whether Edward wan then in
town; but nothing would have induced Fanny volun-
42 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
tarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell
her that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved
on, or till her husband's expectations on Colonel
Brandon were answered ; because she believed them
still so very much attached to each other, that they
could not be too sedulously divided in word and deed
on every occasion. The intelligence, however, which
she would not give, soon flowed from another quar-
ter. Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor's com-
passion on being unable to see Edward, though he
had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear
of detection, and though their mutual impatience to
meet was not to be told, they could do nothing at
present but write.
Edward assured them himself of his being in
town, within a yery short time, by twice calling in
Berkeley-street. Twice was his card found on the
table, when they returned from their mornings'en-
gagements. Elinor was pleased that he had called,
and still more pleased that she had missed him.
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted
with the Middletons, that though not much in the
habit of giving anything, they determined to give
them — a dinner, and soon after their acquaintance
began, invited them to dine in Harley-street, where
they had taken a very good house for three months.
Their sisters and Mrs. Jennings were invited likewise,
and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel
Brandon, who, always glad to be where the Miss
Dashwoods were, received his eager civilities with
borne surprise, but much more pleasure. They were
SBNSE AND SENSIBILITY. 13
to meet Mrs. Ferrari ; but Elinor could not learn
whether her sons were to be of the party. The ex-
pectation of seeing her, however, was enough to
make her interested in the engagement ; for though
she could now meet Edward's mother without that
strong anxiety which had once promised to attend
such an introduction, though she could now sec her
with perfect indifference, as to her opinion of herself,
her desire of being in company with Mrs. Ferrars,
her curiosity to know what she was like, was as
lively as ever.
The interest with which she thus anticipated the
party, was soon afterwards increased, more power-
fully than pleasantly, by her hearing that the Miss
Stecles were also to be at it.
So well had they recommended themselves to
Lady Middleton, so agreeable had their assiduities
made them to her, that though Lucy waB scarcely
elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she wuh as
ready as Sir John to ask them to spend a week or
two in Conduit-street ; and it happened to be par-
ticularly convenient to the Miss Steeles, as soon as
the Dashwoods* invitation was known, that their
visit should begin a few days before the party took
pluce.
Their claims on the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood,
as the nieces of the gentleman who for many years
had had the care of her brother, might not have done
much, however, towards procuring them seats at her
table ; but as Lady Middlcton's guests they miiHt be
welcome ; and Lucy, who had long wanted to he
personally known to the family, to have a nearer
44 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
view of their characters and her own difficulties, and
to have an opportunity of endeavouring to please
them, had seldom been happier in her life than she
was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwood's card.
On Elinor its effect was very different. She began
immediately to determine that Edward, who lived
with his mother, must be asked, as his mother was,
to a party given by his sister ; and to see him for the
first time, after all that passed, in the company of
Lucy ! — she hardly knew how she could bear it !
These apprehensions perhaps were not founded
entirely on reason, and certainly not at all on truth.
They were relieved however, not by her own recol-
lection, but by the good-will of Lucy, who believed
herself to be inflicting a severe disappointment when
she told her that Edward certainly would not be in
Harley-street on Tuesday, and even hoped to be
carrying the pain still farther by persuading her, that
he was kept away by that extreme affection for her-
self, which he could not conceal when they were
together.
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce
the two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-
law.
" Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood ! w said Lucy, as
they walked up the stairs together — for the Middle-
tons arrived so directly after Mrs. Jennings, that
they all followed the servant at the same time—
" There is nobody here but you, that can feel for
me. — I declare I can hardly stand. Good gracious! —
In a moment I shall see the person that all my hap-
pinesa depends on — that is to be my mother \ n —
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. i. " >
Elinor could have given her immediate relief by
suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton's
mother, rather than her own, whom they were about
to behold ; but instead of doing that, she assured her,
and with great sincerity, that she did pity her, — to
the utter amazement of Lucy, who, though really
uncomfortable herself, hoped at least to be an object
of irrepressible envy to Elinor.
Mrs. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright,
even to formality, in her figure, and serious, even to
sourness, in her aspect. Her complexion was sallow;
and her features small, without beauty, and naturally
without expression : but a lucky contraction of the
brow had rescued her countenance from the disgrace
of insipidity, by giving it the strong characters of
pride nnd ill-nature. She was not a woman of many
words ; for, unlike people in general, she propor-
tioned them to the number of her ideas ; and of the
few nyllables that did escape her, not one fell to the
share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyed with the
spirited determination of disliking her at all events.
Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this
behaviour. A few months ago it would have hurt
her exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs. Ferrars's
power to distress her by it now; — and the difference
of her manners to the Miss Steeles — a difference
which seemed purposely made to humble her more- -
only amused her. She could not but smile to see
the graciousness of both mother and daughter to-
wards the very person — for Lucy was particularly
distinguished — whom of all others, had they known
as much as she did, they would have been numt ^\\-
46 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
xious to mortify; while she herself, who had com-
paratively no power to wound them, sat pointedly
slighted by both. But while she smiled at a gra-
ciousness so misapplied, she could not reflect on the
mean-spirited folly from which it sprung, nor observe
the studied attentions with which the Miss Steeles
courted its continuance, without thoroughly despising
them all four.
Lucy was all exultation on being so honourably
distinguished; and Miss Steele wanted only to be
teazed about Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.
The dinner was a grand one, the servants were
numerous, and everything bespoke the mistress's in-
clination for show, and the master's ability to support
it. In spite of the improvements and additions which
were making to the Norland estate, and in spite of
its owner having once been within some thousand
pounds of being obliged to sell out at a loss, nothing
gave any symptom of that indigence which he had
tried to infer from it; — no poverty of any kind, ex-
cept of conversation, appeared — but there the defi-
ciency was considerable. John Dashwood had not
much to say for himself that was worth hearing, and
his wife had still less. But there was no peculiar
disgrace in this, for it was very much the case with
the chief of their visitors, who almost all laboured
under one or other of these disqualifications for being
agreeable: — Want of sense, either natural or im-
proved — want of elegance — want of spirits— or want
of temper.
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room
after dinner, this poverty was particularly evident,
I
tlVSB AUD S1HSIBILITT. 47
for the gentlemen had supplied the discourse with
tome variety— the variety of politics, enclosing land,
and breaking horses — but then it was all over, and
one subject only engaged the ladies till coffee came
in, which was the comparative heights of Harry
Dashwood, and Lady MUkUeton's second son Wil-
liam, who were nearly of the same age.
Had both the children been there, the affair might
have been determined too easily by measuring them
at once j but as Harry only was present, it was all
conjectural assertion on both sides, and everybody
had a right to be equally positive in their opinion,
and to repeat it over and over again as often as they
liked.
The parties stood thus :
The two mothers, though each really convinced
that her own son was the tallest, politely decided in
favour of the other.
The two grandmothers, with not less partiality,
but more sincerity, were equally earnest in support
of their own descendant
Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one
parent than the other, thought the boys were both
remarkably tall for their age, and could not conceive
that there could be the smallest difference in the
world between them; and Miss Steele, with yet
greater address, gave it, as fast as she could, in fa-
vour of each.
Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on
William's side, by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars,
and Fanny still more, did not see the necessity of
enforcing it by any farther assertion and Marianne^
48 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
when called on for hers, offended them all by declar-
ing that she had no opinion to give, as she had never
thought about it.
Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had
painted a very pretty pair of screens for her sister-
in-law, which being now just mounted and brought
home, ornamented her present drawing-room ; and
these screens catching the eye of John Dash wood
on his following the other gentlemen into the room,
were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon
for his admiration.
" These are done by my eldest sister, " said he ;
" and you, as a man of taste, will, I dare say, be
pleased with them. I do not know whether you
ever happened to see any of her performances before,
but she is in general reckoned to draw extremely
well. "
The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions
to connoisseurship, . warmly admired the screens, as
he would have done anything painted by Miss Dash-
wood ; and the curiosity of the others being of course
excited, they were handed round for general inspec-
tion. Mrs. Ferrars, not aware of their being Elinor's
work, particularly requested to look at them ; and
after they had received the gratifying testimony of
Lady Middleton's approbation, Fanny presented
them to her mother, considerately informing her at
the same time, that they were done by Miss Dash-
wood.
" Hum " — said Mrs. Ferrars — " very pretty,* —
and without regarding them at ail, returned them to
her daughter.

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 49
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her
mother had been quite rude enough, — for, colouring
a little, she immediately said,
" They are very pretty, ma'am — an't they P " But
then again, the dread of having been too civil, too
encouraging herself, probably came oyer her, for bIio
presently added,
" Do you not think they are something in Miss
Morton's style of painting, ma'am P — She does paint
most delightfully ! — How beautifully her last land-
scape is done ! "
" Beautifully indeed ! But she does everything
well. "
Marianne could not bear this. She was already
greatly displeased with Mrs. Ferrars ; and such ill-
timed praise of another, at Elinor's expense, though
she had not any notion of what was principally
meant by it, provoked her immediately to say with
warmth,
" This is admiration of a very particular kind ! —
what is Miss Morton to us P — who knows, or w'o
cares, for herP — it is Elinor of whom we think and
speak. "
And so saying, she took the screens out of her
sister-in-law's hands, to admire them herself as they
ought to be admired.
Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and
drawing herself up more stiffly than ever, pronounced
in re fort this bitter philippic : " Miss Morton is Lord
Morton's daughter.''
Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband
was all in a fright at his sister's audacity. Elinor
D VOL. II.
50 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
was much more hurt by Marianne's warmth, than
she had been by what produced it; but Colonel
Brandon's eyes, as they were fixed on Marianne, de-
clared that he noticed only what was amiable in it ;
the affectionate heart which could not bear to see
a sister slighted on the smallest point.
Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold
insolence of Mrs. Ferrars's general behaviour to her
sister, seemed, to her, to fortel such difficulties and
distresses to Elinor, as her own wounded heart taught
her to think of with horror ; and urged by a strong
impulse of affectionate sensibility, she moved, after a
moment, to her sister's chair, and putting one arm
round her neck, and one cheek close to hers, said in
a low but eager voice,
" Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let
them make you unhappy. "
She could say no more ; her spirits were quite
overcome, and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder,
she burst into tears. — Everybody's attention was
called, and almost everybody was concerned. — Colo-
nel Brandon rose up and went to them without
knowing what he did. — Mrs. Jennings, with a very
intelligent " Ah! poor dear, " immediately gave her
her salts; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged
against the author of this nervous distress, that he
instantly changed his seat to one close by Lucy
Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account
of the whole shocking affair.
In a few minutes, however, Marianne was reco-
vered enough to put an end to the bustle, and sit
down among the rest; though her spirits retained
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 51
the impression of what had passed, the whole oven-
ing.
" Poor Marianne ! M said her brother to Colonel
Brandon in a low voice, as soon as he could secure
his attention, — " She has not such good health as
her sister, — she is very nervous,— she has not Eli-
nor's constitution; — and one must allow that there
is something very trying to a young woman who
has been a beauty, in the loss of her personal attrac-
tions. You would not think it perhaps, but Mari-
anne was remarkably handsome a few months ago —
quite as handsome as Elinor. — Now you sec it is
all gone. "
CHAPTER V.
Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satis-
fied. She had found in her everything that could
tend to make a farther connexion between the fa-
milies undesirable. She had seen enough of her
pride, her meanness, and her determined prejudice
against herself, to comprehend all the difficulties that
must have perplexed the engagement, and retarded
the marriage of Edward and herself, had he been
otherwise free ; — and she had seen almost enough to
be thankful for her own sake, that one greater ob-
stacle preserved hor from suffering under any other
\
52 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of Mrs. Ferrars's creation, preserved her from all de-
pendence upon her caprice, or any solicitude for her
good opinion. Or at least, if she did not bring her-
self quite to rejoice in Edward's being fettered to
Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more
amiable, she ought to have rejoiced.
She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very
much elevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferrars; — that
her interest and her vanity should so very much
blind her, as to make the attention which seemed
only paid her because she was not Elinor, appear a
compliment to herself-— or to allow her to derive
encouragement from a preference only given her,
because her real situation was unknown. But that
it was so, had not only been declared by Lucy's eyes
at the time, but was declared over again the next
morning more openly ; for, at her particular desire,
Lady Middleton set her down in Berkeley-street on
the chance of seeing Elinor alone, to tell her how
happy she was.
The chance proved a lucky one, for a message
from Mrs. Palmer, soon after she arrived, carried
Mrs. Jennings away.
" My dear friend, " cried Lucy as soon as they
were by themselves, " I come to talk to you of my
happiness. Could anything be so flattering as Mrs.
Ferrars's way of treating me yesterday? So exceed-
ing affable as she was ! — You know how I dreaded
the thoughts of seeing her; — but the very moment
I was introduced, there was such an affability in her
behaviour as really should seem to say, she had
quite took a fancy to me. Now was not it so ?
SIMM AMD SBMSIBILITT. 53
Ton taw it all j and was sot you quite struck with
UP*
" She was certainly rery cWll to you,*
" Civil ! — Did you see nothing hut only civility P
I saw a Tart deal more— such kindness as fell to the
share of nobody but me! — No pride, no hauteur,
and your sister just the same—ill sweetness and
affability! "
Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy
still pressed her to own that she had reason for her
happiness, and Elinor was obliged to go on.
" Undoubtedly, if they had known your engage-
ment,* said she, " nothing could be more flattering
than their treatment of you} — but as that was not
the case*
" I guessed you would say so,* replied Lucy
quickly ; but there was no reason in the world why
Mrs. Ferrsrs should seem to like me, if she did not —
and her liking me is everything. You shan't talk
me out of my satisfaction. I am sure it will all «nd
well, and there will be no difficulties at all, to what
I used to think. Mrs. Femurs is a charming woman,
and so is your sister. They are both delightful
women indeed !— I wonder I should never hear you
say how agreeable Mn. Dashwood was !*
To this, Elinor had no answer to make, and did
not attempt any.
44 Are you ill, Miss Dashwood P— you seem low —
you don't speak j — §ure, you an't well.*
" I never was in better health.*
" I am glad of it with all my heart, but really you
did not look it. I should be so sorry to have you
54 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
ill, — you, that have been the greatest comfort to me
in the world ! — Heaven knows what I should have
done without your friendship. " —
Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubt-
ing her own success. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy,
for she directly replied,
" Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard
for me, and, next to Edward's love, it is the greatest
comfort I have. — Poor Edward! But now, there is
one good thing — we shall be able to meet, and meet
pretty often, for Lady Middleton *s delighted with
Mrs. Dash wood, so we shall be a good deal in Har-
ley-street, I dare say, and Edward spends half his
time with his sister — besides, Lady Middleton and
Mrs. Ferrars will visit now; — and Mrs. Ferrers and
your sister were both so good to say more than once,
they should always be glad to see me. — They are
such charming women! — I am sure if ever you tell
your sister what I think of her, you cannot speak
too high. "
But Elinor would not give her any encourage-
ment to hope that she should tell her sister. Lucy
continued.
" I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if
Mrs. Ferrars had took a dislike to me. If she had
only made me a formal curtsey, for instance, without
saying a word, and never after had took any notice
of me, and never looked at me in a pleasant way —
you know what I mean, — if I had been treated in
that forbidding sort of way, I should have gave it all
up in despair. I could not have stood it. For where
she does dislike, I know it is most violent. "
SENSE AND 8ENSIBILTTV.
Elinor was prevented from making any reply t < >
this civil triumph, by the door's being thrown open,
the servant's announcing Mr. Ferrers, and Edward's
immediately walking in.
It was a very awkward moment j and the coun-
tenance of each showed that it was so. They all
looked exceedingly foolish ; and Edward seemed to
have as great an inclination to walk out of the room
again, as to advance further into it. The very cir-
cumstance, in its unpleasantest form, which t hoy-
would each have been most anxious to avoid, had
fallen on them — They were not only all three to-
gether, but were together without the relief of any
other person. The ladies recovered themselves iirst.
It was not Lucy's business to put herself forward,
and the appearance of secrecy must still be kept up.
She could therefore only look her tenderness, and
after slightly addressing him, said no more.
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious was
she, for his sake and her own, to do it well, that she
forced herself, after a moment's recollection, to wel-
come him, with a look and manner that were almost
easy, and almost open ; and another struggle,
another effort still improved them. She would not
allow the presence of Lucy, nor the consciousness of
some injustice towards herself, to deter her from Raying
that she was happy to see him, and that she had very
much regretted being from home, when he called
before in Berkeley-street. She would not be fright-
ened from paying him those attentions which, as a
friend and almost a relation, were his due, by the
observant eyes of Lucy, though she soon perceived
them to be narrowly watching her
56 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Her m ers gave some re-assurance to Edward,
and he had courage enough to sit down ; but his
embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies in a
pro portion which the case rendered reasonable,
though his sex might make it rare ; for his heart had
not the indifference of Lucy's, nor could his con-
science have quite the ease of Elinor's.
Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed de-
termined to make no contribution to the comfort of
the others, and would not 6ay a word ; and almost
everything that was said, proceeded from Elinor,
who was obliged to volunteer all the information
about her mother's health, their coming to town, & c.
which Edward ought to have inquired about, but
never did.
Her exertions did not stop here ; for she soon
afterwards felt herself so heroically disposed as to
determine, under pretence of fetching Marianne, to
leave the others by themselves ; and she really did
it, and that in the handsomest manner, for she loi-
tered away several minutes on the landing-place,
with the most high-minded fortitude, before she
went to her sister. When that was once done,
however, it was time for the raptures of Edward to
cease ; for Marianne's joy hurried her into the
drawing-room immediately. Her pleasure in seeing
him was like every other of her feelings, strong in
itself and strongly spoken. She met him with i
hand that would be taken, and a voice that expressei
the affection of a sister.
" Dear Edward ! " she cried, ** this is a moment
#rcar happiness ! — This would almost make amen
for everything V
SFNBB AND SENSIBILITY. 57
Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved,
but before such witnesses he dared not say half what
he really felt. Again they all sat down, and for a
moment or two all were silent; while Marianne was
looking with the most speaking tenderness, some-
times at Edward and sometimes at Elinor, regretting
only that their delight in each other should be
checked hy Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward
was the first to speak, and it was to notice Ma-
rianne's altered looks, and express his fear of her
not finding London agree with her.
" Oh! don't think of me! " she replied, with
spirited earnestness, though her eyes were filled with
tears as she spoke, " don't think of my health. Eli-
nor is well, you see. That must be enough for uh
both. "
This remark was not calculated to make Edward
or Elinor more easy, nor to conciliate the good-will
of Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with no very
benignant expression.
" Do you like London P M said Edward, willing to
say anything that might introduce another subject.
" Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but
I have found none. The sight of you, Edward, is
the only comfort it has afforded ; and, thank Heaven !
you arc what you always were! "
She paused — no one spoke.
" I think, Elinor, " she presently added, " wo must
employ Edward to take care of us in our return to
Barton. In a week or two, I suppose, we shall be
going; and, I trust, Edward will not bo very unwill-
ing to accept the charge. "
58 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Poor Edward muttered something ; but what it
was, nobody knew, not even himself. But Marianne,
who saw his agitation, and could easily trace it to
whatever cause best pleased herself, was perfectly
satisfied, and soon talked of something else.
" We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley-street
yesterday ! So dull, so wretchedly dull ! — But I
have much to say to you on that head, which cannot
be said now. "
And with this admirable discretion did she defer
the assurance of her finding their mutual relatives
more disagreeable than ever, and of her being par-
ticularly disgusted with his mother, till they were
more in private.
" But why were you not there, Edward ? w — Why
did you not come ? "
" I was engaged elsewhere. "
" Engaged ! — But what was that, when such friends
were to be met ? "
" Perhaps, Miss Marianne, " cried Lucy, eager to
take some revenge on her, " you think young men
never stand upon engagements, if they have no mind
to keep them, little as well as great. "
Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed en-
tirely insensible of the sting ; for she calmly replied,
" Not so, indeed ; for, seriously speaking, I am
very sure that conscience only kept Edward from
Harley-street. And I really believe, he has the most
delicate conscience in the world ; the most scrupu-
lous in performing every engagement, however mi-
nute, and however it may make against his interest
or pleasure. He is the most fearful of giving pain,
SENSE AND 1ENS1BILITT. 59
of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of
being selfish, of anybody I ever saw. Edward, it is
so, and I will say it. What ! are you never to heir
yourself praised ! — Then, you must be no friend of
mine ; for those who will accept of my love and es-
teem, must submit to my open commendation. "
The nature of her commendation in the present
case, however, happened to be particularly ill suited
to the feelings of two-thirds of her auditors, and was
so very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soon
got up to go away.
" Going bo soon! " said Marianne; " my dear
Edward, this must not be. "
And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her
persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer.
But even this encouragement failed, for he would go;
and Lucy, who would have outstaid him had Ii.h
visit lasted two hours, soon afterwards went away.
" What can bring her here so often! " said Mari-
anne, on her leaving them. " Could she not see
that wo wanted her gone ! M — how teazing to Edward !
" Why so ? — we were all his friends, and Lucy
has been the longest known to him of any. It is
but natural that he should like to see her as well as
ourselves. "
Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, " You
know, Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I
cannot bear. If you only hope to have your asser-
tion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the ease,
you ought to recollect that I am the last person in
the world to do it. I cannot descend to be tricked
out of assurances that are not really wanted. "
60 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
She then left the room ; and Elinor dared not
follow her to say more, for hound as she was hy her
promise of secrecy to Lucy, she could give no infor-
mation that would convince Marianne ; and painful
as the consequences of her still continuing in an
error might he, she was ohliged to submit to it. All
that she could hope, was that Edward would not of-
ten expose her or himself to the distress of hearing
Marianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition
of any other part of the pain that had attended their
recent meeting — and this she had every reason to
expect.
CHAPTER VI.
" Within a few days after this meeting, the news-
papers announced to the world, that the lady of
Thomas Palmer, Esq. was safely delivered of a son
and heir ; a very interesting and satisfactory para-
graph, at least to all those intimate connexions who
knew it before.
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's
happiness, produced a temporary alteration in the
disposal of her time, and influenced in a like degree
the engagements of her young friends ; for as she
wished to he as much as possible with Charlotte, she
went thither every morning as soon as she was
dressed, and did not return until late in the evening j
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 61
and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request
of the Middletoiii, spent the whole of every day
in Conduit-street. For their own comfort, they
would much rather have remained, at least all the
morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house ; hut it was not
a thing to be urged against the wishes of everybody.
Their hours were therefore made over to Lady Mid-
dleton and the two Miss Steeles, by whom their
company was in fact as little valued, as it was pro-
fessedly sought.
They had too much sense to be desirable com-
panions to the former j and by the latter they were
considered with a jealous eye, as intruding on their
ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted
to monopolise. Though nothing could be more
polite than Lady Middle ton's behaviour to Elinor
and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered herself nor her chil-
dren, she could not believe them good-natured ; and
because they were fond of reading, she fancied them
satirical : perhaps without exactly knowing what it
was to be satirical ; but that did not signify. It was
censure in common use, and easily given.
Their presence was a restraint both on her and
on Lucy. It checked the idleness of one, and the
business of the other. Lady Middleton was ashamed
of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which
Lucy was proud to think of and administer at other
times, she feared they would despise her for of-
fering. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of
the three by their presence; and it was in their
power to reconcile her to it entirely. Would either
f)2 SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
of them only have given her a full and minute ac-
count of the whole affair between Marianne and
Mr. Willoughby, she would have thought herself
amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best place by
the fire after dinner, which their arrival occasioned.
But this conciliation was not granted; for though
she often threw out expressions of pity for her sister
to Elinor, and more than once dropped a reflection on
the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effect
was produced, but a look of indifference from the
former or of disgust in the latter. An effort even
yet lighter might have made her their friend. Would
they only have laughed at her about the Doctor!
But so little were they, any more than the others,
inclined to oblige her, that if Sir John dined from
home, she might spend a whole day without hearing
any other raillery on the subject, than what she was
kind enough to bestow on herself.
All these jealousies and discontents, however, were
so totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she
thought it a delightful thing for the girls to be to-
gether; and generally congratulated her young
friends every night, on having escaped the company
of a stupid old woman so long. She joined them
sometimes at Sir John's, and sometimes at her own
house ; but wherever it was, she always came in ex-
cellent spirits, full of delight and importance, attri-
buting Charlotte's well-doing to her own care, and
ready to give so exact, so minute a detail of her
situation, as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough
to desire. One thing did disturb her: and of that
she made her daily complaint. Mr. Palmer main-
8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY. G3
tained the common, but unfatherly opinion among
his sex, of all infants being alike $ and though she
could plainly perceive at different times the most
striking resemblance between this baby and every one
of his relations on both sides, there was no convin-
cing his father of it ; no persuading him to believe
thut it was not exactly like every other baby of the
same age ; nor could he even be brought to acknow-
ledge the simple proposition of its being the iiucst
child in the world.
I come now to the relation of a misfortune which
about this time befel Mrs. John Dash wood. It no
happened that while her two staters with Mrs. Jen-
nings were first calling on her in Harley-Btreet, an-
other of her acquaintance had dropped in — a circum-
stance in itself not apparently likely to produce evil
to her. But while the imaginations of other people
will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our
conduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances,
one's happiness must in some measure be always at
the mercy of chance. In the present instance, this
last-arrived lady allowed her fancy so far to outrun
truth and probability, that on merely hearing (lie
name of the Miss Dasliwoods, and understanding
them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters, she immediately
concluded them to be staying in Harley-street ; and
this misconstruction produced within a day or two
afterwards cards of invitation for them, as well as for
their brother and sister, to a small musical party at
her house. The consequence of which was, that
Mrs. John Pashwood was obliged to submit no( only
to the exceedingly great inconvenience of .a\w\.\\\\\
&
.*»*
J^t >
& *
*v*^
.1**


-#**


- " 2 S-4tS*M!5» < > •* " T

* , fe* ™w.*u ^ bee* 1 *v *«T? * e i ^° A ^c-
*»°Ue*«*
«e^*:,^ 6B r;^'
^ we 011'ft0 *^ " H e \e^:° t ft^ UD - £
5S 2
.^'*ecu* & ** <
k O^
T ft

u «c e * v^VnE 1 ?* tf^ _.*wV^ .,^eV t .^ ,-

" «*K3**s* ir^ < :^ ?r e a, ^
i


o*'" ^ q^ri V% ^o
^**
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 65
nence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was
generally concluded with a compliment, which
though meant ai its douceur, was considered by
Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all ; for
after undergoing an examination into the value and
make of her gown, the colour of her shoes, and the
arrangement of her hair, she was almost sure of being
told that upon " her word she looked vastly smart,
and she dared to say would make a great many
conquests. "
With such encouragement as this, was she dismiss-
ed on the present occasion to her brother's carriage ;
•which they were ready to enter five minutes after it
stopped at the door, a punctuality not very agreeable
to their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the
house of her acquaintance, and was there hoping for
some delay on their part that might inconvenience
either herself or her coachman.
The events of the evening were not very remarka-
ble. The party, like other musical parties, compre-
hended a great many people who had real taste for the
performance, and a great many more who had none
at all ; and the performers themselves were, as usual,
in their own estimation, and that of their immediate
friends, the first private performers in England.
As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be
so, she made no scruple of turning away her eyes
from the grand pianoforte, whenever it suited her,
and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp, and
a violoncello, would fix them at pleasure on any
other object in the room. In one of these excursive
glances she perceived among the group of youn^
E VOL. II.
66 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on
toothpick-cases at Gray's. She perceived him soon
afterwards looking at herself, and speaking familiarly
to her brother; and had just determined to find out
his name from the latter, when they Doth came to-
wards her, and Mr. Dashwood introduced him to her
as Mr. Robert Ferrars.
He addressed herewith easy civility, and twisted
his head into a how which assured her as plainly as
words could have done, that he was exactly the cox-
comb she had heard him described to be by Lucy.
Happy had it been for her, if her regard for Edward
had depended less on his own merit, than on the
merit of his nearest relations ! For then his brother's
bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the
ill-humour of his mother and sister would have
begun. But while she wondered at the difference of
the two young men, she did not find that the empti-
ness and conceit of the one, put her at all out of
charity with the modesty and worth of the other.
Why they were different, Robert explained to her
himself in the course of a quarter of an hour's con-
versation ; for, talking of his brother, and lamenting
the extreme gaucherie which he really believed kept
him from mixing in proper society, he candidly and
generously attributed it much less to any natural de-
ficiency, than to the misfortune of a private educa-
tion ; while he himself, though probably without any
particular, any material superiority by nature, merely
from the advantage of a public school, was as well
fitted to mix in the world as any other man.
" Upon my soul, " he added, " I believe it is
SENSE AND BBNSIB1L1TY. 67
nothing mor? ; and so I often tell my mother, when
she is grieving'about it.'My dear madam/ I al-
ways say to her,'you must make yourself easy. The
evil is now irremediable, and it has been entirely
your own doing. Why would you be persuaded by
my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment,
to place Edward under private tuition, at the most
critical time of his life P If you had only sent him
to Westminster as well as myself, instead of sending
him to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have been pre-
vented.'This is the way in which I always consider
the matter, and my mother is perfectly convinced of
her error. "
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because
whatever might be her general estimation of the ad-
vantage of a public school, she could not think of
Edward's abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any sa-
tisfaction.
" You reside in Devonshire, I think " — was his
next observation ; " in a cottage near Dawlish. "
Elinor set him right as to its situation, and it
seemed rather surprising to him that anybody could
live in Devonshire, without living near Dawlish. He
bestowed his hearty approbation, however, on their
species of house.
" For my own part, " said he, " I am excessively
fond of a cottage ; there is always so much comfort,
so much elegance about them. And I protest, if I
had any money to spare, I should buy a little land
and build one myself, within a short distance of
London, where I might drive myself down at any
time, and collect a few friends about me and be
68 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
happy. I advise everybody who is going to build,
to build a cottage. My friend Lord Courtland came
to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,
and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's.
I was to decide on the best of them. * My dear
Courtland/ said I, immediately throwing them all
into the fire, * do not adopt either of them, but by
all means build a cottage.'And that, I fancy, will
be the end of it.
" Some people imagine that there can be no ac-
commodations, no space in a cottage ; but this is all
a mistake. I was last month at my friend Elliott's
near Dartford. Lady Elliott wished to give a dance.
* But how can it be done ?'said she ;'my dear Fer-
rars, do tell me how it is to be managed. There is
not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple,
and where can the supper be ?'/ immediately saw
that there could be no difficulty in it, so I said, * My
dear Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy. The dining
parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card-
tables maybe placed in the drawing-room; the library
may be open for tea and other refreshments ; and let
the supper be set out in the saloon.'Lady Elliott
was delighted with the thought. We measured the
dining-room, and found it would hold exactly eigh-
teen couple, and the affair was arranged precisely
after my plan. So that, in fact, you see, if people
do but know how to set about it, every comfort may
be as well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious
dwelling. "
Elinor agreed to it ail, for she did not think he
deserved the compliment of rational opposition.
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 69
Ai John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music
than his eldest sister, his mind was equally at liberty
to fix on anything else ; and a thought struck him
during the evening, which he communicated to his
wife, for her approbation, when they got home. The
consideration of Mrs. Denison's mistake, in suppos-
ing his sisters their guests, had suggested the propriety
of their being really invited to become such, while
Mrs. Jennings's engagements kept her from home.
The expense would be nothing, the inconvenicnco
not more ; and it was altogether an attention, which
the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be
requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his
promise to his father. Fanny was startled at the
proposal.
" I do not see how it can be done, " said she,
" without affronting Lady Middleton, for they spend
every day with her } otherwiso I should be exceed-
ingly glad to do it. You know I am always ready
to pay them any attention in my power, as my taking
them out this evening shows. But they are Lady
Middle ton's visitors. How can I ask them away
from her? "
Her husband, but with great humility, did not see
the force of her objection. " They had already spent
a week in this manner in Conduit-street, and Lady
Middleton could not be displeased at their giving
the same number of days to such near relations. "
Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fiesh
vigour, said,
" My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if
it was in my power. But I had just settled within
70 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a few days
with us. They are very well-behaved, good kind of
girls ; and I think the attention is due to them, as
their uncle did so very well by Edward. We ean
ask your sisters some other year, you know ; but the
Miss Steeles may not be in town any more. I am
sure you will like them ; indeed, you do like them,
you know, Tery much already, and so does my mo-
ther; and they are such favourites wilh Harry ! "
Mr. Dash wood was convinced. He saw the ne-
cessity of inviting the Miss Steeles immediately,
end his conscience was pacified by the resolution of
inviting his sisters another year ; at the same time,
however, slyly suspecting that another year would
make the invitation needless, by bringing Elinor to
town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne as
their visitor.
Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the
ready wit that had procured it, wrote the next morn-
ing to Lucy, to request her company and her sister's,
for some days, in Harley-street, as soon as Lady Mid-
dleton could spare them. This was enough to make
Lucy really and reasonably happy. Mrs. Dashwood
seemed actually working for her, herself; cherishing
all her hopes, and promoting all her views ! Such
an opportunity of being with Edward and his fa-
mily was, above all things, the most material to her
interest, and such an invitation the most gratifying
to her feelings ! It was an advantage that could
not be too gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily
made use of; and the visit to Lady Middleton, which
had not before had any precise limits, was instantly
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 71
discovered to have been always meant to end in two
days'time.
" When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was
within ten minutes after its arrival, it gave her, for
the first time, some share in the expectations of
Lucy ; for such a mark of uncommon kindness,
vouchsafed on so short an acquaintance, seemed to
declare that the good-will towards her arose from
something more than merely malice against herself,
and might be brought, by time and address, to do
everything that Lucy wished. Her flattery had al-
ready subdued the pride of Lady Middleton, and
made an entry into 4he close heart of Mrs. John
Dashwood ; and these were effects that laid open the
probability of greater.
The Miss Steeles removed to Har ley-street, and
all that reached Elinor of their influence there,
strengthened her expectation of the event. Sir John,
who called on them more than once, brought home
such accounts of the favour they were in, as must be
universally striking. Mrs. Dashwood had never been
so much pleased with any young women in her life,
as she was with them ; had given each of them a
needle-book, made by some emigrant } called Lucy
by her christen name ; and did not know whether
she should ever be able to part with them.
72
CHAPTER VII.
Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight,
that her mother felt it no longer necessary to give up
the whole of her time to her ; and contenting her-
self with visiting her once or twice a day, returned
from that period to her own home, and her own
habits, in which she found the Miss Dashwoods very
ready to reassume their former «hare.
About the third or fourth morning after their
being thus re-settled in Berkeley-street, Mrs. Jen-
nings, on returning from her ordinary visit to Mrs.
Palmer, entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was
sitting by herself, with an air of such hurrying im-
portance as prepared her to hear something wonder-
ful; and giving her time only to form that idea,
began directly to justify it by saying,
Lord ! my dear Miss Dashwood ! have you heard
the news ? w
" No, ma'am. What is it ? "
" Something so strange ! But you shall hear it
all. — When I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte
quite in a fuss about the child. She was sure it was
very ill — it cried, and fretted, and was all over pim-
ples. So I looked at it directly, and,'Lord ! my
dear,'says I,'it is nothing in the world but the red-
gum ;'and nurse said just the same. But Charlotte,
ehe would not be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent
8BNSE AND 8BN8IBIL1TT. 73
for ; and luckily he happened to be just come in from
Harley-street, bo he stepped over directly, and as
soon as ever he saw the child, he said just as we did,
that it was nothing in the world but the red-gum,
and then Charlotte was easy. And so, just as he was
going away again, it came into my head, I am sure
I do not know how I happened to think of it, but it
came into my head to ask him if there was any news.
So upon that, he smirked, and simpered, and looked
grave, and seemed to know something or other, and
at last he said in a whisper,'For fear any unpleasant
report should reach the young ladies under your care
as to their sister's indisposition, I think it advisable
to say, that I believe there is no great reason for
alarm ; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will do very well.'"
" What! is Fanny ill? "
" That is exactly what I said, my dear.'Lord !'
says I, « is Mrs. Dashwood ill ?'So then it all came
out ; and the long and the short of the matter, by all
I can learn, seems to be this : — Mr. Edward Femrs,
the very young man I used to joke with you about
(but however, as it turns out, I am monstrous glad
there never was anything in it), Mr. Edward Ferrars,
it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth
to my cousin Lucy ! — There's for you, my dear ! —
And not a creature knowing a syllable of the matter
except Nancy! — Could you have believed such a
thing possible ? — There is no great wonder in their
liking one another; but that matters should be
brought so forward between them, and nobody sus-
pect it ! That is strange ! — I never happened to sec
them together, or I am sure I should have found it
74 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
out directly. Well, and so this was kept a great
secret, for fear of Mrs. Ferrars ; and neither she nor
your brother or sister suspe cted a word of the matter,
— till this very morning, poor Nancy, who, you know,
is a well-meaning creature, but no conjuror, popped
it all out.'Lord !'thinks she to herself,'they are all
so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no diffi-
culty about it ;'and so, away she went to your sister,
who was sitting all alone at her carpet-work, little
suspecting what was to come — for she had just been
saying to your brother, only five minutes before, that
she thought to make a match between Edward and
some Lord's daughter or other, I forget who. So yon
may think what a blow it was to all her vanity
and pride. She fell into violent hysterics imme-
diately, with such screams as reached your brother's
ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-room
down-stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his
steward in the country. 80 up he flew directly, and
a terrible scene took place, for Lucy was come to
them by that time, little dreaming of what was going
on. Poor soul ! I pity her. And I must say, I think
she was used very hardly; for your sister scolded
like any fury, and soon drove her into a fainting fit.
Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bitterly ;
and your brother, he walked about the room, and
said he did not know what to do. Mrs. Dashwood
declared they should not stay a minute longer in the
house, and your brother was forced to go down upon
•his knees too, to persuade her to let them stay till
they had packed up their clothes. Then she fell into
hysterics again, and he was so frightened that he
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 75
would send for Mr. Donavan,and Mr. Donaran found
the house in all this uproar. The carriage was at
the door ready to take my poor cousins away, and
they were just stepping hi as he came off; poor Lucy
in such a condition, he says, she could hardly walk ;
and Nancy, she was almost as bad. I declare, I have
no patience with your sister ; and I hope, with all my
heart, it will be a match in spite of her. Lord ! what
a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when ho hoars
of it ! To have his love used so scornfully ! for they
say he is monstrous fond of her, as well lie may. I
should not wonder, if he was to be in the greatest of
a passion ! — and Mr. Donavan thinks Just the ruidc.
Ho and I had a great deal of talk about it ; and the
best of all is, that he is gone back again to Jlarloy-
strect, that he may be within call when Mrs. Ferrnrs
is told of it, for she was sent for as soon as ever my
cousins left the house, for your sister was sure she
would be in hysterics too j and so she may, for what
I care. I have no pity for either of them. I have
no notion of people's making such a to-do about
money and greatness. There is no reason on earth
why M r. Kdward and Lucy should not marry ; for I
am sure Mrs. Ferrari may afford to do very well by
her son; and though Lucy has next to nothing herself,
she knows better than anybody how to make the
most of everything ; and I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrnrs
would only allow him five hundred a-year, she would
make as good an appearance with it as anybody else
would with eight. Lord ! how snug they might live
in such auother cottage as yours — or a little bigger —
with two maids and two men ; and I believe I co uld
76 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
help them to a housemaid, for my Betty has a sister
out of place, that would fit them exactly . "
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had
had time enough to collect her thoughts, she was
able to give such an answer, and make such obser-
vations, as the subject might naturally be supposed
to produce. — Happy to find that she was not sus-
pected of any extraordinary interest in it ; that Mrs,
Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be
the case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached
to Edward; and happy above all the rest, in the
absence of Marianne, she felt very well able to speak
of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her
judgment, as she believed, with impartiality on the
conduct of every one concerned in it.
She could hardly determine what her own expec-
tation of its event really was ; — though she earnestly
tried to drive away the notion of its being possible
to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of
Edward and Lucy. What Mrs. Ferrars would say
and do, though there could not* be a doubt of its
nature, she was anxious to hear ; and still more an-
xious to know how Edward would conduct himself.—
For him she felt much compassion $ — for Lucy very
little — and it cost her some pains to procure that
little • — for the rest of the party none at all.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject,
Elinor soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne
for its discussion. — No time was to be lost in un-
deceiving her, in making her acquainted with {he
real truth , and in endeavouring to bring her to hear
it talked of by others, without betraying that she felt
8EN8L AMD SENSIBILITY. 77
any uneasiness for her sister, or any resentment
against Edward.
Elinor's office was a painful one. — She was going
to remove what she really believed to he her Bister's
chief consolation, — to give such particulars of Ed-
ward, as she feared would ruin him for ever in her
good opinion, — and to make Marianne, by a resem-
blance in their situations, which to her fancy would
seem strong, feel all her own disappointment over
again. But unwelcome as such a task must be, it
was necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore has-
tened to perform it.
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her
own feelings, or to represent herself as suffering
much, any otherwise than as the self-command she
had practised since her first knowledge of Edward's
engagement, might suggest a hint of what was prac-
ticable to Marianne. Her narration was clear and
simple ; and though it could not be given without
emotion, it was not accompanied by violent agitation,
nor impetuous grief. — That belonged rather to the
hearer, for Marianne listened with horror, and cried
excessively. Elinor was to be the comforter of others
in her own distresses, no less than in theirs ; and all
the comfort that could be given by assurances of her
own composure of mind, and a very earnest vindica-
tion of Edward from every charge but of imprudence,
was readily offered.
But Marianne for some time would give credit to
neither. Edward seemed a second Willoughby ; and
acknowledging as Elinor did, that she had loved him
most sincerely, could she feel less than herself! As
78 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
for Lucy Steele, she considered her so totally unami-
able, so absolutely incapable of attaching a sensible
man, that she could not be persuaded at first to be-
lieve, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection
of Edward for her. She would not even admit it to
have been natural ; and Elinor left her to be con-
vinced that it was so, by that which only could con-
vince her, a better knowledge of mankind.
Her first communication had reached no farther
than to state the fact of the engagement, and the
length of time it had existed. — Marianne's feelings
had then broken in, and put an end to all regularity
of detail ; and for some time all that could be done
was to soothe her distress, lessen her alarms, and
combat her resentment. The first question on her
side, which led to farther particulars, was,
" How long has this been known to you, Elinor ?
Has he written to you ? n
" I have know it these four months. When Lucy
first came to Barton-park last November, she told me
in confidence of her engagement. "
At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the
astonishment, which her lips could not utter. After
a pause of wonder, she exclaimed,
" Four months ! — Have you known of this four
months ? " —
Elinor confirmed it.
" What! — while attending me in all my misery,
has this been on your heart ? — and I have reproached
you for being happy ! w —
" It was not fit that you should then know hoW
much I was the reverse. " —
SBNSB AMD SBWS1BUITY, 79
" Four months ! " — cried Marianne again. — " So
calm!— so cheerful !— how hate you been sup-
ported P " —
" By feeling that I wm doing my duty.— My pro-
mite to Lucy, obliged me to be secret, I owed it to
her, therefore, to avoid giving any hint of the truth ;
and I owed it to ray family and friends, not to create
in them a solicitude about me, which it could not be
in my power to satisfy.''
Marianne seemed much struck.—
" I have very often wished to undeceive yourself
and my mother, " added Elinor; " and once or twice
I have attempted it;— but without betraying my
trust, I never could have convinced you. "
" Four months I— and yet you loved him l " —
" Yes. But I did not only love him ; — and while
the comfort of others was dear to me, I was glad to
spare them from knowing how much I felt Now,
I can think and speak of it with little emotion. — I
would not have you suffer on my account ; for I
assure you I no longer suffer materially myself. I
have many things to support me. I am not con-
scious of having provoked the disappointment by any
imprudence of my own, and I have borne it as much
as possible without spreading it farther. I acquit
Edward of all essential misconduct* I wish him
very happy; and I am so sure of his always doing his
duty, that though now he may harbour some regret,
in the end he must become so. Lucy does not want
sense, and that is the foundation on which every-
thing good may be built. And after all, Marianne
after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and
80 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
constant attachment, and all that can he said of ones
happiness depending entirely on any particular
person, it is not meant — it is not fit— it is not possi-
ble that it should be so. Edward will marry Lacy;
he will marry a woman superior in person and on*
derstanding to half her sex ; and time and habit will
teach him to forget that he ever thought another
superior to her. " -—
" If such is your way of thinking, " said Marianne,
" if the loss of what is most valued is so easily to be
made up by something else, your resolution, your
self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to be won-
dered at. — They are brought more within my com-
prehension. "
" I understand you. Tou do not suppose that I
have ever felt much. For four months, Marianne, I
have had all this banging on my mind, without being
at liberty to speak of it to a single creature ; know-
ing that it would make you and my mother moat un-
happy whenever it were explained to you, yet unable
to prepare you for it in the least. It was told me,—
it was in a manner forced on me by the very person
herself, whose prior engagement ruined all my pro-
spects; and told me, as I thought, with triumph.
This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had to
oppose, by endeavouring to appear indifferent where
I have been most deeply interested ; — and it has not
been only once; — I have had her hopes and exulta-
tion to listen to again and again. I have known
myself to be divided from Edward for ever, without
heaiing one circumstance that could make me less
desire the connexion. Nothing has proved him un-
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 81
worthy; no* has anything declared him indifferent to
me. I have had to contend against the unkindness
of his sister, and the insolence of his mother ; and
hare suffered the punishment of an attachment, with-
out enjoying its advantages. And all this has been
going on at a time, when, as you too well know, it
has not been my only unhappiness. If you can
think me capable of ever feeling — surely you may
suppose that I have suffered now. The composure
of mind with which I have brought myself at present
to consider the matter, the consolation that I have been
willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and
painful exertion ; — they did not spring up of them-
selves ; — they did not occur to relieve my spirits at
first — no, Marianne. Then, if I had not been bound
to silence, perhaps nothing could have kept me en-
tirely — not even what I owed to my dearest friends
— from openly showing that I was very unhappy. " —
Marianne was quite subdued. —
" Oh ! Elinor, " she cried, " you have made me
hate myself for ever. How barbarous have I been
to you ! — you, who have been my only comfort, who
have borne with me in all my misery, who have
seemed to be only suffering for me! — Is this my
gratitude P Is this the only return I can make you?
Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have
been trying to do it away.*
The tenderest caresses followed this confession.
In such a frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor
had no difficulty in obtaining from her whatever pro-
mise she required ; and, at her request, Marianne
engaged never to speak of the affair to any one with
F VOL. II.
92 SESSE ASD SE3CSBILITT.
the least appearance of bitterness; — to m eet Lary
without betraying the smallest increase of dislike to
berj — and ereii to see Edward himself if <
should bring tbem together, without any <
of her usual cordiality. These were great
sions; but where Marianne felt that she had injured,
no reparation could be too much for her to make.
8he performed her promise of being discreet, to
admiration. 8he attended to all that Mm Jennings
had to saj upon the subject with an unchanging
complexion, dissented from her in nothing, and was
heard three times to say, " Yes, ma'am. 9 She lis-
tened to her praise of Lucy with only moving frost
one chair to another, and when Mrs. Jennings talked
of Edward's affection, it cost her only a spasm in her
throat. Such adrances towards heroism in her sister,
made Elinor feel equal to anything herself.
The next morning brought a farther trial of it J in
a visit from their brother, who'came with a most
serious aspect to talk over the dreadful affair, and
bring them news of his wife. —
" You hare heard, I suppose, " said he with great
solemnity, as soon as he was seated, " of the rery
shocking discovery that took place under our roof
yesterday. "
They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful
a moment for speech.
" Your sister, " he continued, " has suffered dread-
full y. Mrs. Ferrars too — in short, it has been a
scene of such complicated distress — but I will hope
that the storm may be weathered without our being,
any of us, quite overcome. Poor Fanny! she was in
8EN8I AMD ■BHilBILITY. 83
hysterics all yesterday. But I would not alarm you
too much. Donavan says there is nothing materially
to be apprehended ; her constitution is a good one,
and her resolution equal to anything. She has borne
it all with the fortitude of an angel! She says she
never shall think well of anybody again ; and one
cannot wonder at it, after being so deceived ! — meet-
ing with such ingratitude, where so much kind-
ness had been shown, so much confidence had been
placed ! It was quite out of the benevolence of her
heart that she had asked these young women to her
house; merely because she thought they deserved
some attention, were harmless, well-behaved girls,
and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise
we both wished very much to have invited you and
Marianne to be with us, while your kind friend there
was attending her daughter. And now to be so
rewarded !'I wish with all my heart/ says poor
Fanny in her affectionate way, * that we had asked
your sisters instead of them.'"
Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done,
he went on.
" What poor Mrs. Ferrers suffered when first Fanny
broke it to her, is not to be described. While she
with the truest affection had been planning a most
eligible connexion for him, was it to be supposed that
he could be all the time secretly engaged to another
person ! — such a suspicion could never have entered
her head ! If she suspected any prepossession else-
where, it could not bo in that quarter.'There, to be
sure/ said she,'I might have thought myself safe.'
She was quite in an agony. Wo consulted together,
84 BBN8B AND SENSIBILITY*
however, as to what should he done, and at last she
determined to send for Edward. He came. But I
am sorry to relate what ensued. All that Mrs. Fer-
rers could say to make him put an end to the engage-
ment, assisted too as you may well suppose by my
arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail.
Duty, affection, everything was disregarded, I never
thought Edward so stubborn, so unfeeling, before.
His mother explained to him her liberal designs, in
case of his marrying Miss Morton; told him she
would settle on him the Norfolk estate, which, clear
of land-tax, brings in a good thousand a-yearj
offered even, when matters grew desperate, to make
it twelve hundred ; and in opposition to this, if he
still persisted in this low connexion, represented to
him the certain penury that must attend the match.
His own two thousand pounds she protested should
be his all ; she would never see him again ; and so
far would she be from affording him the smallest
assistance, that if he were to enter into any profes-
sion with a view of better support, she would do all
in her power to prevent his advancing in it. "
Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clap-
ped her hands together and cried, " Gracious God!
can this be possible l "
" Well may you wonder, Marianne, " replied her
brother, " at the obstinacy which could resist such
arguments as these. Tour exclamation it very
natural. "
Marianne was going to retort, bat she remembered
her promises, and forbore.
" All this however, " he continued, " was urged i»
•■MB Aft* •IHtlllLITT. 85
vein. Edward said very little) but what he did say,
was in the most determined manner. Nothing could
prevail on him to give up hie engagement. He would
•tend to it, eoithim what it might. "
" Then, " cried Mn, Jennings with blunt sincerity,
no longer able to be silent, " he has acted like an
honest man! I beg your pardon, Mr. Dashwood,
but if he had done otherwise, I should hare thought
him a rascal. I hare some little) concern in the
business, as well as yourself for Lucy Steele is my
oousin, and I believe there is not a better kind of
girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a good
husband. "
John Dashwood was greatly astonished j but his
nature was calm, not open to provocation, and he
never wished to oifend anybody, especially anybody
of good fortune. He thereforereplied, without any
resentment,
" I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any
relation of yours, madam. Miss Lucy Steele is, I
dare say, a very deserving young woman, but in the
present case, you know, the connexion must be im-
possible. And to have entered into a secret engage-
ment with a young man under her uncle's care, the
son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as Mrs. Ferrers, is perhaps altogether a little extra-
ordinary. In short, I do not mean to reflect upon
the behaviour of any person whom you have a regard
for, Mrs. Jennings. We all wish her extremely
ha PPy > and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout the
whole has been such as every conscientious, good
mother, in like circumstances, would adopt. It has
86 SEN8B AND SENSIBILITY.
been dignified and liberal. Edward has drawn bis
own lot, and I fear it will be a bad one. "
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension;
and Elinor's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward,
while braving his mother's threats, for a woman who
could not reward him.
" Well, sir, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did it
end? "
" I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy
rupture : — Edward is dismissed for ever from his
mother's notice. He left her house yesterday, but
where he is gone, or whether he is still in town, I
do not know ; for we of course can make no inquiry. "
" Poor young man ! — and what is to become of
him? "
" What, indeed ma'am ! It is a melancholy con-
sideration. Born to the prospect of such affluence !
I cannot conceive a situation more deplorable. The
interest of two thousand pounds — how can a man
live on it I — and when to that is added the recollec-
tion, that he might, but for his own folly, within
three months have been in the receipt of two thou-
sand five hundred a-year, (for Miss Morton has
thirty thousand pounds,) I cannot picture to myself
a more wretched condition. We must all feel for
him ; and the more so, because it is so totally out of
our power to assist him.''
'* Poor young man ! w cried Mrs. Jennings, " lam
sure he should be very welcome to bed and board at
my house ; and so I would tell him, if I could see
him. It is not fit that he should be living about at
his own charge now, at lodgings and taverns. "
SENSE AMD 8BM8IB1L1TY. 87
Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness to-
wards Edward, though she could not forbear smiling
at the form of it,
" If he would only have done as well by himself/'
•aid John Dashwood, " as all his friends were dis-
posed to do by him, he might now hare been in his
proper situation, and would hare wanted for nothing.
But as it is, it must be out of anybody's power to
assist him. And there is one thing more preparing
against him, which must be worse than all — his mo-
ther has determined, with a ?ery natural kind of
spirit, to settle that estate upon Robert immediately,
which might hare been Edward's, on proper condi-
tions. I left her this morning with her lawyer,
talking over the business. "
" Weill " said Mrs. Jennings,'• that is her revenge.
Everybody has a way of their own. But I don't
think mine would be, to make one son independent,
because another had plagued me. "
Marianne got up, and walked about the room.
" Can anything be more galling to the spirits of a
man, " continued John, " than to see his younger
brother in possession of an estate which might have
been his own ? Poor Edward ! I feel for him sin-
cerely. "
A few minutes more spent in the same kind of
effusion, concluded his visit ; and with repeated as-
surances to his sisters that he really believed there
was no material danger in Fanny's indisposition, and
that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it,
he went away ; leaving the three ladies unanimous
in their sentiments on the present occasion, as far at
88 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
least as it regarded Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the Dash-
woods', and Edward's.
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he
quited the room ; and as her vehemence made reserve
impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jen-
nings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon
the party.
CHAPTER VIII.
Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of
Edward's conduct, but only Elinor and Marianne
understood its true merit. They only knew how
little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and
how small was the consolation, beyond the conscious-
ness of doing right, that could remain to him in the
loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried in his
integrity ; and Marianne forgave all his offences in
compassion for his punishment. But though confi-
dence between them was, by this public discovery,
restored to its proper state, it was not a subject on
which either of them were fond of dwelling when
alone. Elinor avoided it upon principle, as tending
to fix still more upon her thoughts, by the too warm,
too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of
Edward's continued affection for herself, which she
rather wished to do away ; and Marianne's courage
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 89
soon failed her, in trying to converse upon a topic
which always left her more dissatisfied with herself
than ever, by the comparison it necessarily produced
between Elinor's conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison ; but not
as her sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now ;
she felt it with all the pain of continual self-reproach,
regretted most bitterly that she had never exerted
herself before ; but it brought only the torture of
penitence, without the hope of amendment. Her
mind was so much weakened that she still fancied
present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited her more.
Nothing new was heard by them for a day or two
afterwards, of affairs in Harley-street, or Dartlctt's
Buildings. But though so much of the matter was
.known to them already, that Mrs. Jennings might
have had enough to do in spreading that knowledge
farther, without seeking after more, she had resolved
from the first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to
her cousins as soon as she could } and nothing but
the hindrance of more visitors than usual, had pre-
vented her going to them within that time.
The third day succeeding their knowledge of the
particulars, was so fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to
draw many to Kensington Gardens, though it was
only the second week in March. Mrs. Jennings
and Elinor were of the number j but Marianne, who
knew that the Willoughbys were again in town, and
had a constant dread of meeting them, chose rather
to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined
I
90 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
them soon after they entered the Gardens, and Elinor
was not sorry that by her continuing with them, and
engaging all Mrs. Jennings's conversation, she was
herself left to quiet reflection. She saw nothing of
the Willoughbys, nothing of Edward, and for some
time nothing of anybody who could by any chance,
whether grave or gay, be interesting to her. But at
last, she found herself, with some surprise, accosted
by Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy, ex-
pressed great satisfaction in meeting them, and on
receiving encouragement from the particular kindness
of Mrs. Jennings, left her own party for a short time,
to join theirs. Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered
to Elinor,
" Get it all out of her, my dear. She will tell you
anything if you ask. You see I cannot leave Mrs.
Clarke. "
It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity,
and for Elinor's too, that she would tell anything
without being asked, for nothing would otherwise
have been learnt.
" I am so glad to meet you, " said Miss Steele,
taking her familiarly by the arm — " for I wanted to
see you of all things in the world; " and then lower-
ing her voice, " I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard
all about it. Is she angry ? n
" Not at all, I believe, with you. "
" That is a good thing. And Lady Middleton, is
she angry ? "
" I cannot suppose it possible that she should. "
" I am monstrous glad of it. Good gracious !
I have had such a time of it ! 1 never saw Lucy in
SftMMI AND SSNIIBILITY. 01
■uch a rage In my life. She yawed at first she would
never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do anything else
for me again, to long at she lived ; but now she is
quite come to, and we are as good friends as ever.
Look, she made me this bow to my hat, and put in
the feather last night. There now, you are going to
laugh at me too. But why should not I wear pink
ribbons P I do not care if it is the Doctor's favourite
colour. I am sure, for my part, I should never have
known he did like it better than any other colour, if
he had not happen to say so. My cousins have been
■o plaguing me! — I declare sometimes, I do not
know which way to look before them. "
She had wandered away to a subject on which
Elinor had nothing to say, and therefore soon judged
it expedient to find her way back again to the first.
" Well, but Miss Dashwood, " speaking triumph-
antly, " people may say what they choose about Mr.
Ferrars'8 declaring he would not have Lucy, for it's
no such a thing, I can tell you j and it's quite a
shame for such ill-natured reports to be spread
abroad. Whatever Lucy might think about it her-
self, you know, it was no business of other people to
set it down for certain. "
" I never heard anything of the kind hinted at be-
fore, I assure you, " said Elinor.
" Oh ! did not you P But it was said, I know, very
well, and by more than one ; for Miss Oodby told
Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses could
expect Mr. Ferrare to give up a woman like Miss
Morton, with thirty thousand pounds to her fortune,
for Lucy Steele that had nothing at all; and I had it
92 8BK8E AND SENSIBILITY.
from Miss Sparks myself. And besides that, my
cousin Richard said himself, that when it came to the
point, he was afraid Mr. Ferrars would be off; and
when Edward did not come near us for three days, I
could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in
my heart Lucy gave it all up for lost ; for we came
away from your brother's on Wednesday, and we saw
nothing of him not all Thursday, Friday, and Satur-
day, and did not know what was become with him.
Once Lucy thought to write to him, but then her
spirit rose against that. However, this morning he
came, just as we came home from church ; and then
it all came out, how he had been sent for Wednes-
day to Harley-street, and been talked to by his
mother and all of them, and how he had declared be-
fore them all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and
nobody but Lucy would he have : and how he had
been so worried by what passed, that as soon as he
had went away from his mother's house, he had got
upon his horse, and rid into the country somewhere
or other ; and how he had staid about at an inn all
Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the better of
it. And after thinking it all over and over again, he
8a id it seemed to him as if, now he had no fortune,
and no nothing at all, it would be quite unkind to
keep her on to the engagement, because it must be
for her loss, for he had nothing but two thousand
pounds, and no hope of anything else ; and if he was
to go into orders, as he had some thoughts, he could
get nothing but a curacy, and how was they to live
upon that? He could not bear to think of her
doing no better, and so he begged, if she had the least
BBNBB AND SENSIBILITY. 03
mind for it, to put an end to the matter directly, and
leave him to shift for himself. I heard him say all
this as plain as could possibly he. And it was en-
tirely for her sake, and upon her account, that he
■aid a word about being of£ and not upon his own.
I will take my oath he never dropped a syllable of
being tired of her, or of wishing to marry Miss
Morton, or anything like it. But, to be sure, Lucy
would not give ear to such kind of talking j so she
told him directly (with a great deal about sweet and
love, you know, and all that— Oh, la ( one can't re-
peat such kind of things, you know)— the told him
directly, she had not the least mind in the world to
be off, for she could live with him upon a trifle, and
how little soever he might have, she should be very
glad to have it all, you know, or something of the
kind. So then he was monstrous happy, and they
talked on some time about what they should do, and
they agreed he should take orders directly, and
they must wait to be married till he got a living.
And just then I could not hear any more, for my
cousin called from below to tell me Mrs. Richardson
was come in her coach, and would take one of us to
Kensington Gardens ; so I was forced to go into the
room and interrupt them, to ask Lucy if she would
like to go, but she did not care to leave Edward ; so
I just run up stairs and put on a pair of silk stock-
ings, and came off with the Richardsons. "
" I do not understand what you mean by interrupt-
ing them, " said Elinor j " you were all in the same
room together, were not you P
" No indeed; not us. La! Miss Dashwood, do
94 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
you think people make love when anybody else is
by P Oh ! for shame ! — To be sure, you must know
better than that. (Laughing affectedly.) — No, no 5
they were shut up in the drawing-room together, and
all I heard was only by listening at the door.* 9
" How ! " cried Elinor ; " have you been repeating
to me what you only learnt yourself by listening at
the door? " I am sorry I did not know it before;
for I certainly would not have suffered you to give
me particulars of a conversation which you ought
not to have known yourself. How could you behave
so unfairly by your sister P n
" Oh, la ! there is nothing in that. I only stood
at the door, and heard what I could. And I am
sure Lucy would have done just the same by me }
for, a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I
had so many secrets together, she never made any
bones of hiding in a closet, or behind a chimney-
board, on purpose to hear what we said. "
Elinor tried to talk of something else ; but Miss
Steele could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes
from what was uppermost in her mind.
" Edward talks of going to Oxford soon, " said she,
" but now he is lodging at No. — , Pall Mall. What
an ill-natured woman his mother is, an't she P And
your brother and sister were not very kind ! How-
ever, I shan't say anything against them to you; and
to be sure they did send us home in their own
chariot, which was more than I looked for. And
for my part, I was all in a fright for fear your sister
should ask us for the huswifes she had gave us a day
or two before ; but however, nothing was said about
SENSE AND •SKIIBILITY. 05
them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight.
Edward have got some business at Oxford, he says,
so he must go there for a time j and after that, as
soon as he can light upon a bishop, he will be or-
dained. I wonder what curacy he will get! —
Good gracious ! (giggling as she spoke) I'd lay my
life I know what my cousins will say, when they
hear of it. They will tell me I should write to the
Doctor, to get Edward the curacy of his new living.
I know they will ; but I am sure I would not do
such a thing for all the world.'La!'I shall say
directly, * I wonder how you could think of such a
thing. I write to the Doctor, indeed ! "
" Well,* said Elinor, " it is a comfort to be pre-
pared against the worst. You hare got your answer
ready. "
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject,
but the approach of her own party made another
more necessary.
" Oh, la ! here come the Richardsons. I had a
Tast deal more to say to you, but I must not stay
away from them not any longer. I assure you they
are very genteel people. Ho makes a monstrous
deal of money, and they keep their own coach. I
have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings about it
myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear sho
is not in anger against us, and Lady Middlcton the
same ; and if anything should happen to take you
and your sister away, and Mrs. Jennings should want
company, I am sure we should be very glad to conic
and stay with her for as long a time as sho likes.
I suppose Lady Middle ton won't ask us any more
96 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
this bout. Good bye $ I am sorry Miss Marianne
was not here. Remember me kindly to her. La !
if you have not got your best spotted muslin on S — I
wonder you was not afraid of its being torn. "
Such was her parting concern ; for after this, she
had time only to pay her farewell compliments to
Mrs. Jennings, before her company was claimed by
Mrs. Richardson ; and Elinor was left in possession
of knowledge which might feed her powers of reflec-
tion some time, though she had learnt very little
more than what had been already foreseen and fore-
planned in her own mind. Edward's marriage with
Lucy was as firmly determined on, and the time of
its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain, as
she had concluded it would be j— everything depend-
ed, exactly after her expectation, on his getting that
preferment, of which, at present, there seemed not
the smallest chance.
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs.
Jennings was eager for information ; but as Elinor
wished to spread as little as possible intelligence that
had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, she
confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple
particulars, as she felt assured that Lucy, for the sake
of her own consequence, would choose to have known.
The continuance of their engagement, and the means
that were to be taken for promoting its end, was all
her communication; and this produced from Mrs.
Jennings the following natural remark :
" Wait for his having a living ! — ay, we all know
how that will end ; — they will wait a twelvemonth,
and finding no good comes of it, will set down upon
mm ahd •■HHBiLirr* 97
i curacy of fifty poundi a-year, with the interest of
lis two thousand pounds, and what little matter Mr.
Steele and Mr. Pratt can give her. — Then they will
lave a child every year! and Lord help'em f how
> oor they will be I— I mutt eee what I can give them
owardfl furnishing their house. Two maids and two
oen indeed !■— as I talked of t'other day. — No, no,
hey must get a stout girl of all-works.— -Betty's sis-
er would never do for them now.'*
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by
he two-penny post, from Lucy herself.-— It was as
bllows;
Bartlett's Buildings, March.
I hope my dear Miss Dashwcod will excuse tho
iberty I take of writing to her ; but I know your
Hendship for me will make you pleased to hear such
i good account of myself and my dear Edward,
liter all the troubles we haye went through lately,
Jierefore will make no more apologies, but proceed
;o say that, thank God ! though we have suffered
lreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy
is we must always be in one another's lore. We have
lad great trials, and great persecutions, but however,
it the same time gratefully acknowledge many
riendt, yourself not the least among them, whose
peat kindness I shall always thankfully remember,
is will Edward too, who I have told of it, I am sure
,ou will be glad to hear, as likewiso dear Mrs. Jen
lings, I spent two happy hours with him yesterday
ifternoon, he would not hear of our parting, though
earnestly did I, as I thought my duty required, urge
a vol. ii.
98 SEN8E AND SENSIBILITV.
him to it for prudence sake, and would have parted
for ever on the spot, would he consent to it, but he
said it should never be, he did not regard his mo-
ther's anger, while he could hare my affections — our
prospects are not very bright, to be sure, but we
mnst wait, and hope for the best ; he will be ordained
shortly, and should it ever be in your power to re-
commend him to anybody that has a living to bestow,
am very sure you will not forget us, and dear Mrs.
Jennings too, trust she will speak a good word for
us to Sir John, or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that
may be able to assist us. — Poor Anne was much to
blame for what she did, but she did it for the best,
so I say nothing ; hope Mrs. Jennings won't think
it too much trouble to give us a call, should she
come this way any morning, t'would be a great
kindness, and my cousins would be proud to know
her. — My paper reminds me to conclude, and beg*
ging to be most gratefully and respectfully remem-
bered to her, and to Sir John and Lady Middle ton,
and the dear children, when you chance to see them,
and love to Miss Marianne,
I am, & c. & c.
As soon as Elinor had finished it she performed
what she concluded to be its writer's real design, by
placing it in the hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read it
aloud with many comments of satisfaction and praise.
" Very well indeed ! — how prettily she writes ! —
ay, that was quite proper to let him be off if he would.
That was just like Lucy. — Poor soul ! I wish I could
get him a living with all my heart. — She calls me
I
SEVfB AMD fUTBIBItlTT. 99
dear Mrs. Jennings, yon sea* She ii a good-hearted
girl at ever lived. — Very well upon my word. That
tentence is very prettily turned. Yes, yes, I will go
and see her sure enough* How attentive she is, to
think of everybody! — Thank you, my dear, for
showing it me. It is as pretty a letter as ever I saw,
and does Lucy's head and heart great credit.*'
CHAPTER IX.
- The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more
than two months in town, and Marianne's impatience
to be gone increased every day. She sighed for the
air, the liberty, the quiet of the country ; and fan-
cied that if any place could give her ease, Barton
must do it Elinor was hardly less anxious than
herself for their removal, and only so much less bent
on its being effected immediately, as that she was
conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey, which
Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge. She
began, however, seriously to turn her -thoughts
towards its accomplishment, and had already men-
tioned their wishes to their kind hostess, who re-
sisted them with all the eloquence of her good-will,
when a plan was suggested,'Which though detaining
them from home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to
100 8EH8B AND JBXSIBIL1TY,
Elinor altogether much more eligible than any other.
The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about the
end of March, for the Easter holidays; and Hit.
Jennings, with both her friends, received a very
warm invitation from Charlotte to go with then.
This would not, in itself, hare been sufficient for the
delicacy of Miss Dashwood; — but it was enforced
with so much real politeness by Mr. Palmer himself
as, joined to the very great amendment of bis
manners towards them since her sister had been
know to be unhappy, induced her to accept it with
pleasure.
When she told Marianne what she had done,
however, her first reply was not very auspicious.
" Cleveland I " — she cried, with great agitation,
" No, I cannot go to Cleveland. "
" You forget/'said Elinor, gently, " that its si-
tuation is not • • • that it is not in the neigh-
bourhood of . • . "
" But it is in Somersetshire. — I cannot go into
Somersetshire. — There, where I looked forward to
going • • • No, Elinor, you cannot expect me
to go there. "
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of
overcoming such feeling ; — she only endeavoured to
counteract them by working on others ; — and repre-
sented it, therefore, as a measure which would tix
the time of her returning to that dear mother, whom
she so much wished to see, in a more eligible, more
comfortable manner, than any other plan could do,
and perhaps without any greater delay. From
Cleveland, which was within a few miles of Bristol,
3BN8E AMD SENSIBILITY. 101
the distance to Barton was not beyond one day,
though a long day's journey; and their mother's
servant might easily come there to attend them down ;
and as there could be no occasion for their staying
above a week at Cleveland, they might now be at
home in little more than three weeks'time. As
Marianne's affection for her mother was sincere, it
must triumph, with little difficulty, over the imagi-
nary evil she had started.
Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her
guests, that she pressed them very earnestly to return
with her again from Cleveland. Elinor was grateful
for the attention, but it could not alter their design ;
and their mother's concurrence being readily gained,
everything relative to their return was arranged as
far as it could be ; — and Marianne found some relief
in drawing up a statement of the hours that were
yet to divide her from Barton.
" Ah ! Colonel, I do not know what you and I
shall do without the Miss Dashwoods, " — was Mrs.
Jennings's address to him when he first called on
her, after their leaving her was settled — " for they
are quite resolved upon going home from the Pal-
mers ; — and how forlorn we shall be, when I come
back ! — Lord ! we shall sit and gape at one another
as dull as two cats. "
Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vi-
gorous sketch of their future ennui, to provoke him
to make that offer, which might give himself an
escape from it; — and if so, she had soon afterwards
good reason to think her object gained ; for, on
Elinor's moving to the window to take more cxpe-
102 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
ditiously the dimensions of a print which the wis
going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it
with a look of particular meaning, and convened
with her there for several minutes. The effect of his
discourse on the lady too, could not escape her obser-
vation ; for though she was too honourable to listen,
and had even changed her seat on purpose that she
might not hear, to one close by the pianoforte on
which Marianne was playing, she could not keep her-
self from seeing that Elinor changed colour, attended
with agitation, and was too intent on what he said,
to pursue her employment. Still farther in confir-
mation of her hopes, in the interval of Marianne's
turning from one lesson to another, some words of
the Colonel's . inevitably reached her ear, in which
he seemed to be apologising for the badness of his
house. This set the matter beyond a doubt. She
wondered indeed at his thinking it necessary to do
so, — but supposed it to be the proper etiquette.
What Elinor said in reply she could not distinguish,
but judged from the motion of her lips that she did
not think that any material objection; — and Mrs.
Jennings commended her in her heart for being so
honest. They then talked on for a few minutes
longer without her catching a syllable, when another
lucky stop in Marianne's performance brought her
these words in the Colonel's calm voice :
" I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.''
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech,
she was almost ready to cry out,'• Lord ! what should
hinder it! " — but checking her desire, confined her-
self to this silent ejaculation :
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 103
" This is very strange ! — sure he need not wait to
be older. " —
This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not
seem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the
least ; for on their breaking up the conference soon
afterwards, and moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings
very plainly heard Elinor say, and with a voice which
showed her to feel what she said,
" I shall always think myself very much obliged
to you. "
Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude,
and only wondered, that after hearing such a sentence,
the Colonel should be able to take leave of them, as
he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid,
and go away without making her any reply ! — She
had not thought her old friend could have made so
indifferent a suitor.
What had really passed between them was to this
effect :
" I have heard, " said he, with great compassion,
" of the injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered
from his family ; for if I understand the matter right,
he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering
in his engagement with a very deserving young wo-
man. — Have I been rightly informed? — Is it so? "
Elinor told him that it was.
" The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty, " he replied
with great feeling, " of dividing, or attempting to
divide, two young people long attached to each other,
is terrible: Mrs. Ferrars does not know what she
Hay be doing — what she may drive her son to. I
save seen Mr. Edward Ferrars two or three times in
104 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Harley-street, and am much pleased with him. He
is not a young man with whom one can he intimately
acquainted in a short time, hut I have seen enough
of him to wish him well for his own sake, and at a
friend of yours, I wish it still more. I understand
that he intends to take orders. Will yon be so good
as to tell him that the living of Delaford, now just
vacant, as I am informed by this day's post, is his, if
he think it worth his acceptance ; — but that, perhaps,
so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now, it may
be nonsense to appear to doubt ; I only wish it were
more valuable. It is a rectory, but a small one ; the
late incumbent, I believe, did not make more than
200 pounds per annum, and though it is certainly
capable of improvement, I fear, not to such an amount
as to afford him a very comfortable income. Such as
it is, however, my pleasure in presenting him to it
will be very great. Pray assure him of it/'
Elinor's astonishment at this commission could
hardly have been greater, had the Colonel been really
making her an offer of his hand. The preferment,
which only two days before she had considered as
hopeless for Edward, was already provided to enable
him to marry ; — and she, of all people in the world,
was fixed on to bestow it! Her emotion was such
as Mrs. Jennings had attributed to a very different
cause ; — but whatever minor feelings less pure, less
pleasing, might have a share in that emotion, her
esteem for the general benevolence, and her gratitude
for the particular friendship, which together prompted
~ ilonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and
ly expressed. She thanked him for it with all
^-^Xolone
v
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 105
her heart, spoke of Edward's principles and disposi-
tion with that praise which she knew them to deserve,
and promised to undertake the commission with
pleasure, if it were really his wish to put off so agree-
able an office to another. But at the same time, she
could not help thinking that no one could so well
perform it as himself. It was an office, in short, from
which, unwilling to give Edward the pain of receiving
an obligation from her, she would have been very
glad to be spared herself; but Colonel Brandon, on
motives of equal delicacy declining it likewise, still
seemed so desirous of its being given through her
means, that she would not on any account make
farther opposition. Edward, she believed, was still
in town, and fortunately she had heard his address
from Miss Steele. She could undertake therefore to
inform him of it, in the course of the day. After this
had been settled, Colonel Brandon began to talk of
his own advantage in securing so respectable and
agreeable a neighbour; and then it was that he
mentioned with regret, that the house was small and
indifferent ; — an evil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings
had supposed her to do, made very light of, at least aj
far as regarded its size.
" The smallness of the house, " said she, " I cannd
imagine any inconvenience to them, for it will be it
proportion to their family and income. "
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that sha
was considering their marriage as the certain consr
quence of the presentation; for he did not suppose <
possible that Delaford living could supply such an
103 8EN3E AND SENSIBILITY
income, as anybody in their style of life would
venture to settle on — and he said so.
" This little rectory can do no more than make
Mr. Ferrars comfortable as a bachelor ; it cannot en-
able him to marry. I am sorry to say that my patron-
age ends with this ; and my interest is hardly more
extensive. If, however, by any unforeseen chance it
should be in my power to serve him farther, I must
think very differently of him from what I now do, if
I am not as ready to be useful to him then, as I sin-
cerely wish I could be at present. What I am now
doing indeed seems nothing at all, since it can ad-
vance him so little towards what must be his prin-
cipal, his only object of happiness. His marriage
must still be a distant good ; — at least I am afraid it
cannot take place very soon. "
Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood,
so justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jen-
nings ; but after this narration of what really passed
between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they
stood at the window, the gratitude expressed by the
latter on their parting may perhaps appear, in general,
not less reasonably excited, nor less properly worded,
than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage.
107
CHAPTER X.
" Well, Mist Dashwood, " said Mm. Jennings, Rapa-
ciously smiling, as soon as the gentleman had with-
drawn, " I do not ask you what the Colonel Iihh been
saying to you ; for though, upon my honour, I tried
to keep out of hearing, I could not help catching
enough to understand his business. And I unsure
you I never was better pleased in my life, and L wish
you joy of it with all my heart. "
" Thank you, ma'am, " said Elinor. " It is a
matter of great joy to me ; and I feel the good no sh of
Colonel Brandon most sensibly. There arc not
many men who would act as he has done. Few
people have so compassionate a heart ! I never was
more astonished in my life. "
" Lord ! my dear, you are very modest ! I nn't
the least astonished at it in the world, for I have often
thought, of late, there was nothing more likely to
happen. "
" You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's
general benevolence ; bufcat least you conld not fore-
see that the opportunity would so very soon occur. "
" Opportunity! " repeated Mrs. Jennings — " Oh!
as to that, when a man has once made up Ihh mind
to such a thing, somehow or other he will soon find
an opportunity. Well, my dear, I wish you joy of
it again and ngniu ; mid if ever there was a happy
108 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
couple in the world, I think I shall soon know where
to look for them. "
" You mean to go to Delaford after them, I sup-
pose/'said Elinor, with a faint smile.
• " Ay, my dear, that I do, indeed. And as to the
house being a bad one, I do not know what the
Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one at erer
I saw. "
" He spoke of its being out of repair. "
" Well, and whose fault is that? why don't he
repair it ? — who should do it but himself? "
They were interrupted by the servant's coming in,
to announce the chariot's being at the door; and
Mrs. Jennings immediately preparing to go, said—
" Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had
half my talk out. But, however, we may have it all
over in the evening, for we shall be quite alone. I
do not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your
mind is too full of the matter to care for company )
and besides, you must long to tell your sister all
about it. "
Marianne had left the room before the conversa-
tion began.
" Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it ;
but I shall not mention it at present to anybody
else. " •
" Oh ! very well, " said Mrs. Jennings rather dis-
appointed. " Then you would not have me tell it
Lucy, for I think of going as far as Holborn to-day. "
«* No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please. One
day's delay will not be very material ; and till I have
written to Mr. Ferrars, I think it ought not to be
SBK8B AKV SENSIBILITY. 109
mentioned to anybody else. I shall do that directly.
It is of importance that no time should be lost with
him, for he will of course hare much to do relative
to his ordination. "
This speech at first pussled Mrs. Jennings exceed-
ingly. Why Mr. Ferrars was to be written to about
it in such a hurry, she could not immediately com-
prehend. A few moments'reflection, however, pro-
duced a very happy idea, and she exclaimed—
Oh ho ! — I understand you. Mr. Ferrars is to
be the man. Well, so much the better for him. Ay,
to be sure, he must be ordained in readiness ; and I
am very glad to find things are so forward between
you. But, my dear, is not this rather out of charac-
ter? Should not the Colonel write himself P — sure,
he is the proper person/'
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of
Mrs. Jennings's speech; neither did she think it
worth inquiring into ; and therefore only replied to
its conclusion.
" Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he
rather wished any one to announce his intentions to
Mr. Ferrars than himself. "
" And so you are forced to do it Well, that is an
odd kind of delicacy ! However, I will not disturb
you (seeing her preparing to write). You know
your own concerns best. So good bye, my dear. I
have not heard of anything to please me so well since
Charlotte was brought to bed. "
And way she went; but returning again in a
moment,
" I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my
110 SENIE AMD SENSIBILITY.
dear. 1 should be very glad to get her so good a
mistress. But whether she would do for a lady's
maid, I am sure I can't tell. She is an excellent
housemaid, and works very well at her needle. How-
ever, you will think of all that at your leisure. "
44 Certainly, ma'am, " replied Elinor, not hearing
much of what she said, and more anxious to be alone
than to be mistress of the subject.
How she should begin — how she should express
herself in her note to Edward, was now all her con-
cern. The particular circumstances between them
made a difficulty of that which to any other person
would have been the easiest thing in the world j but
she equally feared to say too much or too little, and
sat deliberating over her paper, with the pen in her
hand, till broken in on by the entrance of Edward
himself.
He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way
to the carriage, as he came to leave his farewell card;
and she, after apologising for not returning herself,
had obliged him to enter, by saying that Miss Dash-
wood was above, and wanted to speak with him on
very particular business.
Elinor had just been congratulating herself in the
midst of her perplexity, that however difficult it might
be to express herself properly by letter, it was at
least preferable to giving the information by word of
mouth, when her visitor entered, to force her upon
this greatest exertion of all. Her astonishment and
confusion were very great on his so sudden appear-
ance.. She had not seen him before since his engage-
ment became public, and therefore not since hie
8BK8B AND 8KN8IBILITY. Hi
knowing her to be acquainted with it ; which, with
the consciousness of what she had been thinking of,
and what she had to tell him, made her feel particu-
larly uncomfortable for some minutes. He too was
much distressed, and they sat down together in a
most promising state of embarrassment. Whether he
had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming
into the room, he could not recollect; but determin-
ing to be on the safe side, he made his apology in
form as soon as he could say anything, after taking a
chair.
«« Mrs. Jennings told me, " said he, " that you
wished to speak with me, at least I understood her
so — or I certainly should not have intruded on you
in such a manner ; though, at the same time, I should
have been extremely sorry to Leave London without
seeing you and your sister ; especially as it will most
likely be some time — it is not probable that I should
soon have the pleasure of meeting you again. I go
to Oxford to-morrow. "
** You would not have gone, however, " said
Elinor, recovering herself, and determined to got
over what she so much dreaded as soon as possible,
" without receiving our good wishes, even if we had
not been able to give them in person. Mrs. Jennings
was quite right in what she said. I have something
of consequence to inform you of, which I was on the
point of communicating by paper. I am charged
with a most agreeable office (breathing rather faster
than usual as she spoke). Colonel Brandon, who
was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me to
say, that, understanding you mean to take orders he
112 8ENBB AMD SENSIBILITY*
has great pleasure in offering yon the living of Dels*
ford, now just vacant, and only wishes it were mora
valuable. Allow me to congratulate you on having
so respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join
in his wish that the living — it is about two hundred
a-year — were much more considerable, and such at
might better enable you to— as might be more than a
temporary accommodation to yourself — such, in
short, as might establish all your views of happiness. "
What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself,
it cannot be expected that any one else should say it
for him. He looked all the astonishment which such
unexpected, which such unthought-of information
could not fail of exciting j but he said only these
two words :
" Colonel Brandon ! " —
" Yes, " continued Elinor, gathering more resolu-
tion, as some of the worst was over ; " Colonel Bran-
don means it as a testimony of his concern for what
has lately passed — for the cruel situation in which
the unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed
you — a concern which I am sure Marianne, myself,
and all your friends must share ; and likewise as a
proof of his high esteem for your general character,
and his particular approbation of your behaviour on
the present occasion. "
" Colonel Brandon give me a living ! — Can it be
possible? "
" The unkindness of your own relations has made
you astonished to find friendship anywhere. "
" No, " replied he, with sudden consciousness, " not
to find it in you j for I cannot be ignorant that to
•BMU AMD •MflHLlTY. 113
yon, to your goodness, I owe it alL— I fool it — I
would express It if I cou l d b ut, m you well know,
J am no orator. "
" Tou are very much mistaken. I do assure you
that you owe it entirely, at least almost entirely, to
your own merit, and Colonel Brandon's discernment
of it I have had no hand in it I did not even
know, till I understood his design, that the living
was vacant ; nor had it ever occurred to me that ho
might have such a living in his gift. As a friend of
mine, of my family, he may perhaps— indeed I know
he has, still greater pleasure in bestowing it ; — but,
upon my word, you owe nothing to my solicitation. "
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small
share in the action j but she was at the same time
so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of Edward,
that she acknowledged it with hesitation ; which
probably contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind
which had recently entered it For a short time he
sat deep in thought, after Elinor had ceased to speak ; .
-—at last, as if it were rather an effort, he said,
" Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth
and respectability. I have always heard him spoken
of as such, and your brother, I know, esteems him
highly. He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in
his manners perfectly the gentleman. "
'< Indeed, replied Elinor, " I believe that you
will find him, on farther acquaintance, all that you
have heard him to be ; and as you will be such very
near neighbours, (for I understand the parsonage? is
almost close to the mansion-house,) it is particularly
important that he should be all this. "
H VOL. II.
114 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Edward made no answer; but when she had
turned away her head, gave her a look so serious, so
earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that he
might hereafter wish the distance between the par-
sonage and the mansion-house much greater.
" Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. JamesV
street, " said he, soon afterwards, rising from his
chair.
Elinor told him the number of the house:
" I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks
which you will not allow me to give you ; to assure
him that he has made me a very — an exceedingly
happy man. "
Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they
parted, with a very earnest assurance on her side of
her unceasing good wishes for his happiness in every
change of situation that might befal him; on his,
with rather an attempt to return the same good-will,
than the power of expressing it.
" When I see him again, " said Elinor to herself
as the door shut him out, " I shall see him the hus-
band of Lucy. "
And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down
to reconsider the past, recall the words, and endeavour
to comprehend all the feelings of Edward ; and, of
course, to reflect on her own with discontent.
When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she re-
turned from seeing people whom she had never seen
before, and of whom therefore she must have a great
deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by
the important secret in her possession, than by any-
thing else, that she reverted to it again as soon as
JDlinor appeared.
SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 115
u " Well, my dear, " she cried, " I sent you up the
young man. Did not I do right P — And I suppose
you had no great difficulty — You did not find him
" very unwilling to accept your proposal ? w
" No, ma'am ; that was not very likely. "
" Well, and how soon will he he ready P — For it
seems all to depend upon that. "
" Really/'said Elinor, " I know so little of these
kind of forms, that I can hardly even conjecture as to
the time, or the preparation necessary ; hut I suppose
two or three months will complete his ordination. "
" Two or three months P* cried Mrs. Jennings;
" Lord ! my dear, how calmly you talk of it ! and
can the Colonel wait two or three months ! Lord
bless me ! — I am sure it would put me quite out of
patience ! — And though one would be very glad to
do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do think it is
not worth while to wait two or three months for him.
Sure, somebody else might be found that would do as
well— somebody that is in orders already. "
" My dear ma'am/'said Elinor, " what can you
be thinking of P — Why, Colonel Brandon's only ob-
ject is to be of use to Mr. Ferrars. "
" Lord bless you, my dear! — Sure you do not
mean to persuade me that the Colonel only marries
you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr. Fer-
rars! "
The deception could not continue after this ; and
an explanation immediately took place, by which
both gained considerable amusement for the moment,
without any material loss of happiness to either, for
Mrs. Jennings only exchanged one form of delight
116 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
for another, and still without forfeiting her expecta-
tion of the first.
" Ay, ay, the parsonage is but a small one, "
said she, after the first ebullition of Surprise and
satisfaction was oyer, " and very likely may be out
of repair; but to hear a man apologising, as I thought,
for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting-
rooms on the ground-floor, and, I think the house-
keeper told me, could make up fifteen beds ! And
to you too, that had been used to live in Barton
Cottage! It seemed quite ridiculous. — But, my
dear, we must touch up the Colonel to do something
to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them,
before Lucy goes to it. "
" But Colonel Brandon does not seem to hare any
idea of the living's being enough to allow them to
marry. "
" The Colonel is a ninny, my dear ; because he
has two thousand a-year himself, he thinks that no-
body else can marry on less. Take my word for it,
that, if I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at Dela-
ford Parsonage before Michaelmas ; and I am sure I
shan't go if Lucy an't there. "
Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the proba-
bility of their not waiting for anything more.
117
CHAPTER XI.
Edward having carried hia thanks to Colonel
Brandon, proceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and
such was the excess of it by the time he reached
Bartlett's Buildings, that she was able to assure Mrs.
Jennings, who called on her again the next day with
her congratulations, that she had never seen him in
such spirits before in her life.
Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at
least very certain; and she joined Mrs. Jennings
most heartily in her expectation of their being all
comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before
Michaelmas. So far was she, at the same time, from
any backwardness to give Elinor that credit which
Edward would give her, that she spoke of her friend-
ship for them both with the most grateful warmth,
was ready to own all their obligation to her, and
openly declared that no exertion for their good on
Miss Dashwood's part, either present or future, would
ever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing
anything in the world for those she really valued. As
for Colonel Brandon, she was not only ready to wor-
ihip him as a saint, but was moreover truly anxious
hat he should be treated as one in all worldly con-
erns ; anxious that his tithes should be raised to the
tmost; and secretly resolved to avail herself at Dc-
ford, as far as she possibly could, of his servants,
i carriage, his cows, and his poultry.
118 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
It was now above a week since John Dashwood
had called in Berkeley-street, and as since that time
no notice had been taken by them of his wife's in»
disposition, beyond one verbal inquiry, Elinor began
to feel it necessary to pay her a visit. This was an
obligation, however, which not only opposed her
own inclination, but which had not the assistance of
any encouragement from her companions. Marianne,
not contented with absolutely refusing to go herself,
was very urgent to prevent her sister's going at all ;
and Mrs. Jennings, though her carriage was always
at Elinor's service, so very much disliked Mrs. John
Dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how
she looked after the late discovery, nor her strong
desire to affront her by taking Edward's part, could
overcome her unwillingness to be in her company
again. The consequence was, that Elinor set out
by herself to pay a visit, for which no one could
have really less inclination, and to run the risk of a
tete-a-tete with a woman whom neither of the
others had so much reason to dislike.
Mrs. Dashwood was denied ; but before the car-
riage could turn from the house, her husband acci-
dentally came out He expressed great pleasure in
meeting Elinor, told her that he had been just going
to call in Berkeley-street, and assuring her that
Fanny would be very glad to see her, invited her to
come in.
They walked up stairs into the drawing-room.—
Nobody was there. —
" Fanny is in her own room, I suppose, " said he j —
M I will go to her presently, for I am sure she will
SENSE AMD SENSIBILITY. 119
not have the least objection in the world to seeing
you — very far from it indeed. Now especially there
cannot be — but however, you and Marianne were
always great favourites. — Why would not Marianne
comcP " —
Elinor made what excuse she could for her.
«« I am not sorry to see you alone,'1 he replied,
" for I have a good deal to say to you. This living
of Colonel Brandon's— can it be true P — has he really
given it to Edward P — I heard it yesterday by chance,
and was coming to you on purpose to inquire farther
about it. "
" It is perfectly true. — Colonel Brandon has given
the living of Dclaford to Edward. "
" Really ! — Well, this is very astonishing ! — no
relationship! — no connexion between them! — and
now that livings fetch such a price ! — what was the
value of this P w
" About two hundred a-ycar. "
41 Very well — and for the next presentation to a
living of that value — supposing the late incumbent
to have been old and sickly, and likely to vacate
it soon — he might have got, I dare say — four-
teen hundred pounds. And how came he not to
have settled that matter before this person's deatli P —
Now indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a man
of Colonel Brandon's sense! — I wonder ho should
be so improvident in a point of such common, such
natural concern ! — Well, I am convinced that there
is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human
character. I suppose, however— on recollection —
that the case may probably be this. Edward is only
120 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
to hold the living till the person to whom the Colonel
has really sold the presentation is old enough to take
it. — Ay, ay, that is the fact, depend upon it. "
Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively;
and hy relating that she had herself been employed
in conveying the offer from Colonel Brandon to Ed-
ward, and therefore must understand the terms on
which it was given, obliged him to submit to her
authority.
" It is truly astonishing ! " — he cried, after hear-
ing what she said — « what could be the Colonel's
motive ? "
" A very simple one — to be of use to Mr. Ferrars. "
. " Well, well ; whatever Colonel Brandon may be,
Edward is a very lucky man ! You will not men-
tion the matter to Fanny, however; for though I have
broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well, she will
not like to hear it much talked of. "
Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from ob-
serving, that she thought Fanny might have borne
with composure an acquisition of wealth to her bro-
ther, by which neither she nor her child could be
possibly impoverished.
" Mrs. Ferrars, " added he, lowering his voice to
the tone becoming so important a subject, " knows
nothing about it at present, and I believe it will be
best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as
may be. " When the marriage takes place, I fear she
must hear of it all/'
" But why should such precaution be used? —
Though it is not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars
can have the smallest satisfaction in knowing that her
8EN9E AND SENSIBILITY. 121
son haft money enough to live upon,— for that must
bo quite out of the question ; yet why, after her late
behaviour, i« she supposed to feel at all? She has
done with her son, she has cast him off for ever, and
has made all those over whom she had any influence
cast him oil'likewise. Surely, after doing ho, she
cannot be imagined liable to any impression of sor-
row or of joy on his account — she cannot be interested
in anything that befaln him. She would not be ho
weak as to throw away the comfort of a child, ami
yet retain the anxiety of a parent! "
•'Al\ ! Elinor, " said John, " your reasoning is very
good, but it is founded on ignorance of human na-
ture " When Edward's unhappy match takes place,
depend upon it his mother will feel as much nn if
*he had never discarded him ; and therefore every
circumstance that may accelerate that dreadful event,
must be concealed from her as much as possible. M rs.
Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son. "
" You surprise me ; I should think it must nearly
have escaped her memory by this time. "
" You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs. Ferrars is
one of the most affectionate mothers in the world. "
Elinor wuh silent.
'* \Yc think now, " said Mrs. Dash wood, after a
short pauric, " of Itobert's marrying Miss Morton. "
Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive import-
ance of her brother's tone, calmly replied, —
*'The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the
affair. "
" Choice ! — how do you mean P M
" I only mean, that 1 suppose from your manner
122 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of speaking, it must be the same to Miss Morton
whether she marry Edward or Robert. "
" Certainly, there can be no difference ; for Ro-
bert will now to all intents and purposes be con-
sidered as the eldest son ; and as to anything else,
they are both very agreeable young men — I do not
know that one is superior to the other. "
Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short
time silent. His reflections ended thus :
" Of one thing, my dear sister, " kindly taking her
hand, and speaking in an awful whisper, " I may
assure you ; and I will do it, because I know it mutt
gratify you. I have good reason to think — indeed I
have it from the best authority, or I should not re-
peat it, for otherwise it would be very wrong to say
anything about it — but I have it from the very best
authority — not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Fer-
rars say it herself, but her daughter did, and I hare
it from her — That, in short, whatever objections
there might be against a certain — a certain con-
nexion — you understand me — it would have been far
preferable to her, it would not have given her half
the vexation that this does. I was exceedingly
pleased to hear that Mrs. Ferrars considered it in
that light — a very gratifying circumstance, you know,
to us all.'It would have been beyond comparison,'
she said, « the least evil of the two, and she would be
glad to compound now for nothing worse.'But,
however, all that is quite out of the question — not to
be thought of or mentioned ; as to any attachment,
you know — it never could be — all that is gone by.
But I thought I would just tell you of this, because
•BKII AND UMIUILITT. 123
I knew how much it must please you. Not that
yon hare any reason to regret, my deer Elinor.
There ia no doubt of your doing exceedingly well —
quite aa well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.
Haa Colonel Brandon been with you lately P "
Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her
vanity and raise her self-importance, to agitate her
nerves and All her mind j and she was therefore glad
to be spared from the necessity of saying much in
reply herself, and from the danger of hearing any-
thing more from her brother, by the entrance of Mr.
Robert Ferrari. After a few moments'chat, John
Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet unin-
formed of his sister's being there, quitted the room
in quest of her ; and Elinor was left to improve her
acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gay unconcern,
the happy self-complacency of his manner while en-
joying so unfair a division of his mother's love and
liberality, to the prejudice of his banished brother,
earned only by his own dissipated course of life, and
that brother's integrity, was confirming her most un-
favourable opinion of his head and heart.
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves,
before he began to speak of Edward } for he too had
heard of the living, and was very inquisitive on the
subject. Elinor repeated the particulars of it, as she
had given them to John, and their effect on Robert,
though very different, was not less striking than it
had been on him. He laughed most immoderately.
The idea of Edward's being a clergyman, and living
in a small parsonage-house, diverted him beyond
measure j and when to that was added the fanciful
124 9ENSB AND SENSIBILITY.
imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white sur-
plice, and publishing the banns of marriage between
John Smith and Mary Brown, he could conceive no-
thing more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she waited in silence, and immovable
gravity, the conclusion of such folly, could not re-
strain her eyes from being fixed on him with a look
that spoke all the contempt it excited. It was a look,
however, very well bestowed, for it relieved her own
feelings, and gave no intelligence to him. He was
recalled from wit to wisdom, not by any reproof of
hers, but by his own sensibility.
" We may treat it as a joke, 1 * said he at last, re-
covering from the affected laugh which had con-
siderably lengthened out the genuine gaiety of the
moment — " but, upon my soul, it is a most serious
business. Poor Edward ! he is ruined for ever. I
am extremely sorry for it — for I know him to be l
very good-hearted creature ; as well-meaning a fel-
low, perhaps, as any in the world. Ton must not
judge of him, Miss Dashwood, from your slight ac-
quaintance. Poor Edward ! His manners are cer-
tainly not the happiest in nature. But we are not
all born, you know, with the same powers — the same
address. Poor fellow! to see him in a circle of
strangers ! — to be sure it was pitiable enough ! — but,
upon my soul, I believe he has as good a heart as any
in the kingdom ; and I declare and protest to you I
never was so shocked in my life, as when it all burst
forth. I could not believe it. My mother was the
first person who told me of it, and I feeling myself
called on to act with resolution, immediately said to
*EKSB AMD SENSIBILITY. 125
her, * My dear madam, I do not know what you may
intend to do on the occasion, but M for myself, I
must say, that if Edward does marry this young
woman, I never will see him again.'That was what
I eaid immediately,— • I was most uncommonly
■hocked indeed I—Poor Edward J— he has done for
himself completely I— shut himself out for ever from
all decent society ! — but, as I directly said to my
mother, I am not in the least surprised at it j from his
style of education it was always to be expected. My
poor mother was half frantic. "
" Hare you ever seen the lady ? n
" Yes, once ; while she was staying in this house,
I happened to drop in for ten minutes ; and 1 saw
quite enough of her. The merest awkward country
girl, without style, or elegance, and almost without
beauty. I remember her perfectly. Just the kind
of girl I should suppose likely to captivate poor Ed-
ward. I offered immediately, as Boon as my mother
related the affair to me, to talk to him myself, and
dissuade him from the mateh ; but it was too late
then, I found, to do anything, for unluckily, I was
not in the way at first, and knew nothing of it till
after the breach had taken place, when it was not
for me, you know, to interfere. But had I been in-
formed of it a few hours earlier, I think it is most
probable that something might haTe been hit on.
I certainly should have represented it to Edward in
a very strong light'My dear fellow/ I should have
said,'consider what you are doing. You are mak-
ing a most disgraceful connexion, and such a one
as your family are unanimous in disapproving. I
126 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
cannot help thinking, in short, that means might
have been found. Bat now it is all too late. He
must be starved, you know ; that is certain ; abso-
lutely starved. "
He had just settled this point with great compo-
sure, when the entrance of Mrs. John Dashwood pot
an end to the subject. But though the never spoke
of it out of her own family, Elinor could see its in-
fluence on her mind, in the something like confu-
sion of countenance with which she entered, and an
attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself!
She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find
that Elinor and her sister were so soon to leave
town, as she had hoped to see more of them ; an
exertion in which her husband, who attended her
into the room, and hung enamoured over her accents,
seemed to distinguish everything that was most
affectionate and graceful.
CHAPTER XII.
One other call in Harley-street, a short and take-
leave call, in which Elinor received her brother's
congratulations, on their travelling so far towards
Barton without any expense, and on Colonel Bran-
don's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 127
wo, completed the intercourse of the brother and
liters in town ; and a faint invitation from Fanny,
o come to Norland whenever it should happen to
« in their way, which of all things was the most
inlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less
•ublic, assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promp-
itude with which he should come to see her at
telaford, was all that foretold any meeting in the
ountry.
It amused her to observe that all her friends
eemed determined to send her to Delaford ; a place,
i which, of all others, she would now least choose
Tisit, or wish to reside ; for not only was it con-
idered as her future home by her brother and Mrs.
ennings, but even Lucy, when they parted, gave
ler a pressing invitation to visit her there.
Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day,
le two parties from Hanover-square and Berkeley-
treet set out from their respective homes, to meet,
y appointment, on the road. For the convenience
f Charlotte and her child, they were to be more
lan two days on their journey, and Mr. Palmer,
ravelling- more expeditiously with Colonel Brandon,
is to join them at Cleveland soon after their arival.
Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort
1 London, and eager as she had long been to quit
, could not, when it came to the point, bid adieu to
le house in which she had for the last time enjoyed
lose hopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby,
'hich were now extinguished for ever, without great
ain. Nor could she leave the place in which
Willoughby remained, busy in new engagements,
128 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
and new schemes, in which she could have no share,
without shedding many tears.
Elinor's satisfaction at the moment of removal,
was more positive. She had no such object for her
lingering thoughts to fix on, she left no creature be-
hind from whom it would give her a moment's re-
gret to be divided for ever, she was pleased to be
free herself from the persecution of Lucy's friendship,
she was grateful for bringing her sister away unseen
by Willoughby since his marriage, and she looked
forward with hope to what a few months of tran
quillity at Barton might do towards restoring Mari
anne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.
Their journey was safely performed. The second
day brought them into the cherished, or the prohi-
bited, county of Somerset, for as such was it dwelt
on by turns in Marianne's imagination } and in the
forenoon of the third they drove up to Cleveland.
Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house,
situated on a sloping lawn. It had no park, but the
pleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive ; and like
every other place of the same degree of importance,
it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood-walk ; a
road of smooth gravel winding round a plantation
led to the front ; the lawn was dotted over with tim
berj the house itself was under the guardianship c
the fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thic
screen of them altogether, interspersed with t*
Lombardy poplars, shut out the offices*
Marianne entered the house with a heart sw <
ing with emotion from the consciousness of be
only eighty miles from Barton, and not thirty f)
SENSE AND 8ENS1B1LITY. 129
Combe Magna ; and before she had been five minutes
within its walls, while the others were busily help-
ing Charlotte show her child to the housekeeper, hIic
quitted it. again, stealing away through the winding
shrubberies, now just beginning to bo in beauty, to
gain a distant eminence ; where, from its Grecian
temple, her eye, wandering over a wide tract of
country to the south-cast, could fondly rest on the
farthest ridge of hills in the horizon, and fancy that
from their summits Combe Magna might be seen.
In such moments of precious, of invaluable misery,
she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ;
and as she returned by a different circuit to the
house, feeling all the happy privilege of country li-
berty, of wandering from place to place in free and
luxurious solitude, she resolved to spend almost every
hour of every day while she remained with the Pal-
mers, in the indulgence of such solitary rambles.
She returned just in time to join the others as they
quitted the house, on an excursion through its more
immediate premises; and the rest of the morning
was easily vvhiled away, in lounging round the
kitchen garden, examining the bloom upon its walls,
and listening to the gardener's lamentations upon
blights, — in dawdling through the green-house,
where the loss of her favourite plants, uirwvrily ex-
posed, and nipped by the lingering frost, raised the
laughter of Charlotte, — and in visiting her poultry-
yard, where in the disappointed hopes of her dairy-
maid, by hens foisuking their nests, or being stolen
by a fox, or in the rapid decease of a promising young
brood, she found fresh sources of merriment.
I VOL. II.
130 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in
her plan of employment abroad, had not calculated for
any change of weather during their stay at Cleve-
land. With great surprise, therefore, did she find
herself prevented by a settled rain from going out
again after dinner. She had depended on a twilight
walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all over
the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp
would not have deterred her from it; but a heavy
and settled rain even she could not fancy dry or
pleasant weather for walking.
Their party was small, and the hours passed
quietly away. Mrs. Palmer had the child, and Mrs.
Jennings her carpet-work; they talked of the
friends they had left behind, arranged Lady Middle-
ton's engagements, and wondered whether Mr. Pal-
mer and Colonel Brandon would get farther than
Reading that night. Elinor, however little con-
cerned in it, joined in their discourse, and Marianne,
who had the knack of finding her way in every
house to the library, however it might be avoided by
the family in general, soon procured herself a book.
Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side, that
constant and friendly good-humour could do, to
make them feel themselves welcome. The openness
and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for
that want of recollection and elegance, which made
her often deficient in the forms of politeness ; her
kindness, recommended by so pretty a face, was en-
gaging ; her folly, though evident, was not conceited ;
and Elinor could have forgiven everything but her
laugh.
I
SBNfll AND 8ENSIBIL1TT. 131
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very
late dinner, affording a pleasant enlargement of tho
party, and a very welcome variety to their conversa-
tion, which a long morning of the tame continued
rain had reduced very low.
Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in
that little had seen so much variety in his address to
her sister and herself, that she knew not what to ex-
pect to find him in his own family. She found him,
however, perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to
all his visiters, and only occasionally rude to his wife
and her mother ; she found hira very capable of be-
ing a pleasant companion, and only prevented from
being so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy
himself as much superior to people in general, as lie
must feel himself to be to Mrs. Jennings and Char-
lotte. For tho rest of his character and habits, they
were marked, as far as Elinor could perceive, with
no traits at all unusual in his sex and time of life.
He was nice in his eating, uncertain in his hours ;
fond of his child, though affecting to slight it ; and
idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to
have been devoted to business. She liked him, how-
ever, upon the whole, much better than she had ex-
pected, and in her heart was not sorry that she could
like him no more ; not sorry to be driven by the ob-
servation of his epicurism, his selfishness, and his
conceit, to rest with complacency on the remembrance
of Edward's generous temper, simple taste, and diffi-
dent feelings.
Of Edward, or at least of some of his concern?,
she now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon,
132 8EH8B AKD JEH81BILITY.
who had been into Dorsetshire lately; and who,
treating her at once as the disinterested friend of Mr.
Ferrars, and the kind confidant of himself, talked to
her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford, de-
scribed its deficiencies, and told her what he meant
to do himself towards removing them. His beha-
viour to her in this as well as in every other particu-
lar, his open pleasure in meeting her after an absence
of only ten days, his readiness to converse with her,
and his deference for her opinion, might very well
justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment,
and would have been enough, perhaps, had not Eli-
nor still, as from the first, believed Marianne his
real favourite, to make her suspect it herself. But
as it was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered her
head, except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion ; and she
could not help believing herself the nicer observer
of the two ; she watched his eyes, while Mrs. Jen-
nings thought only of his behaviour ; and while his
looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling in
her head and throat the beginning of a heavy cold,
because unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the
latter lady's observation, the could discover in them
the quick feelings and needless alarm of a lover.
Two delightful twilight walks on the third and
fourth evenings of her being there, not merely 01
the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but all over tb
grounds, and especially in the most distant par
of them, where there was something more of wil
ness than in the rest, where the trees were the olde
and the grass was the longest and wettest, had
assisted by the still greater imprudence of sittinf
tBNSB AMD 1BNBIBILITY. 133
her wet shoes and stockings — given Marianne a cold
so Tiolent, as, though- for a day or two trifled with or
denied, would force itself by increasing ailments on
the concern of eyerybody, and the notice of herself.
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and, as
usual, were all declined. Though heavy and fever-
ish, with a pain in her limbs, a cough, and a sore
throat, a good night's rest was to cure her entirely ;
and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on
her, when she went to bed, to try one or two of the
simplest of the remedies.
CHAPTER XIII.
Marianne got up the next morning at her usual
time ; to every inquiry replied that she was bettor,
and tried to prove herself so, by engaging in her uc-
customary employments. But a day spent in sitting
shivering over the fire with a book in her hand
which she was unable to read, or in lying, weary and
languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour of
her amendment ; and when, at last, she went early
to bed, more and more indisposed, Colonel Brandon
was only astonished at her sister's composure, who,
though attending and nursing her the whole day,
against Marianne's inclination, and forcing proper
134 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
medicines on her at night, trusted like Marianne to
the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and felt no real
alarm.
A very restless and feyerish night, howerer, dis-
appointed the expectation of both ; and when Ma-
rianne, after persisting in rising, confessed herself
unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to her bed,
Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's ad-
vice, of sending for the Palmers'apothecary.
He came, examined his patient, and though en-
couraging Miss Dashwood to expect that a very few
days would restore her sister to health, yet by pro-
nouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and
by allowing the word " infection " to pass his lips,
gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer on her baby's
account. Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclined
from the first to think Marianne's complaint more
serious than Elinor, now looked very grave on Mr.
Harris's report, and confirming Charlotte's fears and
caution, urged the necessity of her immediate re-
moval with the infant; and Mr. Palmer, though
treating their apprehensions as idle, found the
anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be
withstood. Her departure was therefore fixed on j
and within an hour after Mr. Harris's arrival, she
set off, with her little boy and his nurse, for the house
of a near relation of Mr. Palmer's who liyed a few
miles on the other side of Bath ; whither her husband
promised, at her earnest entreaty, to join her in a day
or two ; and whither she was almost equally urgent
with her mother to accompany her. Mrs. Jennings,
however, with a kindness of heart which made
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 135
ir really love her, declared her resolution of
stirring from Cleveland as long as Marianne
ined ill, and of endeavouring, by her own att en-
care, to supply to her the place of tho mother
had taken her from ; and Elinor found her on
ry occasion a most willing and active helpmate,
irous to share in all her fatigues, and often, by her
,ter experience in nursing, of muterial use.
Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature
her malady, and feeling herself universally ill,
mid no longer hope that to-morrow would And her
^covered ; and the idea of what to-morrow would
lave produced, hut for this unlucky illness, made
jyery ailment more severe; for on that day they
Hrerc to have begun their Journey home, and, at-
tended the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jen-
nings, wero to have tuken their mother by surprise
on the following forenoon. The little that she Niiid,
was all in lamentation of this inevitable delay ;
though Elinor tried to raise her spirits, and make
her believe, as she then really believed herself, that
it would bo a very short one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in
tho state of the patient; she certainly waH not
better, and except that there was no amendment,
did not appear worse. Their party was now
farther reduced; for Mr. Palmer, though very un-
willing to go, as well from real humanity and good-
nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be fright-
ened away by his wife, was persuaded at last by
Colonel Brandon to perform his promise of following
her; and while he was preparing to go, Colonel
136 SENSE AND 8EN3IBILITY.
Brandon himself, with a much greater exertion, be-
gan to talk of going likewise. Here, however, the
kindness of Mrs. Jennings interposed most accep-
tably ; for to send the Colonel away while his love
was in so much uneasiness on her sister's account,
would be to deprive them both, she thought, of every
comfort ; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself, that she
should want him to play at piquet of an evening
while Miss Dash wood was above with her sister, & c.
she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who
was gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a
compliance, could not long even affect to demur;
especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty was warmly
seconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief
to himself in leaving behind him a person so well
able to assist or advise Miss Dashwood in any emer-
gency.
Marianne was of course kept in ignorance of all
these arrangements. She knew not that she had
been the means of sending the owners of Cleveland
away, in about seven days from the time of their
arrival. It gave her no surprise that she saw nothing
of Mrs. Palmer ; and as it gave her likewise no con-
cern, she never mentioned her name.
Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Pal-
mer's departure, and her situation continued, with
little variation, the same. Mr. Harris, who attended
her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery,
and M iss Dashwood was equally sanguine ; but the
expectation of the others was by no means so cheer-
ful. Mrs. Jennings had determined very early in the

•BVIB AMD MUSIBILITY. 137
leisure that Marianne would never get over it, and
'Colonel Brandon, who waa chiefly of use in listening
to Mrs. Jennings's forebodings, was not in a state of
mind to resist their influence. He tried to reason
himself out of fears which the different judgment of
the apothecary seemed to render absurd j but the
many hours of each day in which he was left entirely
•lone were but too favourable for the admission of
erery melancholy idea, and he could not expel from
his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne
no more*
On the morning of the third day, however, the
gloomy anticipations of both were almost done away ;
for when Mr. Harris arrived, he declared his patient
materially better. Her pulse was much stronger
and every symptom more favourable than on the pre-
ceding visit Elinor, confirmed in every pleasant
hope, was all cheerfulness ; rejoicing that in her
letters to her mother, she had pursued her own judg-
ment rather than her friend's, in making very light
of the indisposition which delayed them at Cleveland,
and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would
be able to travel.
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it be-
gan. Towards the evening, Marianne became ill
again, growing more heavy, restless, and uncomfort-
able than before. Her sister, however, still sanguine,
was willing to attribute the change to nothing more
£han the fatigue of having sat up to have her bed
made ; and carefully administering the cordials pre-
scribed, saw her with satisfaction sink at last into a
slumber, from which she expected the most benefit
138 SENSE AND 8EN8IBILITT.
cial effects. Her sleep, though not so quit
nor wished to see it, lasted a considerable ti
anxious to observe the result of it herselj
solved to sit with her during the whole of
Jennings, knowing nothing of any change i
tient, went unusually early to bed j her ir
was one of the principal nurses, was recrea
self in the housekeeper's room, and Elinor :
alone with Marianne.
The repose of the latter became more i
disturbed ; and her sister, who watched
remitting attention her continual change of
and heard the frequent but inarticulate s
complaint which passed her lips, was almosi
to rouse her from so painful a slumber, wh
anne, suddenly awakened by some acciden
in the house, started hastily up, and, with
wildness, cried out —
" Is mamma coming P "
" Not yet, " replied the other, concealing
ror, and assisting Marianne to lie down agai
she will be here, I hope, before it is long,
great way, you know, from hence to Barton.
" But she must not go round by London
Marianne, in the same hurried manner,
never see her, if she goes to London. "
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was ]
herself, and while attempting to soothe her
felt her pulse. It was lower and quicker th
and Marianne, still talking wildly of man
alarm increased so rapidly, as to determin
sending instantly for Mr. Harris, and despa
IBHfB AMD IBNSIBILITT. 139
messenger to Barton for her mother. To consult
with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting
the latter, was a thought which immediately followed
the resolution of its performance; and as soon an alio
had rung up the maid to take her place by her sister,
■he hastened down to the dining-room, where she
knew he was generally to be found at a much later
hour than the present
It was no time for hesitation. Her fear and her
difficulties were immediately before him. Her fears,
he had no courage, no confidence to attempt the re-
moval of j— he listened to them in silent despondence;
—but her difficulties were instantly obviated, for with
a readiness that seemed to speak the occasion, and the
service pre-arranged in his mind, he offered himself
as the messenger who should fetch Mrs. Dashwood.
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily over-
come. She thanked him with brief, though fervent
gratitude, and while he went to hurry off his servant
with a message to Mr. Harris, and an order for post-
horses directly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as
Colonel Brandon— of such a companion for her mo-
ther, — how gratefully was it felt! — a companion
whose judgment would guide, whose attendance must
relieve, and whose friendship might soothe her ! — as
far as the shock of such a summons could be lessened
to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,
would lessen it.
// < ?, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted witli
all the firmness of a collected mind, made every ne-
cessary arrangement with the utmost despatch, and
140 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
calculated with exactness the time in which si
look for his return. Not a moment was lost
of any kind. The horses arrived, even bef
were expected, and Colonel Brandon only
her hand with a look of solemnity, and a fe 1
spoken too low to reach her ear, hurried i
carriage. It was then about twelve o'clock,
returned to her sister's apartment to wait fop
val of the apothecary, and to watch by her
of the night. It was a night of almost equal t
to both. Hour after hour passed away in i
pain and delirium on Marianne's side, anc
most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr.
appeared. Her apprehensions once raised,
their excess for all her former security; and
vant who sat up with her, for she would n
Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured he
by hints of what her mistress had always the
Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, i
coherently on her mother, and whenever si
tioned her name, it gave a pang to the heart
Elinor, who reproaching herself for havinj
with so many days of illness, and wretched 1
immediate relief, fancied that all relief might
in vain, that everything had been delayed t
and pictured to herself her suffering mother
too late to see this darling child, or to see her :
She was on the point of sending again
Harris, or if he could not come, for some c
vice, when the former — but not till after fiv€
— arrived. His opinion, however, made so:
amends for his delay, for though acknowh
i
flBNIB AMD IKKIIBILITY. 141
Tery unexpected and unpleuant alteration in his pa-
tient, he would not allow the danger to he material,
and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treat-
ment must procure, with a confidence which, in a
lesser degree, was communicated to Elinor. He pro-
mised to call again in the course of three or four
hours, and left both the patient and her anxious at-
tendant more composed than he had found them.
With strong concern, and with many reproaches
for not being called to their aid, did Mrs. Jennings
hear in the morning of what had passed. Her former
apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left
her no doubt of the event ; — and though trying to
speak comfort to Elinor, her conviction of her sister's
danger would not allow her to offer the comfort of
hope. Her heart was really grieved. The rapid de-
cay, the early death of a girl so young, so lovely as
Marianne, must have struck a less interested person
with concern. On Mrs. Jennings's compassion she
had other claims. She had been for three months
her companion, was still under her care, and she was
known to have been greatly injured, and long un-
happy. The distress of her sister too, particularly a
favourite, was before her ; — and as for their mother,
when Mrs. Jennings considered that Marianne might
probably be to her what Charlotte was to herself, her
sympathy in her sufferings was very sincere.
Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit ; — but
he came to be disappointed in his hopes of what tho
last would produce. His medicines had failed ; — tho
fever was unabated ; and Marianne only more quiet
—not more herself — remained in a heavy stupor.
142 8BNSE AMD SENSIBILITY.
Elinor, catching all, and more than all, hit fears in a
moment, proposed to call in farther advice. But he
judged it unnecessary ; he had still something more
to try, some fresh application, of whose success he
was almost as confident as the last, and his -visit con-
cluded with encouraging assurances which reached
the ear, hut could not enter the heart, of Miss Dash-
wood. She was calm, except when she thought of
her mother, but she was almost hopeless ; and in this
state she continued till noon, scarcely stirring an inch
from her sister's bed, her thoughts wandering from
one image of grief, one suffering friend, to another,
and her spirits oppressed to the utmost by the con-
versation of Mrs. Jennings, who scrupled not to attri-
bute the severity and danger of this attack to the
many weeks of previous indisposition which Mari-
anne's disappointment had brought on. Elinor felt
all the reasonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh
misery to her reflections.
About noon, however, she began-— but with a
caution, a dread of disappointment, which for some
time kept her silent, even to her friend — to fancy, to
hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her
sister's pulse; — she waited, watched, and examined
it again and again; — and at last, with an agitation
more difficult to bury under exterior calmness than
all her foregoing distress, ventured to communicate
her hopes. Mrs. Jennings, though forced on exa-
mination to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried
to keep her young friend from indulging a thought
of its continuance ; and Elinor, conning over eyerj
injunction of distrust, told herself likewise not tf
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 143
hope. But it was too late. Hope had already en-
tered; and feeling all its anxious flutter, she bent
over her sister to watch — she hardly knew for what.
Half an hour passed away, and the favourable sym-
ptom yet blessed her. Others even arose to confirm it.
Her breath, her skin, her lips, all flattered Elinor
with signs of amendment, and Marianne fixed her
eyes on her with a rational, though languid, gaze.
Anxiety and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees,
and left her no moment of tranquillity till the arrival
of Mr. Harris at four o'clock ; — when his assurance*,
his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even sur-
passinghis expectation, gave her confidence, comfort,
and tears of Joy.
Marianne was in every respect materially better,
and he declared her entirely out of danger. Mrs.
Jennings, perhaps satisfied with the partial justifica-
tion of her forebodings which had been found in their
late alarm, allowed herself to trust in his judgment,
and admitted with unfeigned joy, and soon with un-
equivocal cheerfulness, the probability of an entire
recovery.
Elinor could not he cheerful. Her joy was of a
different kind, and led to anything rather than to
gaiety. Marianne restored to life, health, friends,
and to her doating mother, was an idea to fill her
heart with sensations of exquisite comfort, and expand
it in fervent gratitude; — but it led to no outward de-
monstrations of joy, no words, no smiles. All within
Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.
She continued by the side of her sister with little,
intermission ihc whole afternoon, calming every fear,
144 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits, sup-
plying every succour, and watching almost every look
and every breath. The possibility of a relapse would
of course, in some moments, occur to remind her of
what anxiety was — but when she saw, on her frequent
and minute examination, that every symptom of re-
covery continued, and saw Marianne at six o'clock
sink into a quiet, steady, and to all appearance com-
fortable sleep, she silenced every doubt.
The timewas now drawing on, when Colonel Bran-
don might be expected back. At ten o'clock, she
trusted, or at least not much later, her mother would
be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she
must now be travelling towards them. The Colonel
too ! — perhaps scarcely less an object of pity! — Oh!
— how slow was the progress of time which yet kept
them in ignorance !
At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly
asleep, she joined Mrs. Jennings in the drawing-room
to tea. Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears,
and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eating
much ; — and the present refreshment, therefore, with
such feelings of content as she brought to it, was par-
ticularly welcome. Mrs. Jennings would have per-
suaded her at its conclusion to take some rest before
her mother's arrival, and allow her to take her place
by Marianne ; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue, no
capability of sleep at that moment about her, and she
was not to be kept away from her sister an unneces-
sary instant. Mrs. Jennings therefore attending her
up stairs into the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that
all continued right, left her there again to her charge
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 145
and her thoughts, and retired to her own room to
write letters and sleep.
The night was cold and stormy. The wind roared
round the house, and the rain heat against the win-
dows; but Elinor, all happiness within, regarded it
not. Marianne slept through every blast, and the.
travellers — they had a rich reward in store, for every
present inconvenience.
The clock struck eight. Had it been ten, Elinor
would have been convinced that at that moment she
heard a carriage driving up to the house ; and so
strong was the persuasion that she did, in spite of the
almost impossibility of their being already come, that
she moved into tho adjoining dressing-closet and
opened a window-shutter, to be satisfied of the truth.
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived her.
The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in
view. By their uncertain light she thought she could
discern it to be drawn by four horses ; and this, while
it told the excess of her poor mother's alarm, pave
some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.
Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult
to be calm, as at that moment. The knowledge of
what her mother must bo feeling as the carriage
stopped at the door, — of her doubt — her dread — per-
haps her despair! — and of what she had to tell! —
with such knowledge it was impossible to be calm.
All that remained to be done was to be speedy ; and
therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs. Jen-
nings's maid with her sister, she hurried down
stairs.
The bustle in the vestibule, as she paused along
K VOL. II.
146 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
an inner lobby, assured her that they were already
in the house. She rushed forwards towards the
drawing-room, — she entered it, — and saw only " Wil-
loughby.
CHAPTER XIV.
Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the
Bight of him, obeyed the first impulse of her heart in
turning instantly to quit the room, and her hand was
already on the lock, when its action was suspended
by his hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather
of command than supplication,
" Miss Dashwood, for half an hour — for ten mi-
nutes — I entreat you to stay. "
" No, sir, " she replied with firmness, " I shall not
stay. Your business cannot be with me. The ser-
vants, I suppose, forgot to tell you that Mr. Palmer
was not in the house. "
" Had they told me, " he cried with vehemence,
*« that Mr. Palmer and all his relations were at the
devil, it would not have turned me from the door.
My business is with you, and only you. "
" With me ! " — in the utmost amazement — " well,
sir — be quick — and if you can — less violent.'*
" Sit down, and I will be both. "
She hesitated; she knew not what to do. Th <
SIN8K AND 8EN8IBIUTT. 147
possibility of Colonel Brandon's arriving and finding
him there, came across her. But she had promised
to hear him, and her curiosity no less than her ho-
nour was engaged. After a moment's recollection,
therefore, concluding that prudence required des-
patch, and that her acquiescence would best promote
it, she walked silently towards the table, and sat
down. He took the opposite chair, and for half a
minute not a word was said by either.
u Pray be quick, sir, " said Elinor impatiently —
u I have no time to spare. "
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation,
and seemed not to hear her.
" Your sister, " said he, with abruptness, a moment
afterwards — •* is out of danger. I heard it from the
servant. God be praised I-- But is it trueP — is it
really true P "
Elinor would not speak. He repeated the inquiry
with yet greater eagerness.
" For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is
she not P "
«'We hope she is. "
He rose up, and walked across the room.
" Had I known as much half an hour ago — But
since I am here " — speaking with a forced vivacity as
he returned to his seat — " what does it signify ? — »
For once, Miss Dashwood — it will be the last time,
perhaps— let us be cheerful together. — I am in a fine
mood for gaiety. — Tell me honestly " — a deeper glow
overspreading his cheeks — " do you think me most a
knave or a fool P "
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment
148 SENSE AND 8EN8IBILITT.
than ever. She began to think that he must be in
liquor ; — the strangeness of such a visit, and of such
manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible ; and with
this impression she immediately rose, saying,
" Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to re-
turn to Combe. I am not at leisure to remain with
you longer. Whatever your business may be with
me, it will be better recollected and explained to-
morrow. "
" I understand you, " he replied, with an expres-
sive smile, and a voice perfectly calm.'* Yes, I am
very drunk. A pint of porter with my cold beef at
Marlborough was enough to overset me. "
" At Marlborough ! " cried Elinor, more and more
at a loss to understand what he would be at,
" Tes — I left London this morning at eight
o'clock, and the only ten minutes I have spent out
of my chaise since that time procured me a noon-
chine at Marlborough. "
The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence
of his eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that what-
ever other unpardonable folly might bring him to
Cleveland, he was not brought there by Intoxication,
she said, after a moment's recollection,
" Mr. Willoughby, you ought to feel, and I ceN
tainly do — that after what has passed — your coming
here in this manner, and forcing yourself upon my
notice, requires a very particular excuse. WTiat is it
that you mean by it P "
" I mean, " said he with serious energy, «« if I can,
to make you hate me one degree less than you do
now, I mean to offer some kind of explanation,
8EN8B AND 8EN8IBILITT. 149
fome kind of apology, for the past — to open my
whole heart to you, and by convincing you, that
though I have been always a blockhead, I have not
been always a rascal, to obtain something like for-
giveness from Ma — from your sister. "
" Is this the real reason of your coming? "
tf Upon my soul it is, " — was his answer, with a
warmth which brought all the former Willoughby to
her remembrance, and in spite of herself made her
think him sincere.
" If that is all, you may be satisfied already, — for
Marianne does — she has long forgiven you. "
*'Has she ! " — he cried, in the same eager tone. — •
" Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have
£one it. But she shall forgive me again, and on more
reasonable grounds. Now will you listen to me ?*'
Elinor bowed her assent.
fi I do not know, 1'said he, after a pause of expec-
tation on her side, and though tfulness on his own, —
" how you may have accounted for my behaviour to
your sister, or what diabolical motive you may have
imputed to me. — Perhaps you will hardly think the
better of me, — it is worth the trial however, and you
shall hear everything. — When I first became intimate
in your family, I had no other intention, no other
yiew in the acquaintance than to pass my time plea-
santly while I was obliged to remain in Devonshire,
more pleasantly than I had ever done before. Your
sister's lovely person and interesting manners could
not but please me ; and her behaviour to me, almost
from the first, was of a kind It is astonishing,
when I reflect on what it was, and what she was, that
150 «EN8I AND SENSIBILITY.
my heart should have been bo insensible I — Bat si
first, I must confess, my vanity only was elevated by
it. Careless of her happiness, thinking'only of my
own amusement, giving way to feelings which I had
always been too much in the habit of indulging, I
endeavoured, by every means in my power, to make
myself pleasing to her, without any design of return-
ing her affection/'
Miss Dashwood at this point, turning her eyes on
him with the most angry contempt, stopped him, by
saying,
" It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for
you to relate, or for me to listen any longer. Such
a beginning as this cannot be followed by anything.
—Do not let me be pained by hearing anything mora
on the subject. "
" I insist on your hearing the whole of it, " he re-
plied. " My fortune was never large, and I had
always been expensive, always in the habit of asso-
ciating with people of better income than myself.
Every year since my coming of age, or even before, I
believe, had added to my debts; and though the
death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set me
free, yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far
distant, it had been for some time my intention to re*
establish my circumstances by marrying a woman of
fortune. To attach myself to your sister, therefore,
was not a thing to be thought of $ — and with a mean-
ness, selfishness, cruelty — which no indignant, no
contemptuous look, even of yours, Miss Dashwood,
can ever reprobate too much — I was acting in this
manner, trying to engage her regard, without a thought

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 151
of returning it. But one thing may be said for me,
even in that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not
know the extent of the injury I meditated, because I
did not then know what it was to love. But have I
ever known it P — Well may it be doubted; for, had I
really loved, could I have sacrificed my feelings to
vanity, to avarice P — or, what is more, could I have
sacrificed hersP — But I have done it. To avoid a
comparative poverty, which her affection and her so-
ciety would have deprived of all its horrors, I have,
by raising myself to affluence, lost everything that
could make it a blessing. "
" You did then, " said Elinor, a little softened,
'* believe yourself at one time attached to her. "
•• To have resisted such attractions, to have with-
stood such tenderness! — Is there a man on earth who
could have done it ! — Yes, I found myself, by insen-
sible degrees, sincerely fond of her; and the happiest
hours of my life were what I spent with her, when I
felt my intentions were strictly honourable, and my
feelings blameless. Even then, however, when fully
determined on paying my addresses to her, I allowed
myself most improperly to put off, from day to day,
the moment of doing it, from an unwillingness to en-
ter into an engagement while my circumstances were
so greatly embarrassed. I will not reason here — nor
will I stop for you to expatiate on the absurdity, and
the worse than absurdity, of scrupling to engage my
faith where my honour was already bound. The event
has proved, that I was a cunning fool, providing with
great circumspection for a possible opportunity of
making myself contemptible and wretched for ever.
152 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
At last, however, my resolution was taken, and I had
determined, as soon as I could engage her alone, to
justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her,
and openly assure her of an affection which I had
already taken such pains to denote. But in the in-
terim — in the interim of the very few hours that were
to pass, before I could have an opportunity of speak-
ing with her in private — a circumstance occurred —
an unlucky circumstance, to ruin all my resolution,
and with it all my comfort. A discovery took place, "
— here he hesitated and looked down. — " Mrs. Smith
had somehow or other been informed, I imagine by
some distant relation, whose interest it was to deprive
me of her favour, of an affair, a connexion — but I
need not explain myself farther/'he added, looking
at her with a heightened colour and an inquiring
eye, " your particular intimacy — you have probably
heard the whole story long ago. "
" I have, " returned Elinor, colouring likewise,
and hardening her heart anew against any compas-
sion for him, " I have heard it all. And how you
will explain away any part of your guilt in that
dreadful business, I confess is beyond my compre-
hension. "
" Remember, " cried Willoughby, " from whom
you received the account. Could it be an impartial
one? I acknowledge that her situation and her
character ought to have been respected by me. I
do not mean to justify myself, but at the same time
cannot leave you to suppose that I have nothing to
urge, — that because Hhe was injured, she was irre-
proachable — and because 1 was a libertine, she must
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 153
be a saint. If the violence of her passion, the weak-
ness of her understanding — I do not mean, how-
ever, to defend myself. Her affection for me de-
served better treatment, and I often, with grout self-
reproach, recall the tenderness which, for a very short
time, had the power of creating any return. I wish
— 1 heartily wish it had never been. But I have
injured more than herself; and I have injured one
whose affection for me (may I say itP) was scarcely
less warm than hers, and whose mind — Oli ! how
infinitely superior! " —
** Your indifference, however, towards that unfor-
tunate girl — I must say it, unpleasant to me as the
discussion of such a subject may well be — your in-
difference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her.
Do not think yourself excused by any weakness, any
natural defect of understanding on her side, in the
wanton cruelty so evident on yours. You must have
known, that while you were enjoying yourself in
Devonshire, pursuing fresh schemes, always gay,
always happy, she was reduced to the extremest in-
digence. "
** But, upon my soul, I did not know it, " he wnrnily
replied; " I did not recollect that I had omitted to
give her my direction ; and common sense might have
told her how to find it out. "
« Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith ?'*
" She taxed me with the offence at once, and my
confusion may be guessed. The purity of her life,
the formality of her notions, her ignorance of the
world — everything was against me.'The matter
itself I could not deny, and vain was every endeavour
154 SEME AND 8EN8lBtLITT.
to soften it. She was previously disposed, I believe,
to doubt the morality of my conduct in general, and
was moreover discontented with the very little at-
tention, the very little portion of my time that I had
bestowed on her, in my present visit. In short, it
ended in a total breach. By one measure I might
have saved myself. In the height of her morality,
good woman ! she offered to forgive the past, if I
would marry Eliza. That could not be — and I was
formally dismissed from her favour and her house.
The night following this affair — I was to go the next
morning — was spent by me in deliberating on what
my future conduct should be. The struggle was
great — but it ended too soon. My affection for
Marianne, my thorough conviction of her attachment
to me — it was all insufficient to outweigh that dread
of poverty, or get the better of those false ideas of
the necessity of riches, which I was naturally in-
clined to feel, and expensive society had increased.
I had reason to believe myself secure of my present
wife, if I chose to address her, and I persuaded my-
self to think that nothing else in common prudence
remained for me to do. A heavy scene however
awaited me, before I could leave Devonshire; — I
was engaged to dine with you on that very day
some apology was therefore necessary for my break-
ing the engagement. But whether I should write
this apology, or deliver it in person, was a point oi
long debate. To see Marianne, I felt would be
dreadful, and I even doubted whether I could see her
again, and keep to my resolution. In that point,
however, I undervalued my own magnanimity, u
•Mil AMD SBKSIBILITT. 155
the event declared ; for I went, I saw her, and saw
her miserable, and left her miserable — and left her,
hoping never to see her again. "
" Why did yon call, Bfr.WilloughbyP* said Elinor,
reproachfully ; M a note would have answered every
purpose. " Why was it necessary to call ? n
'« It was necessary to my own pride. I could not
bear to leave the country in a manner that might
lead you, or the rest of the neighbourhood, to sua*
pect any part of what had really passed between
Mrs. Smith and myself, and I resolved therefore on
calling at the cottage, in my way to Honiton. The
sight of your dear sister, however, was really dread-
ful ; and to heighten the matter, I found her alone.
You were all gone, I do not know where. I had
left her only the evening before, so fully, so firmly
resolved within myself on doing right ! A few hours
were to have engaged her to me for ever ; and I re*
member how happy, how gay were my spirits, as I
walked from the cottage to Allenham, satisfied with
myself, delighted with everybody ! But in this, our
last interview of friendship, I approached her with a
sense of guilt that almost took from me the power of
dissembling. Her sorrow, her disappointment, her
deep regret, when I told her that I was obliged to
leave Devonshire so immediately — I never shall for-
get it; united, too, with such reliance, such con-
fidence in me ! O God ! what a hard-hearted rascal
I was! "
They were both silent for a few moments. Elinor
first spoke.
u Did you tell her that you should soon return P "
156 SENBR AND SENSIBILITY*
«'I do not know what I told her, " he replied, im-
patiently; " less than was due to the past, beyond a
doubt, and in all likelihood much more than wat
justified by the future. I cannot think of it, — it won't
do. — Then came your dear mother to torture me far-
ther, with all her kindness and confidence. Thank
Heaven ! it did torture me. I was miserable. Miss
Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort it
gives me to look back on my own misery. I owe such
a grudge to myself for the stupid, rascally folly of my
own heart, that all my past sufferings under it are
only triumph and exultation to me now. Well, I
went, left all that I loved, and went to those to whom,
at best, I was only indifferent. My journey to town
— travelling with my own horses, and therefore so
tediously — no creature to speak to— -my own reflec-
tions so cheerful — when I looked forward everything
so inviting! — when I looked back at Barton, the pic-
ture so soothing \ — oh { it was a blessed journey f
He stopped.
" Well, sir, " said Elinor, who, though pitying him!
grew impatient for his departure,'< and this is all P*
" All ! — no, — have you forgot what passed in town?
That infamous letter! Did she show it you P "
" Yes, I saw every note that passed. "
" When the first of hers reached me, (as it imme-
diately did, for I was in town the whole time,) what
I felt is — in the common phrase, not to be expressed j
in a more simple one — perhaps too simple to raise any
emotion — my feelings were very, very painful. Every
line, every word was — in the hackneyed metaphor
which their dear writer, were she here, would forbid
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY, 157
iagger to my heart To know that Marianne
11 town was — in the same language — a thunder-
Thunderbolts and daggers! — what a reproof
d she have given me ! — her taste, her opinions—
ieve they are better known to me than my own,
[ am sure they are dearer. "
inor's heart, which had undergone many changes
e course of this extraordinary conversation, was
softened again ; yet she felt it her duty to check
ideas in her companion as the last.
This is not right, Mr. Willoughby. Remember
you are married. Relate only what in your con-
ice you think necessary for me to hear.
Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still
jar to her as in former days — that in spite of the
r, many weeks we had been separated, she was
onstant in her own feelings and as full of faith
le constancy of mine as ever, awakened all my
> rse. I say awakened, because time and London,
aess and dissipation, had in some measure qui-
it, and I had been growing a fine hardened
in, fancying myself indifferent to her, and choos-
to fancy that she too must have become indiffer-
lo me; talking to myself of our past attachment
. mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up my
lders in proof of its being so, and silencing
y reproach, overcoming every scruple, by secretly
lg now and then, * I shall be heartily glad to
she is well married.'But this note made me
w myself better. I felt that she was infinitely
er to me than any other woman in the world,
that I was using her infamously. But every-
158 SENSE AN I* SENSIBILITY*
thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and
me. To retreat was impossible. All that I had to
do, was to avoid you both. I sent no answer to
Marianne, intending by that means to preserve my-
self from her farther notice ; and for some time I
was even determined not to call in Berkeley-street:
but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of a cool,
common acquaintance than anything else, I watched
you all safely out of the house one morning, and left
my name. "
" Watched us out of the house ! "
" Even so. You would be surprised to hear how
often I watched you, how often I was on the point
of falling in with you. I have entered many a shop
to avoid youi sight, as the carriage drove by. Lodg-
ing as I did in Bond-street, there was hardly a day
iu which I did not catch a glimpse of one or other
of you; and nothing but the most constant watchful-
ness on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire
to keep out of your sight, could hare separated us so
long. I avoided the Middletons as much as pos-
sible, as well as everybody else who waa likely to
prove an acquaintance in common. Not aware of
their being in town, however, I blundered on Sir
John, I believe, the first day of his coming, and the
day after I had called at Mrs. Jennings's* He asked
me to a party, a dance at his house in the evening*
Had he not told me as an inducement that you and
your sister were to be there, I should have felt it too
certain a thing, to trust myself near him. The next
morning brought another short note from Marianns
— still affectionate, open, artless, coa^ding— every*
S1N8B AND SENSIBILITY, 159
thing that could make my conduct most hateful. I
could not answer it, I tried, but could not frame a
■entence. But I thought of her, I believe, every
moment of the day. If you can pity me, Miss Dash-
wood, pity my situation as it was then. With my
head and heart full of your sister, I was forced to
play the happy lover to another woman! Those three
or four weeks were worse than all. Well, at last, as
I need not tell you, you were forced on me ; and
what a sweet figure I cut! what an evening of agony
it was! Marianne, beautiful as an angel, on one side,
calling me Willoughby in such a tone ! — oh, God!—
holding out her hand to me, asking me for an expla-
nation with those bewitching eyes fixed in such
speaking solicitude on my face ! and Sophia, jealous
as the devil, on the other hand, looking all that was
" Well, it does not signify; it is over now. Such
an evening! I ran away from you all as soon as I
could, but not before I had seen Marianne's sweet
face as white as death. That was the last, last look
I ever had of her — the last manner in which she
appeared to me. It was a horrid sight ! Yet when
I thought of her to-day as really dying, it was a kind
of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly
how she would appear to those who saw her last in
this world. She was before me, constantly before
me, as I travelled, in the same look and hue. "
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded.
Willoughby first rousing himself, broke it thus :
44 Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your sis-
ter is certainly better, certainly out of danger? "
" We are assured of it. "
tons'; and her letter, with some others, w
to me there from my lodgings. It happen*
Sophia** eye before it caught mine — and i
elegance of the paper the hand-writing, a]
immediate!; gave her a suspicion of its nal
Tazne report had reached her before of my a
to some ycting lady in Devonshire, and
passed within her observation the precedix
had marked who the young lady was, and
more jealous than ever. Affecting that ai
fulness, therefore, which is delightful in a *
loves, she opened the letter directly, and re;
tents. She was well paid for her impude
read what made her wretched. Her wreU
could have borne, but her passion — her m
all events it must be appeased. And in sfc
do you think of my wife's style of letter-w
delicate, tender, truly feminine — was it no
" Your wife ! — The letter was in your c
writing. "
SBNSB AND SENSIBILITY. 161
paration ! — day ! — In honest words, her money was
necessary to me, and in a situation like mine any-
thing was to be done to prevent a rupture. And
after all, what did it signify to my character in the
opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what language
my answer was couched P It must hare been only
to one end. My business was to declare myself a
scoundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or bluster
was of little importance.'I am ruined for ever in
their opinion/ said I to myself; I am shut out for ever
from their society ; they already think me an unprin-
cipled fellow, this letter will only make them think
me a blackguard one.'Such were my reasonings as,
in a sort of desperate carelessness, I copied my wife's
words, and parted with the last relics of Marianne.
Her three notes — unluckily they were all in my poc-
ket-book, or I should hare denied their existence, and
hoarded them for ever ; I was forced to put them up,
and could not even kiss them. And the lock of hair
— that too I had always carried about me in the same
pocket-book, which was now searched by Madam
with the most ingratiating virulence, — the dear lock
— all, every memento was torn from me/'
" You are very wrong, Mr. " Willoughby, very
'laroeable, " said Elinor, while her voice, in spite of
erself, betrayed her compassionate emotion ; " you
lght not to speak in this way, either of Mrs. Wil-
ughby or my sister. You have made your own
oice. It was not forced on you. Your wife has a
im to your politeness, to your respect, at least.
» must be attached to you, or she would not have
•ried you. To treat her with unkindness, to speak
L VOL. II.
162 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
of her slightingly, is no atonement to Ma-
nor can I suppose it a relief to your owi
science. "
" Do not talk to me of my wife, " said he,
heavy sigh. " She does not deserve your ©
sion. She knew I had no regard for her wl
married. Well, married we were, and came
to Combe Magna to he happy, and afterwa
turned to town to be gay. And now do y <
me, Miss Dashwood? or have I said all this
purpose ? Am I — be it only one degree — an
guilty in your opinion than I was before ?
tentions were not always wrong. Have I exj
away any part of my guilt ? "
'* Yes, you have certainly removed someth
little. You have proved yourself, on the who
faulty than I had believed you. You have prove
heart less wicked, much less wicked. But I
know — the misery that you have inflicted — I
know what could have made it worse. "
" Will you repeat to your sister, when she
covered, what I have been telling you ? Let
a little lightened too in her opinion as weU
yours. You tell me that she has forgiven me aJ
Let me be able to fancy that a better knowle*
my heart, and of my present feelings, will dr*i
her a more spontaneous, more natural, more j
less dignified forgiveness. Tell her of my mise
my penitence, tell her that my heart was never
stant to her, and if you will, that at this mome
is dearer to me than ever. "
" I will tell her all that is necessary to wha
8EN8B AND SENSIBILITY. 163
comparatively be called, your justification. But you
have not explained to me the particular reason of your
coming now, nor how you heard of her illness/'
" Last night, in Drury-lane lobby, I ran against
Sir John Middleton, and when he saw who I was
(for the first time these two months) he spoke to
me. That he had cut me ever since my marriage, I
had seen without surprise or resentment. Now,
however, his good-natured, honest, stupid soul, full
of indignation against me, and concern for your
sister, could not resist the temptation of telling me
what he knew ought to, though probably he did not
think it would, vex me horribly. As bluntly as he
could speak it, therefore, he told me that Marianne
Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland —
a letter that morning received from Mrs. Jennings
declared her danger most imminent — the Palmers all
50 ne off in a fright, & c. I was too much shocked to
ye able to pass myself off as insensible, even to the
indiscerning Sir John. His heart was softened in
eeing mine suffer ; and so much of his ill-will was
one away, that when we parted, he almost shook
e by the hand while he reminded me of an old
omise about a pointer puppy. What I felt on
aring that your sister was dying — and dying too
levin g me the greatest villain upon earth, scorn-
, hating me in the latest moments — for how could
til what horrid projects might not have been im~
?d ? — One person I was sure would represent me as
ible of anything. What I felt was dreadful! My
lution was soon made, and at eight o'clock this
dng I was in my carriage. Now you know all.*'
164 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
Elinor made no answer. Her thoughts were
silently fixed on the irreparable injury which too
early an independence and its consequent habits of
idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the
mind, the character, the happiness, of a man who,
to every advantage of person and talents, united a
disposition naturally open and honest, and a feeling,
affectionate temper. The world had made him ex-
travagant and Tain; extravagance and vanity had
made him cold-hearted and selfish. Vanity, while
seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of
another, had involved him in a real attachment,
which extravagance, or at least its offspring, neces-
sity, had required to be sacrificed. Each faulty
propensity in leading him to evil, had led him like-
wise to punishment. The attachment, from which
against honour, against feeling, against every better
interest he had outwardly torn himself, now, when
no longer allowable, governed every thought; and
the connexion, for the sake of which he had, with
little scruple, left her sister to misery, was likely to
prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far
more incurable nature. From a reverie of this kind
she was recalled at the end of some minutes by " Wil-
loughby, who, rousing himself from a reverie at least
equally painful, started up in preparation for going,
and said,
" There is no use in staying here ; I must be
off. "
'* Are you going back to town ? "
" No; to Combe Magna. I have business there ;
from thence to town in a day or two. Good bye. "
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 165
He held out his hand. She could not refuse to
give him hers ; he pressed it with affection.
" And do you think something better of me than
you did? " said he, letting it fall, and leaning against
the mantel-piece, as if forgetting he was to go.
Elinor assured him that she did ; that she forgave,
pitied him, wished him well — was even interested in
his happiness — and added some gentle counsel aw to
the behaviour most likely to promote it. His answer
was not very encouraging.
" As to that, " said he, " I must rub through the
world as well as I can. Domestic happiness is out
of the question. If, however, I am allowed to think
that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and
actions, it may be the means — it may put me on my
guard — at least, it may be something to live for.
Marianne, to be sure, is lost to me for ever. Were I
even, by any blessed chance, at liberty again "
Elinor stopped him with a reproof.
" Well, " he replied, " once more, good bye. I
shall now go away and live in dread of one event. "
" What do you mean ? "
" Your sister s marriage. "
" You are very wrong. She can never be more
lost to you than she is now. "
" But she will be gained by some one else. And
if that some one should be the very he whom, of all
others, I could least bear But I will not stay to
rob myself of all your compassionate good-will, by
showing that where I have most injured I can least
forgive. Good bye ; God bless you ! "
And, with these words, he almost ran out of the
room.
CHAPTER XV.
Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time
even after the sound of his carriage had died away,
remained too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas,
widely differing in themselves, but of which sadness
was the general result, to think even of her sister.
Willoughby — he whom only half an hour ago she
had abhorred as the most worthless of men — Wil-
loug'by, in spite of all his faults, excited a degree of
commiseration for the sufferings produced by them,
which made her think of him as now separated for
ever from her family with a tenderness, a regret, ra-
ther in proportion, as she soon acknowledged within
herself, to his wishes than to his merits. She felt
that his influence over her mind was heightened by
circumstances which ought not in reason to have
weight ; by that person of uncommon attraction —
that open, affectionate, and lively manner which it
wast no merit to possess ; and by that still ardent love
for Marianne, which it was not even innocent to in-
dulge. But she felt that it was so, long, long before
she could feel his influence less.
When at last she returned to the unconscious Ma-
rianne, she found her just awaking, refreshed by so
long and sweet a sleep to the extent of her hopes.
Elinor's heart was full. The past, the present, the
future — Willoughby *8 visit, Marianne's safety, and her
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 1G7
mother's expected arrival, threw her altogether into
an agitation of spirits which kept off every indication
of fatigue, and made her only fearful of betraying her-
self to her sister. Short was the time, however, in
which that fear could affect her, for within half an
hour after Willoughby's leaving the house, she wrh
again called down stairs by the sound of another car-
riage. Eager to save her mother from every unne-
cessary moment's horrible suspense, she ran imme-
diately into the hall, and reached the outward door
just in time to receive and support her as she en-
tered it.
Mrs. Dash wood, whose terror as they drew near the
house had promised almost the conviction of Maii-
anne's being no more, had no voice to inquire after
her, no voice even for Elinor; but she, waiting nei-
ther for salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joy-
ful relief; — and her mother, catching it with all her
usual warmth, was in a moment as much overcome ! > y
her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.
She was supported into the drawing-room between
her daughter and her friend ; and there, shedding
tears of joy, though still unable to speak, embraced
Elinor again and again, turning from her at intervals
to press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look which
spoke at once her gratitude, and her conviction of his
snaring with herself in the bliss of the moment. He
shared it, however, in a silence even greater than her
own.
As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself,
to see Marianne was her first desire; and in two
minutes she was with her beloved child, rendered
168 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and
danger. Elinor*8 delight, as she saw what each felt
in the meeting, was only checked by an apprehen-
sion of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep : but
Mrs. Dash wood could be calm, could be eren pru-
dent, when the life of a child was at stake, and Ma-
rianne, satisfied in knowing her mother was near
her, and conscious of being too weak for conversation,
submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed
by every nurse around her. Mrs. Dashwood would
sit up with her all night, and Elinor, in compliance
with her mother's entreaty, went to bed. But the
rest, which one night entirely sleepless and many
hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed to make
requisite, was kept off by irritation of spirits. " Wil-
loughby, " poor Willoughby, " as she now allowed
herself to call him, was constantly in ber thoughts;
she would not but have heard his vindication for the
world, and now blamed, now acquitted herself, for
having judged him so harshly before. But her pro-
mise of relating it to her sister was inyariably pain-
ful. She dreaded the performance of it, dreaded what
its effect on Marianne might be; doubted whether,
after such an explanation, she could ever be happy
with another, and for a moment wished Willoughby
a widower; then, remembering Colonel Brandon,
reproved herself, felt that to his sufferings and hi*
constancy, far more than to his rival's, the reward of
her sister was due, and wished anything rather than
Mrs. Willoughby's death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton
had been much softened to Mrs. Dashwood by her

StNSt AND SENSIBILITY. 169
Nit alarm; for to great was her uneasiness
lanne, that she had already determined to
Cleveland on that Tery day, without wait-
f farther intelligence, and had so far settled
17 before his arrival, that the Careys were
rted every moment to fetch Margaret away,
iher was unwilling to take her where there
afection.
ae continued to mend every day, and the
heerfulness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and
ved her to be, as she repeatedly declared
le of the happiest women in the world,
dd not hear the declaration, nor witness its
thout sometimes wondering whether her
•r recollected Edward. But Mrs. Dash-
iting to the temperate account of her own
ment which Elinor had sent her, was led
be exuberance of her joy to think only of
d increase it. Marianne was restored to
a danger in which, as she now began to
vn own mistaken judgment in encouraging
unate attachment to Willoughby had con-
> place her; and in her recovery she had
jr source of joy unthought of by Elinor,
s imparted to her, as soon as any oppor-
rivate conference between them occurred:
t we are alone. My Elinor, you do not
all my happiness. Colonel Brandon loves
he has told me so himself. "
lghtor, feeling by turns both pleased and
rprUed and not surprised, was all silent
170 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" You are never like me, dear Elinor, o
wonder at your composure now. Had I sa
wish for any possible good to my family,
have fixed on Colonel Brandon's marrying <
as the object most desirable. And I believe
will be the most happy with him of the tw <
Elinor was half inclined to ask her i
thinking so, because satisfied that none f <
an impartial consideration of their age, cha
feelings, could be given ; — but her mother
ways be carried away by her imagination <
teresting subject, and therefore, instead of a
she passed it off with a smile.
" He opened his whole heart to me ye
we travelled. It came out quite unawares,
designedly. I, you may well believe, cou
nothing but my child; — he could not conce
tress ; I saw that it equalled my own, and he
thinking that mere friendship, as the world
would not justify so warm a sympathy— or i
thinking at all, I suppose — giving way to i
feelings, made me acquainted with his ear
der, constant affection for Marianne. He
her, my Elinor, ever since the first moment
her. "
Here, however, Elinor perceived, not
guage, not the professions of Colonel Brai
the natural embellishments of her mothe
fancy, which fashioned everything delightf
as it chose.
" His regard for her, infinitely surpassing
that Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as m
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 171
warm, as more sincere or constant — whichever we are
to call it — has subsisted through all the knowledge of
dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worth-
less young man ! — and without selfishness — without
encouraging a hope ! — could he hare seen her happy
with another P Such a noble mind ! — such openness,
such sincerity! — no one can be deceived in him. 1'
*'Colonel Brandon's character/'said Elinor, " as
an excellent man, is well established. "
" I know it is, " replied her mother seriously — " or
after such a warning, / should be the last to encourage
his affection, or even to be pleased by it. But his
coming for me as he did, with such active, such ready
friendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest
of men. "
" His character, however, " answered Elinor, " does
not rest on one act of kindness, to which his affection
for Marianne, were humanity out of the case, would
have prompted him. To Mrs. Jennings, to the Mid-
dletons, he has been long and intimately known ; they
equally love and respect him; and even my know-
ledge of him, though lately acquired, is very coiihU
derable ; and so highly do / value and esteem him,
that if Marianne can be happy with him, I shall he
as ready as yourself to think our connexion the
greatest blessing to us in the world. What answer
did you give him P Did you allow him to hope P M
" Oh ! my love, I could not then talk of hope to
him or to myself. Marianne might at that moment
be dying. But he did not ask for hope or encourage-
ment. His was an involuntary confidence, an irre-
pressible effusion to a soothing friend, — not an appli-
172 8ENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
cation to a parent. Yet after a time I didnzj, for at
first I was quite overcome, that if the lived, as I
trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie in
promoting their marriage ; and since our arrival, since
our delightful security, I have repeated it to him more
fully, have given him every encouragement in my
power. Time, a very little time, I tell him, will do
everything ; — Marianne's heart is not to be wasted
for ever on such a man as Willoughby. His own
merits must soon secure it. "
" To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however,
you have not yet made him equally sanguine. "
" No. He thinks Marianne's affection too deeply
rooted for any change in it under a great length of
time ; and even supposing her heart again free, is
too diffident of himself to believe, that with such a
difference of age and disposition, he could ever attach
her. There, however, he is quite mistaken. Hii
age is only so much beyond hers, as to be an ad-
vantage, as to make his character and principles
fixed ; and his disposition, I am well convinced, is
exactly the very one to make your sister happy.
And his person, his manners too, are all in his favour.
My partiality does not blind me ; he certainly is not
so handsome as Willoughby ; but, at the same time,
there is something much more pleasing in his coun-
tenance. There was always a something, if you re-
member, in Willoughby's eyes at times, which I did
not like. "
Elinor could not remember it; but her mother,
without waiting for her assent, continued,
«'And his manners, the Colonel's manners, are
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 173
not only more pleasing to me than Willoughby's ever
were, but they are of a kind I well know to be more
solidly attaching to Marianne. Their gentleness,
their genuine attention to other people, and their
manly unstudied simplicity, are much more accordant
with her real disposition, than the liveliness, often
artificial, and often ill-timed, of the other. I am
very sure myself, that had Willoughby turned out as
really amiable as he has proved himself the contrary,
Marianne would yet never have been so happy with
him, aa she will be with Colonel Brandon. "
She paused. Her daughter could not quite agree
with her, but her dissent was not heard, and therefore
gave no offence.
" At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance
of me/'added Mrs. Dashwood, " even if I remain at
Barton ; and in all probability, for I hear it is a
large village — indeed there certainly must be some
small house or cottage close by, that would suit us
quite as well as our present situation. "
Poor Elinor! here was a new scheme for getting
her to Delaford! but her spirit was stubborn.
" His fortune too ! for at my time of life, you
know, everybody cares about that; and though I
neither know, nor desire to know, what it really is,
I am sure it must be a good one/'
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a
third person, and Elinor withdrew to think it all
over in private, to wish success to her friend, and
yet, in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.
174
CHAPTER XVI.
Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind,
had not been long enough to make her recovery
slow ; and with youth, natural strength, and her
mother's presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly
as to enable her to remove, within four days after
the arrival of the latter, into Mrs. Palmer's dressing-
room. When there, at her own particular request,
for she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to
him for fetching her mother, Colonel Brandon was
invited to visit her.
His emotion in entering the room, in seeing
her altered looks, and in receiving the pale hand
which she immediately held out to him, was such as,
in Elinor's conjecture, must arise from something
more than his affection for Marianne, or the con-
sciousness of its being known to others ; and she soon
discovered in his melancholy eye and varying com-
| plexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recur-
rence of many past scenes of misery to his mind,
!l brought back by that resemblance between Marianne
, and Eliza already acknowledged, and now strength-
f ened by the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture
j. of reclining weakness, and the warm acknowledgment
f of peculiar obligation.
]'Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed
than her daughter, but with a mind very differently
8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 175
influenced, and therefore watching to very different
effect, saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but
what arose from the most simple and self-evident
sensations, while in the actions and words of Mari-
anne she persuaded herself to think that something
more than gratitude already dawned.
At the end of another day or two, Marianne grow-
ing visibly stronger every twelve hours, Mrs. Dash-
wood, urged equally by her own and her daughter's
wishes, began to talk of removing to Barton. On
her measures depended those of her two friends ; Mrs.
Jennings could not quit Cleveland during the Dash-
woods'stay, and Colonel Brandon was soon brought
by their united request, to consider his own abode
there as equally determinate, if not equally indispen-
sable. At his and Mrs. Jennings'united request in
return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevailed on to accept
the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the
better accommodation of her sick child ; and the Co-
lonel, at the joint invitation of Mrs. Dashwood and
VIrs. Jennings, whose active good-nature made her
riendly and hospitable for other people as well as
erself, engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit
the cottage, in the course of a few weeks.
The day of separation and departure arrived ; and
arianne, after taking so particular and lengthened
eave of Mrs. Jennings — one so earnestly grateful,
full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to
own heart from a secret acknowledgment of
. inattention — and bidding Colonel Brandon fare-
with the cordiality of a friend, was carefully
ted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed
f
1/6 SENSE AND SENSIBILI1
anxious that she should engross at 1
Dashwood and Elinor then followed,
were left by themselves, to talk of th
feel their own dullness, till Mrs. Jei
moned to her chaise to take comfort
her maid for the loss of her two you
and C Ion el Brandon immediately i
his solitary way to Delaford.
The Dash woods were two days oi
Marianne bore her journey on both i
fatigue. Everything that the most i
the most solicitous care, could do to :
fortable, was the office of each watd
and each found their reward in her
her calmness of spirits. To Elinor,
of the latter was particularly grateful
seen her week after week so cons
oppressed by anguish of heart whicl
courage to speak of, nor fortitude
saw, with a joy which no other coi
an apparent composure of mind, w
result as she trusted of serious reflf
tually lead her to contentment anl
As they approached Barton, in <
on scenes of which every field and
some peculiar, some painful rec
silent and thoughtful, and turn
from their notice, sat earnestly
window. But here, Elinor co'
nor blame ; and when she saw,'
anne from the carriage, that she
saw only an emotion too natu
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 177
anything less tender than pity, and in its unobtrusive-
ness entitled to praise. In the whole of her subse-
quent manner, she traced the direction of a mind
awakened to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner had
they entered their common sitting-room, than Mari-
anne turned her eyes around it with a look of reso-
lute firmness, as if determined at once to accustom
herself to the sight of every object with which the
remembrance of Willoughby could be connected.
She said little, hut every sentence aimed at cheerful-
ness, and though a sigh sometimes escaped her, it
never passed away without the atonement of a smile.
After dinner, she would try her pianoforte. She
went to it ; but the music on which her eye first
rested was an opera, procured for her by Willoughby,
containing some of their favourite duets, and bearing
on its outward leaf her own name in his hand-writ-
ing. That would not do. She shook her head,
put the music aside, and, after running over the keys
for a minute, complained of feebleness in her fingers,
and closed the instrument again ; declaring however
with firmness at she did so, that she should in future
practise much.
The next morning produced no abatement in these
happy symptoms. On the contrary, with a mind and
body alike strengthened by rest, she looked and spoke
with more genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure
of Margaret's return, and talking of the dear family
party which would then be restored, of their mutual
pursuits and cheerful society as the only happiness
worth a wish.
"'When the weather is settled, and I have reco-
M VOL. II.
178 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
vered my strength, " said she, " we will take long
walks together every day. We will walk to the farm
at the edge of the down, and see how the children
go on ; we will walk to Sir John's new plantations
at Barton Cross, and the Abbe j land; and we will
often go to the old ruins of the Priory, and try to
trace its foundations as far as we are told they once
reached. I know we shall he happy. I know the
summer will pass happily away. I mean never to
be later in rising than six, and from that time till
dinner I shall divide every moment between music
and reading. I have formed my plan, and am deter-
mined to enter on a course of serious study. Our
own library is too well known to me, to be resorted
to for anything beyond mere amusement. But there
are many works well worth reading, at the Park;
and there are others of more modern production
which I know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon,
By reading only six hours a day, I shall gain in th <
course of a twelvemonth a great deal of instruction
which I now feel myself to want. "
Elinor honoured her for a plan which originate!
so nobly as this; though smiling to see the same
eager fancy which had been leading her to the ex*
treme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now
at work in introducing excess into a scheme of suck
rational employment and virtuous self-control. Her
smile, however, changed to a sigh when she remem-
bered that her promise to Willoughby was yet un-
fulfilled, and feared she had that to communicate
which might again unsettle the * nd of Marianne,
and ruin at least for a time this far prospect of busy
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 179
tranquillity. Willing therefore to delay the evil hour,
she resolved to wait till her sister's health were more
secure, before she appointed it. But the resolution
was made only to be broken.
Marianne had been two or three days at home,
before the weather was fine enough for an invalid
like herself to venture out. But at last a soft, genial
morning appeared — such as might tempt the daugh-
ter's wishes and the mother's confidence; and Mari-
anne, leaning on Elinor's arm, was authorised to walk
as long as she could without fatigue, in the lane
before the house.
The sisters set out at a pace slow as the feeble-
ness of Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried
since her illness required ; — and they had advanced
only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view
of the hill, the important hill behind, when pausing
with her eyes turned towards it, Marianne calmly
said,
*« There, exactly there " — pointing with one hand,
u on that projecting mound, — there I fell ; and there
I first saw Willoughby. "
Her voice sunk with the word, but presently re-
viving, she added,
" I am thankful to find that I can look with so
little pain on the spot ! — shall we ever talk on that
subject, Elinor? " — hesitatingly it was said. — " Or will
it be wrong P — I can talk of it now, I hope, as I
ought to do. "
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.
" As for regret, " said Marianne, " I have done with
that, as far as he is concerned, I do not mean to
180 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
talk to you of what my feelings hare been for him,
but what they are now. At present, if I could be sa-
tisfied on one point — if I could be allowed to think
that he was not always acting a part, not always de-
ceiving me ; — but above all, if I could be assured that
he never was so very wicked as my fears have some-
times fancied him, since the story of that unfortunate
girl " —
She stopped. Elinor joyfully treasured her words
as she answered,
" If you could be assured of that, you think yon
should be easy. "
" Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in
it ; — for not only is it horrible to suspect a person,
who has been what he has been to me, of such de-
signs, — but what must it make me appear to myself?
What in a situation like mine, but a most shamefully
unguarded affection could expose me to " —
44 How then, " asked her sister, " would you ac-
count for his behaviour ? "
44 1 would suppose him, — Oh ! how gladly would I
suppose him, only fickle — very, very fickle. "
Elinor said no more. She was debating within
herself on the eligibility of beginning her story di-
rectly, or postponing it till Marianne were in stronger
health ; — and they crept on for a few minutes in
silence.
44 1 am not wishing him too much good, " said Ma-
rianne at last with a sigh, " when I wish his secret
reflections may be no more unpleasant than my own.
He will suffer enough in them. "
44 Do you compare your conduct with his P*
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 181
" No. I compare it with what it ought to have
been ; I compare it with yours. "
" Our situations have borne little resemblance. "
" They have borne more than our conduct. Do
not, my dearest Elinor, let your kindness defend what
I know your judgment must censure. My illness has
made me think — it has given me leisure and calm-
ness for serious recollection. Long before I was
enough recovered to talk, I was perfectly able to re-
flect. I considered the past ; I saw in my own beha-
viour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with
him last autumn, nothing but a series of imprudence
towards myself, and want of kindness to others. 1
saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings,
and that my want of fortitude under them had almost
led me to the grave. My illness, I well knew, had
been entirely brought on by myself, by such negli-
gence of my own health as I had felt even at the
time to be wrong. Had I died, it would have been
self-destruction. I did not know my danger till the
danger was removed ; but with such feelings as these
reflections gave me, I wonder at my recovery, — won-
der that the very eagerness of my desire to live, to
have time for atonement to my God, and to you all,
did not kill me at once. Had I died, in what pecu-
liar misery should I have left you, my nurse, my
friend, my sister.! — Tou, who had seen all the fretful
selfishness of my latter days ; who had known all the
murmurings of my heart ! — How should I have lived
in your remembrance ! — My mother too! How could
you have consoled her ! — I cannot express my own
abhorrence of myself. Whenever I looked towards
182 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some failing
indulged. Everybody seemed injured by me. The
kindness, the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings,
I had repaid with ungrateful contempt. To the Mid-
dletons, the Palmers, the Steeles, to every common
acquaintance even I had been insolent and unjust ;
with a heart hardened against their merits, and a
temper irritated by their very attention. To John,
to Fanny, — yes, even to them, little as they deserve,
I had given less than their due. But you, — you aboie
all, above my mother, had been wronged by me. I,
and only I, knew your heart and its sorrows ; yet, to
what did it influence me P — not to any compassion
that could benefit you or myself. Your example was
before me : but to what avail ? Was I more con-
siderate of you and your comfort P Did I imitate
your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by taking
any part in those offices of general complaisance or
particular gratitude which you had hitherto been left
to discharge alone P No; — not less when I knew
you to be unhappy, than when I had believed you at
ease, did I turn away from every exertion of duty or
friendship ; scarcely allowed sorrow to exist but with
me, regretting only that heart which had deserted
and wronged me, and leaving you, for whom I pro-
fessed an unbounded affection, to be miserable for
my sake/'
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving
spirit ; and Elinor, impatient to soothe, though too
honest to flatter, gave her instantly that praise and
support wnich her frankness and her contritiou so
well desetred. Marianne pressed her hand and
replied,
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 183
ou are very good. The future must be my
I have laid down my plan, and if I am capa-
adhering to it, my feelings shall be governed
y temper improved. They shall no longer worry
, nor torture myself. I shall now live solely
r family. You, my mother, and Margaret, must
forth be all the world to me ; you will share my
ons entirely between you. From you, from my
I shall never again have the smallest incite-
x > move ; and if I do mix in other society, it will
iy to show that my spirit is humbled, my heart
led, and that I can practise the civilities, the
duties of life, with gentleness and forbearance.
• Willoughby, to say that I shall soon or that
1 ever forget him, would be idle. His remem-
b can be overcome by no change of circum-
» or opinions. But it shall be regulated, it
be checked by religion, by reason, by constant
yment. w
» paused, and added in a lower voice, " If I
but know his heart, everything would become
nor, who had now been for some time reflecting
e propriety or impropriety of speedily hazard-
it narration, without feeling at all nearer deci-
han at first, heard this ; and perceiving that as
ion did nothing, resolution must do all, soon
herself leading to the fact
i managed the recital, as she hoped, with ad-
; prepared her anxious listener with caution ;
d simply and honestly the chief points on
. Willoughby grounded his apology j did jus-
184 8EN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
tice to his repentance, and softened only his protes-
tations of present regard. Marianne said not a
word ; she trembled, her eyes were fixed on the
ground, and her lips became wMter than even sick*
ness had left them. A thousand inquiries sprung up
from her heart, but she dared not urge one. She
caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her
hand, unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her
sister's, and tears covered her cheeks.
Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towardi
home ; and till they reached the door of the cottage,
easily conjecturing what her curiosity must be though
no question was suffered to speak it, talked of no-
thing but Willoughby, and their conversation together
was carefully minute in every particular of speech
and look, where minuteness could be safely indulged.
As soon as they entered the house, Marianne, with s
kiss of gratitude, and these two words just articulate
through her tears, " Tell mamma, " withdrew from
her sister and walked slowly up stairs. Elinor would
not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable u
what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously
pre-arranging its result, and a resolution of reviving
the subject again should Marianne fail to do it, she
turned into the parlour to fulfil her parting injunc-
tion.
185
CHAPTER XVII.
Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindi-
cation of her former favourite. She rejoiced in his
being cleared from some part of his imputed guilt ;
she was sorry for him ; she wished him happy. But
the feelings of the past could not be recalled. No-
thing could restore him with a faith unbroken — a
character unblemished, to Marianne, Nothing could
do away the knowledge of what the latter had suf-
fered through his means, nor remove the guilt of his
conduct towards Eliza. Nothing could replace him,
therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure the in-
terest of Colonel Brandon.
Had Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard
Willoughby's story from himself — had she witnessed
his distress, and been under the influence of his
countenance and his manner, it is probable tnat her
compassion would have been greater. But it was
neither in Elinor's power, nor in her wish, to rouse
such feelings in another, by her retailed explanation,
as had at first been called forth in herself. Reflec-
tion had given calmness to her judgment, and sobered
her own opinion of Willoughby's deserts j she wished,
therefore, to declare only the simple truth, and lay
open such facts as were really due to his character,
without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the
fancy astray.
186 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
In the evening, when they were all there together,
Marianne began voluntarily to speak of him again;
but that it was not without an effort, the irestless,
unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for
some time previously sitting, her rising colour as she
spoke, and her unsteady voice, plainly showed.
" I wish to assure you both, " said she, " that I see
everything — as you can desire me to do.'*
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her in-
stantly with soothing tenderness, had not Elinor,
who really wished to hear her sister's unbiassed
opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence.
Marianne slowly continued —
" It is a great relief to me — what Elinor told me
this morning — I have now heard exactly what I
wished to hear. " For some moments her voice was
lost; but, recovering herself, she added, and with
greater calmness than before : " I am now perfectly
satisfied. I wish for no change. I never could have
been happy with him, after knowing, as soonei or
later I must have known, all this. I should have
had no confidence, no esteem. Nothing could have
done it away to my feelings. "
" I know it — I know it, " cried her mother.
" Happy with a man of libertine practices ! With
one who had so injured the peace of the dearest of
our friends, and the best of men ! No — my Mari-
anne has not a heart to be made happy by such a
man ! Her conscience, her sensitive conscience,
would have felt all that the conscience of her hus-
band ought to lave felt. "
Marianne sighed, and repeated — *'I wish for no
change. "

•EW8P AMD SENSIBILITY. 187
M You consider the matter, " said Elinor,'* exactly
a good mind and a sound understanding must
isider it ; and I dare say you perceive, as well as
self, not only in this, but in many other circum-
nces, reason enough to be convinced that your
Triage must haye involved you in many certain
ubles and disappointments in which you would
re been poorly supported by an affection, on his
Is, much leas certain. Had you married, you
1st have been always poor. His expensiveness is
knowledged even by himself, and his whole con-
ict declares that self-denial is a word hardly under-
K > d by him. His demands and your inexperience
jether on a small, very small income, must have
ought on distresses which would not be the less
levous to you from having been entirely unknown
d unthought of before. Your sense of honour and
nesty would have led you, I know, when aware of
or situation, to attempt all the economy that would
pear to you possible ; and perhaps, as long as your
igality retrenched only on your own comfort, you
ght have been suffered to practise it, but beyond
it — and how little could the utmost of your single
inagement do to stop the ruin which had begun bo-
's your marriage P — beyond that, had you endea-
ared, however reasonably, to abridge hi* enjoy-
tnts, is it not to be feared, that instead of prevailing
feelings so selfish to consent to it, you would have
sened your own influence on his heart, and made
n regret the connexion which had involved him in
:h difficulties ? "
Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the
188 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
word " Selfish P " in a tone that implied " Do yon
really think him selfish P "
< < The whole of his behaviour, " replied Elinor,
" from the beginning to the end of the affair, hat
been grounded on selfishness. It was selllshneei
which first made him sport with your affections—
which afterwards, when his own were engaged, made
him delay the confession of it, and which finally car-
ried him from Barton. His own enjoyment, or hi*
own ease, was in every particular his ruling prin-
ciple. "
< < It is very true. My happiness never was his
object. "
" At present, " continued Elinor, * he regrets what
he has done. And why does he regret itP Because
he finds it has not answered towards himself. It has
not made him happy. His circumstances are now
unembarrassed — he suffers from no evil of thai kind,
and he thinks only that he has married a woman of
a less amiable temper than yourself. But does it
thence follow, that had he married you, he would
have been happy P The inconveniences would have
been different. He would then have suffered under
the pecuniary distresses which, because they are re-
moved, he now reckons as nothing. He would have
had a wife of whose temper he could make no com-
plaint, but he would have been always necessitous —
always poor; and probably would soon have learnt
to rank the innumerable comforts of a clear estate
and good income as of far more importance, even
to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of a
wife. "
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 189
" I have not a doubt of it, " said Marianne ; " and
I have nothing to regret — nothing but my own
folly. "
'« Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child, "
said Mrs. Dashwood ; " she must be answerable. "
Marianne would not let her proceed ; and Elinor,
satisfied that each felt their own error, wished to
avoid any survey of the past that might weaken her
sister's spirits : she therefore, pursuing the first sub-
ject, immediately continued,
" One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn
from the whole of the story — that all Willoughby's
difficulties have arisen from the first offence against
virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams. That
crime has been the origin of every lesser one, and of
all his present discontents. "
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark ;
and her mother was led by it to an enumeration of
Colonel Brandon 8 injuries and merits, warm as
friendship and design could unitedly dictate. Her
daughter did not look, however, as if much of it
were heard by her*
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the
two or three following days, that Marianne did not
continue to gain strength as she had done ; but while
her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried to
appear cheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust
to the effect of time upon her health.
Margaret returned, and the family were again all
restored to each other, again quietly settled at the
cottage, and if not pursuing their usual studies with
quite so much vigour as when they first came to Bar-



< V > ***
*3?*
«

*yvv



t*«
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 191
The servant, who taw only that Mist Marianne was
en ill, had sense enough to call one of the maids,
,o, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance, supported her
o the other room. By that time, Marianne was
her better, and her mother leaving her to the care
Margaret and the maid, returned to Elinor, who,
ragh still much disordered, had so far recovered the
i of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an
|uiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.
rs. Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on
rtelf ; and Elinor had the benefit of the information
thout the exertion of seeking it.
11 Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married,
lomas P "
" I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in
ceter, and his lady too, Miss Steele as was. They
is stopping in a chaise at the door of the New Lon-
m Inn, as I went there with a message from Sally
the Park to her brother, who is one of the postboys.
happened to look up as I went by the chaise, and
I see directly it was the youngest Miss Steele ; so
took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me,
id inquired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies,
pecially Miss Marianne, and bid me I should give
sr compliments and Mr. Ferrars's, their best com-
iments and service, and how sorry they was they
id not time to come on and see you — but they was
i a great hurry to go forwards, for they was going
irther down for a little while— but howsever, when
ley come back, they'd make sure to come and see
du. "
" But did she tell you she was married, Thomas? "
192 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
" Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she hid
changed her name since she was in these parts. 8he
was always a very affable and free-spoken young
lady, and very civil-behaved. So, I made free to wiih
her joy. "
" Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?**
" Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it,
but he did not look up 5 — he never was a gentleman
much for talking. "
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not
putting himself forward ; and Mrs* Dashwood pro-
bably found the same explanation.
" Was there no one else in the carriage P "
" No, ma'am, only they two. "
" Do you know where they came from P "
" They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy-
Mrs. Ferrars told me. "
" And are going farther westward P "
" Yes, ma'am — but not to bide long. They will
8oo n be back again, and then they'd be sure and call
here. "
Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter $ but
Elinor knew better than to expect them. She recog-
nised the whole of Lucy in the message, and was very
confident that Edward would never come near them.
She observed, in a low voice, to her mother, that they
were probably going down to Mr. Pratt's, near
Plymouth.
Thomas's intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked
as if she wished to hear more.
" Did you see them off, before you came awayP "
" No, ma'am — the horses was just coming out,
SEN8E AND SEN8IBILITY. 193
but I could not bide any longer ; I was afraid of
being late. "
" Did Mrs. Ferrars look well P "
" Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well ;
and to my mind she was always a very handsome
young lady — and she seemed vastly contented. "
Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question,
and Thomas and the table-cloth, now alike needless,
were soon after dismissed. Marianne had already
sent to say that she should eat nothing more ; Mrs.
Dashwood's and Elinor's appetites were equally lost,
and Margaret might think herself very well off, that
with so much uneasiness as both her sisters had lately
experienced, so much reason as they had often had
to be careless of their meals, she had never been
obliged to go without her dinner before.
When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and
Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor were left to themselves,
they remained long together in a similarity of thought-
fulness and silence. Mrs. Dashwood feared to
hazard any remark, and ventured not to offer con-
solation. She now found that she had erred in re-
lying on Elinor'8 representation of herself; and
justly concluded that everything had been expressly
softened at the time, to spare her from an increase
of unhappiness, suffering as she then had suffered
for Marianne. She found that she had been misled
by the careful, the considerate attention of her
daughter, to think the attachment, which once she
had so well understood, much slighter in reality
than she had been wont to believe, or than it was
now proved to be. She feared that under this per-
N VOL. II.
194 SGN8E AND SENSIBILli..
suasion she had been unjust, inattentive — nay,
almost unkind to her Elinor; — that Marianne's
affliction, because more acknowledged, more imme-
diately before her, had too much engrossed her ten-
derness, and led her away to forget that in Elinor
she might have a daughter suffering almost as much,
certainly with less self-provocation, and greater for-
titude.
CHAPTER XVIII.
Elinor now found the difference between the ex-
pectation of an unpleasant event, however certain
the mind may be told to consider it, and certainty
itself. She now found, that in spite of herself, she
had always admitted a hope, while Edward remained
single, that something would occur to prevent his
marrying Lucy ; that some resolution of his own,
some mediation of friends, or some more eligible
opportunity of establishment for the lady, would
arise to assist the happiness of all. But he was now
married, and she condemned her heart for the lurk-
ing flattery which so much heightened the pain of
the intelligence.
That he should be married so soon, before (as she
imagined) he could be in orders, and consequently
*£N8E AND SENSIBILITY. 195
before he could be in possession of the living, sur-
prised her a little at first. But she soon saw how
likely it was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in
her haste to secure him, should overlook everything
but the risk of delay. They were married, married in
town, and now hastening down to her uncle's. What
had Edward felt on being within four miles of Barton,
on seeing her mother's servant, on hearing Lucy's
message!
They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Dela-
ford, — Delaford, that place in which so much con-
spired to give her an interest — which she wished to
be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid. She
saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house ; saw
in Lucy, the active, 1 contriving manager, uniting at
once a desire of smart appearance with) the utmost
frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her
economical practices ;— -pursuing her own interest in
every thought) courting the favour of Colonel Bran-
don, of Mrs, Jennings, and of every wealthy friend.
In Edward, she knew not what she saw, nor what
she wished to see; — happy or unhappy,*— nothing
pleased her ; —she turned away her head from every
sketch of him.
Elinor flattered herself that some one of their con-
nexions in London would write to them to announce
the event, and give farther particulars ; but day after
day passed off, and brought no letter, no tidings.
Though uncertain that any one were to blame, she
found fault with every absent friend. They were all
thoughtless or indolent.
" When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am? "
196 8EN8E AND SEN8IBILlTT r
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of
her mind to have something going on.
" I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather
expect to see, than to hear from him again. I ear-
nestly pressed his coming to us, in my letter, and
should not be surprised to see him walk in to-day or
to-morrow, or any day. "
This was gaining something, something to look
forward to. Colonel Bmndon^must have some in-
formation to give.
Scarcely had he so determined it, when the figure
of a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window.
He stopped at their gate. It was a gentleman, it
was Colonel Brandon himself. Now she should hear
more ; — and she trembled in expectation of it. But
— it was not Colonel Brandon — neither his air, nor
his height. Were it possible, she should say it must
be Edward. She looked again. He had just dis-
mounted ; — -she could not be mistaken,- — it was Ed-
ward. She moved away and sat down. " He comes
from Mr.VPratt's purposely to see us. I will be calm;
I will be mistress of myself/'
In a moment she perceived that the others were
likewise aware of the mistake. She saw her mother
and Marianne change colour ; saw them look at her-
self, and whisper a few sentences to each other. She
would have given the world to be able to speak — and
to make them understand that she hoped no coolness,
no slight, would appear in their behaviour to him;—
but she had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all
to their own discretion.
Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in
SENSB AND SENSIBILITY. 197
silence for the appearance of their visitor. His foot-
steps were heard along the gravel path ; in a moment
le was in the passage, and in another he was before
ihero.
His countenance, as he entered the room, was not
too happy, even for Elinor. His complexion was
white with agitation, and he looked as if fearful of
hiis reception, and conscious that he merited no kind
me. Mrs. Dashwood, however, conforming, as she
trusted, to the wishes of that daughter by whom she
;hen meant, in the warmth of her heart, to be guided
n everything, met him with a look of forced compla-
cency, gave him her hand, and wished him joy.
He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible
reply. Elinor's lips had moved with her mother's,
ind when the moment of action was over, she wished
bat she had shaken hands with him too. But it
vaa then too late, and with a countenance meaning
o be open, she Bat down again and talked of the
veather.
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of
ight, to conceal her distress; and Margaret, under-
taking some part, but not the whole, of the case,
nought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and
herefore took a seat as far from him as she could,
ind maintained a strict silence.
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness
if the season, a very awful pause took place. It was
> ut an end to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to
lope that he had left Mrs. Ferrars very well. In a
Lurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.
Another pause.'
IQB •J£9i AND 5ENiilBlLLTV,
Elinor, resolving to exert herself though fearing
the sound of her own voice, now said,
" la Mrs. Fermra at Longetaple ? "
" At Longataple l " — be replied, with an air of iur*
prise., " No, my mother ii in town. "
" I meant,* 1 Hfiid Elinor ( taking up «owe work from
the table, " to inquire after Mrs, Edward Ferrai's, "'
She dared not loot up j- — but her motber and Mari-
anne both turned their eyes on him, He coloured*
seemed perplexed, looked doubtiugly, and, after some
hesit & tiou, enid*
*'Perhaps you menu- — my brother- — you mean
Mrs. — Mrs. Robert Fwwa. "
11 Mrs. Robert Fcrra™ ! " — was repeated by Mari-
anne and her mother, in an accent of the utmost
amazement; — and though Elinor could not speak,
even her eyes were fixed on him with the same im-
patient wonder. He rose from his seat and walked
to the window, apparently from not knowing what
to do ; took up a pair of scissars that lay there, an4
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting
the latter to pieces as he spoke, said, M in a hurried
voice,
" Perhaps you do not know-— you may not have
heard, that my brother is lately married to — to the
youngest — to Miss Lucy Steele. "
His words were echoed with unspeakable aato-
nishment by all but Elinor, who sat with her head
leaning over her work, in a state of such agitation
as made her hardly know where she was,
'* Yes, " said he, " they were married last week,
and are how at Dawlish. "
8EN3E AND SENSIBILITY. 199
Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out
of the room, and as soon as the door was closed,
burst into tears of joy, which at first she thought
would never cease. Edward, who had till then looked
anywhere rather than at her, saw her hurry away,
and perhaps saw — or even heard — her emotion ; for
immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie, which
no remarks, no inquiries, uo affectionate address of
Mrs. Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without
saying a word, quitted the room, and walked out to-
wards the Tillage ; leaving the others in the greatest
astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situa-
tion so wonderful and so sudden — a perplexity which
they had no means of lessening but by their own
conjectures.
CHAPTER XIX.
Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of
his release might appear to the whole family, it was
certain that Edward was free; and to what purpose
that freedom would be employed was easily predeter-
mined by all; for after experiencing the blessings of
one imprudent engagement, contracted without his
mother's consent, as he had already done for more
than four years, nothing less could be expected of
him in the failure of that, than the immediate con-
traction of another.
200 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
His errand at Barlon, in fact, was a simple one.
It was only to ask Elinor to marry him ; and con-
sidering that he was not altogther inexperienced in
such a question, it [might he strange that he should
feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really
did, so much in need of encouragement and fresh
air.
How soon he had walked himself into the proper
resolution however, how soon an opportunity of ex-
ercising it occurred, in what manner he expressed
himself, and how he was received, need not be parti-
cularly told. This only need be said : — that when
they all sat down to table at four o'clock, about three
hours after his arrival, he had secured his lady, en-
gaged her mother'8 consent, and was not only in the
rapturous profession of the lover, but in the reality of
reason and truth, one of the happiest of men. His
situation indeed was more than commonly joyful
He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted
love to swell Ms heart, and raise his spirits. He was
released, without any reproach to himself, from an en-
tanglement which had long formed his misery, from
a woman whom he had long ceased to love — and
elevated at once to that security with another, which
he must have thought of almost with despair, as soon
as he had learnt to consider it with desire. He was
brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery
to happiness ; — and the change was openly spoken in
such a genuine, flowing, grateful cheerfulness, as his
friends had never witnessed in him before.
His heart was now open to Elinor — all its weak-
nesses, all its errors confessed, and his first boyish.
8BN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 201
lent to Lucy treated with all the boyish dignity
tty-four.
was a foolish, idle inclination on my side, "
" the consequence of ignorance of the world
vant of employment. Had my mother given
le active profession when I was removed at
a from the care of Mr. Pratt, I think — nay, I
> , it would never have happened!; for though
ongstaple with what I thought, at the time, a
iconquerable preference for his niece, yet had
lad any pursuit, any object to engage my time
;p me at a distance from her for a few months,
i very soon have outgrown the fancied attach-
specially by mixing more with the world, as
a case I must have done. But instead of
my thing to do— instead of having any profes-
: > sen for me, or being allowed to choose any
I returned home to be completely idle ; and
first twelvemonth afterwards, I had not even
ninal employment which belonging to the
tty would have given me, for I was not en-
, Oxford till I was nineteen. I had therefore
in the world to do, but to fancy myself in
nd as my mother did not make my home in
espect comfortable — as I had no friend, no
ion in my brother, and disliked new acquaint-
was not unnatural for me to be very often at
iple, where I always felt myself at home, and
vays sure of a welcome; and accordingly I
ie greatest part of my time there from eighteen
iteen. Lucy appeared everything that was
and obliging. She was pretty too— at least
202 SBM8S AMD SENSIBILITY.
I thought so then; and I had seen so little of other
women, that I could make no comparisons, and see
no defects. Considering everything, therefore, I hope,
foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since
in every way been proved, it was not at the time an
unnatural, or an inexcusable piece of folly. "
The change which a few hours had wrought in
the minds and the happiness of the Dash woods was
such — so great — as promised them all, the satisfac-
tion of a sleepless night. Mrs. Dashwood, too happy
to be comfortable, knew not how to love Edward
nor praise Elinor enough — how to be enough thank-
ful for his release without wounding his delicacy,
nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained
conversation together, and yet enjoy, as she wished,
the sight and society of both.
Marianne could speak her happiness only by tears.
Comparisons would occur, regrets would arise; and
her joy, though sincere as her love for her sister,
was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor lan-
guage.
But Elinor, how are her feelings to be described?
From the moment of learning that Lucy was married
to another, that Edward was free, to the moment of
his justifying the hopes which had so instantly fol-
lowed, she was everything by turns but tranquil
But when the second momeut had passed — when ah*
found every doubt, every solicitude removed — con
pared her situation with what so lately it had been,-
saw him honourably released from his former engag
inent — saw him instantly profiting by the release,
address herself and declare an affection as tender,
8KN8E AND SENSIBILITY. £08
nstant as she had ever supposed it to be, — she
is oppressed, she was overcome by her own felicity 5
d happily disposed as is the human mind to be
sily familiarised with any change for the better,
required several hours to give sedateness to
r spirits, or any degree of tranquillity to her
art.
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a
sek ; for whatever other claims might be made on
m, it was impossible that less than a week should
given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company,
suffice to say half that was to be said of the past,
e present, and the future ; for though a very few
> urs spent in the hard labour of incessant talking
ill despatch more subjects than can really be in com*
on between any two rational creatures, yet with
vers it is different. Between them no subject is
rished, no communication is even made, till it has
ten made at least twenty times over.
Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable
onder among them all, formed of course one of the
jliest discussions of the lovers ; and Elinor's par-
jular knowledge of each party made it appear to her,
. every view, as one of the most extraordinary and
imccountable circumstances s'e had ever heard.
!ow they could be thrown together, and by what
traction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl
* whose beauty she had herself heard him speak
ithout any admiration — a girl too already engaged
< hU brother, and on whose account that brother
id. been thrown off by his family — it was beyond her
> mprehension to make out. To her own heart it
201 SESSB A» SENSIBILITY.
was ft delightful affair, to her imagination it w
a ridiculous one ; bat to her reason, her judgs
was completely a puzzle.
Edward could only attempt an explanat
supposing-, that perhaps at first accidentally m
the vanity of the one had been so worked on
flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees
the rest. minor remembered what Robe
told her in Hariey-street, of his opinion o
his own mediation in his brother's affairs
hare done, if applied to in time. She repc
to Edward.
" That was exactly like Robert, " was his
diate observation. ** And that, " he presently
44 might perhaps be in his head when the aci
ance between them first began. And Luc
haps at first might think only of procuring hi
offices in my favour. Other designs might afte
arise. "
How long it had been carrying on between
however, he was equally at a loss with hei
make out ; for at Oxford, where he had remal
choice ever since his quitting London, he h
no means of hearing of her but from herself, a
letters to the very last were neither less fri
nor less affectionate than usual. Not the si
suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to p
him for what followed ; and when at last it bi
him in a letter from Lucy herself, he had be
some time, he believed, half stupified betwe
wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a d
ance. He put the letter into Elinor's hands.
8ENSE AND 8EN8IBILITY. 205
" Dear Sir,
" Being very sure I have long lost your affections,
I have thought myself at liberty to bestow my own on
another, and have no doubt of being as happy with
him as I once used to think I might be with you ;
but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was
another's. Sincerely wish you happy in your choice,
and it shall not be my fault if we are not always good
friends, as our near relationship now makes proper.
I can safely say I owe you no ill-will, and am sure
you will be too generous to do us any ill offices.
Tour brother has gained my affections entirely, and
as we could not live without one another, we are
just returned from the altar, and are now on our
way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which place your
dear brother has great curiosity to see, but thought
I would first trouble you with these few lines, and
shall always remain,
" Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
" Lucy Ferrars.
" I have burnt all your letters, and will return
your picture the first opportunity. Please to destroy
my scrawls ; but the ring, with my hair, you are very
welcome to keep. ,,
Elinor read and returned it without any comment.
" I will not ask your opinion of it as a composi-
tion/* said Edward. " For worlds would not I have
had a letter of hers seen by you in former days. In
a sister it is bad enough, but in a wife ! How I
have blushed over the pages of. her writing ! and I
believe I may say, that since the first half-year of
206 SUMS AND BENSIBItlf *.
our foolish — business — this is the only letter I e?er
receiVed from her, of which the substance made me
any amendB for the defect of the style. "
" However it may have come about, " said Elinor,
after a pause, " they are certainly married. And
your mother has brought on herself a most appropriate
punishment. The independence she settled on Ro-
bert, through resentment against you, has put it in
his power to make his own choice; and she has ac-
tually been bribing one son with a thousand a-yetr,
to do the very deed which she disinherited the other
for intending to do. She will hardly be less hurt, I
suppose, by Robert's marrying Lucy, than she would
have been by your marrying her. "
" She will be more hurt by it, for Robert al-
ways was her favourite. She will be more hurt by it,
and on the same principle will forgive him much
sooner. "
In what state the affair stood at present between
them, Edward knew not, for no communication with
any of his family had yet been attempted by him.
He had quitted Oxford within four-and-twenty houra
after Lucy's letter arrived, and with only one object
before him, the nearest road to Barton, had had no
leisure to form any scheme of conduct with which
that road did not hold the most intimate connexion.
He could do nothing till he were assured of his fate
with Miss Dashwood ; and by his rapidity in seeking
that fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the jealousy
with which he had once thought of Colonel Brandon
— in spite of the modesty with which he rated his
own deserts, and the politeness with which he talked
SEV8B AMD ■EKBIBILITY. 207
of hit doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expect a
very cruel reception. It was his business, however,
to say that he did, and he 6aid it very prettily. " What
he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after,
must be referred to the imagination of husbands and
wives.
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go
off with a flourish of malice against him in her mes-
sage by Thomas, was perfectly clear to Elinor ; and
Edward himself, now thoroughly enlightened on her
character, had no scruple in believing her capable of
the utmost meanness of wanton ill-nature. Though
his eyes had been long opened, even before his ac-
quaintance with Elinor began, to her ignorance and
a want of liberality in some of her opinions, they had
been equally imputed, by him, to her want of educa-
tion; and till her last letter reached him, he had al-
ways believed her to be a well-disposed, good-hearted
girl, and thoroughly attached to himself. Nothing
but such a persuasion could have prevented his put-
ting an end to an engagement which, long before the
discovery of it laid him open to his mother's anger,
had been a continual source of disquiet and regret
to him.
** I thought it my duty, " said he, " independent of
my feelings, to give her the option of continuing the
engagement or not, when I was renounced by my
mother, and stood to all appearance without a friend
in the world to assist me. In such a situation as
that, where there seemed nothing to tempt the avarice
or the vanity of any living creature, how could I sup-
pose, when she so earnestly, so warmly insisted on
2Q8 SENSE AMD BENS IE IL ITT,
sharing my fate, whatever it might he, that anything
but the most disinterested affection wai her induce-
ment ? And even now, I cannot comprehend on
what motive she acted, or what funded advantage it
could be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom sbe
had not the smallest regard, and who hail only two
thousand pounds in the world. She could not foresee
that Colonel Brandon would give me a living/'
*'No, but sbe might suppose that something would
occur in jour favour ; that your own family might in
time relent. And at any rate, she lost nothiug by
continuing the engagement, for she has proved that it
fettered neither her inclination nor her actions. The
connexion was certainly a respectable one, and pro-
bably grained her consideration among her friends;
and if nothing more advantageous occurred, it would
be better for her to marry you than be single. "
Edward was of course immediately convinced that
nothing could hare been more natural than Lucy's
conduct, nor more self-evident than the motive of it.
Elinor scolded hinij harshly as ladies always scold
the imprudence which compliments themselves, for
having spent so much time with them at Norland,
when be must have felt his own inconstancy,
" Your behaviour was certainly very wrong/* said
she! " because— to say nothing of my own convic-
tion — our relations were all led away by it to fancy
and expect what, as you were then situated, could
never be*''
He could only plead an ignorance of his own
heart, and a mistaken conndence in the force of his
engagement.
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 209
" I was simple enough to think that, because my
faith was plighted to another, there could be no dan-
ger in my being with you ; and that the consciousness
of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and
sacred as my honour. I felt that I admired you, but
I told myself it was only friendship; and till I began
to make comparisons between yourself and Lucy, I
did not know how far I was got. After that, I sup-
pose, I was wrong in remaining so much in Sussex,
and the arguments with which I reconciled myself to
the expediency of it were no better than these : —
Hie danger is my own ; I am doing no injury to any-
body but myself. "
Elinor smiled, and shook her head.
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's
being expected at the Cottage, as he really wished not
only to be better acquainted with him, but to have
an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer
resented hie giving him the living of Delaford —
M Which, at present/'»aid he, " after thanks so un-
graciously delivered as mine were on the occasion,
he must think I have never forgiven him for offering. "
Now he felt astonished himself that he had never
yet been to the place. But so little interest had he
taken in the matter, that he owed all his knowledge
of the house, garden and glebe, extent of the parish,
condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor
herself, who had heard so much of it from Colonel
Brandon, and heard it with so much attention, as to
be entirely mistress of the subject.
One question after this only remained undecided
between them, one difficulty only was to be overcome.
o VOL. II.
210 SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY.
They were brought together by mutual affection, with
the warmest approbation of their real friends; their
intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make
their happiness certain — and they only wanted some-
thing to live upon. Edward had two thousand
pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living,
was all that they could call their own ; for it was im-
possible that Mrs. Dashwood should advance any-
thing, and they were neither of them quite enough in
love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a
year would supply them with the comforts of life.
Edward was not entirely without hopes of some
favourable change in his mother towards him ; and
on that he rested for the residue of their income.
But Elinor had no such dependance ; for, since Ed-
ward would still be unable to marry Miss Morton,
and his choosing herself had been spoken of in Mrs.
Ferrars'8 flattering language as only a lesser evil than
his choosing Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert's
offence would serve no other purpose than to enrich
Fanny.
About four days after Edward's arrival, Colonel
Brandon appeared, to complete Mrs. Dashwood's
satisfaction, and to give her the dignity of having,
for the first time since her living at Barton* more
company with her than her house would hold. Ed-
ward was allowed to retain the privilege of first-
comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every
night to his old quarters at the Park; from whence
he usually returned in the morning, early enough to
interrupt the lovers'first tete-a-tete before breakfast.
A three weeks'residence at Delaford, where, in
SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 211
his evening hours at least, he had little to do hut to
calculate the disproportion between thirty-six and
seventeen, hrought him to Barton in a temper of
mind which needed all the improvement in Mari-
anne's looks, all the kindness of her welcome, and
all the encouragement of her mother's language, to
make it cheerful. Among such friends however,
and such flattery, he did revive. No rumour of Lucy's
marriage had yet reached him ; he knew nothing of
what had passed, and the first hours of his visit were
consequently spent in hearing and in wondering.
Everything was explained to him hy Mrs. Dashwood ,
and he found fresh reason to rejoice in what he had
done for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted
the interest of Elinor.
It would he needless to say, that the gentlemen
advanced in the good opinion of each other as they
advanced in each other's acquaintance, for it could
not he otherwise. Their resemblance in good prin-
ciples and good sense, in disposition and manner of
thinking, would probably have been* sufficient to
unite them in friendship, without any other attrac-
tion ; but their being in love with two sisters, and
two sisters fond of each other,^ made that mutual
regard inevitable and immediate, which might other-
wise have waited the effect of time and judgment.
The letters from town, which a few days before
would have made every nerve in Elinor's body thrill
with transport, now arrived to be read with less
emotion than mirth. Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell
the wonderful tale, to vent her honest indignation
against the jilting girl, and pour forth her compas-
212 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY.
sion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she was sun
had quite doated upon the worthless hussey, an
was now, by all accounts, almost broken-hearted, i
Oxford. — " I do think, " she continued, " nothing wt
ever carried on so sly; for it was but two days befoi
Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me. ,N <
a soul suspected anything of the matter, not eve
Nancy, who, poor soul! came crying to me the da
after, in a great fright for fear of Mrs. Femurs, I
well as not knowing how to get to Plymouth ; ft
Lucy, it seems, borrowed all her money before sb
went off to be married, on purpose, we suppose, t
make a show with, and poor Nancy had not sere
shillings in the world ; — so I was very glad to gii
her five guineas, to take her down to Exeter, whei
she thinks of staying three or four weeks with Mr
Burgess, in hopes, as I tell her) ■ to fall in with tJ
Doctor again. And I must say that Lucy's croatM
not to take her along with them in -the chaise,
worse than all. Poor Mr. Edward ! I cannot get 1
out of my head, but you must send for him to J
ton, and Miss Marianne must try to comfort him
Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn.
Ferrar8 was the most • unfortunate of. women —
Fanny had suffered agonies of sensibility — ai
considered the existence of each, under such a
with grateful wonder. Robert's offence was i
donable, but Lucy'« was infinitely worse. N
of them was ever again to be mentioned t <
Ferrars ; and, even if she might hereafter be i
to forgive her son, his wife should never be a
iedged as her daufcYilfei, nor be permitted to
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 213
in her presence. The secrecy with which everything
had heen carried on between them, was rationally
treated as enormously heightening the crime, be-
cause, had any suspicion of it occurred to the others,
proper measures would have been taken to prevent
the marriage ; and he called on Elinor to join with
him in regretting that Lucy's engagement with Ed-
ward had not rather been fulfilled, than that she
should thus be the means of spreading misery farther
in the family. He thus continued :
" Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's
name, which does not surprise us ; but, to our great
astonishment, not a line has been received from him
on the occasion. Perhaps, however, he is kept silent
by his fear of offending, and I shall therefore give him
a hint, by a line to Oxford, that his sister and I both
think a letter of proper submission from him, ad-
dressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her shown to her
mother, might not be taken amiss ; for we all know
the tenderness of Mrs. Ferrars's heart, and that she
wishes for nothing so much as to be on good terms
with her children. "
This paragraph was of some importance to the
prospects and conduct of Edward. It determined
him to attempt a reconciliation, though not exactly
in the manner pointed out by their brother and
sister.
" A letter of proper submission ! " repeated he ;
" would they have me beg my mother's pardon for
Robert's ingratitude to her, and breach of honour to
me ? — I can make no submission — I am grown nei-
ther humble nor penitent by what has passed. I am
96 « 9 »»^ XTT'
•2\4
-*—* ^a»-**T-»
et c»t.
Cl > *ft'

5 r^tt 0t alt tO ° C A 7-**^
,»»*•

* < & ».
*ecot* <

L en*»
a^ ostt!


v erso^

> t* > t <
itxdot^

in*. *
joW an t ^it o» ^ 1W0 « ettt i e 4V» te H o«\edg <
three
HbeV
***
***£* W^* ?«****«*, *«* * to*
8t»?
^•S*^

.rue?
to'
215
CHAPTER XX.
After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Fer-
rars, just so violent and so steady as to preserve her
from that reproach which she always seemed fearful
of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, Ed-
ward was admitted to her presence, and pronounced
to be again her son.
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuat-
ing. For many years of her life she had had two
sons ; but the crime and annihilation of Edward, a
few weeks ago, had robbed her of one ; the similar
annihilation of Robert had left her for a fortnight
without any ; and now, by the resuscitation of Ed-
ward, she had one again.
In spite of his being allowed once more to live,
however, he did not feel the continuance of his
existence secure, till he had revealed his present en-
gagement ; for the publication of that circumstance,
he feared, might give a sudden turn to his constitu-
tion, and carry him off as rapidly as before. With
apprehensive caution therefore it was revealed, and
he was listened to with unexpected calmness. Mrs.
Ferrara at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade
him from marrying Miss Dashwood, by every argu-
ment in her power ; — told him, that in Miss Morton
he would have a woman of higher rank and larger
fortune ; — and enforced the assertion, by observing
> *«
****


-^
*v? >



**S




SEN8E AND SENSIBILITY. 217
was making considerable improvements ; and after
waiting some time for their completion — after expe-
riencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments and
delays, from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the
workmen, — Elinor, as usual, broke through the first
positive resolution of not marrying till everything
was ready, and the ceremony took place in Barton
church early in the autumn.
The first month after their marriage was spent
with their friend at the Mansion-house, from whence
they could superintend the progress of the Parsonage,
and direct everything as} they liked on the spot;
could choose papers, project shrubberies, and invent
a sweep. Mrs. Jennings's prophecies, though rather
jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled ; for she was
able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage
by Michaelmas, and she found in Elinor and her
husband, as fihe really believed, one of the happiest
couples in the world. They had in fact nothing to
wish for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and
Marianne, and rather better pasturage for their
cows.
They were visited on their first settling by almost
all their relations and friends; Mrs. Ferrars came
to inspect the happiness which she was almost
ashamed of having authorised ; and even the Dash-
woods were at the expense of a journey from Sussex
to do them honour.
" I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear
sister, " said John, as they were walking together one
morning before the gates of Delaford House — " that
would be saying too much, for certainly you have


SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 219
the'prosperity which crowned it, therefore, may be
held forth as a most encouraging instance of what an
earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest, how-
ever its progress may be apparently obstructed, will
do in securing every advantage of fortune, with no
other sacrifice than that of time and conscience.
When Robert first sought her acquaintance, and pri-
vately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings, it was only
with the view imputed to him by his brother. He
merely meant to persuade her to give up the engage-
ment ; and as there could be nothing to overcome but
the affection of both, he naturally expected that one
or two interviews would settle the matter. In that
point, however, and that only, he erred ; — for though
Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would
convince her in time, another visit, another conversa-
tion, was always wanted to produce this conviction.
Some doubts always lingered in her mind when they
parted, which could only be removed by another half-
hour's discourse with himself. His attendance was
by this means secured, and the rest followed in course.
Instead of talking of Edward, they came gradually to
talk only of Robert, — a subject on which he had al-
ways more to say than on any other, and in which
she soon betrayed an interest even equal to his own;
and in short, it became speedily evident to both, that
he had entirely supplanted his brother. He was
proud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and
very proud of marrying privately without his mother's
consent. What immediately followed is known.
They passed some months in great happiness at Daw-
lish ; for she had many relations and old acquaintance
KEJiSE AND SENSIBILITY.
to cut — and he drew several plana for ma
cottagee ; — ami from thence returning to to
cured the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by tl
expedient of asking it, which* at Lucy's jni
waa adopted. The forgiveness at firsts in dee
reasonable, comprehended only Robert; m
who had owed his mother no duty* and
could hare transgressed none, still remain
weeks longer unpardoned* But perseverani
mility of conduct* and messages, in eelf-condi
for Robert's offence, and gratitude for the
ntjKS she wns treated with* procured her in
haughty notice which overcame her by its
ness, and led soon afterwards, by rapid de
the highest state of affection and influence
became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as eith <
or Fanny ; and while Edward was never core
given for having once intended to marry her,
nor, though superior to her in fortune and t
spoken of as an intruder, she was in everytt
sidered, and always openly acknowledged,
favourite child. They settled in town, rece
liberal assistance from Mrs. Ferrars, were or
terms imaginable with the Dashwoods ; an
aside the jealousies and ill-will continually 8
between Fanny and Lucy, in which their 1
of course took a part, as well as the frequent
disagreements between Robert and Lucy the
nothing could exceed the harmony in which
lived together.
What Edward had done to forfeit the
eldest son, might have puzzled many peopl
SENSE " AND SENSIBILITY. 221
out ,* and what Robert had done to succeed to it,
might have puzzled them still more. It was an
arrangement, however, justified in its effects, if not
in its cause ; for nothing ever appeared in Robert's
style of living, or of talking, to give a suspicion of
his regretting the extent of his income, as either
leaving his brother too little, or bringing himself too
much ; — and if Edward might be judged from the
ready discharge of his duties in every particular,
from an increasing attachment to his wife and his
home, and from the regular cheerfulness of his
spirits, he might be supposed no less contented with
his lot, no less free from every wish of an exchange.
Elinor's marriage divided her as little from her
family as could well be contrived, without rendering
the cottage at Barton entirely useless, for her mother
-. and. sisters > pent much more than half their time
with herr~~Mj?T Dashwood was acting on motives of
policy., as well as pleasure in the frequency of her
W visits at Delafoal^ for Tier wish of bringing Mari-
anne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less
earnest, though rather more liberal, than what John
~-w -had exprjfeed. It was now her darling object.
Precious as was the company of her daughter to her,
she desired nothing so much as to give up its con-
stant enjoyment to her valued friend; and to see
• Marianne settled at the Mansion-house was equally
the wish of Edward and Elinor. They each felt his
sorrows and their own obligations, and Marianne,
by general consent, was to be the reward of all.
With such a confederacy against her — with a
knowledge so intimate of his goodness — with a con-

BESS* AUB 6ESSI & ILITT.

vietion of hi* fond attachment to herself,
last, though long after it was observable to
*I*e* burst on her— what could she do ?
Marianne Da^hwood was born to an cxt
late. She was born to discover the falaeh
own opinions, and to counteract* by her cc
mott favourite maxims. She was born t«
an affection formed so late in life n» at
and with no sentiment superior to stro
and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
to another!— and that other, a man win
fered no less than herself under the event
attachment, — whom, two years before, sh
sidered too old to be married, — and who i
the constitutional safeguard of a flannel w;
But so it was. Instead of falling a sac
irresistible passion,'as once she had fond
herself with expecting, — instead of re ma
for ever with her mother, and finding her
sures in retirement and study, as afterwi
more calm and sober judgment she had (
on, — she found herself, at nineteen, sub
new attachments, entering on new duties,
a new home, a wife, the mistress of a fi
the patroness of a village.
Colonel Brandon was now as happy as
who best loved him believed he deserved
Marianne he was consoled for every past ai
her regard and her society restored his mi
mation, and his spirits to cheerfulness;
Marianne found her own happiness in fo
was equally the persuasion and delight oi
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 223
serving friend. Marianne could never love by halves;
and her whole heart became, in time, as much de-
voted to her husband, as it had once been to Wil-
loughby.
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage with-
out a pang ; and his punishment was soon afterwards
complete in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith,
who, by stating his marriage with a woman of cha-
racter, as the source of her clemency, gave him rea-
son for believing, that had he behaved with honour
towards Marianne, he might at once have been happy
and rich. That his repentance of misconduct, which
thus brought its own punishment, was sincere, need
not be doubted ; nor that he long thought of Colonel
Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret.
But that he was for ever inconsolable — that he fled
from society , or contracted an habitual gloom of temper,
or died of a broken heart, must not be depended on —
for he did neither. He lived to exert, and frequently
to enj oy himself. His wife was not always out of
humour, nor his home always uncomfortable; and
in his breed of horses and dogs, and in sporting of
every kind, he found no inconsiderable degree of
domestic felicity.
For Marianne, however — in spite of his incivility
in surviving her loss — he always retained that de-
cided regard which interested him in everything that
befel her, and made her his secret standard of per-
fection in woman ; and many a rising beauty would
be slighted by him in after days as bearing no com-
parison with Mrs. Brandon.
Mrs. Da sh wood was prudent enough to remain at

Le Cottage, without attempting a removal to
ford ; and fortunately for Sir John and M i > . Jnu
when Marianne was taken from them, Marg-are
reached an age highly suitable for dancing, an
▼fry ineligible for being supposed to have a loi
Between Barton and Delaford, there was tha
itant communieation which strong family aff
Would naturally dictate ; and among tne mcri
the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let k i
ranked as the least considerable, that though s
and living almost within sight of eacJi other
could lire without disagreement between themi
or producing coolness between their husbands.


