

at jhttp : //books . qooqle . com/


'4 W



*?
-i-P!'.,'. --■-'-
a,

H
N
T*s
4
s
4
EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY
EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS
FICTION
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
R. BRIMLEY JOHNSON


k^ > 3

^IRST.SxSlTIOW:,
Reprinted " .**
February 1906
March 1906; August 1908
INTRODUCTION
Hr. Austen-Leigh declares in his memoir that " there
iras scarcely a charm in Jane Austen's most delightful
xs that was not a true reflection of her own sweet
per and loving heart/'and when we think of the two
idest Miss Bennets, of Emma and " poor Miss Taylor, " of
linor Dashwood, Fanny Price, Anne Elliot, and the
u unheroic " Catherine Morland, we realise the compre-
isiveness of the compliment.
Although few authors have shown a less obtrusive per-
ality, it is true that we can study her nature most fitly
her books. From the women in them whom she intends
to admire we may perceive her correct but sincere senti-
ents, her limited but deep sympathies, her warm affec-
bns, and her sprightly mind. From the characters she
idicules we discover her keen observation, her love of
tire, and her slightly fastidious refinement, for few have
bined so much good nature and absence of cynicism
ith an equal severity towards the vulgar. To the con-
ception of Jane Austen which we may gain from her novels,
kowever, the memoir by her nephew, Mr. Austen-Leigh,
ind the correspondence edited by Lord Brabourne, have
added something beyond the mere pleasure which the last
news of a favourite author must afford.
The letters contain many satiric passages as piquant as
those in the novels, and only less interesting to us because
they refer to persons of whom we know nothing. The
Bffect produced by her writings upon one of her contem-
poraries is shown by the following passage from the bio-
graphical notice prefixed to M. Hyacinthe de F.'s French
translation of Northanger Abbey : " Son talent pour creer
ies caracteres etait naturel et infini. Le style de sa corre-
spondance etait le meme que celui de ses nouvelles. Tout
ce que sa plume tracait etait parfait; elle avait des id6es
claires sur chaque sujet, ses expressions etaient tou jours
I
viii I^TJtpDUCTIOW
bien choisies, et je crois ne rien hasarder eiTassurant qu'el
n'a rien ecrit, ni lettre, ni billet, qui ne fiit digne d'e Tin
pression. " This is obviously an exaggeration, but, from
French writer, it is a striking tribute to Miss Austen%
powers of style. It was written in 1824, and must, ther#
fore, so far as it concerns her correspondence, have beep
founded on the few letters that were printed in the origin!
preface to Northanger Abbey.
Something of her character has been revealed, but of th
events of her life there is little to know. She was born oi
December 16, 1775, m the pretty little country parsonag
of Steventon, in Hampshire, where she spent the firs
twenty-six years of her life. In 1801 her father gave u|
his parochial duties to his son, and went with his family tS
Bath, where they remained till his death in February, 1805
The mother and daughters then lived for a while at SouthJ
ampton, but in 1809 settled into what her nephew has fitlj
called Jane's second home at Chawton, near Winchester!
on the estate which her brother Edward inherited from Mri
Knight of Godmersham Park, who had adopted him. Ii
was here that during the year 181 6 her last illness laid its
hold upon her. She did not quickly give way to it and
indeed, suffered comparatively little, but those wh4
watched her saw with alarm how steadily her weakness
increased, and in May, 181 7, she was persuaded to move tc
Winchester to consult a Mr. Lyford — a surgeon of som*
reputation. In that city she died on July 18, 181 7]
having at the end told her attendants that she wanted
" nothing but death.''She was buried in Winchestei
Cathedral.
She began to write at an early age, and the specimen
which Mr. Austen-Leigh gives of her childish compositions
is certainly clever. Some idea of its date may be gathered
from her letter of advice to a niece, in which she recom-
mends her to cease writing till the age of sixteen on the
ground that " she had herself often wished she had read
more and written less in the corresponding years of hei
life. " These first nonsensical pieces were followed by bur-
lesques of the style of romance which was then fashionable
It seems to me probable that Lady Susan was written soon
after these, since it is inferior to her other work, and was
D
I^CT^DUCTIO^i ix
el merally believed by her family to be a youthful composi-
i E on. Moreover, it is in the form of letters, like the first
n raft of Sense and Sensibility.
j n Her first period of serious composition began early, and
5r ras of brief duration. Pride and Prejudice, Sense and
ee visibility, and Northanger Abbey were all written at
n teventon between the ages of twenty-one and twenty-
hree. During the eight years she spent at Bath and
ti Southampton she produced nothing but the fragment of
the Watsons, with which she was evidently dissatisfied,
ig tod which she never attempted to finish. When she had
rs ettled in Chawton she revised the three former novels for
u ht press, and also wrote Emma, Mansfield Park, and
t Persuasion between the ages of thirty-six and forty-one.
3 it is generally admitted that she produced one masterpiece
th luring each of the two periods. At the time of her death
bli & was engaged upon a novel, of which a few extracts have
ei been published, but we have not sufficient material to judge
lx sven of its promise.
1 With singular self -insight Jane Austen spoke once of the
it * little bit of ivory two inches wide, on which she worked
d rith a brush so fine as to produce little effect after much
tx ibour. " She gives us a further glimpse of her methods in
5S < be following comments on a young relative's attempts in
t < le art of novel writing: — " You are now collecting your
n < people delightfully, getting them exactly into such a spot
y U is the delight of my life. Three or four families in a
2 C gantry village is the very thing to work on, and I hope
ei ou will do a great deal more, and make full use of them,
foile they are so favourably arranged. " On the " two-
;r ich bit of ivory " of a country village she drew her finished
i < tiniatures, and took every advantage of the " favourable
5 < 3 frangement. " Moreover, there is a sense in which she
i roduced little effect after much labour. Her novels are
lc tactically without plot or passion, and treat only of a
d tnited class during a particular period. The country life
sr f the upper middle class at the beginning of the nineteenth
-- btury is her theme, and she makes no effort to vary it.
i. t is moreover in the course of their daily life that her
laracters betray themselves, on those trivial occasions
s hen humanity .does^ not take the trouble to act a part.
a

xii I^T^DUCTIO^C
We leaxn from the preface to Lady Susan that Sense at
Sensibility was first written in the form of letters. Tl
reference here is evidently to the earlier story of Elinor at
Marianne, which was partially incorporated in Sense at
Sensibility, and which gives it a claim to be considered tl
•earliest of her published compositions.
For the sale of Sense and Sensibility Miss Austen receive
/150, which seemed to her a magnificent sum. In a lett <
to her sister Cassandra, dated April 25, 181 1, slie write*
" No, indeed, I am never too busy to think of S. and S.
I can no more forget it than a mother can forget her suckin
child . . . the incomes remain as they were, but I will g€
them altered if I can. ... I think [Mrs. Knatchbull] wi
like my Elinor, but cannot build on anything else. " Sh
confided to her family that " Anne Steele never succeede
in catching the doctor. "
R. Brimley Johnson.
Pride and Prejudice, written between October, 1796, and Auguq
1797, first published in 1813, and a second edition the same year, thi*
^edition 1817; Sense and Sensibility, written in its present form betwefi
November, 1797, and 1798, though a portion was extracted from a
•earlier manuscript, in the form of letters, entitled " Elinor and Mac
anne, " first published in 181 1, second edition 1813; Northang*
Abbey, written during 1798, and first published in 1818; Mansfiel
Park, written between 1811 and 1814, and first published in i8n
second edition in 1816; Emma, written between 18 11 and 18 16, an
first published in 1816; Persuasion, written between 181 1 and 18 ij
and first published in 181 8. In this edition the novels are printd
from the last editions revised by the author, certain obvious misprint
some of which do not occur in the earlier editions, being corrected
All such corrections are indicated by the words being enclosed in squai
brackets.
2) \
I\
a)
.VI
tt
te
SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
CH^PTEQ^ I
gf The family^ j^JDashwood had been long settled in Sussex.
w Their estate was large, and their residence was at Norland
SI Park, in the c entre of th eir property, where for many genera-
de tions they had lived in so respecfcabk-a-«tanner as to engage
the general good opinion of ^eir^sujTound^
The late owner of this estate was a single man, who lived to
a very advanced age, and who for many years of his life had
a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister. But
ru tar death, which happened ten years before his own, produced
JjJ ft great alteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he
i i invited and received into his house the family of his nephew,
[fffli. HenryDa^wood^jtbjELie^ of the Norland
te, ancTthT^rTorrto whomES~irltended to bequeath it.
society of his nephew and niece, and their children,
old gentleman's days were comfortably spent. His
itftttachment to them all increased. The constant attention
ni i Mr. and Mrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which pro-
\l ceded not merely from interest, but from goodness of heart,
ave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could
eceive; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish
o his existence.
By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one son;
j his present lady, three daughters. The son, a steady,
fespectable young man, was amply provided for by the for-
me of his mother, which had been large, and half of which
evolved on him on his coming of age. By his own marriage,
kewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to his
ealth. To him, therefore, the succession to the Norland
itate was not so really important as to his sisters; for their
tttune, independent of what might arise to them from their
A.
J
2 SE & QSE ADtD SEDtSIBILITT
father's inheriting that property, could be but small. Thei:
mother had nothing, and their father only seven thousan*
pounds in his own disposal; for the remaining moiety of hi
first wife's fortune was also secured to her ch3d, and he ha <
only a life interest in it.
The old gentleman died; his will was read, and like almos
every other will, gave as much disappointment as pleasun
He was neither so unjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave hi
estate from his nephew; but he left it to him on such terras
as destroyed half the value of the bequest. Mr. Dashwood
had wished for it more for the sake of his wife and daughters
than for himself or his son; but to his son, and his son's son,
a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, as to
leave to himself no power of providing for those who were
most dear to him, and who most needed a provision, by any
charge on the estate, or by any sale of its valuable woods.
The whole was tied up for the benefit of this child, who, in
occasional visits with his father and mother at Norland had
so far gained on the affections of his uncle, by such attractions
as are by no means unusual in children of two or three years
old: an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having
his own way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise,
as to outweigh all the value of all the attention which, for
years, he had received from his niece and her daughters. He
meant not to be unkind, however, and as a mark of his
affection for the three girls, he left them a thousand pounds
a-piece.
Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was at first severe; but-
his temper was cheerful and sanguine, and he might *$ason-
ably hope to live many years, and by living economically,
lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate
already large, and capable of almost immediate improvement.
But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, was his
only one twelvemonth. He survived his uncle no longer;
and ten thousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all
that remained for his widow and daughters. ***\
His son was sent for, as soon as his danger was knowpi
and to him Mr. Dashwood recommended, with all the strengtib
and urgency which illness could command, the interest
his mother-in-law-and^wtersr
Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the re!
1 SE3^SE A3^D SENSIBILITY 3
Lei i the family; but he was affected by a recommendation of
uh uch a nature at such a time, ai^he^ijxtmised to do every-
hi hing inJiis-pejs^rtoniake tligaajc^miortable. His father
ia < wras rendered easyBy^ucITaji assurance, and Mr. John Dash-
wood had then leisure to consider how much there might
os prudently be in his power to do for them.
ir( He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather
hi cold-hearted, and rather selfish, is to be ill-disposed: but he
*n was, in general, well respected ; for he conducted himself with
> o < propriety in the discharge of his ordinary duties. Had he
er married a more amiable woman, he might have been made
01 still more respectable than he was ; he might even have been
ti made amiable himself; for he was very young when he
if married, and very fond of his wife. But Mrs. John Dash-
.n| wood was a strongairicature of himself; more narrow-minded
d| anoU dfish.
'When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within
himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present
of a thousand pounds a-piece. He then really thought him-
11J self equal to it. The prospect of four thousand a-year, in
n addition to his present income, besides the remaining half of
si his own mother's fortune, warmed his heart and made him
feel capable of generosity. " Yes, he would give them three
thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It
ij would be enough to make them completely easy. Three
c thousand pounds ! he could spare so considerable a sum with
little inconvenience. " He thought of it all day long, and for
I many days successively, and he did not repent.
r No sooner was his father's fu neral over, thajuMrSj. John
H Dashwood, without sending~any notice 0? her intention to
4 hermother-in-law, arrived with her child and their attendants.
II No one could dispute her right to come; the house was her
ii hu:^uid's from the moment of his father's decease; but the
cacy of her conduct was so much the greater, and to a
man in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only common
lings, must have been highly unpleasing; but in her mind
re was a sense of honour so keen, a generosity so romantic,
at any offence of the kind, by whomsoever given or re-
ived, was to her a source of immoveable disgust. Mrs.
ohn Dashwood had never been a favourite with any of her
usband's famUyi,,but she had had no opportunity, till the
4 SE3^SE ADtp SEDiSIBILITT
present^jof shewing them with how little attention to the com
fort of other people she could act when occasion required il
So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this] ungracious beha\»
iour, and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law fo
it, that, on the arrival of the latter, she would have quitte
the house for ever, had not the entreaty of her eldest gii
induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going, and he
own tender love for all her three children determined he
afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breach wit]
their brother.
Elinor, this eldest daughter whose advice was so effectual
possessed a strength of understanding, and coolness of judg
ment, which qualified her, though only nineteen, to be th
counsellor of her mother, and enabled her frequently t
counteract, to the advantage of them all, that eagerness o
mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have led t
imprudence. She had an excellent heart; her dispositio]
was affectionate, and her feelings were strong: but she kaey
how to govern them : it was a knowledge which her mothe
had yet to learn, and which one of her sisters had resolve*
never to be taught.
Ma rianne's abilities were, in many resp ects, quite equa l t
Elinor 7 s^Jjhe was sensib le and clever, but eage r in every
th ing ; hersorrgWsTllW loVs, Cm] |fj Viavft no mfJ ftrfl tinn Sh
was generous, UIllluUKi, Interesting: she was everything bu
prudent. The resemblance between her and her mothe
was strikingly great.
Elino r saw, with goncern, the excess of her sister's sensi
bifi£y JHSuTby Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished
They encouraged each other now in the violence of thei
affliction. The agony of grief which overpowered them a
first, was voluntarily renewed, was sought for, was create
again and again. They gave themselves up wholly to Aei
sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every refl & flg*
that could afford it, and resolved against ever admitting car
solation in future. Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; bli
still she could struggle, she could exert herself. She coujl
consult with her brother, could receive her sister-in-law o:
her arrival, and treat her with proper attention: and coul
strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion, and encourag
her to similar forbearance.
I
SES^SE A3iD SEOiSIBILITT 5
o*n| Margaret, jtibejjdifiiL-sistei^was a good-humoured, well-
i it dispoi^^fTfTSut as she had already imbibed a good deal of
Marianne's romance, without having much of her sense; she
did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equal her sisters at a more
advanced period of life.
lav
rfo
tte <
he
he
vitl
ual
idg
thi
• t(
s
I t(
tioi
ie^
he
CH^PTE% II
Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of
Norland; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded
to the condition of visitors. As such, however, they were
treated by her with quiet civility; and by her husband with
as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond
himself, his wife, and their child!* He really pressed them,
with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home;
v^i and, as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as
remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a
house in the neighbourhood, his invitation was accepted.
A continuance in a place where everything reminded her
of former delight, was exactly what suited her mind. In
seasons of cheerfulness, no temper could be more cheerful
than hers, or possess, in a greater degree, that sanguine
expectation of happiness which is happiness itself. But in
^sj! sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy, and as
for beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.
Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her
husband intended to do for his sisters. To take three thou-
sand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy, would be
impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree. She begged
5fc InWto think again on the subject. How could he answer it
Q-nf to himself to rob his child, and his only child too, of so large
tra a sum ? And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,
mil who were related to him only by half blood, which she con-
01^ adered as no relationship at all, have on his generosity to so
lul & bige an amount? T± was v e ry well k n owp that no affecti on
raglw to ftypr gy ppft gftf l to exist between the children of any man
|tydifferent marriages; and why was he to ruin himself, and
lt(
Try
Sh(
bu
he
ed
leii
al
ted
leii
8 SE3^§E AD^p SE3^SIBILITT
My mother was quite sick of it. Her income was not her own
she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was th
more unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the mone;
would have been entirely at my mother's disposal, withou
any restriction whatever. It has given me such an abhor
rence of annuities, that I am sure I would not pin myself dowi
to the payment of one for all the world. " *
" It is certainly an unpleasant thing, " replied Mr. Dash-
wood, " to have those kind of yearly drains on one's income.
One's fortune, as your mother justly says, is not one's own,
To be tied down to the regular payment of such a sum, on
every rent day, is by no means desirable : it takes away one's
independence. "
" Undoubtedly ; and, after all, you have no thanks for it.
They think themselves secure, you do no more than what is
expected, and it raises no gratitude at all. If I were you,
whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely^
I would not bind myself to allow them anything yearly. Ii
may be very inconvenient some years to spare a hundred, or
even fifty pounds, from our own expenses. "
" I believe you are right, my love ; it will be better that
there should be no annuity in the case; whatever I may give
them occasionally will be of far greater assistance than a
yearly allowance, because they would only enlarge their
style of living if they felt sure of a larger income, and would
not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year. It
will certainly be much the best way. A present of fifty
pounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed
for money, and will, I think, be amply discharging my
promise to my father. "
" To be sure it will. Indeed, to say the truth, I am con-
vinced within myself, that your father had no idea of yourj
giving them any money at all. The assistance he thought oL
I dare say, was only such as might be reasonably expected or
you ; for instance, such as looking out for a comfortable small
house for them, helping them to move their things, and send-
ing them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever
they are in season. I'll lay my life that he meant nothing
v further; indeed, it would be very strange and unreasonable
if he did. Do but consider, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how
excessively comfortable your mother-in-law and her daughters
SED^SE ADtp SEZQIBILITT 9
wnimay live on the interest of seven thousand pounds, besides
th the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, which
ne brings them in fifty pounds a-year a-piece, and, of course,
lou they will pay their mother for their board out of it. Al-
101 together, they will have five hundred a-year amongst them,
> wf and what on earth can four women want for more than that ?
They will live so cheap ! Their housekeeping will be nothing
at all. They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardly any
servants; they will keep no company, and can have no
expenses of any kind ! Only conceive how comfortable they
wll be ! Five hundred a-year ! I am sure I cannot imagine
tew they will spend half of it; and as to your giving them
more, it is quite absurd to think of it. They will be much
more able to give you something. "
" Upon my word, " said Mr. Dashwood, " I believe you are
)ul perfectly right. My father certainly could mean nothing
more by his request to me than what you say. I clearly
understand it now, and I will strictly fulfil my engagement
oi by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you have
described. When my mother removes into another house,
Latj my services shall be readily given to accommodate her as
ve far as I can. Some little present of furniture, too, may be
acceptable then. "
" Certainly, " returned Mrs. John Dashwood. " But,
however, one thing must be considered. When your father
and mother moved to Norland, though the furniture of Stan-
hill was sold, all the china, plate, and linen was saved, and is
now left to your mother. Her house will therefore be almost
completely fitted up as soon as she takes it. "
" That is a material consideration, undoubtedly. A valu-
able legacy indeed ! And yet some of the plate would have
urf been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here. "
jf, " Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as hand-
of some as what belongs to this house. A great deal too
ill handsome, in my opinion, for any place they can ever afford
to live in. But, however, so it is. Your father thought
er °ply of them. And I must say this: that you owe no par-
ig ticular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes, for we
le v «y well know that if he could, he would have left almost
w ^erything in the world to them "
rs This argument was irresistible. It gave to his intentions
l
io SE3^SE AO^D SENSIBILITY
whatever of decision was wanting before; and he fii
resolved, that it would be absolutely unnecessary, if
highly indecorous, to do more for the widow and childn
his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts as his
wife pointed out.
CH*APTE% III
Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months;
from any disinclination to move when the sight of every
known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion which it
duced for a while; for when her spirits began to revive,
her mind became capable of some other exertion than
of heightening its affliction by melancholy remembrai
she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in
inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhoo
Norland; for to remove far from that beloved spot
impossible. But she could hear of no situation that at
answered her notions of comfort and ease, and suited
prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadier judgi
rejected several houses as too large for their income, \s
her mother would have approved.
Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband o
solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour, \s
gave comfort to his last earthly reflections. She dou
the sincerity of this assurance no more than he had dou
it himself, and she thought of it for her daughters'sake
satisfaction, though, as for herself, she was persuaded
a much smaller provision than seven thousand pounds v,
support her in affluence. For their brother's sake too
the sake of his own heart, she rejoiced; and she reproa
herself for being unjust to his merit before, in believing
incapable of generosity. His attentive behaviour to he
and his sisters, convinced her that their welfare was de;
him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied on the liber
of his intentions.
The contempt which she had, very early in their acqu
ance, felt for her daughter-in-law, was very much incre
ren
► 01
SENSE ADtp SENSIBILITY n
i^ by the further knowledge of her character, which half-a-
" year's residence in her family afforded; and, perhaps, in
spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection
on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found it
impossible to have/lived together so long, had not a particular
I circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, accord-
j ing to the opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters'
I continuance at Norland.
J This circumstance was a growing attachment between her
r eldest girl and the brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentle-
j man-like and pleasing young man, who was introduced to
their acquaintance soon after his sister's establishment at
Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part of his
time there.
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from
motives of interest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of
a man who had died very rich; and some might have re-
pressed it from motives of prudence, for, except a trifling
sum, the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his
mother. But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by
either consideration. It was enough for her that he appeared
to be amiable, that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor
returned the partiality. It was contrary to every doctrine
of hers, that difference of fortune should keep any couple
asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition;
and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged by
every one who knew her, was to her comprehension im-
possible.
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good
opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address. He
was not handsome, and his manners required intimacy to
make them pleasing. He was too diffident to do justice to
himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome, his
behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate
heart. His understanding was good, and his education had
given it solid improvement. But he was neither fitted by
abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his mother
and sister, who longed to see him distinguished — as — they
hardly knew what. They wanted him to make a fine figure
in the world in some manner or other. His mother wished
to interest him in political concerns, to get him into parlia-
12 SES^SE AO^p SEDiSIBILITT
ment, or to see him connected with some of the great men
the day. Mrs. John Dashwood wished it likewise; but
the meanwhile, till one of these superior blessings could
attained, it would have quieted her ambition to see hi
driving a barouche. But Edward had no turn for gre
men or barouches. All his wishes centred in domest
comfort and the quiet of private life. Fortunately he had
younger brother who was more promising.
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house befo
he engaged much of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for si
was, at that time, in such affliction as rendered her carele
of surrounding objects. She saw only that he was quiet ai
unobtrusive, and she liked him for it. He did not distu:
the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversatio
She was first called to observe and approve him farther, 1
a reflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on ti
difference between him and his sister. It was a contra
which recommended him most forcibly to her mother.
" It is enough, " said she; " to say that he is unlike Fam
is enough. It implies everything amiable. I love hi
already. "
" I think you will like him, " said Elinor, " when you knc
more of him. "
" Like him ! " replied her mother, with a smile. " la
feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love. "
" You may esteem him. "
" I have never yet known what it was to separate estee
and love. "
Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted wii
him. Her manners were attaching, and soon banished h
reserve. She speedily comprehended all his merits; tl
persuasion of his regard for Elinor perhaps assisted h
penetration; but she really felt assured of his worth: ar
even that quietness of manner which militated against i
her established ideas of what a young man's address ougl
to be, was no longer uninteresting when she knew his hea
to be warm and his temper affectionate.
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in h
behaviour to Elinor, than she considered their serious attad
ment as certain, and looked forward to their marriage i
rapidly approaching.
SE3QE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 13
" In a few months, my dear Marianne/'said she, " Elinor
will in all probability be settled for life. We shall miss
her; but she will be happy. "
" mama! how shall we do without her? "
" My love, it will be scarcely a separation. We shall live
within a few miles of each other, and shall meet every day
of our lives. You will gain a brother — a real, affectionate
brother. I have the highest opinion in the world of Edward's
heart. But you look grave, Marianne; do you disapprove
pour sister's choice? "
" Perhaps, " said Marianne, " I may consider it with some
surprise. Edward is very amiable, and I love him tenderly.
But yet, he is not the kind of young man — there is a some-
thing wanting, his figure is not striking — it has none of that
jrace which I should expect in the man who could seriously
attach my sister. His eyes want all that spirit, that fire,
which at once announce virtue and intelligence. And
besides all this, I am afraid, mama, he has no real taste.
Music seems scarcely to attract him, and though he admires
Elinor's drawings very much, it is not the admiration of a
person who can understand their worth. It is evident, in
spite of his frequent attention to her while she draws, that in
fact he knows nothing of the matter. He admires as a lover,
not as a connoisseur. To satisfy me, those characters must
be united. I could not be happy with a man whose taste
did not in every point coincide with my own. He must
enter into all my feelings; the same books, the same music
must charm us both. mama ! how spiritless, how tame was
Edward's manner in reading to us last night! I felt for my
sister most severely. Yet she bore it with so much com-
posure, she seemed scarcely to notice it. I could hardly
keep my seat. To hear those beautiful lines which have
frequently almost driven me wild, pronounced with such
impenetrable calmness, such dreadful indifference ! "
" He would certainly have done more justice to simple
and elegant prose. I thought so at the time; but you would
give him Cowper. "
" Nay, mama, if he is not to be animated by Cowper! —
but we must allow for difference of taste. Elinor has not my
feelings, and therefore she may overlook it, and be happy
with him. But it would have broke my heart had I loved
14 SEO^SE JDiD SENSIBILITY
him, to hear hjn j.jw.fcd h» nil L'o lilflesensibility. Mama, tl
more 1 Know oithe world, the more am I convinced that
shall never see a man whom I can really love. I require i
much! He must have all Edward's virtues, and his perse
and manners must ornament his goodness with ever
possible charm. ,,
" Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen. It i
yet too early in life to despair of such an happiness. Wb
should you be less fortunate than your mother? In on
circumstance only, my Marianne, may your destiny b
different from hers ! "
CH^PTE^ IV
" What a pity it is, Elinor, " said Marianne, " that Edwan
should have no taste for drawing. "
" No taste for drawing, " replied Elinor; " why shouk
you think so ? He does not draw himself, indeed, but he hai
great pleasure in seeing the performances of other people, an(
I assure you, he is by no means deficient in natural taste
though he has not had opportunities of improving it. Ha(
he ever been in the way of learning, I think he would hav <
drawn very well. He distrusts his own judgment in sucl
matters so much, that he is always unwilling to give hi
opinion on any picture; but he has an innate propriety aiu
simplicity of taste, which in general direct him perfect!)
rig**'" .
Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on th)
subject; but the kind of approbation which Elinor describe!
as excited in him by the drawings of other people, was ver;
far from that rapturous delight, which, in her opinion, coul <
alone be called taste. Yet, though smiling within herself a
the mistake, she honoured her sister for that blind partialit
to Edward which produced it.
" I hope, Marianne, " continued Elinor, " you do no
consider him as deficient in general taste. Indeed, I thin]
I may say that you cannot, for your behaviour to him i
1
jED^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 15
, t erfectly cordial, and if that were your opinion, I am sure
ia§ou could never be civil to him. "
Marianne hardly knew what to say. She would not wound
srihe feelings of her sister on any account, and yet to say what
:v she did not believe was impossible. At length she replied —
" Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in
It everything equal to your sense of his merits. I have not had
W so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities
of his mind, his inclinations, and tastes, as you have; but I
have the highest opinion in the world of his goodness and
sense. I think him everything that is worthy and amiable.''
" I am sure, " replied Elinor, with a smile, " that his
dearest friends could not be dissatisfied with such commen-
dation as that. I do not perceive how you could express
yourself more warmly. "
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased.
" Of his sense and his goodness, " continued Elinor, " no
one can, I think, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough
to engage him in unreserved conversation. The excellence
of his understanding, and his principles can be concealed
only by that shyness which too often keeps him silent. You
know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth. But of
his minuter propensities, as you call them, you have from
peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself.
He and I have been at times thrown a good deal together,
while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affection-
ate principle by my mother. I have seen a great deal of him,
have studied his sentiments, and heard his opinion on subjects
of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, I venture to
pronounce that his mind is well-informed, his enjoyment of
books exceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observa-
tion just and correct, and his taste delicate and pure. His
abilities in every respect improve as much upon acquaint-
ance as his manners and person. At first sight, his address
is certainly not striking; and his person can hardly be called
handsome, till the expression of his eyes, which are un-
commonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance
is perceived. At present, I know him so well, that 1 think
him really handsome ; or, at least, almost so. What say you,
Marianne? "
" I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not
> -
1 6 SE3^SE AO^D SENSIBILITY
now. When you tell me to love him as a brother, I shall nq
more see imperfection in his face, than I now do in his hearty
Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for m
warmth she had been betrayed into, in speaking of him. She
felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion. She
believed the regard to be mutual; but she required greater
certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction of their attach-
ment agreeable to her. She knew that what Marianne and'
her mother conjectured one moment, they believed the next
— that with them, to wish was to hope, and to hope was to
expect. She tried to explain the real state of the case to her
sister.
" I do not attempt to deny, " said she, " that I think very
highly of him — that I greatly esteem, that I like him. "
Marianne here burst forth with indignation —
" Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor. Oh!
worse than cold-hearted ! Ashamed of being otherwise. Use
those words again, and I will leave the room this moment. "
Elinor could not help laughing. " Excuse me, " said she,
" and be assured that I meant no offence to you, by speaking,
in so quiet a way, of my own feelings. Believe them to be
stronger than I have declared; believe them, in short, to be
such as his merit, and the suspicion — the hope of his affection
for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly. But
further than this you must not believe. I am by no means
assured of his regard for me. There are moments when the
extent of it seems doubtful; and till his sentiments are fully
known, you cannot wonder at my wishing to avoid any en-
couragement of my own partiality, by believing or calling
it more than it is. In my heart I feel little — scarcely any
doubt of his preference. But there are other points to be
considered besides his inclination. He is very far from being
independent. What his mother really is we cannot know;
but, from Fanny's occasional mention of her conduct and
opinions, we have never been disposed to think her amiable;
and I am very much mistaken, if Edward is not himself
aware that there would be many difficulties in his way, if he
were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great
fortune or high rank. "
Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination
of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth.
SE2(SE A3ip SEZQIBILITT 17
i " And you really are not engaged to him ! " said she. " Yet
it certainly soon will happen. But two advantages will
Bproceed from this delay. I shall not lose you so soon, and
Edward will have greater opportunity of improving that
natural taste for your favourite pursuit, which must be so
indispensably necessary to your future felicity. Oh! if he
should be so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to
draw himself, how delightful it would be ! "
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister. She could
not consider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a
state as Marianne had believed it. There was, at times, a
want of spirits about him, which, if it did not denote indiffer-
ence, spoke a something almost as unpromising. A doubt
1 of her regard, supposing him to feel it, need not give him
more than inquietude. It would not be likely to produce
that dejection of mind which frequently attended him. A
more reasonable cause might be found in the dependent
situation which forbad the indulgence of his affection. She
knew that his mother neither behaved to him so as to make
his home comfortable at present, nor to give him any assur-
ance that he might form a home for himself, without strictly
attending to her views for his aggrandisement. With such a
knowledge as this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy
on the subject. She was far from depending on that result
^ of his preference of her, which her mother and sister still
k considered as certain. Nay, the longer they were together,
the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard; and
sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be
no more than friendship.
But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough,
when perceived by his sister, to make her uneasy; and at
the same time (which was still more common), to make her
uncivil. She took the first opportunity of affronting her
mother-in-law on the occasion, talking to her so expressively
of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs. Ferrars's resolu-
tion that both her sons should marry well, and of the danger
attending any young woman who attempted to draw him in,
that Mrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious,
nor endeavour to be calm. She gave her an answer which
marked her contempt, and instantly left the room, resolving
that, whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so
B
):
£
1 8 SEO^SE AD^D SED^SIBILITT
sudden a removal, her beloved Elinor should not be expose
another week to such insinuations.
In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to to
from the post, which contained a proposal particularly wel
timed. It was the offer of a small house, on very easy ternu
belonging to a relation of her own, a gentleman of consequenc
and property in Devonshire. The letter was from thi
gentleman himself, and written in the true spirit of friendl;
accommodation. He understood that she was in need of
dwelling, and though the house he now offered her was merel
a cottage, he assured her that everything should be done to i
which she might think necessary, if the situation pleased hei
He earnestly pressed her, after giving the particulars of th
house and garden, to come with her daughters to Barto
Park, the place of his own residence, from whence she migh
judge herself whether Barton Cottage, for the houses wer
in die same parish, could by any alteration be made con
fortable to her. He seemed really anxious to accommodat
them, and the whole of his letter was written in so friendl
a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; moi
especially at a moment when she was suffering under th
cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections. Sh
needed no time for deliberation or inquiry. Her resolutio
was formed as she read. The situation of Barton, in a count
so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which but a fe
hours before would have been a sufficient objection to ou
weigh every possible advantage belonging to the place, wi
now its first recommendation. To quit the neighbourhoc
of Norland was no longer an evil; it was an object of desin
it was a blessing in comparison of the misery of continuir
her daughter-in-law's guest: and to remove for ever froi
that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit <
visit it while such a woman was its mistress. She instant!
wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledgment of his kini
ness, and her acceptance of his proposal; and then hasten*
to shew both letters to her daughters, that she might 1
secure of their approbation before her answer were sent.
Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent fi
them to settle at some distance from Norland than immec
ately amongst their present acquaintance. On that hea
therefore, it was not for her to oppose her mother's intentic
SE & QSE JM'^IBILITr 19
of removing into Devonshire. The house, too, as described
by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent so un-
commonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on
either point; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which
brought any charm to her fancy, though it was a removal
[ from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes, she made
\ no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending her letter of
acquiescence.
CH < APTE < R^ V
No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood
indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-
law and his wife that she was provided with a house, and
should incommode them no longer than till everything were
ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her with surprise.
Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly
hoped that she would not be settled far from Norland. She
had great satisfaction in replying that she was going into
Devonshire. Edward turned nastily towards her on hearing
this, and in a voice of surprise and concern, which required no
explanation to her, repeated, " Devonshire ! Are you indeed
going there ? So far from hence ! And to what part of it ? "
She explained the situation. It was within four miles
northward of Exeter.
" It is but a cottage, " she continued, " but I hope to see
many of my friends in it. A room or two can easily be added ;
and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so far to see
me, I am sure I will find none in accommodating them. "
She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs.
John Dashwood to visit her at Barton; and to Edward she
gave one with still greater affection. Though her late con-
versation with her daughter-in-law had made her resolve on
remaining at Norland no longer than was unavoidable, it
had not produced the smallest effect on her in that point
to which it principally tended. To separate Edward and
Elinor was as far from being her object as ever; and she
wished to shew Mrs. John Dashwood by this pointed invita*
1
20 SEZ^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITr
tion to her brother, how totally she disregarded her disap
probation of the match.
Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again ho*
exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken an house at suet
a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of any service
to her in removing her furniture. He really felt conscien-
tiously vexed on the occasion; for the very exertion to which
he had limited the performance of his promise to his father
was by this arrangement rendered impracticable. — The
furniture was all sent round by water. It chiefly consisted of
household linen, plate, china, and books, with an handsome
pianoforte of Marianne's. Mrs. John Dashwood saw the
packages depart with a sigh; she could not help feeling it
hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be so trifling in
comparison with their own, she should have any handsome
article of furniture.
Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was
ready furnished, and she might have immediate possession.
No difficulty arose on either side in the agreement; and she
waited only for the disposal of her effects at Norland, and to
determine her future household, before she set off for the
west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in the perform-
ance of everything that interested her, was soon done. — The
horses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon
after his death, and an opportunity now offering of disposing
of her carriage, she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest
advice of her eldest daughter. For the comfort of hei
children, had she consulted only her own wishes, she would
have kept it; but the discretion of Elinor prevailed. Hei
wisdom, too, limited the number of their servants to three-
two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily pro-
vided fffom amongst those who had formed their establish-
ment at Norland.
The man and one of the maids were sent off immediatelj
into Devonshire, to prepare the house for their mistress's
arrival; for, as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown tc
Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred going directly to the cottage
to being a visitor at Barton Park; and she relied so un-
doubtingly on Sir John's description of the house, as to feel
no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as hei
own. Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved
SE^SE J3^p SE^SIBILITr 21
from diminution by the evident satisfaction of her daughter-
in-law in the prospect of her removal; a satisfaction which
was but feebly attempted to be concealed under a cold invita-
tion to her to defer her departure. Now was the time when
her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particular
propriety be fulfilled. Since he had neglected to do it on
first coming to the estate, their quitting his house might be
looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment.
But Mrs. Dashwood began shortly to give over every hope of
the kind, and to be convinced, from the general drift of his
discourse, that his assistance extended no further than their
maintenance for six months at Norland. He so frequently
talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and of
the perpetual demands upon his purse which a man of any
consequence in the world was beyond calculation exposed to,
that he seemed rather to stand in need of more money himself
than to have any design of giving money away.
In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John
Middleton's first letter to Norland, everything was so far
settled in their future abode, as to enable Mrs. Dashwood
and her daughters to begin their journey.
Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to
a place so much beloved. " Dear, dear Norland! " said
Marianne, as she wandered alone before the house, on the
last evening of their being there; " when shall I cease to
regret you? — when learn to feel a home elsewhere? — O
happy house ! could you know what I suffer in now viewing
you from this spot, from whence perhaps I may view you no
more! — And you, ye well-known trees! — but you will con-
tinue the same. — No leaf will decay because we are removed,
nor any branch become motionless although we can^pbserve
you no longer! — No; you will continue the same; uncon-
scious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insens-
ible of any change in those who walk under your shade j^—
But who will remain to enjoy you? "
22 SEO^SE A2{p SED^SIBILITT
CH^fPTE^ VI
The first part of their journey was performed in too melan-
choly a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and un-
pleasant. But as they drew towards the end of it, their
interest in the appearance of a country which they were to
inhabit overcame their dejection, and a view of Barton
Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness. It was
a pleasant, fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture.
After winding along it for more than a mile, they reached
their own house. A small green court was the whole of its
demesne in front; and a neat wicket gate admitted them
into it.
As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable
and compact; but as a cottage it was defective, for the build-
ing was regular, the roof was tiled, the window-shutters were
not painted green, nor were the walls covered with honey-
suckles. A narrow passage led directly through the house
into the garden behind. On each side of the entrance was a
sitting-room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them
were the offices and the stairs. Four bedrooms and two
garrets formed the rest of the house. It had not been built
many years, and was in good repair. In comparison of Nor-
land, it was poor and small indeed! — but the tears which
recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon
dried away. They were cheered by the joy of the servants
on their arrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved
to appear happy. It was very early in September; the
season was fine, and from first seeing the place under the
advantage of good weather, they received an impression in
its favour which was of material service in recommending it
to their lasting approbation.
The situation of the house was good. High hills rose imme-
diately behind, and at no great distance on each side ; some
of which w^re open downs, the others cultivated and woody.
The village of Barton was chiefly on one of these hills, and
formed-^ pleasant view from the cottage windows. The
prospect in front was more extensive; it commandled the
whole of the valley, and reached into the country bteyond.
SE^SE A3^p SEO^SIBILITT 23
hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley
at direction ; under another name, and in another course,
inched out again between two of the steepest of them,
ith the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood
upon the whole well satisfied; for though her former
of life rendered many additions to the latter indispens-
, yet to add and improve was a delight to her; and she
at this time ready money enough to supply all that was
ted of greater elegance to the apartments. " As for the
e itself, to be sure, " said she* " it is too small for our
ly; but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for
present, as it is too late in the year for improvements,
aps in the spring if I have plenty of money, as I dare
I shall, we may think about building. These parlours
X)th too small for such parties of our friends as I hope
*e often collected here; and I have some thoughts of
ring the passage into one of them, with perhaps a part
e other, and so leave the remainder of that other for an
ince; this, with a new drawing-room, which may be
y added, and a bed-chamber and garret above, will make
very snug little cottage. I could wish the stairs were
some. But one must not expect everything; though I
ose it would be no difficult matter to widen them. I
see how much I am beforehand with the world in the
g, and we will plan our improvements accordingly. "
the meantime, till all these alterations could be made
the savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a
an who never saved in her life, they were wise enough to
mtented with the house as it was; and each of them
busy in arranging their particular concerns, and en-
During, by placing around them their books and other
ssions, to form themselves a home. Marianne's piano-
was unpacked and properly disposed of; and Elinor's
ings were affixed to the walls of their sitting-room,
such employments as these they were interrupted soon
breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord,
called to welcome them to Barton, and to offer them
'accommodation from his own house and* garden in
1 theirs might at present be deficient. Sir John Middle-
ras a good-looking man about forty. He had formerly
d at Stanhill, but it was too long ago for his young
24 SE^SE AD^D SE^SIBILITT
cousins to remember him. His countenance was thoroughly
good-humoured; and his manners were as friendly as the
style of his letter. Their arrival seemed to afford him real
satisfaction, and their comfort to be an object of real solici-
tude to him. He said much of his earnest desire of theii
living on the most sociable terms with his family, and pressed
them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they
were better settled at home, that, though his entreaties were
carried to a point of perseverance beyond civility, they could
not give offence. His kmdness was not confined to words;
for within an hour after he left them, a large basket full of
garden stuff and fruit arrived from the Park, which was fol-
lowed before the end of the day by a present of game. He
insisted, moreover, [on] conveying all their letters to and
from the post for them, and would not be denied the satis-
faction of sending them his newspaper every day.
Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him,
denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon
as she could be assured that her visit would be no inconveni-
ence; and as this message was answered by an invitation
equally polite, her ladyship was introduced to them the next
day.
They were of course very anxious to see a person on whom
so much of their comfort at Barton must depend; and th(
elegance of her appearance was favourable to their wishes
Lady Middleton was not more than six or seven and twenty
her face was handsome, her figure tall and striking, and he
address graceful. Her manners had all the elegance whicl
her husband's wanted. But they would have been improve*
by some share of his frankness and warmth; and her visi
was long enough to detract something from their first ad
miration, by shewing that, though perfectly well-bred, sh
was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say for herself beyon
the most common-place inquiry or remark.
Conversation, however, was not wanted, for Sir John w*
very chatty, and Lady Middleton had taken the wise pn
caution of bringing with her their eldest child, a fine litt
boy about six years old, by which means there was one sul
ject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of extremity
for they had to inquire his name and age, admire his beaut
and ask him questions, which his mother answered for hii
SE3^SE A3^D SEOiSIBILITT 25
" while he hung about her and held down his head, to the great
I surprise of her ladyship, who wondered at his being so shy
I before company, as he could make noise enough at home.
fc On every formal visit a child ought to be of the party, by
I way of provision for discourse. In the present case it took
up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like
bis father or mother, and in what particular he resembled
S either; for of course everybody differed, and everybody was
astonished at the opinion of the others.
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of
u- debating on the rest of the children, as Sir John would not
j ij leave the house without securing their promise of dining at
I the park the next day.
CHJlPTE% VII
Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage. The
ladies had passed near it on their way along the valley, but
it was screened from their view at home by the projection
of an hill. The house was large and handsome; and the
Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality and elegance.
The former was for Sir John's gratification, the latter for that
of his lady. They were scarcely ever without some friends
staying with them in the house, and they kept more company
of every kind than any other family in the neighbourhood.
It was necessary to the happiness of both; for, however dis-
similar in temper and outward behaviour, they strongly
resembled each other in that total want of talent and taste
which confined their employments, unconnected with such
as society produced, within a ^very narrow compass. Sir
John was a sportsman, Lady Middleton a mother. He
hunted and shot, and she humoured her children; and these
were their only resources. Lady Middleton had the advan-
tage of being able to spoil her children all the year round,
while Sir John's independent employments were in existence
only half the time. Continual engagements at home and
abroad, however, supplied all the deficiencies of nature and
26 SE$(SE A3^p SEOiSIBILITT
education; supported the good spirits of Sir John, and gave
exercise to the good breeding of his wife.
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her
table, and of all her domestic arrangements ; and from this
kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in any of their
parties. But Sir John's satisfaction in society was much
more real; he delighted in collecting about him more young
people than his house would hold, and the noisier they were
the better was he pleased. He was a blessing to all the
juvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for
ever forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors,
and in winter his private balls were numerous enough for
Jv^oung lady who was not suffering under the insatiable
state of fifteen,
he arrival of a new family in the country was always a
ter of joy to him, and in every point of view he was
; charmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for his
y cottage at Barton. The Miss Dashwoods were young,
pretty, and unaffected. It was enough to secure his good
opinion, for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could
want to make her mind as captivating as her person. The
friendliness of his disposition made him happy in accom-
modating those whose situation might be considered, in
comparison with the past, as unfortunate. In shewing kind-
ness to his cousins, therefore, he had the real satisfaction of a
good heart; and in settling a family of females only in his
cottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a
sportsman, though he esteems only those of his sex who are
sportsmen likewise, is not often desirous of encouraging their
taste by admitting them to a residence within his own manor.
Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door
of the house by Sir John, who welcomed them to Barton
Park with unaffected sincerity; and as he attended them to
the drawing-room, repeated to the young ladies the concern
which the same subject had drawn from him the day before,
at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.
They would see, he said, only one gentleman there besides
himself; a particular friend who was staying at the Park,
but who was neither very young nor very gay. He hoped
they would all excuse the smallness of the party, and could
assure them it should never happen so again. He had been
SEO^SE AD < ^ > SE^SIBILITT 27
to several families that morning, in hopes of procuring some
addition to their number; but it was moonlight, and every-
body was full of engagements. Luckily, Lady Middleton's
mother had arrived at Barton within the last hour, and as
she was a very cheerful, agreeable woman, he hoped the
young ladies would not find it so very dull as they might
imagine. The young ladies, as well as their mother, were
perfectly satisfied with having two entire strangers of the
party, and wished for no more.
Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a good-
humoured, merry, fat, elderly woman, who talked a great
deal, seemed very happy, and rather vulgar. She was full
of jokes and laughter, and before dinner was over had said
many witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands;
hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,
and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.
; Marianne was vexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her
eyes towards Elinor, to see how she bore these attacks, with
an earnestness which gave Elinor far more pain than could
arise from such common-place raillery as Mrs. Jennings's.
Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more
adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend than
Lady Middleton was to be his wife, or Mrs. Jennings to be
Lady Middleton's mother. He was silent and grave. His
appearance, however, was not unpleasing, in spite of his
being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret, an absolute
old bachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five-and-thirty ;
but though his face was not handsome, his countenance was
sensible, and his address was particularly gentlemanlike.
There was nothing in any of the party which could recom-
mend them as companions to the Dashwoods; but the cold
insipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly repulsive
that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel Brandon, and
even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his mother-in-law,
was interesting. Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to
enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children
after dinner, who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put
an end to every kind of discourse except what related to
themselves.
In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical,
she was invited to play. The instrument was unlocked,
28 SEO^SE A2{p SE^SIBILITr
everybody prepared to be charmed, and Marianne, who sang
very well, at their request went through the chief of the songs
which Lady Middleton had brought into the family on her
marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since in the same
position on the pianoforte; for her ladyship had celebrated
that event by giving up music, although by her mother's
account she had played extremely well, and by her own was
very fond of it.
Marianne's performance was highly applauded. Sir John
was loud in his admiration at the end of every song, and as
loud in his conversation with the others while every song
lasted. Lady Middleton frequently called him to order,
wondered how any one's attention could be diverted from
music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular
song which Marianne had just finished. Colonel Brandon
alone, of all the party, heard her without being in raptures.
He paid her only the compliment of attention; and she felt
a respect for him on the occasion which the others had reason-
ably forfeited by their shameless want of taste. His pleasure
in music, though it amounted not to that extatic delight
which alone could sympathise with her own, was estimable
when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the
others; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man
of five-and-thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of
feeling and every exquisite power of enjoyment. She was
perfectly disposed to make every allowance for the colonel's
advanced state of life which humanity required.
CH^PTE^ vm
Mrs. Jennings was a widow, with an ample jointure. She
had only two daughters, both of whom she had lived to see
respectably married, and she had now therefore nothing to
do but to marry all the rest of the world. In the promotion
of this object, she was zealously active, as far as her ability
reached, and missed no opportunity of projecting weddings
among all the young people of her acquaintance. She was
)
SEO^SE AD^p SEtKSIBILITT 29
remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had
enjoyed the advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity
of many a young lady by insinuations of her power over
such a young man; and this kind of discernment enabled
her soon after her arrival at Barton, decisively to pronounce
that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne
Dashwood. She rather suspected it to be so, on the very
first evening of their being together, from his listening so
attentively while she sang to them ; and when the visit was
returned by the Middletons dining at the cottage, the fact
was ascertained by his listening to her again. It must be so.
She was perfectly convinced of it. It would be an excellent
match, for he was rich and she was handsome. Mrs. Jennings
had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married ever
since her connection with Sir John first brought him to her
knowledge; and she was always anxious to get a good
husband for every pretty girl.
The immediate advantage to herself was by no means in-
considerable, for it supplied her with endless jokes against
them both. At the Park she laughed at the colonel, and in
the cottage at Marianne. To the former her raillery was
probably, as far as it regarded only himself, perfectly in-
different; but to the latter it was at lirst incomprehensible;
and when its object was understood, she hardly knew whether
most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,
for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel's
advanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old
bachelor.
Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five years
younger than herself so exceedingly ancient as he appeared
to the youthful fancy of her daughter, ventured to clear Mrs.
Jennings from the probability of wishing to throw ridicule
on his age.
" But at least, mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of
the accusation, though you may not think it intentionally
ill-natured. Colonel Brandon is certainly younger than Mrs.
Jennings, but he is old enough to be my father; and if he
were ever animated enough to be in love, must have long
outlived every sensation of the kind. It is too ridiculous!
When is a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity
will not protect him? "
3 o SE^SE A${p SEOiSIBILITT
" Infirmity! " said Elinor; " do you call Colonel Brandon
infirm? I can easily suppose that his age may appear much
greater to you than to my mother; but you can hardly
deceive yourself as to his having the use of his limbs? "
" Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism? and
is not that the commonest infirmity of declining life ? "
" My dearest child, " said her mother, laughing, " at this
rate, you must be in continual terror of my decay; and it
must seem to you a miracle that my life has been extended
to the advanced age of forty. "
" Mama, you are not doing me justice. I know very well
that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to make his friends
yet apprehensive of losing him in the course of Nature. He
may live twenty years longer. But thirty-five has nothing
to do with matrimony. "
" Perhaps, " said Elinor, " thirty-five and seventeen had
better not have anything to do with matrimony together.
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman
who is single at seven-and-twenty, I should not think Colonel
Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to his marrying
her. "
" A woman of seven-and-twenty, " said Marianne, after
pausing a moment, " can never hope to feel or inspire affection
again; and if her home be uncomfortable, or her fortune
small, I can suppose that she might bring herself to submit
to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of the provision and
security of a wife. In his marrying such a woman, therefore,
there would be nothing unsuitable. It would be a compact
of convenience, and the world would be satisfied. In my
eyes it would be no marriage at all, but that would be nothing.
To me it would seem only a commercial exchange, in which
each wished to be benefited at the expense of the other. "
" It would be impossible, I know, " replied Elinor, " to con-
vince you that a woman of seven-and-twenty could feel for a
man of thirty-five anything near enough to love to make him
a desirable companion to her. But I must object to your
dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to the constant con-
finement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced to
complain yesterday (a very cold, damp day) of a slight
rheumatic feel in one of his shoulders. "
" But he talked of flannel waistcoats, " said Marianne;
SE3^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 31
" and with me a flannel waistcoat is invariably connected
with aches, cramps, rheumatisms, and every species of
- ailment that can afflict the old and the feeble. "
" Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have
despised him half so much. Confess, Marianne, is not there
I something interesting to you in the flushed cheek, hollow eye,
E and quick pulse of a fever? "
Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room,
" Mama, " said Marianne, " I have an alarm on the subject
.. of illness, which I cannot conceal from you. I am sure
r Edward Ferrars is not well. We have now been here almost
; a fortnight, and yet he does not come. Nothing but real
\ indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay. What
f else can detain him at Norland? "
" Had you any idea of his coming so soon? " said Mrs.
> Dashwood. " / had none. On the contrary, if I have felt
1 any anxiety at all on the subject, it has been in recollecting
\ that he sometimes shewed a want of pleasure and readiness
• in accepting my invitation, when I talked of his coming to
Barton. Does Elinor expect him already ? "
f " I have never mentioned it to her ; but of course she must. "
" I rather think you are mistaken, for, when I was talking
to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bed-
chamber, she observed that there was no immediate hurry
for it, as it was not likely that the room would be wanted
for some time. "
" How strange this is! What can be the meaning of it?
But the whole of their behaviour to each other has been
unaccountable! How cold, how composed were their last
adieus ! How languid their conversation the last evening of
their being together! In Edward's farewell there was no
distinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes
of an affectionate brother to both. Twice did I leave them
purposely together in the course of the last morning, and
each time did he most unaccountably follow me out of the
room. And Elinor, in quitting Norland and Edward, cried
not as I did. Even now her self-command is invariable.
When is she dejected or melancholy? When does she try
to avoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it? "
SEO^SE JDtp SE2QIBILITT
CH^PTE^ IX
The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable
comfort to themselves. The house and the garden, with all
the objects surrounding them, were now become familiar;
and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland half
its charms, were engaged in again with far greater enjoyment
than Norland had been able to afford since the loss of their
father. Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day
for the first fortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing
much occupation at home, could not conceal his amazement
on finding them always employed.
Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not
many; for, in spite of Sir John's urgent entreaties that they
would mix more in the neighbourhood, and repeated assur-
ances of his carriage being always at their service, the inde-
pendence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame the wish of
society for her children; and she was resolute in declining
'it any family beyond the distance of a walk. There
were but few who could be so classed; and it was not all of
them that were attainable. About a mile and a half from
the cottage, along the narrow winding valley of Allenham,
which issued from that of Barton, as formerly described, the
girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered an ancient
respectable-looking mansion, which, by reminding them a
little of Norland, interested their imagination, and made
them wish to be better acquainted with it. But they learnt,
on inquiry, that its possessor, an elderly lady of very good
character, was unfortunately too infirm to mix with the
world, and never stirred from home.
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful
walks. The high downs, which invited them from almost
every window of the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoyment
of air on their summits, were a happy alternative when the
dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior beauties;
and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret
one memorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the
partial sunshine of a showery sky, and unable longer to bear
the confinement which the settled rain of the two preceding
SEO^SE AD^D SEOiSIBILITT 33
days had occasioned. The weather was not tempting enough
to draw the two others from their pencil and their book, in
spite of Marianne's declaration that the day would be lastingly
fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn off
from their hills; and the two girls set off together.
They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own pene-
tration at every glimpse of blue sky : and when they caught
in their faces the animating gales of an high south-westerly
wind, they pitied the fears which had prevented their mother
and Elinor from sharing such delightful sensations.
" Is there a felicity in the world, " said Marianne, " superior
to this? Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours. "
Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the
wind, resisting it with laughing delight for about twenty
minutes longer, when suddenly the clouds united over their
heads, and a driving rain set full in their faces. Chagrined
and surprised, they were obliged, though unwillingly, to turn
back, for no shelter was nearer than their own house. One
consolation, however, remained for them, to which the
exigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety ; it
was that of running with all possible speed down the steep
side of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate.
They set off. Marianne had at first the advantage, but a
false step brought her suddenly to the ground, and Margaret,
unable to stop herself to assist her, was involuntarily hurried
along, and reached the bottom in safety.
A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing
round him, was passing up the hill and within a few yards of
Marianne, when her accident happened. He put down his
gun and ran to her assistance. She had raised herself from
the ground, but her foot had been twisted in the fall, and she
was scarcely able to stand. The gentleman offered his ser-
vices, and perceiving that her modesty declined what her
situation rendered necessary, took her up in his arms without
farther delay, and carried her down the hill. Then passing
through the garden, the gate of which had been left open
by Margaret, he bore her directly into the house, whither
Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not his hold till he had *
seated her in a chair in the parlour.
Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their en-
trance, and while the eyes of both were fixed on him with an
c
t
I
SE^SE JD^D SES^SIBILITT
evident wonder and a secret admiration which equally sprung
from his appearance, he apologised for his intrusion by relat- j
ing its cause, in a manner so frank and so graceful, that his \
person, which was uncommonly handsome, received addi-
tional charms from his voice and expression. Had he been
even old, ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of
Mrs. Dashwood would have been secured by any act of atten-
tion to her child; but the influence of youth, beauty, and
elegance, gave an interest to the action which came home
to her feelings.
She thanked him again and again, and with a sweetness of
address which always attended her, invited him to be seated.
But this he declined, as he was dirty and wet. Mrs. Dash-
wood then begged to know to whom she was obliged. His
name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his present home was
at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would allow him the
honour of calling to-morrow to inquire after Miss Dashwood.
The honour was readily granted, and he then departed, to
make himself still more interesting, in the midst of an heavy
rain.
His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness
were instantly the theme of general admiration, and the
laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne received
particular spirit from his exterior attractions. Marianne
herself had seen less of his person than the rest, for the con-
fusion which crimsoned over her face, on his lifting her up,
had robbed her of the power of regarding him after their
entering the house. But she had seen enough of him to join
in all the admiration of the others, and with an energy which
always adorned her praise. His person and air were equal
to what her fancy had ever drawn for the hero of a favourite
story; and in his carrying her into the house with so little
previous formality, there was a rapidity of thought which
particularly recommended the action to her. Every circum-
stance belonging to him was interesting. His name was
good, his residence was in their favourite village, and she
soon found out that of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket
was the most becoming. Her imagination was busy, her
reflections were pleasant, and the pain of a sprained ankle was
disregarded.
Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair
SE3^SE J^p SE^SIBILITT 35
I weather that morning allowed him to get out of doors; and
fMarianne's accident being related to him, he was eagerly
I asked whether he knew any gentleman of the name of
f Willoughby at Allenham.
" Willoughby ! " cried Sir John; " what, is he in the
\ country? That is good news, however; I will ride over to-
morrow, and ask him to dinner on Thursday. "
" You know him then? " said Mrs. Dashwood.
[ " Know him ! to be sure I do. Why, he is down here
1 every year. "
■ " And what sort of a young man is he ? "
" As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you. A
[ very decent shot, and there is not a bolder rider in England. "
* " And is that all you can say for him ! " cried Marianne
indignantly. " But what are his manners on more intimate
acquaintance? what his pursuits, his talents, and genius? "
Sir John was rather puzzled.
" Upon my soul, " said he, " I do not know much about
- him as to all that. But he is a pleasant, good-humoured
fellow, and has got the nicest little black bitch of a pointer
I ever saw. Was she out with him to-day ? "
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour
of Mr. Willoughby's pointer than he could describe to her
the shades of his mind.
" But who is he? " said Elinor. " Where does he come
from? Has he a house at Allenham? "
On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence ;
and he told them that Mr. WSloughby had no property of
his own in the country; that he resided there only while he
was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court, to whom he
was related, and whose possessions he was to inherit; adding,
" Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching, I can tell you,
Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own in
Somersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give
him up to my younger sister in spite of all this tumbling
down hills. Miss Marianne must not expect to have all the
men to herself. Brandon will be jealous, if she does not take
care. "
" I do not believe, " said Mrs. Dashwood, with a good-
humoured smile, " that Mr. Willoughby will be incommoded
by the attempts of either of my daughters towards what you
36 SE3^SE A^D SE^SIBILITr
call catching htm. It is not an employment to which tl
have been brought up. Men are very safe with us, let th
be ever so rich. I am glad to find, however, from what 3
say, that he is a respectable young man, and one wh
acquaintance will not be ineligible. "
" He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever live*
repeated Sir John. " I remember last Christmas, at a lit
hop at the Park, he danced from eight o'clock till fo
without once sitting down. "
" Did he, indeed? " cried Marianne, with sparkling ey
" and with elegance, with spirit? "
" Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert. ,
" That is what I like; that is what a young man ought
be. Whatever be his pursuits, his eagerness in them shoi
know no moderation, and leave him no sense of fatigue/
" Aye, aye, I see how it will be, " said Sir John, " 1 1
how it will be. You will be setting your cap at him nc
and never think of poor Brandon. "
" That is an expression, Sir John, " said Marianne warm
" which I particularly dislike. I abhor every common-ph
phrase by which wit is intended; and'setting one's cap a
man/ or'making a conquest/ are the most odious of i
Their tendency is gross and illiberal ; and if their constructs
could ever be deemed clever, time has long ago destroyed
its ingenuity. "
Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but
laughed as heartily as if he did, and then replied, —
" Aye, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, c
way or other. Poor Brandon ! he is quite smitten alreac
and he is very well worth setting your cap at, I can tell y(
in spite of all this tumbling about and spraining of anklei
CH^PTE^ X
Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance th
precision, stiled Willoughby, called at the cottage early t
next morning to make his personal inquiries. He was i
ceived by Mrs. Dashwood with more than politeness — wit!
SEO^SE A^D SENSIBILITY 37
I kindness which Sir John's account of him and her own grati-
r^e prompted; and everything that passed during the visit
I pded to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,
^ Jul domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had
> w introduced him. Of their personal charms he had not
juired a second interview to be convinced.
Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features,
d a remarkably pretty figure. Marianne was still hand-
ier. Her form, though not so correct as her sister's, in
having the advantage of height, was more striking; and her
face was so lovely, that when, in the common cant of praise,
she was called a beautiful girl, truth was less violently out-
raged than usually happens. Her skin was very brown, but,
from its transparency, her complexion was uncommonly
brilliant; her features were all good; her smile was sweet
and attractive; and in her eyes, which were very dark, there
was a life, a spirit, an eagerness, which could hardly be seen
without delight. From Willoughby their expression was
at first held back, by the embarrassment which the remem-
brance oi his assistance created. But when this passed away,
when her spirits became collected — when she saw that to the
(perfect good-breeding of the gentleman, he united frankness
and vivacity, and, above all, when she heard him declare
4hat of music and dancing he was passionately fond, she gave
L him such a look of approbation as secured the largest share
1 of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay.
I It was only necessary to mention any favourite amuse-
1 ment to engage her to talk. She could not be silent when
I such points were introduced, and she had neither shyness nor
reserve in their discussion. They speedily discovered that
their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, and that
I it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that
related to either. Encouraged by this to a further examina-
tion of his opinions, she proceeded to question him on the
subject of books; her favourite authors were brought forward
I and dwelt upon with so rapturous a delight, that any young
I man of five-and-twenty must have been insensible indeed,
f not to become an immediate convert to the excellence of
such works, however disregarded before. Their taste was
strikingly alike. The same books, the same passages were
idolised by each — or, if any difference appeared, any objec-
i
38 SEfr(SE A^D SE^SIBILITT
tion arose, it lasted no longer than till the force of her arg
merits and the brightness of her eyes could be displaye
He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught all her enthusiasn
and long before his visit concluded, they conversed with tl
familiarity of a long-established acquaintance.
" Well, Marianne, " said Elinor, as soon as he had le:
them, " for one morning I think you have done pretty wel
You have already ascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion i
almost every matter of importance. You know what I
thinks of Cowper and Scott; you are certain of his estimatin
their beauties as he ought, and you have received ever
assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is prope
But how is your acquaintance to be long supported, unde
such extraordinary dispatch of every subject for discourse
You will soon have exhausted each favourite topic. Anoth*
meeting will suffice to explain his sentiments on picturesqv
beauty and second marriages, and then you can have nothui
farther to ask "
" Elinor/'cried Marianne, " is this fair? is this just? ai
my ideas so scanty ? But I see what you mean. I have bee
too much at my ease, too happy, too frank. I have erre
against every common-place notion of decorum! I hav
been open and sincere where I ought to have been reservec
spiritless, dull, and deceitful. Had I talked only of th
weather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in te
minutes, this reproach would have been spared. "
" My love, " said her mother, " you must not be offende
with Elinor — she was only in jest. I should scold her mysel
if she were capable of wishing to check the delight of you
conversation with our new friend. " Marianne was softene
in a moment.
Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of his pleasui
in their acquaintance which an evident wish of improving i
could offer. He came to them every day. To inquire arte
Marianne was at first his excuse; but the encouragement (
his reception, to which every day gave greater kindnes
made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceased to b
possible by Marianne's perfect recovery. She was confine
for some days to the house: but never had any confinemei
been less irksome. Willoughby was a young man of goo
abilities, quick imagination, lively spirits, and open, affe*
i
SE^SE AOiD SENSIBILITY 39
tionate manners. He was exactly formed to engage Mari-
anne's heart; for, with all this, he joined not only a captivat-
ing person, but a natural ardour of mind, which was now
roused and increased by the example of her own, and which
recommended him to her affection beyond everything else.
His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.
They read, they talked, they sang together; his musical
talents were considerable ; and he read with all the sensibility
and spirit which Edward had unfortunately wanted.
In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation, he was as faultless as in
Marianne's; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him but
a propensity, in which he strongly resembled and peculiarly
delighted her sister, of saying too much what he thought on
every occasion, without attention to persons or circumstances.
In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other people, in
sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided
attention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too
easily the forms of worldly propriety, he displayed a want of
caution which Elinor could not approve, in spite of all that he
and Marianne could say in its support.
Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation
which had seized her at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a
man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection, had been rash
and unjustifiable. Willoughby was all that her fancy had
delineated in that unhappy hour, and in every brighter period,
as capable of attaching her; and his behaviour declared his
wishes to be in that respect as earnest as his abilities were
Her mother, too, in whose mind not one speculative
thought of their marriage had been raised by his prospect
of riches, was led before the end of a week to hope and expect
it, and secretly to congratulate herself on having gained two
such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.
Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had so
early been discovered by his friends, now first became per-
ceptible to Elinor, when it ceased to be noticed by them.
Their attention and wit were drawn off to his more fortunate
rival; and the raillery which the other had incurred before
any partiality arose, was removed when his feelings began
really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.
Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the
40 SE3^§E A^p SEOiSIBILITT
sentiments which Mrs. Jennings had assigned him
own satisfaction, were now actually excited by he
and that however a general resemblance of dii
between the parties might forward the affection of
loughby, an equally striking opposition of characte]
hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon. Sh
with concern; for what could a silent man of five-ai
hope, when opposed by a very lively one of five-and-
and as she could not even wish him successful, she
wished him indifferent. She liked him — in spit*
gravity and reserve, she beheld in him an object of
His manners, though serious, were mild; and his
appeared rather the result of some oppression of spii
of any natural gloominess of temper. Sir John had
hints of past injuries and disappointments, which
her belief of his being an unfortunate man, and she
him with respect and compassion.
Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more
he was slighted by Willoughby and Marianne, who, pi
against him for being neither lively nor young,
resolved to undervalue his merits.
" Brandon is just the kind of man, " said Willoug
day, when they were talking of him together, " who:
body speaks well of, and nobody cares about; whoi
delighted to see, and nobody remembers to talk to. "
" That is exactly what I think of him, " cried Mai
" Do not boast of it, however, " said Elinor, "
injustice in both of you. He is highly esteemed b
family at the Park, and I never see him myself withoi
pains to converse with him. "
" That he is patronised by you, 7'replied Willoug
certainly in his favour; but as for the esteem of th
it is a reproach in itself. Who would submit to the i
of being approved by such women as Lady Middl <
Mrs. Jennings, that could command the indiffe
anybody else? "
" But perhaps the abuse of such people as youi
Marianne will make amends for the regard of Lady $
and her mother. If their praise is censure, your cenj
be praise; for they are not more undiscerning than
prejudiced and unjust. "
A
1
I
I
SE3^SE J & (p SED^SIBILITr 41
" In defence of your protege^ you can even be saucy. "
" My protege^ as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense
will always have attractions for me. Yes, Marianne, even in
a man between thirty and forty. He has seen a great deal
of the world; has been abroad; has read, and has a thinking
mind. I have found him capable of giving me much in-
formation on various subjects, and he has always answered
my inquiries with the readiness of good-breeding and good-
nature. "
" That is to say, " cried Marianne contemptuously, " he has
told you that in the East Indies the climate is hot, and the
mosquitoes are troublesome. "
" He would have told me so, I doubt not, had I made any
such inquiries; but they happened to be points on which I
had been previously informed. "
" Perhaps, " said Willoughby, " his observations may have
extended to the existence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and
palanquins. "
" I may venture to say that his observations have stretched
much farther than your candour. But why should you
dislike him? "
" I do not dislike him. I consider him, on the contrary,
as a very respectable man, who has everybody's good word
and nobody's notice ; who has more money than he can spend,
more time than he knows how to employ, and two new coats
every year. "
" Add to which, " cried Marianne, " that he has neither
genius, taste, nor spirit. That his understanding has no
brilliancy, his feelings no ardour, and his voice no expression.''
" You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass, "
replied Elinor, " and so much on the strength of your own
imagination, that the commendation I am able to give of
him is comparatively cold and insipid. I can only pronounce
him to be a sensible man, well-bred, well-informed, of gentle
address, and, I believe, possessing an amiable heart. "
" Miss Dashwood, " cried Willoughby, " you are now using
me unkindly. You are endeavouring to disarm me by reason,
and to convince me against my will. But it will not do.
You shall find me as stubborn as you can be artful. I have
three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon:
he has threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine;
42 SEO^SE J3^D SENSIBILITY
he has found fault with the hanging of my curricle, and
cannot persuade him to buy my brown mare. If it will b
any satisfaction to you, however, to be told that I believe hi
character to be in other respects irreproachable, I am read]
to confess it. And in return for an acknowledgment whicl
must give me some pain, you cannot deny me the privilegi
of disliking him as much as ever. "
CH^PTE^ XI
Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined, whei
they came first into Devonshire, that so many engagement
would arise to occupy their time as shortly presented them
selves, or that they should have such frequent invitation)
and such constant visitors as to leave them little leisuri
for serious employment. Yet such was the case. Whei
Marianne was recovered, the schemes of amusements a
home and abroad which Sir John had been previously form
ing were put in execution. The private balls at the Pari
then began; and parties on the water were made and accom
plished as often as a showery October would allow. In ever]
meeting of the kind, Willoughby was included; and the eas <
and familiarity which naturally attended these parties wer
exactly calculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaint
ance with the Dashwoods, to afford him opportunity o
witnessing the excellences of Marianne, of marking hi
animated admiration of her, and of receiving, in her behaviou
to himself, the most pointed assurance of her affection.
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment. Sh <
only wished that it were less openly shewn, and once or twio
did venture to suggest the propriety of some self-comman <
to Marianne. But Marianne abhorred all concealment wher
no real disgrace could attend unreserve; and to aim a
the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselve
illaudable, appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort
but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common-plaa
and mistaken notions. Willoughby thought the same; an <
\
SE^SE A3iD SEOiSIBILITT 43
j their behaviour, at all times, was an illustration of their
opinions.
When he was present, she had no eyes for any one else.
Everything he did was right. Everything he said was
clever. If their evenings at the park were concluded with
cards, he cheated himself and all the rest of the party to get
her a good hand. If dancing formed the amusement of the
night, they were partners for half the time; and when
obliged to separate for a couple of dances, were careful to
stand together, and scarcely spoke a word to anybody else.
Such conduct made them of course most exceedingly laughed
at; but ridicule could not shame, and seemed hardly to
\ provoke them.
I Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a
I warmth which left [her] no inclination for checking this ex-
cessive display of them. To her it was but the natural con-
r sequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent mind.
This was the season of happiness to Marianne. Her heart
J was devoted to Willoughby, and the fond attachment to
i Norland which she brought with her from Sussex, was more
likely to be softened than she had thought it possible before, by
. the charms which his society bestowed on her present home.
Elinor's happiness was not so great. Her heart was not
so much at ease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements so
pure. They afforded her no companion that could make
amends for what she had left behind, nor that could teach
her to think of Norland with less regret than ever. Neither
Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jennings could supply to her the
conversation she missed; although the latter was an ever-
lasting talker, and from the first had regarded her with a
kindness which ensured her a large share of her discourse.
She had already repeated her own history to Elinor three or
four times; and had Elinor's memory been equal to her
means of improvement, she might have known very early in
her acquaintance all the particulars of Mr. Jennings's last
illness, and what he said to his wife a few minutes before he
died. Lady Middleton was more agreeable than her mother
only in being more silent. Elinor needed little observation
to perceive that her reserve was a mere calmness of manner
with which sense had nothing to do. Towards her husband
and mother she was the same as to them; and intimacy was
44 SE^SE J2Q > SE^SIBILITr
therefore neither to be looked for nor desired. She hai
nothing to say one day that she had not said the day before
Her insipidity was invariable, for even her spirits wen
always the same; and though she did not oppose the partiei
arranged by her husband, provided everything were con
ducted in style and her two eldest children attended her, sh <
never appeared to receive more enjoyment from them, thai
she might have experienced in sitting at home; — and so littl <
did her presence add to the pleasure of the others, by an)
share in their conversation, that they were sometimes onlj
reminded of her being amongst them by her solicitude abou'
her troublesome boys.
In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, di(
Elinor find a person who could in any degree claim th <
respect of abilities, excite the interest of friendship, or giv <
pleasure as a companion. Willoughby was out of the ques
tion. Her admiration and regard, even her sisterly regard
was all his own: but he was a lover; his attentions wer <
wholly Marianne's, and a far less agreeable man might hav
been more generally pleasing. Colonel Brandon, unfortun
ately for himself, had no such encouragement to think onl]
of Marianne, and in conversing with Elinor, he found th
greatest consolation for the total indifference of her sister.
Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reasoi
to suspect that the misery of disappointed love had alread;
been known by him. This suspicion was given by som
words which accidentally dropt from him one evening at th
Park, when they were sitting down together by mutua
consent, while the others were dancing. His eyes were fixe«
on Marianne, and, after a silence of some minutes, he sai
with a faint smile, " Your sister, I understand, does no
approve of second attachments. "
" No, " replied Elinor; " her opinions are all romantic. "
" Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impossibl
to exist. "
" I believe she does. But how she contrives it withou
reflecting on the character of her own father, who had hin:
self two wives, I know not. A few years, however, will settl
her opinions on the reasonable basis of common sense an
observation; and then they may be more easy to define an
to justify than they now are, by anybody but herself. "
SEO^SE J*(p SE & (SIBILITr 45
" This will probably be the case, " he replied; " and yet
there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a young
mind, that one is sorry to see them give way to the reception
of more general opinions. "
" I cannot agree with you there, " said Elinor. " There
are inconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne's,
which all the charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the
world cannot atone for. Her systems have all the unfortun-
ate tendency of setting propriety at nought; and a better
acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as her
greatest possible advantage. "
After a short pause, he resumed the conversation, by
saying —
" Does your sister make no distinction in her objections
against a second attachment? or is it equally criminal in
everybody? Are those who have been disappointed in their
first choice, whether from the inconstancy of its object, or
the perverseness of circumstances, to be equally indifferent
during the rest of their lives ? "
" Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the [minutiae]
of her principles. I only know that I never yet heard her
admit any instance of a second attachment's being pardon-
able. "
" This, " said he, " cannot hold; but a change, a total
change of sentiments — No, no, do not desire it, — for when the
romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged to give
way, how frequently are they succeeded by such opinions as
are but too common, and too dangerous! I speak from
experience. I once knew a lady who in temper and mind
greatly resembled your sister, who thought and judged like
her, but who from an enforced change — from a series of
unfortunate circumstances " Here he stopt suddenly ;
appeared to think that he had said too much, and by his
countenance gave rise to conjectures which might not other-
wise have entered Elinor's head. The lady would probably
have passed without suspicion, had he not convinced Miss
Dashwood that what concerned her ought not to escape his
lips. As it was, it required but a slight effort of fancy to
connect his emotion with the tender recollection of past
regard. Elinor attempted no more. But Marianne, in her
place, would not have done so little. The whole story would
46 SE^SE J3^D SEDiSIBILITT
have been speedily formed under her active imaginatid
and [everything] established in the most melancholy orab^n
of disastrous love.
CH^PTE^ XII
As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next!
morning, the latter communicated a piece of news to her ]
sister, which, in spite of all that she knew before of Marianne's
imprudence and want of thought, surprised her by its extra- !
vagant testimony of both. Marianne told her, with the
greatest delight, that Willoughby had given her a horse, one
that he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and
which was exactly calculated to carry a woman. Without
considering that it was not in her mother's plan to keep any
horse — that if she were to alter her resolution in favour of
this gift, she must buy another for the servant, and keep a
servant to ride it, and after all, build a stable to receive them
— she had accepted the present without hesitation, and told
her sister of it in raptures.
" He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire im-
mediately for it, " she added, " and when it arrives, we will
ride every day. You shall share its use with me. Imagine
to yourself, my dear Elinor, the delight of a gallop on some
of these downs. "
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of
felicity, to comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended
the affair, and for some time she refused to submit to them.
As to an additional servant, the expense would be a trifle;
mama, she was sure, would never object to it; and any horse
would do for him ; he might always get one at the Park; as
to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient. Elinor then
ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a
present from a man so little, or at least so lately known to
her. This was too much.
" You are mistaken, Elinor, " said she warmly, " in sup-
posing I know very little of Willoughby. I have not known
him long indeed, but I am much better acquainted with him
SE^SE AD^D SE^SIBILITr 47
than I am with any other creature in the world, except your-
self and mama. It is not time or opportunity that is to
determine intimacy: — it is disposition alone. Seven years
would be insufficient to make some people acquainted with
each other, and seven days are more than enough for others.
I should hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting
a horse from my brother than from Willoughby. Of John
I know very little, though we have lived together for years;
but of Willoughby, my judgment has long been formed. ,,
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.
She knew her sister's temper. Opposition on so tender a
subject would only attach her the more to her own opinion.
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother, by repre-
senting the inconveniences which that indulgent mother
must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the case) she
consented to this increase of establishment, Marianne was
shortly subdued; and she promised not to tempt her mother
■ to such imprudent kindness by mentioning the offer, and to
tell Willoughby when she saw him next, that it must be
declined.
She was faithful to her word; and when Willoughby called
at the cottage, the same day, Elinor heard her express her
disappointment to him in a low voice, on being obliged to
forego the acceptance of his present. The reasons for this
alteration were at the same time related, and they were such
as to make further entreaty on his side impossible. His
concern, however, was very apparent; and after expressing
it with earnestness, he added in the same low voice — " But,
Marianne, the horse is still yours, though you cannot use it
now. I shall keep it only till you can claim it. When you
leave Barton to form your own establishment in a more
lasting home, Queen Mab shall receive you. "
This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the
whole of the sentence, in his manner of pronouncing it, and
in his addressing her sister by her christian name alone, she
instantly saw an intimacy so decided, a meaning so direct,
as marked a perfect agreement between them. From that
moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each other;
and the belief of it created no other surprise, than that she,
or any of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank to
discover it by accident.
J
48 SE2QE A^D SENSIBILITY
Margaret related something to her the next day, whic
placed this matter in a still clearer light. Willoughby ha
spent the preceding evening with them, and Margaret, b
being left some time in the parlour with only him and Mari
anne, had had opportunity for observations, which, with ;
most important face, she communicated to her eldest sister
when they were next by themselves.
" Oh! Elinor, " she cried, " I have such a secret to tell yoi
about Marianne. I am sure she will be married to Mr
Willoughby very soon. "
" You have said so, " replied Elinor, " almost every da]
since they first met on High-church Down; and they hat
not known each other a week, I believe, before you wer
certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck; bu
it turned out to be only the miniature of our great-uncle. "
" But indeed this is quite another thing. I am sure the}
will be married very soon, for he has got a lock of her hair.'
" Take care, Margaret. It may be only the hair of som <
great-uncle of his. "
" But indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost sun
it is, for I saw him cut it off. Last night after tea, when yoi
and mama went out of the room, they were whispering an <
talking together as fast as could be, and he seemed to b
begging something of her, and presently he took up he
scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it was al
tumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and folded it u]
in a piece of white paper, and put it into his pocket-book. "
From such particulars, stated on such authority, Elino
could not withhold her credit: nor was she disposed to it
for the circumstance was in perfect unison with what she ha <
heard and seen herself.
Margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in a way &
satisfactory to her sister. When Mrs. Jennings attack©
her one evening at the Park, to give the name of the younj
man who was Elinor's particular favourite, which had bee
long a matter of great curiosity to her, Margaret answers
by looking at her sister, and saying, " I must not tell, may 1
Elinor? "
This, of course, made everybody laugh; and Elinor trio
to laugh too. But the effort was painful. She was con
vinced that Margaret bad fixed on a person whose name sh
SE^SE A3(D SENSIBILITY 49
could not bear with composure to become a standing joke
with Mrs. Jennings.
Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did more
harm than good to the cause, by turning very red, and saying
I in an angry manner to Margaret, —
" Remember, that whatever your conjectures may be, you
have no right to repeat them. "
I " I never had any conjectures about it, " replied Margaret;
I " it was you who told me of it yourself. "
I This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret
was eagerly pressed to say something more.
" Oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about it, " said
Mrs. Jennings. " What is the gentleman's name. "
" I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what it
is; and I know where he is too. "
" Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own house at
Norland, to be sure. He is the curate of the parish, I dare
say. "
" No, that he is not. He is of no profession at all. "
" Margaret, " said Marianne, with great warmth, " you
know that all this is an invention of your own, and that there
is no such person in existence. "
" Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure
there was such a man once, and his name begins with an F. "
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observ-
r ing at this moment, " that it rained very hard, " though
she believed the interruption to proceed less from any atten-
tion to her, than from her ladyship's great dislike of all such
inelegant subjects of raillery as delighted her husband and
mother. The idea, however, started by her, was immediately
pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasion
mindful of the feelings of others ; and much was said on the
subject of rain by both of them. Willoughby opened the
pianoforte, and asked Marianne to sit down to it; and thus,
amidst the various endeavours of different people to quit the
topic, it fell to the ground. But not so easily did Elinor
recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her.
A party was formed this evening for going on the following
r day to see a very fine place about twelve miles from Barton,
belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without
whose interest it could not be seen, as the proprietor, who
D
l
50 SEO^SE A^D SE^SIBILITr
was then abroad, had left strict orders on that head,
grounds were declared to be highly beautiful, and Sir J <
who was particularly warm in their praise, might be alio
to be a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to ^
them, at least, twice every summer for the last ten ye
They contained a noble piece of water; a sail on which
to form a great part of the morning's amusement; cold
visions were to be taken, open carriages only to be emplo
and everything conducted in the usual style of a comj
party of pleasure.
To some few of the company it appeared rather a
undertaking, considering the time of year, and that it
rained every day for the last fortnight; — and Mrs. Dashw
who had already a cold, was persuaded by Elinor to sta
home.
CH^PTE^XIII
Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out -
differently from what Elinor had expected. She was
pared to be wet through, fatigued, and frightened;
the event was still more unfortunate, for they did no
at all.
By ten o'clock the whole party were assembled at
Park, where they were to breakfast. The morning
rather favourable, though it had rained all night, as
clouds were then dispersing across the sky, and the sun
quently appeared. They were all in high spirits and j
humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit t <
greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than
otherwise.
While they were at breakfast, the letters were brough
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon;
took it, looked at the direction, changed colour, and imn
ately left the room.
" What is the matter with Brandon? " said Sir John.
Nobody could tell.
I SES^SE J^p SE^SIBILITT 51
I " I hope he has had no bad news, " said Lady Middleton.
I " It must be something extraordinary that could make
I Colonel Brandon leave my breakfast-table so suddenly. "
■ In about five minutes he returned.
( " No bad news, Colonel, I hope ? " said Mrs. Jennings, as
soon as he entered the room.
t " None at all, ma'am, I thank you. "
" Was it from Avignon ? I hope it is not to say that your
sister is worse ? "
" No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely a letter
'of business. "
" But how came the hand to discompose you so much, if
it was only a letter of business ? Come, come, this won't do,
Colonel; so let us hear the truth of it. "
" My dear madam, " said Lady Middleton, " recollect what
j you are saying. "
! " Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is
married ? " said Mrs. Jennings, without attending to her
daughter's reproof.
I " No, indeed, it is not. "
" Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel. And I hope
she is well. "
" Whom do you mean, ma'am ? " said he, colouring a little.
" Oh ! you know who I mean. "
" I am particularly sorry, ma'am, " said he, addressing
lady Middleton, " that I should receive this letter to-day,
for it is on business which requires my immediate attendance
in town. "
" In town! " cried Mrs. Jennings. " What can you have
to do in town at this time of year? "
" My own loss is great, " he continued, " in being obliged
to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the more concerned,
as I fear my presence is necessary to gain your admittance
at Whitwell. "
What a blow upon them all was this !
" But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. Brandon, "
said Marianne, eagerly, " will it not be sufficient? "
He shook his head.
" We must go, " said Sir John. " It shall not be put off
when we are so near it. You cannot go to town till to-morrow,
Brandon, that is all. "
f
52 SE3(SE A3(D SENSIBILITY
" I wish it could be so easily settled. But it is not in my*-
power to delay my journey for one day ! "
" If you would but let us know what your business is, "
said Mrs. Jennings, " we might see whether it could be put
off or not. "
" You would not be six hours later/'said Willoughby, |
" if you were to defer your journey till our return. "
" I cannot afford to lose one hour. " —
Elinor then heard Willoughby say in a low voice to Man-'
anne, " There are some people who cannot bear a party of :
pleasure. Brandon is one of them. He was afraid of catch- \
ing cold, I dare say, and invented this trick for getting out
of it. I would lay fifty guineas the letter was of his own
writing. "
" I have no doubt of it, " replied Marianne.
" There is no persuading you to change your mind, Brandon,
I know of old, " said Sir John, " when once you are deter-
mined on anything. But, however, I hope you will think
better of it. Consider, here are the two Miss Careys come
over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods walked up
from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby got up two hours
before his usual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell. "
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the
cause of disappointing the party, but at the same time
declared it to be unavoidable.
" Well then, when will you come back again? "
" I hope we shall see you at Barton, " added her ladyship,
" as soon as you can conveniently leave town; and we must
put off the party to Whitwell tell you return. "
" You are very obliging. But it is so uncertain when I
may have it in my power to return, that I dare not engage
for it at all. "
" Oh ! he must and shall come back, " cried Sir John. " If
he is not here by the end of the week, I shall go after him. "
" Aye, so do, Sir John, " cried Mrs. Jennings, " and then
perhaps you may find out what his business is. "
" I do not want to pry into other men's concerns, I suppose
it is something he is ashamed of. "
Colonel Brandon's horses were announced. £
" You do not go to town on horseback, do you? " added |^
Sir John.
SED^SE AD < ^) SESiSIBILITT 53
" No — only to Honiton. I shall then go post. "
" Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good journey,
ut you had better change your mind. "
" I assure you it is not in my power. "
He then took leave of the whole party.
" Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in
wn this winter, Miss Dashwood? "
J " I am afraid, none at all. "
jf " Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I
^hould wish to do. "
To Marianne he merely bowed and said nothing.
" Come, Colonel, " said Mrs. Jennings, " before you go, do
let us know what you are going about. "
He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John,
left the room.
The complaints and lamentations which politeness had
hitherto restrained, now burst forth universally; and they
all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so
I disappointed.
" I can guess what his business is, however, " said Mrs.
Jennings, exultingly.
I " Can you, ma'am? " said almost everybody.
I " Yes ; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure. "
I " And who is Miss Williams? " asked Marianne.
" What ! do not you know who Miss Williams is ? I am
sure you must have heard of her before. She is a relation of
the Colonel's, my dear — a very near relation. We will not
say how near, for fear of shocking the young ladies. " Then
Wering her voice a little, she said to Elinor, " She is his
Natural daughter. "
" Indeed! "
" Oh! yes; and as like him as she can stare. I dare say
the Colonel will leave her all his fortune. "
When Sir John returned, he joined most heartily* in the
general regret on so unfortunate an event; concluding, how-
ever, by observing, that as they were all got together, they
ttUist do something by way of being happy; and after some
consultation it was agreed, that although happiness could
,only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure a tolerable
composure of mind by driving about the country. The
carriages were then ordered; Willoughby's was first, and
54 SE^SE AJiD SE^SIBILITr
Marianne never looked happier than when she got into it
He drove through the park very fast, and they were soon out
of sight; and nothing more of them was seen till their return,
which did not happen till after the return of all the rest
They both seemed delighted with their drive, but said only
in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the
others went on the downs.
It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening;
and that everybody should be extremely merry all day long,
Some more of the Careys came to dinner* and they had the
pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table, which Sii
John observed with great contentment. Willoughby tool
his usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwoods. Mrs
Jennings sat on Elinor's right hand; and they had not beer
long seated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby, anc
said to Marianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "'
have found you out, in spite of all your tricks. I know when
you spent the morning. "
Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, " Where
pray? " —
" Did not you know, " said Willoughby, " that we had beei
out in my curricle? "
" Yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well, and
was determined to find out where you had been to. I hop
you like your house, Miss Marianne. It is a very large one
I know, and when I come to see you, I hope you will hav
new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much when I wa
there six years ago. "
Marianne turned away in great confusion. Mrs. Jenning
laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in her resolution t
know where they had been, she had actually made her ow
woman inquire of Mr. Willoughby's groom, and that she ha
by that method been informed that they had gone to Allei
ham, and spent a considerable time there in walking abou
the garden, and going all over the house.
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seeme
very unlikely that Willoughby should propose, or Mariann
consent, to enter the house while Mrs. Smith was in it, wit
whom Marianne had not the smallest acquaintance.
As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor inquired c
her about it; and great was her surprise when she found tha
SES^SE A2(p SEDiSIBILITT 55
* every circumstance related by Mrs. Jennings was perfectly
I true. Marianne was quite angry with her for doubting it.
I " Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go
* there, or that we did not see the house ? Is not it what you
[have often wished to do yourself? "
" Yes, Mariannne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smith was
there, and with no other companion than Mr. Willoughby. "
g " Mr. Willoughby, however, is the only person who can
1 have a right to shew that house; and as he went in an open
I carriage, it was impossible to have any other companion.
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life. "
I " I am afraid, " replied Elinor, " that the pleasantness of
an employment does not always evince its propriety. "
" On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it,
£ Elinor; for if there had been any real impropriety in what
I I did, I should have been sensible of it at the time, for we
I always know when we are acting wrong, and with such a
* conviction I could have had no pleasure. "
1 " But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you to
some very impertinent remarks, do you not now begin to
doubt the discretion of your own conduct? "
) " If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are to be the
proof of impropriety in conduct, we are all offending every
moment of all our lives. I value not her censure any more
than I should do her commendation. I am not sensible of
having done anything wrong in walking over Mrs. Smith's
grounds, or in seeing her house. They will one day be Mr.
Willoughby's, and "
" If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you
would not be justified in what you have done. "
She blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying
to her; and after a ten minutes'interval of earnest thought,
she came to her sister again, and said with great good humour,
" Perhaps, Elinor, it was rather ill-judged in me to go to
Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby wanted particularly to shew
me the place; and it is a charming house, I assure you.
There is one remarkably pretty sitting-room upstairs, of a
nice comfortable size for constant use, and with modern
furniture it would be delightful. It is a corner room, and
has windows on two sides. On one side you look across the
bowling-green, behind the house, to a beautiful hanging
56 SE^SE J2Q) SE^SIBILITr
wood ; and on the other you have a view of the church and
village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we
have so often admired. I did not see it to advantage, for
nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture, — but if it
were newly fitted up — a couple of hundred pounds, Wil-
loughby says, would make it one of the pleasantest summer-
rooms in England. "
Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption
from the others, she would have described every room in the
house with equal delight.
CHtAPTE^XIF
The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the
park, with his steadiness in concealing its cause, filled the
mind and raised the wonder of Mrs. Jennings for two or three
days : she was a great wonderer, as every one must be who
takes a very lively interest in all the comings and goings
of all their acquaintance. She wondered with little inter-
mission what could be the reason of it; was sure there musl
be some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress
that could have befallen him, with a fixed determination
that he should not escape them all.
" Something very melancholy must be the matter, I an
sure, " said she. " I could see it in his face. Poor man! ]
am afraid his circumstances may be bad. The estate ai
Delaford was never reckoned more than two thousand i
year, and his brother left everything sadly involved. I d(
think he must have been sent for about money matters, foi
what else can it be? I wonder whether it is so. I wouk
give anything to know the truth of it. Perhaps it is abou
Miss Williams — and, by the bye, I dare say it is, because rn
looked so conscious when I mentioned her. Maybe she is il
in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have a notioi
she is always rather sickly. I would lay any wager it is abou
Miss Williams. It is not so very likely he should be distressec
in his circumstances now, for he is a very prudent man, an <
j SE3^SE A3^D SENSIBILITY 57
^ to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time. I
m wonder what it can be ! Maybe his sister is worse at Avignon,
. " ■ and has sent for him over. His setting off in such a hurry
* seems very like it. Well, I wish him out of all his trouble
»with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain. "
So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings ; her opinion varying
with every fresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable
c^ as they arose. Elinor, though she felt really interested in
■ M the welfare of Colonel Brandon, could not bestow all the
I wonder on his going so suddenly away which Mrs. Jennings
* was desirous of her feeling; for besides that the circumstance
did not in her opinion justify such lasting amazement or
variety of speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed
of. It was engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her
sister and Willoughby on the subject, which they must know
to be peculiarly interesting to them all. As this silence
continued, every day made it appear more strange and more
incompatible with the disposition of both. Why they should
not openly acknowledge to her mother and herself, what
their constant behaviour to each other declared to have taken
place, Elinor could not imagine.
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be
immediately in their power; for though Willoughby was
independent, there was no reason to believe him rich. His
estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or seven
hundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which that
income could hardly be equal, and he had himself often com-
plained of his poverty. But for this strange kind of secrecy
maintained by them relative to their engagement, which in
- fact concealed nothing at all, she could not account; and it
was so wholly contradictory to their general opinions and
ij practice, that a doubt sometimes entered her mind of their
fcl being really engaged, and this doubt was enough to prevent
her making any inquiry of Marianne.
Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them
all than Willoughby's behaviour. To Marianne it had all
the distinguishing tenderness which a lover's heart could
give, and to the rest of the family it was the affectionate
c attention of a son and a brother. The cottage seemed to be
et considered and loved by him as his home ; many more of his
Hours were spent there than at Allenham ; and if no general
/
i
58 SE^SE AD^p SE^SIBILITT
engagement collected them at the park, the exercise which
called him out in the morning was almost certain of ending
there, where the rest of the day was spent by himself at
the side of Marianne, and by his favourite pointer at her
feet.
One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel
Brandon had left the country, his heart seemed more than
usually open to every feeling of attachment to the objects
around him ; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happening to mention
her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he warmly -
opposed every alteration of a place which affection had
established as perfect with him.
" What! " he exclaimed — " Improve this dear cottage.
No — that I will never consent to. Not a stone must be added
to its walls, not an inch to its size, if my feelings are regarded. "
" Do not be alarmed, " said Miss Dashwood, " nothing of
the kind will be done; for my mother will never have money
enough to attempt it. "
" I am heartily glad of it, " he cried. " May she always
be poor if she can employ her riches no better. "
" Thank you, Willoughby. But you may be assured that
I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of
yours, or of any one whom I loved, for all the improvements
in the world. Depend upon it, that whatever unemployed
sum may remain when I make up my accounts in the spring,
I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it in a
manner so painful to you. But are you really so attached to
this place as to see no defect in it? "
" I am, " said he. " To me it is faultless. Nay, more, I
consider it as the only form of building in which happiness
is attainable; and were I rich enough, I would instantly pull
Combe down, and build it up again in the exact plan of this
cottage. "
" With dark narrow stairs, and a kitchen that smokes, I !
suppose, " said Elinor.
" Yes, " cried he in the same eager tone, " with all and
everything belonging to it; — in no one convenience or in-
convenience about it, should the least variation be perceptible,
Then, and then only, under such a roof, I might perhaps be <
as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton. "
" I flatter myself, " replied Elinor, " that even under the
SE^SE J3Q) SEDiSIBIUTT 59
disadvantage of better rooms and a boarder staircase, you
will hereafter find your own house as faultless as you now
do this. "
" There certainly are circumstances, " said Willoughby,
j " which might greatly endear it to me; but this place will
I always have one claim on my affection which no other can
possibly share. "
I Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne, whose
! fine eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly
denoted how well she understood him.
" How often did I wish, " added he, " when I was at Allen-
ham this time twelvemonth, that Barton Cottage were in-
habited ! I never passed within view of it without admiring
its situation, and grieving that no one should live in it.
How little did I then think that the very first news I should
hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next came into the country,
would be that Barton Cottage was taken! and I felt an
immediate satisfaction and interest in the event, which
nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I should
experience from it can account for. Must it not have been so,
Marianne ? " speaking to her in a lowered voice. Then con-
tinuing his former tone, he said, " And yet this house you
would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood! You would rob it of its sim-
plicity by imaginary improvement! and this dear parlour,
in which our acquaintance first began, and in which so many
happy hours have been since spent by us together, you would
degrade to the condition of a common entrance, and every-
body would be eager to pass through the room which has
hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation
and comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest
dimensions in the world could possibly afford. "
Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of
the kind should be attempted.
" You are a good woman, " he warmly replied. " Your
promise makes me easy. Extend it a little farther, and it
will make me happy. Tell me that not only your house will
remain the same, but that I shall ever find you and yours
as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you will always
consider me with the kindness which has made everything
belonging to you so dear to me. "
The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's behaviour
(
60 SE3^SE ADiD SE3^S1B1LITT
during the whole of the [evening] declared at once his
affection and happiness.
" Shall we see you to-morrow to dinner? " said Mrs. Dash-
wood, when he was leaving them. " I do not ask you to
come in the morning, for we must walk to the park, to call
on Lady Middleton. "
He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.
CHtAPTE^XV
Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took place the
next day, and two of her daughters went with her; but
Marianne excused herself from being of the party, under
some trifling pretext of employment; and her mother, who
concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the
night before, of calling on her while they were absent, was
perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home.
On their return from the park they found Willoughby's
curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs. Dash-
wood was convinced that her conjecture had been just. So
far it was all as she had foreseen; but on entering the house,
she beheld what no foresight had taught her to expect.
They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne came
hastily out of the parlour, apparently in violent affliction,
with her handkerchief at her eyes, and without noticing
them ran upstairs. Surprised and alarmed, they proceeded
directly into the room she had just quitted, where they found
only Willoughby, who was leaning against the mantel-piece
with his back towards them. He turned round on their
coming in, and his countenance showed that he strongly
partook of the emotion which overpowered Marianne.
" Is anything the matter with her? " cried Mrs. Dash wood
as she entered — " is she ill ? "
" I hope not, " he replied, trying to look cheerful;, and
with a forced smile, presently added, " It is I who may
rather expect to be ill — for I am now suffering under a very
heavy disappointment! "
i
i

:br " i
SE^SE A3(p SE^SIBILITr 61
" Disappointment! "
" Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you.
DeJ Mrs. Smith has this morning exercised the privilege of riches
upon a poor dependent cousin, by sending me on business to
Ilindon. I have just received my dispatches, and taken my
farewell of Allenham; and by way of exhilaration, I am now
come to take my farewell of you.
I " To London! — and are you going this morning? "
" Almost this moment. "
" This is very unfortunate. But Mrs. Smith must be
obliged; — and her business will not detain you from us long,
Illope. ,,
He coloured as he replied, " You are very kind, but I have
no idea of returning into Devonshire immediately. My
e ti| ™ts to Mrs. Smith are never repeated within the twelve-
month. "
" And is Mrs. Smith your only friend ? Is Allenham the
only house in the neighbourhood to which you will be
rtir| welcome? For shame, Willoughby. Can you wait for an
invitation here ? "
His colour increased ; and with his eyes fixed on the ground,
he only replied, " You are too good. "
Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise. Elinor
felt equal amazement. For a few moments every one was
ik j- silent. Mrs. Dashwood first spoke.
*l| " I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton
ikI cottage you will always be welcome; for I will not press you
2. 1 to return here immediately, because you only can judge how
a; I far thai might be pleasing to Mrs. Smith; and on this head I
si shall be no more disposed to question your judgment than to
c * doubt your inclination. "
? T " My engagements at present, " replied Willoughby, con-
rl fusedly, " are of such a nature — that — I dare not flatter
I myself " —
* He stopt. Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished to
(speak, and another pause succeeded. This was broken by
Willoughby, who said with a faint smile, " It is folly to
linger in this manner. I will not torment myself any longer
by remaining among friends whose society it is impossible
for me now to enjoy. "
He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room.
>
62 SEO^SE AD < D SEJ^SIBILITT
They saw him step into his carriage, and in a minute it was
out of sight.
Mrs. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly
quitted the parlour, to give way in solitude to the concern
and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned.
Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother's.
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and dis-
trust. Willoughby's behaviour in taking leave of them, his
embarrassment, and affectation of cheerfulness, and, above
all, his unwillingness to accept her mother's invitation, a
backwardness so unlike a lover — so unlike himself, greatl)
disturbed her. One moment she feared that no serious
design had ever been formed on his side; and the next, thai
some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him anc
her sister; the distress in which Marianne had quitted th(
room was such as a serious quarrel could most reasonablj
account for; though when she considered what Marianne'!
love for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.
But whatever might be the particulars of their separation
her sister's affliction was indubitable; and she thought witl
the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which Mari
anne was in all probability not merely giving way to as i
relief, but feeding and encouraging as a duty.
In about half an hour her mother returned, and thougl
her eyes were red, her countenance was not uncheerful.
" Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton
Elinor, " said she, as she sat down to work, " and with ho\
heavy a heart does he travel ! "
" It is all very strange. So suddenly to be gone ! I
seems but the work of a moment. And last night he wa
with us so happy, so cheerful, so affectionate! And no^
after only ten minutes'notice— Gone too without intendin
to return ? — Something more than what he owned to us mus
have happened. He did not speak, he did not behave Uk
himself. You must have seen the difference as well as'.
What can it be? Can they have quarrelled? Why els
should he have shown such unwillingness to accept yoi
invitation here? " —
" It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor ! I coul
plainly see that. He had not the power of accepting it.
have thought it all over, I assure you, and I can perfect
SENgE A3^D SENSIBILITY 63
account for everything that at first seemed strange to me as
well as to you. "
" Can you indeed? "
" Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most satis-
factory way ; — but you, Elinor, who love to doubt where you
can — It will not satisfy you > I know; but you shall not talk
me out of my trust in it. I am persuaded that Mrs. Smith
suspects his regard for Marianne, disapproves of it (perhaps
because she has other views for him), and on that account is
eager to get him away; — and that the business which she
sends him off to transact, is invented as an excuse to dismiss
him. This is what I believe to have happened. He is more-
over aware that she does disapprove the connection, he dares
not therefore at present confess to her his engagement with
Marianne, and he feels himself obliged, from his dependent
situation, to give in to her schemes, and absent himself from
Devonshire for a while. You will tell me, I know, that this
may or may not have happened; but I will listen to no cavil
unless you can point out any other method of understanding
the affair as satisfactory as this. And now, Elinor, what
have you to say ? "
" Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer. "
" Then you would have told me, that it might or might
not have happened. Oh ! Elinor, how incomprehensible are
your feelings! You had rather take evil upon credit than
good. You had rather look out for misery for Marianne and
guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology for the latter.
You are resolved to think him blameable, because he took
leave of us with less affection than his usual behaviour has
shewn. And is no allowance to be made for inadvertence,
or for spirits depressed by recent disappointment? Are no
probabilities to be accepted, merely because they are not
certainties? Is nothing due to the man whom we have all
so much reason to love, and no reason in the world to think
ill off? to the possibility of motives unanswerable in them-
selves, though unavoidably secret for a while? And, after
all, what is it you suspect him of ? "
" I can hardly tell you myself. But suspicion of some-
thing unpleasant is the inevitable consequence of such an
alteration as we have just witnessed in him. There is great
truth, however, in what you have now urged of the allow-
\
64 SEO^SE AD < ^ > SEO^SIBILITr
ances which ought to be made for him, and it is my wis!
be candid in my judgment of everybody. Willoughby n
undoubtedly have very sufficient reasons for his condi
and I will hope that he has. But it would have been m
like Willoughby to acknowledge them at once. Secrecy n
be advisable; but still I cannot help wondering at its be
practised by him. "
" Do not blame him, however, for departing from his ch
acter, where the deviation is necessary. But you really
admit the justice of what I have said in his defence? — 1 1
happy — and he is acquitted. "
" Not entirely. It may be proper to conceal their enga;
ment (if they are engaged) from Mrs. Smith — and if thai
the case, it must be highly expedient for Willoughby to
but little in Devonshire at present. But this is no exci
for their concealing it from us. "
" Concealing it from us ! my dear child, do you acci
Willoughby and Marianne of concealment? This is strar
indeed, when your eyes have been reproaching them eve
day for incautiousness. "
" I want no proof of their affection, " said Elinor; " but
their engagement I do. "
" lam perfectly satisfied of both. "
" Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subje
by either of them. "
" I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoli
so plainly. Has not his behaviour to Marianne and to all
us, for at least the last fortnight, declared that he loved a
considered her as his future wife, and that he felt for us 1
attachment of the nearest relation? Have we not perfec
understood each other? Has not my consent been da
asked by his looks, his manner, his attentive and affection!
respect? My Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engaj
ment? How could such a thought occur to you? How
it to be supposed that Willoughby, persuaded as he mi
be of your sister's love, should leave her, and leave 1
perhaps for months, without telling her of his affection:
that they should part without a mutual exchange of c <
fidence. "
" I confess, " replied Elinor, " that every circumstar
except one is in favour of their engagement, but that one
I SEWSE A3 < p SE^SIBILITT 65
^the total silence of both on the subject, and with me it
1 almost outweighs every other. "
1 " How strange this is ! You must think wretchedly indeed
1 of Willoughby, if, after all that has openly passed between
(them, you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they
are together. Has he been acting a part in his behaviour to
your sister all this time? Do you suppose him really in-
different to her? "
1 " No, I cannot think that. He must and does love her, I
M am sure. "
m " But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave her
-4 with such indifference, such carelessness of the future, as you
: I attribute to him. "
f " You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never
considered this matter as certain. I have had my doubts, I
confess; but they are fainter than they were, and they may
soon be entirely done away. If we find they correspond,
I every fear of mine will be removed. "
" A mighty concession indeed ! If you were to see them
I at the altar, you would suppose they were going to be married.
! Ungracious girl! But I require no such proof. Nothing, in
^my opinion, has ever passed to justify doubt; no secrecy has
been attempted ; all has been uniformly open and unreserved.
Vou cannot doubt your sister's wishes. It must be Wil-
loughby therefore whom you suspect. But why? Is he not
s| a man of honour and feeling? Has there been any incon-
J sistency on his side to create alarm? can he be deceitful? "
J " I hope not, I believe not, " cried Elinor. " I love Wil-
3* loughby, sincerely love him; and suspicion of his integrity
~l cannot be more painful to yourself than to me. It has been
[J involuntary, and I will not encourage it. I was startled, I
~ » confess, by the alteration in his manners this morning ; he
Zi did not speak like himself, and did not return your kindness
J with any cordiality. But all this may be explained by such
J a situation of his affairs as you have supposed. He had just
£i parted from my sister, had seen her leave him in the greatest
_J affliction; and if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs.
-.1 Smith, to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and
* yet aware that by declining your invitation, by saying that
he was going away for some time, he should seem to act an
ungenerous, a suspicious, part by our family, he might well
66 SENSE A3^D SE^SIBILITT
be embarrassed and disturbed. In such a case, a plain an <
open avowal of his difficulties would have been more to hi
honour, I think, as well as more consistent with his genera
character; — but I will not raise objections against any one'
conduct on so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judg
ment from myself, or a deviation from what I may thin
right and consistent. "
" You speak very properly. Willoughby certainly doe
not deserve to be suspected. Though we have not know
him long, he is no stranger in this part of the world; an
who has ever spoken to his disadvantage ? Had he been i
a situation to act independently and marry immediately, :
might have been odd that he should leave us without acknov
ledging everything to me at once: but this is not the cas <
It is an engagement in some respects not prosperously begui
for their marriage must be at a very uncertain distance ; an
even secrecy, as far as it can be observed, may now be ver
advisable. "
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; an
Elinor was then at liberty to think over the representatior
of her mother, to acknowledge the probability of many, an
hope for the justice of all.
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when si
entered the room and took her place at the table withoi
saying a word. Her eyes were red and swollen; and
seemed as if her tears were even then restrained with difi
culty. She avoided the looks of them all, could neither e
nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silent
pressing her hand with tender compassion, her small degr
of fortitude was quite overcome — she burst into tears ar
left the room.
This violent oppression of spirits continued the who
evening. She was without any power, because she w;
without any desire of command over herself. The slighte
mention of anything relative to Willoughby overpowered h
in an instant; and though her family were most anxious
attentive to her comfort, it was impossible for them, if th <
spoke at all, to keep clear of every subject which her feelinj
connected with him.
SE3QE AS^D SE^SIBILITr 67
CH^PTE^ XVI
! Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had
l she been able to sleep at all the first night after parting from
j Willoughby. She would have been ashamed to look her
J family in the face the next morning, had she not risen from
her bed in more need of repose than when she lay down in
it. But the feelings which made such composure a disgrace,
- m left her in no danger of incurring it. She was awake the
~m whole night, and she wept the greatest part of it. She got
J up with an headache, was unable to talk, and unwilling to
4 ^ e any nourishment; giving pain every moment to her
I mother and sisters, and forbidding all attempt at consolation
I from either. Her sensibility was potent enough !
When breakfast was over, she walked out by herself, and
wandered about the village of Allenham, indulging the
recollection of past enjoyment and crying over the present
reverse for the chief of the morning.
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling.
1 She played over every favourite song that she had been used
m to play to Willoughby, every air in which their voices had
e1 been oftenest joined, and sat at the instrument gazing on
s * every line of music that he had written out for her, till her
3 heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be gained ;
and this nourishment of grief was every day applied. She
spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and
crying, her voice often totally suspended by her tears. In
sj books, too, as well as in music, she courted the misery which
a contrast between the past and present was certain of giving.
She read nothing but what they had been used to read
together.
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported
for ever; it sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy;
but these employments, to which she daily recurred, her
solitary walks and silent meditations, still produced occasional
effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.
No letter from Willoughby came, and none seemed ex-
pected by Marianne. Her mother was surprised, and Elinor
again became uneasy. But Mrs. Dashwood could find
1
68 SEWSE A2Q) SED^SIBILITT
explanations whenever she wanted them, which at least \
satisfied herself.
" Remember, Elinor, " said she, " how very often Sir John
fetches our letters himself from the post, and carries them to
it. We have already agreed that secrecy may be necessary,
and we must acknowledge that it could not be maintained if
their correspondence were to pass through Sir John's hand. "
Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried to
find in it a motive sufficient for their silence. But there was
one method so direct, so simple, and in her opinion so eligible
of knowing the real state of the affair, and of instantly re-
moving all mystery, that she could not help suggesting it to
her mother.
" Why do you not ask Marianne at once, " said she,
" whether she is or not engaged to Willoughby? From
you, her mother, and so kind, so indulgent a mother, the
question could not give offence. It would be the natural
result of your affection for her. She used to be all unreserve,
and to you more especially. "
" I would not ask such a question for the world. Suppos-
ing it possible that they are not engaged, what distress would
not such an inquiry inflict! At any rate, it would be most
ungenerous. I should never deserve her confidence again,
after forcing from her a confession of what is meant at present
to be unacknowledged to any one. I know Marianne's heart:
I know that she dearly loves me, and that I shall not be the
last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances
make the revealment of it eligible. I would not attempt to
force the confidence of any one, of a child much less, because
a sense of duty would prevent the denial which her wishes
might direct. "
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering
her sister's youth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain;
common sense, common care, common prudence, were all
sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's romantic delicacy.
It was several days before Willoughby's name was men-
tioned before Marianne by any of her family; Sir John and
Mrs. Jennings, indeed, were not so nice; their witticisms
added pain to many a painful hour; — but one evening, Mrs.
Dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume of Shakespeare,
exclaimed,
SE^SE ADiD SEDiSIBILlTT 69
3 have never finished Hamlet, Marianne; our dear
ghby went away before we could get through it. We
t it by, that when he comes again. . . . But it may
iths, perhaps, before that happens. "
> nths ! " cried Marianne, with strong surprise. " No —
.ny weeks. "
Dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but it
linor pleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne
ressive of confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of
mtions.
morning, about a week after his leaving the country >
ne was prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual
nstead of wandering away by herself. Hitherto she
refully avoided every companion in her rambles. If
;ers intended to walk on the downs, she directly stole
»wards the lanes; if they talked of the valley, she
speedy in climbing the hills, and could never be found
he others set off. But at length she was secured by
srtions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such con-
seclusion. They walked along the road through the
and chiefly in silence, for Marianne's mind could not
trolled, and Elinor, satisfied with gaining one point,
not then attempt more. Beyond the entrance of the
where the country, though still rich, was less wild and
Den, a long stretch of the road which they had travelled
coming to Barton lay before them; and on reaching
rint, they stopped to look around them, and examine
►ect which formed the distance of their view from the
:, from a spot which they had never happened to reach
of their walks before.
ngst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered
lated one; it was a man on horseback, riding towards
In a few minutes they could distinguish him to be a
lan; and in a moment afterwards Marianne raptur-
xclaimed,
Is he; it is indeed; — I know it is! " — and was hasten-
neet him, when Elinor cried out,
ieed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken. It is not
jhby. The person is not tall enough for him, and has
air. "
has, he has, " cried Marianne, " I am sure he has ! —
70 SE2QE A3iD SEZ^SIBILITT
his air, his coat, his horse. I knew how soon he woi
come. "
She walked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor, to scr <
Marianne from particularity, as she felt almost certain of
not being Willoughby, quickened her pace and kept up w
her. They were soon within thirty yards of the gentlem
Marianne looked again; her heart sunk within her: s
abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back, when |
the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain her
third, almost as well known as Willoughby's, joined th
in begging her to stop, and she turned round with surprise
see and welcome Edward Ferrars.
He was the only person in the world who could at i
moment be forgiven for not being Willoughby ; the only <
who could have gained a smile from her; but she disper
her tears to smile on him, and in her sister's happiness for
for a time her own disappointment.
He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant wall
back with them to Barton, whither he was purposely com
to visit them.
He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality,
especially by Marianne, who shewed more warmth of reg
in her reception of him than even Elinor herself. To M;
anne, indeed, the meeting between Edward and her sii
was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness wt
she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behavk
On Edward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiei
of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasi
He was confused, seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure
seeing them, looked neither rapturous nor gay, said little
what was forced from him by questions, and distinguis;
Elinor by no mark of affection. Marianne saw and listei
with increasing surprise. She began almost to feel a dis!
of Edward; and it ended, as every feeling must end with 1
by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby, whose mam
formed a contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brot
elect.
After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise i
inquiries of meeting, Marianne asked Edward if he a
directly from London. No, he had been in Devonshii
fortnight.
SE^SE A WD SE & QIBILITT 71
" A fortnight ! " she repeated, surprised at his being so
ng in the same county with Elinor without seeing her before.
He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had been
aying with some friends near Plymouth.
" Have you been lately in Sussex? " said Elinor.
" I was at Norland about a month ago. "
" And how does dear, dear Norland look? " cried Marianne.
" Dear, dear Norland, " said Elinor, " probably looks
iuch as it always does at this time of year — the woods and
alks thickly covered with dead leaves. "
" Oh! " cried Marianne, " with what transporting sensa-
ons have I formerly seen them fall ! How have I delighted,
5 1 walked, to see them driven in showers about me by the
ind! What feelings have they, the season, the air alto-
ether inspired ! Now there is no one to regard them. They
re seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven as
mch as possible from the sight. "
" It is not every one, " said Elinor, " who has your passion
> r dead leaves. "
" No; my feelings are not often shared, not often under-
tood. But sometimes they are. " — As she said this, she sunk
lto a reverie for a few moments ; but rousing herself again,
Now, Edward, " said she, calling his attention to the
rospect, " here is Barton valley. Look up it, and be
ranquil if you can. Look at those hills ! Did you ever see
heir equals? To the left is Barton Park, amongst those
roods and plantations. You may see one end of the house,
ind there, beneath that farthest hill which rises with such
randeur, is our cottage. "
" It is a beautiful country, " he replied ; " but these bottoms
aust be dirty in winter. "
" How can you think of dirt, with such objects before
™? "
" Because, " replied he, smiling, " amongst the rest of the
objects before me, I see a very dirty lane. "
" How strange ! " said Marianne to herself as she walked on.
" Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here? Are the
Middletons pleasant people? "
" No, not at all, " answered Marianne; " we could not be
more unfortunately situated. "
" Marianne, " cried her sister, " how can you say so ?
72 SED^SE AVip SEOiSIBILITT
How can you be so unjust? They are a very respectable
family, Mr. Ferrars, and towards us have behaved in the
friendliest manner. Have you forgot, Marianne, how many
pleasant days we have owed to them ? "
" No, " said Marianne, in a low voice, " nor how many
painful moments. "
Elinor took no notice of this, and directing her attention
to their visitor, endeavoured to support something like dis-
course with him by talking of their present residence, its con-
veniences, etc., extorting from him occasional questions and
remarks. His coldness and reserve mortified her severely:
she was vexed and half angry; but resolving to regulate her
behaviour to him by the past rather than the present, she
avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and
treated him as she thought he ought to be treated from the
family connection.
CH^PTE^ XVII \
i
Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing f-
him; for his coming to Barton was, in her opinion, of all ~
things the most natural. Her joy and expressions of regard
long outlived her wonder. He received the kindest welcome f
from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve, could not stand
against such a reception. They had begun to fail him before
he entered the house, and they were quite overcome by the f
captivating manners of Mrs. Dashwood. Indeed a man'
could not very well be in love with either of her daughters, *
without extending the passion to her; and Elinor had the
satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself.
His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and \
his interest in their welfare again became perceptible. He \
was not in spirits however; he praised their house, admired
its prospect, was attentive and kind; but still he was not in
spirits. The whole family perceived it, and Mrs. Dashwood,
attributing it to some want of liberality in his mother, sat
down to table indignant against all selfish parents.
SE^SE J^D SENSIBILITY 73
" What are Mrs. Ferrar's views for you at present,
Edward? " said she, when dinner was over, and they had
drawn round the fire; " are you still to be a great orator in
spite of yourself? "
" No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no
more talents than inclination for a public life. "
" But how is your fame to be established? for famous you
must be to satisfy all your family; and with no inclination
for expense, no affection for strangers, no profession, and no
assurance, you may find it a difficult matter. "
" I shall not attempt it. I have no wish to be distin-
, guished; and I have every reason to hope I never shall.
I Thank Heaven! I cannot be forced into genius and elo-
! quence. "
" You have no ambition, I well know. Your wishes are
all moderate. "
" As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe.
I wish, as well as everybody else, to be perfectly happy ; but,
t like everybody else, it must be in my own way. Greatness
\ will not make me so. "
1 " Strange if it would ! " cried Marianne. " What have
wealth or grandeur to do with happiness? "
r " Grandeur has but little, " said Elinor, " but wealth has
! much to do with it. "
" Elinor, for shame! " said Marianne; " money can only
give happiness where there is nothing else to give it. Beyond
a competence, it can afford no real satisfaction, as far as mere
self is concerned. "
" Perhaps, " said Elinor, smiling, " we may come to the
same point. Your competence and my wealth are very
much alike, I dare say ; and without them, as the world goes
now, we shall both agree that every kind of external comfort
must be wanting. Your ideas are only more noble than
mine. Come, what is your competence ? "
" About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not
more than that. "
Elinor laughed. " Two thousand a year! One is my
i wealth! I guessed how it would end. "
" And yet two thousand a year is a very moderate in-
I come, " said Marianne. " A family cannot well be maintained
I on a smaller. I am sure I am not extravagant in my de-
74 SE^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITT
mands. A proper establishment of servants, a carriage,
perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on less. "
Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so
accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna.
" Hunters ! " repeated Edward — " But why must you
have hunters? Everybody does not hunt. "
Marianne coloured as she replied, " But most people do. "
" I wish, " said Margaret, striking out a novel thought,
" that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece! "
" O that they would! " cried Marianne, her eyes sparkling
with animation, and her cheeks glowing with the delight of
such imaginary happiness.
" We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose, " said
Elinor, " in spite of the insufficiency of wealth. "
" Oh dear, " cried Margaret, " how happy I should be. I
wonder what I should do with it ! "
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point.
" I should be puzzled to spend a large fortune myself, "
said Mrs. Dashwood, " if my children were all to be rich
without my help. "
" You must begin your improvements on this house, "
observed Elinor, " and your difficulties will soon vanish. "
" What magnificent orders would travel from this family
to London, " said Edward, " in such an event! What a
happy day for booksellers, music-sellers, and print-shops!
You, Miss Dashwood, would give a general commission for
every new print of merit to be sent you — and as for Marianne,
I know her greatness of soul, there would not be music enough
in London to content her. And books ! — Thomson, Cowper,
Scott — she would buy them all over and over again; she
would buy up every copy, I believe, to prevent their falling
into unworthy hands; and she would have every book that
tells her how to admire an old twisted tree. Should not you,
Marianne? Forgive me, if I am very saucy. But I was
willing to shew you that I had not forgot our old disputes. "
" I love to be reminded of the past, Edward — whether it
be melancholy or gay, I love to recall it — and you will never
offend me by talking of former times. You are very right in
supposing how my money would be spent — some of it, at
least my loose cash, would certainly be employed in im-
proving my collection of music and books. "
SEO^SE A3ip SE^SIBILITr 75
" And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in
annuities on the authors or their heirs. "
" No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it. "
" Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that
person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim,
that no one can ever be in love more than once in their life —
for your opinion on that point is unchanged, I presume? "
" Undoubtedly. At my time of life, opinions are tolerably
fixed. It is not likely that I should now see or hear anything
to change them. "
" Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see, " said Elinor,
" she is not at all altered. "
" She has only grown a little more grave than she was. "
" Nay, Edward, " said Marianne, " you need not reproach
me. You are not very gay yourself. "
" Why should you think so ! " replied he, with a sigh.
I " But gaiety never was a part of my character. "
" Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's, " said Elinor.
" I should hardly call her a lively girl; she is very earnest,
very eager in all she does — sometimes talks a great deal, and
always with animation — but she is not often really merry. "
" I believe you are right, " he replied, " and yet I have
always set her down as a lively girl. "
" I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mis-
takes, " said Elinor, " in a total misapprehension of character
in some point or other: fancying people so much more gay
or grave, or ingenious or stupid than they really are, and I can
hardly tell why, or in what the deception originated. Some-
times one is guided by what they say of themselves, and very
frequently by what other people say of them, without giving
oneself time to deliberate and judge. "
" But I thought it was right, Elinor, " said Marianne, " to
be guided wholly by the opinion of other people. I thought
our judgments were given us merely to be subservient to
those of our neighbours. This has always been your doctrine,
I am sure. "
" No, Marianne, never. My doctrine has never aimed at
the subjection of the understanding. All I have ever
attempted to influence has been the behaviour. You must
not confound my meaning. I am guilty, I confess, of having
often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with
76 SE^SE A3^D SEO^SIBILITT
greater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt
their sentiments or conform to their judgment in serious
matters ? "
" You have not been able then to bring your sister over to
your plan of general civility, " said Edward to Elinor. " Do
you gain no ground ? " \
" Quite the contrary/'replied Elinor, looking expressively
at Marianne.
" My judgment, " he returned, " is all on your side of the
question ; but I am afraid my practice is much more on your
sister's. I never wish to offend, but I am so foolishly shy,
that I often seem negligent, when I am only kept back by my
natural awkwardness. I have frequently thought that I
must have been intended by nature to be fond of low com-
pany, I am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility! "
" Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of
hers, " said Elinor.
" She knows her own worth too well for false shame, "
replied Edward. " Shyness is only the effect of a sense of
inferiority in some way or other. If I could persuade myself
that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful, I should
not be shy. "
" But you would still be reserved, " said Marianne, " and
that is worse. "
Edward stared — " Reserved ? Am I reserved, Marianne ? "
" Yes, very. "
" I do not understand you, " replied he, colouring. " Re-
served! — how, in what manner? What am I to tell you?
What can you suppose? "
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion, but trying to
laugh off the subject, she said to him, " Do not you know my
sister well enough to understand what she means? Do not
you know she calls every one reserved, who does not talk as
fast, and admire what she admires as rapturously as herself? "
Edward made no answer. His gravity and thoughtfulness
returned on him in their fullest extent, and he sat for some
time silent and dull.
SE3^SE AO^p SE^SIBILITT 77
CH^PTE^ XVlll
Ilinor saw with great uneasiness the low spirits of her
riend. His visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction,
vhile his own enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect. It
vas evident that he was unhappy ; she wished it were equally
evident that he still distinguished her by the same affection
which once she had felt no doubt of inspiring; but hitherto
the continuance of his preference seemed very uncertain,
and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradicted
one moment what a more animated look had intimated the
preceding one.
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the
next morning before the others were down; and Marianne,
who was always eager to promote their happiness as far as
she could, soon left them to themselves. But, before she
was half way upstairs, she heard the parlour door open, and,
turning round, was astonished to see Edward himself come
)ut.
" I am going into the village to see my horses, " said he,
'as you are not yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back
igain presently. "
Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the
urrounding country; in his walk to the village, he had seen
lany parts of the valley to advantage ; and the village itself,
1 a much higher situation than the cottage, afforded a
eneral view of the whole, which had exceedingly pleased
im. This was a subject which ensured Marianne's attention,
rid she was beginning to describe her own admiration of
lese scenes, and to question him more minutely on the
bjects that had particularly struck him, when Edward
iterrupted her by saying, " You must not inquire too far,
[arianne — remember, I have no knowledge in the picturesque,
id I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste, if
e come to particulars. I shall call hills steep, which ought
) be bold ! surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought to be
regular and rugged; and distant objects out of sight, which
ught only to be indistinct through the soft medium of a
1
78 SE^SE J^p SES^SIBILITr
hazy atmosphere. You must be satisfied with such admira- ^
tion as I can honestly give. I call it a very fine country— ^
the hills are steep, the woods seem full of fine timber, and ra
the valley looks comfortable and snug — with rich meadows
and several neat farm-houses scattered here and there. It
exactly answers my idea of a fine country, because it unites
beauty with utility — and I dare say it is a picturesque one
too, because you admire it; I can easily believe it to be full
of rocks and promontories, grey moss and brushwood, but
these are all lost on me. I know nothing of the picturesque. "
" I am afraid it is but too true, " said Marianne; " but
why should you boast of it? "
" I suspect, " said Elinor, " that to avoid one kind of
affectation, Edward here falls into another. Because he
believes many people pretend to more admiration of the
beauties of nature than they really feel, and is disgusted
with such pretensions, he affects greater indifference and less
discrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses.
He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own. "
" It is very true, " said Marianne, " that admiration of
landscape scenery is become a mere jargon. Everybody
pretends to feel and tries to describe with the taste and ele-
gance of him who first defined what picturesque beauty was.
I detest jargon of every kind, and sometimes I have kept my
feelings to myself, because I could find no language to describe
them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and
meaning. "
" lam convinced, " said Edward, " that you really feel all
the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to feel. But,
in return, your sister must allow me to feel no more than
I profess. I like a fine prospect, but not on picturesque
principles. I do not like crooked, twisted, blasted trees.
I admire them much more if they are tall, straight, and
flourishing. I do not like ruined, tattered cottages. I am
not fond of nettles, or thistles, or heath blossoms. I have
more pleasure in a snug farm-house than a watch-tower —
and a troop of tidy, happy villagers please me better than the
finest banditti in the world. "
Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with com-
passion at her sister. Elinor only laughed.
The subject was continued no further; and Marianne
SE^SE A3^D SEV^SIBILITT 79
remained thoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly
engaged her attention. She was sitting by Edward, and in
taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood, his hand passed so
directly before her as to make a ring, with a plait of hair in
the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers.
" I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward, " she cried.
" Is that Fanny's hair? I remember her promising to give
vou some. But I should have thought her hair had been
darker. "
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt — but
when she saw how much she had pained Edward, her own
vexation at her want of thought could not be surpassed by
his. He coloured very deeply, and giving a momentary
glance at Elinor, replied, " Yes, it is my sister's hair. The
setting always casts a different shade on it, you know. "
Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise.
That the hair was her own, she instantaneously felt as well
satisfied as Marianne; the only difference in their conclusions
was, that what Marianne considered as a free gift from her
sister, Elinor was conscious must have been procured by some
theft or contrivance unknown to herself. She was not in a
humour, however, to regard it as an affront, and affecting to
take no notice of what had passed, by instantly talking of
something else, she internally resolved henceforward to catch
every opportunity cf eyeing the hair, and satisfying herself,
beyond all doubt, that it was exactly the shade of her own.
Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended
in an absence of mind still more settled. He was particularly
grave the whole morning. Marianne severely censured her-
self for what she had said; but her own forgiveness might
have been more speedy, had she known how little offence it
had given her sister.
Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir John
and Mrs. Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a
gentleman at the cottage, came to take a survey of the guest.
With the assistance of his mother-in-law, Sir John was not
long in discovering that the name of Ferrars began with an
F, and this prepared a future mine of raillery against the
devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of their
acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being
immediately sprung. But, as it was, she only learned from
80 SEWSE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
some very significant looks, how far their penetration,^ J
founded on Margaret's instructions, extended.'
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either
inviting them to dine at the Park the next day, or to drink
tea with them that evening. On the present occasion, for
the better entertainment of their visitor, towards whose
amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wished
to engage them for both.
" You must drink tea with us to-night, " said he, " for we
shall be quite alone — and to-morrow you must absolutely
dine with us, for we shall be a large party. "
Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity. " And who knows
but you may raise a dance? " said she. " And that will
tempt you, Miss Marianne. "
" A dance! " cried Marianne. " Impossible! Who is to
dance? "
" Who ! Why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers,
to be sure. What! you thought nobody could dance because
a certain person that shall be nameless is gone ! "
" I wish with all my soul, " cried Sir John, " that Wil-
loughby were among us again. "
This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to
Edward. " And who is Willoughby? " said he, in a low
voice to Miss Dashwood, by whom he was sitting.
She gave him a brief reply. Marianne's countenance was
more communicative. Edward saw enough to comprehend
not only the meaning of others, but such of Marianne's ex-
pressions as had puzzled him before; and when their visitors
left them, he went immediately round her, and said, in a
whisper, " I have been guessing. Shall I tell you my guess ? "
" What do you mean? "
" Shall I tell you? "
" Certainly. "
" Well, then, I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts. "
Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could not
help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner, and, after
a moment's silence, said,
" Oh ! Edward ! How can you ? — But the time will come,
I hope ... I am sure you will like him. "
" I do not doubt it, " replied he, rather astonished at her
earnestness and warmth; for had he not imagined it to be
SE2QE AD^D SE^SIBILITT 81
& joke for the good of her acquaintance in general, founded
only on a something or a nothing between Mr. Willoughby
and herself, he would not have ventured to mention it.
CH^PTE^XIX
Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnestly
pressed by Mrs. Dashwood to stay longer; but as if he were
bent only on self-mortification, he seemed resolved to be
gone when his enjoyment among his friends was at the height.
His spirits, during the last two or three days, though still
very unequal, were greatly improved — he grew more and
more partial to the house and environs — never spoke of going
away without a sigh — declared his time to be wholly disen-
gaged — even doubted to what place he should go when he left
them — but still go he must. Never had any week passed so
quickly — he could hardly believe it to be gone. He said so
repeatedly; other things he said too, which marked the turn
of his feelings and gave the lie to his actions. He had no
pleasure at Norland; he detested being in town; but either
to Norland or London he must go. He valued their kindness
beyond anything, and his greatest happiness was in being
with them. Yet he must leave them at the end of a week, in
spite of their wishes and his own, and without any restraint
on his time.
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting
to his mother's account; and it was happy for her that he
had a mother whose character was so imperfectly known to
her, as to be the general excuse for everything strange on the
part of her son. Disappointed, however, and vexed as she
was, and sometimes displeased with his uncertain behaviour
to herself, she was very well disposed on the whole to regard
■ his actions with all the candid allowances and generous quali-
fications, which had been rather more painfully extorted
from her, for Willoughby's service, by her mother. His
want of spirits, of openness, and of consistency, were most
I usually attributed to his want of independence, and his better
knowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's dispositions and designs. The
i
82 SEO^SE AD < p SE^SIBILITT
shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purpose in
them, originated in the same fettered inclination, tr
inevitable necessity of temporising with his mothe:
old well-established grievance of duty against will,
against child, was the cause of all. She would hai
glad to know when these difficulties were to cease, thi
sition was to yield, — when Mrs. Ferrars would be re:
and her son be at liberty to be happy. But from su
wishes, she was forced to turn for comfort to the ren
her confidence in Edward's affection, to the remembi
every mark of regard in look or word which fell fn
while at Barton, and above all to that flattering pro
which he constantly wore round his finger.
" I think, Edward, " said Mrs. Dashwood, as they
breakfast the last morning, " you would be a happi
if you had any profession to engage your time and
interest to your plans and actions. Some inconveni
your friends, indeed, might result from it — you woulc
able to give them so much of your time. But " i
smile) " you would be materially benefited in one pa
at least — you would know where to go when you left
" I do assure you, " he replied, " that I have long thoi
this point as you think now. It has been, and is, an
ably will always be a heavy misfortune to me, that I hi
no necessary business to engage me, no profession to |
employment or afford me anything like independent
unfortunately my own nicety and the nicety of my
have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being. W
could agree in our choice of a profession. I always p]
the church, as I still do. But that was not smart enc
my family. They recommended the army. That
great deal too smart for me. The law was allowe <
genteel enough; many young men, who had cham
the Temple, made a very good appearance in the first
and drove about town in very knowing gigs. But I
inclination for the law, even in this less abstruse stuc
which my family approved. As for the navy, it had
on its side, but I was too old when the subject was first
to enter it, — and, at length, as there was no necessity
having any profession at all, as I might be as dashi
expensive without a red coat on my back as with 01
SE^SE AOtp SEO^SIBILITT 83
vas pronounced on the whole to be the most advantage-
nd honourable, and a young man of eighteen is not in
al so earnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solid-
is of his friends to do nothing. I was therefore entered
rford, and have been properly idle ever since. "
[ " he consequence of which, I suppose, will be, " said Mrs.
wood, " since leisure has not promoted your own happi-
that your sons will be brought up to as many pursuits,
oyments, professions, and trades as Columella's. "
rhey will be brought up, " said he, in a serious accent,
be as unlike myself as is possible, — in feeling, in action,
ndition, in everything. "
3ome, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of
s, Edward. You are in a melancholy humour, and
r that any one unlike yourself must be happy. But
mber that the pain of parting from friends will be felt
rerybody at times, whatever be their education or state.
¥ your own happiness. You want nothing but patience
give it a more fascinating name, call it hope. Your
ier will secure to you, in time, that independence you
3 anxious for; it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long
ne her happiness to prevent your whole youth from
I wasted in discontent. How much may not a few
iisdo! "
'. think, " replied Edward, " that I may defy many
:hs to produce any good to me. "
as desponding turn of mind, though it could not be
nunicated to Mrs. Dashwood, gave additional pain to
1 all in the parting, which shortly took place, and left an
mfortable impression on Elinor's feelings especially,
h required some trouble and time to subdue. But as
5 her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herself
appearing to suffer more than what all her family
red on his going away, she did not adopt the method so
iously employed by Marianne, on a similar occasion, to
lent and fix her sorrow, by seeking silence, solitude, and
ess. Their means were as different as their objects, and
lly suited to the advancement of each,
inor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was out
e house, busily employed herself the whole day, neither
ht nor avoided the mention of his name, appeared to
84 SE2(SE J$(p SEO^SIBILITr
interest herself almost as much as ever in the general concerns'
of the family, and if, by this conduct, she did not lessen her t
own grief, it was at least prevented from unnecessary increase, u
and her mother and sisters were spared much solicitude on
her account.
Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own,
appeared no more meritorious to Marianne than her own had
seemed faulty to her. The business of self-command she
settled very easily; — with strong affections it was impossible,
with calm ones it could have no merit. That her sister's
affections were calm, she dared not deny, though she blushed
to acknowledge it; and of the strength of her own, she gave
a very striking proof, by still loving and respecting that sister
in spite of this mortifying conviction.
Without shutting herself up from her family, or leaving
the house in determined solitude to avoid them, or laying
awake the whole night to indulge meditation, Elinor found
every day afforded her leisure enough to think of Edward,
and of Edward's behaviour, in every possible variety which
the different state of her spirits at different times could
produce; — with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and
doubt. There were moments in abundance, when, if not by
the absence of her mother and sisters, at least by the nature
of their employments, conversation was forbidden among
them, and every effect of solitude was produced. Her mind
was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could not be chained
elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject so
interesting, must be before her, must force her attention,
and engross her memory, her reflection, and her fancy.
From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table,
she was roused one morning, soon after Edward's leaving
them, by the arrival of company. She happened to be quite (
alone. The closing of the little gate, at the entrance of the
green court in front of the house, drew her eyes to the window,
and she saw a large party walking up to the door. Amongst
them were Sir John and Lady Middleton, and Mrs. Jennings;
but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were
quite unknown to her. She was sitting near the window;
and as soon as Sir John perceived her, he left the rest of the <
party to the ceremony of knocking at the door, and stepping
across the turf, obliged her to open the casement to speak to
SE2QE A$ip SED^SIBILITT 85
him, though the space was so short between the door and the
window as to make it hardly possible to speak at one without
being heard at the other.
" Well, " said he, " we have brought you some strangers.
How do you like them ? "
" Hush! they will hear you. "
" Never mind if they do. It is only the Palmers. Charlotte
is very pretty, I can tell you. You may see her if you look
this way. "
As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes,
without taking that liberty, she begged to be excused.
" Where is Marianne ? Has she run away because we are
come? I see her instrument is open. "
" She is walking, I believe. "
They were now joined by Mrs. Jennings, who had not
patience enough to wait till the door was open before she told
her story. She came hallooing to the window, " How do you
do, my dear ? How does Mrs. Dashwood do ? And where
are your sisters? What! all alone! you will be glad of a
little company to sit with you. I have brought my other son
and daughter to see you. Only think of their coming so
suddenly ! I thought I heard a carriage last night, while we
were drinking our tea, but it never entered my head that it
could be them. I thought of nothing but whether it might
not be Colonel Brandon come back again; so I said to Sir
John,'I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is Colonel
Brandon come back again'"
Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her
story, to receive the rest of the party; Lady Middleton
introduced the two strangers; Mrs. Dashwood and Margaret
came downstairs at the same time, and they all sat down to
look at one another, while Mrs. Jennings continued her story
as she walked through the passage into the parlour, attended
by Sir John.
Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middle-
ton, and totally unlike her in every respect. She was short
and plump, had a very pretty face, and the finest expression
of good humour in it that could possibly be. Her manners
were by no means so elegant as her sister's, but they were
much more prepossessing. She came in with a smile — smiled
all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, and smiled
86 SEWSE AD < JD SE^SIBILITT
when she went away. Her husband was a grave looking
young man of five or six and twenty, with an air of more
fashion and sense than his wife, but of less willingness to
please or be pleased. He entered the room with a look of
self-consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies without speak-
ing a word, and, after briefly surveying them and their apart-
ments, took up a newspaper from the table and continued to
read it as long as he staid.
Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowed
by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and happy,
was hardly seated before her admiration of the parlour and
everything in it burst forth.
" Well ! what a delightful room this is ! I never saw any-
thing so charming ! Only think, mama, how it is improved
since I was here last ! I always thought it such a sweet place,
ma'am " (turning to Mrs. Dashwood), " but you have made
it so charming ! Only look, sister, how delightful everything
is ! How I should like such a house for myself. Should not
you, Mr. Palmer? "
Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise
his eyes from the newspaper.
" Mr. Palmer does not hear me, " said she, laughing. " He
never does, sometimes. It is so ridiculous ! "
This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood ; she had never
been used to find wit in the inattention of any one, and could
not help looking with surprise at them both.
Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she
could, and continued her account of their surprise the evening
before, on seeing their friends, without ceasing till everything
was told. Mrs. Palmer laughed heartily at the recollection of
their astonishment, and everybody agreed two or three times
over, that it had been quite an agreeable surprise.
" You may believe how glad we all were to see them, "
added Mrs. Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor, and
speaking in a low voice as if she meant to be heard by no one
else, though they were seated on different sides of the room:
" but, however, I can't help wishing they had not travelled
quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it, for they
came all round by London upon account of some business,
for you know " (nodding significantly and pointing to her
daughter) " it was wrong in her situation. I wanted her
SE^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITT 87
to stay at home and rest this morning, but she would come
with us; she longed so much to see you all ! "
Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any
harm.
" She expects to be confined in February, " continued Mrs.
Jennings.
Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversa-
tion, and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer if there
was any news in the paper.
" No, none at all, " ne replied, and read on.
" Here comes Marianne, " cried Sir John. " Now Palmer,
you shall see a monstrous pretty girl. "
He immediately went into the passage, opened the front
door, and ushered her in himself. Mrs. Jennings asked her, as
soon as she appeared, if she had not been to Allenham; and
Mrs. Palmer laughed so heartily at the question as to shew
she understood it. Mr. Palmer looked up on her entering
the room, stared at her some minutes, and then returned to
his newspaper. Mrs. Palmer's eye was now caught by the
drawings which hung round the room. She got up to
examine them.
" Oh! dear, how beautiful these are! Well, how delight-
ful! Do but look, mama, how sweet! I declare they are
quite charming; I could look at them for ever. " And then
sitting down again, she very soon forgot that there were any
such things in the room.
When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmer rose
also, laid down the newspaper, stretched himself, and looked
at them all round.
" My love, have you been asleep ? " said his wife, laughing.
He made her no answer, and only observed, after again
examining the room, that it was very low-pitched, and that
the ceiling was crooked. He then made his bow and departed
with the rest.
Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the
next day at the park. Mrs. Dashwood, who did not chuse
to dine with them oftener than they dined at the cottage,
absolutely refused on her own account; her daughters
might do as they pleased. But they had no curiosity to see
how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation
of pleasure from them in any other way. They attempted,
88 SE^SE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
therefore, likewise to excuse themselves; the weather was
uncertain and not likely to be good. But Sir John would
not be satisfied — the carriage should be sent for them, and
they must come. Lady Middleton too, though she did not
press their mother, pressed them. Mrs. Jennings and Mrs.
Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to
avoid a family party, and the young ladies were obliged to
yield.
" Why should they ask us? " said Marianne, as soon as
they were gone. " The rent of this cottage is said to be low;
but we have it on very hard terms, if we are to dine at the
park whenever any one is staying either with them or with us. "
" They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now, " said
Elinor, " by these frequent invitations than by those which
we received from them a few weeks ago. The alteration is
not in them, if their parties are grown tedious and dull.
We must look for the change elsewhere. "
CHJlPTE < R^XX
As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the
Park the next day, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in
at the other, looking as good-humoured and merry as before.
She took them all most affectionately by the hand, and
expressed great delight in seeing them again.
" I am so glad to see you! " said she, seating herself
between Elinor and Marianne, " for it is so bad a day I was
afraid you might not come, which would be a shocking thing,
as we go away again to-morrow. We must go, for the
Westons come to us next week, you know. It was quite a
sudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it
till the carriage was coming to the door, and then Mr. Palmer
asked me if I would go with him to Barton. He is so droll!
He never tells me anything ! I am so sorry we cannot stay
longer; however, we shall meet again in town very soon,
I hope. "
They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation.
" Not go to town! " cried Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh; " I
I
SE2QE AND SED^IBILITT 89
shall be quite disappointed if you do not. I could get the
nicest house in the world for you next door to ours, in
Hanover Square. You must come, indeed. I am sure I
shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am
confined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into public. "
They thanked her, but were obliged to resist all her
entreaties.
" Oh! my love, " cried Mrs. Palmer to her husband, who
just then entered the room; " you must help me to persuade
the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter. "
Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to
the ladies, began complaining of the weather.
" How horrid all this is ! " said he. " Such weather makes
everything and everybody disgusting. Dulness is as much
produced within doors as without by rain. It makes one
detest all one's acquaintance. What the devil does Sir John
mean by not having a billiard-room in his house ? How few
people know what comfort is! Sir John is as stupid as
the weather. "
The rest of the company soon dropt in.
" lam afraid, Miss Marianne, " said Sir John, " you have
not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham to-day. "
Marianne looked very grave, and said nothing.
" Oh! don't be so sly before us, " said Mrs. Palmer: " for
we know all about it, I assure you; and I admire your taste
very much, for I think he is extremely handsome. We do
not live a great way from him in the country, you know, —
not above ten miles, I dare say. "
" Much nearer thirty, " said her husband.
" Ah ! well ! there is not much difference. I never was
at his house ; but they say it is a sweet, pretty place. "
" As vile a spot as ever I saw in my life, " said Mr. Palmer..
Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her counten-
ance betrayed her interest in what was said.
" Is it very ugly? " continued Mrs. Palmer — " then it
must be some other place that is so pretty, I suppose. "
When they were seated in the dining-room, Sir John
observed with regret that they were only eight all together.
" My dear, " said he to his lady, " it is very provoking that
we should be so few. Why did not you ask the Gilberts to
come to us to-day? "
i
90 SEO^SE J$(p SE^QIBILITT
" Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me abou
it before, that it could not be done? They dined with m
last. "
" You and I, Sir John, " said Mrs. Jennings, " should nol
stand upon such ceremony. "
" Then you would be very ill-bred, " cried Mr. Palmer.
" My love, you contradict everybody, " said his wife, with
her usual laugh. " Do you know that you are quite rude? "
" I did not know I contradicted anybody in calling youi
mother ill-bred. "
" Aye, you may abuse me as you please, " said the good-
natured old lady. " You have taken Charlotte off my hands,
and cannot give her back again. So there I have the whip
hand of you. "
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could
not get rid of her, and exultingly said, she did not care ho*
cross he was to her, as they must live together. It was im-
possible for any one to be more thoroughly good-natured 01
more determined to be happy than Mrs. Palmer. The studied
indifference, insolence, and discontent of her husband gave
her no pain; and when he scolded or abused her, she was
highly diverted.
" Mr. Palmer is so droll ! " said she > in a whisper, to Elinor,
" He is always out of humour. "
Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give
him credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured
or ill-bred as he wished to appear. His temper might per-
haps be a little soured by finding, like many others of his sex
that through some unaccountable bias in favour of beauty,
he was the husband of a very silly woman — but she kne*
that this kind of blunder was too common for any sensible
man to be lastingly hurt by it. It was rather a wish of dis-
tinction, she believed, which produced his contemptuous
treatment of everybody, and his general abuse of everything
before him. It was the desire of appearing superior to othei
people. The motive was too common to be wondered atj
but the means, however they might succeed by establishing
his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to attach any
one to him except his wife.
" Oh I my dear Miss Dashwood, " said Mrs. Palmer soon
afterwards, " I have got such a favour to ask of you and youi
SEV^SE J2\D SE^SIBILITT 91
sister. Will you come and spend some time at Cleveland
this Christmas ? Now, pray do — and come while the Westons
are with us. You cannot think how happy I shall be! It
will be quite delightful! My love, " applying to her
husband, " don't you long to have the Miss Dash woods come
to Cleveland? "
" Ortainly, " he replied with a sneer — " I came into Devon-
shire with no other view. "
" There now, " — said his lady, " you see Mr. Palmer
expects you; so you cannot refuse to come. "
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invita-
tion.
" But indeed, you must and shall come. I am sure you
will like it of all things. The Westons will be with us, and
it will be quite delightful. You cannot think what a sweet
place Cleveland is; and we are so gay now, for Mr. Palmer
is always going about the country canvassing against the
election; and so many people come to dine with us that I
never saw before, it is quite charming! But, poor fellow!
it is very fatiguing to him ! for he is forced to make every-
body like him. "
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented
to the hardship of such an obligation.
" How charming it will be, " said Charlotte, " when he is
in Parliament! — won't it? How I shall laugh! It will be
so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to him with an
M.P. But do you know, he says he will never frank for me.
He declares he won't. Don't you, Mr. Palmer? "
Mr. Palmer took no notice of her.
" He cannot bear writing, you know, " she continued —
" he says it is quite shocking. "
" No, " said he, " I never said anything so irrational.
Don't palm all your abuses of language upon me. "
" There now; you see how droll he is. This is always the
way with him ! Sometimes he won't speak to me for half a
day together, and then he comes out with something so
droll — all about anything in the world. "
She surprised Elinor very much, as they returned into the
drawing-room, by asking her whether she did not like Mr.
Palmer excessively.
" Certainly, " said Elinor, " he seems very agreeable. "
f
92 SED^SE AO^D SEOtSIBILITT
" Well — I am so glad you do. I thought you would, I
so pleasant; and Mr. Palmer is excessively pleased with
and your sisters, I can tell you, and you can't think how
appointed he will be if you don't come to Cleveland. I a
imagine why you should object to it. "
Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation; and
changing the subject, put a stop to her entreaties,
thought it probable that, as they lived in the same coun
Mrs. Palmer might be able to give some more partici
account of Willoughby's general character than could
gathered from the Middletons'partial acquaintance v
him, and she was eager to gain from any one such a c
firmation of his merits as might remove the possibility
fear for Marianne. She began by inquiring if they saw m
of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whether they v
intimately acquainted with him.
" Oh! dear, yes; I know him extremely well, " rep
Mrs. Palmer — " Not that I ever spoke to him, indeed;
I have seen him for ever in town. Somehow or othe
never happened to be staying at Barton while he was
Allenham. Mama saw him here once before; — but I
with my uncle at Weymouth. However, I dare say
should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire,
had not happened very unluckily that we should never r.
been in the country together. He is very little at Comh
believe; but if he were ever so much there, I do not tl
Mr. Palmer would visit him, for he is in the opposition,
know, and besides it is such a way off. I know why
inquire about him, very well; your sister is to marry 1
I am monstrous glad of it, for then I shall have her f <
neighbour, you know. "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " you know much r
of the matter than I do, if you have, any reason to ex
such a match. "
" Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is v
everybody talks of. I assure you I heard of it in my
through town. "
" My dear Mrs. Palmer! "
" Upon my honour I did. — I met Colonel Bran*
Monday morning in Bond Street, just before we left U
and he told me of it directly. "
SE^SE J & Cp SENSIBILITY 93
fou surprise me very much. Colonel Brandon tell you
! Surely you must be mistaken. To give such in-
ence to a person who could not be interested in it, even
were true, is not what I should expect Colonel Brandon
But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and I will tell
bow it happened. When we met him, he turned back
walked with us; and so we began talking of my brother
sister, and one thing and another, and I said to him,
Colonel, there is a new family come to Barton Cottage,
\i, and mama sends me word they are very pretty, and
one of them is going to be married to Mr. Willoughby,
> mbe Magna. Is it true, pray ? for of course you must
r, as you have been in Devonshire so lately.'"
Vnd what did the Colonel say ? "
)h! — he did not say much; but he looked as if he knew
be true, so from that moment I set it down as certain,
ill be quite delightful, I declare! When is it to take
:? "
& r. Brandon was very well, I hope? "
)h! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises, he did
ing but say fine things of you. "
'. am flattered by his commendation. He seems an
lent man; and I think him uncommonly pleasing. "
k > do I. — He is such a charming man, that it is quite a
tie should be so grave and so dull. Mama says he was in
with your sister too. I assure you it was a great compli-
if he was, for he hardly ever falls in love with any-
s Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of Somer-
ire ? " said Elinor.
)h ! yes, extremely well ; — that is, I do not believe many
le are acquainted with him, because Combe Magna is so
BE; but they all think him extremely agreeable, I assure
Nobody is more liked than Mr. Willoughby wherever
> es, and so you may tell your sister. She is a monstrous
7 girl to get him, upon my honour; not but that he is
i more lucky in getting her, because she is so very hand-
; and agreeable that nothing can be good enough for her.
ever, I don't think her hardly at all handsomer than
I assure you; for I think you both excessively pretty,
94 SE^SE AO^D SENSIBILITY
and so does Mr. Palmer too, I am sure, though we could not
get him to own it last night. "
Mrs. Palmer's information respecting Willoughby was not
very material; but any testimony in his favour, however
small, was pleasing to her.
" I am so glad we are got acquainted at last, " continued
Charlotte. " And now I hope we shall always be great
friends. You can't think how much I longed to see you ! It
ic so delightful that you should live at the cottage ! Nothing
can be like it, to be sure ! And I am so glad your sister is
going to be well married ! I hope you will be a great deal at
Combe Magna. It is a sweet place, by all accounts. "
" You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon,
have not you ? "
" Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married. He
was a particular friend of Sir John's. I believe, " she added
in a low voice, " he would have been very glad to have had
me, if he could. Sir John and Lady Middleton wished it
very much. But mama did not think the match good
enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it
to the colonel, and we should have been married immediately. "
" Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal to
your mother before it was made ? Had he never owned his
affection to yourself? "
" Oh! no; but if mama had not objected to it, I dare say
he would have liked it of all things. He had not seen me
then above twice, for it was before I left school. However,
I am much happier as I am. Mr. Palmer is just the kind of
man I like. "
CHtAPTEl^XXl
The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the
two families at Barton were again left to entertain each other.
But this did not last long; Elinor had hardly got their last
visitors out of her head — had hardly done wondering at
Charlotte's being so happy without a cause, at Mr. Palmer's
acting so simply with good abilities, and at the strange un-
f
I
I
i
3
SE & QE A3^D SE2QIBILITT 95
suitableness which often existed between husband and wife,
before Sir John's and Mrs. Jennings'active zeal in the cause
of society procured her some other new acquaintance to see
and observe.
In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met with
two young ladies whom Mrs. Jennings had the satisfaction
of discovering to be her relations, and this was enough for
Sir John to invite them directly to the Park, as soon as their
present engagements at Exeter were over. Their engage-
ments at Exeter instantly gave way before such an invitation,
and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the
return of Sir John, by hearing that she was very soon to
receive a visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her
life, and of whose elegance — whose tolerable gentility even,
she could have no proof; for the assurances of her husband
and mother on that subject went for nothing at all. Their
being her relations too, made it so much the worse; and
Mrs. Jennings'attempts at consolation were therefore unfor-
tunately founded, when she advised her daughter not to
care about their being so fashionable, because they were all
cousins and must put up with one another.
As it was impossible however now to prevent their coming,
Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it with all the
philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with
merely giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject
five or six times every day.
The young ladies arrived, their appearance was by no
means ungenteel or unfashionable. Their dress was very
smart, their manners very civil, they were delighted with the
house and in raptures with the furniture, and they happened
to be so doatingly fond of children that Lady Middleton's
good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had
been an hour at the Park. She declared them to be very
agreeable girls indeed, which for her ladyship was enthu-
siastic admiration. Sir John's confidence in his own judg-
ment rose with this animated praise, and he set off directly
for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles'
arrival, and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls
in the world. From such commendation as this, however,
there was not much to be learned; Elinor well knew that the
sweetest girls in the world were to be met with in every part
/
96 SE3^SE A3^D SES^SIBILITr
of England, under every possible variation of form, face,
temper, and understanding. Sir John wanted the whole
family to walk to the Park directly and look at his guests.
Benevolent, philanthropic man ! It was painful to him even
to keep a third cousin to himself.
" Do come now, " said he — " pray come — you must come
— I declare you shall come. — You can't think how you will
like them. Lucy is monstrous pretty, and so good-humoured
and agreeable! The children are all hanging about her
already, as if she was an old acquaintance. And they both
long to see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeter
that you are the most beautiful creatures in the world; and
I have told them it is all very true, and a great deal more.
You will be delighted with them, I am sure. They have
brought the whole coach full of playthings for the children.
How can you be so cross as not to come! Why, they are
your cousins, you know, after a fashion. You are my cousins,
and they are my wife's, so you must be related. "
But Sir John could not prevail. He could only obtain a
promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two, and
then left them in amazement at their indifference, to walk
home and boast anew of their attractions to the Miss Steeles,
as he had been already boasting of the Miss Steeles to them.
When their promised visit to the Park and consequent
introduction to these young ladies took place, they found in
the appearance of the eldest, who was nearly thirty, with a
very plain and not a sensible face, nothing to admire; but
in the other, who was not more than two or three and twenty,
they acknowledged considerable beauty; her features were
pretty, and she had a sharp, quick eye, and a smartness of
air, which, though it did not give actual elegance or grace,
gave distinction to her person. Their manners were parti-
cularly civil, and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some
kind of sense, when she saw with what constant and judicious
attentions they were making themselves agreeable to Lady
Middleton. With her children they were in continual
raptures, extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and
humouring all their whims; and such of their time as could
be spared from the importunate demands which this polite-
ness made on it, was spent in admiration of whatever her
ladyship was doing, if she happened to be doing anything,
SEO^SE AD^D SE^SIBILITr 97
\ or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in which her
appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing
j. delight. Fortunately for those who pay their court through
I such foibles, a fond mother, though, in pursuit of praise for
F her children, the most rapacious of human beings, is likewise
I the most credulous; her demands are exorbitant; but she
I will swallow anything; and the excessive affection and
endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring, were
viewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest
surprise or distrust. She saw with maternal complacency
'all the impertinent incroachments and mischievous tricks to
which her cousins submitted. She saw their sashes untied,
their hair pulled about their ears, their work-bags searched,
and their knives and scissors stolen away, and felt no doubt
I of its being a reciprocal enjoyment. It suggested no other
surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so com-
posedly by without claiming a share in what was passing.
" John is in such spirits to-day ! " said she, on his taking
Miss Steele's pocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of
window — " He is full of monkey tricks. "
And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinch-
Iing one of the same lady's fingers, she fondly observed,
" How playful William is! "
" And here is my sweet little Annamaria, " she added,
tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old, who had not
made a noise for the last two minutes; " And she is always
so gentle and quiet — Never was there such a quiet little
tiling! "
But unfortunately, in bestowing these embraces, a pin in
her ladyship's head-dress slightly scratching the child's neck,
produced from this pattern of gentleness such violent screams
as could hardly be outdone by any creature professedly noisy.
The mother's consternation was excessive; but it could not
surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, and everything was
done by all three, in so critical an emergency, which affection
3 could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little
sufferer. She was seated in her mother's lap, covered with
kisses, her wound bathed with lavender-water by one of the
Miss Steeles, who was on her knees to attend her, and her
mouth stuffed with sugar-plums by the other. With such
a reward for her tears, the child was too wise to cease crying.
G
/
f
98 SEO^SE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her two brothers
for offering to touch her, and all their united soothings were
ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in
a scene of similar distress, last week, some apricot marmalade
had been successfully applied for a bruised temple, the same
remedy was eagerly proposed for this unfortunate scratch,
and a slight intermission of screams in the young lady on
hearing it, gave them reason to hope that it would not be
rejected. She was carried out of the room therefore in her
mother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boys
chose to follow, though earnestly entreated by their mother
to stay behind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness
which the room had not known for many hours. (^
" Poor little creature ! " said Miss Steele, as soon as they
were gone. " It might have been a very sad accident. "
" Yet I hardly know how, " cried Marianne, " unless it had
been under totally different circumstances. But this is the
usual way of heightening alarm, where there is nothing to
be alarmed at in reality. "
" What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is, " said Lucy
Steele.
Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what
she did not feel, however trivial the occasion; and upon
Elinor, therefore, the whole task of telling lies when politeness
required it always fell. She did her best, when thus called
on, by speaking of Lady Middleton with more warmth than
she felt, though with far less than Miss Lucy.
" And Sir John, too, " cried the elder sister, " what a
charming man he is ! "
Here, too, Miss Dashwood's commendation being only
simple and just, came in without any eclat She merely
observed that he was perfectly good-humoured and
friendly.
: " And what a charming little family they have 1 I never
saw such fine children in my life. I declare I quite doat upon
them already, and indeed I am always distractedly fond of
children. "
" I should guess so, " said Elinor with a smile, " from what
I have witnessed this morning. "
'* T have a notion, " said Lucy, " you think the little Middle-
tons rather too much indulged; perhaps they may be the
SEO^SE AD^p SE^SIBILITT 99
outside of enough; but it so natural in Lady Middleton; and
for my part, I love to see children full of fife and spirits; I
cannot bear them if they are tame and quiet. "
" I confess, " replied Elinor, " that while I am at Barton
Park, I never think of tame and quiet children with any
abhorrence. "
A short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken
by Miss Steele, who seemed very much disposed for conversa-
tion, and who now said rather abruptly, " And how do you
I Mke Devonshire, Miss Dashwood ? I suppose you were very
Horry to leave Sussex. "
I In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at
I least of the manner in which it was spoken, Elinor replied
[ that she was.
" Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it? " added
Miss Steele.
" We have heard Sir John admire it excessively, " said
Lucy, who seemed to think some apology necessary for the
freedom of her sister.
" I think every one must admire it, " replied Elinor, " who
ever saw the place ; though it is not to be supposed that any
one can estimate its beauties as we do. "
" And had you a great many smart beaux there ? • I
suppose you have not so many in this part of the world; for
my part, I think they are a vast addition always. "
" But why should you think, " said Lucy, looking ashamed
of her sister, " that there are not as many genteel young men
in Devonshire as Sussex ? "
" Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that there
an't. I'm sure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter ;
but you know, how could I tell what smart beaux there might
be about Norland? and I was only afraid the Miss Dash-
woods might find it dull at Barton, if they had not so many
as they used to have. But perhaps you young ladies may
not care about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as
with them. For my part, I think they are vastly agreeable,
provided they dress smart and behave civil. But I can't
bear to see them dirty and nasty. Now, there's Mr. Rose at
Exeter, a prodigious smart young man, quite a beau, clerk
to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet him
of a morning, he is not fit to be seen. I suppose your brother
££0924
J
ioo SEO^SE A^D SE^SIBILITr
was quite a beau, Miss Dashwood, before he married, as
was so rich? "
" Upon my word, " replied Elinor, " I cannot tell you,
I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the w <
But this I can say, that if he ever was a beau before
married, he is one still, for there is not the smallest alterai
in him. "
" Oh! dear! one never thinks of married men's tx
beaux — they have something else to do. "
" Lord! Anne, " cried her sister, " you can talk of not!
but beaux; — you will make Miss Dash wood believe you tl
of nothing else. " And then, to turn the discourse, she be
admiring the house and furniture.
This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough. The vu
freedom and folly of the eldest left her no recommendat
and as Elinor was not blinded by the beauty or the shn
look of the youngest, to her want of real elegance and art!
ness, she left the house without any wish of knowing tl
better.
Not so the Miss Steeles. They came from Exeter,
provided with admiration for the use of Sir John Middle
his family, and all his relations, and no niggardly propor
was now dealt out to his fair cousins, whom they deck
to be the most beautiful, elegant, accomplished and agree
girls they had ever beheld, and with whom they were part
larly anxious to be better acquainted. And to be be
acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevit
lot; for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the ■
Steeles, their party would be too strong for opposition,
that kind of intimacy must be submitted to, which com
of sitting an hour or two together in the same room air
every day. Sir John could do no more ; but he did not k
that any more was required; to be together was, in
opinion, to be intimate, and while his continual schemes
their meeting were effectual, he had not a doubt of t
being established friends.
To do him justice, he did everything in his power, to
mote their unreserve, by making the Miss Steeles acquaii
with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins'situat
in the most delicate particulars, — and Elinor had not i
them more than twice, before the eldest of them wished
SES^SE AND SE^SIBILITr 101
joy on her sister's having been so lucky as to make a conquest
of a very smart beau since she came to Barton.
"'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young, to be
sure, " said she, " and I hear he is quite a beau, and prodigious
handsome. And I hope you may have as good luck yourself
soon,— but perhaps you may have a friend in the corner
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice
i in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than
he had been with respect to Marianne ; indeed it was rather
his favourite joke of the two, as being somewhat newer and
[ more conjectural: and since Edward's visit, they had never
| dined together, without his drinking to her best affections
with so much significancy, and so many nods and winks, as
to excite general attention. The letter F — had been like-
I wise invariably brought forward, and found productive of
I such countless jokes, that its character as the wittiest letter
■ in the alphabet had been long established with Elinor.
I The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the benefit
of these jokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity
to know the name of the gentleman alluded to, which, though
often impertinently expressed, was perfectly of a piece with
her general inquisitiveness into the concerns of their family.
But Sir John did not sport long with the curiosity which he
delighted to raise, for he had at least as much pleasure in
telling the name, as Miss Steele had in hearing it.
" His name is Ferrars, " said he, in a very audible whisper;
" but pray do not tell it, for it's a great secret. "
" Ferrars ! " repeated Miss Steele ; " Mr. Ferrars is the
happy man, is he? What! your sister-in-law's brother,
Miss Dashwood? a very agreeable young man, to be sure;
I know him very well. "
" How can you say so, Anne? " cried Lucy, who generally
made an amendment to all her sister's assertions. " Though
we have seen him once or twice at my uncle's, it is rather too
much to pretend to know him very well. "
Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise. " And
who was this uncle? where did he live? how came they
acquainted ! " She wished very much to have the subject
continued, though she did not chuse to join in it herself; but
nothing more of it was said, and, for the first time in her life,
102 SEJ^SE JD^D SE^SIBILITT
she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity after
petty information, or in a disposition to communicate it.
The manner in which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward
increased her curiosity; for it struck her, as being rather
ill-natured, and suggested the suspicion of that lady's know-
ing, or fancying herself to know, something to his dis-
advantage. But her curiosity was unavailing, for no farther
notice was taken of Mr. Ferrars's name by Miss Steele when
alluded to or even openly mentioned by Sir John.
CH^PTE^XXII
Marianne, who had never much toleration for anything like
impertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference
of taste from herself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed,
from the state of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss
Steeles, or to encourage their advances; and to the invariable
coldness of her behaviour towards them, which checked every
endeavour at intimacy on their side, Elinor principally
attributed that preference of herself which soon became
evident in the manners of both, but especially of Lucy, who
missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation, or
of striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and
frank communication of her sentiments.
Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just
and amusing; and as a companion for half an hour Elinor
frequently found her agreeable ; but her powers had received
no aid from education, she was ignorant and illiterate, and
her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want of in-
formation in the most common particulars, could not be
concealed from Miss Dashwood, in spite of her constant
endeavour to appear to advantage. Elinor saw, and pitied
her for the neglect of abilities which education might have
rendered so respectable; but she saw, with less tenderness
of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, of rectitude, and
integrity of mind, which her attentions, her assiduities, her
flatteries at the Park betrayed ; and she could have no lasting
SE^SE J & Cp SEO^SIBILITr 103
satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity
with ignorance, whose want of instruction prevented their
meeting in conversation on terms of equality, and whose
conduct towards others made every shew of attention and
deference towards herself perfectly valueless.
" You will think my question an odd one, I dare say, " said
Lucy to her one day as they were walking together from the
Park to the cottage — " but, pray, are you personally ac-
quainted with your sister-in-law's mother, Mrs. Ferrars ? "
Elinor did think the question a very odd one, and her
countenance expressed it, as she answered that she had never
seen Mrs. Ferrars.
" Indeed ! " replied Lucy ; " I wonder at that, for I thought
you must have seen her at Norland sometimes. Then,
perhaps you cannot tell me what sort of a woman she is? "
" No, " returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion
of Edward's mother, and not very desirous of satisfying what
seemed impertinent curiosity — " I know nothing of her. "
" I am sure you think me very strange, for inquiring about
her in such a way, " said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively as
she spoke; " but perhaps there may be reasons — I wish I
might venture; but however I hope you will do me the
justice of believing that I do not mean to be impertinent. "
Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few
minutes in silence. It was broken by Lucy, who renewed
the subject again by saying with some hesitation —
" I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently
curious ; I am sure I would rather do anything in the world
than be thought so by a person whose good opinion is so well
worth having as yours. And I am sure I should not have
the smallest fear of trusting you ; indeed I should be very
glad of your advice how to manage in such an uncomfortable
situation as I am ; but however there is no occasion to trouble
you. I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Ferrars. "
" I am sorry I do not, " said Elinor in great astonishment,
" if it could be of any use to you to know my opinion of her.
But really, I never understood that you were at all connected
with that family, and therefore I am a little surprised, I
confess, at so serious an inquiry into her character. "
" I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder
at it But if I dared tell you all, you would not be so much
104 SE^SE A3^D SEZQIBILITr
surprised. Mrs. Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at prese
— but the time may come — how soon it will come must depei
upon herself — when we may be very intimately connected
She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, wi
only one side-glance at her companion to observe its effe
oh her.
" Good heavens ! " cried Elinor, " what do you mear
Are you acquainted with Mr. Robert Ferrars ? Can you be ?
And she did not feel much delighted with the idea of such
sister-in-law.
" No, " replied Lucy, " not to Mr. Robert Ferrars — I nev <
saw him in my life; but, " fixing her eyes upon Elinor, " 1
his elder brother. "
What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, th*
would have been as painful as it was strong, had not a
immediate disbelief of the assertion attended it. She turne
towards Lucy in silent amazement, unable to divine tl
reason or object of such a declaration; and though her con
plexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt in b
danger of an hysterical fit or a swoon.
" You may well be surprised, " continued Lucy; " for, 1
be sure, you could have had no idea of it before ; for I dai
say he never dropped the smallest hint of it to you or any <
your family ; because it was always meant to be a great secre
and I am sure has been faithfully kept so by me to this hou
Not a soul of all my relations know of it but Anne, and
never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not felt tl
greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and
really thought my behaviour in asking so many questioi
about Mrs. Ferrars must seem so odd that it ought to 1
explained. And I do not think Mr. Ferrars can be displease
when he knows I have trusted you, because I know he h
the highest opinion in the world of all your family, and loo
upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as 1
own sisters. " — She paused.
Elinor for a few moments remained silent. Her astonis
'ment at what she heard was at first too great for words ; b
at length forcing herself to speak, and to speak cautious!
she said with a calmness of manner which tolerably well co
cealed her surprise and solicitude — " May I ask if yo
engagement is of long standing? "
SEO^SE AO^p SEO^SIBILITr 105
" We have been engaged these four years. "
" Four years! "
" Yes. "
Elinor, though greatly shocked) still felt unable to believe
it.
" I did not know, " said she, " that you were even ac-
quainted till the other day. "
" Our acquaintance, however, is of many years'date.
He was under my uncle's care, you know, a considerable
while. "
" Your uncle! "
" Yes; Mr. Pratt. Did you never hear him talk of Mr.
Pratt? "
" I think I have, " replied Elinor, with an exertion of
spirits which increased with her increase of emotion.
" He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Long-
staple, near Plymouth. It was there our acquaintance
begun, for my sister and me was often staying with my uncle,
and it was there our engagement was formed, though not till
a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but he was almost
always with us afterwards. I was very unwilling to enter
into it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and
approbation of his mother; but I was too young and loved
him too well to be so prudent as I ought to have been. —
Though you do not know him so well as me, Miss Dashwood,
you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he is very
capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him. "
" Certainly, " answered Elinor, without knowing what she
said; but after a moment's reflection, she added with revived
security of Edward's honour and love, and her companion's
falsehood — " Engaged to Mr. Edward Ferrars ! — I confess
myself so totally surprised at what you tejl me, that really —
I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistake
of person or name. We cannot mean the same Mr. Ferrars. "
" We can mean no other, " cried Lucy, smiling. " Mr.
Edward Ferrars, the eldest son of Mrs. Ferrars of Park Street,
and brother of your sister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwood, is
the person I mean; you must allow that / am not likely to
be deceived as to the name of the man on who all my
happiness depends. "
" It is strange, " replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity,
106 SE^SE AO^D SEZQIBILlTr
" that I should never have heard him even mention y
name. "
" No; considering our situation, it was not strange. (
first care has been to keep the matter secret. — You ki
nothing of me or my family, and therefore there could be
occasion for ever mentioning my name to you ; and as he'
always particularly afraid of his sister's suspecting anythi
that was reason enough for his not mentioning it. "
She was silent. — Elinor's security sunk; but her s
command did not sink with it.
" Four years you have been engaged, " said she wit!
firm voice.
" Yes; and Heaven knows how much longer we may h
to wait. Poor Edward! it puts him quite out of heai
Then taking a small miniature from her pocket, she adc
" To prevent the possibility of mistake, be so good as to 1
at this face. It does not do him justice, to be sure, but
I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it was d
for. I have had it above these three years. "
She put it into her hands as she spoke, and when Elinor s
the painting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too ha
decision or her wish of detecting falsehood might suffei
linger in her mind, she could have none of its being Edwai
face. She returned it almost instantly, acknowledging
likeness.
" I have never been able, " continued Lucy, " to give 1
my picture in return, which I am very much vexed at, foi
has been always so anxious to get it ! But I am determi
to sit for it the very first opportunity.''
" You are quite in the right, " replied Elinor calr
They then proceeded a few paces in silence. Lucy sp
first.
" lam sure, " said she, " I have no doubt in the worl <
your faithfully keeping this secret, because you must k
of what importance it is to us not to have it reach his mot)
for she would never approve of it, I dare say. I shall t
no fortune, and I fancy she is an exceeding proud woman.
" I certainly did not seek your confidence, " said Elii
" but you do me no more than justice in imagining 1
I may be depended on. Your secret is safe with me;
pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessai
SEC^SE ADiD SE^SIBILITr 107
nunication. You must at least have felt that my being
tainted with it could not add to its safety. "
> she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to
> ver something in her countenance, — perhaps the false-
1 of the greatest part of what she had been saying; but
y's countenance suffered no change.
I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty
i you, " said she, " in telling you all this. I have not
wa you long to be sure, personally at least, but I have
wm you and all your family by description a great while ;
as soon as I saw you, I felt almost as if you was an old
jaintance. Besides, in the present case, I really thought
e explanation was due to you after my making such
ticular inquiries about Edward's mother; and I am so
jrtunate that I have not a creature whose advice I can
Anne is the only person that knows of it, and she has no
pnent at all ; indeed, she does me a great deal more harm
1 good, for I am in constant fear of her betraying me.
does not know how to hold her tongue, as you must per-
e; and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world
her day, when Edward's name was mentioned by Sir
n, lest she should out with it all. You can't think how
ih I go through in my mind from it altogether. I only
ider that I am alive after what I have suffered for
yard's sake these last four years. Everything in such
> ense and uncertainty, and seeing him so seldom— we can
ily meet above twice a-year. I am sure I wonder my
rt is not quite broke. "
[ere she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did not
very compassionate.
Sometimes, " continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes, " I
ik whether it would not be better for us both, to break off
matter entirely. " As she said this, she looked directly
ler companion. " But then, at other times, I have not
rtution enough for it. I cannot bear the thoughts of
dng him so miserable, as I know the very mention of such
ling would do. And on my own account too — so dear as
is to me — I don't think I could be equal to it. What
lid you advise me to do in such a case, Miss Dashwood ?
at would you do yourself? "
Pardon me, " replied Elinor, startled by the question;
108 SE^S£ A^D SENSIBILITY
" but I can give you no advice under such circumstances.
Your own judgment must direct you. "
" To be sure, " continued Lucy, after a few minutes'
silence on both sides, " his mother must provide for him
some time or other; but poor Edward is so cast down about
it! Did not you think him dreadful low-spirited when he
was at Barton? he was so miserable when he left us at Long-
staple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would think him
quite ill. "
" Did he come from your uncle's then when he visited us? "
" Oh yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us. Did
you think he came directly from town ? "
" No, " replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every
fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity. " I re-
member he told us that he had been staying a fortnight with
some friends near Plymouth. " She remembered, too, her
own surprise at the time, at his mentioning nothing farther
of those friends, at his total silence with respect even to their
names.
" Did not you think him sadly out of spirits? " repeated
Lucy.
" We did indeed, particularly so when he first arrived. "
" I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect
what was the matter; but it made him so melancholy, not
being able to stay more than a fortnight with us, and seeing
me so much affected. — Poor fellow! — I am afraid it is just
the same with him now; for he writes in wretched spirits. I
heard from him just before I left Exeter; " taking a letter
from her pocket and carelessly shewing the direction to
Elinor. " You know his hand, I dare say, a charming one
it is; but that is not written so well as usual. He was tired,
I dare say, for he had just filled the sheet to me as full as
possible. "
Elinor saw that it was his hand, and she could doubt nc
longer. The picture, she had allowed herself to believe,
might have been accidentally obtained; it might not have
been Edward's gift; but a correspondence between them bj
letter could subsist only under a positive engagement, coulc
be authorised by nothing else; for a few moments she wai
almost overcome — her heart sunk within her, and she couk
hardly stand ; but exertion was indispensably necessary, anc
SEO^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 109
ggled so resolutely against the oppression of her
that her success was speedy, and for the time
ting to each other, " said Lucy, returning the letter
pocket, " is the only comfort we have in such long
)ns. Yes, / have one other comfort in his picture;
r Edward has not even that If he had but my
he says he should be easy. I gave him a lock of my
in a ring when he was at Longstaple last, and that
e comfort to him, he said, but not equal to a picture,
you might notice the ring when you saw him ? "
d, " said Elinor, with a composure of voice under
as concealed an emotion and distress beyond any-
e had ever felt before. She was mortified, shocked,
ied.
lately for her they had now reached the cottage, and
versation could be continued no farther. After
rith them a few minutes, the Miss Steeles returned
ark, and Elinor was then at liberty to think and be
I.
CH^PTE^XXIII
:r small Elinor's general dependence on Lucy's
might be, it was impossible for her on serious reflec-
;uspect it in the present case, where no temptation
answerable to the folly of inventing a falsehood of
iescription. What Lucy had asserted to be true,
j, Elinor could not, dared not longer doubt; sup-
s it was too on every side by such probabilities and
md contradicted by nothing but her own wishes.
portunity of acquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt
oundation for the rest, at once indisputable and
;; and Edward's visit near Plymouth, his melan-
ite of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own prospects,
rtain behaviour towards herself, the intimate know-
the Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family con-
, which had often surprised her, the picture, the
no SE3^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT
letter, the ring, formed altogether such a body of evidence as
overcame every fear of condemning him unfairly, and estab-
lished as a fact which no partiality could set aside, his ill-
treatment of herself. Her resentment of such behaviour, her''
indignation at having been its dupe, for a short time made
her feel only for herself; but other ideas, other considerations,
soon arose. Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her?
Had he feigned a regard for her which he did not feel ? Was
his engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart? No;
whatever it might once have been, she could not believe it
such at present. His affection was all her own. She could
not be deceived in that. Her mother, sisters, Fanny, all had
been conscious of his regard for her at Norland; it was not
an illusion of her own vanity. He certainly loved her. f
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion! How
much could it not tempt her to forgive ! He had been blame-
able, highly blameable in remaining at Norland after he first
felt her influence over him to be more than it ought to be.
In that, he could not be defended; but if he had injured her,
how much more had he injured himself! If her case were
pitiable, his was hopeless. His imprudence had made her
miserable for a while; but it seemed to have deprived him-
self of all chance of ever being otherwise. She might in time
regain tranquility; but he, what had he to look forward to?
Could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele ? could
he, were his affection for herself out of the question, with his
integrity, his delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied
with a wife like her — illiterate, artful, and selfish ?
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally
blind him to everything but her beauty and good nature;
but the four succeeding years — years which, if rationally
spent, give such improvement to the understanding, must
have opened his eyes to her defects of education: while the
same period of time, spent on her side in inferior society and
more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of that
simplicity which might once have given an interesting
character to her beauty.
. If, in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself, his
difficulties from his mother had seemed great, how much
greater were they now likely to be, when the object of his
engagement was undoubtedly inferior in connections, and
SE3^S_E A*KD SE3i§IBILITT in
> bably inferior in fortune to herself! These difficulties,
leed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy, might not press
ry hard upon his patience; but melancholy was the state
the person by whom the expectation of family opposition
d unkindness could be felt as a relief !
As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession,
e wept for him more than for herself. Supported by the
nviction of having done nothing to merit her present un-
ppiness, and consoled by the belief that Edward had done
thing to forfeit her esteem, she thought she could even now,
ider the first smart of the heavy blow, command herself
ough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother
id sisters. And so well was she able to answer her own
pectations, that when she joined them at dinner only two
> urs after she had first suffered the extinction of all her
jarest hopes, no one would have supposed from the appear-
ice of the sisters, that Elinor was mourning in secret over
> stacles which must divide her for ever from the object of
;r love, and that Marianne was internally dwelling on the
srfections of a man of whose whole heart she felt thoroughly
assessed, and whom she expected to see in every carriage
hich drove near their house.
The necessity of concealing from her mother and Marianne
hat had been entrusted in confidence to herself, though it
bliged her to unceasing exertion, was no aggravation of
llinor's distress. On the contrary, it was a relief to her to be
pared the communication of what would give such affliction
3 them, and to be saved likewise from hearing that con-
emnation of Edward which would probably flow from the
xcess of their partial affection for herself, and which was
lore than she felt equal to support.
From their counsel or their conversation she knew she
ould receive no assistance; their tenderness and sorrow
aust add to her distress, while her self-command would
teither receive encouragement from their example nor from
heir praise. She was stronger alone, and her own good sense
o well supported her, that her firmness was as unshaken, her
ippearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as, with regrets so
wignant and so fresh, it was possible for them to be.
Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with
Lucy on the subject, she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing
ii2 SE^SE ADiD SEDiSIBILITT
it, and this for more reasons than one. She wanted to hear |sbi
many particulars of their engagement repeated again, she
wanted more clearly to understand what Lucy really felt for Ifc
Edward, whether there were any sincerity in her declaration pz
of tender regard for him, and she particularly wanted to con-
vince Lucy, by her readiness to enter on the matter again, fa?
and her calmness in conversing on it, that she was no other-
wise interested in it than as a friend, which she very much
feared her involuntary agitation, in their morning discourse,
must have left at least doubtful. That Lucy was disposed
to be jealous of her, appeared very probable; it was plain
that Edward had always spoken highly in her praise, not
merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venturing to
trust her on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret
so confessedly and evidently important. And even Sir
John's joking intelligence must have had some weight. But
indeed, while Elinor remained so well assured within herself
of being really beloved by Edward, it required no other con- <
sideration of probabilities to make it natural that Lucy
should be jealous ; and that she was so, her very confidence
was a proof. What other reason for the disclosure of the
affair could there be, but that Elinor might be informed by
it of Lucy's superior claims on Edward, and be taught to
avoid him in future? She had little difficulty in under-
standing thus much of her rival's intentions, and while she
was firmly resolved to act by her as every principle of honour
and honesty directed, to combat her own affection for Edward
and to see him as little as possible; she could not deny herself
the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that -her
heart was unwounded. And as she could now have nothing
more painful to hear on the subject than had already been
told, she did not mistrust her own ability of going through a
repetition of particulars with composure.
But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing
so could be commanded, though Lucy was as well disposed
as herself to take advantage of any that occurred; for the
weather was not often fine enough to allow of their joining in
a walk, where they might most easily separate themselves
from the others; and though they met at least every other
evening either at the Park or cottage, and chiefly at the
former, they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of
SE^SE A3^D SENSIBILITY 113
-sation. Such a thought would never enter either Sir
or Lady Middleton's head, and therefore very little
: was ever given for general chat, and none at all
rticular discourse. They met for the sake of eating,
rig, and laughing together, playing at cards or conse-
es, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.
or two meetings of this kind had taken place without
ing Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private,
Sir John called at the cottage one morning, to beg in
ime of charity, that they would all dine with Lady
3ton that day, as he was obliged to attend the club at
r, and she would otherwise be quite alone, except her
t and the two Miss Steeles. Elinor, who foresaw a
opening for the point she had in view, in such a party
s was likely to be, more at liberty among themselves
the tranquil and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton
arhen her husband united them together in one noisy
se, immediately accepted the invitation; Margaret,
tier mother's permission, was equally compliant, and
nne, though always unwilling to join, any of their
s, was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to
ler seclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go
se.
: young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily
ved from the frightful solitude which had threatened
The insipidity of the meeting was exactly such as
: had expected; it produced not one novelty of thought
> ression, and nothing could be less interesting than the
of their discourse both in the dining parlour and draw-
om : to the latter, the children accompanied them, and
they remained there, she was too well convinced of the
sibility of engaging Lucy's attention to attempt it.
quitted it only with the removal of the tea-things,
ard-table was then placed, and Elinor began to wonder
•self for having ever entertained a hope of finding time
nversatdon at the Park. They all rose up in preparation
round game.
am glad, " said Lady Middleton to Lucy, " you are not
to finish poor little Annamaria's basket this evening;
am sure it must hurt your eyes to work fillagree by
elight. And we will make the dear little love some
1
ii 4 SE3^§E AO^D SE^SIBILITT
amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and then I hope
she will not much, mind it. "
This hint was enough; Lucy recollected herself instantly
and replied, " Indeed, you are very much mistaken, Lady
Middleton; I am only waiting to know whether you can
make your party without me, or I should have been at my
fillagree already. I would not disappoint the little angel
for all the world; and if you want me at the card-table now
I am resolved to finish the basket after supper. "
" You are very good; I hope it won't hurt your eyes-
will you ring the bell for some working candles? My pool
little girl would be sadly disappointed, I know, if the baskei
was not finished to-morrow, for though I told her it certainlj
would not, I am sure she depends upon having it done. "
Lucy directly drew her work-table near her, and reseatec
herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed tx
infer that she could taste no greater delight than in making
a fillagree basket for a spoilt child.
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of casino to the others
No one made any objection but Marianne, who, with hei
usual inattention to the forms of general civility, exclaimed
" Your ladyship will have the goodness to excuse me — yoi
know I detest cards. I shall go to the pianoforte; I hav <
not touched it since it was tuned. " And without farthei
ceremony, she turned away and walked to the instru
ment.
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that sk
had never made so rude a speech.
" Marianne can never keep long from that instrument
you know, ma'am, " said Elinor, endeavouring to smootl
away the offence; " and I do not much wonder at it, for i
is the very best-toned pianoforte I ever heard. "
The remaining five were now to draw their cards.
" Perhaps, " continued Elinor, " if I should happen to cu
out, I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele, in rolling he
papers for her; and there is so much still to be done to tto
basket, that it must be impossible, I think, for her labou
singly, to finish it this evening. I should like the work ex
ceedingly, if she would allow me a share in it. "
" Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help, 1
cried Lucy, " for I find there is more to be done to it than
SE^SE A3^D SEZQIBILITT 1 i 5
thought there was; and it would be a shocking thing to
disappoint dear Annamaria after all. "
" Oh ! that would be terrible indeed/'said Miss Steele.
" Dear little soul, how I do love her ! "
" You are very kind/'said Lady Middleton to Elinor;
" and as you really like the work, perhaps you will be as well
pleased not to cut in till another rubber, or will you take
your chance now? "
Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and
thus, by a little of that address which Marianne could never
condescend to practise, gained her own end and pleased Lady
Middleton at the same time. Lucy made room for her with
ready attention, and the two fair rivals were thus seated side
by side at the same table, and with the utmost harmony
engaged in forwarding the same work. The pianoforte, at
which Marianne, wrapt up in her own music and her own
thoughts, had by this time forgotten that anybody was in
the room besides herself, was luckily so near them that Miss
pashwood now judged she might safely, under the shelter of
its noise, introduce the interesting subject, without any risk
of being heard at the card-table.
CH^tPTE^ XXIV
In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began —
" I should be undeserving of the confidence you have
honoured me with, if I felt no desire for its continuance, or
no farther curiosity on its subject. I will not apologise
therefore for bringing it forward again. "
" Thank you, " cried Lucy warmly, " for breaking the ice;
you have set my heart at ease by it; for I was somehow or
other afraid I had offended you by what I told you that
Monday. "
" Offended me! How could you suppose so? Believe
me, " and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity, " nothing
could be farther from my intention than to give you such an
idea. Could you have a motive for the trust that was not
honourable and flattering to me ? "
n6 SENSE AD^p SEOiSIBILITT
" And yet I do assure you, " replied Lucy, her little sharp
eyes full of meaning, " there seemed to me to be a coldness
and displeasure in your manner that made me quite uncom-
fortable. I felt sure that you was angry with me; and have
been quarrelling with myself ever since, for having took such
a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs. But I am very
glad to find it was only my own fancy, and that you do not
really blame me. If you knew what a consolation it was to
me to relieve my heart by speaking to you of what I am
always thinking of every moment of my life, your compassion
would make you overlook everything else, I am sure. "
" Indeed I can easily believe that it was a very great relief
to you to acknowledge your situation to me, and be assured
that you shall never have reason to repent it. Your case is
a very unfortunate one; you seem to me to be surrounded
with difficulties, and you will have need of all your mutual
affection to support you under them. Mr. Ferrars, I believe,
is entirely dependent on his mother. "
" He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it would
be madness to marry upon that, though for my own part I
could give up every prospect of more without a sigh. I have
been always used to a very small income, and could struggle
with any poverty for him ; but I love him too well to be the
selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all that his mother
might give him if he married to please her. We must wait, it
may be for many years. With almost every other man in
the world, it would be an alarming prospect; but Edward's
affection and constancy nothing can deprive me of, I know. "
" That conviction must be everything to you ; and he is
undoubtedly supported by the same trust in yours. If the
strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed, as between
many people and under many circumstances it naturally
would during a four years'engagement, your situation would
have been pitiable indeed. "
Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful in guarding
her countenance from every expression that could give her
words a suspicious tendency.
" Edward's love for me, " said Lucy, " has been pretty well
put to the test, by our long, very long absence since we were
first engaged, and it has stood the trial so well that I should
be unpardonable to doubt it now. I can safely say that he
SE^SE A3^D SED^SIBILITT 117
has never gave me one moment's alarm on that account
from the first. "
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this
assertion.
Lucy went on. " I am rather of a jealous temper, too, by
nature, and from our different situations in life, from his
being so much more in the world than me, and our continual
separation, I was enough inclined for suspicion, to have
found out the truth in an instant, if there had been the
slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met, or
any lowness of spirits that I could not account for, or if he
had talked more of one lady than another, or seemed in any
respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to be. I do
not mean to say that I am particularly observant or quick-
sighted in general, but in such a case I am sure I could not
be deceived. "
" All this, " thought Elinor, " is very pretty; but it can
impose upon neither of us. "
" But what, " said she, after a short silence, " are your
views ? or have you none but that of waiting for Mrs. Ferrars'
death, which is a melancholy and shocking extremity? Is
her son determined to submit to this, and to all the tedious-
ness of the many years of suspense in which it may involve
you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure for a while
by owning the truth? "
" If we could be certain that it would be only for a while !
But Mrs. Ferrars is a very headstrong, proud woman, and in
her first fit of anger upon hearing it, would very likely secure
everything to Robert; and the idea of that, for Edward's
sake, frightens away all my inclination for hasty measures. "
" And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your
disinterestedness beyond reason. "
Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent.
" Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars? " asked Elinor.
" Not at all — I never saw him ; but I fancy he is very
1 unlike his brother — silly and a great coxcomb. "
" A great coxcomb ! " repeated Miss Steele, whose ear had
\ caught those words by a sudden pause in Marianne's music —
" Oh! they are talking of their favourite beaux, I dare say. "
" No, sister, " cried Lucy, " you are mistaken there, our
favourite beaux are not great coxcombs. "
I
120 SEO^SE ADiD SE^SIBILITT
!E
" How unlucky that is ! I had quite depended upon
meeting you there. Anne and me are to go the latter end of f
January to some relations who have been wanting us to visit
them these several years! But I only go for the sake of
seeing Edward. He will be there in February; otherwise
London would have no charms for me, I have not spirits *|
for it. "
Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion
of the first rubber, and the confidential discourse of the two
ladies was therefore at an end, to which both of them sub-
mitted without any reluctance, for nothing had been said on
either side to make them dislike each other less than they
had done before ; and Elinor sat down to the card-table with
the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only without j^
affection for the person who was to be his wife, but that he —
had not even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, U=
which sincere affection on her side would have given, for self- (3
interest alone could induce a woman to keep a man to an irr
engagement of which she seemed so thoroughly aware that \±z
he was weary. i^s:
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor; z-s
and when entered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an oppor-
tunity of introducing it, and was particularly careful to
inform her confidante of her happiness whenever she received
a letter from Edward, it was treated by the former with calm- --
ness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civility would
allow; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence
which Lucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to
herself.
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened
far beyond what the first invitation implied. Their favour
increased, they could not be spared ; Sir John would not hear
of their going; and in spite of their numerous and long-
arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of the absolute
necessity of their returning to fulfil them immediately, which
was in full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed " ^
on to stay nearly two months at the Park, and to assist in the
due celebration of that festival which requires a more than
ordinary share of private balls and large dinners to proclaim r-
its importance.
SEWSE A3^D SEO^SIBILITr 121
CHJtPTE^XXV
Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large
portion of the year at the houses of her children and friends,
she was not without a settled habitation of her own. Since
the death of her husband, who had traded with success in a
less elegant part of the town, she had resided every winter
in a house in one of the streets near Portman Square. To-
wards this home, she began on the approach of January to
turn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and
very unexpectedly by them, asked the elder Miss Dashwoods
to accompany her. Elinor, without observing the varying
complexion of her sister, and the animated look which spoke
no indifference to the plan, immediately gave a grateful but
absolute denial for both, in which she believed herself to be
speaking their united inclinations. The reason alleged,
was their determined resolution of not leaving their mother
at that time of year. Mrs. Jennings received the refusal
with some surprise, and repeated her invitation immediately.
" O Lord ! I am sure your mother can spare you very well,
and I do beg you will favour me with your company, for Fve
quite set my heart upon it. Don't fancy that you will be
any inconvenience to me, for I shan't put myself at all out
of my way for you. It will only be sending Betty by the
coach, and I hope I can afford that. We three shall be able
to go very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if
you do not like to go wherever I do, well and good, you may
always go with one of my daughters. I am sure your mother
will not object to it; for I have had such good luck in getting
my own children off my hands, that she will think me a very
fit person to have the charge of you: and if I don't get one
of you at least well married before I have done with you, it
shall not be my fault. I shall speak a good word for you to
all the young men, you may depend upon it. "
" I have a notion, " said Sir John, " that Miss Marianne
would not object to such a scheme, if her elder sister would
come into it. It is very hard indeed that she should not have
a little pleasure, because Miss Dashwood does not wish it.
122 SE3^SE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
So I would advise you two to set off for town when you
tired of Barton, without saying a word to Miss Dash¥
about it. "
" Nay, " cried Mrs. Jennings, " I am sure I shall be n
strous glad of Miss Marianne's company, whether Miss D
wood will go or not, only the more the merrier say I,
I thought it would be more comfortable for them t(
together; because if they got tired of me, they might
to one another, and laugh at my odd ways behind my b
But one or the other, if not both of them, I must have. 1
bless me ! how do you think I can live poking by myse
who have been always used till this winter to have Charl
with me. Come, Miss Marianne, let us strike hands i
the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change her n
by-and-bye, why, so much the better. "
" I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you, " said \
anne, with warmth; " your invitation has insured my g
tude for ever, and it would give me such happiness—
almost the greatest happiness I am capable of, to be abl
accept it. But my mother, my dearest, kindest mothc
I feel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she 1
to be made less happy, less comfortable by our absen
Oh! no, nothing should tempt me to leave her. It sh
not, must not be a struggle. "
Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dash\
could spare them perfectly well; and Elinor, who now ur
stood her sister, and saw to what indifference to all
everything else she was carried by her eagerness to be
Willoughby again, made no farther direct opposition tc
plan, and merely referred it to her mother's decision,
whom however she scarcely expected to receive any sup
in her endeavour to prevent a visit which she could
approve of for Marianne, and which on her own accoum
had particular reasons to avoid. Whatever Marianne
desirous of her mother would be eager to promote — she c
not expect to influence the latter to cautiousness of con
in an affair respecting which she had never been abl
inspire her with distrust: and she dared not explain
motive of her own disinclination for going to London.'
Marianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly acquainted
Mrs. Jennings's manners, and invariably disgusted by t
SE3^SE J3^D SE3^SIBILITr 123
should overlook every inconvenience of that kind, should
disregard whatever must be most wounding to her irritable
feelings, in her pursuit of one object, was such a proof, so
strong, so full, of the importance of that object to her, as
Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared to
witness.
On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood, per-
suaded that such an excursion would be productive of much
amusement to both her daughters, and perceiving through
all her affectionate attention to herself, how much the heart
of Marianne was in it, would not hear of their declining the
offer upon her account; insisted on their both accepting it
directly, and then began to foresee, with her usual cheerful-
ness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all
from this separation.
" lam delighted with the plan, " she cried, " it is exactly
what I could wish. Margaret and I shall be as much bene-
fited by it as yourselves. When you and the Middletons
are gone, we shall go on so quietly and happily together with
our books and our music! You will find Margaret so im-
proved when you come back again ! And I have a little plan
of alteration for your bedrooms too, which may now be per-
formed without inconvenience to any one. It is very right
that you should go to town; I would have every young
woman of your condition in life acquainted with the manners
and amusements of London. You will be under the care of
a motherly, good sort of woman, of whose kindness to you I
can have no doubt. And in all probability you will see your
brother, and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his
wife, when I consider whose son he is, I cannot bear to have
you so wholly estranged from each other. "
" Though, with your usual anxiety for our happiness, "
said Elinor, " you have been obviating every impediment to
the present scheme which occurred to you, there is still one
objection which, in my opinion, cannot be so easily removed. "
Marianne's countenance sunk.
" And what, " said Mrs. Dashwood, " is my dear prudent
Elinor going to suggest? What formidable obstacle is she
now to bring forward ? Do not let me hear a word about the
expense of it. "
" My objection is this: though I think very well of Mrs.
i2 4 SE^(SE J3^D SEViSIBILITT
Jennings's heart, she is not a woman whose society can afford
us pleasure, or whose protection will give us consequence. "
" That is very true, " replied her mother; " but of her
society, separately from that of other people, you will
scarcely have anything at all, and you will almost always
appear in public with Lady Middleton. "
" If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs.
Jennings, " said Marianne, " at least it need not prevent my
accepting her invitation. I have no such scruples, and I am
sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of that kind
with very little effort. ,,
Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference
towards the manners of a person to whom she had often had
difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable
politeness, and resolved within herself, that if her sister per-
sisted in going, she would go likewise, as she did not think
it proper that Marianne should be left to the sole guidance of
her own judgment, or that Mrs. Jennings should be aban-
doned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her
domestic hours. To this determination she was the more
easily reconciled, by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by
Lucy's account, was not to be in town before February, and
that their visit, without any unreasonable abridgment, might
be previously finished.
" I will have you both go, " said Mrs. Dashwood; " these
objections are nonsensical. You will have much pleasure in
being in London, and especially in being together; and if
Elinor would ever condescend to anticipate enjoyment, she
would foresee it there from a variety of sources ; she would
perhaps expect some from improving her acquaintance with
her sister-in-law's family. "
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting
to weaken her mother's dependence on the attachment of
Edward and herself, that the shock might be the less when
the whole truth were revealed, and now on this attack, though
almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to begin her
design by saying, as calmly as she could, " I like Edward
Ferrars very much, and shall always be glad to see him; but
as to the rest of the family, it is a matter of perfect indiffer-
ence to me whether I am ever known to them or not. "
Mrs. Dashwood smiled and said nothing. Marianne lifted
SEO^SE A3^D SEO^SIBILITT 125
up her eyes in astonishment, and Elinor conjectured that she
might as well have held her tongue.
After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that
the invitation should be fully accepted. Mrs. Jennings
received the information with a great deal of joy, and many
assurances of kindness and care; nor was it a matter of
pleasure merely to her. Sir John was delighted; for to a
man whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of being alone,
the acquisition of two to the number of inhabitants in London
was something. Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of
being delighted, which was putting herself rather out of her
way; and as for the Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had
never been so happy in their lives as this intelligence made
them.
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted
her wishes with less reluctance than she had expected to feel.
With regard to herself, it was now a matter of unconcern
whether she went to town or not; and when she saw her
mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and her sister
exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner, restored to all
her usual animation, and elevated to more than her usual
gaiety, she could not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would
hardly allow herself to distrust the consequence.
Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness, so
great was the perturbation of her spirits and her impatience
to be gone. Her unwillingness to quit her mother was her
only restorative to calmness ; and at the moment of parting
her grief on that score was excessive. Her mother's affliction
was hardly less, and Elinor was the only one of the three
who seemed to consider the separation as anything short
of eternal.
Their departure took place in the first week in January.
The Middletons were to follow in about a week. The Miss
Steeles kept their station at the Park, and were to quit it
only with the rest of the family.
i26 SE3^SE ADtp SE^SIBILITr
CH^PTE^XXFI
Elinor could, not find herself in the carriage with Mrs.
Jennings, and beginning a journey to London under her pro-
tection, and as her guest, without wondering at her own
situation, so short had their acquaintance with that lady
been, so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition,
and so many had been her objections against such a measure
only a few days before ! But these objections had all, with
that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother
equally shared, been overcome or overlooked; and Elinor,
in spite of every occasional doubt of Willoughby's constancy,
could not witness the rapture of delightful expectation which
filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes of Marianne,
without feeling how blank was her own prospect, how cheer-
less her own state of mind in the comparison, and how gladly
she would engage in the solicitude of Marianne's situation to
have the same animating object in view, the same possibility
of hope. A short, a very short time, however, must now
decide what Willoughby's intentions were : in all probability
he was already in town. Marianne's eagerness to be gone
declared her dependence on finding him there; and Elinor
was resolved not only upon gaining every new light as to his
character which her own observation or the intelligence of
others could give her, but likewise upon watching his be-
haviour to her sister with such zealous attention, as to
ascertain what he was, and what he meant, before many
meetings had taken place. Should the result of her observa-
tions be unfavourable, she was determined at all events to
open the eyes of her sister; should it be otherwise, her exer-
tions would be of a different nature — she must then learn
to avoid every selfish comparison, and banish every regret
which might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of
Marianne.
They were three days on their journey, and Marianne's
behaviour as they travelled was a happy specimen of what
her future complaisance and companionableness to Mrs.
Jennings might be expected to be. She sat in silence almost
SES^SE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT 127
sdl the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcely ever
voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque
beauty within their view drew from her an exclamation of
delight exclusively addressed to her sister. To atone for
this conduct, therefore, Elinor took immediate possession of
the post of civility which she had assigned herself, behaved
¥ath the greatest attention to Mrs. Jennings, talked with her,
laughed with her, and listened to her whenever she could;
and Mrs. Jennings on her side treated them both with all
possible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their
ease and enjoyment, and only disturbed that she could not
make them choose their own dinners at the inn, nor extort
a confession of their preferring salmon to cod, or boiled fowls
to veal cutlets. They reached town by three o'clock the
third day, glad to be released, after such a journey, from the
confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxury
of a good fire.
The house was handsome and handsomely fitted up, and
the young ladies were immediately put in possession of a very
comfortable apartment. It had formerly been Charlotte's,
and over the mantelpiece still hung a landscape in coloured
silks of her performance, in proof of her having spent seven
years at a great school in town to some effect.
As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from
their arrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in
writing to her mother, and sat down for that purpose. In a
few moments Marianne did the same. " / am writing home,
Marianne, " said Elinor; " had not you better defer your
letter for a day or two ? "
" I am not going to write to my mother, " replied Marianne
hastily, and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry. Elinor
said no more; it immediately struck her that she must then
be writing to Willoughby, and the conclusion which as
instantly followed was, that however mysteriously they
might wish to conduct the affair, they must be engaged.
This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave her
pleasure, and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.
Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes; in length it
could be no more than a note : it was then folded up, sealed
and directed with eager rapidity. Elinor thought she could
distinguish a large W in the direction, and no sooner was it
128 SE^SE JDiD SEO^SIBILITr
complete than Marianne, ringing the bell, requested the
footman who answered it, to get that letter conveyed for hei
to the two-penny post. This decided the matter at once.
Her spirits still continued very high, but there was a fluttei
in them which prevented their giving much pleasure to hei
sister, and this agitation increased as the evening drew on
She could scarcely eat any dinner, and when they afterward:
returned to the drawing-room, seemed anxiously listening
to the sound of every carriage.
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings, b)
being much engaged in her own room, could see little of wha
was passing. The tea things were brought in, and ahead]
had Marianne been disappointed more than once by a rap a
a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenly hear*
which could not be mistaken for one at any other house
Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach
and Marianne, starting up, moved towards the door. Every
thing was silent; this could not be borne many seconds, sh
opened the door, advanced a few steps towards the stain
and after listening half a minute, returned into the room in al
the agitation which a conviction of having heard him wouli
naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her feelings at tha
instant she could not help exclaiming, " O Elinor, it is Wil
loughby, indeed it is! " and seemed almost ready to thro\
herself into his arms, when Colonel Brandon appeared.
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, am
she immediately left the room. Elinor was disappointed too
but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon ensure*
his welcome with her, and she felt particularly hurt that i
man so partial to her sister should perceive that she ex
perienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeinj
him. She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him
that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room
with such astonishment and concern, as hardly left him th
recollection of what civility demanded towards herself.
" Is your sister ill? " said he.
Elinor answered in some distress that she was, and the:
talked of head-aches, low-spirits, and over-fatigues; an <
of everything to which she could decently attribute he
sister's behaviour.
He heard her with the most earnest attention, but seemin
SE3t§E J3tp SENSIBILITY 129
to recollect himself, said no more on the subject, and began
directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them in London,
making the usual inquiries about their journey and the friends
they had left behind.
In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either
side, they continued to talk, both of them out of spirits, and
the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere. Elinor wished
very much to ask whether Willoughby were then in town,
but she was afraid of giving him pain by any inquiry after
his rival; and at length by way of saying something, she
asked if he had been in London ever since she had seen him
last. " Yes, " he replied with some embarrassment, " almost
ever since; I have been once or twice at Delaford for a few
days, but it has never been in my power to return to Barton. "
This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately
brought back to her remembrance all the circumstances of
his quitting that place, with the uneasiness and suspicions
they had caused to Mrs. Jennings, and she was fearful that
her question had implied much more curiosity on the subject
than she had ever felt.
Mrs. Jennings soon came in. " O Colonel ! " said she, with
her usual noisy cheerfulness, " lam monstrous glad to see
you — sorry I could not come before — beg your pardon, but
I have been forced to look about me a little, and settle my
matters; for it is a long while since I have been at home, and
you know one has always a world of little odd things to do
after one has been away for any time; and then I have had
Cartwright to settle with. Lord, I have been as busy as a
bee ever since dinner! But pray, Colonel, how came you to
conjure out that I should be in town to-day ? "
" I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's, where
I have been dining. "
" Oh! you did; well, and how do they all do at their house ?
How does Charlotte do ? I warrant you she is a fine size by
this time. "
" Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissioned
to tell you that you will certainly see her to-morrow. "
" Aye, to be sure, I thought as much. Well, Colonel, I
a have brought two young ladies with me, you see — that is,
you see but one of them now, but there is another somewhere.
Your friend Miss Marianne, too — which you will not be sorry
1
130 SED^SE ADip SE^SIBILITT
to hear. I do not know what you and Mr. Willoughby will do
between you about her. Aye, it is a fine thing to be young
and handsome. Well ! I was young once, but I never was
very handsome — worse luck for me. However, I got a very
good husband, and I don't know what the greatest beauty
can do more. Ah ! poor man ! he has been dead these eight
years and better. But, Colonel, where have you been to
since we parted ? And how does your business go on ? Come,
come, let's have no secrets among friends. "
He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her in-
quiries, but without satisfying her in any. Elinor now began
to make the tea, and Marianne was obliged to appear again.
After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more thought-
ful and silent than he had been before, and Mrs. Jennings
could not prevail on him to stay long. No other visitor
appeared that evening, and the ladies were unanimous in
agreeing to go early to bed.
Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and
happy looks. The disappointment of the evening before
seemed forgotten in the expectation of what was to happen
that day. They had not long finished their breakfast before
Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, and in a few
minutes she came laughing into the room; so delighted to
see them all, that it was hard to say whether she received
most pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss Dash-
woods again. So surprised at their coming to town, though
it was what she had rather expected all along; so angry at
their accepting her mother's invitation after having declined
her own, though at the same time she would never have
forgiven them if they had not come !
" Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you, " said she ; " what
do you think he said when he heard of your coming with
mama? I forget what it was now, but it was something so
droll! "
After an hour or two spent in what her mother called
comfortable chat, or in other words, in every variety of
inquiry concerning all their acquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's
side, and in laughter without cause on Mrs. Palmer's, it was
proposed by the latter that they should all accompany her
to some shops where she had business that morning, to which
Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having likewise
SE2QE A3(p SENSIBILITY 131
some purchases to make themselves; and Marianne, though
declining it at first, was induced to go likewise.
Wherever they went, she was evidently always on the
watch. In Bond Street especially, where much of their
business lay, her eyes were in constant inquiry; and in
whatever shop the party engaged, her mind was equally
abstracted from everything actually before them, from all
that interested and occupied the others. Restless and dis-
satisfied everywhere, her sister could never obtain her opinion
of any article of purchase, however it might equally concern
them both; she received no pleasure from anything; was
only impatient to be at home again, and could with difficulty
govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs. Palmer, whose
eye was caught by everything pretty, expensive, or new;
who was wild to buy all, could determine on none, and
dawdled away her time in rapture and indecision.
It was late in the morning before they returned [home];
and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne
flew eagerly upstairs, and when Elinor followed, she found
her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance,
which declared that no Willoughby had been there.
" Has no letter been left here for me since we went out? "
said she to the footman who then entered with the parcels.
She was answered in the negative. " Are you quite sure ol
it? " she replied. " Are you certain that no servant, no
porter has left any letter or note ? "
The man replied that none had.
" How very odd, " said she in a low and disappointed voice,
as she turned away to the window.
" How odd indeed ! " repeated Elinor within herself, re-
garding her sister with uneasiness. " If she had not known
him to be in town, she would not have written to him, as she
did; she would have written to Combe Magna; and if he is
in town, how odd that he should neither come nor write !
my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting an
engagement between a daughter so young, a man so little
known, to be carried on in so doubtful, so mysterious a
manner! / long to inquire; but how will my interference
be borne! "
She determined, after some consideration, that if appear-
ances continued many days longer as unpleasant as they now
1
132 SE^SE A3^D SED^SIBILITT
were she would represent in the strongest manner to her
mother the necessity of some serious inquiry into the affair.
Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings's
intimate acquaintance, whom she had met and invited in
the morning, dined with them. The former left them soon
after tea to fulfil her evening engagements; and Elinor was
obliged to assist in making a whist-table for the others.
Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as she would
never learn the game; but though her time was therefore at
her own disposal, the evening was by no means more pro-
ductive of pleasure to her than to Elinor, for it was spent in
all the anxiety of expectation and the pain of disappoint-
ment. She sometimes endeavoured for a few minutes to
read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and she returned
to the more interesting employment of walking backwards
and forwards across the room, pausing for a moment when-
ever she came to the window, in hopes of distinguishing the
long-expected rap.
CHtAPTE^XXVU
" If this open weather holds much longer, " said Mrs. Jen-
nings, when they met at breakfast the following morning,
" Sir John will not like leaving Barton next week ;'tis a sad
thing for sportsmen to lose a day's pleasure. Poor souls!
I always pity them when they do — they seem to take it so
much to heart. "
" That is true, " cried Marianne in a cheerful voice, and
walking to the window as she spoke, to examine the day.
" I had not thought of that. This weather will keep many
sportsmen in the country. "
It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits were
restored by it. " It is charming weather for them indeed, "
she continued, as she sat down to the breakfast table with a
happy countenance. " How much they must enjoy it!
But " (with a little return of anxiety), " it cannot be expected
to last long. At this time of year, and after such a series of
SEV(SE A3 < j) SEDiSIBILITT 133
rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it. Frosts
will soon set in, and in all probability with severity. In
another day or two, perhaps; this extreme mildness can
hardly last longer — nay, perhaps it may freeze to-night ! "
" At any rate, " said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs.
Jennings from seeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she
did, " I dare say we shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton
in town by the end of next week. "
" Aye, my dear, I'll warrant you we do. Mary always
has her own way. "
" And now, " silently conjectured Elinor, " she will write
to Combe by this day's post. "
But if she did, the letter was written and sent away with
a privacy that eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the
fact. Whatever the truth of it might be, and as far as
Elinor was from feeling thorough contentment about it, yet
while she saw Marianne in spirits, she could not be very un-
comfortable herself. And Marianne was in spirits, happy
in the mildness of the weather, and still happier in her ex-
pectation of a frost.
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the
houses of Mrs. Jennings's acquaintance to inform them of her
being in town; and Marianne was all the time busy in observ-
ing the direction of the wind, watching the variations of the
sky, and imagining an alteration in the air.
" Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning,
Elinor? There seems to me a very decided difference. I
can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff. It was
not so yesterday, I think. The clouds seem parting too, the
sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clear after-
noon. "
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne
persevered, and saw every night in the brightness of the fire,
and every morning in the appearance of the atmosphere, the
certain symptoms of approaching frost.
The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dis-
satisfied with Mrs. Jennings's style of living and set of
acquaintance than with her behaviour to themselves, which
was invariably kind. Everything in her household arrange-
ments was conducted on the most liberal plan, and excepting
a few old city friends, whom, to Lady Middleton's regret, she
i 3 4 SE^SE J^p SENSIBILITY
had never dropped, she visited no one to whom an intro
duction could at all discompose the feelings of her younf
companions. Pleased to find herself more comfortabh
situated in that particular than she had expected, Elinor wa
very willing to compound for the want of much real enjoy
ment from any of their evening parties, which, whether a
home or abroad, formed only for cards, could have little t
amuse her.
Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to th
house, was with them almost every day; he came to look a
Marianne and talk to Elinor, who often derived more satis
faction from conversing with him than from any other dail
occurrence, but who saw at the same time with much concer
his continued regard for her sister. She feared it was
strengthening regard. It grieved her to see the earnestnei
with which he often watched Marianne, and his spirits wei
certainly worse than when at Barton.
About a week after their arrival, it became certain ths
Willoughby was also arrived. His card was on the tab!
when they came in from the morning's drive.
" Good God! " cried Marianne, " he has been here whi
we were out. " Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of his being i
London, now ventured to say, " Depend upon it, he will ca
again to-morrow. " But Marianne seemed hardly to he*
her, and on Mrs. Jennings's entrance, escaped with tl
precious card.
This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restore
to those of her sister all, and more than all, their form*
agitation. From this moment her mind was never quie
the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day mac
her unfit for anything. She insisted on being left behind tl
next morning, when the others went out.
Elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passing i
Berkley Street during their absence; but a moment's glan(
at her sister when they returned was enough to inform he
that Willoughby had paid no second visit there. A note vn
just then brought in, and laid on the table.
" For me ! " cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward.
" No, ma'am, for my mistress. "
But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up.
" It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking ! "
SE$(SE JD^D SE3^SIBILITT 135
" You are expecting a letter then? " said Elinor, unable
to be longer silent.
" Yes! a little— not much. "
After a short pause, " You have no confidence in me,
I Marianne. "
I " Nay, Elinor, this reproach from you I — you who have
confidence in no one ! "
" Me! " returned Elinor in some confusion; " indeed,
Marianne, I have nothing to tell. "
" Nor I, " answered Marianne with energy ; " our situations
then are alike. We have neither of us anything to tell; you,
because you communicate, and I, because I conceal nothing. "
Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself,
which she was not at liberty to do away, knew not how,
under such circumstances, to press for greater openness in
Marianne.
Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her,
she read it aloud. It was from Lady Middleton, announcing
their arrival in Conduit Street the night before, and request-
ing the company of her mother and cousins the following
evening. Business on Sir John's part, and a violent cold on
her own, prevented their calling in Berkeley Street. The
invitation was accepted : but when the hour of appointment
drew near, necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs.
Jennings that they should both attend her on such a visit,
Elinor had some difficulty in persuading her sister to go, for
still she had seen nothing of Willoughby, and therefore was
not more indisposed for amusement abroad, than unwilling
to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.
Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition
is not materially altered by a change of abode; for although
scarcely settled in town, Sir John had contrived to collect
around him nearly twenty young people, and to amuse them
with a ball. This was an affair, however, of which Lady
Middleton did not approve. In the country, an unpre-
meditated dance was very allowable; but in London, where
the reputation of elegance was more important and less
easily obtained, it was risking too much, for the gratification
of a few girls, to have it known that Lady Middleton had given
a small dance of eight or nine couple, with two violins, and a
! niere sideboard collation.
\
136 SE & (SE AD^D SE^SIBILITT
Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the forme
whom they had not seen before since their arrival in towi
as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any attention 1
his mother-in-law, and therefore never came near her, the
received no mark of recognition on their entrance. B
looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who the
were, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings from the oth <
side of the room. Marianne gave one glance round the apar
ment as she entered ; it was enough, he was not there— an
she sat down, equally ill-disposed to receive or communicai
pleasure. After they had been assembled about an hou
Mr. Palmer sauntered towards the Miss Dashwoods, to e
press his surprise on seeing them in town, though Colon
Brandon had been first informed of their arrival at his hous
and he had himself said something very droll on hearing thi
they were to come.
" I thought you were both in Devonshire, " gaid he.
" Did you? " replied Elinor.
" When do you go back again ? "
" I do not know. " And thus ended their discourse.
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her li
as she was that evening, and never so much fatigued by tl
exercise. She complained of it as they returned to Berkele
Street.
" Aye, aye, " said Mrs. Jennings, " we know the reason
all that very well; if a certain person who shall be namele
had been there, you would not have been a bit tired ; and
say the truth, it was not very pretty of him not to give y(
the meeting when he was invited. "
" Invited! " cried Marianne.
" So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems Sir Jol
met him somewhere in the street this morning. "
Marianne said no more, but looked exceedingly hurt. I*
patient in this situation to be doing something that mig
lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolved to write the ne
morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fea
for the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries whi
had been so long delayed; and she was still more eagei
bent on this measure, by perceiving after breakfast on tl
morrow, that Marianne was again writing to Willoughb
for she could not suppose it to be to any other person.
SEO^SE J3^D SEDiSIBILITT 137
About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out by
herself on business, and Elinor began her letter directly;
while Marianne, too restless for employment, too anxious for
conversation, walked from one window to the other, or sat
down by the fire in melancholy meditation. Elinor was very
earnest in her application to her mother, relating all that had
passed, her suspicions of Willoughby's inconstancy, urging
her by every plea of duty and affection to demand from
Marianne an account of her real situation with respect to
him.
Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a
visitor, and Colonel Brandon was announced. Marianne,
who had seen him from the window, and who hated company
of any kind, left the room before he entered it. He looked
more than usually grave, and though expressing satisfaction
at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat in
particular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word.
Elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make
in which her sister was concerned, impatiently expected its
opening. It was not the first time of her feeling the same
kind of conviction; for more than once before, beginning
with the observation of " Your sister looks unwell to-day/'
or " Your sister seems out of spirits, " he had appeared on
the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring, something
particular about her. After a pause of several minutes, their
silence was broken by his asking her, in a voice of some
agitation, when he was to congratulate her on the acquisition
of a brother? Elinor was not prepared for such a question,
and having no answer ready, was obliged to adopt the simple
and common expedient of asking what he meant? He tried
to smile as he replied, " Your sister's engagement to Mr.
Willoughby is very generally known. "
" It cannot be generally known, " returned Elinor, " for
her own family do not know it. "
He looked surprised, and said, " I beg your pardon, I am
afraid my inquiry has been impertinent; but I had not sup-
posed any secrecy intended, as they openly correspond, and
their marriage is universally talked of. "
" How can that be? By whom can you have heard it
mentioned. "
" By many — by some of whom you know nothing, by
138 SEO^SE J3^D SENSIBILITY
others with whom you are most intimate — Mrs. Jennings,
Mrs. Palmer, and the Middletons. But still I might not have
believed it — for where the mind is perhaps rather unwilling
to be convinced, it will always find something to support its
doubts — if I had not, when the servant let me in to-day, acci-
dentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to Mr. Willoughby
in your sister's writing. I came to inquire, but I was con-
vinced before I could ask the question. Is everything finally
settled? Is it impossible to — ? But I have no right, and
I could have no chance of succeeding. — Excuse me, Miss
Dashwood. I believe I have been wrong in saying so much,
but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence I have
the strongest dependence. Tell me that it is all absolutely
resolved on, that any attempt — that in short concealment,
if concealment be possible, is all that remains. "
These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of
his love for her sister, affected her very much. She was not
immediately able to say anything, and even when her spirits
were recovered, she debated for a short time on the answer
it would be most proper to give. The real state of things
between Willoughby and her sister was so little known to
herself, that in endeavouring to explain it, she might be as
liable to say too much as too little. Yet as she was con-
vinced that Marianne's affection for Willoughby could leave
no hope of Colonel Brandon's success, whatever the event
of that affection might be, and at the same time wished to
shield her conduct from censure, she thought it most prudent
and kind, after some consideration, to say more than she
really knew or believed. She acknowledged, therefore, that
though she had never been informed by themselves of the
terms on which they stood with each other, of their mutual
affection she had no doubt, and of their correspondence she
was not astonished to hear.
He listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing
to speak, rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a
voice of emotion, " To your sister I wish all imaginable
happiness; to Willoughby, that he may endeavour to
deserve her, " — took leave, and went away.
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversa-
tion to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points;
she was left, on the contrary, with a melancholy impression
SE$(SE J3Q) SE2QIBILITT 139
of Colonel Brandon's unhappiness, and was prevented from
even wishing it removed, by her anxiety for the very event
that must confirm it.
CH^PTE^ XXVlll
Nothing occurred during the next three or four days to make
Elinor regret what she had done in applying to her mother;
for Willoughby neither came nor wrote. They were engaged
: about the end of that time to attend Lady Middleton to a
f party, from which Mrs. Jennings was kept away by the indis-
1 position of her youngest daughter; and for this party,
Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and
seeming equally indifferent whether she went or staid, pre-
pared, without one look of hope, or one expression of pleasure.
She sat by the drawing-room fire after tea, till the moment
of Lady Middleton's arrival, without once stirring from her
seat, or altering her attitude, lost in her own thoughts and
insensible of her sister's presence: and when at last they
I were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at the door,
f she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected.
They arrived in due time at the place of destination, and
as soon as the string of carriages before them would allow,
alighted, ascended the stairs, heard their names announced
from one landing-place to another in an audible voice, and
entered a room splendidly lit up, quite full of company, and
insufferably hot. When they had paid their tribute of
politeness by curtesying to the lady of the house, they were
permitted to mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the
heat and inconvenience, to which their arrival must neces-
sarily add. After some time spent in saying little and doing
less, Lady Middleton sat down to casino, and as Marianne
was not in spirits for moving about, she and Elinor, luckily
I succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no great distance
I from the table.
f They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor
perceived Willoughby, standing within a few yards of them,
in earnest conversation with a very fashionable-looking young
woman. She soon caught his eye, and he immediately bowed,
i 4 o SE^SE J3^D SEDiSIBILITT
but without attempting to speak to her, or to approach
Marianne, though he could not but see her; and then
continued his discourse with the same lady. Elinor turned
involuntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be un-
observed by her. At that moment she first perceived him 3
and her whole countenance glowing with sudden delight 3
she would have moved towards him instantly, had not hei
sister caught hold of her.
" Good heavens ! " she exclaimed, " he is there — he is
there. Oh ! why does he not look at me ? why cannot 1
speak to him? "
" Pray, pray be composed, " cried Elinor, " and do no1
betray what you feel to everybody present. Perhaps he ha!
not observed you yet. "
This, however, was more than she could believe herself
and to be composed at such a moment was not only beyond
the reach of Marianne, it was beyond her wish. She sat ii
an agony of impatience which affected every feature.
At last he turned round again, and regarded them both
she started up, and pronouncing his name in a tone of affec-
tion, held out her hand to him. He approached, and address
ing himself rather to Elinor than Marianne, as if wishing U
avoid her eye, and determined not to observe her attitude
inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs. Dashwood, and askec
how long they had been in town. Elinor was robbed of al
presence of mind by such an address, and was unable to sa]
a word. But the feelings of her sister were instantly ex
pressed. Her face was crimsoned over, and she exclaimec
in a voice of the greatest emotion, " Good God ! Willoughby
what is the meaning of this? Have you not received m)
letters? Will you not shake hands with me? "
He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painfu
to him, and he held her hand only for a moment. During al
this time he was evidently struggling for composure. Ehno
watched his countenance, and saw its expression becoming
more tranquil. After a moment's pause, he spoke witl
calmness.
" I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street las
Tuesday, and very much regretted that I was not fortunati
enough to find yourselves and Mrs. Jennings at home. M)
card was not lost, I hope. "
SE^SE J3KP SEDiSIBILITT 141
" But have you not received my notes? " cried Marianne
in the wildest anxiety. " Here is some mistake, I am sure —
some dreadful mistake. What can be the meaning of it?
Tell me, Willoughby — for heaven's sake, tell me, what is the
= matter? "
(He made no reply; his complexion changed and all his
embarrassment returned; but as if, on catching the eye of
(the young lady with whom he had been previously talking,
lie felt the necessity of instant exertion, he recovered himself
, again, and after saying, " Yes, I had the pleasure of receiving
the information of your arrival in town, which you were so
I good as to send to me, " turned hastily away with a slight
i bow and joined his friend.
f Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable to
stand, sunk into her chair, and Elinor, expecting every
moment to see her faint, tried to screen her from the observa-
tion of others, while reviving her with lavender water.
" Go to him, Elinor, " she said, as soon as she could speak,
I " and force him to come to me. Tell him I must see him
I again — must speak to him instantly. I cannot rest — I shall
I not have a moment's peace till this is explained — some
I dreadful misapprehension or other. Oh, go to him this
■ moment. "
f " How can that be done? No, my dearest Marianne, you
must wait. This is not a place for explanations. Wait only
till to-morrow. "
With difficulty, however, could she prevent her from
following him herself; and to persuade her to check her
agitation — to wait, at least, with the appearance of com-
posure — till she might speak to him with more privacy and
more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continued inces-
santly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings,
by exclamations of wretchedness. In a short time Elinor
saw Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the stair-
case, and telling Marianne that he was gone, urged the im-
possibility of speaking to him again that evening, as a fresh
argument for her to be calm. She instantly begged her sister
would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home, as she
I was too miserable to stay a minute longer.
Lady Middleton, though in a middle of a rubber, on being
informed that Marianne was unwell, was too polite to object
1 42 SENgE A3iD SE$(SIBILITr
for a moment to her wish of going away, and making over h
cards to a friend, they departed as soon as the carriage con
be found. Scarcely a word was spoken during their retui
to Berkeley Street. Marianne was in a silent agony, t <
much oppressed even for tears; but as Mrs. Jennings wi
luckily not come home, they could go directly to their o*
room, where hartshorn restored her a little to herself. SI
was soon undressed and in bed, and as she seemed desiroi
of being alone, her sister then left her, and while she wait*
the return of Mrs. Jennings, had leisure enough for thinkii
over the past.
That some kind of engagement had subsisted betwe <
Willoughby and Marianne, she could not doubt; and thi
Willoughby was weary of it, seemed equally clear; for hoi
ever Marianne might still feed her own wishes, she could ni
attribute such behaviour to mistake or misapprehension
any kind. Nothing but a thorough change of sentimei
could account for it. Her indignation would have been st
stronger than it was, had she not witnessed that embarras
ment which seemed to speak a consciousness of his own mi
conduct, and prevented her from believing him so unpri
cipled as to have been sporting with the affections of h
sister from the first, without any design that would be
investigation. Absence might have weakened his regard, ai
convenience might have determined him to overcome it, b
that such a regard had formerly existed she could not brL
herself to doubt.
As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meetL
must already have given her, and on those still more seve
which might await her in its probable consequence, she con
not reflect without the deepest concern. Her own situati*
gained in the comparison; for while she could esteem Edwa
as much as ever, however they might be divided in futui
her mind might be always supported. But every circui
stance that could embitter such an evil seemed uniting
heighten the misery of Marianne in a final separation fro
Willoughby — in an immediate and irreconcileable ruptu
with him.
I
SE$(SE AD < D SED^SIBILITT 143
CH < APTE% XXIX
Before the house-maid had lit their fire the next day, or the
sun gained any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January,
Marianne, only half dressed, was kneeling against one of the
window-seats for the sake of all the little light she could com-
mand from it, and writing as fast as a continual flow of tears
would permit her. In this situation, Elinor, roused from
sleep by her agitation and sobs, first perceived her; and
after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety,
said, in a tone of the most considerate gentleness —
" Marianne, may I ask? "
" No, Elinor, " she replied, " ask nothing; you will soon
know all. "
The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said
lasted no longer than while she spoke, and was immediately
followed by a return of the same excessive affliction. It was
some minutes before she could go on with her letter, and the
frequent bursts of grief which still obliged her, at intervals,
to withhold her pen, were proofs enough of her feeling how
more than probable it was that she was writing for the last
time to Willoughby.
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in
her power; and she would have tried to soothe and tran-
quilUse her still more, had not Marianne entreated her, with
all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability, not to speak
to her for the world. In such circumstances, it was better
for both that they should not be long together; and the rest-
less state of Marianne's mind not only prevented her from
remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed, but
requiring at once solitude and continual change of place, made
her wander about the house till breakfast time, avoiding the
sight of everybody.
At breakfast she neither ate nor attempted to eat anything ;
and Elinor's attention was then all employed, not in urging
her, not in pitying her, nor in appearing to regard her, but in
endeavouring to engage Mrs. Jennings's notice entirely to
herself.
144 SEO^SE A^D SE3 < SIBILITT
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings, it last
a considerable time, and they were just setting themselv*
after it, round the common work table, when a letter w
delivered to Marianne, which she eagerly caught from tl
servant, and, turning of a death-like paleness, instantly n
out of the room. Elmor, who saw as plainly by this, as if si
had seen the direction, that it must come from WiDoughb
felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her hard
able to hold up her head, and sat in such a general trenn
as made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Jennings's notic
That good lady, however, saw only that Marianne had receive
a letter from Willoughby, which appeared to her a very goc
joke, and which she treated accordingly, by hoping, with
laugh, that she would find it to her liking. Of Elinor
distress, she was too busily employed in measuring lengtl
of worsted for her rug, to see anything at all; and calml
continuing her talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, sh
said —
" Upon my word, I never saw a young woman so despei
ately in love in my life ! My girls were nothing to her, an
yet they used to be foolish enough; but as for Miss Marianne
she is quite an altered creature. I hope, from the bottor
of my heart, he won't keep her waiting much longer, for it i
quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn. Pray, whe:
are they to be married ? "
Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at tha
moment, obliged herself to answer such an attack as this
and, therefore, trying to smile, replied, " And have you realty
ma'am, talked yourself into a persuasion of my sister's beinj
engaged to Mr. Willoughby? I thought it had been only i
joke, but so serious a question seems to imply more: and
must beg, therefore, that you will not deceive yourself an;
longer. I do assure you that nothing would surprise m
more than to hear of their being going to be married. "
" For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood ! How can yoi
talk so ! Don't we all know that it must be a match — tha
they were over head and ears in love with each other fron
the first moment they met? Did not I see them together u
Devonshire every day, and all day long? And did not'.
know that your sister came to town with me on purpose t(
buy wedding clothes ? Come, come, this won't do. Because
I
SE3QE J3Q) SEDiSIBILITT 145
you are so sly about it yourself, you think nobody else has
any senses ; but it is no such thing, I can tell you, for it has
been known all over the town this ever so long. I tell every-
body of it, and so does Charlotte. "
" Indeed, ma'am/'said Elinor very seriously, " you are
mistaken. Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in
spreading the report, and you will find that you have, though
you will not believe me now. "
Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not spirits to
say more, and eager at all events to know what Willoughby
had written, hurried away to their room, where, on opening
the door, she saw Marianne stretched on the bed, almost
choked by grief, one letter in her hand, and two or three others
lying by her. Elinor drew near, but without saying a word;
and seating herself on the bed, took her hand, kissed her
affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst of
tears, which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne's.
The latter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the
tenderness of this behaviour, and after some time thus spent
in joint affliction, she put all the letters into Elinor's hands;
and then covering her face with her handkerchief, almost
screamed with agony. Elinor, who knew that such grief,
shocking as it was to witness it, must have its course, watched
by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat spent itself,
and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read as
follows: —
Bond Street, January.
My Dear Madam, — I have just had the honour of receiving
your letter, for which I beg to return my sincere acknowledg-
ments. I am much concerned to find there was anything in
my behaviour last night that did not meet your approbation;
and though I am quite at a loss to discover in what point I
could be so unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your for-
giveness of what I can assure you to have been perfectly
unintentional. I shall never reflect on my former acquaint-
ance with your family in Devonshire without the most grate-
ful pleasure, and flatter myself it will not be broken by any
mistake or misapprehension of my actions. My esteem for
your whole family is very sincere; but if I have been so
unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than I felt, or
K
146 SENgE J O^p SEDiSIBILITT
meant to express, I shall reproach myself for not having be*
more guarded in my professions of that esteem. That
should ever have meant more, you will allow to be impossibl
when you understand that my affections have been loi
engaged elsewhere, and it will not be many weeks, I believ
before this engagement is fulfilled. It is with great regr
that I obey your commands of returning the letters wil
which I have been honoured from you, and the lock of ha
which you so obligingly bestowed on me.
I am, dear Madam,
Your most obedient
humble Servant,
John Willoughby.
With what indignation such a letter as this must be res
by Miss Dashwood, may be imagined. Though aware, befo:
she began it, that it must bring a confession of his incoi
stancy, and confirm their separation for ever, she was m
aware that such language could be suffered to announce i
nor could she have supposed Willoughby capable of departii
so far from the appearance of every honourable and delica
feeling — so far from the common decorum of a gentleman, ;
to send a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, inste*
of bringing with his desire of a release any professions
regret, acknowledged no breach of faith, denied all peculi
affection whatever — a letter of which every line was an insul
and which proclaimed its writer to be deep in hardened villan
She paused over it for some time with indignant astonisl
ment; then read it again and again; but every perusal on
served to increase her abhorrence of the man, and so bitt
were her feelings against him, that she dared not trust hers*
to speak, lest she might wound Marianne still deeper I
treating their disengagement, not as a loss to her of ai
possible good, but as an escape from the worst and mo
irremediable of evils, a connection, for life, with an u
principled man, as a deliverance the most real, a blessii
the most important.
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the lettc
on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it, an
probably, on the very different mind of a very differ©
person, who had no other connection whatever with the affa
I
SE^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 147
than what her heart gave him with everything that passed,
Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her sister, forgot that
she kad three letters on her lap yet unread, and so entirely
forgot how long she had been in the room, that when, on
hearing a carriage drive up to the door, she went to the
window to see who could be coming so unreasonably early,
she was all astonishment to perceive Mrs. Jennings's chariot,
which she knew had not been ordered till one. Determined
not to quit Marianne, though hopeless of contributing, at
present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuse herself from
attending Mrs. Jennings, on account of her sister being in-
disposed. Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured
concern for its cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and
Elinor, after seeing her safe off, returned to Marianne, whom
she found attempting to rise from the bed, and whom she
reached just in time to prevent her from falling on the floor,
faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest and food;
for it was many days since she had any appetite, and many
nights since she had really slept; and now, when her mind
was no longer supported by the fever of suspense, the con-
sequence of all this was felt in an aching head, a weakened
stomach, and general nervous faintness. A glass of wine,
which Elinor procured for her directly, made her more com-
fortable, and she was at last able to express some sense of
her kindness, by saying —
" Poor Elinor ! How unhappy I make you ! "
" I only wish, " replied her sister, " there were anything I
could do which might be of comfort to you. "
This, as everything else would have been, was too much
for Marianne, who could only exclaim, in the anguish of her
heart, " O Elinor, I am miserable indeed, " before her voice
was entirely lost in sobs.
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted
grief in silence.
" Exert yourself, dear Marianne, " she cried, " if you would
not kill yourself and all who love you . . Think of your mother ;
think of her misery while you suffer; for her sake you must
exert yourself. "
" I cannot, I cannot, " cried Marianne; " leave me, leave
me, if I distress you; leave me, hate me, forget me; but do
not torture me so. Oh ! how easy for those who have no
148 SE^(SE A^D SEJ^SIBILITT
sorrow of their own to talk of exertion! Happy, hapj
Elinor, you cannot have an idea of what I suffer. "
" Do you call me happy, Marianne! Ah; if you kne^
And can you believe me to be so while I see you so wretched !
" Forgive me, forgive me, " throwing her arms round b
sister's neck; " I know you feel for me; I know what
heart you have; but yet you are — you must be happ]
Edward loves you — what, oh! what can do away sue
happiness as that ! "
" Many, many circumstances, " said Elinor solemnly.
" No, no, no, " cried Marianne wildly; " he loves you, an
only you. You can have no grief. "
" I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state. "
" And you will never see me otherwise. Mine is a miser
which nothing can do away. "
" You must not talk so, Marianne. Have you no con
forts? no friends? Is your loss such as leaves no openin
for consolation ? Much as you suffer now, think of what yo
would have suffered if the discovery of his character had bee
delayed to a later period — if your engagement had bee
carried on for months and months, as it might have beei
before he chose to put an end to it. Every additional da
of unhappy confidence, on your side, would have made tl
blow more dreadful. "
" Engagement ! " cried Marianne, " there has been r
engagement. "
" No engagement ! "
" No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him. He hi
broken no faith with me. "
" But he told you that he loved you? "
" Yes — no — never — absolutely. It was every day implies
but never professedly declared. Sometimes I thought it ha
been — but it never was. "
" Yet you wrote to him? "
" Yes — could that be wrong after all that had passed
But I cannot talk. "
Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three lettei
which now raised a much stronger curiosity than befor <
directly ran over the contents of all. The first, which wa
what her sister had sent him on their arrival in town, was t
this effect —
w
I
i
J
J
I
SEO^SE A2{p SE2QIBILITT 149
" Berkeley Street, January.
" How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on receiving this !
and I think you will feel something more than surprise, when
you know I am in town. An opportunity of coming hither,
though with Mrs. Jennings, was a temptation we could not
resist. I wish you may receive this in time to come here
to-night, but I will not depend on it. At any rate I shall
expect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu. M. D. "
Her second note, which had been written on the morning
after the dance at the Middletons', was in these words —
" I cannot express my disappointment in having missed
you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment at not
having received any answer to a note which I sent you above
a week ago. I have been expecting to hear from you, and
still more to see you, every hour of the day. Pray call again
as soon as possible, and explain the reason of my having
expected this in vain. You had better come earlier another
time, because we are generally out by one. We were last
night at Lady Middleton's where there was a dance. I have
been told that you were asked to be of the party. But could
it be so ? You must be very much altered indeed since we
parted, if that could be the case, and you not there. But I
will not suppose this possible, and I hope very soon to receive
your personal assurance of its being otherwise. M. D. "
The contents of her last note to him were these: —
" What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your behaviour
last night? Again I demand an explanation of it. I was
prepared to meet you with the pleasure which our separation
naturally produced, with the familiarity which our intimacy
at Barton appeared to me to justify. I was repulsed indeed !
I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a
conduct which can scarcely be called less than insulting; but
though I have not yet been able to form any reasonable
apology for your behaviour, I am perfectly ready to hear
your justification of it. You have perhaps been misinformed,
or purposely deceived, in something concerning me, which
150 SE3^SE A3*p SEDiSIBILITT
may have lowered me in your opinion. Tell me what it is
explain the grounds on which you acted, and I shall tx
satisfied in being able to satisfy you. It would grieve m <
indeed to be obliged to think ifl of you; but if I am to d(
it, if I am to learn that you are not what we have hitherto
believed you, that your regard for us all was insincere, thai
your behaviour to me was intended only to deceive, let it \x
told as soon as possible. My feelings are at present in i
state of dreadful indecision; I wish to acquit you, but cer
tainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer. I
your sentiments are no longer what they were, you will retun
my notes, and the lock of my hair which is in your possession
" M.D. "
That such letters, so full of affection and confidence, couk
have been so answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake, woul <
have been unwilling to believe. But her condemnation o
him did not blind her to the impropriety of their havinj
been written at all; and she was silently grieving over th
imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs o
tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding, and mos
severely condemned by the event, when Marianne, perceivini
that she had finished the letters, observed to her that the;
contained nothing but what any one would have written i
the same situation.
" I felt myself, " she added, " to be as solemnly engagei
to him as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us t
each other. "
" I can believe it, " said Elinor; " but unfortunately, h
did not feel the same. "
" He did feel the same, Elinor — for weeks and weeks h
felt it. I know he did. Whatever may have changed hii
now (and nothing but the blackest art employed against m
can have done it), I was once as dear to him as my own soi
could wish. This lock of hair, which now he can so readil
give up, was begged of me with the most earnest supplicatioi
Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard his voic
at that moment! Have you forgot the last evening of ou
being together at Barton ? The morning that we parted toe
When he told me that it might be many weeks before we me
again — his distress — can I ever forget his distress ! "
i

SENgE A3 < D SE^SIBILITr 151
For a moment or two she could say no more; but when
this emotion had passed away, she added, in a firmer tone —
" Elinor, I have been cruelly used, but not by Willoughby. "
" Dearest Marianne, who but himself? By whom can he
have been instigated? "
" By all the world, rather than by his own heart. I could
rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued
together to ruin me in his opinion, than believe his nature
capable of such cruelty. This woman of whom he writes —
whoever she be — or any one, in short, but your own dear
self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to
belie me. Beyond you three, is there a creature in the world
whom I would not rather suspect of evil than Willoughby,
whose heart.I know so well? "
Elinor would not contend, and only replied, " Whoever
may have been so detestably your enemy, let them be
cheated of their malignant triumph, my dear sister, by seeing
how nobly the consciousness of your own innocence and good
intentions supports your spirits. It is a reasonable and
laudable pride which resists such malevolence. "
" No, no, " cried Marianne, " misery such as mine has no
pride. I care not who knows that I am wretched. The
triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world. Elinor,
Elinor, they who suffer little may be proud and independent
as they like — may resist insult, or return mortification — but
I cannot. I must feel — I must be wretched — and they are
welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can. "
" But for my mother's sake and mine — "
" I would do more than for my own. But to appear happy
when I am so miserable — Oh! who can require it? "
Again they were both silent. Elinor was employed in
walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the
window to the fire, without knowing that she received
warmth from one, or discerning objects through the other;
and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed, with her head
leaning against one of its posts, again took up Willoughby's
letter, and after shuddering over every sentence, exclaimed —
" It is too much 1 O Willoughby, Willoughby, could this
be yours! Cruel, cruel — nothing can acquit you. Elinor,
nothing can. Whatever he might have heard against me —
ought he not to have suspended his belief? ought he not to
i
152 SE3^SE ADtp SEOiSIBILITT
I
have told me of it, to have given me the power of clearing
myself?'The lock of hair'(repeating it from the letter),
'which you so obligingly bestowed on me'— that is unpar-
donable. Willoughby, where was your heart, when you
wrote those words? Oh! barbarously insolent! — Elinor,
can he be justified? "
" No, Marianne, in no possible way. "
" And yet this woman — who knows what her art may have
been — how long it may have been premeditated, and how
deeply contrived by her! — Who is she? — Who can she be?—
Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young and attractive
among his female acquaintance? Oh! no one, no one— he
talked to me only of myself. "
Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated,
and it ended thus —
" Elinor, I must go home. I must go and comfort mama.
Cannot we be gone to-morrow? "
" To-morrow, Marianne ! "
" Yes; why should I stay here? I came only for Wil-
loughby's sake — and now who cares for me? Who regards
me? "
" It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe Mrs.
Jennings much more than civility; and civility of the com-
monest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that. "
" Well, then, another day or two perhaps ; but I cannot
stay here long, I cannot stay to endure the questions and
remarks of all these people. The Middletons and Palmers-
how am I to bear their pity ? The pity of such a woman as
Lady Middleton! — oh! what would he say to that! "
Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she
did so; but no attitude could give her ease, and in restless
pain of mind and body she moved from one posture to
another, till growing more and more hysterical, her sister
could with difficulty keep her on the bed at all, and for some
time was fearful of being constrained to call for assistance.
Some lavender drops, however, which she was at length
persuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till Mrs.
Jennings returned, she continued on the bed quiet and
motionless.
SEZtSE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 153
CH^PTET^XXX
rs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return,
id without waiting to have her request of admittance
iswered, opened the door and walked in with a look of real
ncern.
" How do you do, my dear? " said she, in a voice of great
mpassion, to Marianne, who turned away her face without
tempting to answer.
" How is she, Miss Dashwood ? Poor thing ! she looks
try bad. No wonder. Aye, it is but too true. He is to be
arried very soon — a good-for-nothing fellow! I have no
itience with him. Mrs. Taylor told me of it half an hour
0, and she was told it by a particular friend of Miss Grey
xself, else I am sure I should not have believed it; and I
is almost ready to sink as it was. Well, said I, all I can say
that if it is true, he had used a young lady of my acquaint-
ice abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife may
ague his heart out. And so I shall always say, my dear,
iu may depend on it. I have no notion of men's going on
this way ; and if ever I meet him again, I will give him such
dressing as he has not had this many a day. But there is
le comfort, my dear Miss Marianne ; he is not the only young
an in the world worth having; and with your pretty face
Ni will never want admirers. Well, poor thing! I won't
sturb her any longer, for she had better have her cry out at
tee and have done with it. The Parrys and Sandersons
ckily are coming to-night, you know, and that will amuse
> r. "
She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room, as
she supposed her young friend's affliction could be increased
r noise.
Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determined on
ning with them. Elinor even advised her against it. But
no, she would go down; she could bear it very well, and
e bustle about her would be less. " Elinor, pleased to have
:r governed for a moment by such a motive, though believ-
l it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner, said
1 more ; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could
154 SE^SE A3(p SEV^SIBILITT
while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist
her into the dining-room as soon as they were summoned
to it.
When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate more
and was calmer than her sister had expected. Had she tried
to speak, or had she been conscious of half Mrs. Jennings's
well-meant but ill-judged attentions to her, this calmness
could not have been maintained; but not a syllable escaped
her lips, and the abstraction of her thoughts preserved her in
ignorance of everything that was passing before her.
Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness, though
its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost
ridiculous, made her those acknowledgments, and returned
her those civilities, which her sister could not make or return
for herself. Their good friend saw that Marianne was un-
happy, and felt that everything was due to her which might
make her at all less so. She treated her, therefore, with all
the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child
on the last day of its holidays. Marianne was to have the
best place by the fire, was to be tempted to eat by every
delicacy in the house, and to be amused by the relation of all
the news of the day. Had not Elinor, in the sad countenance
of her sister, seen a check to all mirth, she could have been
entertained by Mrs. Jennings's endeavours to cure a dis-
appointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives,
and a good fire. As soon, however, as the consciousness of
all this was forced by continual repetition on Marianne,
she could stay no longer. With an hasty exclamation of
misery, and a sign to her sister not to follow her, she directly
got up and hurried out of the room.
" Poor soul ! " cried Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she was
gone, " how it grieves me to see her ! And I declare if she
is not gone away without finishing her wine ! And the dried
cherries too ! Lord ! nothing seems to do her any good. I
am sure if I knew of anything she would like, I would send all
over the town for it. Well, it is the oddest thing to me, that
a man should use such a pretty girl so ill ! But when there
is plenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other,
Lord bless you ! they care no more about such things ! — "
" The lady then — Miss Grey I think you called her— is
very rich? "
)
SE^SE ADiD SEWSIBILITT 155
" Fifty thousand pounds, my dear. Did you ever see her?
a smart, stilish girl, they say, but not handsome. I remember
her aunt very well, Biddy Henshawe; she married a very
wealthy man. But the family are all rich together. Fifty
thousand pounds ! and by all accounts it won't come before
it's wanted; for they say he is all to pieces. No wonder!
dashing about with his curricle and hunters ! Well, it don't
signify talking, but when a young man, be he who he will,
comes and makes love to a pretty girl, and promises marriage,
he has no business to fly off from his word only because he
grows poor, and a richer girl is ready to have him. Why
don't he, in such a case, sell his horses, let his house, turn
off his servants, and make a thorough reform at once ? I
warrant you, Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait
tQl matters came round. But that won't do now-a-days;
nothing in the way of pleasure can ever be given up by the
young men of this age. "
" Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is ? Is she
said to be amiable? "
" I never heard any harm of her; indeed, I hardly ever
heard her mentioned; except that Mrs. Taylor did say this
morning, that one day Miss Walker hinted to her, that she
believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison would not be sorry to have
Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison could never agree. "
" And who are the Ellisons ? "
" Her guardians, my dear. But now she is of age and may
choose for herself; and a pretty choice she has made! —
What now, " after pausing a moment — " your poor sister has
gone to her own room, I suppose, to moan by herself. Is
there nothing one can get to comfort her? Poor dear, it
seems quite cruel to let her be alone. Well, by-and-by we
shall have a few friends, and that will amuse her a little.
What shall we play at? She hates whist, I know; but is
there no round game she cares for? "
" Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary. Mari-
anne, I dare say, will not leave her room again this evening.
I shall persuade her, if I can, to go early to bed, for I am sure
she wants rest. "
" Aye, I believe that will be best for her. Let her name
her own supper, and go to bed. Lord ! no wonder she has
been looking so bad and so cast-down this last week or two,
156 SENgE A3^D SEDtSIBILITT
for this matter I suppose has been hanging over her head as
long as that. And so the letter that came to-day finished itl
Poor soul ! I am sure if I had had a notion of it, I would not
have joked her about it for all my money. But then, you
know, how should I guess such a thing ? I made sure of its
being nothing but a common love-letter, and you know young
people like to be laughed at about them. Lord ! how con-
cerned Sir John and my daughters will be when they hear it!
If I had had my senses about me, I might have called in
Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it. But
I shall see them to-morrow. "
" It would be unnecessary, I am sure, for you to caution
Mrs. Palmer and Sir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby,
or making the slightest allusion to what has passed, before
my sister. Their own good-nature must point out to them
the real cruelty of appearing to know anything about it
when she is present; and the less that may ever be said to
myself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared,
as you, my dear madam, will easily believe. ,,
" O Lord ! yes, that I do indeed. It must be terrible for
you to hear it talked of; and as for your sister, I am sure I
would not mention a word about it to her for the world.
You saw I did not all dinner-time. No more would Sir John
nor my daughters, for they are all very thoughtful and con-
siderate — especially if I give them a hint, as I certainly will.
For my part, I think the less that is said about such things,
the better, the sooner'tis blown over and forgot. And
what good does talking ever do, you know? "
" In this affair it can only do harm — more so perhaps than
in many cases of a similar kind, for it has been attended by
circumstances which, for the sake of every one concerned in
it, make it unfit to become the public conversation. I must
do this justice to Mr. Willoughby — he has broken no positive
engagement with my sister. "
" Law, my dear! Don't pretend to defend him. No
positive engagement indeed! after taking her all over
Allenham House, and fixing on the very rooms they were
to live in hereafter ! "
Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject
farther, and she hoped it was not required of her for Wil-
loughby's; since, though Marianne might lose much, he
SEO^SE AV^D SEV^SIBILITT 157
could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth.
After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings, with all
her natural hilarity, burst forth again —
" Well, my dear,'tis a true saying about an ill wind, for
it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon. He will have
her at last; aye, that he will. Mind me, now, if they an't
married by Midsummer. Lord ! how he'll chuckle over this
news ! I hope he will come to-night. It will be all to one
a better match for your sister. Two thousand a-year without
debt or drawback — except the little love-child, indeed; aye,
I had forgot her; but she may be'prenticed out at small
cost, and then what does it signify? Delaford is a nice
place, I can tell you ; exactly what I call a nice old-fashioned
place, full of comforts and conveniences; quite shut in with
great garden walls that are covered with the best fruit-trees
in the country; and such a mulberry tree in one corner!
Lord ! how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were
there ! Then, there is a dovecote, some delightful stewponds,
and a very pretty canal; and everything, in short, that one
could wish for: and, moreover, it is close to the church, and
only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike-road, so'tis never
dull, for if you only go and sit up in an old yew arbour behind
the house, you may see all the carriages that pass along.
Oh!'tis a nice place! A butcher hard by in the village,
and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw. To my
fancy, a thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where
they are forced to send three miles for their meat, and have
not a neighbour nearer than your mother. Well, I shall
spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can. One shoulder of
mutton, you know, drives another down. If we can but
put Willoughby out of her head ! "
" Aye, if we can but do that, ma'am, " said Elinor, " we
shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon. " And
then rising, she went away to join Marianne, whom she
found, as she expected, in her own room, leaning, in silent
misery, over the small remains of a fire which, till Elinor's
entrance, had been her only light.
" You had better leave me, " was all the notice that her
sister received from her.
" I will leave you, " said Elinor, " if you will go to bed. "
But this, from the momentary perverseness of impatient
I
158 SEO^SE ADtp SEDiSIBILITT j
suffering, she at first refused to do. Her sister's earnest, r ,
though gentle persuasion, however, soon softened her to
compliance, and Elinor saw her lay her aching head on the
pillow, and saw her, as she hoped, in a way to get some quiet
rest before she left her. \
In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was !
soon joined by Mrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of
something, in her hand.
" My dear, " said she, entering, " I have just recollected
that I have some of the finest old Constantia wine, in the
house, that ever was tasted — so I have brought a glass of it i
for your sister. My poor husband ! how fond he was of it!
Whenever he had a touch of his old cholicky gout, he said
it did him more good than anything else in the world. Do
take it to your sister. "
" Dear ma'am, " replied Elinor, smiling at the difference
of the complaints for which it was recommended, " how good
you are ! But I have just left Marianne in bed, and, I hope,
almost asleep; and as I think nothing will be of so much
service to her as rest, if you will give me leave, I will drink the
wine myself. "
Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been
five minutes earlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and
Elinor, as she swallowed the chief of it, reflected that, though
its good effects on a cholicky gout were at present of little
importance to her, its healing powers on a disappointed heart
might be as reasonably tried on herself as on her sister.
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and
by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne,
Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected nor
wished to see her there, and, in short, that he was already
aware of what occasioned her absence. Mrs. Jennings was
not struck by the same thought; for, soon after his entrance,
she walked across the room to the tea-table where Elinor
presided, and whispered — " The Colonel looks as grave as
ever, you see. He knows nothing of it; do tell him, my
dear. "
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers, and, with
a look which perfectly assured her of his good information,
inquired after her sister.
" Marianne is not well, " said she. " She has been in-
SE^SE AV^D SEO^SIBILITT 159
disposed all day; and we have persuaded her to go to
bed. "
" Perhaps, then, " he hesitatingly replied, " what I heard
this morning may be true — there may be more truth in it
than I could believe possible at first. "
" What did you hear? "
" That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think — in
ihort, that a man, whom I knew to be engaged — but how
ihall I tell you? If you know it already, as surely you
mist, I may be spared. "
" You mean, " answered Elinor, with forced calmness,
'Mr. Willoughby's marriage with Miss Grey. Yes, we do
now it all. This seems to have been a day of general
lucidation, for this very morning first unfolded it to us.
ir. Willoughby is unfathomable! Where did you hear it? "
" In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I had business.
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage, and one of them
73ls giving the other an account of the intended match, in
, voice so little attempting concealment, that it was im-
possible for me not to hear all. The name of Willoughby,
bhn Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught my
ttention, and what followed was a positive assertion that
verything was now finally settled respecting his marriage
rith Miss Grey — it was no longer to be a secret — it would
ake place even within a few weeks, with many particulars
f preparation and other matters. One thing, especially,
remember, because it served to identify the man still more;
-as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to
x > mbe Magna, his seat in Somersetshire. My astonishment !
Jut it would be impossible to describe what I felt. The
ommunicative lady, I learnt on inquiry, for I staid in the
hop till they were gone, was a Mrs. Ellison, and that, as
'. have been since informed, is the name of Miss Grey's
guardian. "
" It is. But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has
ifty thousand pounds? In that, if in anything, we may
ind an explanation. "
" It may be so; but Willoughby is capable — at least I
hink " — he stopped a moment; then added in a voice which
eemed to distrust itself, " And your sister — how did she — "
" Her sufferings have been very severe. I have only to
I
160 SE3^SE ADip SENglBILITr
hope that they may be proportionably short. It has beer
it is a most cruel affliction. Till yesterday, I believe, sh
never doubted his regard; and even now, perhaps — but
am almost convinced that he never was really attached t
her. He has been very deceitful ! and, in some points, thei
seems a hardness of heart about him. "
" Ah! " said Colonel Brandon, " there is, indeed 1 Bi
your sister does not — I think you said so — she does n(
consider it quite as you do? "
" You know her disposition, and may believe how eager]
she would still justify him if she could. "
He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the remov
of the tea things, and the arrangement of the card partie
the subject was necessarily dropped. Mrs. Jennings, wl
had watched them with pleasure while they were talking, ar
who expected to see the effect of Miss Dashwood's commun
cation, in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon
side as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, <
hope and happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain tl
whole evening more serious and thoughtful than usual.
CH^PTE^XXXI
From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Mariani
awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of misei
in which she had closed her eyes.
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of wh
she felt; and before breakfast was ready, they had goi
through the subject again and again; with the same steac
conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor's side, the sar
impetuous feelings and varying opinions on Marianne's,
before. Sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be
unfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at others, lc
every consolation in the impossibility of acquitting hii
At one moment she was absolutely indifferent to the observ
tion of all the world, at another she would seclude herst
from it for ever, and at a third could resist it with energ
SE3i§E A ${p SEV^SIBILITT 161
In one thing, however, she was uniform, when it came to the
point, in avoiding, where it was possible, the presence of
Mrs. Jennings, and in a determined silence when obliged to
endure it. Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs.
Jennings's entering into her sorrows with any compassion.
" No, no, no, it cannot be, " she cried; " she cannot feel.
Her kindness is not sympathy ; her good-nature is not tender-
ness. All that she wants is gossip, and she only likes me now
because I supply it. "
Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to
which her sister was often led in her opinion of others, by
the irritable refinement of her own mind, and the too great
importance placed by her on the delicacies of a strong sensi-
bility, and the graces of a polished manner. Like half the
rest of the world, if more than half there be that are clever
and good, Marianne, with excellent abilities and an excellent
disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid. She expected
from other people the same opinions and feelings as her own,
and she judged of their motives by the immediate effect of
their actions on herself. Thus a circumstance occurred, while
the sisters were together in their own room after breakfast,
which sunk the heart of Mrs. Jennings still lower in her estima-
tion ; because, through her own weakness, it chanced to prove
a source of fresh pain to herself, though Mrs. Jennings was
governed in it by an impulse of the utmost good-will.
With a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance
gaily smiling, from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she
entered their room, saying —
" Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure
will do you good. "
Marianne heard enough. In one moment her imagination
placed before her a letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness
and contrition, explanatory of all that had passed, satisfac-
tory, convincing; and instantly followed by Willoughby
himself, rushing eagerly into the room to inforce, at her feet,
by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurances of his letter. The
Work of one moment was destroyed by the next. The hand-
writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, was before
her; and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which
followed such an ecstasy of more than hope, she felt as if,
till that instant, she had never suffered.
j
1 62 SE^SE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, within her reach
in her moments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed;
and now she could reproach her only by the tears which
streamed from her eyes with passionate violence — a reproach,
however, so entirely lost on its object, that after many ex-
pressions of pity, she withdrew, still referring her to the letter
for comfort. But the letter, when she was calm enough to
read it, brought little comfort. Willoughby filled every
page. Her mother, still confident of her engagement, and
relying as warmly as ever on his constancy, had only been
roused by Elinor's application, to intreat from Marianne
greater openness towards them both, and this, with such
tenderness towards her, such affection for Willoughby, and
such a conviction of their future happiness in each other,
that she wept with agony through the whole of it.
All her impatience to be at home again now returned; her
mother was dearer to her than ever — dearer through the
very excess of her mistaken confidence in Willoughby, and
she was wildly urgent to be gone. Elinor, unable herself to
determine whether it were better for Marianne to be in
London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own except
of patience till their mother's wishes could be known; and
at length she obtained her sister's consent to wait for that
knowledge.
Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for she could
not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were able to
grieve as much as herself; and positively refusing Elinor's
offered attendance, went out alone for the rest of the morning.
Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of the pain she was
going to communicate, and perceiving by Marianne's letter
how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it,
then sat down to write her mother an account of what had
passed, and intreat her directions for the future; while
Marianne, who came into the drawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's
going away, remained fixed at the table where Elinor wrote,
watching the advancement of her pen, grieving over her for
the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondly
over its effect on her mother.
In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an
hour, when Marianne, whose nerves could not then bear any
sudden noise, was startled by a rap at the door.
SE^SE J3^D SE^SIBILITr 163
" Who can this be? " cried Elinor. " So early too! I
thought we had been safe. "
Marianne moved to the window.
" It is Colonel Brandon! " said she, with vexation. " We
are never safe from him. "
" He will not come in, as Mrs. Jennings is from home. "
" I will not trust to that, " retreating to her own room.
'A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no
ttnscience in his intrusion on that of others. "
The event proved her conjecture right, though it was
ounded on injustice and error, for Colonel Brandon did come
a; and Elinor, who was convinced that solicitude for Mari-
nne brought him thither, and who saw that solicitude in his
listurbed and melancholy look, and in his anxious though
> rief inquiry after her, could not forgive her sister for
steeming him so lightly.
" I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street, " said he, after the
irst salutation, " and she encouraged me to come on; and I
ras the more easily encouraged, because I thought it probable
hat I might find you alone, which I was very desirous of
loing. My object — my wish — my sole wish in desiring it —
'. hope, I believe it is — is to be a means of giving comfort —
10, I must not say comfort — not present comfort — but con-
iction, lasting conviction to your sister's mind. My regard
or her, for yourself, for your mother — will you allow me to
> rove it by relating some circumstances, which nothing but
1 very sincere regard — nothing but an earnest desire of being
iseful — . I think I am justified — though where so many
lours have been spent in convincing myself that I am right,
s there not some reason to fear I may be wrong? " He
topped.
" I understand you, " said Elinor. " You have something
x > tell me of Mr. Willoughby, that will open his character
larther. Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendship
;hat can be shewn Marianne. My gratitude will be insured
mmediately by any information tending to that end, and
ters must be gained by it in time. Pray, pray, let me hear it.''
" You shall ; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton last
)ctober — but this will give you no idea. I must go farther
> ack. You will find me a very awkward narrator, Miss
3ashwood; I hardly know where to begin. A short account
i
1 64 SE^SE J^p SEV^IBILITT
of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it shall be a short
one. On such a subject/'sighing heavily, " I can have little
temptation to be diffuse. "
He stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with anothei
sigh, went on.
" You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation—
(it is not to be supposed that it could make any impression
on you) — a conversation between us one evening at Barton
Park — it was the evening of a dance — in which I alluded to a
lady I had once known, as resembling, in some measure,
your sister Marianne. "
" Indeed, " answered Elinor, " I have not forgotten it. "
He looked pleased by this remembrance, and added —
" If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality
of tender recollection, there is a very strong resemblance
between them, as well in mind as person — the same warmth
of heart, the same eagerness of fancy and spirits. This lady
was one of my nearest relations, an orphan from her infancy.
and under the guardianship of my father. Our ages were
nearly the same, and from our earliest years we were play-
fellows and friends. I cannot remember the time when I did
not love Eliza; and my affection for her, as we grew up, was
such, as perhaps, judging from my present forlorn and cheer-
less gravity, you might think me incapable of having ever felt.
Hers, for me, was, I believe, fervent as the attachment of your
sister to Mr. Willoughby, and it was, though from a different
cause, no less unfortunate. At seventeen she was lost to me
for ever. She was married — married against her inclination
to my brother. Her fortune was large, and our family estate
much encumbered. And this, I fear, is all that can be
said for the conduct of one who was at once her uncle and
guardian. My brother did not deserve her; he did not even
love her. I had hoped that her regard for me would support
her under any difficulty, and for some time it did ; — but at
last the misery of her situation, for she experienced great
unkindness, overcame all her resolution, and though she had
promised me that nothing — but how blindly I relate! 1
have never told you how this was brought on. We were
within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland. The
treachery, or the folly, of my cousin's maid betrayed us. 1
was banished to the house of a relation far distant, and she
SE3^SE ADtp SEOiSIBILITT 165
was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement, till my
father's point was gained. I had depended on her fortitude
too far, and the blow was a severe one — but had her marriage
been happy, so young as I then was, a few months must have
reconciled me to it, or at least I should not have now to
lament it. This, however, was not the case. My brother
had no regard for her ; his pleasures were not what they ought
to have been, and from the first he treated her unkindly.
The consequence of this, upon a mind so young, so lively, so
inexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too natural. She
resigned herself at first to all the misery of her situation; and
happy had it been if she had not lived to overcome those
regrets which the remembrance of me occasioned. But can
we wonder that with such a husband to provoke inconstancy,
and without a friend to advise or restrain her (for my father
lived only a few months after their marriage, and I was with
my regiment in the East Indies), she should fall? Had I
remained in England, perhaps — but I meant to promote the
happiness of both by removing from her for years, and for
that purpose had procured my exchange. The shock which
her marriage had given me, " he continued in a voice of great
agitation, " was of trifling weight — was nothing — to what I
felt when I heard, about two years afterwards, of her divorce.
It was that which threw this gloom, — even now the recol-
lection of what I suffered — "
He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few
minutes about the room. Elinor, affected by his relation,
and still more by his distress, could not speak. He saw her
concern, and coming to her, took her hand, pressed it, and
kissed it with grateful respect. A few minutes more of
silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure.
" It was nearly three years after this unhappy period
before I returned to England. My first care, when I did
arrive, was of course to seek for her; but the search was as
fruitless as it was melancholy. I could not trace her beyond
her first seducer, and there was every reason to fear that she
had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life of sin.
Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune, nor suffi-
cient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from my
brother that the power of receiving it had been made over
some months before to another person. He imagined, and
1
1 66 SED^SE ANj? SEDiSIBILITT
calmly could he imagine it, that her extravagance and conse- \
quent distress had obliged her to dispose of it for some
immediate relief. At last, however, and after I had been
six months in England, I did find her. Regard for a former
servant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune, >
carried me to visit him in a spunging-house, where he was *-
confined for debt; and there, in the same house, under a
similar confinement, was my unfortunate sister. So altered t_
— so faded — worn down by acute suffering of every kind!
hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure
before me, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful
girl, on whom I had once doated. What I endured in so
beholding her — but I have no right to wound your feelings
by attempting to describe it — I have pained you too much
already. That she was, to all appearance, in the last stage *%_
of a consumption, was — yes, in such a situation it was my t
greatest comfort. Life could do nothing for her, beyond
giving time for a better preparation for death; and that was
given. I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings, and under
proper attendants; I visited her every day during the rest
of her short life : I was with her in her last moments. "
IjAgain he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor spoke " %
her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern at the fate'*
of his unfortunate friend.
" Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended/'said he, " by
the resemblance I have fancied between her and my poor
disgraced relation. Their fates, their fortunes cannot be the
same; and had the natural sweet disposition of the one ^
been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happier marriage, she *
might have been all that you will live to see the other be.
But to what does all this lead ? I seem to have been distress-
ing you for nothing. Ah ! Miss Dashwood — a subject such
as this — untouched for fourteen years — it is dangerous to
handle it at all! I will be more collected — more concise.
She left to my care her only little child, a little girl, the ^
offspring of her first guilty connection, who was then about 1
three years old. She loved the child, and had always kept *
it with her. It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and
gladly would I have discharged it in the strictest sense, by * -
watching over her education myself, had the nature of our
situations allowed it; but I had no family, no home; and
SEO^SE J3iD SEOiSIBILITT 167
my little Eliza was therefore placed at school. I saw her
there whenever I could, and after the death of my brother
(which happened about five years ago, and which left me the
possession of the family property), she frequently visited me
at Delaford. I called her a distant relation; but I am well
aware that I have in general been suspected of a much nearer
connection with her. It is now three years ago (she had just
reached her fourteenth year), that I removed her from school,
to place her under the care of a very respectable woman,
residing in Dorsetshire, who had the charge of four or five
other girls of about the same time of life; and for two years
I had every reason to be pleased with her situation. But
last February, almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly dis-
appeared. I had allowed her (imprudently, as it has since
turned out), at her earnest desire, to go to Bath with one of
her young friends, who was attending her father there for his
health. I knew him to be a very good sort of man, and I
thought well of his daughter — better than she deserved, for,
with a most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy, she would tell
nothing, would give no clue, though she certainly knew all.
He, her father, a well-meaning, but not a quick-sighted man,
could really, I believe, give no information; for he had been
generally confined to the house, while the girls were ranging
over the town and making what acquaintances they chose;
and he tried to convince me, as thoroughly as he was con-
vinced himself, of his daughter's being entirely unconcerned
in the business. In short, I could learn nothing but that she
was gone; all ftie rest, for eight long months, was left to con-
jecture. What I thought, what I feared, may be imagined;
and what I suffered too. "
" Good heavens! " cried Elinor, " could it be! could
Willoughby— "
" The first news that reached me of her, " he continued,
" came in a letter from herself last October. It was for-
warded to me from Delaford, and I received it on the very
norning of our intended party to Whitwell ; and this was the
reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly, which I am sure
nust at the time have appeared strange to everybody, and
vhich I believe gave offence to some. Little did Mr. Wil-
oughby imagine, I suppose, when his looks censured me for
ncivility in breaking up the party, that I was called away to
168 SE^SE A3^D SEO^SIBILITT
the relief of one whom he had made poor and miserable; bul
had he known it, what would it have availed? Would h(
have been less gay or less happy in the smiles of your sister i
No, he had already done that which no man who can fee
for another would do. He had left the girl whose youth anc
innocence he had seduced, in a situation of the utmost dis
tress, with no creditable home, no help, no friends, ignoranl
of his address! He had left her, promising to return; h(
neither returned, nor wrote, nor relieved her. "
" This is beyond everything! " exclaimed Elinor.
" His character is now before you — expensive, dissipated
and worse than both. Knowing all this, as I have no\s
known it many weeks, guess what I must have felt on seeing
your sister as fond of him as ever, and on being assured that
she was to marry him; guess what I must have felt for all
your sakes. When I came to you last week and found you
alone, I came determined to know the truth, though irreso-
lute what to do when it was known. My behaviour must have
seemed strange to you then; but now you will comprehend it.
To suffer you all to be so deceived; to see your sister — but
what could I do ? I had no hope of interfering with success;
and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might yet
reclaim him. But now, after such dishonourable usage, who
can tell what were his designs on her? Whatever they may
have been, however, she may now, and hereafter doubtless
will, turn with gratitude towards her own condition, when
she compares it with that of my poor Eliza, when she con-
siders the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl,
and pictures her to herself, with an affection for him as strong,
still as strong as her own, and with a mind tormented by
self-reproach, which must attend her through life. Surely
this comparison must have its use with her. She will feel
her own sufferings to be nothing. They proceed from no
misconduct, and can bring no disgrace. On the contrary,
every friend must be made still more her friend by them.
Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for her fortitude
under it, must strengthen every attachment. Use your own
discretion, however, in communicating to her what I have
told you. You must know best what will be its effect ; but
had I not seriously and from my heart believed it might be
of service, might lessen her regrets, I would not have suffered
SEZ^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 169
myself to trouble you with this account of my family afflic-
tions, with a recital which may seem to have been intended
to raise myself at the expense of others. "
Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful earnest-
| ness; attended too with the assurance of her expecting
i material advantage to Marianne, from the communication of
what had passed.
I " I have been more pained, " said she, " by her endeavours
I to acquit him than by all the rest; for it irritates her mind
j more than the most perfect conviction of his unworthiness
can do. Now, though at first she will suffer much, I am sure
j she will soon become easier. Have you, " she continued,
1 after a short silence, " ever seen Mr. Willoughby since you
l left him at Barton? "
j " Yes, " he replied gravely, " once I have. One meeting
'was unavoidable. "
Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously,
saying —
" What! have you met him to — "
" I could meet him in no other way. Eliza had confessed
to me, though most reluctantly, the name of her lover; and
when he returned to town, which was within a fortnight after
myself, we met by appointment, he to defend, I to punish
his conduct. We returned unwounded, and the meeting,
therefore, never got abroad. "
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a
man and a soldier, she presumed not to censure it.
" Such, " said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, " has been
the unhappy resemblance between the fate of mother and
daughter ! and so imperfectly have I discharged my trust ! "
" Is she still in town? "
" No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for I
found her near her delivery, I removed her and her child into
the country, and there she remains. "
Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably
dividing Elinor from her sister, he put an end to his visit,
receiving from her again the same grateful acknowledgments,
and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for him.
170 SE3^SE A^p SENSIBILITY
CH^PTE^XXXII
When the particulars of this conversation were repez
Miss Dashwood to her sister, as they very soon wer
effect on her was not entirely such as the former had
to see. Not that Marianne appeared to distrust the t
any part of it, for she listened to it all with the most
and submissive attention, made neither objection nor i
attempted no vindication of Willoughby, and seemed 1
by her tears that she felt it to be impossible. But
this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of h
was carried home to her mind ; though she saw with sj
tion the effect of it, in her no longer avoiding Colonel B
when he called, in her speaking to him, even volu
speaking, with a kind of compassionate respect, and
she saw her spirits less violently irritated than befoi
did not see her less wretched. Her mind did become s
but it was settled in a gloomy dejection. She felt the
Willoughby's character yet more heavily than she h
the loss of his heart; his seduction and desertion (
Williams, the misery of that poor girl, and the doubt c
his designs might once have been on herself, preyed altc
so much on her spirits, that she could not bring hei
speak of what she felt even to Elinor; and brooding cr
sorrows in silence, gave more pain to her sister thar
have been communicated by the most open and most fr
confession of them.
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashw
receiving and answering Elinor's letter, would be c
give a repetition of what her daughters had already ft
said ; of a disappointment hardly less painful than Man;
and an indignation even greater than Elinor's. Long
from her, quickly succeeding each other, arrived to
that she suffered and thought; to express her anxious
tude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear up witl
tude under this misfortune. Bad indeed must tie na
Marianne's affliction be, when her mother could talk o
tude ! mortifying and humiliating must be the origin o
regrets, which she could wish her not to indulge !
SE^SE A3iD SENSIBILITY 171
Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs.
Dashwood had determined that it would be better for Mari-
anne to be anywhere at that time, than at Barton, where
everything within her view would be bringing back the past
in the strongest and most afflicting manner, by constantly
placing Willoughby before her, such as she had always seen
him there. She recommended it to her daughters, therefore,
by all means not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings; the
length of which, though never exactly fixed, had been ex-
pected by all to comprise at least five or six weeks. A variety
of occupations, of objects, and of company, which could not
be procured at Barton, would be inevitable there, and might
yet, she hoped, cheat Marianne, at times, into some interest
beyond herself, and even into some amusement, much as
the idea of both might now be spurned by her.
From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her mother
considered her to be at least equally safe in town as in the
country, since his acquaintance must now be dropped by all
who called themselves her friends. Design could never bring
them in each other's way; negligence could never leave them
exposed to a surprise; and chance had less in its favour in
the crowd of London than even in the retirement of Barton,
where it might force him before her while paying that visit
at Allenham on his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from
foreseeing at first as a probable event, had brought herself
to expect as a certain one.
She had yet another reason for wishing her children to
remain where they were; a letter from her son-in-law had
told her that he and his wife were to be in town before the
middle of February, and she judged it right that they should
sometimes see their brother.
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's
opinion, and she submitted to it therefore without opposition,
though it proved perfectly different from what she wished
and expected, though she felt it to be entirely wrong, formed
on mistaken grounds, and that by requiring her longer con-
tinuance in London it deprived her of the only possible
alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sympathy of
her mother, and doomed her to such society and such scenes
as must prevent her ever knowing a moment's rest.
But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that what
1
172 SED^SE A^iD SED^SIBILITT
brought evil to herself would bring good to her sister; ai
Elinor, on the other hand, suspecting that it would not 1
in her power to avoid Edward entirely, comforted hersc
by thinking, that though their longer stay would therefo:
militate against her own happiness, it would be better fi
Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire.
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearir
Willoughby's name mentioned, was not thrown awa;
Marianne, though without knowing it herself, reaped all i
advantage ; for neither Mrs. Jennings, nor Sir John, nor eve
Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her. Elin(
wished that the same forbearance could have extended t <
wards herself, but that was impossible, and she was oblige
to listen day after day to the indignation of them all.
Sir John could not have thought it possible. " A man (
whom he had always had such reason to think well ! Sue
a good-natured fellow! He did iiot-^eKevF^fehere was
bolder rider in England ! It was an unaccountable busines
He wished him at the devil with all his heart. He woul
not speak another word to him, meet him where he migh
for all the world ! No, not if it were to be by the side <
Barton covert, and they were kept waiting for two hou]
together. Such a scoundrel of a fellow! such a deceitfi
dog ! It was only the last time they met that he had offere
him one of Folly's puppies ! and, this was the end of it ! "
Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry. " She w*
determined to drop his acquaintance immediately, and si
was very thankful that she had never been acquainted wit
him at all. She wished with all her heart Combe Magna m
not so near Cleveland ; but it did not signify, for it was a gre*
deal too far off to visit; she hated him so much that she w*
resolved never to mention his name again, and she shod
tell everybody she saw, how good-for-nothing he was. "
The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shewn in pr
curing all the particulars in her power of the approachii
marriage, and communicating them to Elinor. She cou
soon tell at what coachinaker's the new carriage was buildin
by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait was drawn, ar
at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be seen.
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on tl
occasion was a happy relief to Elinor's spirits, oppressed ;
SED^SE A^D SED^SIBILITT 173
they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others. It
was a great comfort to her to be sure of exciting no interest
in one person at least among their circle of friends; a great
comfort to know that there was one who would meet her
without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any
anxiety for her sister's health.
Every qualification is raised at times, by the circum-
stances of the moment, to more than its real value; and she
was sometimes worried down by officious condolence to rate
good-breeding as more indispensable to comfort than good-
nature.
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about
once every day, or twice, if the subject occurred very often,
by saying, " It is very shocking indeed ! " and by the means
of this continual though gentle vent, was able not only to see
the Miss Dashwoods from the first without the smallest
emotion, but very soon to see them without recollecting a
word of the matter; and having thus supported the dignity
of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what was
wrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend
to the interest of her own assemblies, and therefore deter-
mined (though rather against the opinion of Sir John), as
Mrs. Willoughby would at once be a woman of elegance and
fortune, to leave her card with her as soon as she married.
Colonel Brandon's delicate unobtrusive inquiries were never
unwelcome to Miss Dashwood. He had abundantly earned
the privilege of intimate discussion of her sister's disappoint-
ment, by the friendly zeal with which he had endeavoured to
soften it, and they always conversed with confidence. His
chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing past
sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying
eye with which Marianne sometimes observed him, and the
gentleness of her voice whenever (though it did not often
happen) she was obliged, or could oblige herself to speak to
him. These assured him that his exertion had produced an
increase of good-will towards himself, and these gave Elinor
hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; but Mrs.
Jennings, who knew nothing of all this — who knew only that
the Colonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could
never prevail on him to make the offer himself, nor commis-
sion her to make it for him — began at the end of two days to
174 SE3^SE ADiD SE^(SIBILIT2
think that, instead of Midsummer, they would not be married
till Michaelmas, and by the end of a week that it would not
be a match at all. The good understanding between the
Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that
the honours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew
arbour, would all be made over to her ; and Mrs. Jennings
had for some time ceased to think at all of Mr. Ferrars.
Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of
Willoughby's letter, Elinor had the painful office of informing
her sister that he was married. She had taken care to have
the intelligence conveyed to herself, as soon as it was known
that the ceremony was over, as she was desirous that Mari-
anne should not receive the first notice of it from the public
papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.
She received the news with resolute composure; made no
observation on it, and at first shed no tears ; but after a short
time they would burst out, and for the rest of the day she was
in a state hardly less pitiable than when she first learnt to
expect the event.
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married;
and Elinor now hoped, as there could be no danger of her
seeing either of them, to prevail on her sister, who had never
yet left the house since the blow first fell, to go out again by
degrees as she had done before.
About this time, the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at
their cousin's house in Bartlett's Buildings, Holborn, pre-
sented themselves again before their more grand relations in
Conduit and Berkeley Street, and were welcomed by them
all with great cordiality.
Elinor only was sorry to see them. Their presence always
gave her pain, and she hardly knew how to make a very
gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy in finding
her still in town.
" I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found
you here still " said she repeatedly, with a strong emphasis
on the word. " But I always thought I should. I was
almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile; though
you told me, you know, at Barton, that you should not stay
above a month. But I thought, at the time, that you would
most likely change your mind when it came to the point. It
would have been such a great pity to have went away before
P
SEZ^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 175
four brother and sister came. And now, to be sure, you will
te in no hurry to be gone. I am amazingly glad you did not
keep to your word "
Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced to use all
her self-command to make it appear that she did not.
" Well, my dear, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did you
travel? "
" Not in the stage, I assure you, " replied Miss Steele, with
quick exultation; " we came post all the way, and had a very
smart beau to attend us. Dr. Davies was coming to town,
and so we thought we'd join him in a post-chaise; and he
behaved very genteelly, and paid ten or twelve shillings more
than we did. "
" Oh, oh! " cried Mrs. Jennings, " very pretty, indeed!
and the doctor is a single man, I warrant you. "
" There now, " said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering;
" everybody laughs at me so about the Doctor, and I cannot
think why. My cousins say they are sure I have made a
conquest; but for my part I declare I never think about him
from one hour's end to another. * Lord ! here comes your
beau, Nancy/ my cousin said t'other day, when she saw him
crossing the street to the house.'My beau, indeed !'said I,
I cannot think who you mean. The Doctor is no beau of
nine.'"
" Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking — but it won't do —
he Doctor is the man, I see. "
" No, indeed ! " replied her cousin, with affected earnest-
less, " and I beg you will contradict it, if you ever hear it
alkedof. "
Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance
hat she certainly would not, and Miss Steele was made
ompletely happy.
" I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and
ister, Miss Dashwood, when they come to town, " said
Aicy., returning, after a cessation of hostile hints, to the
harge.
" No, I do not think we shall. "
" Oh, yes, I dare say you will. "
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition.
" What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood can
pare you both for so long a time together ! "
J
176 SE3^SE A^D SE3^SIBILITT
" Long a time, indeed ! " interposed Mrs. Jennings, i
" Why, their visit is but just begun ! "
Lucy was silenced.
" I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood, "
said Miss Steele. " I am sorry she is not well; " for Marianne
had left the room on their arrival.
" You are very good. My sister will be equally sorry to
miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much
plagued lately with nervous headaches, which make her unfit
for company or conversation. "
" Oh, dear, that is a great pity ! but such old friends as
Lucy and me ! — I think she might see us ; and I am sure we
would not speak a word. "
Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal. " Her
sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed, or in her dressing-
gown, and therefore not able to come to them. "
" Oh, if that's all, " cried Miss Steele, " we can just as well
go and see her "
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her
temper; but she was saved the trouble of checking it, by
Lucy's sharp reprimand, which now, as on many occasions,
though it did not give much sweetness to the manners of one
sister, was of advantage in governing those of the other.
CH^PTE% XXXIII
After some opposition, Marianne yielded to her sister's
entreaties, and consented to go out with her and Mrs. Jen-
nings, one morning for half an hour. She expressly con-
ditioned, however, for paying no visits, and would do no
more than accompany them to Gray's in Sackville Street,
where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange
of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother.
When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollected
that there was a lady at the other end of the street on whom
she ought to call; and as she had no business at Gray's, it
was resolved, that while her young friends transacted theirs,
she should pay her visit, and return to them.
i
SE3^SE AD < £ SE3^SIBILITT 177
On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods found so
many people before them in the room, that there was not a
person at liberty to attend to their orders; and they were
obliged to wait. All that could be done was, to sit down at
that end of the counter which seemed to promise the quickest
succession; one gentleman only was standing there, and it
is probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting his
politeness to a quicker dispatch. But the correctness of his
eye, and the delicacy of his taste, proved to be beyond his
politeness. He was giving orders for a toothpick-case for
himself, and till its size, shape, and ornaments were deter-
mined, — all of which, after examining and debating for a
quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop,
were finally arranged by his own inventive fancy, — he had
no leisure to bestow any other attention on the two ladies,
than what was comprised in three or four very broad stares;
a kind of notice which served to imprint on Elinor the
remembrance of a person and face of strong, natural, sterling
. insignificance, though adorned in the first style of fashion.
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of
contempt and resentment, on this impertinent examination
• of their features, and on the puppyism of his manner in
deciding on all the different horrors of the different tooth-
pick-cases presented to his inspection, by remaining un-
conscious of it all; for she was as well able to collect her
thoughts within herself, and be as ignorant of what was
passing around her, in Mr. Gray's shop, as in her own bed-
room.
At last the affair was decided. The ivory, the gold, and
the pearls, all received their appointment, and the gentleman
having named the last day on which his existence could be
continued without the possession of the toothpick-case,
drew on his gloves with leisurely care, and bestowing another
glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but such a one as seemed
rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with
an happy air of real conceit and affected indifference.
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, and
was on the point of concluding it, when another gentleman
presented himself at her side. She turned her eyes towards
his face, and found him with some surprise to be her
brother.
M
178 SE2QE A3^D SE^SIBILITT
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enoug
to make a very creditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shoj
John Dashwood was really far from being sorry to see h:
sisters again; it rather gave them satisfaction; and h
inquiries after their mother were respectful and attentive.
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town tw
days.
" I wished very much to call upon you yesterday, " sai
he, " but it was impossible, for we were obliged to tak
Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Exchange: and w
spent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars. Harry wa
vastly pleased. This morning I had fully intended to ca
on you, if I could possibly find a spare half -hour, but one ha
always so much to do on first coming to town ! I am com
here to bespeak Fanny a seal. But to-morrow I think
shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street, and t
introduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings. I understand sfc
is a woman of very good fortune. And the Middletons to <
you must introduce me to them. As my mother-in-law
relations, I shall be happy to shew them every respect. The
are excellent neighbours to you in the country, I understand.
" Excellent indeed. Their attention to our comfor
their friendliness in every particular, is more than I ca
express. "
" I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word ; extreme!
glad indeed. But so it ought to be; they are people of larj
fortune, they are related to you, and every civility ar
accommodation that can serve to make your situatic
pleasant, might be reasonably expected. And so you a
most comfortably settled in your little cottage, and wai
for nothing. Edward brought us a most charming accoui
of the place; the most complete thing of its kind, he sai
that ever was, and you all seemed to enjoy it beyor
anything. It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it,
assure you. "
Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and w
not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him, I
the arrival of Mrs. Jennings's servant, who came to tell h
that his mistress waited for them at the door.
Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introdua
to Mrs. Jennings at the door of her carriage, and repeatii
SE^SE A^D SENSIBILITY 179
his hope of being able to call on them the next day, took
leave.
His visit was duly paid. He came with a pretence at an
apology from their sister-in-law, for not coming too; " but
she was so much engaged with her mother, that really she
had no leisure for going anywhere. " Mrs. Jennings, however,
assured him directly, that she should not stand upon cere-
mony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and she
should certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very soon,
and bring her sisters to see her. His manners to them, though
calm, were perfectly kind; to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively
civil; and on Colonel Brandon's coming in soon after himself,
he eyed him with a curiosity which seemed to say, that he
only wanted to know him to be rich to be equally civil to him.
After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor to
walk with him to Conduit Street, and introduce him to Sir
John and Lady Middleton. The weather was remarkably
fine, and she readily consented. As soon as they were out of
the house, his inquiries began.
" Who is Colonel Brandon? Is he a man of fortune? "
" Yes; he has a very good property in Dorsetshire. "
" I am glad of it. He seems a most gentlemanlike man,
and I think, Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect
of a very respectable establishment in life. "
" Me, brother — what do you mean? "
" He likes you. I observed him narrowly, and am con-
vinced of it. What is the amount of his fortune ? "
" I believe about two thousand a-year. "
" Two thousand a-year; " and then working himself up to
a pitch of enthusiastic generosity, he added:
" Elinor, I wish with all my heart it were twice as much
for your sake. "
" Indeed I believe you, " replied Elinor, " but I am very
sure that Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of
marrying me "
" You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken.
A very little trouble on your side secures him. Perhaps just
at present he may be undecided; the smallness of your for-
tune may make him hang back; his friends may all advise
him against it. But some of those little attentions and
encouragements which ladies can so easily give, will fix him,
180 SEZ^SE A3^D SE3^IBILITT
in spite of himself. And there can be no reason why you *
should not try for him. It is not to be supposed that any
prior attachment on your side — in short, you know as to an
attachment of that kind, it is quite out of the question, the
objections are insurmountable — you have too much sense
not to see all that. Colonel Brandon must be the man; and
no civility shall be wanting on my part, to make him pleased *
with you and your family. It is a match that must give uni- r .
versal satisfaction. In short, it is a kind of thing that " — |
lowering his voice to an important whisper — " will be exceed- *
ingly welcome to all parties. " Recollecting himself, however, ^
he added, " That is, I mean to say — your friends are all truly :
anxious to see you well settled, Fanny particularly, for she
has your interest very much at heart, I assure you. And her «
mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman, I am \
sure it would give her great pleasure, she said as much the !
other day. "
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer.
" It would be something remarkable now, " he continued,
" something droll, if Fanny should have a brother and I a .
sister settling at the same time. And yet it is not very t
unlikely. " i
" Is Mr. Edward Ferrars, " said Elinor with resolution, f
" going to be married? " %
" It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in *
agitation. He has a most excellent mother. Mrs. Ferrars,
with the utmost liberality, will come forward, and settle on
him a thousand a-year, if the match takes place. The lady
is the Honourable Miss Morton, only daughter of the late
Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pounds — a very desirable
connection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its
taking place in time. A thousand a-year is a great deal for
a mother to give away, to make over for ever; but Mrs.
Ferrars has a noble spirit. To give you another instance of
her liberality : — The other day, as soon as we came to town, -
aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now,
she put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to the amount of
two hundred pounds. And extremely acceptable it is, for
we must live at a great expense while we are here. " «-
He paused for her assent and compassion; and she forced
herself to say —
SE^SE A3^D SEO^SIBILITT 181
" Your expenses both in town and country must certainly
be considerable, but your income is a large one. ,,
" Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose. I do
not mean to complain, however; it is undoubtedly a com-
fortable one, and, I hope, will in time be better. The in-
dosure of Norland Common, now carrying on, is a most
serious drain. And then I have made a little purchase
> within this half-year — East Kingham Farm, you must
[ remember the place, where old Gibson used to live. The
i land was so very desirable for me in every respect, so imme-
! diately adjoining my own property, that I felt it my duty to
buy it. I could not have answered it to my conscience to
let it fall into any other hands. A man must pay for his
[ convenience, and it has cost me a vast deal of money. "
T " More than you think it really and intrinsically worth? "
" Why, I hope not that. I might have sold it again, the
next day, for more than I gave: but with regard to the
purchase-money, I might have been very unfortunate indeed;
for the stocks were at that time so low, that if I had not
happened to have the necessary sum in my banker's hands,
[ I must have sold out to very great loss. "
Elinor could only smile.
" Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on
first coming to Norland. Our respected father, as you well
know, bequeathed all the Stanhill effects that remained at
Norland (and very valuable they were) to your mother. Far
be it for me to repine at his doing so; he had an undoubted
1 right to dispose of his own property as he chose. But, in
r consequence of it, we have been obliged to make large pur-
|, chases of linen, china, etc., to supply the place of what was
[ taken away. You may guess, after all these expenses, how
* very far we must be from being rich, and how acceptable
1 Mrs. Ferrars's kindness is. "
L " Certainly, " said Elinor; " and assisted by her liberality
I I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstances. "
I " Another year or two may do much towards it, " he
gravely replied; " but however there is still a great deal to
be done. There is not a stone laid of Fanny's greenhouse,
and nothing but the plan of the flower-garden marked out. "
" Where is the greenhouse to be? "
" Upon the knoll behind the house. The old walnut-trees
1 82 SE^SE A$(p SENSIBILITY
are all come down to make room for it. It will be a very fine
object from many parts of the park, and the flower-garden
will slope down just before it, and be exceedingly pretty.
We have cleared away all the old thorns that grew in patches
over the brow. "
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself, and
was very thankful that Marianne was not present to share
the provocation.
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and
to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each
of his sisters, in his next visit at Gray's, his thoughts took a
cheerfuller turn, and he began to congratulate Elinor on
having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings.
" She seems a most valuable woman indeed. Her house,
her style of living, all bespeak an exceeding good income, and
it is an acquaintance that has not only been of great use to
you hitherto, but in the end may prove materially advan-
tageous. Her inviting you to town is certainly a vast thing
in your favour; and, indeed, it speaks altogether so great a
regard for you, that in all probability when she dies you will
not be forgotten. She must have a great deal to leave. "
" Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has only
her jointure, which will descend to her children. "
" But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her
income. Few people of common prudence will do that ; and
whatever she saves, she will be able to dispose of. "
" And do you not think it more likely that she should
leave it to her daughters, than to us ? "
" Her daughters are both exceedingly well married, and
therefore I cannot perceive the necessity of her remembering
them farther. Whereas, in my opinion, by her taking so
much notice of you, and treating you in this kind of way, she
has given you a sort of claim on her future consideration,
which a conscientious woman would not disregard. Nothing
can be kinder than her behaviour; and she can hardly do all
this, without being aware of the expectations she raises. "
" But she raises none in those most concerned. Indeed
brother, your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carrie!
you too far. "
" Why to be sure, " said he, seeming to recollect himself
" people have little, have very little in their power. But
SEO^SE A$ip SEDiSlBILITT 183
my dear Elinor, what is the matter with Marianne? — she
looks very unwell, has lost her colour, and is grown quite
thin. Is she ill? "
" She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint on her
for several weeks. "
" lam sorry for that. At her time of life, anything of an
illness destroys the bloom for ever! Hers has been a very
short one! She was as handsome a girl last September as
any I ever saw, and as likely to attract the men. There was
something in her style of beauty to please them particularly.
I remember Fanny used to say that she would marry sooner
and better than you did; not but what she is exceedingly
fond of you — but so it happened to strike her. She will be
mistaken, however. I question whether Marianne now will
marry a man worth more than five or six hundred a-year at
the utmost, and I am very much deceived if you do not do
better. Dorsetshire ! I know very little of Dorsetshire, but,
my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of
it; and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and
myself among the earliest and best pleased of your visitors. "
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was
no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon; but it was
an expectation of too much pleasure to himself to be
relinquished, and he was really resolved on seeking an
intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting the marriage
by every possible attention. He had just compunction
enough for having done nothing for his sisters himself , to be
exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do a great
deal; and an offer from Colonel Brandon, or a legacy from
Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest means of atoning for his
Dwn neglect.
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home,
ind Sir John came in before their visit ended. Abundance
)f civilities passed on all sides. Sir John was ready to like
inybody, and though Mr. Dashwood did not seem to know
nuch about horses, he soon set him down as a very good-
tatured fellow; while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion
a his appearance to think his acquaintance worth having;
nd Mr. Dashwood went away delighted with both.
" I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny, " said
e, as he walked back with his sister. " Lady Middleton is
1 84 SEO^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT
really a most elegant woman ! such a woman as I am sure 4
Fanny will be glad to know. And Mrs. Jennings too, an
exceeding well-behaved woman, though not so elegant as her fc
daughter. Your sister need not have any scruple even of
visiting her, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case,
and very naturally; for we only knew that Mrs. Jennings
was the widow of a man who had got all his money in a low
way; and Fanny and Mrs. Ferrars were both strongly pre-
possessed that neither she nor her daughters were such kind
of women as Fanny would like to associate with. But now
I can carry her a most satisfactory account of both. "
CH^PTE^ XXXI V \
Mrs. John Dashwood had so much confidence in her hus-
band's judgment, that she waited the very next day both on :
Mrs. Jennings and her daughter; and her confidence was
rewarded by finding even the former, even the woman with
whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthy her {
notice ; and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of the j
most charming women in the world ! j
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood. r
There was a kind of cold-hearted selfishness on both sides, i
which mutually attracted them; and they sympathised with \
each other in an insipid propriety of demeanour, and a general
want of understanding. *
The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs.
John Dashwood to the good opinion of Lady Middleton, did
not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jennings, and to her she appeared „
nothing more than a little proud-looking woman of uncordial
address, who met her husband's sisters without any affection,
and almost without having anything to say to them ; for of \
the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street, she sat j
at least seven minutes and a half in silence.
Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not
chuse to ask, whether Edward was then in town; but nothing (
would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his name
before her, till able to tell her that his marriage with Miss
SE^SE JJ^D SEOiSIBILITT 185
Morton was resolved on, or till her husband's expectations on
Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believed them
still so very much attached to each other, that they could not
be too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.
The intelligence, however, which she would not give, soon
flowed from another quarter. Lucy came very shortly to
claim Elinor's compassion on being unable to see Edward,
though he had arrived in town with Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood.
He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fear of detection,
and though their mutual impatience to meet was not to be
told, they could do nothing at present but write.
Edward assured them himself of his being in town, within
a very short time, by twice calling in Berkeley Street. Twice
was his card found on the table, when they returned from
their morning's engagements. Elinor was pleased that he
had called, and still more pleased that she had missed him.
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the
Middletons, that though not much in the habit of giving
anything, they determined to give them a dinner, and soon
after their acquaintance began, invited them to dine in Harley
Street, where they had taken a very good house for three
months. Their sisters and Mrs. Jennings were invited like-
wise, and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel
Brandon, who, always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods
were, received his eager civilities with some surprise, but
much more pleasure. They were to meet Mrs. Ferrars; but
Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to be of the
party. The expectations of seeing her y however, was enough
to make her interested in the engagement; for though she
could now meet Edward's mother without that strong anxiety
which had once promised to attend such an introduction,
though she could now see her with perfect indifference, as to
her opinion of herself, her desire of being in company with
Mrs. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was luce, was as
lively as ever.
The interest with which she thus anticipated the party, was
soon afterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly,
by her hearing that the Miss Steeles were also to be at it.
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady
Middleton, so agreeable had their assiduities made them to
her, that though Lucy was certainly not elegant, and her
1 86 SE^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITT
sister not even genteel, she was as ready as Sir John to ask
them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and it
happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles,
as soon as the Dashwoods'invitation was known, that their
visit should begin a few days before the party took place.
Their claims to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood, as the
nieces of the gentleman who for many years had had the care
of her brother, might not have done much, however, towards
procuring them seats at her table; but as Lady Middleton's
guests they must be welcome; and Lucy, who had long
wanted to be personally known to the family, to have a
nearer view of their characters and her own difficulties, and
to have an opportunity of endeavouring to please them, had
seldom been happier in her life than she was on receiving
Mrs. John Dashwood's card.
On Elinor its effect was very different. She began imme-
diately to determine that Edward, who lived with his mother,
must be asked, as his mother was, to a party given by his
sister; and to see him for the first time, after all that [had]
passed, in the company of Lucy ! — she hardly knew how she
could bear it !
These apprehensions perhaps were not founded entirely
on reason, and certainly not at all on truth. They were
relieved, however, not by her own recollection, but by the
goodwill of Lucy, who believed herself to be inflicting a
severe disappointment when she told her that Edward
certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even
hoped to be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her,
that he was kept away by that extreme affection for herself,
which he could not conceal when they were together.
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the
two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-law.
" Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood I " said Lucy, as they
walked up the stairs together — for the Middletons arrived so
directly after Mrs. Jennings, that they all followed the servant
at the same time — " There is nobody here but you, that can
feel for me. I declare I can hardly stand. Good gracious !
— In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness
depends on — that is to be my mother ! " —
Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting
the possibility of its being Miss Morton's mother, rather than
SEO^SE A3{D SED^SIBILITT 187
her own, whom they were about to behold; but instead of
doing that, she assured her, and with great sincerity, that she
did pity her, — to the utter amazement of Lucy, who, though
really uncomfortable herself, hoped at least to be an object
of irrepressible envy to Elinor.
Mrs. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright, even to
formality, in her figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her
aspect. Her complexion was sallow: and her features small,
without beauty, and naturally without expression: but a
lucky contraction of the brow had rescued her countenance
from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving it the strong char-
acters of pride and ill-nature. She was not a woman of many
words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them
to the number of her ideas : and of the few syllables that did
escape her, not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom
she eyed with the spirited determination of disliking her at
all events.
Elinor could not now be made unhappy by this behaviour.
A few months ago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but
it was not in Mrs. Ferrars's power to distress her by it now;
and the difference of her manners to the Miss Steeles — a
difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more
— only amused her. She could not but smile to see the
graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very
person — for Lucy was particularly distinguished — whom of
all others, had they known as much as she did, they would
have been most anxious to mortify; while she herself, who
had comparatively no power to wound them, sat pointedly
slighted by both. But while she smiled at a graciousness so
misapplied, she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly
from which it sprung, nor observe the studied attentions with
which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance, without
thoroughly despising them all four.
Lucy was all exultation on being so honourably distin-
guished ; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teased about Dr.
Davi[e]s to be perfectly happy.
The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous,
and everything bespoke the Mistress's inclination for shew,
and the Master's ability to support it. In spite of the im-
provements and additions which were making to the Norland
estate, and in spite of its owner having once been within some
1 88 SE^SE A${p SEDiSIBILITT
thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a loss, nothing ^
gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to
infer from it; no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,
appeared — but there the deficiency was considerable. John
Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was worth
hearing, and his wife had still less. But there was no peculiar
disgrace in this, for it was very much the case with the chief
of their visitors, who almost all laboured under one or other of
these disqualifications for being agreeable — want of sense,
either natural or improved, want of elegance, want of spirits,
or want of temper.
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after
dinner, this poverty was particularly evident, for the gentle-
men had supplied the discourse with some variety — the
variety of politics, inclosing land, and breaking horses — but
then it was all over, and one subject only engaged the ladies
till coffee came in, which was the comparative heights of
Harry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton's second son William,
who were nearly of the same age.
Had both the children been there, the affair might have
been determined too easily by measuring them at once; but
as Harry only was present, it was all conjectural assertion on
both sides, and everybody had a right to be equally positive
in their opinion, and to repeat it over and over again as often
as they liked.
The parties stood thus :
The two mothers, though each really convinced that her
own son was the tallest, politely decided in favour of the other.
The two grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more
sincerity, were equally earnest in support of their own
descendant.
Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent
than the other, thought the boys were both remarkably tall
for their age, and could not conceive that there could be the
smallest difference in the world between them; and Miss
Steele, with yet greater address, gave it, as fast as she could,
in favour of each.
Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William's side,
by which she offended Mrs. Ferrars, and Fanny still more,
did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any farther asser-
tion; and Marianne, when called on for hers, offended them
i
SENSE AOtp SENSIBILITr 189
^ all by declaring that she had no opinion to give, as she had
never thought about it.
Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a
» very pretty pair of screens for her sister-in-law, which being
* now just mounted and brought home, ornamented her
present drawing-room; and these screens catching the eye
of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemen into
p the room, were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon
for his admiration.
" These are done by my eldest sister, " said he ; " and you,
k as a man of taste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them. I
P do not know whether you ever happened to see any of her
I performances before, but she is in general reckoned to draw
L extremely well. "
m The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to con-
^ noisseurship, warmly admired the screens, as he would have
1 done anything painted by Miss Dashwood; and the curiosity
I of the others being of course excited, they were handed round
[ for general inspection. Mrs. Ferrars, not aware of their being
f Elinor's work, particularly requested to look at them; and
^ after they had received the gratifying testimony of Lady
Middleton's approbation, Fanny presented them to her
mother, considerately informing her at the same time that
they were done by Miss Dashwood.
" Hum " — said Mrs. Ferrars — " very pretty, " — and with-
out regarding them at all, returned them to her daughter.
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother
had been quite rude enough, — for, colouring a little, she
immediately said,
" They are very pretty, ma'am — an't they? " But then
again, the dread of having been too civil, too encouraging
herself, probably came over her, for she presently added,
" Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton's'
style of painting, ma'am ? She does paint most delightfully.
How beautifully her last landscape is done ! "
" Beautifully indeed. But she does everything well. "
Marianne could not bear this. She was already greatly
displeased with Mrs. Ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of
another, at Elinor's expense, though she had not any notion
of what was principally meant by it, provoked her imme-
diately to sa}'with warmth,
190 SE2QE A^D SE^SIBILITT
" This is admiration of a very particular kind ! What is
Miss Morton to us? Who knows or who cares for her? It
is Elinor of whom we think and speak. "
And so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-
law's hands to admire them herself as they ought to be
admired.
Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing her-
self up more stiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter
[philippic] : " Miss Morton is Lord Morton's daughter. "
Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband was all in
a fright at his sister's audacity. Elinor was much more hurt
by Marianne's warmth, than she had been by what produced
it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as they were fixed on Mari-
anne, declared that he noticed only what was amiable in it;
the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister
slighted in the smallest point.
Marianne's feelings did not stop here. The cold insolence
of Mrs. Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to
her, to foretell such difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as her
own wounded heart taught her to think of with horror; and
urged by a strong impulse of affectionate sensibility, she
moved, after a moment, to her sister's chair, and putting one
arm round her neck, and one cheek close to hers, said in a
low, but eager voice :
" Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them. Don't let them
make you unhappy. "
She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome,
and hiding her face on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into tears.
Everybody's attention was called, and almost everybody
was concerned. Colonel Brandon rose up and went to them
without knowing what he did. Mrs. Jennings, with a very
intelligent " Ah ! poor dear, " immediately gave her her salts;
and Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the author
of this nervous distress, that he instantly changed his seat to
one close by Lucy Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief
account of the whole shocking affair.
In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered enough
to put an end to the bustle, and sit down among the rest;
though her spirits retained the impression of what had passed,
the whole evening.
" Poor Marianne ! " said her brother to Colonel Brandon
SE3^SE AD^D SED^SIBILITT .191
^ in a low voice, as soon as he could secure his attention, " She
has not such good health as her sister, — she is very nervous,
i — she has not Elinor's constitution; and one must allow that
? there is something very trying to a young woman who has
^ been a beauty, in the loss of her personal attractions. You
would not think it perhaps, but Marianne was remarkably
handsome a few months ago — quite as handsome as Elinor.
t Now you see it is all gone. "
CH*4PTE7{ XXXV
Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied. She
had found in her everything that could tend to make a
farther connection between the families undesirable. She
had seen enough of her pride, her meanness, and her deter-
mined prejudice against herself, to comprehend all the diffi-
culties that must have perplexed the engagement, and
retarded the marriage of Edward and herself, had he been
otherwise free; and she had seen almost enough to be thank-
ful for her own sake, that one greater obstacle preserved her
from suffering under any other of Mrs. Ferrars's creation,
preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice, or any
solicitude for her good opinion. Or at least, if she did not
bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's being fettered to
Lucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more amiable,
she ought to have rejoiced.
She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very much
elevated by the civility of Mrs. Ferrars; that her interest
and her vanity should so very much blind her, as to make
the attention which seemed only paid her because she was
not Elinor, appear a compliment to herself — or to allow her
to derive encouragement from a preference only given her,
because her real situation was unknown. But that it was so,
had not only been declared by Lucy's eyes at the time, but
was declared over again the next morning more openly; for,
at her particular desire, Lady Middleton set her down in
Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing Elinor alone, to tell
her how happy she was.
192 SE2QE A3^D SEOiSIBILITT
The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mrs.
Palmer, soon after she arrived, carried Mrs. Jennings away.
" My dear friend/'cried Lucy as soon as they were by
themselves, " I come to talk to you of my happiness. Could
anything be so flattering as Mrs. Ferrars's way of treating me
yesterday? So exceedingly affable as she was! You know
how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her; but the very
moment I was introduced, there was such an affability in
her behaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite
took a fancy to me. Now was not it so? You saw it all;
and was not you quite struck with it? "
" She was certainly very civil to you. "
" Civil! — Did you see nothing but only civility? I saw a
vast deal more — such kindness as fell to the share of nobody
but me ! No pride, no hauteur, and your sister just the same
— all sweetness and affability ! "
Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still
pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness,
and Elinor was obliged to go on.
" Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement, "
said she, " nothing could be more flattering than their
treatment of you; but as that was not the case — "
" I guessed you would say so, " replied Lucy quickly;
" but there was no reason in the world why Mrs. Ferrars
should seem to like me, if she did not — and her liking me is
everything. You shan't talk me out of my satisfaction.
I am sure it will all end well, and there will be no difficulties
at all, to what I used to think. Mrs. Ferrars is a charming
woman, and so is your sister. They are both delightful
women indeed ! — I wonder I should never hear you say how
agreeable Mrs. Dashwood was ! "
To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt
any.
" Are you ill, Miss Dashwood ? — you seem low — you don't
speak; — sure, you an't well. "
" I never was in better health. "
" I am glad of it with all my heart, but really you did not
look it. I should be so sorry to have you ill, — you, that have
been the greatest comfort to me in the world! — Heaven
knows what I should have done without your friendship. "
Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her
SE^SE AD^D SENSIBILITY 193
own success. But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she directly
replied:
" Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me,
and next to Edward's love, it is the greatest comfort I have.
Poor Edward ! But now, there is one good thing — we shall
be able to meet, and meet pretty often, for Lady Middleton's
delighted with Mrs. Dashwood, so we shall be a good deal in
Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends half his time
with his sister — besides, Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars
will visit now; and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister were both so
good to say more than once, they should always be glad to
see me. — They are such charming women ! — I am sure if ever
you tell your sister what I think of her, you cannot speak
too high. "
But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope
that she should tell her sister. Lucy continued :
" I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs.
Ferrars had took a dislike to me. If she had only made me
I a formal curtsey, for instance, without saying a word, and
never after had took any notice of me, and never looked at
me in a pleasant way — you know what I mean, — if I had been
treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should have gave
it all up in despair. I could not have stood it. For where
she does dislike, I know it is most violent. "
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil
triumph, by the door's being thrown open, the servant's
announcing Mr. Ferrars, and Edward's immediately walking
in.
It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of
^ each shewed that it was so. They all looked exceedingly
foolish; and Edward seemed to have as great an inclination
to walk out of the room again, as to advance farther into it.
The very circumstance, in its unpleasantest form, which they
would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallen on
them — they were not only all three together, but were
together without the relief of any other person. The ladies
recovered themselves first. It was not Lucy's business to
put herself forward, and the appearance of secrecy must still
be kept up. She could therefore only look her tenderness,
and after slightly addressing him, said no more.
But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she, for
N
194 SE^SE A3^D SE3i§IBILITT
his sake and her own, to do it well, that she forced herself
after a moment's recollection, to welcome him, with a look
and manner, that were almost easy and almost open; and
another struggle, another effort still improved them. She
would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor the consciousness
of some injustice towards herself, to deter her from saying
that she was happy to see him, and that she had very much
regretted being from home, when he called before in Berkeley
Street. She would not be frightened from paying him those
attentions which, as a friend and almost a relation, were his
due, by the observant eyes of Lucy, though she soon perceived
them to be narrowly watching her.
Her manners gave some reassurance to Edward, and he
had courage enough to sit down; but his embarrassment
still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion which the
case rendered reasonable, though his sex might make it rare;
for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy's, nor could his
conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.
Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined
to make no contribution to the comfort of the others, and
would not say a word; and almost everything that was said,
proceeded from Elinor, who was obliged to volunteer all the
information about her mother's health, their coming to town,
etc., which Edward ought to have inquired about, but never
did.
Her exertions did not stop here; for she soon afterwards
felt herself so heroically disposed as to determine, under
pretence of fetching Marianne, to leave the others by them-
selves; and she really did it, and that in the handsomest
manner, for she loitered away several minutes on the landing
place, with the most high-minded fortitude, before she went
to her sister. When that was once done, however, it was
time for the raptures of Edward to cease; for Marianne's
joy hurried her into the drawing-room immediately. Her
pleasure in seeing him was like every other of her feelings,
strong in itself and strongly spoken. She met him with sl
hand that would be taken, and a voice that expressed the?
affection of a sister.
" Dear Edward ! " she cried, " this is a moment of great
happiness! — This would almost make amends for every-
thing! "
SE2QE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 195
L Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved, but
f before such witnesses he dared not say half what he really
i felt. Again they all sat down, and for a moment or two all
I were silent ; while Marianne was looking with the most speak-
f ing tenderness, sometimes at Edward and sometimes at
\ Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each other should
i be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence. Edward was
t the first to speak, and it was to notice Marianne's altered
f looks, and express his fear of her not finding London agree
L with her.
" Oh! don't think of me! " she replied, with spirited
earnestness, though her eyes were filled with tears as she
spoke, " don't think of my health. Elinor is well, you see.
That must be enough for us both. "
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor
more easy, nor to conciliate the good-will of Lucy, who
looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expres-
sion.
" Do you like London? " said Edward, willing to say
anything that might introduce another subject.
" Not at all. I expected much pleasure in it, but I have
found none. The sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort
it has afforded; and, thank Heaven! you are what you
always were ! "
She paused — no one spoke.
" I think, Elinor, " she presently added, " we must employ
Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton. In a
week or two, I suppose, we shall be going; and, I trust,
Edward will not be very unwilling to accept the charge. "
Poor Edward muttered something; but what it was,
nobody knew, not even himself. But Marianne, who saw
J his agitation, and could easily trace it to whatever cause
best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied, and soon talked
of something else.
" We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street, yester-
_# day ! So dull, so wretchedly dull ! But I have much to say
4 to you on that head, which cannot be said now. "
J And with this admirable discretion did she defer the
^ assurance of her finding their mutual relatives more disagree-
able than ever, and of her being particularly disgusted with
his mother, till they were more in private.
196 SE2QE ADip SESiSIBILITT
" But why were you not there, Edward? — Why did you
not come? "
" I was engaged elsewhere. "
" Engaged ! — But what was that, when such friends were
to be met? "
" Perhaps, Miss Marianne, " cried Lucy, eager to take
some revenge on her, " you think young men never stand
upon engagements, if they have no mind to keep them, little
as well as great. "
Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely
insensible of the sting; for she calmly replied,
" Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure
that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street. And
I really believe he has the most delicate conscience in the
world ; the most scrupulous in performing every engagement,
however minute, and however it may make against his
interest or pleasure. He is the most fearful of giving pain,
of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being
selfish of anybody I ever saw. Edward, it is so, and I wiS
say it. What! are you never to hear yourself praised?
Then you must be no friend of mine; for those who will
accept of my love and esteem, must submit to my open
commendation. "
The nature of her commendation in the present case,
however, happened to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings
of two-thirds of her auditors, and was so very unexhilarating
to Edward, that he very soon got up to go away.
" Going so soon! " said Marianne; " my dear Edward,
this must not be. "
And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her per-
suasion that Lucy could not stay much longer. But even
this encouragement failed, for he would go; and Lucy, who
would have outstaid him had his visit lasted two hours,
soon afterwards went away.
" What can bring her here so often ! " said Marianne, on
her leaving them. " Could she not see that we wanted her
gone ! How teasing to Edward ! "
" Why so ? — we were all his friends, and Lucy has been
the longest known to him of any. It is but natural that he
should like to see her as well as ourselves. "
Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, " You know,
SEO^SE A2(p SENSIBILITY 197
Elinor, that this is a kind of talking which I cannot bear. If
you only hope to have your assertion contradicted, as I must
suppose to be the case, you ought to recollect that I am the
last person in the world to do it. I cannot descend to be
tricked out of assurances that are not really wanted. "
She then left the room; and Elinor dared not follow her
to say more, for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy
to Lucy, she could give no information that would convince
Marianne; and painful as the consequences of her still con-
tinuing in an error might be, she was obliged to submit to it.
All that she could hope, was that Edward would not often
expose her or himself to the distress of hearing Marianne's
mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part of
the pain that had attended their recent meeting — and this
she had every reason to expect.
CH^fPTE^ XXXVI
Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers an-
nounced to the world, that the lady of Thomas Palmer, Esq.,
was safely delivered of a son and heir; a very interesting
and satisfactory paragraph, at least to all those intimate
connections who knew it before.
This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness,
produced a temporary alteration in the disposal of her time,
and influenced in a like degree the engagements of her young
friends; for as she wished to be as much as possible with
k \ Charlotte, she went thither every morning as soon as she was
s I dressed, and did not return till late in the evening ; and the
I Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request of the Middletons,
(3 j spent the whole of every day in Conduit Street. For their
is own comfort, they would much rather have remained, at
least all the morning, in Mrs. Jennings's house; but it was
^m not a thing to be urged against the wishes of everybody.
k Their hours were therefore made over to Lady Middleton
and the two Miss Steeles, by whom their company was in
fact as little valued, as it was professedly sought.
198 SE2QE A3iD SENSIBILITT
They had too much sense to be desirable companions to
the former; and by the latter they were considered with a
jealous eye, as intruding on their ground, and sharing the
kindness which they wanted to monopolise. Though nothing
could be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour to
Elinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children, she
could not believe them good-natured; and because they
were fond of reading, she fancied them satirical: perhaps
without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical; but
that did not signify. It was censure in common use, and
easily given.
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.
It checked the idleness of one, and the business of the other.
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them,
and the flattery which Lucy was proud to think of and
administer at other times, she feared they would despise her
for offering. Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the
three by their presence ; and it was in their power to reconcile
her to it entirely. Would either of them only have given her
a full and minute account of the whole affair between Mari-
anne and Mr. Willoughby, she would have thought herself
amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best place by the fire
after dinner, which their arrival occasioned. But this con-
ciliation was not granted; for though she often threw out
expressions of pity for her sister to Elinor, and more than
once dropt a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before
Marianne, no effect was produced, but a look of indifference
from the former or of disgust in the latter. An effort even
yet lighter might have made her their friend. Would they
only have laughed at her about the Doctor! Uut so little
were they, any more than the others, inclined to oblige her,
that if Sir John dined from home, she might spend a whole
day without hearing any other raillery on the subject than
what she was kind enough to bestow on herself.
All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so
totally unsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she thought it a
delightful thing for the girls to be together; and generally
congratulated her young friends every night, on having
escaped the company of a stupid old woman so long. She
joined them sometimes at Sir John's, and sometimes at her
SEDQE A Dip SEDiSIBILITT 199
own house ; but wherever it was, she always came in excellent
spirits, full of delight and importance, attributing Charlotte's
well-doing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so
minute a detail of her situation, as only Miss Steele had
curiosity enough to desire. One thing did disturb her; and
of that she made her daily complaint. Mr. Palmer main-
tained the common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex,
of all infants being alike; and though she could plainly
perceive at different times the most striking resemblance be-
tween this baby and every one of his relations on both sides,
there was no convincing his father of it; no persuading him
to believe that it was not exactly like every other baby of
the same age; nor could he even be brought to acknowledge
the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the
world.
I come now to the relation of a misfortune which about
this time befell Mrs. John Dashwood. It so happened that
while her two sisters with Mrs. Jennings were first calling on
her in Harley Street, another of her acquaintance had dropt
in — a circumstance in itself not apparently likely to produce
evil to her. But while the imaginations of other people will
carry them away to form wrong judgments of our conduct,
and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happiness
must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance. In
the present instance, this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy
so far to outrun truth and probability, that on merely hear-
ing the name of the Miss Dashwoods, and understanding
them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters, she immediately con-
cluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and this mis-
construction produced within a day or two afterwards cards
of invitation for them, as well as for their brother and sister,
to a small musical party at her house. The consequence of
which was, that Mrs. John Dashwood was obliged to submit
not only to the exceedingly great inconvenience of sending
her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, what was still
worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing
to treat them with attention: and who could tell that they
might not expect to go out with her a second time? The
power of disappointing them, it was true, must always be
hers. But that was not enough; for when people are
determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be

200 SENSE AND SENSIBILITY
wrong, they feel injured by the expectation of anything
better from them.
Marianne had now been brought by degrees so much
into the habit of going out every day, that it was become a
matter of indifference to her whether she went or not: and
she prepared quietly and mechanically for every evening's
engagement, though without expecting the smallest amuse-
ment from any, and very often without knowing till the
last moment where it was to take her.
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly
indifferent, as not to bestow half the consideration on it,
during the whole of her toilette, which it received from Miss
Steele in the first five minutes of their being together, when
it was finished. Nothing escaped her minute observation
and general curiosity; she saw everything, and asked every-
thing; was never easy till she knew the price of every part
of Marianne's dress; could have guessed the number of her
gowns altogether with better judgment than Marianne her-
self, and was not without hopes of finding out before they
parted, how much her washing cost per week, and how much
she had every year to spend upon herself. The impertinence
of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was generally con-
cluded with a compliment, which though meant as its
douceur, was considered by Marianne as the greatest im-
pertinence of all; for after undergoing an examination into
the value and make of her gown, the colour of her shoes, and
the arrangement of her hair, she was almost sure of being
told that upon " her word she looked vastly smart, and she
dared to say would make a great many conquests. "
With such encouragement as this, was she dismissed on
the present occasion to her brother's carriage; which they
were ready to enter five minutes after it stopped at the door,
a punctuality not very agreeable to their sister-in-law, who
had preceded them to the house of her acquaintance, and
was there hoping for some delay on their part that might
inconvenience either herself or her coachman.
The events of the evening were not very remarkable. The
party, like other musical parties, comprehended a great many
people who had real taste for the performance, and a great
many more who had none at all; and the performers them-
selves were, as usual, in their own estimation, and that of
ay
at
BO-
OT
SED^SE A3^D SE2QIBILITT 201
their immediate friends, the first private performers in
England.
As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, she
made no scruple of turning away her eyes from the grand
pianoforte, whenever it suited her, and unrestrained even by
the presence of a harp, and a violoncello, would fix them at
pleasure on any other object in the room. In one of these
excursive glances she perceived among the group of young
men, the very he who had given them a lecture on toothpick-
cases at Gray's. She perceived him soon afterwards looking
at herself, and speaking familiarly to her brother; and had
just determined to find out his name from the latter, when
they both came towards her, and Mr. Dashwood introduced
him to her as Mr. Robert Ferrars.
He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head
into a bow which assured her as plainly as words could have
done, that he was exactly the coxcomb she had heard him
described to be by Lucy. Happy had it been for her if her
Tegard for Edward had depended less on his own merit, than
on the merit of his nearest relations. For then his brother's
bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the ill-
humour of his mother and sister would have begun. But
while she wondered at the difference of the two young men,
she did not find that the emptiness and conceit of the one put
her at all out of charity with the modesty and worth of the
other. Why they were different, Robert explained to her
himself in the course of a quarter of an hour's conversation;
for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extreme
%aucherie which he really believed kept him'from mixing in
proper society, he candidly and generously attributed it
much less to any natural deficiency, than to the misfortune
of a private education; while he himself, though probably
without any particular, any material superiority by nature,
merely from the advantage of a public school, was as well
fitted to mix in the world as any other man.
" Upon my soul, " he added, " I believe it is nothing more:
and so I often tell my mother, when she is grieving about it.
1 My dear madam,'I always say to her, * you must make
yourself easy. The evil is now irremediable, and it has been
entirely your own doing. Why would you be persuaded by
my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment, to place
202 SE2 > (SE JNp SED^IBILITT
Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time <
life? If you had only sent him to Westminster as we
myself, instead of sending him to Mr. Pratt's, all this w
have been prevented.'This is the way in which I al
consider the matter, and my mother is perfectly convi
of her error. "
Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because whai
might be her general estimation of the advantage of a p
school, she could not think of Edward's abode in Mr. Pi
family with any satisfaction.
" You reside in Devonshire, I think, " was his next obs <
tion, " in a cottage near Dawlish. "
Elinor set him right as to its situation, and it se <
rather surprising to him that anybody could live in De
shire without living near Dawlish. He bestowed his h <
approbation, however, on their species of house.
" For my own part, " said he, " I am excessively fond
cottage; there is always so much comfort, so much eleg
about them. And I protest, if I had any money to spa
should buy a little land and build one myself, within a j
distance of London, where I might drive myself down al
time, and collect a few friends about me and be happ]
advise everybody who is going to build, to build a cottage,
friend Lord Courtland came to me the other day on pui
to ask my advice, and laid before me three different pla
Bonomi's. I was to decide on the best of them. * My
Courtland,'said I, immediately throwing them all intc
fire, * do not adopt either of them, but by all means bu
cottage.'And that, I fancy, will be the end of it. "
" Some people imagine that there can be no accomm
tions, no space in a cottage; but this is all a mistake. 1
last month at my friend Elliott's near Dartford. ]
Elliott wished to give a dance. * But how can it be do:
said she;'my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it is t <
managed. There is not a room in this cottage that will
ten couple, and where can the supper be ?'J immedi*
saw that there could be no difficulty in it, so I said,'My
Lady Elliott, do not be uneasy. The dining parlour
admit eighteen couple with ease; card-tables may be p]
in the drawing-room; the library may be open for tea
other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in
!
rfc
*
be
SE3KSE A3^D SENSIBILITY 203
saloon.'Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought. We
measured the dining-room, and found it would hold exactly
eighteen couple, and the affair was arranged precisely after
my plan. So that in fact, you see, if people do but know
how to set about it, every comfort may be as well enjoyed in
a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling. "
Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved
the compliment of rational opposition.
As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than
his eldest sister, his mind was equally at liberty to fix on
anything else; and a thought struck him during the evening,
which he communicated to his wife, for her approbation
when they got home. The consideration of Mrs. Dennison's
mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, had suggested
the propriety of their being really invited to become such,
while Mrs. Jennings's engagements kept her from home.
The expense would be nothing, the inconvenience not more;
and it was altogether an attention which the delicacy of his
conscience pointed out to be requisite to its complete en-
franchisement from his promise to his father. Fanny was
startled at the proposal.
" I do not see how it can be done, " said she, " without
affronting Lady Middleton, for they spend every day with
her; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it. You
know I am always ready to pay them any attention in my
power, as my taking them out this evening shews. But
they are Lady Middleton's visitors. How can I ask them
away from her? "
Her husband, but with great humility, did not see the force
of her objection. " They had already spent a week in this
manner in Conduit Street, and Lady Middleton could not be
displeased at their giving the same number of days to such
near relations. "
Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigour,
" My love, I would ask them with all my heart, if it was
in my power. But I had just settled within myself to ask the
Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us. They are very well-
behaved, good kind of girls; and I think the attention is due
^ to them, as their uncle did so very well by Edward. We can
® ask your sisters some other year, you know; but the Miss
204 SENSE AD < D SENSIBILITY
Steeles may not be in town any more. I am sure you will
like them; indeed, you do like them, you know, very much
already, and so does my mother; and they are such favourites
with Harry! "
Mr. Dashwood was convinced. He saw the necessity of
inviting the Miss Steeles immediately, and his conscience
was pacified by the resolution of inviting his sisters another
year; at the same time, however, slyly suspecting that
another year would make the invitation needless by bringing
Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne as
their visitor.
Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit
that had secured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy, to
request her company and her sister's for some days in Harley
Street, as soon as Lady Middleton could spare them. This
was enough to make Lucy really and reasonably happy.
Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her herself,
cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views ! Such
an opportunity of being with Edward and his family was,
above all things, the most material to her interest, and such
an invitation the most gratifying to her feelings ! It was an
advantage that could not be too gratefully acknowledged,
nor too speedily made use of; and the visit to Lady Middle-
ton, which had not before had any precise limits, was in-
stantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two
days'time.
When the note was shewn to Elinor, as it was within ten
minutes after its arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some
share in the expectations of Lucy; for such a mark of un-
common kindness, vouchsafed on so short an acquaintance,
seemed to declare that the good-will towards her arose from
something more than merely malice against herself, and
might be brought, by time and address, to do everything
that Lucy wished. Her flattery had already subdued the
pride of Lady Middleton, and made an entry into the close
heart of Mrs. John Dashwood; and these were effects that
laid open the probability of greater.
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that
reached Elinor of their influence there, strengthened her
expectation of the event. Sir John, who called on them
more than once, brought home such accounts of the favour
SE^SE AND SENSIBILITY 205
they were in as must be universally striking. Mrs. Dash wood
had never been so much pleased with any young women in
her life as she was with them; had given each of them a
needle-book, made by some emigrant; called Lucy by her
Christian name; and did not know whether she should ever
be able to part with them.
CH^tPTE^ XXXVII
Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her
mother felt it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her
time to her; and contenting herself with visiting her once or
twice a day, returned from that period to her own home, and
her own habits, in which she found the Miss Dashwoods very
ready to reassume their former share.
About the third or fourth morning after their being thus
re-settled in Berkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning
from her ordinary visit to Mrs. Palmer, entered the drawing-
room, where Elinor was sitting by herself, with an air of such
H hurrying importance as prepared her to hear something
m l wonderful ; and giving her time only to form that idea, began
*! directly to justify it by saying,
/ " Lord ! my dear Miss Dashwood ! have you heard the
-| news? "
" No, ma'am. What is it ? "
" Something so strange ! But you shall hear it all. When
I got to Mr. Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about
the child. She was sure it was very ill — it cried, and fretted,
and was all over pimples. So I looked at it directly, and
'Lord ! my dear,'says I,'it is nothing in the world but the
red-gum;'and nurse said just the same. But Charlotte,
she would not be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent for; and
luckily he happened to be just come in from Harley Street, so
he stepped over directly, and as soon as ever he saw the child,
he said just as we did, that it was nothing in the world but
the red-gum, and then Charlotte was easy. And so, just as
he was going away again, it came into my head, I am sure I
do not know how I happened to think of it, but it came into
206 SE^SE A^D SEDiSIBILITT
my head to ask him if there was any news. So upon th
he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed
know something or other, and at last he said in a whisp
'For fear any unpleasant report should reach the you
ladies under your care as to their sister's indisposition
think it advisable to say, that I believe there is no gn
reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. Dashwood will do very well.
" What! is Fanny ill? "
" That is exactly what I said, my dear.'Lord !'says
1 is Mrs. Dashwood ill?'So then it all came out; and 1
long and the short of the matter, by all I can learn, seems [
be this : — Mr. Edward Ferrars, the very young man I used
joke with you about (but, however, as it turns out, I i
monstrous glad there never was anything in it), Mr. Edwa
Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemor
to my cousin Lucy ! — There's for you, my dear ! — And nol
creature knowing a syllable of the matter except Nancy!
Could you have believed such a thing possible? — There is
great wonder in their liking one another; but that matto
should be brought so forward between them, and nobo
suspect it! That is strange! — I never happened to see the
together, or I am sure I should have found it out direct
Well, and so this was kept a great secret, for fear of M
Ferrars ; and neither she nor your brother or sister suspect
a word of the matter, — till this very morning, poor Nanc
who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but no conjun
popt it all out.'Lord !'thinks she to herself,'they are ;
so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty abo
it;'and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting s
alone at her carpet-work, little suspecting what was to cor
— for she had just been saying to your brother, only fi
minutes before, that she thought to make a match betwe
Edward and some lord's daughter or other, I forget who. !
you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pric
She fell into violent hysterics immediately, with such screai
as reached your brother's ears, as he was sitting in his o\
dressing-room downstairs, thinking about writing a lett
to his steward in the country. So up he flew directly, and
terrible scene took place, for Lucy was come to them by th
time, little dreaming what was going on. Poor soul ! I pi
her. And I must say, I think she was used very hardl
SE^SE A3iD SENSIBILITY 207
for your sister scolded like any fury, and soon drove her into
a fainting fit. Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried
bitterly; and your brother, he walked about the room, and
said he did not know what to do. Mrs. Dashwood declared
they should not stay a minute longer in the house, and your
brother was forced to go down upon his knees too, to persuade
her to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes.
Then she fell into hysterics again, and he was so frightened
that he would send for Mr. Donavan, and Mr. Donavan found
the house in all this uproar. The carriage was at the door
ready to take my poor cousins away, and they were just
stepping in as he came off; poor Lucy in such a condition,
he says, she could hardly walk; and Nancy, she was almost
as bad. I declare, I have no patience with your sister; and
I hope, with all my heart, it will be a match in spite of her.
Lord ! what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when he hears
of it ! To have his love used so scornfully ! for they say he is
monstrous fond of her, as well he may. I should not wonder,
if he was to be in the greatest of a passion ! and Mr. Donavan
thinks just the same. He and I had a great deal of talk
about it; and the best of all is, that he is gone back again to
Harley Street, that he may be within call when Mrs. Ferrars
is told of it, for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins
left the house, for your sister was sure she would be in hysterics
too; and so she may, for what I care. I have no pity for
either of them. I have no notion of people's making such
a to-do about money and greatness. There is no reason on
earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy should not marry; for I
am sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very well by her son;
and though Lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows
better than anybody how to make the most of everything;
and I dare say, if Mrs. Ferrars would only allow him five
hundred a-year, she would make as good an appearance with
it as anybody else would with eight. Lord ! how snug they
might live in such another cottage as yours — or a little bigger
— with two maids and two men; and I believe I could help
them to a housemaid, for my Betty has a sister out of place,
that would fit them exactly. "
Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time
enough to collect her thoughts, she was able to give such an
answer, and make such observations, as the subject might
208 SEO^SE A^D SENSIBILITY
naturally be supposed to produce. Happy to find tl
was not suspected of any extraordinary interest in it
Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might
case) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to E <
and happy above all the rest, in the absence of Marian
felt very well able to speak of the affair without
rassment, and to give her judgment, as she believe <
impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in
She could hardly determine what her own expecta
its event really was; — though she earnestly tried tc
away the notion of its being possible to end otherwise \
than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy. What Mrs. ]
would say and do, though there could not be a doub
nature, she was anxious to hear; and still more anx:
know how Edward would conduct himself. For h
felt much compassion; — for Lucy very little — and it c
some pains to procure that little; — for the rest of the
none at all.
As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject,
soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its disc
— No time was to be lost in undeceiving her, in maki
acquainted with the real truth, and in endeavouring U
her to hear it talked of by others, without betraying tl
felt any uneasiness for her sister, or any resentment i
Edward.
Elinor's office was a painful one. — She was going to i
what she really believed to be her sister's chief consolai
to give such particulars of Edward, as she feared wou
him for ever in her good opinion, — and to make Ma:
by. a resemblance in their situations, which to her
would seem strong, feel all her own disappointmen
again. But unwelcome as such a task must be,
necessary to be done, and Elinor therefore hastened 1
form it.
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own f c
or to represent herself as suffering much, any otherwis
as the self-command she had practised since her first
ledge of Edward's engagement, might suggest a hint o
was practicable to Marianne. Her narration was cle
simple; and though it could not be given without en
it was not accompanied by violent agitation, nor imp
SEO^SE A3iD SEOiSIBILITT 209
grief. — That belonged rather to the hearer, for Marianne
e| listened with horror, and cried excessively. Elinor was to be
k| the comforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in
zJj theirs; and all the comfort that could be given by assurances
sz of her own composure of mind, and a very earnest vindica-
r- tion of Edward from every charge but of imprudence, was
readily offered.
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither.
Edward seemed a second Willoughby; and acknowledging
as Elinor did, that she had loved him most sincerely, could
she feel less than herself! As for Lucy Steele, she considered
E5 her so totally unamiable, so absolutely incapable of attaching
e a sensible man, that she could not be persuaded at first to
believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection of
Edward for her. She would not even admit it to have been
natural; and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so,
by that which only could convince her, a better knowledge
of mankind.
Her first communication had reached no farther than to
state the fact of the engagement, and the length of time it
had existed. Marianne's feelings had then broken in, and
put an end to all regularity of detail; and for some time all
that could be done was to soothe her distress, lessen her
alarms, and combat her resentment. The first question on
her side, which led to farther particulars, was —
" How long has this been known to you, Elinor? Has he
written to you? "
" I have known it these four months. When Lucy first
came to Barton Park last November, she told me in confidence
of her engagement. "
At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonish-
ment which her lips could not utter. After a pause of
wonder, she exclaimed —
" Four months ! — Have you known of this four
months? " —
Elinor confirmed it.
" What! — while attending me in all my misery, has this
been on your heart? and I have reproached you for being
happy ! " —
" It was not fit that you should then know how much I
was the reverse. " —
210 SENgE A3 < p SES^SIBILITT
" Four months ! " cried Marianne again. " So cal
cheerful! How have you been supported? "
" By feeling that I was doing my duty. My pron
Lucy obliged me to be secret. I owed it to her, the
to avoid giving any hint of the truth; and I owed it
family and friends not to create in them a solicitude
me, which it could not be in my power to satisfy. ,,
Marianne seemed much struck.
" I have very often wished to undeceive yourself a
mother, " added Elinor; " and once or twice I have atte
it; — but without betraying my trust, I never could hai
vinced you. "
" Four months ! — and yet you loved him ! "
" Yes. But I did not love only him; — and while th
fort of others was dear to me, I was glad to spare ther
knowing how much I felt. Now, I can think and spea
with little emotion. I would not have you suffer (
account; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially i
I have many things to support me. I am not consci
having provoked the disappointment by any imprudc
my own, and I have borne it as much as possible v >
spreading it farther. I acquit Edward of all essentia
conduct. I wish him very happy; and I am so sure
always doing his duty, that though now he may h
some regret, in the end he must become so. Lucy dc
want sense, and that is the foundation on which ever
good may be built. And after all, Marianne, after all
bewitching in the idea of a single and constant attacl
and all that can be said of one's happiness depending e
on any particular person, it is not meant — it is not fil
not possible that it should be so. Edward will marry
he will marry a woman superior in person and understs
to half her sex; and time and habit will teach him to
that he ever thought another superior to her. "
" If such is your way of thinking, " said Marianne,'
loss of what is most valued is so easily to be made
something else, your resolution, your self-comman
perhaps a little less to be wondered at. They are b:
more within my comprehension. "
" I understand you. You do not suppose that ]
ever felt much. For four months, Marianne, I have ]
SE3^SE AD^D SED^SIBILITT 211
this hanging on my mind, without being at liberty to speak
of it to a single creature; knowing that it would make you
and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to
you, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least. It was
told me — it was in a manner forced on me by the very person
herself whose prior engagement ruined all my prospects ; and
told me, as I thought, with triumph. This person's sus-
picions, therefore, I have had to oppose, by endeavouring to
appear indifferent where I have been most deeply interested.
And it has not been only once; I have had her hopes and
exultation to listen to again and again. I have known myself
to be divided from Edward for ever, without hearing one
circumstance that could make me less desire the connection.
Nothing has proved him unworthy; nor has anything de-
clared him indifferent to me. I have had to contend against
the unkindness of his sister, and the insolence of his mother,
and have suffered the punishment of an attachment without
enjoying its advantages. And all this has been going on at
a time when, as you too well know, it has not been my only
unhappiness. If you can think me capable of ever feeling —
surely you may suppose that I have suffered now. The com-
posure of mind with which I have brought myself at present
to consider the matter, the consolation that I have been
willing to admit, have been the effect of constant and painful
exertion; — they did not spring up of themselves; they did
not occur to relieve my spirits at first, — no, Marianne.
Then, if I had not been bound to silence, perhaps nothing
could have kept me entirely — not even what I owed to my
dearest friends — from openly shewing that I was very
unhappy. "
Marianne was quite subdued.
" Oh! Elinor, " she cried, " you have made me hate myself
for ever. How barbarous have I been to you! — you, who
have been my only comfort, who have borne with me in all
my misery, who have seemed to be only suffering for me ! —
Is this my gratitude? Is this the only return I can make
you ? Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have been
trying to do it away. "
The tenderest caresses followed this confession. In such a
frame of mind as she was now in, Elinor had no difficulty
in obtaining from her whatever promise she required; and,
212 SE^SE A3 < £ > SES^IBILITT
at her request, Marianne engaged never to speak of the affa
to any one with the least appearance of bitterness; — to me <
Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of dislike 1
her; — and even to see Edward himself, if chance should brir
them together, without any diminution of her usual cordialit
These were great concessions, but where Marianne felt thi
she had injured, no reparation could be too much for her 1
make.
She performed her promise of being discreet to admiration
She attended to all that Mrs. Jennings had to say upon tl
subject with an unchanging complexion, dissented from to
in nothing, and was heard three times to say, " Yes, ma'am.
She listened to her praise of Lucy with only moving from or
chair to another, and when Mrs. Jennings talked of Edward
affection, it cost her only a spasm in her throat. Sue
advances towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor fe
equal to anything herself.
The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a vis
from their brother, who came with a most serious aspect 1
talk over the dreadful affair, and bring them news of h
wife.
" You have heard, I suppose, " said he with great solemnit;
as soon as he was seated, " of the very shocking discovei
that took place under our roof yesterday. "
They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a momei
for speech.
" Your sister, " he continued, " has suffered dreadfull]
Mrs. Ferrars too — in short, it has been a scene of such con
plicated distress; but I will hope that the storm may b
weathered without our being, any of us, quite overcome
Poor Fanny! she was in hysterics all yesterday. But
would not alarm you too much. Donavan says there i
nothing materially to be apprehended; her constitution is
good one, and her resolution equal to anything. She ha
borne it all with the fortitude of an angel! She says sh
never shall think well of anybody again; and one cannc
wonder at it, after being so deceived! — meeting with sue
ingratitude, where so much kindness had been shewn, s
much confidence had been placed. It was quite out of th
benevolence of her heart that she had asked these youn
women to her house; merely because she thought the
SE$(SE A^D SEZQIBILITT 213
deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behaved girls,
and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we both
wished very much to have invited you and Marianne to be
with us, while your kind friend there was attending her
daughter. And now to be so rewarded ! * I wish with all
my heart/ says poor Fanny in her affectionate way,'that
we had asked your sisters instead of them.'"
Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done, he
went on.
" What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered when first Fanny broke
it to her, is not to be described. While she with the truest
affection had been planning a most eligible connection for
him, was it to be supposed that he could be all the time
secretly engaged to another person ! — such a suspicion could
never have entered her head ! If she suspected any prepos-
session elsewhere, it could not be in that quarter.'There, to
be sure/ said she,'I might have thought myself safe.'She
was quite in an agony. We consulted together, however, as
to what should be done, and at last she determined to send for
Edward. He came. But I am sorry to relate what ensued.
All that Mrs. Ferrars could say to make him put an end to
the engagement, assisted, too, as you may well suppose by
. my arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail.
Duty, affection, everything was disregarded. I never
thought Edward so stubborn, so unfeeling, before. His
mother explained to him her liberal designs, in case of his
M marrying Miss Morton; told him she would settle on him the
®\ Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax, brings in a good
H thousand a-year; offered even, when matters grew desperate,
£| to make it twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if he
still persisted in this low connection, represented to him the
certain penury that must attend the match. His own two
thousand pounds she protested should be his all; she would
never see him again; and so far would she be from affording
him the smallest assistance, that if he were to enter into any
profession with a view of better support, she would do all in
her power to prevent his advancing in it. "
Here Marianne in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped her
hands together and cried, " Gracious God ! can this be
possible ! "
" Well may you wonder, Marianne, " replied her brother,
2i 4 SE2QE A3^D SE^SIBILITT
" at the obstinacy which could resist such arguments as
these. Your exclamation is very natural. "
Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her
promises, and forbore.
" All this, however, " he continued, " was urged in vain.
Edward said very little ; but what he did say was in the most
determined manner. Nothing should prevail on him to give
up his engagement. He would stand to it, cost him what
it might. "
" Then, " cried Mrs. Jennings, with blunt sincerity, no
longer able to be silent, " he has acted like an honest man.
I beg your pardon, Mr. Dashwood, but if he had done other-
wise, I should have thought him a rascal. I have some little
concern in the business, as well as yourself, for Lucy Steele
is my cousin, and I believe there is not a better kind of girl
in the world, nor one who more deserves a good husband. "
John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature
was calm, not open to provocation, and he never wished to
offend anybody, especially anybody of good fortune. He
therefore replied, without any resentment —
" I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation
of yours, madam. Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare say, a very
deserving young woman, but in the present case, you know,
the connection must be impossible. And to have entered
into a secret engagement with a young man under her uncle's
care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune
as Mrs. Ferrars, is perhaps altogether a little extraordinary.
In short, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any
person whom you have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings. We all
wish her extremely happy, and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct
throughout the whole has been such as every conscientious,
good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt. It has
been dignified and liberal. Edward has drawn his own lot,
and I fear it will be a bad one. "
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension ; and Elinor's
heart wrung for the feelings of Edward, while braving his
mother's threats, for a woman who could not reward him.
" Well, sir, " said Mrs. Jennings, " and how did it end? "
" I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture —
Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother's notice. He
left her house yesterday, but where he is gone, or whether he
SEO^SE A^p SE2QIBILITT 215
is still in town, I do not know ; for we of course can make no
inquiry. "
" Poor young man ! and what is to become of him? "
" What indeed, ma'am ! It is a melancholy consideration.
Bom to the prospect of such affluence I I cannot conceive a
situation more deplorable. The interest of two thousand
pounds — how can a man live on it! — and when to that is
added the recollection that he might, but for his own folly,
within three months have been in the receipt of two thousand
five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton has thirty thousand
pounds), I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condi-
tion. We must all feel for him; and the more so, because
it is totally out of our power to assist him. ,,
" Poor young man! " cried Mrs. Jennings, " lam sure he
should be very welcome to bed and board at my house; and
so I would tell him, if I could see him. It is not fit that he
should be living about at his own charge now, at lodgings
and taverns. "
Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards
Edward, though she could not forbear smiling at the form
of it.
" If he would only have done as well by himself, " said
j John Dashwood, " as all his friends were disposed to do by
him, he might now have been in his proper situation, and
would have wanted for nothing. But as it is, it must be out
of anybody's power to assist him. And there is one thing
more preparing against him, which must be worse than all —
his mother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit,
to settle thai estate upon Robert immediately, which might
have been Edward's on proper conditions. I left her this
morning with her lawyer, talking over the business. "
" Well ! " said Mrs. Jennings, " that is her revenge. Every-
body has a way of their own. But I don't think mine would
be to make one son independent because another had
plagued me. "
y Marianne got up, and walked about the room.
" Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man, "
V continued John, " than to see his younger brother in pos-
session of an estate which might have been his own? Poor
Edward! I feel for him sincerely. "
A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion,
e-
216 SEZ^SE AND SEJiSIBILITr
concluded his visit; and with repeated assurances to his ^
sisters that he really believed there was no material danger
in Fanny's indisposition, and that they need not therefore be
very uneasy about it, he went away; leaving the three ladies
unanimous in their sentiments on the present occasion, as
far at least as it regarded Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, the
Dashwoods', and Edward's.
Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted
the room; and as her vehemence made reserve impossible in
Elinor, and unnecessary in Mrs. Jennings, they all joined in
a very spirited critique upon the party.
CH^PTE^XXXFIII
Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's
conduct, but only Elinor and Marianne understood its true
merit. They only knew how little he had had to tempt him
to be disobedient, and how small was the consolation, beyond
the consciousness of doing right, that could remain to him
in the loss of friends and fortune. Elinor gloried in his
integrity; and Marianne forgave all his offences in com-
passion for his punishment. But though confidence between
them was, by this public discovery, restored to its proper
state, it was not a subject on which either of them were fond
of dwelling when alone. Elinor avoided it upon principle,
as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts, by the too
warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of
Edward's continued affection for herself, which she rather
wished to do away; and Marianne's courage soon failed her,
in trying to converse upon a topic which always left her more
dissatisfied with herself than ever, by the comparison it
necessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and her own.
She felt all the force of that comparison; but not as her
sister had hoped, to urge her to exertion now; she felt it
with all the pain of continual self-reproach, regretted most
bitterly that she had never exerted herself before; but it
brought only the torture of penitence, without the hope of
amendment. Her mind was so much weakened that she still
SE^SE A^D SE^SIBILITr 217
fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it only
dispirited her more.
Nothing new was heard by them for a day or two after-
wards, of affairs in Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings.
But though so much of the matter was known to them
already, that Mrs. Jennings might have had enough to do in
spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking after
more, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort
and inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing
but the hindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented
her going to them within that time.
The third day succeeding their knowledge of the parti-
culars, was so fine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to
Kensington Gardens, though it was only the second week in
March. Mrs. Jennings and Elinor were of the number; but
Marianne who knew that the Willoughbys were again in
town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose
rather to stay at home, than venture into so public a place.
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined them
soon after they entered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry
that by her continuing with them, and engaging all Mrs.
Jennings's conversation, she was herself left to quiet reflec-
tion. She saw nothing of the Willoughbys, nothing of
Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could
by any chance, whether grave or gay, be interesting to her.
But at last, she found herself, with some surprise, accosted by
Miss Steele, who, though looking rather shy, expressed great
satisfaction in meeting them, and on receiving encouragement
from the particular kindness of Mrs. Jennings, left her own
party for a short time, to join theirs. Mrs. Jennings imme-
diately whispered to Elinor—
" Get it all out of her, my dear. She will tell you anything
if you ask. You see I cannot leave Mrs. Clarke.''
It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity, and
Elinor's too, that she would tell anything without being asked,
for nothing would otherwise have been learnt.
" I am so glad to meet you, " said Miss Steele, taking her
familiarly by the arm, " for I wanted to see you of all things
in the world; " and then lowering her voice, " I suppose Mrs.
Jennings has heard all about it. Is she angry ? "
" Not at all, I believe, with you. "
J
2i 8 SEO^SE A^D SE^QIBILITr
" That is a good thing. And Lady Middleton, is she
angry? "
" I cannot suppose it possible that she should. "
" I am monstrous glad of it. Good gracious! I have had
such a time of it I I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life.
She vowed at first she would never trim me up a new bonnet,
nor do anything else for me again, so long as she lived; but
now she is quite come to, and we are as good friends as ever.
Look, she made me this bow to my hat, and put in the feather
last night. There now, you are going to laugh at me too.
But why should not I wear pink ribbons ? I do not care if
it is the Doctor's favourite colour. I am sure, for my part,
I should never have known he did like it better than any other
colour, if he had not happened to say so. My cousins have
been so plaguing me! I declare sometimes, I do not know
which way to look before them. "
She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had
nothing to say, and therefore soon judged it expedient to
find her way back again to the first.
" Well, but, Miss Dashwood, " speaking triumphantly,
" people may say what they chuse about Mr. Ferrars's
declaring he would not have Lucy, for it's no such a thing, I
can tell you; and it's quite a shame for such ill-natured
reports to be spread abroad. Whatever Lucy might think
about it herself, you know it was no business of other people
to set it down for certain. "
" I never heard anything of the kind hinted at before, I
assure you, " said Elinor.
" Oh! did not you? But it was said, I know very well,
and by more than one ; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks, that
nobody in their senses could expect Mr. Ferrars to give up a
woman like Miss Morton, with thirty thousand pounds to her
fortune, for Lucy Steele, that had nothing at all; and I had
it from Miss Sparks myself. And besides that, my cousin
Richard said himself, that when it came to the point, he was
afraid Mr. Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not
come near us for three days, I could not tell what to think
myself; and I believe in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost;
for we came away from your brother's Wednesday, and we
saw nothing of him hot all Thursday, Friday, and Saturday*
and did not know what was become with him. Once Lucy
SE2QE ADiD SE^SIBILITT 219
thought to write to him, but then her spirit rose against that.
However, this morning he came, just as we came home from
church ; and then it all came out, how he had been sent for
Wednesday to Harley Street, and been talked to by his
mother and all of them, and how he had declared before
them all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and nobody but
Lucy would he have. And how he had been so worried by
what passed, that as soon as he had went away from his
mother's house, he had got upon his horse, and rid into the
country somewhere or other; and how he had staid about at
an inn all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the better
of it. And after thinking it all over and over again, he said
it seemed to him as if, now he had no fortune, and no nothing
at all, it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the engage-
ment, because it must be for her loss, for he had nothing but
two thousand pounds, and no hope of anything else; and if he
was to go into orders, as he had some thoughts, he could get
nothing but a curacy, and how was they to live upon that? —
He could not bear to think of her doing no better, and so he
begged, if she had the least mind for it, to put an end to the
matter directly, and leave him to shift for himself. I heard
him say all this as plain as could possibly be. And it was
entirely for her sake, and upon her account, that he said a
word about being off, and not upon his own. I will take my
oath he never dropt a syllable of being tired of her, or of
wishing to marry Miss Morton, or anything like it. But,
to be sure, Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking;
so she told him directly (with a great deal about sweet and "
love, you know, and all that — Oh, la ! one can't repeat such
kind of things, you know) — she told him directly, she had
not the least mind in the world to be off, for she could live
with him upon a trifle, and how little soever he might have,
she should be very glad to have it all, you know, or something
of the kind. So then he was monstrous happy, and talked on
some time about what they should do, and they agreed he
should take orders directly, and they must wait to be married
till he got a living. And just then I could not hear any more,
for my cousin called from below to tell me Mrs. Richardson
was come in her coach, and would take one of us to Kensing-
ton Gardens; so I was forced to go into the room and inter-
rupt them, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she did
I
220 SE^SE A3^D SEOiSIBILITT
not care to leave Edward; so I just run upstairs and put on ih
a pair of silk stockings, and came off with the Richardsons. "
" I do not understand what you mean by interrupting
them, " said Elinor; " you were all in the same room together,
were not you ? "
" No indeed! not us. La! Miss Dashwood, do you think
people make love when anybody else is by ? Oh ! for shame ?
— To be sure, you must know better than that. " (Laughing
affectedly.) — " No, no; they were shut up in the drawing-
room together, and all I heard was only by listening at the
door. "
" How! " cried Elinor; " have you been repeating to me
what you only learnt yourself by listening at the door? I
am sorry I did not know it before; for I certainly would not
have suffered you to give me particulars of a conversation
which you ought not to have known yourself. How could
you behave so unfairly by your sister? "
" Oh, la ! there is nothing in that, I only stood at the door,
and heard what I could. And I am sure Lucy would have
done just the same by me; for, a year or two back, when
Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together, she never fes
made any bones of hiding in a closet, or behind a chimney-
board, on purpose to hear what we said. "
Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Miss Steele
could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes from what was £
uppermost in her mind.
" Edward talks of going to Oxford soon, " said she, " but
now he is lodging at No. — , Pall Mall. What an ill-natured
woman his mother is, an't she ? And your brother and sister m
were not very kind ! However, I shan't say anything against
them to you ; and to be sure they did send us home in then-
own chariot, which was more than I looked for. And for my «**
part, I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask us for
the huswif es she had gave us a day or two before ; but how-
ever, nothing was said about them, and I took care to keep ^
mine out of sight. Edward have got some business at ~
Oxford, he says, so he must go there for a time: and after %
that, as soon as he can light upon a bishop, he will be ordained, p
I wonder what curacy he will get ! — Good gracious ! " (giggling £
as she spoke) " I'd lay my life I know what my cousins will
say, when they hear of it. They will tell me I should write to
F
f
SEO^SE JOiD SE^SIBILITT 221
lie Doctor, to get Edward the curacy of his new living. I
enow they will; but I am sure I would not do such a thing
:or all the world. —'La!'I shall say directly,'I wonder how
jrou could think of such a thing. I write to the Doctor,
ndeed!'"
" Well, " said Elinor, " it- is a comfort to be prepared
against the worst. You have got your answer ready. "
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but
the approach of her own party made another more necessary.
" Oh, la ! here come tie Richardsons. I had a vast deal
more to say to you, but I must not stay away from them not
any longer. I assure you they are very genteel people. He
makes a monstrous deal of money, and they keep their own
coach. I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jennings about it
myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is not
in anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same; and if
anything should happen to take you and your sister away,
and Mrs. Jennings should want company, I am sure we should
be very glad to come and stay with her for as long a time as
she likes. I suppose Lady Middleton won't ask us any more
this bout. Good-bye; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not
here. Remember me kindly to her. La! if you have not
got your spotted muslin on! — I wonder you was not afraid
of its being torn. "
Such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time
only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings,
before her company was claimed by Mrs. Richardson: and
Elinor was left in possession of knowledge which might feed
her powers of reflection some time, though she had learnt
very little more than what had been already foreseen and
foreplanned in her own mind. Edward's marriage with
Lucy was as firmly determined on, and the time of its taking
place remained as absolutely uncertain, as she had concluded
it would be; — everything depended, exactly after her expecta-
tion, on his getting that preferment, of which, at present,
there seemed not tie smallest chance.
As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings.
was eager for information; but as Elinor wished to spread
is little as possible intelligence that had in the first place
Deen so unfairly obtained, she confined herself to the brief
repetition of such simple particulars, as she felt assured that
t
222 SE^SE A^iD SE3QIBILITT j
Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, would chuse to y
have known. The continuance of their engagement, and the [
means that were to be taken for promoting its end, was all •;
her communication; and this produced from Mrs. Jennings;
the following natural remark: — I
" Wait for his having a living ! — aye, we all know how that > :
will end; — they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding no \
good comes of it, will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds *
a-year, with the interest of his two thousand pounds, and \
what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr. Pratt can give her.— r
Then they will have a child every year ! and Lord help'em ! /
how poor they will be! — I must see what I can give them
towards furnishing their house. Two maids and two men ,
indeed ! — as I talked of t'other day. — No, no, they must get j
a stout girl of all works. — Betty's sister would never do for **
them now " j
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the twopenny «
post, from Lucy herself. It was as follows : — J
" Bartlett's Buildings, March
" I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the liberty I
take of writing to her; but I know your friendship for me^
will make you pleased to hear such a good account of myself *
and my dear Edward, after all the troubles we have went
through lately, therefore will make no more apologies, but a
proceed to say that, thank God! though we have suffered
dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy as we
must always be in one another's love. We have had great
trials, and great persecutions, but however, at the same time,
gratefully acknowledge many friends, yourself not the least
among them, whose great kindness I shall always thankfully
remember, as will Edward too, who I have told of it. I am
sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise dear Mrs. Jennings,
I spent two happy hours with him yesterday afternoon, he
would not hear of our parting, though earnestly did I, as I
thought my duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,
and would have parted for ever on the spot, would he consent
to it; but he said it should never be, he did not regard his
mother's anger, while he could have my affections; our„
prospects are not very bright, to be sure, but we must wait,
and hope for the best; he will be ordained shortly, and should
SED^SE A^D SES^SIBILITT 223
it ever be in your power to recommend him to anybody that
has a living to bestow, am very sure you will not forget us,
and dear Mrs. Jennings too, trust she will speak a good word
for us to Sir John, or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be
able to assist us. — Poor Anne was much to blame for what
she did, but she did it for the best, so I say nothing; hope
Mrs. Jennings won't think it too much trouble to give us a
call, should she come this way any morning,'twould be a
great kindness, and my cousins would be proud to know her.
— My paper reminds me to conclude, and begging to be most
gratefully and respectfully remembered to her, and to Sir
John and Lady Middleton, and the dear children, when you
chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,
" I am, etc., etc. "
As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what she
concluded to be its writer's real design, by placing it in the
hands of Mrs. Jennings, who read it aloud with many com-
ments of satisfaction and praise.
" Very well indeed ! — how prettily she writes ! — aye, that
was quite proper to let him be off if he would. That was
just like Lucy. — Poor soul ! I wish I could get him a living
with all my heart. — She calls me dear Mrs. Jennings, you see.
She is a good-hearted girl as ever lived. — Very well, upon
my word. That sentence is very prettily turned. Yes, yes,
I will go and see her sure enough. How attentive she is, to
think of everybody! — Thank you, my dear, for shewing it
me. It is as pretty a letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's
head and heart great credit. "
CH < APTE < I^ XXXIX
The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two
months in town, and Marianne's impatience to be gone in-
creased every day. She sighed for the air, the liberty, the
quiet of the country; and fancied that if any place could give
her ease, Barton must do it. Elinor was hardly less anxious
]
224 SE2QE AJiD SEViSIBILITT
than herself for their removal, and only so much less bent on
its being effected immediately, as that she was conscious of
the difficulties of so long a journey, which Marianne could
not be brought to acknowledge. She began, however,
seriously to turn her thoughts towards its accomplishment,
and had already mentioned their wishes to their kind hostess,
who resisted them with all the eloquence of her good-will,
when a plan was suggested, which though detaining them &
from home yet a few weeks longer, appeared to Elinor alto-
gether much more eligible than any other. The Palmers
were to remove to Cleveland about the end of March, for the
Easter holidays; and Mrs. Jennings, with both her friends,
received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with
them. This would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the
delicacy of Miss Dashwood; — but it was inforced with so ^j
much real politeness by Mr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the
very great amendment of his manners towards them since
her sister had been known to be unhappy, induced her to
accept it with pleasure.
When she told Marianne what she had done, however, her
first reply was not very auspicious.
" Cleveland ! " — she cried, with great agitation. " No, I <
cannot go to Cleveland. " -
" You forget, " said Elinor gently, " that its situation is
not . . . that it is not in the neighbourhood of ... " M
" But it is in Somersetshire. — I cannot go into Somerset-
shire. — There, where I looked forward to going ... No,
Elinor, you cannot expect me to go there. "
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming
such feelings; — she only endeavoured to counteract them by
working on others; — and represented it, therefore, as a
measure which would fix the time of her returning to that -
dear mother, whom she so much wished to see, in a more
eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plan
could do, and perhaps without any greater delay. From
Cleveland, which was within a few miles of Bristol, the dis-
tance to Barton was not beyond one day, though a long day's
journey; and their mother's servant might easily come there
to attend them down; and as there could be no occasion for >
their staying above a week at Cleveland, they might now be -.
at home in little more than three weeks'time. As Marianne's j
i
SE^SE A3iD SESiSIBILITT 225
affection for her mother was sincere, it must triumph, with
little difficulty, over the imaginary evils she had started.
Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her guests,
that she pressed them very earnestly to return with her
again from Cleveland. Elinor was grateful for the attention,
but it could not alter their design; and their mother's con-
currence being readily gained, everything relative to their
return was arranged as far as it could be; — and Marianne
found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that
were yet to divide her from Barton.
" Ah ! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do
without the Miss Dashwoods, " — was Mrs. Jennings's address
to him when he first called on her, after their leaving her was
settled — " for they are quite resolved upon going home
from the Palmers; — and how forlorn we shall be, when I
come back ! — Lord ! we shall sit and gape at one another as
dull as two cats. "
Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous
sketch of their future ennui, to provoke him to make that
offer which might give himself an escape from it — and if so,
she had soon afterwards good reason to think her object
gained; for, on Elinor's moving to the window to take more
expeditiously the dimensions of a print which she was going
to copy for her friend, he followed her to it with a look of
particular meaning, and conversed with her there for several
minutes. The effect of this discourse on the lady too, could
not escape her observation ; for though she was too honour-
able to listen, and had even changed her seat on purpose that
she might not hear, to one close by the pianoforte on which
Marianne was playing, she could not keep herself from seeing
that Elinor changed colour, attended with agitation, and was
too intent on what he said, to pursue her employment. —
Still farther in. confirmation of her hopes, in the interval of
Marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some words
of the Colonel's inevitably reached her ear, in which he
seemed to be apologising for the badness of his house. [This
set] the matter beyond a doubt. She wondered indeed at
his thinking it necessary to do so; — but supposed it to be the
proper etiquette. What Elinor said in reply she could not
distinguish, but judged from the motion of her lips that she
did not think that any material objection; — and Mrs. Jen-
p
226 SES^SE A3iD SESiSIBILITT
nings commended her in her heart for being so honest. They fee
then talked on for a few minutes longer without her catching
a syllable, when another lucky stop in Marianne's perform- fc^
ance brought her these words in the ColonePs calm voice— r?
" I am afraid it cannot take place very soon. "
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, she —
was almost ready to cry out, " Lord ! what should hinder 3?
it ! " — but checking her desire, confined herself to this silent m
ejaculation — fe
" This is very strange ! — sure he need not wait to be older. " C
This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem to'-
offend or mortify his fair companion in the least; for on " T
their breaking up the conference soon afterwards, and %.
moving different ways, Mrs. Jennings very plainly heard if
Elinor say, and in a voice which shewed her to feel what she ^~
said — 1^
" I shall always think myself very much obliged to you. " J-
Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only -
wondered, that after hearing such a sentence, the Colonel _
should be able to take leave of them, as he immediately did, ^
with the utmost sang-froid, and go without making her any %-
reply ! — She had not thought her old friend could have made
so indifferent a suitor.
What had really passed between them was to this effect—
" I have heard, " said he, with great compassion, " of the
injustice your friend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from his family; " ^
for if I understand the matter right, he has been entirely
cast off by them for persevering in his engagement with a
very deserving young woman. — Have I been rightly in- *
formed ? — Is it so ?
Elinor told him that it was.
" The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty, " he replied, with great .
feeling, " of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young
people long attached to each other, is terrible; — Mrs. Ferrars
does not know what she may be doing — what she may drive
her son to. I have seen Mr. Ferrars two or three times in ^
Harley Street, and am much pleased with him. He is not a _
young man with whom one can be intimately acquainted in
a short time, but I have seen enough of him to wish him weD ^
for his own sake, and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more. *
I understand that he intends to take orders. Will you be so \
SEO^SE Jfr(p SENSIBILITY 227
good as to tell him that the living of Delaford, now just
vacant, as I am informed by this day's post, is his, if he think
it worth his acceptance; — but that, perhaps, so unfortunately
circumstanced as he is now, it may be nonsense to appear to
doubt; I only wish it were more valuable. — It is a rectory,
but a small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did not make
more than 200 pounds per annum, and though it is certainly
capable of improvement, I fear, not to such an amount as to
afford him a very comfortable income. Such as it is, how-
ever, my pleasure in presenting him to it will be very great.
Pray assure him of it. "
Elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly
have been greater, had the Colonel been really making her an
offer of his hand. The preferment, which only two days
before she had considered as hopeless for Edward, was
already provided to enable him to marry; — and she, of all
people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it! — Her emotion
was such as Mrs. Jennings had attributed to a very different
cause; — but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing,
might have a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general
benevolence, and* her gratitude for the particular friendship,
which together prompted Colonel Brandon to this act, were
strongly felt, and warmly expressed. She thanked him for
it with all her heart, spoke of Edward's principles and dis-
position with that praise which she knew them to deserve,
and promised to undertake the commission with pleasure, if
it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office to
another. But, at the same time, she could not help thinking
that no one could so well perform it as himself. It was an
office, in short, from which, unwilling to give Edward the
pain of receiving an obligation from her, she would have
been very glad to be spared herself; — but Colonel Brandon,
on motives of equal delicacy declining it likewise, still seemed
so desirous of its being given through her means, that she
would not on any account make farther opposition. Edward,
she believed, was still in town, and fortunately she had heard
his address from Miss Steele. She could undertake therefore
to inform him of it in the course of the day. After this had
been settled, Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own
advantage in securing so respectable and agreeable a neigh-
bour; and then it was that he mentioned with regret, that
228 SE & CSE A^D SEZQIBILITT
the house was small and indifferent; — an evil which Elinor,
as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made very light of,
at least as far as regarded its size.
" The smallness of the house, " said she, " I cannot imagine
any inconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to
their family and income. "
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that she was
considering their marriage as the certain consequence of the
presentation; for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford
living could supply such an income as anybody in his style of
life would venture to settle on — and he said so.
" This little rectory can do no more than make Mr. Ferrars
comfortable as a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry.
I am sorry to say that my patronage ends with this; and my
interest is hardly more extensive. If, however, by any un-
foreseen chance it should be in my power to serve him
farther, I must think very differently of him from what 1
now do, if I am not as ready to be useful to him then, as 1
sincerely wish I could be at present. What I am now doing
indeed seems nothing at all, since it can, advance him so
little towards what must be his principal, his only object ol
happiness. His marriage must still be a distant good; — at
least I am afraid it cannot take place very soon. "
Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, sc
justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings; but
after this narration of what really passed between Colonel
Brandon and Elinor, while they stood at the window, the
gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting may per-
haps appear, in general, not less reasonably excited, nor less
properly worded, than if it had arisen from an offer oi
marriage.
CHtAPTE?^ XL
" Well, Miss Dashwood, " said Mrs. Jennings, sagaciously
smiling, as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn, " I do not
ask you what the Colonel has been saying to you ; for though,
upon my honour, I tried to keep out of hearing, I could not
help catching enough to understand his business. And 1
t
I
I
i
i
i
SE^SE AD^D SED^SIBILITT 229
assure you I never was better pleased in my life, and I wish
you joy of it with all my heart. "
" Thank you, ma'am, " said Elinor. " It is a matter of
great joy to me; and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon
most sensibly. There are not many men who would act as
he has done. Few people have so compassionate a heart!
I never was more astonished in my life. "
" Lord! my dear, you are very modest! I an't the least
astonished at it in the world, for I have often thought, of
late, there was nothing more likely to happen. "
" You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's general
benevolence; but at least you could not foresee that the
opportunity would so very soon occur. "
" Opportunity! " repeated Mrs. Jennings — " Oh! as to
that, when a man has once made up his mind to such a thing,
somehow or other he will soon find an opportunity. Well,
my dear, I wish you joy of it again and again; and if ever
there was a happy couple in the world, I think I shall soon
know where to look for them. "
" You mean to go to Delaford after them, I suppose, "
said Elinor, with a faint smile.
" Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed. And as to the house
being a bad one, I do not know what the Colonel would be
at, for it is as good a one as ever I saw. "
" He spoke of its being out of repair. "
" Well, and whos.e fault is that? why don't he repair it?
—who should do it but himself? "
They were interrupted by the servant's coming in, to
£ announce the carriage being at the door; and Mrs. Jennings,
1 1 immediately preparing to go, said —
" Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half my
talk out. But, however, we may have it all over in the
evening, for we shall be quite alone. I do not ask you to go
with me, for I dare say your mind is too full of the matter
to care for company; and besides, you must long to tell
I your sister all about it. "
Marianne had left the room before the conversation
began.
" Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall
not mention it at present to anybody else. "
" Oh ! very well, " said Mrs. Jennings, rather disappointed.
230 SE3^SE AO^D SE^QIBILITT
" Then you would not have me tell it Lucy, for I think of
going as far as Holborn to-day. "
" No, ma'am, not even Lucy, if you please. One day's
delay will not be very material; and till I have written to
Mr. Ferrars, I think it ought not to be mentioned to anybody
else. I shall do that directly. It is of importance that no
time should be lost with him, for he will, of course, have
much to do relative to his ordination. "
This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly.
Why Mr. Ferrars was to be written to about it in such a hurry
she could not immediately comprehend. A few moments'
reflection, however, produced a very happy idea, and she
exclaimed —
" Oh, ho ! I understand you. Mr. Ferrars is to be the man.
Well, so much the better for him. Aye, to be sure, he must
be ordained in readiness; and I am very glad to find things
are so forward between you. But, my dear, is not this rather
out of character? Should not the Colonel write himself?
Sure, he is the proper person. "
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs.
Jennings's speech; neither did she think it worth inquiring
into; and therefore only replied to its conclusion.
" Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather
wished any one to announce his intentions to Mr. Ferrars
than himself. "
" And so you are fofced to do it. Well, that is an odd
kind of delicacy ! However, I will not disturb you " (seeing
her prepare to write). " You know your own concerns best.
So good-bye, my dear. I have not heard of anything tc
please me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed. "
And away she went, but returning again in a moment —
" I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear. 1
should be very glad to get her so good a mistress. But
whether she would do for a lady's maid, I am sure I can'1
tell. She is an excellent housemaid, and works very well al
her needle. However, you will think of all that at youi
leisure. "
" Certainly, ma'am, " replied Elinor, not hearing much oi
what she said, and more anxious to be alone than to tx
mistress of the subject.
How she should begin — how she should express herself ii
SEO^SE A^D SENSIBILITY 231
1
her note to Edward was now all her concern. The particular
circumstances between them made a difficulty of that which
i to any other person would have been the easiest thing in the
c world; but she equally feared to say too much or too little,
I and sat deliberating over her paper, with the pen in her hand,
[ till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself.
[ He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to the
carriage, as he came to leave his farewell card; and she, after
apologising for not returning herself, had obliged him to
enter by saying that Miss Dashwood was above, and wanted
to speak with him on very particular business.
Elinor had just been congratulating herself in the midst
of her perplexity, that however difficult it might be to express
herself properly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving
the information by word of mouth, when her visitor entered,
to force her upon this greatest exertion of all. Her astonish-
ment and confusion were very great on his so sudden appear-
ance. She had not seen him before since his engagement
became public, and therefore not since his knowing her to be
acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness of what
she had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made
her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes. He
too was much distressed, and they sat down together in a
most promising state of embarrassment. — Whether he had
asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming into the
room, he could not recollect; but determining to be on the
safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he could say
anything, after taking a chair.
" Mrs. Jennings told me, " said he, " that you wished to
speak with me, at least I understood her so — or I certainly
should not have intruded on you in such a manner; though,
at the same time, I should have been extremely sorry to
leave London without seeing you and your sister; especially
as it will most likely be some time — it is not probable that I
should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again. I go
to Oxford to morrow. "
" You would not have gone, however, " said Elinor, recover-
ing herself, and determined to get over what she so much
► dreaded as soon as possible, " without receiving our good
wishes, even if we had not been able to give them in person.
Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what she said. I have
£
232 SEO^SE ADtp SED^SIBILITT
something of consequence to inform you of, which I was on
the point of communicating by paper. I am charged with
a most agreeable office " (breathing rather faster than usual F~-
as she spoke). " Colonel Brandon, who was here only ten £~
minutes ago, has desired me to say, that, understanding you j
mean to take orders, he has great pleasure in offering you the p
living of Delaford, now just vacant, and only wishes it were p
more valuable. Allow me to congratulate you on having so p
respectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish p
that the living — it is about two hundred a-year — were much a
more considerable, and such as might better enable you to — I-
as might be more than a temporary accommodation to
yourself — such, in short, as might establish all your views
of happiness. "
What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot
be expected that any one else should say it for him. He
looked all the astonishment which such unexpected, such un-
thought-of information could not fail of exciting; but he
said only these two words —
" Colonel Brandon! "
" Yes, " continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as
some of the worst was over; " Colonel Brandon means it as a
testimony of his concern for what has lately passed — for the
cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of your
family has placed you — a concern which, I am sure, Marianne,
myself, and all your friends must share; and likewise as a
proof of his high esteem for your general character, and his
particular approbation of your behaviour on the present
occasion. "
" Colonel Brandon give me a living f— Can it be possible ? "
" The unkindness of your own relations has made you
astonished to find friendship anywhere. "
" No, " replied he, with sudden consciousness, " not to
find it in you ; for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your
goodness, I owe it all. I feel it — I would express it if I could
— but, as you well know, I am no orator. "
" You are very much mistaken. I do assure you that you
owe it entirely, at least almost entirely, to your own merit,
and Colonel Brandon's discernment of it. I have had no
hand in it. I did not even know, till I understood his design,
that the living was vacant; nor had it ever occurred to me
SE^SE AVip SE^SIBILITr 233
that he might have such a living in his gift. As a friend of
mine, of my family, he may perhaps — indeed I know he has,
still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word,
you owe nothing to my solicitation. "
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the
action; but she was at the same time so unwilling to appear
as the benefactress of Edward, that she acknowledged it with
hesitation; which probably contributed to fix that suspicion
in his mind which had recently entered it. For a short time
he sat deep in thought, after Elinor had ceased to speak;
at last, as if it were rather an effort, he said —
" Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and re-
spectability. I have always heard him spoken of as such,
and your brother, I know, esteems him highly. He is
undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners perfectly
the gentleman. "
" Indeed, " replied Elinor, " I believe that you will find
him, on farther acquaintance, all that you have heard him
to be; and as you will be such very near neighbours (for I
understand the parsonage is almost close to the mansion-
house), it is particularly important that he should be all
this. "
Edward made no answer; but when she had turned away
her head, gave her a look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful,
as seemed to say, that he might hereafter wish the distance
between the parsonage and the mansion-house much greater.
" Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James's Street, "
said he, soon afterwards, rising from his chair.
Elinor told him the number of the house.
" I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks which
you will not allow me to give you ; to assure him that he has
made me a very — an exceedingly happy man. "
Elinor did not offer to detain him ; and they parted, with
a very earnest assurance on her side of her unceasing good
wishes for his happiness in every change of situation that
might befall him; on his, with rather an attempt to return
the same good-will, than the power of expressing it.
" When I see him again, " said Elinor to herself, as the
door shut him out, " I shall see him the husband of Lucy. "
And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down to re-
consider the past, recall the words, and endeavoured to
234 SE & CSE A3iD SEO^SIBILITT
comprehend all the feelings of Edward; and, of course, to
reflect on her own with discontent.
When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she returned
from seeing people whom she had never seen before, and of
whom therefore she must have a great deal to say, her mind
was so much more occupied by the important secret in her
possession, than by anything else, that she reverted to it
again as soon as Elinor appeared.
" Well, my dear, " she cried, " I sent you up the young
man. Did not I do right? — And I suppose you had no great
difficulty. — You did not find him very unwilling to accept
your proposal? "
" No, ma'am; that was not very likely. "
" Well, and how soon will he be ready ? — For it seems all
to depend upon that. "
" Really, " said Elinor, " I know so little of these kind of
forms, that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time, or
the preparation necessary ; but I suppose two or three months
will complete his ordination. "
" Two or three months? " cried Mrs. Jennings; " Lord!
my dear, how calmly you talk of it ! and can the Colonel wait
two or three months ! Lord bless me ! — I am sure it would
put me quite out of patience. — And though one would be
very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do think it
is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.
Sure, somebody else might be found that would do as well —
somebody that is in orders already. "
" My dear ma'am, " said Elinor, "'what can you be thinking
of? — Why, Colonel Brandon's only object is to be of use to
Mr. Ferrars. "
" Lord bless you, my dear! — Sure you do not mean to per-
suade me that the Colonel only marries you for the sake of
giving ten guineas to Mr. Ferrars ! "
The deception could not continue after this; and an ex-
planation immediately took place, by which both gained
considerable amusement for the moment, without any
material loss of happiness to either, for Mrs. Jennings only
exchanged one form of delight for another, and still without
forfeiting her expectation of the first.
" Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one, " said she,
after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over,
SE3^SE A3ip SE3KSIBILITT 235
" and very likely may be out of repair; but to hear a man
apologising, as I thought, for a house that to my knowledge
has five sitting-rooms on the ground-floor, and, I think the
house-keeper told me, could make up fifteen beds ! — And to
you too, that had been used to live in Barton Cottage ! It
seemed quite ridiculous. — But, my dear, we must touch up
the Colonel to do something to the parsonage, and make it
comfortable for them, before Lucy goes to it. "
" But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea
of the living's being enough to allow them to marry. "
" The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two
thousand a-year himself, he thinks that nobody else can
marry on less. Take my word for it, that, if I am alive, I
shall be paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage before Michael-
mas; and I am sure I shan't go if Lucy an't there. "
Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of
their not waiting for anything more.
CHtAPTEl^XLI
Edward having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon, pro-
ceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and such was the excess
of it by the time he reached Bartlett's Buildings, that she was
able to assure Mrs. Jennings, who called on her again the next
day with her congratulations, that she had never seen him
in such spirits before in her life.
Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very
certain; and she joined Mrs. Jennings most heartily in her
expectation of their being all comfortably together in Dela-
ford Parsonage before Michaelmas. So far was she, at the
same time, from any backwardness to give Elinor that credit
which Edward would give her, that she spoke of her friendship
for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready to
own all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no
exertion for their good on Miss Dashwood's part, either pre-
sent or future, would ever surprise her, for she believed her
capable of doing anything in the world for those she really
valued. As for Colonel Brandon, she was not only ready to
236 SE^SE AD^p SEVQIBILITT
worship him as a saint, but was moreover truly anxious that
he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns; anxious
that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and secretly
resolved to avail herself at Delaford, as far as she possibly
could, of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.
It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called
in Berkeley Street, and as since that time no notice had been
taken by them of his wife's indisposition, beyond one verbal
inquiry, Elinor began to feel it necessary to pay her a visit. —
This was an obligation, however, which not only opposed her
own inclination, but which had not the assistance of any
encouragement from her companions. Marianne, not con-
tented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent
to prevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jennings,
though her carriage was always at Elinor's service, so very
much disliked Mrs. John Dashwood, that not even her
curiosity to see how she looked after the late discovery, nor
her strong desire to affront her by taking Edward's part,
could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company again.
The consequence was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay a
visit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and
to run the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman whom neither
of the others had so much reason to dislike.
Mrs. Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could
turn from the house, her husband accidentally came out.
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor, told her that
he had been just going to call in Berkeley Street, and assur-
ing her that Fanny would be very glad to see her, invited
her to come in.
They walked up stairs into the drawing-room. — Nobody
was there.
" Fanny is in her own room, I suppose, " said he; — " I
will go to her presently, for I am sure she will not have the
least objection in the world to seeing you — very far from it
indeed. Now especially there cannot be — but however, you
and Marianne were always great favourites. — Why would
not Marianne come ? "
Elinor made what excuse she could for her.
" I am not sorry to see you alone, " he replied, " for I have
a good deal to say to you. This living of Colonel Brandon's
— can it be true? — has he really ^iven it to Edward? — I
I
SE^SE AOip SE3KSIBILITT 237
heard it yesterday by chance, and was coming to you on pur-
pose to inquire farther about it. "
" It is perfectly true. — Colonel Brandon has given the
living of Delaford to Edward. "
" Really ! — Well, this is very astonishing ! — no relation-
ship ! — no connection between them ! — and now that livings
fetch such a price ! — what was the value of this ? "
" About two hundred a-year. "
" Very well — and for the next presentation to a living of
that value — supposing the late incumbent to have been old
and sickly and likely to vacate it soon — he might have got,
I dare say — fourteen hundred pounds. And how came he
not to have settled that matter before this person's death?
—Now indeed it would be too late to sell it, but a man
of Colonel Brandon's sense! — I wonder he should be so
improvident in a point of such common, such natural con-
cern! — Well, I am convinced that there is a vast deal of
inconsistency in almost every human character. I suppose,
however — on recollection — that the case may probably be
this, Edward is only to hold the living till the person to
whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation is old
enough to take it. — Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon
it. "
Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by
relating that she had herself been employed in conveying
the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward, and therefore
must understand the terms on which it was given, obliged
him to submit to her authority.
" It is truly astonishing! " — he cried, after hearing what
she said — " what could be the Colonel's motive ? "
" A very simple one — to be of use to Mr. Ferrars. "
" Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward
is a very lucky man ! You will not mention the matter to
Fanny, however; for though I have broke it to her, and
she bears it vastly well, she will not like to hear it much
talked of. "
Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing,
that she thought Fanny might have borne with composure
an acquisition of wealth to her brother, by which neither
she nor her child could be possibly impoverished.
" Mrs. Ferrars/'added he, lowering Yas vo\cfe \.o ^wt \gxsr.
238 SE^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITr
becoming so important a subject, " knows nothing aboi
it at present, and I believe it will be best to keep it entire!
concealed from her as long as may be. — When the marriag
takes place, I fear she must hear of it all. "
" But why should such precaution be used? — Though it
not to be supposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have the smallei
satisfaction in knowing that her son has money enough 1
live upon, — for that must be quite out of the question; y <
why, after her late behaviour, is she supposed to feel at al]
She has done with her son, she has cast him off for ever, an
has made all those over whom she had any influence cast hii
off likewise. Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imagine
liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account-
she cannot be interested in anything that befalls him. SI
would not be so weak as to throw away the comfort of a chile
and yet retain the anxiety of a parent ! "
" Ah ! Elinor, " said John, " your reasoning is very goo <
but it is founded on ignorance of human nature. Whe
Edward's unhappy match takes place, depend upon it h
mother will feel as much as if she had never discarded bin:
and therefore every circumstance that may accelerate tha
dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much a
possible. Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is ht
son. "
" You surprise me; I should think it must nearly hav
escaped her memory by this time. "
" You wrong her exceedingly. Mrs. Ferrars is one of th
most affectionate mothers in the world. "
Elinor was silent.
" We think now, " said Mr. Dashwood, after a short pause
" of Robert's marrying Miss Morton. "
Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance
her brother's tone, calmly replied —
" The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair. "
" Choice! — how do you mean? "
" I only mean, that I suppose from your manner of speak
ing, it must be the same to Miss Morton whether she marr
Edward or Robert. "
" Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert wil
now to all intents and purposes be considered as the eldes
son; and as to anything else, they are both very agreeabl
1
1

S£^£ A^D SE^SIBILITr 239
young men — I do not know that one is superior to the
other. "
Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time
silent. His reflections ended thus —
" Of one thing, my dear sister, " kindly taking her hand,
and speaking in an awful whisper, " I may assure you: and
I will do it, because I know it must gratify you. I have good
reason to think — indeed I have it from the best authority,
or I should not repeat it, for otherwise it would be very wrong
to say anything about it — but I have it from the very best
authority — not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Ferrars say
it herself, but her daughter did, and I have it from her — That,
in short, whatever objections there might be against a certain
— a certain connection — you understand me — it would have
been far preferable to her, it would not have given her half
the vexation that this does. I was exceedingly pleased to
hear that Mrs. Ferrars considered it in that light — a very
gratifying circumstance, you know, to us all. * It would
have been beyond comparison/ she said,'the least evil of
the two, and she would be glad to compound now for nothing
worse.'But, however, all that is quite out of the question —
not to be thought of or mentioned; as to any attachment,
you know — it never could be — all that is gone by. But I
thought I would just tell you of this, because I knew how much
it must please you. Not that you have any reason to regret,
my dear Elinor. There is no doubt of your doing exceed-
ingly well — quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things
considered. Has Colonel Brandon been with you lately ? "
Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity and
raise her self-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her
mind; and she was therefore glad to be spared from the
necessity of saying muchin reply herself, and from the danger
of hearing anything more from her brother, by the entrance
of Mr. Robert Ferrars. After a few moments'chat, John
Bashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of
his sister being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and
Elinor was left to improve her acquaintance with Robert,
who, by the gay unconcern, the happy self-complacency of
his manner while enjoying so unfair a division of his mother's
love and liberality, to the prejudice of his banished brother,
earned only by his own dissipated course of life, and that
240 SEWSE ADiD SED^SIBILITT
brother's integrity, was confirming her most unfavoi
opinion of his head and heart.
They had scarcely been two minutes by thems
before he began to speak of Edward; for he too had
of the living, and was very inquisitive on the subject. ]
repeated the particulars of it, as she had given them to
and their effect on Robert, though very different, w*
less striking than it had been on him. He laughed
immoderately. The idea of Edward's being a clerg]
and living in a small parsonage-house, diverted him b
measure; and when to that was added the fanciful im
of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice, and publ
the banns of marriage between John Smith and Mary B
he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.
Elinor, while she waited in silence, and immovable gr
the conclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eyes
being fixed on him with a look that spoke all the contei
excited. It was a look, however, very well bestowed,
relieved her own feelings, and gave no intelligence to
He was recalled from wit to wisdom, not by any repn
hers, but by his own sensibility.
" We may treat it as a joke, " said he at last, recoT
from the affected laugh which had considerably lengtl
out the genuine gaiety of the moment — " but, upon my
it is a most serious business. Poor Edward! he is r
for ever. I am extremely sorry for it — for I know him
a very good-hearted creature; as well meaning a f <
perhaps, as any in the world. You must not judge of
Miss Dashwood, from your slight acquaintance.
Edward! His manners are certainly not the happic
nature. But we are not all born, you know, with the
powers — the same address. Poor fellow! to see him
circle of strangers ! — to be sure it was pitiable enough !-
upon my soul, I believe he has as good a heart as any i
kingdom; and I declare and protest to you I never ^
shocked in my life, as when it all burst forth. I coul
believe it. My mother was the first person who told me
and I, feeling myself called on to act with resolution
mediately said to her,'My dear madam, I do not know
you may intend to do on the occasion, but as for mys
must say, that if Edward does marry this young worn
it
&
SE^SE A3iD SENSIBILITY 241
never will see him again.'That was what I said immediately,
— I was most uncommonly shocked indeed ! — Poor Edward !
— he has done for himself completely ! — shut himself out fqr
ever from all decent society! — but as I directly said to my
mother, I am not in the least surprised at it; from his style
of education it was always to be expected. My poor mother
was half frantic.''
" Have you ever seen the lady ? "
" Yes, once; while she was staying in this house. I
happened to drop in for ten minutes ; and I saw quite enough
of her. The merest awkward country girl, without style or
elegance, and almost without beauty. I remember her per-
fectly. Just the kind of girl I should suppose likely to capti-
vate poor Edward. I offered immediately, as soon as my
mother related the affair to me, to talk to him myself, and
dissuade him from the match; but it was too late then, I
found, to do anything, for unluckily, I was not in the way
at first, and knew nothing of it till after the breach had taken
place, when it was not for me, you know, to interfere. But
had I been informed of it a few hours earlier, I think it is
most probable that something might have been hit on. I
certainly should have represented it to Edward in a very
strong light.'My dear fellow/ I should have said,'con-
sider what you are doing. You are making a most disgrace-
ful connection, and such a one as your family are unanimous
in disapproving.'I cannot help thinking, in short, that
means might have been found. But now it is all too late.
He must be starved, you know; that is certain; absolutely
starved. "
He had just settled this point with great composure, when
the entrance of Mrs. John Dashwood put an end to the sub-
ject. But though she never spoke of it out of her own family,
Elinor could see its influence on her mind, in the something
like confusion of countenance with which she entered, and an
attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself. She even
proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that Elinor and
her sister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see
more of them; an exertion in which her husband, who
attended her into the room, and hung enamoured over her
accents, seemed to distinguish everything that was most
affectionate and graceful.
Q
242 SED^SE ytC^D SEVQIBILITT
CH^PTE^XLII
One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor receive*
her brother's congratulations, on their travelling so far to
wards Barton without any expense, and on Colonel Brandon'
being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or two, complete*
the intercourse of the brother and sisters in town; and \
faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norland wheneve
it should happen to be in their way, which of all things wa
the most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though les
public assurance, from John to Elinor of the promptitud
with which he should come to see her at Delaford, was al
that foretold any meeting in the country.
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed deter
mined to send her to Delaford; a place in which, of all others
she would now least chuse to visit or wish to reside; for no
only was it considered as her future home by her brothe
and Mrs. Jennings, but even Lucy, when they parted, gavi
her a pressing invitation to visit her there.
Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, th <
two parties from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street se
out from their respective homes, to meet by appointment 01
the road. For the convenience of Charlotte and her child
they were to be more than two days on their journey, an(
Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with Colone
Brandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after thei
arrival.
Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in London
and eager as she had long been to quit it, could not, when i
came to the point, bid adieu to the house in which she ha <
for the last time enjoyed those hopes and that confideno
in Willoughby, which were now extinguished for ever
without great pain. Nor could she leave the place in whicl
Willoughby remained busy in new engagements, and ne?
schemes, in which she could have no share, without shedding
many tears.
Elinor's satisfaction at the moment of removal was mon
positive. She had no such object for her lingering thought
to fix on, she left no creature behind from whom it woulc
SE9QE A3^p SEOiSIBILITT 243
give her a moment's regret to be divided for ever, she was
pleased to be free herself from the persecution of Lucy's
friendship, she was grateful for bringing her sister away
unseen by Willoughby since his marriage, and she looked
forward with hope to what a few months of tranquillity at
Barton might do towards restoring Marianne's peace of mind,
and confirming her own.
Their journey was safely performed. The second day
brought them into the cherished, or the prohibited county of
Somerset, for as such was it dwelt on by turns in Marianne's
imagination; and in the forenoon of the third they drove up
to Cleveland.
Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house, situated on
a sloping lawn. It had no park, but the pleasure-grounds
were tolerably extensive; and like every other place of the
same degree of importance, it had its open shrubbery, and
closer wood-walk; a road of smooth gravel winding round a
plantation, led to the front; the lawn # was dotted over with
timber; the house itself was under the guardianship of the
fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of
them altogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars,
shut out the offices.
Marianne entered the house with an heart swelling with
emotion from the consciousness of being only eighty miles
from Barton, and not thirty from Combe Magna; and before
she had been five minutes within its walls, while the others
were busily helping Charlotte shew her child to the house-
keeper, she quitted it again, stealing away through the wind-
ing shrubberies, now just beginning to be in beauty, to gain
a distant eminence; where, from its Grecian temple, her eye,
wandering over a wide tract of country to the south-east,
could fondly rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon,
and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might
be seen.
In such moments of precious, of invaluable misery, she
rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland; and as she
returned by a different circuit to the house, feeling all the
happy privilege of country liberty, of wandering from place
to place in free and luxurious solitude, she resolved to spend
almost every hour of every day while she remained with the
Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary rambles.
244 SE^SE A^D SEDiSIBILITT
She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted
the house, on an excursion through its more immediate
premises ; and the rest of the morning was easily whiled away,
in lounging round the kitchen garden, examining the bloom
upon its walls, and listening to the gardener's lamentations
upon blights, — in dawdling through the green-house, where
the loss of her favourite plants, unwarily exposed, and nipped
by the lingering frost, raised the laughter of Charlotte, — and
in visiting her poultry-yard, where in the disappointed hopes
of her dairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests, or being
stolen by a fox, or in the rapid decease of a promising young
brood, she found fresh sources of merriment.
The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in her plan
of employment abroad, had not calculated for any change of
weather during their stay at Cleveland. With great sur-
prise, therefore, did she find herself prevented by a settled
rain from going out again after dinner. She had depended
on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all
over the grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would
not have deterred her from it; but a heavy and settled rain
even she could not fancy dry or pleasant weather for walking.
Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.
Mrs. Palmer had her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-
work; they talked of the friends they had left behind,
arranged Lady Middleton's engagements, and wondered
whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther
than Reading that night. Elinor, however little concerned
in it, joined in their discourse, and Marianne, who had the
knack of finding her way in every house to the library,
however it might be avoided by the family in general, soon
procured herself a book.
Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side, that constant
and friendly good humour could do, to make them feel them-
selves welcome. The openness and heartiness of her manner
more than atoned for that want of recollection and elegance,
which made her often deficient in the forms of politeness;
her kindness, recommended by so pretty a face, was engaging;
her folly, though evident, was not disgusting because it was
not conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven everything
but her laugh.
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late
SEWSE ADiD SEDiSIBILITT 245
dinner, affording a pleasant enlargement of the party, and a
very welcome variety to their conversation, which a long
morning of the same continued rain had reduced very low.
Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in that little
had seen so much variety in his address to her sister and
herself, that she knew not what to expect to find him in his
own family. She found him, however, perfectly the gentle-
man in his behaviour to all his visitors, and only occasionally
rude to his wife and her mother; she found him very capable
of being a pleasant companion, and only prevented from
being so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as
much superior to people in general, as he must feel himself
to be to Mrs. Jennings and Charlotte. For the rest of his
character and habits, they were marked, as far as Elinor
could perceive, with no traits at all unusual in his sex and
time of life. He was nice in his eating, uncertain in his
hours; fond of his child, though affecting to slight it; and
idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to have
been devoted to business. She liked him, however, upon
the whole; much better than she had expected, and in her
heart was not sorry that she could like him no more; not
sorry to be driven by the observation of his Epicurism, his
selfishness, and his conceit, to rest with complacency on the
remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simple taste,
and diffident feelings.
» Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now
received intelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been
into Dorsetshire lately ; and who, treating her at once as the
disinterested friend of Mr. Ferrars, and the kind confidante
of himself, talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at
Delaford, described its deficiencies, and told her what he
meant to do himself towards removing them. His behaviour
to her in this as well as in every other particular, his open
pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, his
readiness to converse with her, and his deference for her
opinion, might very well justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion
of his attachment, and would have been enough, perhaps, had
not Elinor still, as from the first, believed Marianne his real
favourite, to make her suspect it herself. But as it was,
such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head, except by
Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she could not help believing
*46 SE & (SE ADiD SE^SIBILITr
herself the nicest observer of the two; she watched
while Mrs. Jennings thought only of his behaviour; i
his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feelii
head and throat the beginning of an heavy cold,
unexpressed by words, entirely escaped the latt
observation, she could discover in them the quid
and needless alarm of a lover.
Two delightful twilight walks on the third an
evenings of her being there, not merely on the dry
the shrubbery, but all over the grounds, and esp
the most distant parts of them, where there was s
more of wildness than in the rest, where the trees
oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettes
assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting h
shoes and stockings — given Marianne a cold so vi
though for a day or two trifled with or denied, wc
itself by increasing ailments on the concern of e\
and the notice of herself. Prescriptions poured in
quarters, and as usual were all declined. Though h
feverish, with a pain in her limbs, a cough, an
throat, a good night's rest was to cure her entirely
was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her,
went to bed, to try one or two of the simplest of the
CH^PTE^ XLUI
Marianne got up the next morning at her usual
every inquiry replied that she was better, and tried
herself so, by engaging in her accustomary emp]
But a day spent in sitting shivering over the fire wi
in her hand which she was unable to read, or in lyii
and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favc
amendment; and when, at last, she went early to I
and more indisposed, Colonel Brandon was only a
at her sister's composure, who though attending an <
her the whole day, against Marianne's inclination, an
proper medicines on her at night, trusted like Ma
the certainty and efficacy of sleep, and felt no real
SEO^SE ADtp SEOiSIBILITT 247
A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed
the expectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting
in rising, confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned
voluntarily to her bed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs.
Jennings's* advice, of sending for the Palmers'apothecary.
He came, examined his patient, and though encouraging
Miss Dashwood to expect that a very few days would restore
her sister to health, yet by pronouncing her disorder to have
a putrid tendency, and allowing the word " infection " to
pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer on her baby's
account. Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclined from the
first to think Marianne's complaint more serious than Elinor,
now looked very grave on Mr. Harris's report, and confirming
Charlotte's fears and caution, urged the necessity of her im-
mediate removal with her infant; and Mr. Palmer, though
treating their apprehensions as idle, found the anxiety and
importunity of his wife too great to be withstood. Her
departure therefore was fixed on; and within an hour after
Mr. Harris's arrival, she set off, with her little boy and his
nurse, for the house of a near relation of Mr. Palmer's, who
lived a few miles on the other side of Bath; whither her
husband promised, at her earnest entreaty, to join her in a
day or two; and whither she was almost equally urgent with
her mother to accompany her. Mrs. Jennings, however,
with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her,
declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long
as Marianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by her own
attentive care, to supply to her the place of the mother she
had taken her from ; and Elinor found her on every occasion
a most willing and active helpmate, desirous to share in all
her fatigues, and often, by her better experience in nursing,
of material use.
Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her
malady, and feeling herself universally ill, .could no longer
hope that to-morrow would find her recovered; and the idea
of what to-morrow would have produced, but for this unlucky
illness, made every ailment more severe; for on that day
they were to have begun their journey home, and, attended
the whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings, were to have
taken their mother by surprise on the following forenoon
The little that she said, was all in lamentation of this inevit-
!
248 SENSE JNJ? SEVQIBILITr
able delay; though Elinor tried to raise her spirits, and make
her believe, as she then really believed herself, that it would
be a very short one.
The next day produced little or no alteration in the state
of the patient; she certainly was not better, and except thai
there was no amendment, did not appear worse. Their party
was now farther reduced; for Mr. Palmer, though very un-
willing to go, as well from real humanity and good-nature;
as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away by his
wife, was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon, to perform
his promise of following her; and while he was preparing tc
go, Colonel Brandon himself, with a much greater exertion,
began to talk of going likewise. Here, however, the kindness
of Mrs. Jennings interposed most acceptably; for to send the
Colonel away while his love was in so much uneasiness on hei
sister's account, would be to deprive them both, she thought,
of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that his
stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should
want him to play at piquet of an evening while Miss Dash-
wood was above with her sister, etc., she urged him so strongly
to remain, that he, who was gratifying the first wish of hi
own heart by a compliance, could not long even affect tc
demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty was warmly
seconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himsell
in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist 01
advise Miss Dashwood in any emergence.
Marianne was of course kept in ignorance of all these
arrangements. She knew not that she had been the means
of sending the owners of Cleveland away, in about seven days
from the time of their arrival. It gave her no surprise thai
she saw nothing of Mrs. Palmer; and as it gave her likewise
no concern, she never mentioned her name.
Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's
departure, and her situation continued, with little variation,
the same. Mr. Harris, who attended her every day, still
talked boldly of a speedy recovery, and Miss Dashwood was
equally sanguine; but the expectation of the others was by
no means so cheerful. Mrs. Jennings had determined very
early in the seizure that Marianne would never get over it,
and Colonel Brandon, who was chiefly of use in listening to
Mrs. Jennings's forebodings, was not in a state of mind to
SE3^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 249
resist their influence. He tried to reason himself out of fears
which the different judgment of the apothecary seemed to
render absurd; but the many hours of each day in which he
was left entirely alone were but too favourable for the
admission of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel
from his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne
no more.
On the morning of the third day, however, the gloomy
anticipations of both were almost done away; for when Mr.
Harris arrived, he declared his patient materially better.
Her pulse was much stronger and every symptom more
favourable than on the preceding visit. Elinor, confirmed
in every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that
in her letters to her mother, she had pursued her own judg-
ment rather than her friend's, in making very light of the
indisposition which delayed them at Cleveland, and almost
fixing on the time when Marianne would be able to travel.
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began.
Towards the evening Marianne became ill again, growing
more heavy, restless, and uncomfortable than before. Her
sister, however, still sanguine, was willing to attribute the
change to nothing more than the fatigue of having [sat] up
to have her bed made; and carefully administering the
cordials prescribed, saw her with satisfaction sink at last into
a slumber, from which she expected the most beneficial
effects. Her sleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to
see it, lasted a considerable time; and anxious to observe
the result of it herself, she resolved to sit with her during the
whole of it. Mrs. Jennings, knowing nothing of any change
in the patient, went unusually early to bed; her maid, who
was one of the principal nurses, was recreating herself in
the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remained alone with
Marianne.
The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed;
and her sister, who watched with unremitting attention her
continual change of posture, and heard the frequent but in-
articulate sounds of complaint which passed her lips, was
almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a slumber when
Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in
the house, started hastily up, and, with feverish wildness,
cried out —
1
250 SEZ^SE AJiD SENSIBILITY
" Is mama coming? "
" Not yet/'replied the other, concealing her terror, and
assisting Marianne to lie down again; " but she will be here
I hope, before it is long. It is a great way, you know, from
hence to Barton. "
" But she must not go round by London, " cried Marianne^
in the same hurried manner. " I shall never see her, if she
goes to London. "
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself
and while attempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse
It was lower and quicker than ever; and Marianne, stil
talking wildly of mama, her alarm increased so rapidly, as t(
determine her on sending instantly for Mr. Harris, anc
dispatching a messenger to Barton for her mother. T <
consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting
the latter, was a thought which immediately followed th <
resolution of its performance; and as soon as she had rung
up the maid to take her place by her sister, she hastenec
down to the drawing-room, where she knew he was generall)
to be found at a much later hour than at present.
It was no time for hesitation. Her fears and her diffi-
culties were immediately before him. Her fears, he had n(
courage, no confidence to attempt the removal of;— h(
listened to them in silent despondence; — but her difficultiei
were instantly obviated, for with a readiness that seemed t(
speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his mind
he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs
Dashwood. Elinor made no resistance that was not easil)
overcome. She thanked him with a brief, though fervenl
gratitude, and while he went to hurry off his servant with s
message to Mr. Harris, and an order for post-horses directly
she wrote a few lines to her mother.
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel
Brandon — of such a companion for her mother, — how grate-
fully was it felt ! — a companion whose judgment would guide
whose attendance must relieve, and whose friendship might
soothe her !— as far as the shock of such a summons coiddbt
lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,
would lessen it.
He, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the
firmness of a collected mind, made every necessary arrange-
SEO^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITT 251
merit with the utmost dispatch, and calculated with exact-
ness the time in which she might look for his return. Not a
moment was lost in delay of any kind. The horses arrived,
even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandon only
pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words
spoken too low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage.
Et was then about twelve o'clock, and she returned to her
sister's apartment to wait for the arrival of the apothecary,
ind to watch by her the rest of the night. It was a night of
almost equal suffering to both. Hour after hour passed away
In sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne's side, and in the
most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared.
Her apprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all
tier former security, and the servant who sat up with her, for
jhe would not allow Mrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured
her more, by hints of what her mistress had always thought.
Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently
on her mother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it
gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching
herself for having trifled with so many days of illness, and
wretched for some immediate relief, fancied that all relief
might soon be in vain, that everything had been delayed too
long, and pictured to herself her suffering mother, arriving
too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.
She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris, or if
he could not come, for some other advice, when the former —
but not till after five o'clock — arrived. His opinion, how-
ever, made some little amends for his delay, for though
acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasant alteration
in his patient, he would not allow the danger to be material,
and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must
procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, was
communicated to Elinor. He promised to call again, in the
course of three or four hours, and left both the patient and
her anxious attendant more composed than he had found
them.
With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not
being called to their aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in the morn-
ing of what had passed. Her former apprehensions, now
with greater reason restored, left her no doubt of the event;
— and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, her con-
1
252 SE^SE AD\D SE^SIBILITr
viction of her sister's danger would not allow her to offer the j^
comfort of hope. Her heart was really grieved. The rapid
decay, the early death of a girl so young, so lovely as Mari-
anne, must have struck a less interested person with concern.
On Mrs. Jennings's compassion she had other claims. She
had been for three months her companion, was still under
her care, and she was known to have been greatly injured,
and long unhappy. The distress of her sister too, parti-
cularly a favourite, was before her; — and as for their mother,
when Mrs. Jennings considered that Marianne might prob- J-W
ably be to her what Charlotte was to herself, her sympathy
in her sufferings was very sincere.
Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit; — but he came
to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would pro- In-
duce. His medicines had failed; — the fever was unabated; * "
and Marianne only more quiet — not more herself — remained
in an heavy stupor. Elinor catching all, and more than all,
his fears in a moment, proposed to call in farther advice.
But he judged it unnecessary; he had still something more
to try, some fresh application, of whose success he was almost [-
as confident as the last, and his visit concluded with en-
couraging assurances which reached the ear, but could not t
enter the heart of Miss Dashwood. She was calm, except N
when she thought of her mother, but she was almost hopeless; £
and in this state she continued till noon, scarcely stirring < ;
from her sister's bed, her thoughts wandering from one t
image of grief, one suffering friend to another, and her spirits ^
oppressed to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings, ^
who scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this -
attack to the many weeks of previous indisposition which p
Marianne's disappointment had brought on. Elinor felt all &
the reasonableness of the idea, and it gave fresh misery to'-
her reflections. j
About noon, however, she began — but with a caution, a I
dread of some disappointment, which for some time kept her ,-
silent, even to her friend — to fancy, to hope she could perceive i-
a slight amendment in her sister's pulse; — she waited, £
watched, examined it again and again; — and at last, with an r
agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness than
all her foregoing distress, ventured to communicate her
hopes. Mrs. Jennings, tYiou & Yv fotc & & < hv examination to
SEU^SE AJiD SE^SIBILITr 253
acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young
Wend from indulging a thought of its continuance; and
Elinor, conning over every injunction of distrust, told her-
self likewise not to hope. But it was too late. Hope had
already entered ; and feeling all its anxious nutter, she bent
> ver her sister to watch — she hardly knew for what. Half
m hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet
blessed her. Others even arose to confirm it. Her breath,
tier skin, her lips, all flattered Elinor with signs of amend-
ment, and Marianne fixed her eyes on her with a rational
though languid gaze. Anxiety and hope now oppressed her
in equal degrees, and left her no moment of tranquillity till
fche arrival of Mr. Harris at four o'clock; — when his assur-
ances, his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even
surpassing his expectation, gave her confidence, comfort,
and tears of joy.
Marianne was in every respect materially better, and he
declared her entirely out of danger. Mrs. Jennings, perhaps
satisfied with the partial justification of her forebodings
tfhich had been found in their late alarm, allowed herself to
trust in his judgment, and admitted with unfeigned joy, and
soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, the probability of an
entire recovery.
Elinor could not be cheerful. Her joy was of a different
land, and led to anything rather than to gaiety. Marianne
restored to life, health, friends, and to her doating mother,
was an idea to fill her heart with sensations of exquisite
comfort, and expand it in fervent gratitude; — but it led to
no outward demonstrations of joy, no words, no smiles. All
mthin Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent and strong.
She continued by the side of her sister with little inter-
mission the whole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying
ivery inquiry of her enfeebled spirits, supplying every succour,
and watching almost every look and every breath. The
possibility of a relapse would, of course, in some moments,
Dccur to remind her of what anxiety was — but when she saw
on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom
of recovery continued, and saw Marianne at six o'clock, sink
into a quiet, steady, and to all appearance comfortable sleep,
she silenced every doubt.
The time was now drawing on when CoYoxi^^t^tAoxvxsvns^.
256 SEZ^SE A3^p SE^SIBILITr
" Pray be quick, sir, " said Elinor impatiently — " I ha
no time to spare. "
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, ai
seemed not to hear her.
" Your sister, " said he, with abruptness, a moment aft
wards — " is out of danger. I heard it from the servai
God be praised ! — But is it true ? — is it really true ? "
Elinor would not speak. He repeated the inquiry wi
yet greater eagerness.
" For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is s
not? "
" We hope she is. "
He rose up, and walked across the room.
" Had I known as much half an hour ago — But since I «
here " — speaking with a forced vivacity as he returned to
seat — " what does it signify ? — For once, Miss Dashwooc
it will be the last time, perhaps — let us be cheerful together
I am in a fine mood for gaiety. — Tell me honestly " — a dee]
glow overspreading his cheeks — " do you think me mosi
knave or a fool? "
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than e\
She began to think that he must be in liquor; — the stran
ness of such a visit, and of such manners, seemed no oth
wise intelligible; and with this impression, she immediat
rose, saying —
" Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return
Combe. I am not at leisure to remain with you long
Whatever your business may be with me, it will be bet
recollected and explained to-morrow. "
" I understand you, " he replied, with an expressive sm
and a voice perfectly calm. " Yes, I am very drunk,
pint of porter with my cold beef at Marlborough was enoi
to overset me. "
" At Marlborough! " cried Elinor, more and more at a 1
to understand what he would be at.
" Yes — I left London this morning at eight o'clock, a
the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise since tl
time procured me a nuncheon * at Marlborough. "
The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of
eye as he spoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever otl
1 A piece of victuals eaten between meals. — Johnson's Dictionar.
SED^SE A3 < D SEDiSIBILITT 257
unpardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland, he was not
brought there by intoxication, she said, after a moment's
recollection,
" Mr. Willoughby, you ought to feel, and I certainly do —
that after what has passed — your coming here in this manner,
and forcing yourself upon my notice, requires a very par-
ticular excuse. What is it that you mean by it? "
" I mean, " said he, with serious energy, " if I can, to make
you hate me one degree less than you do now. I mean to
offer some kind of explanation, some kind of apology, for the
past — to open my whole heart to you, and by convincing you,
that though I have been always a blockhead, I have not
been always a rascal, to obtain something like forgiveness
from Ma — from your sister. "
" Is this the real reason of your coming? "
" Upon my soul it is, " — was his answer, with a warmth
which brought all the former Willoughby to her remembrance,
and in spite of herself made her think him sincere.
" If that is all, you may be satisfied already, — for Marianne
does — she has long forgiven you. "
" Has she ! " — he cried, in the same eager tone. — " Then
she has forgiven me before she ought to have done it. But
she shall forgive me again, and on more reasonable grounds.
Now, will you listen to me ? "
Elinor bowed her assent.
" I do not know, " said he, after a pause of expectation on
tier side, and thoughtfulness on his own, — " how you may
tiave accounted for my behaviour to your sister, or what
iiabolical motive you may have imputed to me. — Perhaps
rcni will hardly think the better'of me, — it is worth the trial,
however, and you shall hear everything. When I first
became intimate in your family, I had no other intention,
ao other view in the acquaintance than to pass my time
pleasantly while I was obliged to remain in Devonshire,
more pleasantly than I had ever done before. Your sister's
lovely person and interesting manners could not but please
me; and her behaviour to me, almost from the first, was of
1 kind It is astonishing, when I reflect on what it was, and
what she was, that my heart should have been so insensible !
—But at first, I must confess, my vanity only was elevated by
it. Careless of her happiness, thinking only of my own
j
258 SEO^SE J3^D SES^SIBILITT
amusement, giving way to feelings which I had alwa)
too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, b}
means in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, ?
any design of returning her affection. ,,
Miss Dashwood at this point, turning her eyes on hi
the most angry contempt, stopt him, by saying —
" It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for
relate, or for me to listen any longer. Such a begin
this cannot be followed by anything. Do not let
pained by hearing anything more on the subject. "
" I insist on your hearing the whole of it, " he ]
" My fortune was never large, and I had always been
sive, always in the habit of associating with people oi
income than myself. Every year since my coming of
even before, I believe, had added to my debts; and
the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set n
yet that event being uncertain, and possibly far dis
had been for some time my intention to re-establish :
cumstances by marrying a woman of fortune. To
myself to your sister, therefore, was not a thing to be t
of; — and with a meanness, selfishness, cruelty — wi
indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, Miss
wood, can ever reprobate too much — I was acting
manner, trying to engage her regard, without a thoi
returning it. But one thing may be said for me, <
that horrid state of selfish vanity, I did not know the
of the injury I meditated, because I did not then kno
it was to love. But have I ever known it? — Well me
doubted; for, had I really loved, could I have sacrifl
feelings to vanity, to avarice? — or, what is more, <
have sacrificed hers ? — But I have done it. To avoid
parative poverty, which her affection and her society
have deprived of all its horrors, I have, by raising m;
affluence, lost everything that could make it a blessii
" You did then, " said Elinor, a little softened, "
yourself at one time attached to her. "
" To have resisted such attractions, to have wii
such tenderness! — Is there a man on earth who coul
done it! — Yes, I found myself, by insensible degrees, si
fond of her; and the happiest hours of my life were
spent with her, when I felt my intentions were
SEO^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT 259
honourable, and my feelings blameless. Even then, however,
wrhen fully determined on paying my addresses to her, I
dlowed myself most improperly to put off, from day to day,
he moment of doing it, from an unwillingness to enter into
in engagement while my circumstances were so greatly em-
»rrassed. I will not reason here — nor will I stop for you
» expatiate on the absurdity, and the worst than absurdity,
> f scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was already
xmnd. The event has proved, that I was a cunning fool,
wroviding with great circumspection for a possible oppor-
unity of making myself contemptible and wretched for ever.
\t last, however, my resolution was taken, and I had deter-
nined, as soon as I could engage her alone, to justify the
ittentions I had so invariably paid her, and openly assure
ler of an affection which I had already taken such pains to
iisplay. But in the interim — in the interim of the very few
lours that were to pass, before I could have an opportunity
)f speaking with her in private — a circumstance occurred —
in unlucky circumstance, to ruin all my resolution, and with
t all my comfort. A discovery took place, " — here he hesi-
tated and looked down. — " Mrs. Smith had somehow or other
aeen informed, I imagine by some distant relation, whose
interest it was to deprive me of her favour, of an affair, a
zonnection — but I need not explain myself farther, " he added,
looking at her with a heightened colour and an inquiring eye,
" your particular intimacy — you have probably heard the
whole story long ago. "
" I have, " returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and harden-
ing her heart anew against any compassion for him, " I have
beard it all. And how you will explain away any part of
your guilt in that dreadful business, I confess is beyond my
comprehension.''
" Remember, " cried Willoughby, " from whom you re-
ceived the account. Could it be an impartial one? I ac-
knowledge that her situation and her character ought to
have been respected by me. I do not mean to justify myself,
but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I have
nothing to urge, — that because she was injured, she was
irreproachable; and because / was a libertine, she must be a
saint. If the violence of her passions, the weakness of her
understanding — I do not mean, however, to defend myself.
J
260 SE^SE ADiD SE^SIBILITr
Her affection for me deserved better treatment, and I oftei
with great self-reproach, recall the tenderness which, for
very short time, had the power of creating any return,
wish — I heartily wish it had never been. But I have injun
more than herself; and I have injured one whose affectk
for me (may I say it?) was scarcely less warm than hers, ar
whose mind — Oh ! how infinitely superior ! "
" Your indifference, however, towards that unfortuna
girl — I must say it, unpleasant to me as the discussion of su <
a subject may well be — your indifference is no apology f <
your cruel neglect of her. Do not think yourself excused t
any weakness, any natural defect of understanding on h
side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours. You mu;
have known, that while you were enjoying yourself i
Devonshire, pursuing fresh schemes, always gay, alwaj
happy, she was reduced to the extremest indigence. "
" But, upon my soul, I did not know it, " he warmly replie(
" I did not recollect that I had omitted to give her my direi
tion ; and common-sense might have told her how to find
out. "
" Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith? "
" She taxed me with the offence, at once, and my coi
fusion may be guessed. The purity of her life, the formalit
of her notions, her ignorance of the world — everything w*
against me. The matter itself I could not deny, and vai
was every endeavour to soften it. She was previously dii
posed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct i
general, and was moreover discontented with the very littl
attention, the very little portion of my time that I ha
bestowed on her, in my present visit. In short, it ended i
a total breach. By one measure I might have saved mysel
In the height of her morality, good woman ! she offered t
forgive the past if I would marry Eliza. That could not be-
and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house
The night following this affair — I was to go the next morninj
— was spent by me in deliberating on what my future con
duct should be. The struggle was great — but it ended to <
soon. My affection for Marianne, my thorough convictioi
of her attachment to me — it was all insufficient to outweigl
that dread of poverty, or get the better of those false idea!
of the necessity of riches, which I was naturally inclined tc
SE3QE A3^D SE^SIBILITl 261
eel, and expensive society had increased. I had reason to
•elieve myself secure of my present wife, if I chose to address
er, and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else in
ommon prudence remained for me to do. An heavy scene
owever awaited me, before I could leave Devonshire; I
r as engaged to dine with you on that very day, some apology
as therefore necessary for my breaking the engagement,
iut whether I should write this apology, or deliver it in
erson, was a point of long debate. To see Marianne, I felt
ould be dreadful, and I even doubted whether I could see
er again, and keep to my resolution. In that point, how-
irer, I undervalued my own magnanimity, as the event
eclared; for I went, I saw her, and saw her miserable, and
ft her miserable — and left her, hoping never to see her
^ain.
" Why did you call, Mr. Willoughby ? " said Elinor,
jproachfully; " a note would have answered every purpose.
fhy was it necessary to call? "
" It was necessary to my own pride. I could not bear to
save the country in a manner that might lead you, or the
ist of the neighbourhood, to suspect any part of what had
sally passed between Mrs. Smith and myself, and I resolved
lerefore on calling at the cottage, in my way to Honiton.
he sight of your dear sister, however, was really dreadful;
id to heighten the matter, I found her alone. You were all
me, I do not know where. I had left her only the evening
efore, so fully, so firmly resolved within myself on doing
ght ! A few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever;
id I remember how happy, how gay were my spirits, as I
alked from the cottage to Allenham, satisfied with myself,
elighted with everybody! But in this, our last interview
[ friendship, I approached her with a sense of guilt that
Imost took from me the power of dissembling. Her sorrow,
er disappointment, her deep regret, when I told her, that I
ras obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately — I never
hall forget it; united, too, with such reliance, such confi-
lence in me ! O God ! what an hard-hearted rascal I was ! " "
They were both silent for a few moments. Elinor first
poke.
" Did you tell her that you should soon return? "
" I do not know what I told her, " he replied, impatiently ;
I
262 SEO^SE A3iD SEDiSIBILITT
" less than was due to the past, beyond a doubt, and
likelihood much more than was justified by the futu:
cannot think of it — it won't do. Then came your
mother to torture me farther, with all her kindness am
fidence. Thank Heaven! it did torture me. I was i
able. Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the
fort it gives me to look back on my own misery. I owi
a grudge to myself for the stupid, rascally folly of m;
heart, that all my past sufferings under it are only trl
and exultation to me now. Well, I went, left all that I
and went to those to whom, at best, I was only indiff
My journey to town — travelling with my own horses
therefore so tediously — no creature to speak to — m)
reflections so cheerful — when I looked forward everyth
inviting! — when I looked back at Barton, the picti
soothing ! — oh ! — it was a blessed journey. "
He stopt.
" Well, sir, " said Elinor, who, though pitying him,
impatient for his departure, " and this is all? "
" All! — no — have you forgot what passed in town?
infamous letter ! Did she shew it you ? "
" Yes, I saw every note that passed. "
" When the first of hers reached me (as it immediate]
for I was in town the whole time), what I felt is — i
common phrase, not to be expressed; in a more simp
— perhaps too simple to raise any emotion — my feeling
very, very painful. Every line, every word was — i
hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she
would forbid, a dagger to my heart. To know that Ma
was in town was in the same language — a thundc
Thunderbolts and daggers! — what a reproof would she
given me ! — her taste, her opinions — I believe they are
known to me than my own, and I am sure they are de
Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changes
course of this extraordinary conversation, was now so
again; yet she felt it her duty to check such ideas
companion as the last.
" This is not right, Mr. Willoughby. Remember thi
are married. Relate only what in your conscience you
necessary for me to hear. "
" Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still a
SE^SE A3^D SEO^SIBILITT 263
her as in former days — that in spite of the many, many
;eks we had been separated, she was as constant in her own
dings and as full of faith in the constancy of mine as ever,
fckened all my remorse. I say awakened, because time
d London, business and dissipation had in some manner
ieted it, and I had been growing a fine hardened villain,
icying myself indifferent to her, and chusing to fancy that
i too must have become indifferent to me; talking to
rself of our past attachment as a mere idle, trifling busi-
ss, shrugging up my shoulders in proof of its being so, and
mcing every reproach, overcoming every scruple, by
xetly saying now and then,'I shall be heartily glad to
ir she is well married.'But this note made me know
rself better. I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me
in any other woman in the world, and that I was using
r infamously. But everything was then just settled
tween Miss Grey and me. To retreat was impossible.
I that I had to do, was to avoid you both. I sent no
swer to Marianne, intending by that means to preserve
rself from her farther notice ; and for some time I was even
bermined not to call in Berkeley Street: but at last,
iging it wiser to affect the air of a cool, common acquaint-
ed than anything else, I watched you all safely out of the
use one morning, and left my name. "
'Watched us out of the house ! "
'Even so. You would be surprised to hear how often I
tched you, how often I was on the point of falling in with
a. I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight, as
; carriage drove by. Lodging as I did in Bond Street,
jre was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse of
5 or other of you; and nothing but the most constant
tchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire
keep out of your sight, could have separated us so long,
ivoided the Middletons as much as possible, as well as
jrybody else who was likely to prove an acquaintance in
nmon. Not aware of their being in town, however, I
indered on Sir John, I believe, the first day of his coming,
d the day after I called at Mrs. Jennings's. He asked me
a party, a dance at his house in the evening. Had he not
d me as an inducement that you and your sister were to be
ire, I should have felt it too certain a thing to trust myself
264 SEO^SE AOiD SE^QIBILITT
near him. The next morning brought another short 1
from Marianne — still affectionate, open, artless, confu
— everything that could make my conduct most hateful
could not answer it. I tried, but could not frame a sente
But I thought of her, I believe, every moment of the <
If you can pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation *
was then. With my head and heart full of your sister, I
forced to play the happy lover to another woman! Tl
three or four weeks were worse than all. Well, at last,
need not tell you, you were forced on me: and what a st
figure I cut ! what an evening of agony it was ! Maria
beautiful as an angel, on one side, calling me Willoughb
such a tone ! — O God ! — holding out her hand to me, asl
me for an explanation with those bewitching eyes fixe
such speaking solicitude on my face ! and Sophia, jealou
the devil, on the other hand, looking all that was — Wei
does not signify; it is over now. Such an evening ! I
away from you all as soon as I could, but not before I
seen Marianne's sweet face as white as death. That was
last, last look I ever had of her — the last manner in which
appeared to me. It was a horrid sight ! Yet when I thoi
of her to-day as really dying, it was a kind of comfort tc
to imagine that I knew exactly how she would appear to tl
who saw her last in this world. She was before me, ■
stantly before me, as I travelled, in the same look and h
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded,
loughby, first rousing himself, broke it thus —
" Well, let me make haste and be gone. Your siste
certainly better, certainly out of danger. "
" We are assured of it. "
" Your poor mother too ! — doating on Marianne. "
" But the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter; r
you anything to say about that? "
" Yes, yes, that in particular. Your sister wrote to
again, you know, the very next morning. You saw v
she said. I was breakfasting at the Ellison's; and her lei
with some others, was brought to me there from my lodgi
It happened to catch Sophia's eye before it caught m
and its size, the elegance of the paper, the handwriting, 2
gether immediately gave her a suspicion. Some vague re]
had reached her before of my attachment to some yo
SENSE A3 < ^) SENSIBILITY 265
lady in Devonshire, and what had passed within her observa-
tion the preceding evening had marked who the young lady
was, and made her more jealous than ever. Affecting that
air of playfulness, therefore, which is delightful in a woman
one loves, she opened the letter directly, and read its con-
tents. She was well paid for her impudence. She read
what made her wretched. Her wretchedness I could have
borne, but her passion — her malice — at all events it must be
appeased. And in short, what do you think of my wife's
style of letter-writing?— -delicate, tender, truly feminine —
was it not? "
" Your wife ! — the letter was in your own handwriting. "
" Yes, but J had only the credit of servilely copying such
sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to. The original
was all her own, her own happy thoughts and gentle diction.
But what could I do ? — we were engaged, everything in pre-
paration, the day almost fixed — but I am talking like a fool.
Preparation ! — day ! — In honest words, her money was neces-
sary to me, and in a situation like mine anything was to be
done to prevent a rupture. And after all, what did it signify
to my character in the opinion of Marianne and her friends,
in what language my answer was couched? It must have
been only to one end. My business was to declare myself a
scoundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or a bluster was
of little importance.'I am ruined for ever in their opinion/
said I to myself;'I am shut out for ever from their society;
they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter will
only make them think me a blackguard one. " Such were
my reasonings as, in a sort of desperate carelessness, I copied
my wife's words, and parted with the last relics of Marianne.
Her three notes — unluckily they were all in my pocket-book,
or I should have denied their existence, and hoarded them
for ever; I was forced to put them up, and could not even
kiss them. And the lock of hair — that too I had always
carried about me in the same pocket-book, which was now
searched by Madam with the most ingratiating virulence, —
the dear lock — all, every memento was torn from me. "
" You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blameable, "
said Elinor, while her voice, in spite of herself, betrayed her
compassionate emotion; " you ought not to speak in this
way, either of Mrs. Willoughby or my sister. You have
266 SE^SE A2Q) SENSIBILITY
made your own choice. It was not forced on you. Your
wife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least.
She must be attached to you, or she would not have married
you. To treat her with unkindness, to speak of her slight-
ingly, is no atonement to Marianne, nor can I suppose it a
relief to your own conscience. "
" Do not talk to me of my wife, " said he, with a heavy sigh.
4t She does not deserve your compassion. She knew I had
no regard for her when we married. Well, married we were,
and came down to Combe Magna to be happy, and afterwards
returned to town to be gay. And, now do you pity me, Miss
Dashwood? or have I said all this to no purpose? Am I—
be it only one degree — am I less guilty in your opinion than
I was before ? My intentions were not always wrong. Have
I explained away any part of my guilt? "
" Yes, you have certainly removed something — a little.
You have proved yourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had
believed you. You have proved your heart less wicked, much
less wicked. But I hardly know — the misery that you have
inflicted — I hardly know what could have made it worse. "
" Will you repeat to your sister, when she is recovered,
what I have been telling you? Let me be a little lightened
too in her opinion as well as in yours. You tell me that she
has forgiven me already. Let me be able to fancy that a
better knowledge of my heart, and of my present feelings,
will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural, more
gentle, less dignified forgiveness. Tell her of my misery and
my penitence, tell her that my heart was never inconstant to
her, and if you will, that at this moment she is dearer to me
than ever. "
" I will tell her all that is necessary to what may com-
paratively be called your justification. But you have not
explained to me the particular reason of your coming now,
nor how you heard of her illness. "
" Last night, in Drury-lane lobby, I ran against Sir John
Middleton, and when he saw who I was (for the first time
these two months) he spoke to me. That he had cut me ever
since my marriage, I had seen without surprise or resentment.
Now, however, his good-natured, honest, stupid soul, full of
indignation against me, and concern for your sister, could not
resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought to,
SE^SE A3^p SED^SIBILITT 267
though probably he did not think it would, vex me horribly.
As bluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that
Marianne Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland
—a letter that morning received from Mrs. Jennings declared
her danger most imminent — the Palmers all gone off in a
fright, etc. I was too much shocked to be able to pass myself
off as insensible, even to the undiscerning Sir John. His
heart was softened in seeing mine suffer; and so much of his
ill-will was done away, that when we parted, he almost shook
me by the hand, while he reminded me of an old promise
about a pointer puppy. What I felt on hearing that your
sister was dying — and dying, too, believing me the greatest
villain upon earth, scorning, hating me in her latest moments
— for how could I tell what horrid projects might not have
been imputed? — One person I was sure would represent me
as capable of anything. What I felt was dreadful! My
resolution was soon made, and at eight o'clock this morning
I was in my carriage. Now you know all. "
Elinor made no answer. Her thoughts were silently fixed
on the irreparable injury which too early an independence
and its consequent habits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury,
had made in the mind, the character, the happiness, of a man
who, to every advantage of person and talents, united a dis-
position naturally open and honest, and a feeling, affectionate
temper. The world had made him extravagant and vain;
extravagance and vanity had made him cold-hearted and
selfish. Vanity, while seeking its own guilty triumph at the
expense of another, had involved him in a real attachment,
which extravagance, or at least its offspring necessity, had
required to be sacrificed. Each faulty propensity, in leading
him to evil, had led him likewise to punishment. The attach-
ment from which against honour, against feeling, against
every better interest he had outwardly torn himself, now,
when no longer allowable, governed every thought; and the
connection, for the sake of which he had, with little scruple,
left her sister to misery, was likely to prove a source of un-
happiness to himself of a far more incurable nature. From
a reverie of this kind she was recalled at the end of some
minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a reverie
at least equally painful, started up in preparation for going,
and said —
268 SEWSE JD^D SEDiSIBILITT
" There is no use in staying here; I must be off. "
" Are you going back to town? "
" No; to Combe Magna. I have business there; fron
thence to town in a day or two. Good-bye. "
He held out his hand. She could not refuse to give hir
hers; he pressed it with affection.
" And you do think something better of me than you did?
said he, letting it fall, and leaning against the mantelpiec
as if forgetting he was to go.
Elinor assured him that she did; that she forgave, pitie
him, wished him well — was even interested in his happine
— and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviour mo
likely to promote it. His answer was not very encouragin
" As to that, " said he, " I must rub through the world i
well as I can. Domestic happiness is out of the questioi
If, however, I am allowed to think that you and yours fe
an interest in my fate and actions, it may be the means-
may put me on my guard — at least, it may be something 1
live for. Marianne, to be sure, is lost to me for ever. We:
I even, by any blessed chance, at liberty again — "
Elinor stopt him with a reproof.
" Well, " he replied, " once more good-bye. I shall no
go away and live in dread of one event. "
" What do you mean? "
" Your sister's marriage. "
" You are very wrong. She can never be more lost to yc
than she is now. "
" But she will be gained by some one else. And if thi
some one should be the very he whom, of all others, I coul
least bear — But I will not stay to rob myself of all yoi
compassionate good-will, by showing that where I have mo;
injured I can least forgive. Good-bye; God bless you! "
And with these words, he almost ran out of the room.
I
SE^SE A^iD SENSIBILITY 269
CH^PTE^XLF
Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time even
after the sound of his carriage had died away, remained too
much oppressed by a crowd of ideas, widely differing in
themselves, but of which sadness was the general result, to
think even of her sister.
Willoughby — he whom only half-an-hour ago she had
abhorred as the most worthless of men — Willoughby, in spite
of all his faults, excited a degree of commiseration for the
sufferings produced by them, which made her think of him
as now separated for ever from her family with a tenderness,
a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledged
within herself, to his wishes than to his merits. She felt that
his influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances
which ought not in reason to have weight; by that person
of uncommon attraction — that open, affectionate, and lively
manner which it was no merit to possess; and by that still
ardent love for Marianne, which it was not even innocent to
indulge. But she felt that it was so, long, long before she
could feel his influence less.
When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne,
she found her just awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet
a sleep to the extent of her hopes. Elinor's heart was full.
The past, the present, the future — Willoughby's visit,
Marianne's safety, and her mother's expected arrival, threw
her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept off every
indication of fatigue, and made her only fearful of betraying
herself to her sister. Short was the time, however, in which
that fear could affect her, for within half-an-hour after Wil-
loughby's leaving the house, she was again called down-stairs
by the sound of another carriage. Eager to save her mother
from every unnecessary moment's horrible suspense, she
ran immediately into the hall, and reached the outward door
just in time to receive and support her as she entered it.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house
had produced almost the conviction of Marianne's being no
more, had no voice to inquire after her, no voice even for
Elinor; but she, waiting neither for salutation nor inquiry,
270 SEO^SE A3iD SED^SIBILITT
instantly gave the joyful relief; — and her mother, catching
it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as much over-
come by her happiness as she had been before by her fears.
She was supported into the drawing-room between her
daughter and her friend: and there, shedding tears of joy,
though still unable to speak, embraced Elinor again and
again, turning from her at intervals to press Colonel Brandon's
hand, with a look which spoke at once her gratitude, and
her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the
moment. He shared it, however, in a silence even greater
than her own.
As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself, to see
Marianne was her first desire; and in two minutes she was
with her beloved child, rendered dearer to her than ever by
absence, unhappiness, and danger. Elinor's delight, as she
saw what each felt in the meeting, was only checked by an
apprehension of its robbing Marianne of further sleep: but
Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, when
the life of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in
knowing her mother was near her, and conscious of being too
weak for conversation, submitted readily to the silence and
quiet prescribed by every nurse around her. Mrs. Dashwood
would sit up with her all night, and Elinor, in compliance
with her mother's entreaty, went to bed. But the rest, which
one night entirely sleepless and many hours of the most
wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off by
irritation of spirits. Willoughby, " poor Willoughby, " as
she now. allowed herself to call him, was constantly in her
thoughts ; she would not but have heard his vindication for
the world, and now blamed, now acquitted herself, for having
judged him so harshly before. But her promise of relating
it to her sister was invariably painful. She dreaded the
performance of it, dreaded what its effect on Marianne might
be; doubted whether, after such an explanation, she could
ever be happy with another, and for a moment, wished Wil-
loughby a widower; then remembering Colonel Brandon,
reproved herself, felt that to his sufferings and his constancy,
far more than to his rival's, the reward of her sister was due,
and wished anything rather than Mrs. Willoughby's death.
The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had been
much softened to Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm;

I
I
I
f
SEO^SE A^D SE^CSIBILITr 271
for so great was her uneasiness about Marianne, that she had
already determined to set out for Cleveland on that very-
day, without waiting for any farther intelligence, and had so
far settled her journey before his arrival, that the Careys
were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away,
as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might
be infection.
Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant
cheerfulness of Mrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved her
to be, as she repeatedly declared herself, one of the happiest
women in the world. Elinor could not hear the declaration,
nor witness its proofs, without sometimes wondering whether
her mother ever recollected Edward. But Mrs. Dashwood,
trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointment
which Elinor had sent her, was led away by the exuberance
of her joy to think only of what would increase it. Marianne
was restored to her from a danger in which, as she now began
to feel, her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the
unfortunate attachment to Willoughby had contributed to
place her; and in her recovery she had yet another source of
joy unthought of by Elinor. It was thus imparted to her,.
as soon as any opportunity of private conference between
them occurred.
" At last we are alone. My Elinor, you do not yet know
all my happiness. Colonel Brandon loves Marianne; he has
told me so himself. "
Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained,
surprised and not surprised, was all silent attention.
" You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder
at your composure now. Had I sat down to wish for any
possible good to my family, I should have fixed on Colonel
Brandon's marrying one of you as the object most desirable.
And I believe Marianne will be the most happy with him of
the two. "
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so,,
because satisfied that none founded on an impartial con-
sideration of their age, characters, or feelings, could be given;
— but her mother must always be carried away by her imagina-
tion on any interesting subject, and therefore, instead of an
inquiry, she passed it off with a smile.
" He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we
is
272 SES^SE A3*p SEDiSIBILITT
travelled. It came out quite unawares, quite undesignedly.
I, you may well believe, could talk of nothing but my child;
— he could not conceal his distress; I saw that it equalled
my own, and he, perhaps, thinking that mere friendship, as E
the world now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy—
or rather not thinking at all, I suppose — giving way to irre-
sistible feelings, made me acquainted with his earnest, tender,
•constant affection for Marianne. He has loved her, my L
Elinor, ever since the first moment of seeing her. -j
Here, however, Elinor perceived, not the language, not the
professions of Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellish-
ments of her mother's active fancy, which fashioned every-
thing delightful to her, as it chose.
" His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that
Willoughby ever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more
sincere or constant — whichever we are to call it — has sub-
sisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne's unhappy
prepossession for that worthless young man! — and without
selfishness — without encouraging a hope! — could he have
seen her happy with another? Such a noble mind! — such
openness, such sincerity ! — no one can be deceived in htm. "
" Colonel Brandon's character, " said Elinor, " as an
•excellent man, is well established. "
" I know it is, " replied her mother seriously, " or after
such a warning, / should be the last to encourage such
affection, or even to be pleased by it. But his coming for
me as he did, with such active, such ready friendship, is
♦enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men. "
" His character, however, " answered Elinor, " does not
Test on one act of kindness, to which his affection for Marianne,
were humanity out of the case, would have prompted him.
To Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, he had been long and
intimately known; they equally love and respect him: and
even my knowledge of him, though lately acquired, is very
•considerable; and so highly do / value and esteem him, that
if Marianne can be happy with him, I shall be as ready as
yourself to think our connection the greatest blessing to us
in the world. What answer did you give him? Did you
allow him to hope ? "
" Oh ! my love, I could not then talk of hope to him or to
myself Marianne might at that moment be dying. But
SEV^SE ADiD SEViSIBILITT 273
he did not ask for hope or encouragement. His was an
involuntary confidence, an irrepressible effusion to a soothing
friend, — not an application to a parent. Yet after a time I
did say, for at first I was quite overcome, that if she lived,
as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie in
promoting their marriage; and since our arrival, since our
delightful security, I have repeated it to him more fully, have
given him every encouragement in my power. Time, a very
little time, I tell him, will do everything; — Marianne's heart
is not to be wasted for ever on such a man as Willoughby.
His own merits must soon secure it. "
" To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however, you have
not yet made him equally sanguine. "
" No. He thinks Marianne's affection too deeply rooted
for any change in it under a great length of time; and even
supposing her heart again free, is too diffident of himself to
believe, that with such a difference of age, and disposition,
he could ever attach her. There, however, he is quite
mistaken. His age is only so much beyond hers as to be
an advantage, as to make his character and principles fixed;
and his disposition, I am well convinced, is exactly the very
one to make your sister happy. And his person, his manners
too, are all in his favour. My partiality does not blind me;
he certainly is not so handsome as Willoughby; but, at
the same time, there is something much more pleasing in
his countenance. There was always a something, if you
remember, in Willoughby's eyes at times, which I did not
like/;
Elinor could not remember it; but her mother, without
waiting for her assent, continued —
" And his manners, the Colonel's manners, are not only
more pleasing to me than Willoughby's ever were, but they
are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attaching to
Marianne. Their gentleness, their genuine attention to
other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity, is much
more accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness,
often artificial, and often ill-timed, of the other. I am very
sure myself, that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable
as he has proved himself the contrary, Marianne would yet
never have been so happy with him, as she will be with
Colonel Brandon. "
274 SE^SE A3iD SEOiSIBILITT
She paused. Her daughter could not quite agree with
her, but her dissent was not heard, and therefore gave no
offence.
" At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me, "
added Mrs. Dashwood, " even if I remain at Barton; and
in all probability, for I hear it is a large village — indeed there
certainly must be some small house or cottage close by, that
would suit us quite as well as our present situation. "
Poor Elinor! here was a new scheme for getting her to
Delaford ! but her spirit was stubborn.
" His fortune too ! for at my time of life, you know, every-
body cares about that ; and though I neither know, nor desire
to know, what it really is, I am sure it must be a good one. "
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third
person, and Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private,
to wish success to her friend, and yet, in wishing it, to feel a
pang for Willoughby.
CH*APTE\ XLV1
Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not
been long enough to make her recovery slow; and with youth,
natural strength, and her mother's presence in aid, it pro-
ceeded so smoothly as to enable her to remove, within four
days after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs. Palmer's dress-
ing-room. When there, at her own particular request, for
she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetch-
ing her mother, Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her.
His emotion in entering the room, in seeing her altered
looks, and in receiving the pale hand which she immediately
held out to him, was such as in Elinor's conjecture, must
arise from something more than his affection for Marianne,
or the consciousness of its being known to others; and she
soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying com-
plexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence
of many past scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by
that resemblance between Marianne and Eliza already ac-
knowledged, and now strengthened by the hollow eye, the
SE$(§E ADiD SEDiSIBILITT 275
sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness, and the warm
acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.
Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than her
daughter, but with a mind very differently influenced, and
therefore watching to very different effect, saw nothing in
the Colonel's behaviour but what arose from the most simple
and self-evident sensations, while in the actions and words
\ of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that something
\ more than gratitude already dawned!
j At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing visibly
^ stronger every twelve hours, Mrs. Dashwood, urged equally
by her own and her daughter's wishes, began to talk of re-
moving to Barton. On her measures depended those of her
two friends; Mrs. Jennings could not quit Cleveland during
the Dashwoods'stay, and Colonel Brandon was soon brought
by their united request, to consider his own abode there as
equally determinate, if not equally indispensable. At his
and Mrs. Jennings's united request in return, Mrs. Dashwood
was prevailed on to accept the use of his carriage on her
journey back, for the better accommodation of her sick child;
and the Colonel, at the joint invitation of Mrs. Dashwood and
Mrs. Jennings, whose active good-nature made her friendly
and hospitable for other people as well as herself, engaged
with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in the
course of a few weeks.
The day of separation and departure arrived; and Mari-
anne, after taking so particular and lengthened a leave of
Mrs. Jennings — one so earnestly grateful, so full of respect
and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heart from a secret
acknowledgment of past inattention — and bidding Colonel
Brandon farewell with the cordiality of a friend, was carefully
assisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious
that she should engross at least half. Mrs. Dashwood and
Elinor then followed, and the others were- left by themselves,
to talk of the travellers, and feel their own dulness, till Mrs.
Jennings was summoned to her chaise to take comfort in the
gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young companions;
and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took his
solitary way to Delaford.
The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Marianne
bore her journey on both without essential fatigue. Every-
276 SEO^SE A^p SEO^SIBILITr
thing that the most zealous affection, the most solicitous care,
could do to render her comfortable, was the office of each
watchful companion, and each found their reward in her
bodily ease and her calmness of spirits. To Elinor, the
observation of the latter was particularly grateful. She,
who had seen her week after week so constantly suffering,
oppressed by anguish of heart which she had neither courage
to speak of, nor fortitude to conceal, now saw, with a joy
which no other could equally share, an apparent composure
of mind, which in being the result as she trusted of serious
reflection, must eventually lead her to contentment and
cheerfulness.
As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on scenes
of which every field and every tree brought some peculiar,
some painful recollection, she grew silent and thoughtful,
and turning away her face from their notice, sat earnestly
gazing through the window. But here, Elinor could neither
wonder nor blame ; and when she saw, as she assisted Mari-
anne from the carriage, that she had been crying, she saw
only an emotion too natural in itself to raise anything less
tender than pity, and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise.
In the whole of her subsequent manner, she traced the direc-
tion of a mind awakened to reasonable exertion; for no
sooner had they entered their common sitting-room, than
Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look of resolute
firmness, as if determined at once to accustom herself to
the sight of every object with which the remembrance of
Willoughby could be connected. She said little, but every
sentence aimed at cheerfulness, and though a sigh sometimes
escaped her, it never passed away without the atonement of
a smile. After dinner, she would try her pianoforte. She
went to it; but the music on which her eye first rested was
an opera, procured for her by Willoughby, containing some
of their favourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her
own name in his handwriting. That would not do. She
shook her head, put the music aside, and, after running over
the keys for a minute, complained of feebleness in her fingers,
and closed the instrument again; declaring, however, with
firmness as she did so, that she should in future practise
much.
The next morning produced no abatement in these happy
SEV^SE ADiD SEDiSIBILITT 277
symptoms. On the contrary, with a mind and body alike
strengthened by rest, she looked and spoke with more
genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure of Margaret's return,
and talking of the dear family party which would then be re-
stored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society as the
only happiness worth a wish.
" When the weather is settled, and I have recovered my
strength, " said she, " we will take long walks together every
day. We will walk to the farm at the edge of the down, and
see how the children go on; we will walk to Sir John's new
plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland; and we
will often go to the old ruins of the Priory, and try to trace
its foundations as far as we are told they once reached. I
know we shall be happy. I know the summer will pass
happily away. I mean never to be later in rising than six,
and from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment
between music and reading. I have formed my plan, and am
determined to enter on a course of serious study. Our own
library is too well known to me to be resorted to for anything
beyond mere amusement. But there are many works well
worth reading at the Park; and there are others of more
modern production which I know I can borrow of Colonel
Brandon. By reading only six hours a day, I shall gain in
the course of a twelvemonth a great deal of instruction which
I now feel myself to want. "
Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly
as this; though smiling to see the same eager fancy which
had been leading her to the extreme of languid indolence and
selfish repining, now at work in introducing excess into a
scheme of such rational employment and virtuous self-con-
trol. Her smile, however, changed to a sigh when she
remembered that her promise to Willoughby was yet unful-
filled, and feared she had that to communicate which might
again unsettle the mind of Marianne, and ruin at least for a
time this fair prospect of busy tranquillity. Willing there-
fore to delay the evil hour, she resolved to wait till her sister's
health were more secure, before she appointed it. But the
_ resolution was made only to be broken.
i Marianne had been two or three days at home, before the
weather was fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture
out. But at last a soft, genial morning appeared — such as
278 SE2QE AD^p SEV^SIBILITT
might tempt the daughter's wishes and the mother's confi-
dence ; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor's arm, was authorised
to walk as long as she could without fatigue, in the lane before
the house.
The sisters set out at a pace slow as the feebleness of Mari-
anne in an exercise hitherto untried since her illness required:
— and they had advanced only so far beyond the house as tc
admit a full view of the hill, the important hill behind, when
pausing with her eyes turned towards it, Marianne calml)
said —
" There, exactly there " — pointing with one hand, " or
that projecting mound — there I fell; and there I first sau
Willoughby. "
Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving, sh(
added —
" lam thankful to find that I can look with so little pair
on the spot ! — shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?'
— hesitatingly it was said. — " Or will it be wrong? I cos
talk of it now, I hope, as I ought to do. "
Elinor tenderly invited her to be open.
" As for regret, " said Marianne, " I have done with that
as far as he is concerned. I do not mean to talk to you c
what my feelings have been for him, but what they are nou
At present, if I could be satisfied on one point — if I could b
allowed to think that he was not always acting a part, nc
always deceiving me; — but above all, if I could be assure
that he never was so very wicked as my fears have sometime
fancied him, since the story of that unfortunate girl — "
She stopt. Elinor joyfully treasured her words as sli
answered —
" If you could be assured of that, you think you shoul
be easy. "
" Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it;— fc
not only is it horrible to suspect a person, who has been wh*
he has been to me, of such designs, — but what must it mal
me to appear myself? What in a situation like mine, but
most shamefully unguarded affection could expose me to—
" How then, " asked her sister, " would you account fc
his behaviour? "
. " I would suppose him, — Oh ! how gladly would I suppos
him, only fickle — very, very fickle. "
SE3^(SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 279
»r said no more. She was debating within herself on
ibility of beginning her story directly, or postponing
[arianne were in stronger health; — and they crept on
w minutes in silence.
m. not wishing him too much good/'said Marianne at
h a sigh, " when I wish his secret reflections may be
e unpleasant than my own. He will suffer enough
1. "
you compare your conduct with his? "
I compare it with what it ought to have been; I
e it with yours. "
: situations have borne little resemblance. "
jy have borne more than our conduct. Do not, my
Elinor, let your kindness defend what I know your
nt must censure. My illness has made me think — it
en me leisure and calmness for serious recollection,
jfore I was enough recovered to talk, I was perfectly
reflect. I considered the past: I saw in my own
ur, since the beginning of our acquaintance with him
tumn, nothing but a series of imprudence towards
and want of kindness to others. I saw that my own
had prepared my sufferings, and that my want of
e under them had almost led me to the grave. My
[ well knew, had been entirely brought on by myself,
l negligence of my own health as I felt even at the
be wrong. Had I died, it would have been self-
;ion. I did not know my danger till the danger was
i; but with such feelings as these reflections gave me,
sr at my recovery, — wonder that the very eagerness
esire to live, to have time for atonement to my God,
rou all, did not kill me at once. Had I died, in what
misery should I have left you, my nurse, my friend,
sr! — You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of
er days; who had known all the murmurings of my
-How should I have lived in your remembrance! —
ther too! How could you have consoled her! — I
express my own abhorrence of myself. Whenever I
;owards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some
ndulged. Everybody seemed injured by me. The
5, the unceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings, I had
with ungrateful contempt. To the Middletons, the
280 SE3^SE AD^D SE^IBILITT
Palmers, the Steeles, to every common acquaintance even, I
had been insolent and unjust; with an heart hardened against
their merits, and a temper irritated by their very attention.
To John, to Fanny, — yes, even to them, little as they deserve,
I had given less than their due. But you, — you above all,
above my mother, had been wronged by me. I, and only I,
knew your heart and its sorrows; yet, to what did it influence
me? — not to any compassion that could benefit you or
myself. Your example was before me: but to what avail?
Was I more considerate of you and your comfort? Did I
imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by taking
any -part in those offices of general complaisance or particular
gratitude which you had hitherto been left to discharge
alone? No; — not less when I knew you to be unhappy,
than when I had believed you at ease, did I turn away
from every exertion of duty or friendship; scarcely allowed
sorrow to exist but with me, regretting only thai heart which
deserted and wronged me, and leaving you, for whom I
professed an unbounded affection, to be miserable for my
sake. "
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit; and
Elinor, impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, gave
her instantly that praise and support which her frankness
and her contrition so well deserved. Marianne pressed her
hand and replied —
" You are very good. The future must be my proof. I
have laid down my plan, and if I am capable of adhering to
it, my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved.
They shall no longer worry others, nor torture myself. I
shall now live solely for my family. You, my mother, and
Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me ; you will
share my affections entirely between you. From you, from
my home, I shall never again have the smallest incitement to
move ; and if I do mix in other society, it will be only to shew
that my spirit is humbled, my heart amended, and that I can
practise the civilities, the lesser duties of life, with gentleness
and forbearance. As for Willoughby, to say that I shall soon
or that I shall ever forget him, would be idle. His remem-
brance can be overcome by no change of circumstances or
opinions. But it shall be regulated, it shall be checked by
religion, by reason, by constant employment. "
I
I
SE^SE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 281
She paused, and added in a lower voice, " If I could but
know his heart, everything would become easy. "
Elinor, who had now been some time reflecting on the pro-
priety or impropriety of speedily hazarding her narration,
without feeling at all nearer decision than at first, heard this;
and perceiving that as reflection did nothing, resolution must
do all, soon found herself leading to the fact.
She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address ; pre-
pared her anxious listener with caution; related simply and
honestly the chief points on which Willoughby grounded his
apology; did justice to his repentance, and softened only his
protestations of present regard. Marianne said not a word;
she trembled, her eyes were fixed on the ground, and her lips
became whiter than even sickness had left them. A thousand
inquiries sprung up from her heart, but she dared not urge
one. She caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her
hand, unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her sister's,
and tears covered her cheeks.
Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home;
and till they reached the door of the cottage, easily conjec-
turing what her curiosity must be, though no question was
suffered to speak it, talked of nothing but Willoughby, and
their conversation together; and was carefully minute in
every particular of speech and look, where minuteness could
be safely indulged. As soon as they entered the house,
Marianne, with a kiss of gratitude, and these two words just
articulate through her tears, " Tell mama, " withdrew from
her sister and walked slowly upstairs. Elinor would not
attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now
sought; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its result,
and a resolution of reviving the subject again should Marianne
fail to do it, she turned into the parlour to fulfil her parting
injunction.
i
282 SENJSE AD^D SEDiSIBILITT
CHtAPTET^ XLVII
Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of
her former favourite. She rejoiced in his being cleared from
some part of his imputed guilt; she was sorry for him; she
wished him happy. But the feelings of the past could not be
recalled. Nothing could restore him with a faith unbroken
— a character unblemished, to Marianne. Nothing could
do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered
through his means, nor remove the guilt of his conduct
towards Eliza. Nothing could replace him, therefore in her
former esteem, nor injure the interest of Colonel Brandon.
Had Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Willoughby's
story from himself — had she witnessed his distress, and been
under the influence of his countenance and his manner, it is
probable that her compassion would have been greater. But
it was neither in Elinor's power, nor in her wish, to rouse
such feelings in another, by her retailed explanation, as had
at first been called forth in herself. Reflection had given
calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion of
Willoughby's deserts : she wished, therefore, to declare only
the simple truth, and lay open such facts as were really due
to his character, without any embellishment of tenderness
to lead the fancy astray.
In the evening, when they were all there together, Mari-
anne began voluntarily to speak of him again; but that it
was not without an effort, the restless, unquiet thoughtful- *
ness in which she had been for some time previously sitting,
her rising colour as she spoke, and her unsteady voice,
plainly shewed.
" I wish to assure you both, " said she, " that I see every-
thing — as you can desire me to do. "
Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with
soothing tenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to ^
hear her sister's unbiassed opinion, by an eager sign, engaged
her silence. Marianne slowly continued —
" It is a great relief to me — what Elinor told me this —
morning — I have now heard exactly what I wished to hear. "
For some moments her voice was lost; but, recovering her-
SE^SE A3iD SEViSIBILITT 283
self, she added, and with greater calmness than before : " I
am now perfectly satisfied. I wish for no change. I never
could have been happy with him, after knowing, as sooner or
later I must have known, all this. I should have had no
confidence, no esteem. Nothing could have done it away
to my feelings. "
" I know it — I know it, " cried her mother. " Happy with
a man of libertine practices ! With one who had so injured
the peace of the dearest of our friends, and the best of men?
No — my Marianne has not a heart to be made happy by such
a man! Her conscience, her sensitive conscience, would
have felt all that the conscience of her husband ought to
have felt. "
Marianne sighed, and repeated — " I wish for no change. "
" You consider the matter, " said Elinor, " exactly as a
good mind and a sound understanding must consider it; and
I dare say you perceive, as well as myself, not only in this,
but in many other circumstances, reason enough to be con-
vinced that your marriage must have involved you in many
certain troubles and disappointments in which you would
have been poorly supported by an affection, on his side, much
less certain. Had you married, you must have been always
poor. His expensiveness is acknowledged even by himself,
and his whole conduct declares that self-denial is a word
hardly understood by him. His demands and your in-
experience together on a small, very small income, must
have brought on distresses which would not be the less
grievous to you from having been entirely unknown and un-
thought of before. Your sense of honour and honesty would
have led you, I know, when aware of your situation, to
attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible;
and perhaps, as long as your frugality retrenched only on
your own comfort, you might have been suffered to practise
it, but beyond that — and how little could the utmost of your
single management do to stop the*ruin which had begun
before your marriage ? — beyond that, had you endeavoured,
however reasonably, to abridge its enjoyments, is it not to
be feared, that instead of prevailing on feelings so selfish to
consent to it, you would have lessened your own influence
on his heart, and made him regret the connection which had
involved him in such difficulties ? "
284 SEWgE A3^D SED^SIBILITT
Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word
" Selfish? " in a tone that implied " Do you really think him
selfish? "
" The whole of his behaviour, " replied Elinor, " from the
beginning to the end of the affair, has been grounded on
selfishness. It was selfishness which first made him sport
with your affections — which afterwards, when his own were
engaged, made him delay the confession of it, and which
finally carried him from Barton. His own enjoyment, or
his own ease, was in every particular his ruling principle. "
" It is very true. My happiness never was his object. "
" At present, " continued Elinor, " he regrets what he has
done. And why does he regret it? Because he finds it has
not answered towards himself. It has not made him happy.
His circumstances are now unembarrassed — he suffers from
no evil of that kind, and he thinks only that he has married
a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself. But does
it thence follow that, had he married you, he would have
been happy ? The inconveniences would have been different
He would then have suffered under the pecuniary distresses
which, because they are removed, he now reckons as nothing.
He would have had a wife of whose temper he could make
no complaint, but he would have been always necessitous —
always poor; and probably would soon have learnt to rank
the innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income
as of far more importance, even to domestic happiness, than
the mere temper of a wife. "
" I have not a doubt of it, " said Marianne; " and I have
nothing to regret — nothing but my own folly. "
" Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child, " said
Mrs. Dashwood; " she must be answerable. "
Marianne would not let her proceed ; and Elinor, satisfied
that each felt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of
the past that might weaken her sister's spirits; she therefore,
pursuing the first subject, immediately continued —
" One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the
whole of the story — that all Willoughby's difficulties have
arisen from the first offence against virtue, in his behaviour
to Eliza Williams. That crime has been the origin of every
lesser one, and of all his present discontents. "
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and her
SEJ^SE AO^D SE & CSIBILITr 285
mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon's
injuries and merits, warm as friendship and design could
unitedly dictate. Her daughter did not look, however, as if
much of it were heard by her.
Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or
three following days, that Marianne did not continue to gain
strength as she had done; but while her resolution was un-
subdued, and she still tried to appear cheerful and easy, her
sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon her health.
Margaret returned, and the family were again all restored
to each other, again quietly settled at the cottage, and if not
pursuing their usual studies with quite so much vigour as
when they first came to Barton, at least planning a vigorous
prosecution of them in future.
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward. She
had heard nothing of him since her leaving London, nothing
new of his plans, nothing certain even of his present abode.
Some letters had passed between her and her brother, in con-
sequence of Marianne's illness; and in the first of John's,
there had been this sentence: — " We know nothing of our
unfortunate Edward, and can make no inquiries on so pro-
hibited a subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford; "
which was all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the
correspondence, for his name was not even mentioned in any
of the succeeding letters. She was not doomed, however,
to be long in ignorance of his measures.
Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter
on business ; and when, as he waited at table, he had satisfied
the inquiries of his mistress as to the event of his errand, this
was his voluntary communication —
" I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is married. "
Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon Elinor,
, saw her turning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.
Mrs. Dashwood, whose eyes, as she answered the servant's
inquiry, had intuitively taken the same direction, was
shocked to perceive by Elinor's countenance how much she
really suffered, and in a moment afterwards, alike distressed
by Marianne's situation, knew not on which child to bestow
r her principal attention.
The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken
ill, had sense enough to call one of the maids, who, with
286 SE*(SE A3 < p SE^IBILITT
Mrs. Dashwood's assistance, supported her into the othei
room. By that time, Marianne was rather better, and hei
mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the maid
returned to Elinor, who though still much disordered, had s <
far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be jusl
beginning an inquiry of Thomas as to the source of his
intelligence. Mrs. Dashwood immediately took all thai
trouble on herself: and Elinor had the benefit of the in
formation without the exertion of seeking it.
" Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas ?'
" I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in Exeter
and his lady too, Miss Steele as was. They was stopping ir
a chaise at the door of the New London Inn, as I went then
with a message from Sally at the Park to her brother, who u
one of the postboys. I happened to look up as I went by the
chaise, and so I see directly it was the youngest Miss Steele
so I took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me, anc
inquired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies, especial^
Miss Marianne, and bid me I should give her compliment
and Mr. Ferrars's, their best compliments and service, anc
how sorry they was they had not time to come on and se <
you — but they was in a great hurry to go forwards, for the)
was going further down for a little while — buthowsever, whei
they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you. "
" But did she tell you she was married, Thomas? "
" Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she had changec
her name since she was in these parts. She was always i
very affable and free-spoken young lady, and very civil
behaved. So, I made free to wish her joy. "
" Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her? "
" Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it, but he die
not look up; — he never was a gentleman much for talking. "
Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting
himself forward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the
same explanation.
" Was there no one else in the carriage? "
" No, ma'am, only they two. "
" Do you know wl^ere they came from? "
" They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy — Mrs.
Ferrars told me. "
" And are going farther westward ? "
SE^SE AD^D SEOiSIBILITT 287
" Yes, ma'am — but not to bide long. They will soon be
back again, and then they'd be sure and call here. "
Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but Elinor
knew better than to expect them. She recognised the whole
of Lucy in the message, and was very confident that Edward
would never come near them. She observed, in a low voice,
to her mother, that they were probably going down to Mr.
Pratt's, near Plymouth.
Thomas's intelligence seemed over. Elinor looked as if
she wished to hear more.
" Did you see them off before you came away? "
" No, ma'am — the horses was just coming out, but I could
not bide any longer; I was afraid of being late. "
" Did Mrs, Ferrars look well? "
" Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well; and to my
mind she was always a very handsome young lady — and she
seemed vastly contented. "
Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question, and
Thomas and the table-cloth, now alike needless, were soon
after dismissed. Marianne had already sent to say that she
should eat nothing more; Mrs. Dashwood's and Elinor's
appetites were equally lost, and Margaret might think herself
very well off, that with so much uneasiness as both her sisters
had lately experienced, so much reason as they had often
had to be careless of the meals, she had never been obliged
to go without her dinner before.
When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mrs.
Dashwood and Elinor were left to themselves, they remained
long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence.
Mrs. Dashwood feared to hazard any remark, and ventured
not to offer consolation. She now found that she had erred
in relying on Elinor's representation of herself; and justly
concluded that everything had been expressly softened at
the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness, suffer-
ing as she then had suffered for Marianne. She found that
she had been misled by the careful, the considerate attention
of her daughter, to think the attachment which once she
had so well understood, much slighter^ in reality than she
had been wont to believe, or than it was now proved to be.
She feared that under this persuasion she had been unjust,
inattentive — nay, almost unkind to her Elinor: — that Mari-
288 SENgE A3^D SENSIBILITY
anne's affliction, because more acknowledged, more immedi-
ately before her, had too much engrossed her tenderness,
and led her away to forget that in Elinor she might have a
daughter suffering almost as much, certainly with less self-
provocation, and greater fortitude.
CH^PTE^ XLVlll
Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of
an unpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told
to consider it, and certainty itself. She now found, that in
spite of herself, she had always admitted a hope, while
Edward remained single, that something would occur to
prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of his own,
some mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity
of establishment for the lady, would arise to assist the happi-
ness of all. But he was now married, and she condemned
her heart for the lurking flattery which so much heightened
the pain of the intelligence.
That he should be married so soon, before (as she imagined)
he could be in orders, and consequently before he could be
in possession of the living, surprised her a little at first. But
she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy, in her self-provident
care, in her haste to secure him, should overlook everything
but the risk of delay. They were married, married in town,
and now hastening down to her uncle's. What had Edward
felt on being within four miles of Barton, on seeing her
mother's servant, on hearing Lucy's message !
They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Delaford, —
Delaford, that place in which so much conspired to give her
an interest — which she wished to be acquainted with, and yet
desired to avoid. She saw them in an instant in their par-
sonage-house; saw in Lucy the active, contriving manager,
uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with the utmost
frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half her economical
practices; — pursuing her own interest in every thought,
courting the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. Jennings,
and of every wealthy friend. In Edward, she knew not
I
SE^SE J3iD SEO^SIBILITr 289
I
what she saw, nor what she wished to see; — happy or un-
I happy — nothing pleased her; — she turned away her head
from every sketch of him.
Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections
in London would write to them to announce the event, and
give farther particulars; but day after day passed off, and
brought no letter, no tidings. Though uncertain that any
one were to blame, she found fault with every absent friend.
They were all thoughtless or indolent.
" When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am? " was
an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her mind to
2 have something going on.
I " I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect
I to see, than to hear from him again. I earnestly pressed his
1 coming to us, and should not be surprised to see him walk
Iin to-day or to-morrow, or any day. "
This was gaining something, something to look forward to.
Colonel Brandon must have some information to give.
.% Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a
I man on horseback drew her eyes to the window. He stopt
• I at their gate. It was a gentleman, it was Colonel Brandon
\ himself. Now she should hear more; — and she trembled
Iin expectation of it. But — it was not Colonel Brandon —
neither his air, nor his height. Were it possible, she should
say it must be Edward. She looked again. He had just
I dismounted; — she could not be mistaken — it was Edward.
She moved away and sat down. " He comes from Mr. Pratt's
purposely to see us. I will be calm; I will be mistress of
myself. "
r J ► In a moment, she perceived that the others were likewise
I aware of the mistake. She saw her mother and Marianne
change colour; saw them look at herself, and whisper a few
sentences to each other. She would have given the world
to be able to speak — and to make them understand that she
hoped no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour
{ } to him; — but she had no utterance, and was obliged to leave
all to their own discretion.
Not a syllable passed aloud. They all waited in silence
L * for the appearance of their visitor. His footsteps were heard
along the gravel path; in a moment he was in the passage,
A and in another he was before them.
\
£
290 SE^SE A3^D SEOiSIBILITT
His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too 1^
happy, even for Elinor. His complexion was white with C
agitation, and he looked as if fearful of his reception, and I,
conscious that he merited no kind one. Mrs. Dashwood, *
however, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes of that 4
daughter by whom she then meant, in the warmth of her
heart, to be guided in everything, met him with a look of
forced complacency, gave him her hand, and wished him joy.
He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.
Elinor's lips had moved with her mother's, and when the
moment of action was over, she wished that she had shaken m
hands with him too. But it was then too late, and with a
countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again and
talked of the weather.
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight,
to conceal her distress; and Margaret, understanding some
part, but not the whole, of the case, thought it incumbent on
her to be dignified, and therefore took a seat as far from him
as she could, and maintained a strict silence.
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the
season, a very awful pause took place. It was put an end
to by Mrs. Dashwood, who felt obliged to hope that he had
left Mrs. Ferrars very well. In a hurried manner, he replied
in the affirmative.
Another pause.
Elinor, resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound
of her own voice, now said —
" Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple ? "
" At Longstaple ! " — he replied, with an air of surprise.
" No, my mother is in town. "
" I meant, " said Elinor, taking up some work from the
table, " to inquire after Mrs. Edward Ferrars. "
She dared not look up;— but her mother and Marianne
both turned their eyes on him. He coloured, seemed per-
plexed, looked doubtingly, and, after some hesitation said —
" Perhaps you mean — my brother — you mean Mrs. —
Mrs. Robert Ferrars. "
" Mrs. Robert Ferrars ! " — was repeated by Marianne and
her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement; — and
though Elinor could not speak, even her eyes were fixed on
him with the same impatient wonder. He rose from his seat
SEO^SE A2Q) SENSIBILITY 291
and walked to the window, apparently from not knowing
what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, and
while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the
latter to pieces as he spoke, said, in an hurried voice —
" Perhaps you do not know — you may not have heard
that my brother is lately married to — to the youngest — to
Miss Lucy Steele. "
His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by
all but Elinor, who sat with her head leaning over her work,
in a state of such agitation as made her hardly know where
she was.
" Yes, " said he, " they were married last week and are now
at Dawlish. "
Elinor could sit it no longer. She almost ran out of the
room, and as soon as the door was closed, burst into tears of
joy, which at first she thought would never cease. Edward,
who had till then looked anywhere rather than at her, saw
her hurry away, and perhaps saw — or even heard — her emo-
tion; for immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie, which
no remarks, no inquiries, no affectionate address of Mrs.
Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without saying a
word, quitted the room, and walked out towards the village,
leaving the others in the greatest astonishment and per-
plexity on a change in his situation so wonderful and so
sudden — a perplexity which they had no means of lessening
but by their own conjectures.
CH^PTE^XLIX
Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of his re-
lease might appear to the whole family, it was certain that
Edward was free; and to what purpose that freedom would
be employed was easily predetermined by all; for after ex-
periencing the blessings of one imprudent engagement, con-
tracted without his mother's consent, as he had already done
for more than four years, nothing less could be expected of
him in the failure of that, than the immediate contraction of
another.
292 SED^SE ADip SEDiSIBILITT
His errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one. It was \
only to ask Elinor to marry him; and considering that he
was not altogether inexperienced in such a question, it might
be strange that he should feel so uncomfortable in the present
case as he really did, so much in need of encouragement and
fresh air.
How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution
however, how soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred,
in what manner he expressed himself, and how he was
received, need not be particularly told. This only need be
said : — that when they all sat down to table at four o'clock,
about three hours after his arrival, he had secured his lady,
engaged her mother's consent, and was not only in the rap-
turous profession of the lover, but in the reality of reason
and truth, one of the happiest of men. His situation indeed
was more than commonly joyful. He had more than the
ordinary triumph of accepted love to swell his heart, and
raise his spirits. He was released, without any reproach to
himself, from an entanglement which had long formed his
misery, from a woman whom he had long ceased to love —
and elevated at once to that security with another, which he
must have thought of almost with despair, as soon as he had
learnt to consider it with desire. He was brought, not from
doubt or suspense, but from misery to happiness; — and the
change was openly spoken in such a genuine, flowing, grateful
cheerfulness, as his friends had never witnessed in him before.
His heart was now open to Elinor — all its weaknesses, all
its errors confessed, and his first boyish attachment to Lucy
treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty-four.
" It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side, " said he,
" the consequence of ignorance of the world— and want of
employment. Had my mother given me some active pro-
fession when I was removed at eighteen from the care of Mr.
Pratt, I think — nay, I am sure, it would never have hap-
pened; for, though I left Longstaple with what I thought,
at the time, a most unconquerable preference for his niece,
yet had I then had any pursuit, any object to engage my
time and keep me at a distance from her for a few months,
I should very soon have outgrown the fancied attachment, \
especially by mixing more with the world, as in such a case I
must have done. But instead of having anything to do—
SE^SE A3^D SE^SIBILITr 293
instead of having any profession chosen for me, or being
allowed to chuse any myself, I returned home to be com-
pletely idle; and for the first twelvemonth afterwards, I had
not even the nominal employment which belonging to the
university would have given me, for I was not entered at
Oxford till I was nineteen. I had therefore nothing in the
world to do, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother
did not make my home in every respect comfortable — as I
had no friend, no companion in my brother, and disliked new
acquaintance, it was not unnatural for me to be very often
at Longstaple, where I always felt myself at home, and was
always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the
greatest part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen.
Lucy appeared everything that was amiable and obliging.
She was pretty too — at least I thought so then ; and I had
seen so little of other women, that I could make no compari-
sons, and see no defects. Considering everything, therefore,
I hope, foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since
in every way been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural,
or an inexcusable piece of folly. "
The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds
and the happiness of the Dashwoods was such — so great — as
promised them all the satisfaction of a sleepless night. Mrs.
Dashwood, too happy to be comfortable, knew not how to
love Edward nor praise Elinor enough — how to be enough
thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy, nor
how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversa-
tion together, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and
society of both.
Marianne could speak her happiness only by tears. Com-
parisons would occur, regrets would arise; and her joy,
though sincere as her love for her sister, was of a kind to
give her neither spirits nor language.
But Elinor, how are her feelings to be described? From
the moment of learning that Lucy was married to another,
that Edward was free, to the moment of his justifying the
hopes which had so instantly followed, she was everything
by turns but tranquil. But when the second moment had
passed — when she found every doubt, every solicitude re-
moved — compared her situation with what so lately it had
been — saw him honourably released from his former engage-
\
13
if
294 SE2QE ADip SEDiSIBILITT
ment — saw him instantly profiting by the release, to address W
herself and declare an affection as tender, as constant as she
had ever supposed it to be — she was oppressed, she was over-
come by her own felicity; and happily disposed as is the ^]
human mind to be easily familiarised with any change for —
the better, it required several hours to give sedateness to
her spirits, or any degree of tranquillity to her heart. If <
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week; it
for whatever other claims might be made on him, it was
impossible that less than a week should be given up to the
enjoyment of Elinor's company, or suffice to say half that ij
was to be said of the past, the present, and the future; for
though a very, few hours spent in the hard labour of incessant
talking will dispatch more subjects than can really be in
common between any two rational creatures, yet with lovers \^
it is different. Between them no subject is finished, no
communication is even made, till it has been made at least
twenty times over.
Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder
among them all, formed of course one of the earliest dis-
cussions of the lovers; and Elinor's particular knowledge of
each party made it appear to her, in every view, as one of
the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstances she
had ever heard. How they could be thrown together, and
by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl
of whose beauty she had herself heard him speak without i^
any admiration — a girl too already engaged to his brother, L
and on whose account that brother had been thrown off by 4
his family — it was beyond her comprehension to make out. L-
To her own heart it was a delightful affair, to her imagination C
it was even a ridiculous one; but to her reason, her judgment, L^
it was completely a puzzle.'
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing i
that perhaps at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the • <
one had been so worked on by the flattery of the other, as ^.
to lead by degrees to all the rest. Elinor remembered what p
Robert had told her in Harley Street, of his opinion of what j
his own mediation in his brother's affairs might have done, | £
if applied to in time. She repeated it to Edward. 1
" That was exactly like Robert, " was his immediate
observation. " And that, " he presently added, " might
diatel^
SE^SE A3^p SENSIBILITY 295
3 in his head when the acquaintance between them
*an. And Lucy perhaps at first might think only of
tig his good offices in my favour. Other designs
ifterwards arise. "
long it had been carrying on between them, however,
equally at a loss with herself to make out; for at
, where he had remained by choice ever since his
y London, he had had no means of hearing of her but
jrself, and her letters to the very last were neither less
t nor less affectionate than usual. Not the smallest
> n, therefore, had ever occurred to prepare him for
Mowed; and when at last it burst on him in a letter
ucy herself, he had been for some time, he believed,
ipified between the wonder, the horror, and the joy,
a deliverance. He put the letter into Elinor's hands —
ar Sir, — Being very sure I have long lost your affec-
have thought myself at liberty to bestow my own on
', and have no doubt of being as happy with him as
used to think I might be with you; but I scorn to
1 hand while the heart was another's. Sincerely wish
> py in your choice, and it shall not be my fault if we
always good friends, as our near relationship now
)roper. I can safely say I owe you no ill-will, and am
q will be too generous to do us any ill offices. Your
has gained my affections entirely, and as we could not
hout one another, we are just returned from the altar,
now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which
> ur dear brother has great curiosity to see, but thought
first trouble you with these few lines, and shall always
— Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,
" Lucy Ferrars.
ive burnt all your letters, and will return your picture
t opportunity. Please to destroy my scrawls; but
, with my hair, you are very welcome to keep. "
r read and returned it without any comment,
ill not ask your opinion of it as a composition, " said
i. " For worlds would not I have had a letter of hers
you in former days. In a sister it is bad enough, but
i
296 SE^SE J3^p SEDiSIBILITT
in a wife ! How I have blushed over the pages of her writing !
and I believe I may say that since the first half-year of our
foolish — business — this is the only letter I ever received from
her, of which the substance made me any amends for the
defect of the style. "
" However it may have come about/'said Elinor, after a
pause, " they are certainly married. And your mother has
brought on herself a most appropriate punishment. The
independence she settled on Robert, through resentment
against you, has put it in his power to make his own choice;
and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousand
a-year, to do the very deed which she disinherited the other
for intending to do. She will hardly be less hurt, I suppose,
by Robert's marrying Lucy than she would have been by
your marrying her. "
" She will be more hurt by it, for Robert always was her
favourite. She will be more hurt by it, and on the same
principle will forgive him much sooner. "
In what state the affair stood at present between them
Edward knew not, for no communication with any of his
family had yet been attempted by him. He had quitted
Oxford within four-and-twenty hours after Lucy's letter
arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearest
road to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of
conduct with which that road did not hold the most intimate
connection. He could do nothing till he were assured of his
fate with Miss Dashwood; and by his rapidity in seeking thai
fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of the jealousy with which
he had once thought of Colonel Brandon — in spite of the
modesty with which he rated his own deserts, and the polite-
ness with which he talked of his doubts, he did not upon the
whole, expect a very cruel reception. It was his business,
however, to say that he did, and he said it very prettily.
What he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after, must
be referred to the imagination of husbands and wives.
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with
a flourish of malice against him in her message by Thomas
was perfectly clear to Elinor; and Edward himself now
thoroughly enlightened on her character, had no scruple in
believing her capable of the utmost meanness of wanton ill-
nature. Though his eyes had been long opened, even before
SE^SE A3^D SENSIBILITY 297
his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her ignorance and a
want of liberality in some of her opinions, they had been
equally imputed by him to her want of education; and till
her last letter reached him he had always believed her to be
a well-disposed, good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attached
to himself. Nothing but such a persuasion could have pre-
vented his putting an end to an engagement which, long
before the discovery of it laid him open to his mother's anger,
had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to him.
" I thought it my duty, " said he, " independent of my
feelings, to give her the option of continuing the engagement
or not, when I was renounced by my mother, and stood to all
appearance without a friend in the world to assist me. In
such a situation as that, where there seemed nothing to tempt
the avarice or the vanity of any living creature, how could I
suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmly insisted on sharing
my fate, whatever it might be, that anything but the most
disinterested affection was her inducement? And even now,
I cannot comprehend on what motive she acted, or what
fancied advantage it could be to her, to be fettered to a man
for whom she had not the smallest regard, and who had only
two thousand pounds in the world. She could not foresee
that Colonel Brandon would give me a living. "
" No, but she might suppose that something would occur
in your favour; that your own family might in time relent.
And at any rate, she lost nothing by continuing the engage-
ment, for she has proved that it fettered neither her in-
clination nor her actions. The connection was certainly a
respectable one, and probably gained her consideration
among her friends; and if nothing more advantageous
occurred, it would be better for her to marry you than be
single. "
Edward was of course immediately convinced that nothing
could have been more natural than Lucy's conduct, nor
more self-evident than the motive of it.
Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold the
imprudence which compliments themselves, for having spent
so much time with them at Norland, when he must have felt
his own inconstancy.
" Your behaviour was certainly very wrong, " said she,
" because — to say nothing of my own conviction — our rela-
\
298 SES^SE A3 < p SENSIBILITY
tions were all led away by it to fancy and expect what, as
were then situated, could never be. "
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, a:
mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement.
" I was simple enough to think that, because my faith
plighted to another, there could be no danger in my t
with you; and that the consciousness of my engagement
to keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour. 1
that I admired you, but I told myself it was only friend
and till I began to make comparisons between yourself
Lucy, I did not know how far I was got. After that, I
pose, I was wrong in remaining so much in Sussex, anc
arguments with which I reconciled myself to the expedi
of it were no better than these : — The danger is my ow
am doing no injury to anybody but myself. "
Elinor smiled and shook her head.
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's 1
expected at the cottage, as he really wished not only 1
better acquainted with him, but to have an opportuni
convincing him that he no longer resented his giving hir
living of Delaford — " Which at present, " said he, "
thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were or
occasion he must think I have never forgiven hire
offering. "
Now he felt astonished himself that he had never yet
to the place. But so little interest had he taken in the mi
that he owed all his knowledge of the house, garden
glebe, extent of the parish, condition of the land, and n
the tithes, to Elinor herself, who had heard so much
from Colonel Brandon, and heard it with so much atte
as to be entirely mistress of the subject.
One question after this only remained undecided be1
them, one difficulty only was to be overcome. They
brought together by mutual affection, with the wa:
approbation of their real friends; their intimate kno\i
of each other seemed to make their happiness certain-
they only wanted something to live upon. Edward ha
thousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford 1
was all that they could call their own; for it was impc
that Mrs. Dashwood should advance anything, and
were neither of them quite enough in love to think that
SEO^SE A3 < ^) SENSIBILITY 299
d and fifty pounds a year would supply them with the
ts of life.
ard was not entirely without hopes of some favourable
in his mother towards him; and on that he rested for
due of their income. But Elinor had no such depen-
f or, since Edward would still be unable to marry Miss
1, and his chusing herself had been spoken of in Mrs.
i's flattering language as only a lesser evil than his
* Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert's offence would
.0 other purpose than to enrich Fanny,
it four days after Edward's arrival, Colonel Brandon
ed, to complete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction, and to
sr the dignity of having, for the first time since her
at Barton, more company with her than her house
hold. Edward was allowed to retain the privilege of
mer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every
o his old quarters at the Park; from whence he usually
id in the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers'
te-a-tete before breakfast.
ree weeks'residence at Delaford, where, in his evening
at least, he had little to do but to calculate the
> ortion between thirty-six and seventeen, brought
Barton in a temper of mind which needed all the
ement in Marianne's looks, all the kindness of her
le, and all the encouragement of her mother's language,
e it cheerful. Among such friends, however, and such
% he did revive. No rumour of Lucy's marriage had
ched him ; he knew nothing of what had passed, and
t hours of his visit were consequently spent in hearing
wondering. Everything was explained to him by
ashwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoice in what
done for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted
erest of Elinor.
ould be needless to say that the gentlemen advanced
good opinion of each other as they advanced in each
acquaintance, for it could not be otherwise. Their
lance in good principles and good sense, in disposition
inner of thinking, would probably have been sufficient
;e them in friendship, without any other attraction;
eir being in love with two sisters, and two sisters
r each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and
J
300 SEWSE A2(p SEDiSIBILITT
immediate, which might otherwise have waited the effect of
time and judgment.
The letters from town, which a few days before would have
made every nerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport, now
arrived to be read with less emotion than mirth. Mrs.
Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale, to vent her honest
indignation against the jilting girl, and pour forth her com-
passion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, she was sure, had
quite doated upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by all
accounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford. — " I do think, "
she continued, " nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it
was but two days before Lucy called and sat a couple of hours
with me. Not a soul suspected anything of the matter, not
even Nancy, who, poor soul ! came crying to me the day after,
in a great fright for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, as well as not know-
ing how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy, it seems, borrowed
all her money before she went off to be married, on purpose
we suppose, to make a shew with, and poor Nancy hadnol
seven shillings in the world ; — so I was very glad to give bo
five guineas, to take her down to Exeter, where she thinks o
staying three or four weeks with Mrs. Burgess, in hopes, as \
tell her, to fall in with the doctor again. And I must sai
that Lucy's crossness not to take her along with them in thi
chaise, is worse than all. Poor Mr. Edward ! I cannot ge
him out of my head, but you must send for him to Barton
and Miss Marianne must try to comfort him. "
Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn. Mrs. Ferrar
was the most unfortunate of women — poor Fanny ha <
suffered agonies of sensibility — and he considered the exist
ence of each, under such a blow, with grateful wondei
Robert's offence was unpardonable, but Lucy's was infinitel]
worse. Neither of them was ever again to be mentioned to
Mrs. Ferrars; and, even if she might hereafter be induced to
forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledged as he
daughter, nor be permitted to appear in her presence. Thi
secrecy with which everything had been carried on betweei
them was rationally treated as enormously heightening tin
crime, because had any suspicion of it occurred to the others
proper measures would have been taken to prevent the
marriage ; and he called on Elinor to join with him in regret-
ting that Lucy's engagement with Edward had not rathei
SE^SE A^D SENSIBILITY 301
been fulfilled, than that she should thus be the means of
spreading misery farther in the family. He thus con-
tinued —
" Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name,
which does not surprise us; but, to our great astonishment,
not a line has been received from him on the occasion. Per-
haps, however, he is kept silent by his fear of offending, and
I shall therefore give him a hint, by a line to Oxford, that his
sister and I both think a letter of proper submission from him,
addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her shewn to her mother,
might not be taken amiss ; for we all know the tenderness of
Mrs. Ferrars's heart, and that she wishes for nothing so much
as to be on good terms with her children. ,,
I This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects
and conduct of Edward. It determined him to attempt a
reconciliation, though not exactly in the manner pointed out
by their brother and sister.
; " A letter of proper submission! " repeated he; " would
they have me beg my mother's pardon for Robert's ingrati-
tude to her, and breach of honour to me ? — I can make no
submission — I am grown neither humble nor penitent by
what has passed. I am grown very happy, but that would
not interest. I know of no submission that is proper for me
to make. "
" You may certainly ask to be forgiven, " said Elinor,
" because you have offended; — and I should think you might
now venture so far as to profess some concern for having ever
formed the engagement which drew on you your mother's
anger. "
He agreed that he might.
" And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little humility
may be convenient while acknowledging a second engage-
ment, almost as imprudent in her eyes as the first. "
He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the idea
of a letter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it
easier to him, as he declared a much greater willingness to
make mean concessions by word of mouth than on paper, it
was resolved that, instead of writing to Fanny, he should go
to London, and personally intreat her good offices in his
favour. " And if they really do interest themselves, " said
Marianne, in her new character of candour, " in bringing
302 SE^SE A^D SEDiSIBILITT
about a reconciliation, I shall think that even John and p
Fanny are not entirely without merit. "
After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or fa
four days, the two gentlemen quitted Barton together.
They were to go immediately to Delaford, that Edward
might have some personal knowledge of his future home, and
assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improve-
ments were needed to it; and from thence, after staying a Ji
couple of nights he was to proceed on his journey to town. fe
CH^PTE^ L
After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars, just
so violent and so steady as to preserve her from that re-
proach which she always seemed fearful of incurring, the
reproach of being too amiable, Edward was admitted to her
presence, and pronounced to be again her son.
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating. For
many years of her life she had had two sons ; but the crime
and annihilation of Edward, a few weeks ago " , had robbed
her of one; the similar annihilation of Robert had left her
for a fortnight without any; and now, by the resuscitation
of Edward, she had one again.
In spite of his being allowed once more to live, however,
he did not feel the continuance of his existence secure, till he
had revealed his present engagement; for the publication of
that circumstance, he feared might give a sudden turn to his
constitution, and carry him off as rapidly as before. With
apprehensive caution therefore it was revealed, and he was
listened to with unexpected calmness. Mrs. Ferrars at first
reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss
Dashwood, by every argument in her power; — told him, that
in Miss Morton he would have a woman of higher rank and
larger fortune; — and enforced the assertion by observing that
Miss Morton was the daughter of a nobleman with thirty
thousand pounds, while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter
of a private gentleman, with no more than three ; but when
she found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of her
I
SEWSE A3^D SEDiSIBILITT 303
representation, he was by no means inclined to be guided by-
it, she judged it wisest, from the experience of the past, to
submit — and therefore, after such an ungracious delay as she
t owed to her own dignity, and as served to prevent every
& suspicion of good-will, she issued her decree of consent to the
a marriage of Edward and Elinor.
w- What she would engage to do towards augmenting their
v income was next to be considered: and here it plainly
l appeared, that though Edward was now her only son, he was
by no means her eldest; for while Robert was inevitably
endowed with a thousand pounds a year, not the smallest
objection was made against Edward's taking orders for the
sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was any-
thing promised either for the present or in future, beyond
the ten thousand pounds, which had been given with
e Fanny.
«■ It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than
k was expected, by Edward and Elinor; and Mrs. Ferrars her-
er self, by her shuffling excuses, seemed the only person surprised
at her not giving more.
% t With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured
re to them, they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in
d possessing of the living, but the readiness of the house, to
x which Colonel Brandon, with an eager desire for the accom-
q modation of Elinor, was making considerable improvements ;
and after waiting some time for their completion — after
experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointments and
delays, from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen,
i — Elinor, as usual, broke through the first positive resolution
s of not marrying till everything was ready, and the ceremony
1 took place in Barton church early in the autumn.
The first month after their marriage was spent with their
friend at the Mansion-house, from whence they could super-
intend the progress of the Parsonage, and direct everything
as they liked on the spot; could chuse papers, project
shrubberies, and invent a sweep. Mrs. Jennings's pro-
phecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly ful-
filled; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in their
Parsonage by Michaelmas, and she found in Elinor and her
husband, as she really believed, one of the happiest [couples]
in the world. They had in fact nothing to wish for, but the
30 4 SEO^SE A3^D SEC^SIBILITT
marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne, and rather bet
pasturage for their cows.
They were visited on their first settling by almost all th
relations and friends. Mrs. Ferrars came to inspect 1
happiness which she was almost ashamed of having authorise
and even the Dashwoods were at the expense of a joura
from Sussex to do them honour.
" I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sistei
said John, as they were walking together one morning bef <
the gates of Delaford House — " that would be saying t
much, for certainly you have been one of the most fortune
young women in the world, as it is. But, I confess, it woi
give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon brother. I
property here, his place, his house, everything in su
respectable and excellent condition ! and his woods ! I ha
not seen such timber anywhere in Dorsetshire as there is n <
standing in Delaford Hanger! And though, perhaps, Ma
anne may not seem exactly the person to attract him, yei
think it would altogether be advisable for you to have the
now frequently staying with you, for as Colonel Brand
seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what may happ
— for, when people are much thrown together, and see lit
of anybody else — and it will always be in your power to s
her off to advantage, and so forth; in short, you may as w
give her a chance — You understand me. "
But though Mrs. Ferrars did come to see them, and alwa
treated them with the make-believe of decent affection, th
were never insulted by her real favour and preference. 27
was due to the folly of Robert, and the cunning of his wii
and it was earned by them before many months had pass
away. The selfish sagacity of the latter, which had at fii
drawn Robert into the scrape, was the principal instrume
of his deliverance from it; for her respectful humilit
assiduous attentions, and endless flatteries, as soon as t
smallest opening was given for their exercise, reconcil
Mrs. Ferrars to his choice, and re-established him coi
pletely in her favour.
The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the pn
perity which crowned it, therefore, may be held forth as
most encouraging instance of what an earnest, an unceasi
attention to self-interest, however its progress may
SEO^SE A2(D SED^SIBILITr 305
apparently obstructed, will do in securing every advantage
of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time and con-
science. When Robert first sought her acquaintance, and
privately visited her in Bartlett's Buildings, it was only with
the view imputed to him by his brother. He merely meant
to persuade her to give up the engagement; and as there
could be nothing to overcome but the affection of both, he
naturally expected that one or two interviews would settle
the matter. In that point, however, and that only, he
erred; — for though Lucy soon gave him hopes that his
eloquence would convince her in time, another visit, another
conversation, was always wanted to produce this conviction.
Some doubts always lingered in her mind when they parted,
which could only be removed by another half-hour's dis-
course with himself. His attendance was by this means
secured, and the rest followed in course. Instead of talking
of Edward, they came gradually to talk only of Robert, — a
subject on which he had always more to say than on any
other, and in which she soon betrayed an interest even equal
to his own; and in short, it became speedily evident to both,
that he had entirely supplanted his brother. He was proud
of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and very proud
of marrying privately without his mother's consent. What
immediately followed is known. They passed some months
in great happiness at Dawlish; for she had many relations
and did acquaintance to cut — and he drew several plans for
magnificent cottages; — and from thence returning to town,
procured the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by the simple
expedient of asking it, which, at Lucy's instigation, was
adopted. The forgiveness at first, indeed, as was reasonable,
comprehended only Robert; and Lucy, who had owed his
mother no duty, and therefore could have transgressed none,
still remained some weeks longer unpardoned. But per-
severance in humility of conduct, and messages, in self-
condemnation for Robert's offence, and gratitude for the
unkindness she was treated with, procured her in time the
haughty notice which overcame her by its graciousness, and
led soon afterwards, by rapid degrees, to the highest state of
affection and influence. Lucy became as necessary to Mrs.
Ferrars, as either Robert or Fanny; and while Edward was
never cordially forgiven for having once intended to marry
306 SE^SE AQtp SENSIBILITY
her, and Elinor, though superior to her in fortune and 1
was spoken of as an intruder, she was in everything
sidered, and always openly acknowledged, to be a favc
child. They settled in town, received very liberal assis
from Mrs. Ferrars, were on the best terms imaginable
the Dashwoods, and setting aside the jealousies and il
continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy, in \
their husbands of course took a part, as well as the free
domestic disagreements between Robert and Lucy t
selves, nothing could exceed the harmony in which the
lived together.
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest
might have puzzled many people to find out; and
Robert had done to succeed to it, might have puzzled
still more. It was an arrangement, however, justified :
effects, if not in its cause; for nothing ever appear*
Robert's style of living, or of talking, to give a suspici
his regretting the extent of his income, as either leavin
brother too little, or bringing himself too much; — ai
Edward might be judged from the ready discharge c
duties in every particular, from an increasing attachme
his wife and his home, and from the regular cheerfuku
his spirits, he might be supposed no less contented wit
lot, no less free from every wish of an exchange.
Elinor's marriage divided her as little from her fami
could well be contrived, without rendering the cotta;
Barton entirely useless, for her mother and sisters
much more than half their time with her. Mrs. Dash
was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure i
frequency of her visits at Delaford; for her wish of bri
Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardl)
earnest, though rather more liberal, than what Johr
expressed. It was now her darling object. Precious a
the company of her daughter to her, she desired nothi
much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her v
friend; and to see Marianne settled at the Mansion-
was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor. They
felt his sorrows and their own obligations, and Mariani
general consent, was to be the reward of all.
With such a confederacy against her — with a kno^
so intimate of his goodness — with a conviction of his
SE^SE AD^p SEC^SIBILITT 307
ttachment to herself, which at last, though long after it was
bservable to everybody else, burst on her — what could
le do?
Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate,
he was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions,
ad to counteract, by her conduct, her most favourite
laxims. She was born to overcome an affection formed so
ite in life as at seventeen, and with no sentiment superior
> strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to give
er hand to another ! — and that other, a man who had suffered
less than herself under the event of a former attachment,
-whom, two years before, she had considered too old to be
larried, — and who still sought the constitutional safeguard
1 a flannel waistcoat!
But so it was. Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irre-
stible passion, as once she had fondly flattered herself with
specting, — instead of remaining even for ever with her
lother, and finding her only pleasures in retirement and
nidy, as afterwards in her more calm and sober judgment
le had determined on, — she found herself, at nineteen, sub-
utting to new attachments, entering on new duties, placed
1 a new home, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the
atroness of a village.
Colonel Brandon was now as happy as all those who best
rved him believed he deserved to be; — in Marianne he was
msoled for every past affliction; — her regard and her
> ciety restored his mind to animation, and his spirits to
ieerf ulness : and that Marianne found her own happiness
t forming his, was equally the persuasion and delight of each
bserving friend. Marianne could never love by halves;
nd her whole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her
usband, as it had once been to Willoughby.
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a
ang; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete in
le voluntary forgiveness of Mrs. Smith, who, by stating his
larriage with a woman of character, as the source of her
emency, gave him reason for believing, that had he behaved
ith honour towards Marianne, he might at once have been
ippy and rich. That his repentance of misconduct, which
lus brought its own punishment, was sincere, need not be
jubted; nor that he long thought of Colonel Brandon with
3 o8 SES^SE J3^D SEDiSIBILITT
envy, and of Marianne with regret. But that he was for ,
ever inconsolable — that he fled from society, or contracted
an habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart, must
not be depended on — for he did neither. He lived to exert,
and frequently to enjoy himself. His wife was not always
out of humour, nor his home always uncomfortable ! and in
his breed of horses and dogs, and in sporting of every kind,
he found no inconsiderable degree of domestic felicity.
For Marianne, however — in spite of his incivility in sur-
viving her loss — he always retained that decided regard
which interested him in everything that befell her, and made
her his secret standard of perfection in woman; and many a
rising beauty would be slighted by him in after days as
bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.
Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the
cottage, without attempting a removal to Delaford; and
fortunately for Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, when Marianne
was taken from them, Margaret had reached an age highly
suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for being sup-
posed to have a lover.
Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant
communication which strong family affection would naturally
dictate; and among the merits and the happiness of Elinor
and Marianne, let it not be ranked as the least considerable,
that though sisters, and living almost within sight of each
other, they could live without disagreement between them-
selves, or producing coolness between their husbands.
Finis
^S2fc //.£,
THE TEMPLE PRESS, PRINTERS, LETCHWORTH
i

